This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.


Google books


https://books.google.com


This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.


Google books


https://books.google.com


— MÀ — Me. un
» pL Los M ul d
. ; r 4 » Lp : a
Curt d w- ' " ? A * aero LCS voL | set :
, H E "FoLCDv rr Lr Lo o dr LN R H d | ^ ; - ! « 4 | à
" " , . , . : ge on € 0 IA * ow


P rael)


Vh


MS


Ld


ry ar 3 4 a te


gre
MP


^ ara n
Am


Te.
"s
ut

PL
Y
es


(NEZ MP
B

mo

hNS


^, ""»"
s -- 99 any a ur LS »


4-9 n ^ did. d. P -
.


-——


Ur,


ntn


^


^. d Md


5 v
73 c a at at


DITS
»


^N


e


s eese


——


- MAE


-— ^ d M o m m JU


^ b d


LI
D


MYcX


L|


^ 4^4. om de o wm m
"^ A wow Ad. D mo
- - o a un


— — 9
wins


$


——
"y
"f


n,


LLECEES


^t


LR
PERS


t ud ! - .
u-. dit:
! der AVR


ae WE MT rl e ee ONE IT AT rl NES S ET, meh ILE ES ev VEN co AMAN: IS UST SUMA C WR TI i RT ROT a I Amr. o 2d. Jr Y Ny UA. EON ae Ml 2 E LA aro x ue A ME ale i ^'- PERSON cur p Rete rm vh uL
E
D


. .
EY »
DM * "
, dí . .
^. i:
i
"
. E :
D
EE 4
^ d -
' " .
z T ANE -
E
D * id
* '
.
Ti ret ^ .
H
'
L]
e . -
I
D
: ,
. ,
M
x V
v
,
I " t
Y
L
* *
' Ld
- L
ww D .
*
^
. n
D *.
3
. -
; D
.
^ P .
hu
.
.
* *
4
*
. " .
à
-
D ; .
: .
2m
" '
— POE ERN 23 E — —-— —
a ———— — —— A M À —— — —— — 9 — — -k H x
- NEA E - —


A a, clt, caer ee lm aee, ut


RERUM BRITANNICARUM MEDII EVI
SCRIPTORES, |


OR


CHRONICLES AND MEMORIALS OF GREAT BRITAIN.
AND IRELAND


MIME vu rE — € — P —  —B € — A 00 um o o d d s
1 .


 DURING


|. THE MIDDLE AGES.


o —— 0


i
| Qi809. — Wt.21064. | *


ec. ao


-— ——,o—0 v


Ants Air HECAY
| RWhulÀ
MONACENSTS


THE CHRONICLES AND MEMORIALS


OE


GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND
DURING THE MIDDLE AGES.


PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHORITY OF HEKH MAJESTY'S THEASURY, UNDER
THE DIRECTION OF THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS,


ON the 26th of J anuary 1857, the Master of the Rolls
submitted to the Treasury a proposal for the publication
of materials for the History of this Country from the
Invasion of the Romans to the reign of Henry VILI.


The Master of the Rolls suggested that these materials
should be selected for publication under competent
editors without reference to periodieal or chronological
arrangement, without mutilation or abridgment, prefer-
ence being given, in the first instance, to such materials
as were most searee and. valuable.


He proposed that each chronicle or historical docu-
ment to be edited should be treated in the same way as
if the editor were engaged on an Editio Princeps ; and
for this purpose the most correct text should be formed
from an accurate collation of the best MSS. |


To render the work more generally useful, the Master
of the Rolls suggested that thé editor should give an'
account of the MSS. employed by him, of their age and
their peculiarities ; that he should add to the work a
brief account of the lifeand times of the author, and
any remarks necessary to explain the chronology; but
no other note or comment was to be allowed, except
what might be necessary to establish the correctness of


- the text.
à


4


The works to be published in octavo, separately, as
they were finished; the whole responsibility of the task
resting upon the editors, who were to be chosen by the
Master of the Rolls with the sanction of the Treasury.


The Lords of ILler Majesty's Treasury, after a careful
consideration of the subject, expressed their opinion in a
Treasury Minute, dated February 9, 1857, that the plan
recommended by the Master of the Rolls * was well
caleulated for the accomplishment of this important
national object, in an effectual and satisfactory manner,
within a reasonable time, and provided proper attention be
paid to economy, in making the detailed arrangements,
without unnecessary expense."


They expressed their approbation of the proposal that
each Chronicle and historical document should be edited
jn such a manner as to represent with all possible correct-
ness the texi of each writer, derived from a collation of
the best MSS., and that no notes should be added, except
sueh as were illustrative of the various readings. They
suggested, however, that the preface to each work should
contain, in addition to the particulars proposed by the
Master of the Rolls, a biographical account of the author,
so far as authentic materials existed for that purpose,
and an estimate of his historical credibility and value.


Rolls House,
December 18951.


HENRIOI DE BRACTON


LEGIBUS ET CONSUETUDINIBUS


-


ANGLIA.
LIBRI QUINQUE


| (dN v VARIOS TRACTATUS DISTINOTI.


-—


AD DIVERSORUM ET VETUSTISSIMORUM CODICUM
| . COLLATIONEM TYPIS VULGATI.


EDITED
|..BY


SIR TRAVERS TWISS, Q;C., D.C.L.


PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHORITY OF THE LORDS COMMISSIONERB OF HER MAJESTY'8
"TREASURY, UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS.


VOL. IV.


LONDON:
" LONGMAN & Co., ParERNOSTER Row ; TRÜBNER & Co., LUbGATE Hur:
ALSO BY
PARKER & Co., OXFORD; AND MACMILLAN & Co. CAMBRIDGE;
. A. & C. BLACK, AND DOUGLAS & FOULIS, EDINBURGH;
. AND À. THOM, BOB |


T . 1881. 3


| f IB IUTHECA.
; ^ REGIA
FON ACENSIS


a-— ne


Printed by
EYRB and SroTTISWOODE, Her Majesty's Printers.
For Her Mojesty's Stationery Office.


Li -


- —-


CONTENTS.


AN FAKAIASEIRNG UG a


Page

INTRODUCTION - z . - : - vii
TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF CHAPTERS Pod - lxv
Or aw AssisE or Lasr PnxskNTATION, Book IV.—

TnxATIsE II. - DENT So 73x.
Or AN AssrsE or MORTDANCESTER, Book IV.—

TREATISE III. - - " - ]16
Or A WnriT oF CosrNAGE, Book IV.—
'TnraTISEIV. — - - - - - - 29838
OF AN ASSISE or UrRuM, Book IV.— |

TREATISEV. - | .- - - - ,- 8967
Or AN AcrIoN Fon Dowzn, Boox IV.— |

TREATISE VT. - - s : - 151


INDEX - " - - - » 617.


.


* x: - *
- Lag 5
. Ld E
- PI *
. .
- cm di *
» ; j L -
D : a EX E
; z -—
E L] - "
" .
E "
* * ;
» J * -— T -; * B
-— b. s
! B . n
- " " bi
: x * 2
, P : 2
-— T ug - . * Ma- cT 1 ü
! b ES EM
- , :
- , . :
* . x Vr
M : -
x LI - - kd S
? . - : . -
" n " - y : . E
d * m -— - " ^ * T
QE . : f :
-
a " : H .
' 5 i
j x " .
. ; 3 ,
. " - .
E / :
. E - Hu e :
* Ly
- " bI
P" p v IESUS : * d
" -— - t
»P a eU .
-— (E d ,
- Y .
t . Pte
x «d : "
. y wx
. il 5 :
3 207 -
* .
] *
» SEM ou . B
j -. - - t
« -
- » '
2 » E MEL i
E z .
- * e uU: ! ! '
. - : [ d
- , - g
. f € 2 .
P E
- » *
" -— . * wx Md
LI , H
5 e m mln ttt e qp
Li 8 A Li
^ . D
Li ^ x ' E
*
" .
.
. .
ad ^ €). z
L4
. e
; . H e.
L4 ms
" - ec n
^ * T
z -
: tog
" -
" -
" *
» -
. ho x
E . ^ -
.
" - B .
- ! Tos "m
Á
. " -
* r4 * !
. »
ME t
-^ Es i
. hi t
- " $ -
5 ^
E A : 7
H Hu , !
" . E
. .
* n * t
A .
- -
LI od i
. -
-
P 5s : ; . 2
4 . id
n
.
-
" *
* "
, z " "
T * , *. w i
: - " -
: " »
^ — s
] .
" , - " *
Li * E ad
- P . -
* * d
* x $
" " $ t
" L]
H ,
z : '
- * " * -
, y nt j
.
: i
! :
* u nl x
^ a :
* LI * - *
" : » / :
- E M
mH i M d
i -
L] * t
P : * du
. n - , A
MÀ t ja x n "e
B A P


7o att H"- if cad Ma ra id
& va i - 2 Loc AX €
» ' " - 0t E
- D . Ss a. - : M
- e. .tT iv Ue P E
- t * :
» RE E j ! 7
Z é : - $ - e )- D e.
^ s * x T. *
: 2 à : --
hex - P end H D"
som. - l.l . , - H ui
Á- - o^ m -T
ON D
, e 20* :
.V.—— ;
ES - d
Hu . T *


4.


x * r , [
' . .
* ,
" *
*
" JL 2
-
Li * *
LL ^x E " s. *
^ .
, » . *
P .
, ix
LI " LI
] -
" . .
. -
E 2 - I
- *
5 .
- .
-
» :
, 2 . i
.- * .
E , *
1
- - » -
, - H $ -—
n 2 x ; h . B
- ge e. * e
. ! z
à,
- * " *
. - ' z . .
-
x * - - T
- / *
- : z 2 LU *
» : LI " " , *
. -
- .
,
. - x .
a * E .
* " .
* LI
: .
€ E
. .
[] ? $
Li
. " z
P
* - H
. i .
-
PP i . . : E
2 ^ . i .
, d ES
^ À ^ *
" i : ES a
4 " . "s D
" x
- . Z
- * , '
"
- » ' LI
. 2 * " ^
E Fi . d
i - t 4
1 *
- B2 .
E - t t * L
- . * » k
L ui - TN
E ' " *
ie" * * . , m L]
2. rs & .
j BN , 3
- " 1
. / M
* x
Li ^ - L
- i * ' - ES
. *
. * ] s 1
. » . ; ]
'
] " ,
& . L
. .
-— ^* . S E t E H *
" »
i Pa . . - . * " » " "
1 ^ x " - x à 1
E vi - "" I L4 . D 1
; ' - : . [|
i * 3 ET -9 x H K H E * . ^ .
. ' e " a
- - ^ x ^ -— -
E E V M . :
E n t B
r^ - T * $ ni
LI * - * - d LE.
x " ks * N m H 2 * LE NES m 41 -


INTRODUÓTION.


DUST UN TNI IURE INIÁARUAIR UNUS £NUAENIN I


. THE present volume commences with the Assise of Last
Presentation, which forms Bracton's Second Treatise on


Possessory Actions. The subject of this assise is the .


possession of the right of presenting a clerk to à vacant
church, and as this right of presentation was originally
. appurtenant to the possession of a& manor, or of a tene-
ment forming part of à manor, within which the church
was situated, the discussion of the mode of recovering
this right, as an appurtenance of à tenement, follows in
natural order the Assise of Novel Disseysine, by which
possession might be recovered of the tenement itself.
In many eases indeed an assise of novel disseysine might


enure to the simultaneous recovery of an advowson as


an appurtenance of the tenement recovered by the assise,


.but in some cases the right of presenting to & church


had become severed from the manor or other tenement,
to which it was originally appurtenant, and thus there
might be occasions for an independent proceeding to re-
cover the right of presentüng to a church, irrespective of
any right to the -manor itself, within which the church
was locally situated. Further the right of presenting to
& church might be an adverse right in regard to the
feoffee of the manor within which the church was
situated, who might have succeeded by right of in-
heritanee to à manor of which his ancestor had accepted
the donation without its appurtenances, or of which his
ancestor had accepted the donation with its appur-
tenànces from a feoffee, who was in seysine of the manor,
" but from the circumstance that he had never exercised
the right of presentation to the church could not transfer


viii INTRODUCTION,


the adyowson with the manor. How this result was
brought about may require à few words of explanation.
An advowson of a church was an incorporea] thing, and
in its early juridical conception was a right appurtenant
to a corporeal thing. It was accordingly capable of
being transferred with a corporeal thing by a fiction of
law, but the transferree was held not to be in true pos-
session of the incorporeal right until he had exercised
it. When he had exercised the right he was held to be
in true seysine of it, so as to be capable of transferring
it to a third person, but he could not legally transfer the
incorporeal right before he had enjoyed it. Accordingly
if & person in true seysine of & manor gave it with its
appurtenances to another person, and amongst those
appurtenanees was the advowson of & church, if the
donor transferred the manor with its appurtenances
to à third person before he had enjoyed the right of pre-
senting to the church, the advowson did not pass to the
third person with the manor, but fell back as it were to
the original donor of the manor, whose seysine of the
advowson had not been effectively divested by the ex-
ercise of the right of presenting to the church on the
part of his donee, in other words the original feoffee of
the manor eontinued to be the advocate of the church,
although he had given away the manor.

The juridieal character of the right of advowson, as
&n incorporeal thing, has been diseussed by anticipation
very fully by Braeton in his Treatise on Aequiring the
Dominion of Things (Book IL, Ch. XXIII), and it is
evident from the law cases cited by him in that chapter
(Vol. L, p. 433), that the law was well established in the
reign of Henry IIL, that the donee of & manor with its
appurtenances could not assign the advowson of & church
appurtenant to the manor to & third party, before he
had exercised the right of presenting to the church itself.
How momentous this principle was in extricating the

endowments of the manorial churches from the coils


(ouo EM NUaS S SCING 7


INTRODUCTIÓN. ik


of feudalism, has not been, I am disposed to think,


Ssufliclently appreciated by writers on the subject of the


Right of Advowson. On the other hand the law seems
to have been in Bracton's time not quite settled as to the
power of the original donor in such a case, after he had
resumed the enjoyment of his right of presentation, to
give away the advowson by itself without any corporeal
thing to a fourth party; but Bracton was himself in
favour of the legal power of such a donor to transfer the


. riglit of advowson by itself after the likeness of a servi-


tude, and.he observes, in support of his view, that the
right of presentation might adhere to the church itself,


: aS being a structure of wood and stone, more especially


as the right of presenting to the church was termed the
advowson. of the church.
It. may be convenient for the purposes of a more clear


| understending of the intricacies of the law touching
advowsons to investigate the origin of the office of


* Advoeatus Ecclesie," and thereby: to appreciate the
meaning of its correlative term * the advocacy or the ad-
vowson of a ehurch.'

The offiee of " Advocatus Ecclesie " may be raped


P —  ÁH——— M P——— 0. — o e e


back to the fifth century after C Christ. Van Espen, no
mean authority in matters of ecclesiastical lw, refers it
to a Council of Carthage in the sixth century, but


Muratori, whose. authority in. questions of antiquarian


research is perhaps unrivalled, assigns it with more


reason to an earlier council of the Church, namely to the
second Council of Milevie in África, which was convoked
to. condemn the teaching of Pelagius and of Celestinus
under the Pontifieate of Innocent I. (A.D. COCOX VL.)
By the sixteenth article of the canons of this latter
council which are printed in the fourth volume of
Mansi's Great Collection of Couneils of the Church
(Florentie, 1750-98), it was resolved that the most
glorious Emperors (Honorius and Marcianus) should be


requested to direct their judges to assign scholastic de-


gu


Ste. m atm


X INTRODUCTION.


fenders (defensores scholasticos) to conduct ecclesiasti2al
. eauses in the Imperial courts, and to defend the churches
whensoever they should have need of them. It would
appear that by degrees every church of importance came
to have its seholastie defender or advocate, who com-
bined the functions of judge for the people with those of
legal adviser to the patron of the church, for it had
become the established law of the Christian world in the
sixth century that the founder of a new church and his
heirs should have the patronage of the church, in other
words, should have the right of presenting to the bishop
a person for his approval to be ordained by him to serve
the ehureh. By-and-by the practice grew up that the
heir of the founder should not present a person to the
bishop for ordination without previous consultation with


^. the advocate of the church, who was appointed by the


Emperor in some cases, but in the majority of cases
was nominated by the bishop, and in course of time as
the kindred of the founders died off, the advocates of the
churches came to be the persons whose recommendation
of a clerk to fill à vacancy was accepted by the bishops.
After the break up of the Western Empire, when the
reign of law in Western Europe had become interrupted,
bishops came to nominate, and churches came to elect
as advocates, men who could protect their clients with
the sword in the place of the tongue or the pen, and
thus we find in the days of Charlemagne distinguished
warriors and not men of the robe filing the office of
advocate to the great churches, and the advocatus eccle-
8i€ 1s repeatedly mentioned in the Salic laws as well as
in the eapitularies of the kings of the Franks, who
themselves appointed advocates for the most famous
churches. England was no exception to this practice,
of which we have a signal example, which has been
handed down to us in a very curious history of the
foundation of the famous Benedictine Abbey of Ramsey,
in Huntingdonshire. This abbey was founded in the


- INTRODUCTION. xi


reign of King Edgar, by Aelwin, the. Aelderman or Earl
of the East Anglians, and in the Historia Ramesiensis,
of whieh a MS. was preserved in the Royal Exehequer
at Westminster, the text of which has been published by
Gale, in his Collection of Early British Histories (fol.
Oxon, 1691). Aelwin is styled by the writer, who was
evidently a monk of the abbey, Advocatus noster.
Further Aelwin's funetions of advocate are well described
by himself in & passage, in which he is represented as
protesting against the monks themselves appearing before
& secular tribunal, and in which he asserts that he, as
their advocate, was in-duty bound to defend them and
io be their surety in any cause, in which an appearance
on their behalf was required by any lay court. Further
the same historian in reciting the various endowments
conferred upon the abbey, states that a certain matron,
. Abfara by name, gave to St. Benediet of Ramsey tlie
land of Halliwel and the Chureh of Ellesworth, of
which she was the advocate (cujus erat advocata), with a
certain portion of the manor of Ellesworth. The historian
of this abbey thus supplies us not only with an instance
in Saxon times of & great abbey having its advocate, but:
also with an instance of the owner of a manor being the
advocate of à church appurtenant to the manor, and as
such entifled to give the church with a portion of the
manor to & religious house. "We have thus evidence,
that the patronage of parish churches was organised in
England in Saxon times upon the same principle, which
was recognised both in France and in ltaly, for the
advocatus ecclesic; finds à place in the Longobardio laws
equally as in the capitularies of the kings of the Franks,
Further it was & provision of the.laws of Egbert, that
no presbyter should be appointed to à ehurceh without
the authority or consent of the bishop, so that there can
be little doubt that Sir William Blackstone was in error
 insuggesting that before the Conquest all the manorial
ehurehes in England were donatives, unless he means


xii INTRODUCTION.


that the formalities of institution and induction, as
regulated in Archbishop Becket's time, were novel.

Lord Coke, in his Commentary on Littleton, takes &
much sounder view, when he observes that the word
* advocatus," as applied to à church, was of great anti-
quity, although he did not know where to search for its
origin, and he cites à dictum of Sir William Herle in
7 Edw. IIL, that &t that time a man hardly knew what
an &advowson was, and that, when & man intended to
grant the advowson of à church, he would in terms grant
the church itself. Such a state of ignorance on the part
of the laity in the reign of Edward III. need not be sur-
prising, for Bracton himself speaks of the simplicity of
laymen in his time, who when they meant to present to
& vacant church gave the church in terms to the pre-
sentee (fol. 53 b.), whereas the bishop in fact gave the
church, when he instituted the advocate's presentee.

Sir William PBlackstone's error in suggesting that
the manorial churches in England were all donatives
before the Conquest has arisen from his not having
sufficiently appreciated the gveat change in land tenure,
which ensued in England after the Conquest, for church
lands were infeudated equally with the lands of the
laity. 1t is not too much to say that the church in
England was feudalised by William the Norman. There
ean be no doubt that before the Conquest church lands
were all allodial and that when William the Norman
divided the lands of England into à certain number of
knights' fees, the estates of the bishops and of the abbeys
escaped being carved out into knights' fees by the owners
consenting tio find so many knights to answer for the
military service due from theirlands. With regard to the
larger manors they were converted into baronies, whilst
the owners of the smaller manors ceded their churches
with their lands to some powerful lord, and received
them back as beneficiu. "The great lords on the other hand
dealt with the churches appurtenant to the lands granted


|


D —oom occ P £muhef* Am m i9 io Lu


L—-


INTRODUCTION. xiii


to them by the Conqueror. upon the Same principle


which they applied to the lands themselves, and granted:


them freely to clerks of their own choice "without
. troubling themselves to present their clerks to any
bishop for his approval. Still further in many cases
they kept i in their own hands the endowments of the
churches, and allowed the service of the church to be
&liogether neglected. - Hence the general condition of
the manorial churches when Henry I. came to the throne
was that of free donatives, and there is no chapter of
English church history which deserves more to be
— written.afresh, than that which would narrate the vatious
, Steps by which the manorial churches were reconverted

from the feudal condition of donatives to that of bene-
. fiees presentative. Perhaps I should add that I use the
term manorial churches here to denote the churches, of
which the advowsons were appurtenant to manors, and
whieh were not appropriated to abbeys or cáthedrals.
The term * parochial churches" might be ambiguous, as,
although the manorial churches were also parish churches,
many parish churehes were appropriated to corporate
bodies, and have not recovered even in the present day
the st&tus of benefices presentative.

"The first stage of the arduous process of extricating the
church from the coils of feudalism was initiated by
-Krehbishop Anselm in his dispute with Henry I. on the
subject o£ investitures, in which the Bagacious mind of
the king struck out a line of compromise, and, as Canon
Stubbs has justly observed, anticipated by 14 years the
principle, upon which the Concordat of Worms ^ was
. framed between the Pope and the Emperor. The com-
promise of investitures, as it has been termed, was
accomplished two years before the. death of the arch-
bishop. The primacy of Rudolph, his successor, seems
to have passed &way without any effort on his part
to advance the cause of ecclesiastical reform, but Arch-
bishop Corbel, who succeeded to the Metropolitan See

.Q180, — — b


xlv INTRODUCTION.


of Canterbury in 1123, convoked a council of bishops
at London in 11296, in whieh it was resolved that the
clergy who had churches or benefices should be deprived
of them, if they refused to be ordained (though their
bishops invited tbem to it) that they might live more
at liberty. It is &fair presumption from this canon,
Johnson's Canons, Part IT, London, 1720, that the lords
of manors were at that time in the habit of giving their
ehurches to clerks in minor orders, without any reference
. to the bishop, and this inference is confirmed by another
canon of the same council, which ordained that no monk
or clerk should accept & church, tithe, or ecclesiastical
benefice at the hand of a layman without the bishop's
consent, and that every such donation should be null, and
the offender should be liable to canonical punishment.
King Henry I. is said to have assented to all the decrees
of this council, which had also the countenance of the
Papal Legate. Further we find at the commencement of
. Stephen's reign. among the canons of à Legatine Council
held at Westminster in 1138, à canon which ordained that
* no one should accept a church or benefice from the hands


* of & layman," which is evidently to be interpreted as


meaning, that a clerk should not accept an ecclesiastical
benefice as a donative from a lay hand. It cannot be
gainsayed that the progress of ecclesiastical reform had
been hitherto in a safe direction, and it is probable that
the wise policy of Henry I. was mainly influenced by
Bishop Roger of Salisbury, who filled the office of Jus-
ticiar of England from 1107 to 1139.

It is not too much to say, that England is more
indebted to this famous prelate for the organisation of
her judicial system, the main features of which have
been preserved to the present day, than to any of the
great justiciaries who sueceeded him. He created, as it
were, the King's Court of Exchequer, and he trained up
& body of men distinet from the Norman nobles, who
furnished sheriffs to the counties, barons to the Exchequer,


——m7374 0


INTRODUCTION. Xv


and justieiaries to the Curia Regis. "The capital blunder
of king Stephen's reign was his arrest of Bishop Roger,
and ofl his son Nigel, Bishop of Ely, whose son was sub-
sequently Bishop of London, and wrote the Dialogus de
Seaecario. "The effect of this aet of short sighted policy
was to aliénate from the king £he whole body of the
clergy, who resented the injury done to the bishops,
. whilst the entire administrative system of the country
. eame to & dead lock. Their arrest, which was followed
by the arrest of Bishop Roger's. son, also named Roger
le Poor, who was the king's chancellor, was the signal
for & civil war, which lasted more or less for 14 years,
& period of feudal anarchy. Archbishop Theobald of
Canterbury held to the Empress Matilda during this
troubled period, but his influence over the clergy was,
for some time, neutralised by Bishop Henry ef Win-
Chester, who stood by the king, and who had obtained
the commission of legate from Rome in 1189. His
legatine authority, however, terminated with the death
of Pope Innocent I. in 1143, but although the two next
following Suecessors of Innocent I, were opposed to King
Stephen, the office of papal legate was not conferred on
 Arehbishop Theobald before 1150. The bishops of
England at last, under the influence of Archbishop
Theobald, resumed their unity of action, and they refused
their assent to the proposal of King Stephen that his son
Eustace should be associated with him in the kingdom.
— The embers of civil war were soon afterwards fanned
once more into a flame by the arriyal in England of Henry
of Anjou, tlie son of the Empress Matilda and the nephew
of Henry Y. in the spring of 1153, but the joint mediation
of Archbishop Theobald and Bishop Henry of Winchester
was ultimátely successful in re-establishing peace. Under
the treaty of Wallingford Henry of Anjou was recognised
as heir to the kingdom of England. King Stephen's
death in the next following year put an end to a reign,
. which had brought in its. ürain great suffering to the
b 2


/


xvl . J INTRODUCTION.


people of England, but the anarchy of King Stephen's
reign had one good effect; it undermined the founda-
tions of feudalism in England, and it rendered possible
the realisation of great legal reforms in the reign of
Henry II.

It would appear from & Papal letter addressed from
Rome by Alexander III. to the Archbishop of Canter-
bury and his suffragans, that the practice was still preva-
' lent in the early years of the reign of Henry II. for clerks
to accept benefices without requesting the consent of the


ordinary. The arehbishop according to this papal


letter, which is preserved in the Decretals of Gregory IX.,
Lib.VII., De Institutionibus, had excommunicated all such
clerks, and the Pope thought it right to confirm the act
of the archbishop, and to forbid the English bishops to
absolve any such execommunicated clerks before they had
made due satisfaction. How the necessity of the bishop's
institution came to be recognised by the king's justici-
aries as & condition sine quá mon for &clerk to benefit
by his presentation to & church does not, as far as I am
aware, appear from &ny canons or constitutions of the
reign of Henry IL, but the fact is matter of inference from
the Constitutions of Clarendon A.D. 1164, by the first
article of which it was resolved, that if any controversy
should arise about the advocacy and presentation of
churches between laymen, or between laymen and clerks,
or between clerks, 1t should be treated of and determined
in the eourt of the king. It was to give effect to this


constitution that the assise * De Advocationibus," to which


Glanville refers in his fourth book, was drawn up and
published by King Henry II. "This assise deserves to be
carefully studied, for i& imposed upon a party claiming
the patronage of & church the necessity of showing that
either he himself had previously presented a clerk to the
church, or that some ancestor of his had presented to
the church in the reign of Henry Lor since the corona-
nation of Henry IL In fact, few persons reading Glan-


INTRODUCTION, ^— xvii


ville's chapter on Advowsons of. Churches would suppose
that the assise * De Advocationibus Ecclesiarum" had been
introduced with the object of enforcing indirectly upon
the patrons of churches the duty of presenting their
. elerks to &/ bishop, inasmuch as it constituted tho last pre-
sentation the test of the seysine of the right of advowson.
The recognition to be made by the jurors of the assise in
' Glanville's time was thus stated, * Quis advocatus tem-

* pore pacis ultimam personam mortuam ad ecclesiam
.* illam presentaverit?" It would seem that the words .
"tempore. pacis" in the original writ were intended to
exclude the reign of King Stephen, although the words
were retained in the writ in Bracton's time, and. had a
more general interpretation given to them, being taken
. to signify a time free from violence and wrong.

It will be seen on comparing Bracton's treatise De
Assisa, Ultimse Prsesentationis with Glanville's treatise De
Advoeationibus Ecclesiarum, that the constitution of the
Lateran Council of 1179 on the subject of lapse had
been received as law in England in Bracton's time. But
itis to be noted that the decree was received only with
& certain modification, for whereas the decree of the
council allowed a term of six months to a clerical patron,
and only four months io a lay patron, this distinction
between clerical and lay patronage did not obtain in
England, but in all cases, an aile tempua of six months
was allowed to the patron to present & clerk.: "This
doctrine of lapse was all that was wanting to make the
' lmw of advowson once more effective. As long as
churches were infeudated, the.lord of the manor could
retain possession of the church and enjoy personally the
fruits of the glebe or the rents with which the church
was endowed. It was not enough to revindicate for the
churches their presentative character, unless the lord .
was compellable to present & clerk to the bishop on the
vacancy of a church. Pope Alexander IIL. conferred an
unspeakable boon upon Christendom in completing the


xviii | — INTRODUCTION.


disinfeudation of the parish churches, which were ap-
purtenant to manors, by declaring the patronage of
them to be escheated to the bishop, if it were not exer-
cised within six months. "What is strange is, that the
term '' benefice," which is a tradition of a time full of evil
for the church, when it was really in chains to the temporal
power, has been retained as a title of superiority on the
part of churches appurtenant to manors in distinction
from churches appropriated to cathedrals and abbeys.
So that what was originally & term of reproach has
become a term of honour, whilst the word * advowson,"
which had its origin in the best ages of the Church and
of which the maintenance identifies the Church of the
Plantagenets with the Church of the Saxon kings, is of
little or no repute &mongst the clergy themselves, and
many would desire to abolish it under the mistaken
notion that it is à record of lay usurpation.

There is & passage in Bracton's treatise which seems
to throw light upon the time when it was composed,
namely where he treats of the difference hetween the
writ of "quare impedit" and the writ of "quare non
permittit" in Chapter VI. The latter writ was available
io a& class of persons, who were not in seysine of the
right of presentation, but were for some other reason
entitled to the right of presenting to & church. Bracton
in the fourth section of the above chapter enumerates
three classes of persons so entitled by reason of their
temporary possession of & tenement, to which the advow-
son was appurtenant, first husbands who were in such
possession by right of the dower of their deceased wife,
under the law of England (per legem Anglis) ; secondly,
lessees who were in such possession in virtue of a grant
for & term of years; thirdly, creditors who had such
possession of a tenement by way of pledge. Now the
law in respect of dower and advowsons underwent a
change in 1250 (48 H. 111), which is not noticed by
Bracton in this passage, and Britton (L. IV. Ch. vi.) has


INTRODUCTION. l xiX


aceeordingly omitted from his list of persons entitled to :
an action of * quare non permittit," husbands holding pos-
session of the dower of heir wives after iheir death
under the * Lex Anglie." But the silence of Bracton as
to the ehange made in the law by the provisions of
Oxford-in that year for compelling impeders of presenta-
tions to appear and plead, lest the vacant living should
lapse to the bishop, is still more significant. Bracton
States that William de Ralegh from the necessity of the
case had strained the existing law to repress the malice of
persons, who designedly iimpeded presentations in order
that lapse might be incurred, and that & new practice
had been introduced per conatvwm curie, under which
impeders who did not appear to the summons of the
King's Court were liable to be distrained by the sheriff.
And fürther Bracton goes on to say ihat an inhibition .
ought to issue to the Bishop, that he should not admit a
clerk at the presentation of anyone until the plea in the -
court of the king had been terminated. ^ Under the
provisions of Oxford, whieh were drawn up by the barons
and ratified by Henry-IIL in 1259, which were twice
republished by him, and after the general pacification
were etnbodied in the Statute of Marlbridge in 1267, it
was provided that in a plea of quare 4mpedit if. the im-
peder did not appear on the day assigned nor sent an
essoiner, he was to be attached for another day, and
if on that day he neither appeared nor sent an es-
soiner, he was .to be distrained by the sheriff, and there-
upon if he still made default the court was to write to
'the Bishop, that the reclamation of the'impeder should
not, be allowed to stand in the way for that turn of the
presentation.  Bracton would hardly have omitted to
notice this important change in the law, if it had been ac-
complished at tlie time when he wrote his chapter on the
proceedings before the justiciaries, where & party had
been summoned to answer to & writ. of * quare impedit."
It is obvious, that the law in respect of the right of
advowson had become much more settled before the con-


XX | INTRODUCTION.


clusion of the reign of Henry IIL than it was wben
Glanville compiled his work on the Laws and Customs of
England. "Thus we find in the case of clerks, who had
been tortiously presented to churches and upon such
tortious presentation had been instituted by & bishop
under à ' boná fide" belief that the presentation had
been made to him by the advocate of the church, that
Glanville cites a statute, which had been passed expressly
to maintain such clerks during their lifetime in the posses-
sion of their churches, whereas in Bracton's time the
ordinary, if he had instituted a clerk to & church upon the
presentation of & person who was notthe true patron,
might be adjudged to set the church free, or to make
satisfaction to the true patron by collating his clerk to an
equivalent church. It would also seem that in Bracton's
time endeavours were occasionally made by the losing
party to elude the judgment of the King's Court in an
assise of last presentation by applying to the Court of
Rome for letters from the Lord Pope (auctoritate lite-
rarum Domini Papa) authorising nim to commence pro-
ceedings afresh before other judges than those of the
King's Court, as plaintiff respecting the same church.
Before Glanville's time the practice would seem to have
been, where the right of advowson was claimed by ad-
verse parties, for à suit to .be instituted between them in
the Court of Christianity. Under the Constitutions of
Clarendon (A.D. 1164) however it was resolved that all
such suits should be commenced and terminated in the
Court of the King, and Glanville accordingly lays it
down as law in his time that, where adverse parties
claimed before & bishop the right of advowson, & writ
of prohibition might issue to the bishop from the King's
Court at the petition of either party, and the bishop
should be forbidden to proceed further in the matter,
until the right of advowson had been determined in the
King's Court. Thé proceeding therefore, to which Bracton
refers, was & device to elude the provisions of the Consti-
tutions of Clarendonunder the authority of letters from the


P


INTRODUCTION. xxi


. Pope, under which the losing party seught to transfer the
cognizance of the question from the King's Court to the
.. Court of Christianity, in which case the King's justiciaries
were empowered to issue & writ.of prohibition to the
Court of Christianity. "The proceedings in such cases of
prohibition are more fully discussed by Bracton in the
third and fourth chapters of his Treatise on Exceptions,
which concludes his work ;.and which will form part
" of a future volume.

The assise of last presentation, as distinguished from
the assise of the right of advowson, had obviously a two-
fold tendency, in the first place to constrain indirectly
the pátrons of vacant churches to present.their clerks to
- & bishop for institution, and in the second place to pro-
mote the severanee of advowsons from the lordships of
manors, and 80 to accelerate the disinfeudation of pro-
perty dedicated to the services of religion. The assise
of  mortdancester, which follows next in the order of
. Braeton's treatises, was intended for the protection of
heirs against wrongful intrusions made by lords of manors
upon lands, of which the ancestors of such heirs had died
seysed. -It has been thought, with some reason, that the
proceedings in the King's Court under a writ of mort-
daneéester, which were in use in Glanvilles time, had
their origin in the reign of Henry IL, and were not a
modification of a previous form of proceeding for an
identical objeet, as was the case in regard tio & writ of
right. What happened in the reign of Henry II. was
probably a transfer of jurisdiction in such questions from
the manorial courts to the King's Court, or at all events,
if the cognisance of such questions was not altogether
withdrawn from the manorial courts, access to the King's
Court was made available on all occasions to the heir, and
the King's writ-was made returnable * coram me vel jue-
* ticis meis." - These writs might be sued out by the heir -
in the reign of Henry IL, in any one of these cases:
(L) where the ancestor had died within the. realm since


xXli INTRODUCTION.


the ecoronation of the King; (2.) where he had set out
on & pilgrimage to the Holy Land or to the shrine of
Saint James of Compostella since the coronation of the
King, and had died in the course of such pilgrimage ;
(3.) where he had entered into a religious order since
the coronation of the King, such entry into & religious
order being held to constitute the civil death of such
ancestor. À two-fold alteration in the writ of mort-
dancester had taken place before Bracton wrote his
Treatise. It was one of the provisions of the Great
Charter of King John that the king, or during his
absence .out of the realm his chief justiciary, should
send two justiciaries into every county four times in
every year to hold assises of novel disseysine, and mort-
dancester, and last presentation, which should only be
held in the counties in which the cause of action had
arisen. Henry III. on his accession to the throne con-
firmed this provision of the Great Charter, and accord.
ingly the writ in use in Braeton's time, which was
addressed to the viscount, directed him to summon a
jury of twelve loyal men of free condition to appear
coram, justiciamits mostris ad. primam assisaum cum 4n
paries 4llas venerint (fol. 253 b). A further alteration
had been made in the writ as regards the time, within
which the recognition before the King's justiciaries
should be limited. ^ Under a provision made in the
Parliament summoned to Winchester in 21 Henry III.
which is recorded in the Annals of Burton (Rolls Edi-
tion, p. 252), and of which an entry has been made in
the Patent Rolls of 21 Henry IIL, the recognition was
not to extend further back than to the last return of
King John from Ireland. The tenor of the King's Letters
Patent is as follows: * Quum nuper provisum fuit quod
* quaedam brevia nostra de cursu mutentur in articulis
* subscriptis, videlicet, in narratione descensus ab ante-
: * gessoribus in Brevi de Recto, quod prius fieri solet &
* tempore Henrici regis senioris, anno et die quo obiit,


INTRODUCTION. xxiii
" provisum est, quod de cetero non fiat computatio &
* tam longinquo tempore, sed & tempore regis Henrici
." gvi nostri. Brevia mortis antecessoris et Brevia de
* Nativis, quorum terminus prius fuit- post primam
coronationen Ricardi regis avunculi nostri, de cetero
non excedant ultimum reditum domini Johannis regis
* patris nostri de Hybernia in Angliam"! This limi-
tation of time continued in force until the third year
. ofthe reign of King Edward I., when the enquiry under
 &n assise of mortdancester was further limited to the
time of the ecoronation of Henry IIL, the father of the
reigning king. .

The limitation of time in the writ of mortdancester
during the reign of Henry IIL, throws light upon the
time at which Bracton composed his work, or at all
events upon the time at which,he prepared his treatise
* De Assisa Mortis Antecessoris." There are three if not
more MSS. of Braeton's work, one of which has been
very recently discovered in the course of eataloguing the
Digby MSS. in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, in which
the writ isset forth precisely in the terms, in which it was
drawn up during the reign of Henry IIT. On the other
hand the great majority of the MSS., amongst which
must have been those after whieh the text of Tottell's
edition of the printed Bracton of 1569 was settled, ex-
hibit & confused form of writ, in which & parenthesis is
introduced stating that the limitation of time was altered
in the.reign of Edward I. Thus the writ as it stood in
the reign of Henry IIL, and as we find it set forth in
MS. Rawlinson C. 160, was in this form, * Rex vicecomiti


(€


«€


lIn the Editor's note at p. 197
of the present volume it is stated
that this Jimitation of the writ of
mortdancaster was introduced by
the Statute of Merton, 20. H. III.
ànd such would be:a justifiable in:
ference from the mode in which it


is printed in the Statutes at Large,
where it appears as part of the
Statute of Merton, but the better
opinion would seem to he that, it
was enacted in the following year
in à Parliament held at West
minster.


xxlv INTRODUCTION.


* salutem. Si talis fecerit te securum de clameo suo
* prosequendo &c. tunc summone per bonos summoni-
* tores duodecim liberos et legales homines de vicineto
^ de tali villa, quod sint coram justiciariis nostris ad
* primam assisam, cum in partes illas venerint, parati
* cognoscere sacramento, si talis pater vel mater, vel
"* gyuneulus vel amita, frater vel soror ipsius talis fuit
* geisjitus vel seisita in dominico suo ut de feodo de
* tanto terre et tanto redditu cum pertinentiis in tali
* villa, de quibus obiit seisitus post ultimum reditum
* Johannis patris nostri de Hibernia in Angliam, et
* sj predictus talis ejus hores propinquior sit."

The writ as originally drawn up in Glanville's time
was of this tenor: |

* Rex vicecomiti salutem. Si G. filius F. fecerit te
* securum de clamore suo prosequendo, tune summone
* per bonos summonitores duodecim liberos et legales
* homines de visineto de illa villa, quod sint coram
* me vel justiciis meis eo die parati sacramento recog-
* noscere, si T. pater predicti QG. fuit seisitus in
* dominieo suo sicut de feodo suo, de una virgata
' * terre in illa villa die qua obiit, si obiit post primam
eoronationem meam, et si ille G. propinquior hseres
ejus est, &c."
It will be seen on & comparison of this earlier form of
the writ, which was in use in the reign of Henry IL,
with that which was in use in the reign of Henry III,
that it differed both in respect of the judges before whom
it was to be returned, and in respect of the time within
which the recognition was to be limited, and further it
would appear, as observed by Reeve in his History of
English Law (Vol. I, p. 369, edition of 1869), that,
whereas in Glanvilles time the writ on the face of it
seems to have been confined to an inquiry as to the
Seysine of the father, it might embrace in Bracton's time
an inquiry into the seysine of the father or mother,
brother or sister, uncle or &unt. I &m not, however,


Lad
-


Laj
La


INTRODUCTION. —— xxv


quite satisfied, that we should be justified in adopting
the striet. interpretation, whieh Reeve advocates, of the
. lenguage of the writ as set forth by Glanville, inasmuch
- as Glanville in the previous chapter speaks of the heir
claiming tlie seysine of his ancestor, and in & subsequent
 ehapter in explaining the course of proceeding says, that
ihe assise would be stayed, *si & tenente ipso dicatur
'* ípsum petentem inde fuisse seisitum post mortem
* patris vel alicujus-antecessoris wi." lf on the other
. hand the writ of mortdancester, as set out. by Glanville,
— isto be construed strictly, it is manifest that the right
of escheat on the part of the chief lord, as it existed at
that time, had become much curtailed in the reign of
Henry III.

The writ of mortdancester as set out in Tottell's edi-
tion of Bracton of 1569, which is followed in the subse.
quent edition of 1640, is in hopeless confusion. The
text, as wil be seen by reference to fol. 253 b, is not
merely corrupt in itself, but it is rendered more con-
- fused by the clumsy introduction into the text within &
parenthesis of a passage, which was probably Appehoeg
as &, note by the side of the original MS.
^  *Rex vicecomiti salutem. Si talis fecerit te secu-
* rum de clameo suo prosequendo &ec. tunc summone
* per bonos 'summonitores duodecim liberos et legales
* homines de visneto de tali villà, quod "sint coram
* justieiariis nostris ad primam assisam, cum in partes
* illas venerint, parati sacramento recognoscere, si talis
* pater vel mater, vel avunculus, vel amita, frater vel


^. f'goror ipsius talis fuit seysitus vel seysita in dominico


. * guo ut de feodo de tanto terre et tanto redditu cum
." pertinentiis in tali villa, de quo obiit, et si obiit post
*,ultimum reditum regis Johannis patris nostri de
* Hibernia in Angliam (et tempore vegis Edwardi
" mutatus fwit terminus date post coromationem regis
* Henrici patris ipsvus.regis Edward) et si preedietus
* talis ejus heres propinquior sit,"


xxvl INTRODUCTION.


It is hardly open to doubt that the words de quo obiit
"which occur in this version of the writ, are & misprint
for die quo obiit, which is the general reading of the
various MSS., in which a writ containing & parenthesis
of &like character to that of the printed writ, although
not always precisely in the same words, is found. "The
Glastonbury MS. also adds the words *Ista data fuit
* per Statuta de Merton," so far confirming the generally
received tradition, that the limitation of time to the last
return of King John from Ireland was made in the
Parliament of Merton, which tradition as we have already
shown may with good reason be rejected. — It is not very
obvious at first sight on what grounds the Parliament
of Westminster (21 Henry III.) should have chosen the
last return of King John from Ireland as the new limi-
tation for writs of morüdancester King John made
three visits to Ireland. The first occurred during the
lifetime of his father, shortly after Henry II. in a general
council held at Oxford, A.D. 1177, had appointed his
youngest son King, or as some chroniclers say, Lord
of Ireland (Dominus Hibernie), which appointment was
confirmed by Pope Alexander IIL — The second visit
happened A.D. 1185, also during the lifetime of King
Henry IL, but according to the Chronicle of Benedict of
Peterborough (Rolls Edition, Vol. I, p. 339). King John
did not return to England on this occasion with any
glory, as he was deserted by his army in Ireland and
came away almost as a fugitive. The third and last
visit of King John took place A.D. 1210, when he was
in possession of the English throne, and this expedition
was attended with great military success, although it
was stained by execrable acts of cruelty. It was, how-
ever, held forth to the citizens of London as a glorious
expedition, and Matthew Paris speaks of King John
returning triumphant to London, and immediately ex-
torting from & convention of all the clergy of ihe
realm of England an enormous talliage of one hundred


INTRODUCTION. xxvii


thousand. pounds sterling (Historia Anglorum, Rolls
Edition, Vol. IL, p. 123). The same author elsewhere
in his Abbreviatio Chronicorum, (id. Vol. IIL, p. 225),

speaks of the tax on this occasion as amounting to one
hundred thousand marks of silver. Whatever may have
been the correct amount of this nefarious exaction, for
such is the term which Matthew Paris applies to the
Royal tax, there can be no doubt that it constituted on
that account & well marked epoch. We are disposed,

however, to think that the Parliament of Westminster
selected the epoch of King John's last return from
Ireland, as the limit of i inquiry under & writ of mort-
. dancester and under several other writs, such as those of
, eosinage, ael, and bisael, on other considerations, namely,
because the year 1210 was the last year of orderly
government and of what might be called a time of
peace in England, for in the next following year Pope
Innocent IIL absolved from their fealty all the subjects
ofthe Crown of England, and the nobles of King John
both in England and on the Continent rose in rebellion
against him. Further, in the next following year the
Pope formally deposed King John from the throne, and
proclaimed to Europe a general crusade against him, as
the enemy of the Universal Church. These considera-
tions may have influenced the Parliament of West-
minster in deciding that an inquiry under a writ of
mortdancester might with propriety be carried back as
far as the year 1210, which would correspond very
closely with the scope of the inquiry in a writ of last
presentation, which has been already mentioned, namely,
"^ who last presented to the church in Diquesuon in time.
of peace (tempore pacis) " ?

It may excite some surprise at first thought, that the
seribes of the MSS. in which the variation of the writ in
the time of King Edwerd is mentioned, did not sub-
stitute the new Edwardian form of writ in the place of
that Non was in use in the reign of Heuryd ILL, after


£t


LY


xxviii INTRODUCTION.


the example of Bracton himself, who had substituted the
writ of Henry III. in the place of that of Henry II. This
omission on their part may admit of & simple explanation.
In the first place the language of the law was under-
going a change in the latter years of Henry IIL, and
we find that the first statute (Westminster I.) passed in
the reign of Edward IL. is drawn up in Norman French,
and the provisions of it, which applied to the writ Dr
mortdancester, are in these words :

* Et que brief de mort de auncestre, de cosinage,
* del aiel et d'entre, et. brief de neyvte cient le terme
* del eoronement mesme le Roy Henry et nemye
* avaunt."

As the French ions came to be generally adopted
in the cireuits of the judges in the reign of Edward I,
and French forms of writs and pleadings were used in
holding the assises, it would obviously have been in-
appropriate for the copyist in the reign of Edward I. to
have inserted the new French form of writ of mort-
dancester in Bracton's Latin text. The King's Courts
had undergone a great reform in the latter years of
Henry III. King Edward's chief advisers were lay
lawyers rather than elerks and bishops, and the revival
of the office of Chief Justice by Henry III. under the
pressure put upon him by the provisions of Oxford, in
1259, was but the prelude to & more systematic organi-
sation of the King's Courts into three divisions, each
with its own staff of justiciaries and its own sphere of
work, under the title of the King's Bench, the Exchequer,
and the Common Pleas. "The King's Bench and the Ex-
chequer were time-honoured names, that of the Common
Pleas had originated with the Great Charter of King
John, under the seventeenth article of which it was pro-
vided, * Communia placita non sequantur Curiam nos-
* tram, sed teneantur in aliquo certo loco." "This
provision of the Great Charter had probably been
hitherto eluded or had received scanty attention, but


INTRODUCTION. |. XXix ,


heneeforth the admimistration of justice both at West-
minster and in the counties was made both symmetrical
and effective. We might, however, with some reason have
expected to find an. explicit referenee to the Edwardian
legislation as regards the assise of. mortdancester in the
law treatise known as Britton, which is in Norman
French, and according to Lord Coke's authority was
" published in 9. Edward I., but Britton assigns no definite:
time of limitation to the writ of mortdancester, fur-
ther than by observing that the same limitation of
time i8 fixed for writs of Cosinage, Ael, and Besael as
for writs.of mortdancester. "This identity of limitation
as regards all these writs rests upon the Statute of
Westminster, L, so that Britton's language leads to the
inference, that he was aequai nted with the subject mat-
ter.of that statute. I do not propose to discuss at the
. present moment the authorship of Britton, nor the time
at which the work was completed. "There are several
matters referred to in the text of Britton, if such references
have not been added to the original work, which warrant.
us in fixing upon the twentieth year of Edward I. as
the probable period of the completion of the work. Such
seems to be the opinion of Mr. Francis Morgan Nichols, as
expressed by him in his introduction to his recent excellent
edition of Brittou, and for which opinion he gives good
reasons ; but the silence of Britton, equally as of Bracton,
a3 to certein changes made in the law is better evidence
of the period, at which they respectively composed their
Works, then any references to new constitutions, as such
referénces may have been additions on the part of the
Scribe. It has already béen observed that the words de
quo obiit, which occur in Tottell's text of the writ of
mortdancester are probably &n unintentional misprint
for die quo obiit, which phrase, together with the phrases
die quo habitwm religionis asswmpsit, and die quo ter —
peregrinationis arripuit, Braeton proceeds to discuss at


length in fol. 264. This leads up to & discussion as to
Q190. c |


XXX INTRODUCTION.

the signification of the term * day," and as to the
division of the artificial day into twenty-four hours,
and then Bracton goes on to say that an hour is made


up of forty moments. ' Hora autem fit ex quadraginta


momentis." This division of the hour, which was ap-
parently received at Westminster in Bracton's time, is
worthy of remark. "The reading quadraginta in letters
is found in MS., Rawlinson C. 160, and the reading XL.
in numerals is found in MS., Rawlinson C. 159. There can
be little doubt that quadraginta is the correct number,
inasmuch as Bracton adopts the same division of the hour
in his chapter De Essoniis, fol. 359 b., in which he dis-
cusses some of the legal peculiarities of leap year.
Britton in his corresponding chapter (L. III. Ch. xvii.)
in discussing a similar phrase, * del jour qe il morust,"
follows the same system as Bracton in dividing the day
into twenty-four hours, but he does not allude to any
division of the hour into moments or minutes as generally
adopted in his time. — His silence as to leap year may be
attributed to the circumstance, that before his work was
completed leap year had been the subject of a Parlia-
mentary statute, the date of which has been a matter of
dispute, but the editors of the recently revised edition of
the Statutes have adopted the date of 9th May in the
fortieth year of King Henry IIL, upon the authority of
the Red Book of tlie Exchequer, long preserved at West-
minster. The date assigned to the Bissextile Statute in
Cotton MS., Claudius, D. 2, is 44, H. 111.

I lhiave endeavoured in vain to discover any contempo-
raneous evidence, other than Bracton's, of the division of
the hour into forty moments having been received in
England during the reign of Henry III. We know from
various sources that such & division of the hour was
used at Bologna by Accursius, the founder of the school of
the Glossatores, whose son Franciscus accompanied King
Edward 1. to England in 1273, and spent eight years in
England, being one of the most trusted advisers of the


INTRODUCTION. xxxi


king in organising his law reforms. But this visit of
Franciscus to England would be too late to account for
Bracton's use of this division of the hour, and I am dis-
posed to think that it had been adopted in the English
law eourts after the example of the Italian civilians
before the middle of the thirteenth century. "That the
division of the hour into forty moments was not a
technical division confined to professional legists may be
inferred from its mention by two authors in connexion
with other divisions of the hour. Papias, for instance,
an Italian Grammarian of the eleventh century, writes
thus: * Athomi 376 faciunt unum ostentum.  '*Osten-
* tum unum et dimidium facii unum momentum.
* Momenta duo et duz partes unius faciunt partem unam.
" Una pars et I. facit minutum unum, duo minuta faciunt
" punetum unum. Quinque vero puncti faciunt horam
* unam. Hora igitur habet Athomos 22,560. ostenta
" 60, momenta 40, partes 15, punctos 5." 'The other
citation is from an unknown author of & treatise * De
Mensuris" which has been preserved by Goesius in his
.eollection of Rei Agrarie Auctores, Ámstelredami 1674.
The writer, after discussing the subject of weights, and
how the year is capable of being divided after the man-
ner of & pound weight, goes on to say, * Libra dicitur
* quiequid per duodenarii numeri perfectionem adim-
* pletur. Nam libra dici potest annus, qui constat
*.ex qu&tuor temporibus et xii mensibus, et ex lii.
* hebdomadibus et die vel quadrante. Libra esse potest
* gquinoctialis dies sine sua nocte, qui constat xii.
* horis: hora constat ex v. punctis, x. minutis, xv. parti-
* bus, XI momentis, 1x osténtis." It will be seen that
both these &uthors agree as to the division of the hour '
into forty moments, and as to the proportion which the
ostentwm, evidently the forerunner of the modern minute,
bore to the momentwm, and also as to the division of the
hour into fifteen pavtes, they also agree in their compu-
tation of the puncti, and, further, the geometricians seem
| : e 2


xxxii | — INTRODUCTION.


to have been familiar with & division of the hour into
ten minuta, which was also known to Papias.

The early history of horology in England is involved
in much obscurity, and it is & disputed question whether
automatous clocks moved by weights and wheels were
known in England before the fourteenth century; when
Richard de Wallingford, who had the reputation of being
one of the first mathematicians of his age, constructed
&n astronomical clock for the monastery of St. Albans,
of which he had been elected abbot in 1326. He died
in 1335, before the elock was completed. "This clock is
sometimes spoken of as the oldest clock known, and if
its priority as an astronomical clock were in question, it
is probably of earlier origin than any of the famous
astronomical clocks in the German or Burgundian cathe-
drals. But there is good reason for believing that the
astronomical: clocks of the fourteenth century were not
the earliest species of clocks moved by wheels and
weights. The astronomica] clock was a highly complicated
mechanical toy, à kind of rotatory almanac for all time,
which made known not merely the hours of the day and
of the night, but the days of the month, the fasts and
festivals of the year, the course of the heavenly bodies
and their influence on the tides, &c. "The earliest known
elock of this description was & present from the Sultan
of Egypt, in 1232, to the Emperor Frederic IL, and the.
historian Trithemius tells us that it was moved by
weights and wheels. "The mechanism of this clock was
therefore constructed on a totally different principle from
that of the ancient water elocks, of which we have an
equally famous instance in & clock sent by the King of
Persia, in the year 807,as & present to the Emperor
Charlemagne. This clock was of & highly ingenious
character, but it had no affinity to modern clocks, being
kept in motion by water passing through & tube and
dropping into & cup in aceordance with & system of
motive power invented, aecording to Vitruvius (1 ix.


INTRODUCTION. xxxiii


c. viii.) by Ctesibius of Alexandria in the third century
- before Olirist. The complicated astronomical clocks, on the
other hand, were not suited to the open air, and the
knowledge which they ERDOSMuO was chiefly of interest to


. Jearned men:


The less ambitious task of bidiesting the hours of the
day and of the night to the publie out of. doors is said
by Italian chroniclers to have been first discharged by a
clock set upon & lofty tower in the city of Padua by
. Ubertinus, Prince of Carrara, somewhere about 1340.
This elock was constructed by & physician, who combined
the aetive exercise of high mathematieal science and
consummate mechanical skill with the practi?e of medi-
"eine, His name was Jaques Dondi, and *he is sometimes
. eonfounded with his son, also a&.mechanician of remark.
able talent, who was ennobled by the Emperor and traus-
mitted to his family the surname of Dall Horologio.
We need not however travel so far as Italy, nor wait for -
the fourteenth century to make acqueintance with &
 eloek set up on & tower for the service of the public out
of doors. "There is, for instance, & well established tradi-
tion in England that a clock of an earlier date than the
famous clock of Dondi was set up on a tower near West-
 minster Hall under very memorable circumstances. The
elock in question is said to have been construeted out of
the proceeds of & fine of 800 marks imposed upon Chief
Justice Hengham in 1288, in consequence of his having
. &ltered & record, of his court, whereby a poor defendant
was to pay 6s. 8d. instead of 13s. 4d. Lord Coke quotes
this tradition as resting on & very solid foundation, and

the imposition of the fine of 800 marks upon the chief
justice for the cause alleged is cited by the king's jus-
ticiaries on three separate occasions, namely in the reigns
of Richard ILL, of Queen Elizabeth, and of William
IIL, as establishing & precedent against altering any
record of the King's Court, after it has been once made up.
Further, Mr. Justice Southeote in the case which oc-


9 9414 INTRODUCTION,


eurred in the early part of the reign of Queen Elizabeth,


. not merely mentioned the tradition of the fine and its


employment, but added that the clock stil continued
there, which had been furnished out of the fine imposed
upon the chief justice, and he clenched his refusal to
màke an alteration in the record of his court by this
. remark, * I do not intend to have to build another clock
tower." "The Clock House itself continued in existence
In à ruined state as late as the year 1715, but I have not
met with any reference to the clock itself since the reign
of the queen above mentioned. "There is also a record
of & large new clock having been supplied to the
Cathedral of Canterbury, A.p. 1292, at an expense of
thirty pounds, ánd as this clock was not a famous clock
in history,like many cathedral clocks of the next follow-
ing century, it may be presumed to have been an ordi-
nary clock, in which & hammer struck the hours of the
night and of the day upon a bell (campana) as was the
case, without doubt, of the clock set up.on Hengham's
clock tower, the bell of which when struck could be
heard in all the courts of law at Westminster  À
learned editor of * Blackstone's Commentaries" is dis-
posed to discredit both Lord Coke and Mr. Justice South-
cote on the ground that automatous clocks moved by
weights and wheels were not invented before the four-
ieenth century, but his reasoning involves a petitio
principii, and he does not suggest any other probable
origin of the Westminster clock tower. Besides, the
class of eloeks, of which none are known to have been
constructed by European mechanicians before the four.
teenth century, were clocks of most complicated me-
chanism, which was the refined outcome of an art, which
had for sometime ceased to be in its infancy. No one
can suppose that the clock of the Monastery of St.
Albans, already mentioned, could have been constructed
by Riehard de Wallingford without the aid of skilled
workmen to carry out his conceptions, Before Bir


P


" INTRODUCTION. | XXXV


Charles Babbage could carry into execution in the pre-
sent century the conception of his wonderful calculating
machine he had not merely to find skilled workmen, but
to invent tools.for them to work with. And it is not
reasonable to suppose that the famous clock of Bologna
of. the-year 1356, and the famous clock of Paris of 1364,
and the famous clock of Strasbourg of 1370, not to men-
tion other famous clocks ofthe fourteenth century, were
amongst the first attempts to construct clocks kept in
motion by weights and wheels. The fact, that such a
. method of maintaining the. movement of & clock was
practicable, was made known in Europe before the middle
of the 18th century by the arrival of the horologiwm
already alluded to, which was sent in 1232 by the
Sultan of Egypt to the Emperor Frederick II. The
further fact that the hour was divided into momenta
before the middle- of the 13th century is also clear
' from the circumstance that such a division of the hour
was used by Accursius, who was & Professor of Law in
the University of Bologna as early as 1221, and died
somewhere about 1263, having renounced his professor-
ship after forty years' service in order to complete his
Gloss in the quiet of his country residence. "There can also
be little doubt that the term '* momentum," as a division
of the hour, had reference to the movement of a clock im-
pelled by weights and wheels, whilst the term '* osten-
ium" may have been of earlier origin, and may have
been applied to those water clocks,in which a figure
under the action of water passing through a tube and
falling into & cup raised its hand and pointed to a nu-
meral engraved upon a column, thereby indieating the
hour of the day.  Bracton makes no allusion to the divi-
sion of the hour into sixty * ostenta," but he speaks
of its division into forty "momenta" without any
further explanation, as if that mode of dividing the
hour was well known in his day. I have been unable,
however, to find any mention of this division of the


XXXVl INTRODUCTION.


hour since his tme, except in commentators on the Gloss
of Accursius, and the Astronomer Royal, Sir George
Airy, who &t my request has been kind enough to inves-
tigate the subject, has informed me that he has been
equally unsuccessful. It is one amongst many instances,
in which &n intermediate stage in the process of a great
art has been forgotten, where a new invention has quickly
 superseded an older one. Perhaps if the Registry of
Wills at Somerset House were carefully searched there
might be found some allusion to clocks in & will of the
thirteenth century, as it is to the will of Archbishop
Parker, made in 1575, that we are indebted for our
knowledge of the fact, that watches were at that time
made in so compact 8 form that the archbishop carried
one about with him set in the top of his Indian walk-
ing eane, which he bequeathed as & legacy to Richard,
Bishop of Ely.

It was one object of the assise of mortdancester to
ascertain whether the ancestor of the claimant had died
seysed of the estate ''in dominico suo ut de feodo." In
Glanville's writ the words are, *in dominico suo sicut
* de feodo suo." These terms are of feudal origin, but
Bracton instances & variety of interpretations which may
be given to the word * demesne," and concludes by say-
ing that the term * demesne " in the writ may be applied
to every kind of freehold, of which an ancestor died
seysed as of fee, and from which if he had been ejected
during his lifetime he might have recovered it by an
assise of novel disseysine. So also with regard to the
phrase *as of fee," Bracton explains it to signify any-
thing, whether it be à tenement or & rent, which à per- |
son holds from &ny cause for himself and his heirs.
Another and no less important object of this assise was
to ascertain whether the claimant was the next heir
(hzeres propinquior), and here the principle of primogeni-
ture is recognised as giving to the amtenatus an exclusive
preference to the inheritance over the posinatus. "The


INTRODUCTION, | XXXV1ll


law of England - in this matter had pro 'obably nds
a considerable change since the Conquest, although it
màá&y be open to doubt whether there was any uniform
rule of succession to land in England in Anglo-Saxon
times.  Áecording to the ancient British law duriüg the
Roman oceupation, which was still maintained as law in
Wales in the reign of Edward L, the land was divisible
amongst all the sons of & deceased freeholder, and this
rule of suecession was "upheld even in England after the
Conquest in those counties, in which the custom of gavel-
' kímd prevailed. Lord Hale is of opinion that the laws
of Edward the Confessor justify the view that the land -
of & deceased freeholder before the Conquest was divisible
amongst &ll his children, male and female, if he died in-
testate, and that the law of primogeniture was not
established in allits completeness by William the Con-
queror, but grew np gradually, and was in fact not fully
recognised until the reign of Henry IL In support of
. this view Lord Hale cites the compilation known as the
* Leges Henrici Primi," in which the eldest born son is
declared to be entitled to the principal estate- of his
. father, but not to all his land. The custumal, however,
which passes by the name of the Laws of Henry L, is of
& later date than the reign of that king, and it contains
. mumerous vestiges of ancient English jurisprudence,

which are traceable to Ànglo-Saxon times. Lord Hale
may therefore be.said, pace tanti viri, to have been rash
: in relying on this custwmaLl as evidence of the state of
the law in the reign of Henry L, for the limited right of
.primogeniture to which he refers may have been a tradi-
tion of Anglo-Saxon times, inasmuch as it is incontro-
vertible that the-euccession to land held by military
tenure in Anglo-Saxon times was subject to a different
law of inheritance from land held by à tenure other than
military. For instance Glanville, whose authority on
. Such a subject cannot be impugned, says: '* When a per-

^ f son having an inheritable estate dies, if he has only a


xxxvlii INTRODUCTION. :


" single son and heir, it is indistinguishably true that
* such son succeeds to the entire estate of the father.
* |f he leaves more sons than one, then & distinction is
* made whether the father was a knight (miles), in other
* words holding by a military fee or a free sockman (soke-
* mannus) because if he was a knight, in other words
* holding by a military fee, then according to the law of
* the realm of England (Anglis) the first born son suc-
* ceeds his father in the entirety, so that none of his
* brothers can claim of right a part thereof; but if he
* be & free sockman then indeed the inheritance is
* divided amongst all the sons, how many soever they
* may be, in equal parts, if it be & sockage and was
* divided of olden time, saving, however, the chief man.
* sion to the first born son in consideration of his rank
* of eldership (sesnecice suce) on such condition however
* that he shall satisfy the others up to its value. But if
* it has not been divided of olden time, then the eldest
* born, according to the eustom of some, shall obtain the
"* entire inheritance, but according to the custom of
* others the youngest son is the heir." (Lib. VII. Cap. 3).
The controversy amongst learned men whether tenures
were common amongst the Anglo-Saxons, or were intro-
duced by William the Conqueror, would thus appear to
resolve itself into a question of eode,or 8 question of
degree, if any weight is to be given to Glanville's state-
ment in the above passage, and as the principle involved
in the military tenure of the Anglo-Saxons was the
defence of the kingdom, the rudiments of a system
were already in existence when the Conqueror arrived in
England, upon which he had no diffieulty in engrafting
many of the peculiar features of the feudal system ; but
I am disposed to think that the feudalism of England
was at all times superficial, and that as the crust of feu-
dalisn wore away from its inirmsie thinness, the
substance of the earlier Ánglo-Saxon institutions came
once more to the surface, and that it is to the solidity of


INTRODUCTION. XXXlX


those institutions that we are indebted for the continuity
of England's legal and political life.

Further it may be said that the policy of the King's
. Courts in Br&cton's time was to strengthen the right of
primogeniture by importing into the English order of
suecession the right of representation. Glanville informs
us (VIL. Cap. 3. 8. 8.) that before his timé there used to be
great doubts in cases where a person died leaving a
grandson, who was the son of & deceased elder son, to-
gether with a younger son surviving him, whether the
grandson or the younger son, the nephew in fact or the
uncle, had & preferable claim to the inheritance of their
eommonx ancestor.  Glanville himself inclined to the
grandson's claim, except where the elder son before his
death had been provided for by-the father and had left his
father's home 4fo, dico, s. pater suus non fuerit ab. avo
8uo forisfamliatus, but in Bracton's time the theory
of the law was well settled in favour of the grandson,
although the courts were precluded from giving effect to
it under particular cireümstances, propter caswm, regis
(f. 267. b). He elsewhere says (f. 327. b.) that where the
courts had decided in favour of the grandson, and his
uncle was in possession, they could not proceed to judg-
ment *quamdiu casus regis duraverit" This is one of
: the references, which enable us to form & reasonable
eonjeeture as to the time when Braeton wrote certain
of his treatises. He refers to the Casus regis in three
distinet treatises, one of them being the treatise De
assisa mortis antecessoris, the second being the treatise
De consanguinitate (f. 282), and the third being the
treatise De Ingressu (f. 327). —

The king who is alluded to in:the phrase **Casus
regis " was King John, who had successfully maintained
in England his title to succeed to his father's throne on
the.death of bis brother Richard L,in preference to
Prince Arthur, who was the son and representative of
the deceaséd Prince Geoffrey, the elder brother of King
. John. Prince Arthur on the other hand endeavoured to


xl. INTRODUCTION.


maintain on the Continent by force of arms his title to
Anjou and Maine, but he was taken prisoner by his
uncle in 1203, and was generally believed to have been


put to death by his order. Philip King of France, a£


all events believed in the crime of murder, and sum-
moned John as his vassal to appear before him on &
charge of murder made against him by the barons of


Brittany. John was contumacious, so Philip determined -


to enforce against him the sentence of his court, and war
thereupon ensued, the result of which was that the
whole of Normandy, Maine, Anjou, and Touraine, were


wrested from the English crown, and henceforth became


provinces of the kingdom of France. Meanwhile the
Princess Eleanor, the sister of Prince Arthur, had been
kept & state prisoner during the whole of King John's
reign, end her imprisonment was prolonged during the
reign of Henry III. down to the time of her death, which
took place in 1241. After her deasath,as both titles
centred in King Henry IIL, the casus regis may be said
to have come to an end as far as the King's title to the
throne could be in any way affected by the courts of West-
minster judicially recognising the right of representation
in the succession of descendants from & common stock.
The allusion which Bracton makes to the casus regis in
the three treatises above-mentioned, as being & bar to
the effective action of the courts, raises & presumption
that the treatises were composed before the death of the
Prineess Eleanor. Some slight support is given to this
presumption by the circumstance, that in none of the
three treatises is any judgment of the king's justiciaries
cited by Bracton, which is of a date so late as 1241. On
the other hand it deserves remark that Bracton has
made no allusion to the casus regis in his treatise De
&cquirendo rerum dominio," (f. 64 b.) in which he
treats of the right of representation, where he says
without any qualification that, if the younger born


brother has put himself into seysine of the ancestral:


inheritance in anticipation of the grandson, the latter


INTRODUCTION. | xli


may proceed by a writ of consanguinity or by a writ of
right against his uncle. Thisis one of the anomalies to
which I have made allusion in the introduction to the
firs& volume, which seems to warrant us in supposing
ihat Bracton's work was not written wno tenore, and
that some of the treatises which make up the fourth
"E book were composed at an earlier period than his second
book. : Another explanation may be suggested, that his
treatise * De &cquirendo rerum dominio, if it was of an
earlier date, was the substance of readings delivered by
him as Professor of Law in the University of Oxford,
whilst the treatises which are grouped together in his
fourth book were composed by him after he had become
' initiated in the practical working of the King's Courts.

Tt has been observed by Glanville, that the assise of
mortdancester was not applicable to lands held in bur-
gage tenure, in other words that the elder-born son in

' the case of burgage lands was not entitled to succeed
invariably to the estate of his father. This exception,
aceeording to. Glanville, was founded on a constitution

. — enáeted from considerations of publie interest. Bracton,
on the other hand, considers this exception to the general

. law to rest ón the custom of certain cities, boroughs, and
vills, more especially with reference to lands whieh had
been purchased,as distinguished from lands which had
been inherited. It seems to have been & general eustom .
in boroughs, that burghers might bequeath at their dia-

- eretion lands which they had purchased, equally as ehat-
tels, & confirmation of which custom will be found in
. the Domesday: of Ipswich, originally drawn up in the

: reign of King John, and which has been published in

. the Appendix to the Black Book of the Admiralty, Rolls
Series, Vol. II, p. 71. The Domesday of Ipswich says, that
it was used in the said town of Ipswich that all those
who had tenements and rents in the said town of their
Separate purchases in fee; might devise them freely by
wil to whomsoever they. would. Braeton says it was
the singular privilege of the barons of the City of Lon--


xlii | INTRODUCTION.


don, and of the burgesses of the City of Oxford that
they were empowered to bequeath to whom they
pleased not merely lands acquired by purchase, but
lands aequired by inheritance, precisely as if they were
chattels, and therefore he says that in such cities no
assise of mortdancester would lie. I have endeavoured
to ascertain whether there is any record preserved of this
ancient custom in the archives of the City of Oxford, but
the Town Clerk of Oxford has courteously informed me
that the archives contain no record on the subject. "There
are however ample records in existence elsewhere, which
show that the burgesses of Oxford enjoyed the same
eustoms, franchises, and laws as the citizens of London.
Thus, we have the text of à charter granted to the bur-
gesses of Oxford by King Henry III, in the thirteenth
year of his reign under the hand of Ralph Neville,
Bishop of Chichester, his Chancellor, which provides
that the burghers of Oxford shall freely enjoy all their
eustoms, franchises, and laws which they have in com-
mon with our citizens of London, and that they shall
not be impleaded outside the borough of Oxford, and
shallin all pleas derayne themselves according to the
laws and customs of the citizens of London, * quia ipsi
* et cives Londoniarum sunt de una et eadem consue-
* tudine, lege etlibertate." This charteris printed in the
Liber Custumarum of the City of London, Rolls edition,
part 11, p. 671, being copied from a portion of the City
Records, which found their way into the British Museum
—. with the Cotton M.S.S, and eonstitute the contents of
M.S. Claudius D. 11, f. 131 à. But I am obliged to the
Town Clerk of Oxford for having called my attention
to the Charter of Inspeximus, whieh Queen Elizabeth
granted to the citizens of Oxford in the seventh year of
her reign, which recites a previous charter of Henry II,
which is almost in the same words as the charter of
Henry IIL, and ends by confirming to the citizens of
Oxford the customs, franchises, and laws enjoyed by
them under that charter *et sicut cives mei Londin-


INTRODUCTION. xliii
. * enses eas habuerunt" Further this eharter of H. II.
purports to confirm all the franchises, &c. granted to the
citizens of Oxford by Henry L, his grandfather, in whose
reign there is mention of a mayor of Oxford, in à Charter
. of Donation to St. Bartholomew's Hospital, cited by Sir
John Peshalil. ES

The question how the cause was to proceed in an
assise of mordancester, where the tenant has vouched
the king as à warrantor, is diseussed by Braeton in the
 eleventh section of his seventh chapter (p. 180), and he
grounds his opinion, that thereupon judgment must be
deferred until the will of the king is known, upon a
judgment of Martin de Pateshull in 12 H. III. 'He had
laid down the same rule as applicable to proceedings in
an assise of novel disseysine, in fol. 172, for which he
eites no precedent, but in treating of the case of such an
assise falling into & perambulation he rests the same
rule, where the disseysine has been made by the bailiff
of the king, upon à judgment in & York Iter of 8
and 9 Henry III. (fol. 212). It is apparent from these
passages that the treatise on the assise of novel dissey-
sine as well as that on the assise of mortdancester must
have. been written some time prior to the treatise '' De
* warrantia, as Bracton in that treatise, fol 382 b,
cites & provision made on this subject at the dedication
of the Abbey Church of Hales by the king in the
presence of nine bishops and before Earl Richard and
"many other earls, whereby a tenant was. forbidden to
vouch the king as & warrantor, except in cases where the
king was bound to make compensation (ad escambium).?


! 'The charters of the City of Ox-
ford, with the exception of that of
King; Henry IIL, have been col-
lected in Anthony Wood's Ancient
and Present State of the City of
Oxford, with additions by the Rev.
Sir John Peshall, Bart. London,
' 1778.


? Mr. Finlason, in his edition of
Reeve's History, vol. i. p. 424, calls
attention to this provision, and
justly observes that it was an act
of the legislature, and one of those
many Acts of Parliament which are
now lost.


xliv INTRODUCTION.


Bracton has omitted to give the date of this provision,
which worked an important alteration in the general law,
but we are able to fix the date of it, às Matthew Paris
has recorded the dedication of the Abbey Church of
Hayles, in Gloucestershire, as having taken place on the
nones of November, A.D. 1951. Earl Richard was the
patron of the church, which he had founded in pursuance


of a vow, if he should escape shipwreck, and the king


and queen and all the magnates of England were pre-
sent on the occasion (Hist. Angl., Rolls Edition, Vol. III.
p. 115).

Several instances of the tenacity of local custom and
of the respect which the king's justiciaries paid to
them are cited by Bracton from time to time. One
of the most remarkable of these customs was the exemp-
tion of tenements in the county of Kent, if held in gavel-
kind, from being forfeited in certain cases of felony.
Braeton cites two judgments on this subject delivered
by justiciaries for whom he had the greatest respect,
namely, by William de Ralegh and by Martin de Pates-
hull (p. 299). In fact it would appear to have been a
recognised principle of jurisprudence in the early years of
the reign of Henry III. that local eustoms should be re-
spected by the justiciaries itinerant, where the decision
would otherwise be arbitrary on their part, for instance,
in actions of waste against a dowager, or a guardian, or a
termor, the question what ought to be adjudged waste
had to be decided by the justiciaries according to the
measure, constitution, and custom of the locality (patria),
p. 607.

Bracton treats briefly in his treatise De morte anteces-
soris the question, how an heir was to proceed to prove
the legitimacy of his father, ifexception was made to his
title to succeed to his grandfather's estate on the ground
that his father was à bastard. Where bastardy was im-
puted to the heir himself an inquest was usually trans-
mitted to the Court of Christianity (p. 129), if matrimony
or espousals were altogether denied, but the trial of the
marriage of a dead man was not to be transmitted to &


INTRODUCTION. xlv


Court of Christianity, because the man was not alive to
answer nor to except, but it might be inquired into by
an assise held after the manner of a jury, if both parties
consénted to à jury. "The subject, however, of the juris-
diction. of the Court of Christianity in questions of:
bastardy willbe more properly reserved for discussion
in treating of the action of dower.

À treatise on the writ of cosinage follows next in
order after the treatise on the assise of mortdancester.
The latter assise was limited within very narrow degrees,
to wit, such only as have already been specified in the
writ of morlidancester. The writ of cosinage, on the
other hand, equally with the writs of ael and of besael,
were introduced in aid of such kindred as were beyond
the range of the writ of mortdancester, and this writ, as
-Bracton says, was only concerning possession, and was
devised in order to avoid the doubtful event of a pro-


. . eeeding by a& writ of right concerning the property.


This writ, precisely as the writ of mortdancester, did
not apply to disputes between * privies in blood" (con-
junctas personas), but to the claims of blood-cousins
against strangers, and the term of the inquiry under it
was limited, equally as in an assise of mortdancester, to
the last return of King John from Ireland.  Bracton in
his fifth chapter mentions two other writs.  À case
might arise, where à person who was in seysine of an
ancestor's tenement was debarred from the use of certain
of its appurtenances, as, for instance, the heir in posses-
sion of his ancestor's tenement, or the rector in posses-
Sion of his predecessor's church, might be debarred from
the enjoyment of common of pasture appurtenant in one
ease to the tenement, in the other to the church. In
,either of such cases the party prejudiced was entitled by
the beneficence of the prince to & writ, which would en-
title him to submit his claim to & jury, without recourse
loan assise. Inthe sixth chapter there are found the
rudimentis of a writ, the exercise of which was destined
Q 1802. d


xlvi INTRODUCTION.


in after times to be & subject of great abuse on the part
of the ministers of the Crown, the writ of * Quo war-
." vamnio. | Bracton speaks of it as & writ drawn up
from time to time to meet the particular case (breve
formatum ad querelam), savouring partly of a writ of
mortdaneester, partly of à writ of novel disseysine, and
which may be determined beyond the county without
prejudice to the common liberty. Its object was to re-
quire the party in possession of any appurtenance of a
tenement, of which another person was rightfully seysed
of fee, to show cause why he should not give up such
possession. It seems to have been a prerogative writ,
and was already applied, at the time when Britton wrote,
as an effective means of challenging the franchises
claimed under wrongful pretexts by the lords of local
eourts (L. L, ch. xx,s. 3). But Bracton in his sub-
sequent treatise De defaltis (fol 372) intimates that
this writ had already been harshly used by the Crown
against the subject. Still it was useful in some cases to
enable a claimant to shape his action so as to defeat the
asserted title of the tenant, who had been constrained by
the writ of Quo warranto to disclose in à preliminary
proceeding the title on which he rested his tenancy.
The treatise next following after that which treats of
a writ of Cosinage is Bracton's fifth treatise, which treats
of an assise of * Utrum," in other words, of an assise
of which the object is to determine * utrum tenementum
* dequo agitur sit feodum tenentis, vel libera eleemosyna
* pertinens ad eeelesiam alicujus rectoris." This defini-
tion of its object, when compared with Glanville's defini-
tion of the corresponding recognition in his time, marks
& considerable advance in the process of disinfeudating
church property, for Glanville describes it as & recogni-
tion to determine whether a tenement is an ecclesiastical
fee or à lay fee (feodum ecclesiasticum vel laicum feodum).
This assise had been originally granted by a constitution
of King Henry IL, and was in the time of Glanville


. INTRODUCTION. xlvii


available both to the laity and the clergy. It appears
to have been thought by Martin de Pateshull that this
assise ought to be confined to the clergy, as so many


other remedies were open to the laity, and this is one of
the very few instances in which Bracton dissents from


the opinion of the great.judge, whose authority he so
frequent] y cites, and who seems to have adhered to his
opinion as late as the tenth year of Henry III. Bracton.
however held that motives of public policy, with a view
to encourage a resort to other legal remedies than the
duel and the Great Assise, counselled the revival of the
ancient practice of allowing the laity equally with the.
clergy to have recourse to this assise. The purpose of


, this assise, which differed in one important respect from
: all other assises as it determined the right to & given


tenement as well'as the possession of it, was to enable
the rectors of parochial churches to recover tenements.


.or services by reason of tenements, which had been


usurped by laymen, and on the other hand to enable lay-
men to rescue their lands.ftom the grasp of the clergy.
It. was one of the provisions of the Constitutions of


.. Clarendon (A.D. 1164) that all disputes as to the tenure


of an estate being in frankalmoigne should be determined
by & recognition of twelve loyal men under the direc-
tion of the chief justieiary of the king, and it would
appear from the wording of the ninth article of those
Constitutions that a laymen equally with a clerk might
have recourse to this assise. '* Si calumnia emerserit
* jnter clericum et laicum, vel inter laicum et clericum, de
* ullo tenemento quod clericus ad eleemosinam velit at- .
* trahere, laicus vero ad laicum feudum, recognitione
* duodecim legalium hominum per capitalis Justicicze regis
* considerationem  terminabitur, utrum tenementum
* gib pertinens ad eleemosinam sive ad laicum feodum,
* eoram ipso Justitia regis." "These Constitutions pur-


| port to be a.codifieation of the usages of Henry L, but
the language in which they are drawn up savours of &


d 2


xlviii INTRODUCTION.


more advanced jurisprudence, and there can be little
doubt that they form part of & general scheme of ad-
ministrative reform initiated by Henry IL, and based
upon a mature study of the debateable ground between
the spiritual and the temporal powers, and upon a reason-
able desire not to allow it to be any longer & pro-
fessional-battle-field.

The assize of Utrum was only available in the case of
clergy for such rectors of parochial churches as had been
instituted by bishops or other ordinaries, as parsons
(personz). A vicar was not entitled to an assise by him-
self, although it would appear that Martin de Pateshull
had stretehed & point to enable a vicar to be a joint
plaintiff in such an assise. We learn from Bracton how
certain churches came to be divided into medieties either
by reason of two fees or by reason of two patrons, and
under what circumstances their rectors might plead
separately, or must plead conjointly.  Bracton, in his
third chapter, discusses the various other remedies to
which & elerk equally with a layman is entitled, the
single assise from which a clerk was debarred being an
assise of mortdancester, to which however a layman
would be entitled as plaintiff against & clerk. A clerk
however was entitled to à writ of right equally as a lay-
-man, and if he had no warrantor, might defend himself
by the duel, when no witness could speak from his own
sight or hearing, provided however he had the permis-
sion of the ordinary and of the patron. It seems a
little uncertain from Bracton's language, whether he
means to include amongst clerks entitled to an assise of
Utrum canons of prebendal churches, and abbots, priors,
and others who have churches for their own uses, both
of which classes of elergy he says may be called rectors.
Britton, who seems to have had Bracton's text before
him, speaks with no uncertain voice on this subject,
* For the assise," he says (Lib. IV., ch. vii. $. 1), *may
* well lie at the suit of either (clerk or layman) yet not


INTRODUCTION. . xlix


* of all Mie but for such only as are parsons and rec-
* tors of parochial churches, instituted therein by bishops
" Or oiher ordinaries, and also for eanons in cathedral
* ehurehes and abbots and priors,who have churches
* &ppropriated to their use, and are in the position of
«€ parsons."

The fourth chapter contains & paragraph, which
.. enables us to fix the time after which Bracton must have
. eompleted his treatise on the Assisa Utrum. This para-
graph is so intimately connected with the text, that it
would be unreasonable to suggest that i& may be & note,
- which has found its way into the text, like Petrus de
Sabandia (f. 159). The presence of this latter case in
Bracton's text has been one of the cruces in determining
the period, within which Bracton must have completed
his work, inasmucbh as the case of Peter of Savoy is
quoted as having occurred in 46 H. I1I. "The paragraph
however in the present chapter does not raise any diffi-
culty, and it is of considerable historical interest. It
occurs in the discussion of the question what constitutes
perjury on the part of the jury, and Bracton upholds the
principle that perjury is intentional false swearing.
* There are some persons," he says, * who say. on oath
* what is false, but they do not perjure themselves, inas-
* much as they do not lie or go against their intelligence,
* gince they believe the fact to be so, according to their
* eonscience, although the thing is otherwise in fact."
Braeton then proceeds to illustrate his statement by a
ease in point, *Ut si" he says, *quis interrogat, quis
* fuit ad consilium London, et respondeat quis, quod
.'" pex et comes Richardus (ut credit) licet aliter sit in.
* veritate, quod comes ibi non fuerit, talis non mentitur,
* et licet juraverit quod ita sit (ut credit) perjuriam non
* eommittit " (f£. 288 b. 289). The reference of Bracton
in this place is to the Council of London or the Parlia-
ment of London, as Matthew Paris terms it (Hist. Angl.
VoL IIL;p.334); which had been summoned in the absence


| INTRODUCTION,


of King Henry IIL in Gaseony, by the Queen and
Richard Earl of Cornwall, the king's younger brother,
as joint regents during the king's absence, to meet in the
quinzaine of Easter, and according to the chronicler above-
mentioned the assembled magnates waited during three
weeks in vain for the coming of Earl Richard. This
. Parliament, as already observed, is of great histori-
cal interest, for it was the first since the reign of
King John, to which the knights of the shire were sum-
moned ; the writ of summons, which has been published
by Canon Stubbs amongst his Select Charters, purporting .
to require the viscount to return two chosen knights
from each county. (A.D. 1254) It is not very obvious
. why Bracton cites this Parliament of London in illus-
tration of the principle of law, to which he applies it.
Richard Earl of Cornwall was one of the most important
: political personages of this period. He had been the
leader of the party of the barons against Simon de
Montfort, who had married the king's sister, but after he
bad lost his first wife, who had been the link which
closely connected him with the great barons of England,
Earl Richard ceased to head their party against the
Poietevin kinsmen of the king, and his subsequent
marriage with the queen's sister, Cincia de Provence,
drew him still further away from the cause, of which
Simon de Montfort ultimately assumed the leadership.
But Richard's prudent counsels saved Henry on more
than one eritieal occasion. "The reason why he failed to
attend the Parliament of London, which was summoned
to grant an aid to the king, then carrying on war in Gas-
cony, was that he had not arrived from the Continent ;
but from Bracton's allusion to the misapprehension of
persons on the subject of Earl Richard's absence from
the council there seems to have been some prevailing
uncertainty on the subject. Bracton had already intro-
"duced Earl Richard's name to his readers in the second
book ** De acquirendo rerum dominio," f. 47, in which he


INTRODUCTION. lü


eites as an instance of a conditional donation a donation
' to be completed by delivery, *si comes Ricardus effectus
fueritrex Alemannorum." The coronation of Earl Richard
as king of the Romans happened in 1257, and it is on
the strength of this illustration that Professor Güter-
bock is of opinion that Bracton's work must have been
compiled before 1257.

The chapter in which the reference to the Council of
London occurs is à chapter that treats of an attaint of the
jurors, who have made a false oath in any of aforemen-
tioned assises (L. IV.,ch. ix, $ 2). An attaint of the jurors
appears at this time to have been the normal mode of
obtaining a new: trial, by alleging that one or more of the


jurors in the original assise had sworn falsely. The


process, as explained by Braeton, of empannelling a jury
of twenty-four knights to try the jury of twelve, whose
oath was impeached as false, seems to have been elabo-
. rated since Glanvilles time. Glanville, after treating of
ihe great assise in his second book, observes in one of
its concluding chapters (cap. 19), that a penalty for false
swearing had been inserted in the royal institution of
the great assise in cases where the jurors had been law-
. fully convicted, or had made a confession of their false-
hood. It is generally supposed that Glanville intended
his readers to understand that the penalties for per-
jury, the details of which he proceeds to set forth, were
not invented then for the first time, but were applied by
the king to the new proceedings under the great assise
and Lord Coke in 2 Inst. 236, refers to Glanville's chap-
ter as evidence, that an attaint for perjury would lie
under the common law. t appears from Bracton's text,
that whilst the law of attaint had been elaborated since
Glanville's time in its application to the assises of novel
desseysine, of last presentation, and of mortdancester, it
had ceased to be applicable to the great assise. The
reason for this exception as stated by him (fol. 290).is
not. very satisfactory, namely, because the claimant
having the option of the duel or the great assise had of


]lu INTRODUCTION.


his own free will betaken himself to the assise, and
therefore would be disapproving of his own defence if
he impeacehed the finding of the jurors in such an
assise.  -
It may be observed that the form of the writ, which
Bracton gives as proper to be used for summoning the
twenty-four knights on such occasions, is the form which
was in use before the statute of 21 Henry III. had al-
 tered the time of prescription, and further it appears
that proceedings for the conviction of & jury of twelve
might be held beyond the limits of the county, where-
in the assise in question had been held, the restriction
imposed by the Charter of Liberties as to certain assises
not being held beyond the limits of the county, within
which the cause of action has arisen, having no applica-
tion to an attaint. * And if," says Bracton, "the
* common liberty has à bearing upon this, that assises
* ought not to be held beyond the county, it does not
* follow that on that account juries are bound to be held
* jin the county, for an assise has one privilege and a
* jury another" (fol 297). Bracton enters minutely
into details in explaining the proper course of proceeding
in an attaint, which in his time seems to have been of
substantial benefit to the party wronged by the finding of
the first jury. It had, however, begun to lose this beneficial
character even in the reign of Henry VI. and under the
Stuarts it was little more than a proceeding for the
punishment of the jurors, unattended with any redress to
the injured party. Still the process of attaint was
recognised in our law down to the statute of 6 G. IV. c
50, when it was finally abolished as being & mere sound
and not even pretending to be a remedy.

The names of one or two justiciaries oecur in this
part of Bracton's treatise, whose identification gives rise
to some difficulty. Simon de Ropelay and his associates
are mentioned as holding an assise for the attaint of &
jury in the county of Lincoln in the 21 Henry III.
They are however not judges itinerant, as the case is


INTRODUCTION. ]ii


.. eited as amongst the-pleas which follow the king. Simon
.de Poppelay is the reading in this place of. several yery
trustworthy MSS., but S. de Ropelay is the reading
which has been preferred in Tottells printed book.
Neither name appears in any record preserved in the
Rolls Office. So also Tottell's text represents.the king as -
hearing pleas at Woodstoke in the presence of Simon de
Segrave, also in an assise of attaint, whereof a convic-
tion had been previously taken at Windsor before Ege-
lard de Cygony and his associates. No record of Simon
de Segrave is found in the Rolls Oftice, and on ex-
amining some of the best MSS. the name is found
written S. de Segrave, who is probably Stephen de
Segrave, the last great justiciary of England, who
succeeded Hubert de Burgh in that high office in 1232,
 &nd was dismissed in 1234. He was subsequently restored
partially. to the king's favour in 1237, when he was
. made justice of Chester, and he died in 1241. Engelardus '
de Cygony, on the other hand, is not mentioned in
any catalogue of the judges of England. His name,
however wil be found. in the roll of those present at
Westminster at the court held in 18 Henry III. on the
subjeet of antenuptial bastardy. This roll, as pre-
served in the Publie Record Office, has been printed in
Appendix III. to Vol. II. of the present work.

- The action for dower is the subject of Bracton's sixth
treatise, which is the concluding treatise of the present
volume. The nature of dower, as distinguished from
maritagium, has already been discussed by Bracton in the


thirty-ninth chapter of his treatise "De acquirendo


rerum dominio (Vol. II., p. 47), from which it will be seen
that dower aecording to the law of England was not
identieal with the dos of the Roman law. "The ex-
istence, however, of both species of dower, namely, a mar-
riage portion given to the bride by her father or other
relative on occasion of her «marriage, and a gift made to
her by her husband at the church door &tthe time of her
espousals, is recognised by Glanville. * Dos," he S&yS,


liv INTRODUCTION.


" duobis modis dicitur; dos enim vulgariter dicitur id,
* quod aliquis liber homo dat sponse suse ad ostium
* ecelesize tempore desponsationis su:e " (Cap. v1., $. 1.) and
in à subsequent chapter he says, *In alia autem accep-
* tione accipitur dos secundum leges Romanas, secundum .
* quas proprie appellatur dos id, quod cum muliere datur
** viro, quod vulgariterdicitur maritagium." (Cap.vt., $. 1).
Both kinds of dower had been recognised as early as in the
reign of Henry L, inasmuch as in the Charter of Liberties
granted by that king, A.D. 1100, it is provided under
the third article, * Et si mortuo viro uxor ejus reman-
* serit, et sine liberis fuerit, dotem suam et marita-
* tionem habebit, et eam non dabo marito nisi secun-
* dum vellesuum," Art 3. This article in factis the 1n-
auguration of an improved síatus for the English widow,
of which the successive stages are distinetly traceable
in the seventh article of the Magna Charta of King
John, and in the seventh article of the Second Charter of |
Henry III. Under the former of these charters ib was
provided, that the widow should be entitled to remain
forty days in the house of her deceased husband (in domo
. mariti) within which period her dower was to be as-
signed to her; under the latter it was provided, that
she should remain as above in the chief messuage of her
husband, unless it should be a castle, in which case
another house should be provided for her. Further, she
was to have meanwhile reasonable estovers, and then
came a further provision * Ássignetur autem ei pro dote
* sua tertia pars totius terrze mariti sui, quse su& fuit in
* vjta sua, nisi de minori dotata fuerit ad ostium ecoele-
* sig." It will beobserved that by this latter provision the
widow is declared to be entitled to the third part of her
husband's estate which he possessed during his lifetime,
unless dower had been assigned to her at the church
door, but this provision of the charter of Henry III,
which was not contained in the Great Charter of King
John, does not appear to have had effect given to 1t ac-
cording to the letter of it by the king's justiciaries in


INTRODUCTION. | lv


*he time of Bracton, as Bracton limits the wife's reason-
able dewer to the third part of the estate, which her
husband possessed on the day of her espousals. Britton,
on the other hand, whilst he adopts Bracton's defi-
. mition of reasonable dower says, that. it was allowable
for the husband to establish dower not only of such
tenementis as he had on the day of his marriage, but also
of such as he might aequire afterwards for himself and
his heirs. (L. V. ch. ii, $. 4) This proposition of
law is quite reconcileable with Bracton's formal defini-
tion of reasonable dower, which he gives in Chapter
XXXIX. of his treatise De acquirendo rerum dominio, and
to which dower the wife was entitled, if her husband had
neglected to appoint her dower before his death, and
Bracton himself, equally with Britton, lays it down that
'dower might , be appointed by the husband not only in
lands and tenements which have been acquired by him,


. but even in lands and. tenements to be acquired by him,


if they have been acquired or have fallen in during his
life (fol. 98). Nevertheless it would seem to have been
established law, both when Braeton and when Britton
wrote, that in the case of knight's fees and grand ser-
jeanties reasonable dower did not extend beyond the
third of the husband's estate, which he held in demesne
as of fee on the day of the espousals, or which he after-
wards acquired in fee, and that if the guardians should
. have assigned to the widow more than & third part
whilst the heir was under age, the heir might have the
assignment of the excess revoked by a writ of admea-
surement of dower when he came of age. The capital
question to determine in an aetion of dower was the
right of the claimant to the. síatus of legitimate wife,
Since the heir to the estate out of which a woman claimed
— dower might deny her title to claim as lawful widow, or
otherwise two women might lay claim to the character
of lawful widow of & deceased person, whose heir
resisted their claim. In such a case the heir was not
bound to answer to either of them, until it had been


lvi INTRODUCTION.


settled in the Court of Christianity which of them ought
to be declared to be the legitimate wife of the deceased.
We have here an insight into the relations between the
King's Court and the Ecclesiastical Court. Letters went
"jn the name of the king to the bishop or other ordinary
of the place, to whom, as Braeton says, the Pope had
granted jurisdiction in matrimonial matters (f. 302 b.)
for the lawfulness of & marriage was a spiritual ques-
tion, whilst the local limits within which a bishop's juris-
diction might be exercised seem to have been settled by
a consultation between Martin de Pateshull and Peter
des Roches, then Bishop of Winehester. No date is given
by Bracton to this consultation. Peter des Roches had
been appointed Bishop of Winchester in 7 John; he
was made Chancellor in 15 John, and Chief Justice in
16 John. Two years after the accession of Henry III.
Peter des Roches, upon the death of William Marshal,
Earl of Pembroke, became the guardian of the young
king, notwithstanding the rivalry of Hubert de Burgh,
vhe Chief Justice. He lost, however, the king's favour in
1297, and went abroad for three years, after which he
returned and proecured the disgrace of Hubert de Burgh,
and once more acquired the chief direction of the king's
eounsels. As he did not return before A.D. 1230, when
Martin de Pateshull, according to the popular account,
was dead, the settlement of the local limits of & bishop's
jurisdiction in & question of marriage, arising out, of an
exception on the part of an heir to the title of a
woman to claim dower as the lawful widow of his ances-
tor, must have taken place in the early part of the reign
of Henry IIL It appears to have been at that time
agreed, that the domicile of the heir within the diocese
of a bishop was the proper criterion of the bishop's
authority to cite the heir into his court, and to hear wit-
nesses on behalf of the woman to prove her marriage,
after which the bishop was to remit the result of the
inquest to the king. No appeal to the Pope was allowed
in such cases any more than in cases of bastardy. In the


INTRODUCTION. | lvii
first place because the inquest was committed only to the
ordinary mentioned in the king's letters; in the second
place because the lord the Pope, if an. appeal to him were
- interposed, would indirectly decide a title to à lay fee, and
thereby prejudice might be caused to the lord the King.
Britton.states the law in almost the same language which
Braeton uses: * En ceo cas deit le ordinarie fere somoun-
* dre ]e tenaunt qi mist avaunt la excepceioun, en quel lu
* qeilsoit demoraunt, qe il soit a certein jour et lu devaunt
.* ly & moustrer, siil voilleou sache dire encountre le
* matrimoigne" (L. V. ch. vii, $. 4). There is some
slight ambiguity in this passage, just as there is in Brac-
ton's text  '* Qui ei rescripsit, quod in quacunque
* dyocesi ille qui exceptionem opposuerit domicilium
* habuerit, fiat ei talis denuntiatio per ordinarium," &c., -
(£. 802 b.), but the subsequent practice on the principle of
* optimus interpres usus " may be-appealed to as con-
firmatory of the view, that the proper ordinary to hold
the-inquest was the ordinary of the tenant's domicile.
Divorce by reason of consanguinity or affinity put an
end to all claim for dower, but as long as the validity
of a marriage had not been impeached during the life-
time of the husband, the widow's claim to dower was
sustainable.

The best evidence in favour of & widow's claim to
dower was the production of a sufficient sect on her part
to show that she was endowed at the door of the church ;
the next best evidence was an instrument of appoint-
ment, the faith of which might be proved by & compazri-
son of signatures (signorum), or by witnesses, or by the
country. This latter mode of endowment by an instru-
ment seems to have first come into use in cases where &
son endowed his wife at the chureh door out of the
estate of his father, in which case the consent of the
father was required, and no better evidence of such con-
sent could well be supplied than by the signature of the

- father affixed to the instrument of appointment. Britton
.  inhis paraphrase of this passage. (L. V., cap. ix., $. 1,)


lvin -. INTRODUCTION.


speaks of the comparison of seals (collacioun de seals) in-
stead of the comparison of signatures (signorum). I have
in the introduction to Vol: IlL, p. L. already stated
that there is good reason to believe that in the reign of
Henry IIL *signum" had & meaning distinct from
* sigillum," and that *signum " meant & mark, howso-
ever made by the hand on the instrument, whilst
" sigillum " meant à mark impressed in wax. We have
an instance so late as the year 1253, somewhere about the
time when Bracton was composing his work, of the use
of "signum" in the sentence of excommunication
(397 H. IIL) against the transgressors of the charters,
which was published in the names of the Archbishop of
Canterbury and thirteen English and Scotch bishops,
and which coneludes with these words, *In cujus rei
* memoriam sempiternam nos signa nostra duximus
* &pponenda." "This sentence is followed by & written
instrument drawn up in the names of the king and
certain of the great magnates of England, declaring their
consent to the above declaration of excommunication,
and protesting aga,nst any alteration in the words of
the eharters, and this instrument concludes thus, * In
* eujus rei memoriam. et in posterum veritatis testi-
* monium tam dominus rex quam predicti comites
* ad instantiam aliorum magnatum et populi prssenti
* seripto sigilla sua apposuerunt." (Red Book of the
Exchequer, f. c. iiij. xx. 3iij. formerly at Westminster, now
in the Publice Record Office) An explanation of the
differences observable in the manner of attesting the
sentence of excommunication and the instrument of
consent is readily supplied, if we may assume the fact
that all the bishops or clerks could write their names,
whereas the majority of the barons were unskilled in the
use of the pen.

A more difficult case might arise than the determina-
tion of the preferable claim of one or the other of two
women claiming dower respectively from the heir, as the
lawful widow of his ancestor, namely the claim of a


INTRODUCTION. lix


woman to be the lawful widow of the ancestor, after
another woman in respect of the same husband had re-
covered dower. "The proceedings in such a case seem to
have been settled upon a consultation between Martin
de Pateshull and the Bishop of Worcester, which con-
sultation is stated to have been made after the custom
of the realm of England, when it was settled that
. reference should be made in such a case by the king to
the court of the ordinary to decide which of the two
women was the legitimate wife of the deceased. Bigamy
seems to have been by no means unfrequent in Bracton's
time, ànd à woman who had married an Englishman in
France orin the Holy Land had little chance to establish
her claim for dower against a woman, whom the same
man had subsequently espoused in England, inasmuch as
ihe latter would prevail, because the former could not
prove her marriage.
Dower in respect of lands held in sockage was governed
by other rules of law than those, which applied to lands
held by military tenure. "The customs of the cities and
. boroughs were also multiform; and those customs were
respected by the king's justiciaries.  Braeton gives in-
Stances of this practice by cases determined by Martin
de Pateshull in respect of the local eustoms of the City
of London and of the City^of Lincoln, and it would seem
from other instances cited by Bracton that the customs
of counties, as for instance Lincoln and York, were up-
held by the king's justiciaries, and more particularly the
law of gavelkind in Kent, according to which & widow
did not forfeit her dower by reason of the felony of her
husband, although she was liable to forfeit ib upon &
Second marriage, as was also the case with widows in
the City of London and in many other cities and
boroughs.
l have elsewhere observed that the condition of
" women partook of several ameliorations under the Plan-
tagenet kings, an important instance of which is cited


Ix INTRODUCTION.


by Bracton in the Nova, Constitutio, Vhat is the Statute
of Merton of 20 H. IIL, under which & widow was
entitled to damages for having been wrongfully kept out
the enjoyment of her dower-lands by frivolous excep-
tions on the part of the heir (f. 312 b).

The provisions of the Statute of Merton in favour of
widows were of still further extent, as they enlarged
their power of bequest in respect of the growing crops
on the dower lands.

The first artiele of the statute provided *that from
* thenceeforth all widows, who after the death of their
* husbands may be ousted of their dowers, or may be
* unable to have their dowers or their forty days with-
* out plea, and who afterwards by plea may have re-
* covered their dowers of the tenements, whereof their
* husbands died seised, may recover, together with their.
. * dowers, from those who may have been convicted of
* unjust deforcement, their damages, notably the value
" of the whole dower belonging to them from the time
* of the death of their husbands down to the day on
*. which the widows themselves by the judgment of our
* eourb may have recovered their seisin, and the de-
* foreers themselves may nevertheless be in our mercy
* as formerly they were wont."

The second artiele is as follows: '* Also that all such
* widows thenceforth may be able to bequeath their
* growing crops on the land as well from their dower as
* from their other free lands and tenements, saving the
* services of lords, which are due from the dowers."

The action for dower (actio dotis) properly speaking
lay in cases where the widow was kept out altogether of
her enjoyment of her dower lands (unde nihil habet)
but cases might arise where she was only kept out of
the enjoyment of certain appurtenances of her dower
lands. In such eases she was aided by à writ of vight
to dower (Breve de recto de dote), and it would appear
that in Glanvilles time such a writ, where the heir


INTRODUCTION. - Ixi


. denied what was alleged by the widow, led up to the
duel, whereas in Bracton's time the heir was bound to

" produce a sect, if he had one, or to put himself upon the
country. But Bracton s&ys explicitly, * there shall not be

- between them a great assise or wager of battle " f. 313 b.
The proceeding by writ of right of dower might be
determined in the court of the warrantor, or in the county

' eourt before the viscount, or it was removable by

. either party into the King's Court, as in a plea of right
by & great writ, and the latter proceeding was the
more necessary in cases where the husband hadlands in
several counties, and the admeasurement could only take
place by the order of the king's justiciaries.

.- . The last question discussed by Bracton in this matter
is the remedy for the heirs, where the dowager has com-
mitted waste on her dower lands by pulling down houses
or taking unreasonable estovers. The common law en-
titled the widow to reasonable estovers, to burn, to
build, or to fence, upon the lands which she held in
dower, but nothing beyond. "We have here an instance

. of an equitable jurisdiction, exercised by the king's justi-
eiaries, which had come into practice since Glanville's
time.  Bracton, unfortunately, does not mention the

^ mames of the justiciaries who, in à case which occurred
upon the Iter, in the county of Norfolk, in 9 H. IIL, by
& resolution of the court authorised the heir to appoint
& forester to protect the dower woods. Bracton sets

. out the form of writ used on the above oceasion, when
he was probably in attendance on the justiciaries,
 Bracton further remarks that the justiciaries had not
&n arbitrary power to adjudge waste, but that each county
(patria) had i(s own measure, constitutiori, and custom.
Bracton's treatment of the question of waste committed
by'& widow, in the above passage, as well as his subse-
quent notice of waste committed by a guardian, in neither
of which cases does he ni&ke any reference to the provi-
ions of the Statute of Marlbridge (52 H. IIL), are jusely
Q, 1802, e


Ixii |] INTRODUCTION.


considered to raise à strong presumption that his work
was completed before that statute was enacted (A.D. 1267).
Further, Britton's mode of treating the question of waste
committed by a dowager separates him from Bracton by
a considerable interval of time. Britton, for instance,
briefly states that, if the widow commits waste upon her
dower land, the remedy provided by our statutes shall
be preserved (Liv. V., ch. xiii, $ 5) The statutes here
referred to by Britton are without doubt the statutes of
Marlbridge and the Statute of Westminster I. By the
latter of these statutes, it was provided that a writ of
waste might be sued out of Chancery against & person
who held per legem Angliz, and that such à writ should
lie where any one held for life, or for a term of years, or
in dower. Bracton's evidence goes to show, that in the
case of a widow or of a guardian the common law gave
a remedy, but Lord Coke disputes that fact in the case
of a tenant for life or for years. The law of waste was
undoubtedly made more severe by the Edwardian sta-
tute, which ordained that a person found guilty of waste
should both lose the thing wasted and make compensa-
tion to treble the sum at which the waste was rated;
whereas, in Bracton's time, justice was held to .be satis-
fied in the case of dower-lands by the servitude imposed
upon the widow of henceforth having her estovers
delivered to her by the heir's forester, and in the case
of a guardian, if he was convicted, by his loss of the
eustody of the land, and by his liability to pay to the
king &n &amerciament in addition to restoring the
damage, whieh he had caused to the lands under his
charge. - |

The common law in Bracton's time, not merely au-
thorised the imposition of a penalty for waste committed
on dower lands, but it allowed & writ of prohibition to
issue to the sheriff, that he should not allow the dowager
to commit waste, and the sheriff having this writ might,
according to Lord Coke, summon the posse comitatus,


- INTRODUCTION. lxii


and withstand the doing of any acts of waste ; but this.


writ ought to be sued out by the heir, in good time, lest
through his own negligence he should incur damage,
* quia melius est in tempore occurrere, quam post
* eausam vulneratum remedium querere."


The Temple. 1881. T. T.


-. v Fo NETS
"ss "^ id
j - z
. ] "
5 -
zr : -
z -
-
" *
*«
* i
-C€«
.
x e .
ES —
P
*
.
'
-
* .
. ]
l
,
'
,
-


-


"


- i s. i
- ui t ;
- S D i
z BOXE S :
- x
: 4s 4
» * & »
. M ^
" -— e :
-
a
"E
-- * 5G
. I
"-
«
LJ
. E 5
" " ;
PS E id ij
| . i
— Li
gu. tá
"E
- "1 -
L4
- d :
. "
j j
" : "
t4
LJ
:
z
P
L4 * hd "
zt
E
, ;
i
—— -
-
iJ
E
-
z
,
:
;
a ;
Y
;
^u
,
s : '
,
- E
-
e
: :
] .
PE od
. p
.
,
,
;
:
. - e
t ^ !
"
. -


ta


ixvi


INDEX


EORUM OMNIUM QUA IN HOC OPERE
CONTINENTUR.


LisR1 QuaRTI TRACTATUS SECUNDUS. DE ASSISA
ULTIME PRASENTATIONIS,


CaP.l. f01238. -


Page
]l. Cui competat hujusmodi assisa . ! 2
2. Breve de assisa ultim: preesentationis 4
3. De modo procedendi in hujusmodi placito . 6
4. Si deforcians vel impediens ad primum diem
summonitionis non venerit, qualiter sit
resummonendus : e —
5. Breve quod vicecomes venire faciat juratara 8
6. De essoniis et resummonitionibus et hujus-
modi placitis . 10
7. De sacramento juraorum i in assis& NM
preesentationis . ; . 16
8. De veredicto juratorum ; ; 0 —


CAP. II. | fol. 240.


l. Cum utraque pars comparuerit in judicio,
proponat querens intentionem suam . 20


Ixvii


TABLE


OF ALL THINGS WHICH ARE CONTAINED IN


. THIS WORK.


Tue SEcoNp ThEATISE or THE FounaTH Book. Coxw-


-—


CERNING AN ASSISE OF LaAsT PRESENTATION.


CHAPTER I. leaf 238.


. Who is entitled to an assise of this kind — .
. À writ concerning an assise of last presenta-


tion.


. Of the mode of proceeding i in à plea of this


kind


. If the deforcer or the disturber duds - come


on the first day of the summons, how he
is to be re-summoned


. A writ that the viseount cause a T io


come


. Of essoins and re-summonses and pleas of


this kind .


. Of the oath of the jurors in an assise of last


presentation


.8. Of the verdict of the jurors .


— CHAPTER II. leaf 940. -


. When each party has appeared in court, let


. the plaintiff propound his declaration


11


17


21


Ixviii INDEX.


'. CaP. III. fol. 240.


l. De responsione et exceptionibus de forma


m"


rm


Q2 b9 2


contra querentem secundum articulos
brevis


CAP. IV. fol. 242.


. De exceptionibus contra assisam.
. &i charta proferatur, oportet quod probetur


per testes in charta nominatos


. Item de advocatione ecclesi? nostre .
. De diversis usibus super hujusmodi materia


de ultima presentatione .


. Breve episcopo, postquam recüperaverit per


assisam ultimse preesentationis


Car. V. fol. 245 b.


. Si mulier presentaverit ratione dotis sus .
. De advocatione data per eum, qui tenet per


legem Angli» .


. De advocatione data vel alicnüta 2ubcusin


donator fuerit in possessione preesen-
tandi


Cap. VI. fol. 246 b.


. Cum quis summoneatur quare impedit

. Breve quare impedit

. Quid est impedire

. Differentia, inter quare impedit, et P


non permittit . A ; 3 ; ;


. Breve quare non permittit
. Breve si impediens fuerit infra statem


Page


22


38


44.
48


52


62


62


64


68


"ue


TABLE.


—» CHAPTER III. leaf 240. i


. Of the answer and exceptions of form against


the plaintiff con. to the articles of the
. wrib . . : : :


CHAPTER IV. leaf 9249.


. Of exceptions against the assise
. If & charter be produced, it is incumbent


that it be proved by the witnesses named
in the charter .


. Likewise concerning the advowson of our


church


. Concerning divers uses "upon matter of this


kind concerning a last presentation .


. Á wfit to the bishop, after he has recovered U


an assise of last presentation


CHAPTER V. leaf 245 b.


. If à woman has [nee by reason of her


dower


. Of an advowson given by him, who holds by


the law of England.


. Concerning. a donation made or alisnsted be:


fore the donor was possessed of the pre-
sentation .


CHAPTER VI. leaf 246 b.


. When a person is,summoned by a Quare


impedit


. À writ of quare impedit
. What is *to impede " ;
. The difference between a ** quare impedit. E and |


& *quare non permitüt"


. À writ why he does not permit
. À writ, if the impeder is under age


58


63


65


69


ixx


11.


12.


13.


14.


INDEX.


Car. VII. fol 248.


. Forma brevium post seysinam  recupera-


tam .


. Breve episcopo vel ordinario dirigendum,


eum quis seysinam  recuperaverit per
assisam ultimz preesentationis


. Breve quod episcopus admittat clerieum non


obstante reclamatione, sed per judicium .


. Ubi sunt participes in prsesentatione .
. Breve de quatuor sororibus, quarum duse


habent virum et dus non


. Breve si concordia fiat i
. Breve si per judicium ratione firme .
. Breve de admittendo clerico, ubi partes con-


sentiunt in clerieum propter minorem,
qui non potest ad chartas respondere


. Alia forma de eodem .
. De clerico admittendo, ubi quis presentatur


de communi consensu EUN qui sunt
plens setatis

Breve, ubi unus remittit mm suum alteri ex
quatuor participibus, et duo consentiunt
in eundem


Cum quis preesentaverit ad ecclesiam, anto-


quam recuperaverit manerium, ad quod
pertinet advocatio ;

Si episcopus non admiserit Blerienm ad man-
datum regis

De prohibitione facienda judicibus, si iden.
eus alium clerieum implacitaverit .


Car. VIII fol. 250 b.


. Prohibitio, si clericus, ab eo pressentatus qui


amisit, implacitaverit clericum ejus, qui
per judicium recuperaverit  . TN"


Page


96 —


98


102


].


. 9
3.


4.


5.


TABLE.


CHAPTER VII. leaf 248.


The form of writs after the recovery of sey-

- gine.

À writ to be directed to the bishop or  ordi-
nary, when a person has recovered seysine
by an assise of last preseritation

^A writ that a bishop admit a clerk uotwith-


standing & TRAMA RS but by a judg-:


. ment
Where there are partners in the smi:
tion.
À. writ concerning four sisters, of whom bwo
have husbands and two not


6. -A. writ, 1f an accord be made


7.
8


9.
10.


-—


11.


12.


18.


" 14.


].


A. writ, if judgment by reason of a lose

A. writ to admit a clerk, where the parties
agree upon & clerk on account of a minor,
who cannot answer to the charters .

Another form for the same :

Concerning the admission of a clerk, lene à
person is presented by the common assent
of several, who are of fullage .

.À writ, where one remits his right to another


out of four parceners, and two agree upon.


the same person

When a person has | to a church be-
fore he has recovered the manor to which
the advowson appertains .

If the bishop has not admitted a dlerk unen
the king s mandate .

Of issuing & prohibition to the judges if the
clerk has impleaded another clerk


|... CHAPTER VIIL leaf 250 b.
À prohibition, if & clerk, presented by him
who has lost, has impleaded the clerk who
has recovered by a judgment


101


103


108


lxxi | INDEX.


2. De prohibitione, dum quis fuerit infra
setatem

3. Cum quis per assisam recupera verit, et podio.
cum fuerit implacitatus per breve de recto,
incipiat ecclesia vacare


Car. IX. fol 251.


1. Breve de summonendo episcopum, qui ad
mandatum domini regis clericum  admit-
tere recusavit .

2.8 pluries mandatum fuerit officialibus .

3. S1 episcopus fecerit defaltam

4. Cum episcopus comparuerit


106
108
108
110


LrsRr: QuARTI TRACTATUS TERTIUS, IN QUO TRACTATUR


DE AÁssSsiSA MoRTIS ÁNTECESSORIS.


Car.I. fol. 252.
. De prima seysina post mortem antecessoris .
2. Si dominus capitalis vacuam invenerit sey-
sinam  .


E


Car. II. fol. 253 b.


. De impetratione brevis :
Breve assise mortis antecessoris .
Aliud breve de eodem, qui est infra ptatem .


4 O9 ho


morte antecessoris et cum consanguini-
tate.
5. Quod diversa sunt Bus ds Boden


Breve quod mixtam habet naturam cum.


114


118


TABLE.


2. Of a prohibition as long as a person shall be
under age

3. When a person has recovered by an assise,
and afterwards, when he has been im-
pleaded with a writ of right, the church
begins again to be vacant.


CHAPTER IX. ]leaf 251.


1. À writ for summoning a bishop, who upon the
mandate of our lord the king has refused
to admit a clerk

2. If à mandate has been sent more than once
to the officials . à

9. Ifthe bishop has made default

4. When the bishop has appeared... .


-


]xxiii


Page


105


105


Tux THIRD TREATISE or THE FounTH Book, WHICH


TREATS OF AN ÁSSISE OF MORTDANCESTER.


CHAPTER Í. leaf 252.


.1. Of the first seysine after the death of an an-
cestor
.2. If the chief lord lias found the seysine vacant


CHAPTER II. leaf 253b.


1. Concerning the suing out à writ
2. A writ of an assise of mortdancester ,
8. Another writ concerning the same, when he
! is under age
4. À writ, which has & zuixed jai with mort-
^  daneester and with cosinage
5. That there are divers writs on the same sub-
. jeet .


115
119


Ixxiv INDEX.


t2 Im


-


e»


Car. III. fol. 255.


. Qualiter procedendum est post M


brevis, et de essoniis
. De resummonitione, s. quodi fuit in comitatu
vel extra ;
. Breve de resummonitione, si assisa Read
fuerit extra comitatum


CAP. IV. fol 255b.


. Qualiter petens debet fundare intentionem


suam partibus comparentibus .
Si juratore$ sint absentes, breve de  ha-
bendo corpora eorum
. Si eapta fuerit assisa per defaltam, vel si
statim tenens se ponat in assisam sine
alia exceptione


Car. V. fol. 250.


. De seysina facta petenti per judicem


. Breve de seysina facienda post captionem assisse


. Breve, si querens queratur quod b nd


suam habere non possit


. Breve de seysina, ubi tenens Los reeogno-


vit


. 9i justitiarii propria auctoritate scribant


vicecomiti ex parte domini regis


. Brevia de seysina per concordiam
. De extensione facienda, si forte alia TUN


assignanda fuerit in escambium


Carp. VI. fol. 257.


. De exceptionibus et responsionibus contra


assisam quare debeat remanere .


140


TABLE. ». lxxv


CHAPTER III. leaf 255.


Page
. How proceedings are to be had after the suing :
out & writ. Concerning essoins  . 135

. Of a re-summons, to wit, that he was in the
county, or beyond it EO o4 1897

. À writ of re-summons, if the assise is do fli
held outside the county . i e —

CHAPTER IV. leaf 255 b.
. How the claimant, ought to found his declara-

tion upon the parties appearing 141

. If the jurors should absent themselves, a writ
to seize their persons 143

. If the assise has been held by default, or if the

tenant has at once put himself on the assise
without any exception  . . 1438


CHAPTER V. leaf 256.


. Of seysine made to & claimant by a judg-
ment . . : 145
. À writ for making seysine after the holding

of the assise

. À writ, if the plaintiff complain that he can-


not have seysine 147
. A writ for seysine where a tenant gratui-
tously acknowledges the claim . i; 149


. If the justiciaries of their own authority write
to the viseount on behalf ofthe lord the king  —
. Á writ for seysine through an accord . 151
. ÀÁbout making an extent, if by chance other
land has to be assigned in exchange . e —


CHAPTER Vl leaf 257.


. Of exceptions and replies against the assise,
wherefore it ought to be stayed . . . 158


-


Ixxvi INDEX.


2.


10.
11.


Si breve originale non fuerit exhibitum, quia
forte deperditur, quid sit agendum .


Car. VIL fol 257 b.


. Si tenens warrantum vocaverit in assisa mortis


antecessoris


. Si warrantus infra ibtatem fuerit, quid sit


agendum


. Breve de summonendo wuritün :
. Breve de summonendo warrantum, cum vo-


catus manens sit exiír& comitatum, inter-
laqueatum .


. De essoniis post yon errant
. Si warrantus defaltam fecerit, capiatur de


lerra sua


. Breve dum fuerit in geysina .
. Aliud breve de eodem, dum fuerit in seysina
. Breve de summonendo warrantum ad war-


rantizandum, cum assisa& capta fuerit per
defaltam warranti


Si warrantus defaltam non festi


Si assisa tangat regem, et dieat tenens, quod
sine rege respondere non potest. Capiatur
nihilominus, sed ponatur judicium in re-
speetum, quousque dominus rex inde prm-
cepit voluntatem suam


Car. VIIL fol 261 b.


. De exceptionibus proponendis conira assisam


mortis antecessoris


. De morte quarum personarum GR debet.


289188


Page


180


184


e 9


oc 3 C» Q


e


10.
11.


TABLE. Ixxvii


If the original writ has not been exhibited
because it has been lost, what is to be done


CHAPTER VII. leaf 257 b.


. If the tenant has called à warrantor in an


assise of mortdancester


. If the warrantor be under age, what i is to be


done .
À writ for- ummoping 8 Warrantor


. An interlaced writ.for summoning & warran-


tor, when the vouchee is abiding CK the
county


. Of essoins after vouehing & werrantor
. If the warrantor has made default, let there


be taken some of his land .


. À writ, when he is in seysine-
. Another writ for the same, whilst ha- js in


Seysine


. À writ to summon 8 Warinigs to warnt.


when an assise has been held by default of
the warrantor

If the warrantor has not made default

If the assise touches the king, and the tenant
says that he cannot answer without the
king, let the assise be nevertheless held, but
let judgment be respited until the lord the
king has announced his will thereon .


CuaPTER VIII. leaf 261 b.


. Of exceptions to be propounded sgninat an


assise of mortdancester


; Concerning the deaths of what persons the


assise ought to beheld.  . ; .
Q 1802, . f


155


157


181


185:


ixxviii INDEX.


pad


CaP. IX. fol. 261 b.


. Qualiter petens pues debet suam inten-


tionem


. De seysina die auo obiit
. De ultima seysina .
. 8i quis donationem fecerit ad vitam | suam


alicui tantum sine herede, vel alicui et
hsredibus suis .


. Quid s&i&. dominicum

. Quid sit feodum

. Die quo obiit

. Qualiter accipitur dies ..

. Si de usu seysinz in assisa queratur, de hoc


non est curandum


. De termino ;
. De qualitate heredum .
. De hoc quod dicitur in brevi, *summoneas &c.


tales, qui tenent &c."


CAP. X. fol. 266 b.


. De responsione tenentis ad articulos brevis
. Ad hoc quod dieitur in brevi, si talis ante-


cessor &ec. et quod non jaceat exceptio


CaP. XI. fol. 267.


. *Si talis antecessor, «cui competit assisa
. 224


mortis antecessoris


CaP. XII. fol 208.


. De exceptionibus contra articulos brevis
. Dicitur *de tantá terrá," ut si error fuerit


in impetratione, exceptio propter errorem


220


222


291


242


cO O0 -T CO» QC


|a


TABLE.


CHAPTER IX. leaf 261 b.


. In what way. the claimant ought to prove his


declaration


. Of seysine on the day on "which he died .
. Of the last seysine . ;
. If any one has made a donation for his life-


. tàme to some one alone. without his heir, or
to some one and his heirs .


. What is demesne

. What is a fee .

. On the day on which he died .

. In what sense à day is accepted

. If à question is raised in the assise of the use


of the seysine, no attention is to be paid to
it


. Concerning a term .
. Of the quality of heirs
. Concerning this which is said in cde. writ,


* summon &c. such persons who hold " &c. .


CHAPTER X. leaf 266 b.


. Concerning the answer of the tenant to the


articles of the writ


. To this which is said in the writ, * if such an


'* ancestor &c." and that no exception lies to
this


CmAPTER XI. leaf 267.


* If such an ancestor, who is entitled to an
assise of the death of an ancestor


CHAPTER XII. leaf 268.


. Of exceptions against the articles of the writ .
. It is said *of so much land," so that if there


be an error in the suing out of the writ,
an exception lies against the error
| y f 2


217


991


228


225


ixxx INDEX.


OQ» OQ » Q


MD OS Ov ROC


HB» $9 v3


| Page
. Item *die quo obit" . ; . 946
. Casus Roberti de Suche ] "- . 948


. Propinquus hsres et alius adeo propinquus . 250
. Exceptio super id quod dieitur "talis tenet" 252


Car. XIII. fol 270 b.


. Exeeptio, si petens remisit vel confirmavit


postquam jus ad eum descendit — .  ..252

. Exceptio, ubi non ges assisa mortis ante-
cesS0ris  . . 256
. Ubi non jacet 8SS1s8 bortis antecessoris . 2060
Ubi cadit assisà .. ; : . 204
. Si felonia objecta fuerit ; |. 970
. Si duo petant per assisam contra unum .  —


. Qualis seysina habita tollit seysinam . — . 272


Car. XIV. fol 974.


. Exceptio si contra minorem, qui est infra


cetatem, petatur per assisam mortis & ma-


jore, qui est plens setatis : . 280
. Si minor contra minorem  . í i 282
. Si minor econtra majorem  . . 290


. Si minor petat contra minorem, quod distin-


guendum de seysina mortui tenentis —


Car. XV. fol. 276.


. Si plures sint petentes et plures tenentes in


assis& mortis antecessoris . : 292


$9585 9 9


-[ O» CQ m


pe 95 t9


d.


TABLE.


. Likewise * on the day on which he died "

. The case of Robert de Suche .

. À next heir, and another equally near .

. Àn exception upon that which is said * that


* such an one holds"


CHAPTER XIII. leaf 270 b.


. Àn exception, if the claimant has released or


confirmed it, after Me "e has descended
to him ;


. Àn exception, where an assise of moridanoes-


ter does not le .


. Where an assise of morbdapadtór: has aol a


place


. Where an assise falls

. If felony has been objected

. If two claim by an assise against one

. What sort of seysine, if it has been had, takes


áway àn assise .


Oni XIV. leaf 274.


. Àn exception, if a claim is made against &


minor, who is under age, through &n a888ise
'of mortdancester by a is who is of full
age


. If & minor claims "€ a minor
. If a minor claims against à major .


If & minor claims against & minor, that & dis-
 tinction is to be made concerning the sey-
sine of the deceased tenant.


CHAPTER XV. leaf 270.
If there be several claimants and séveral
tenants in an assise of the death of an an-
cestor


Ixxxi
Page
947
249
251


2563


281


298


Ixxxii INDEX.


Car. XVI. fol. 276 b.


L De exceptionibus extraneis, ut de exceptione


felonicze


2. De diversis ensibus
3. Quod si antenatus fuerit in partibus trans-


marinis et juratores dubitaverint utrum
mortuus vel vivens fuerit, fiat minori
seysina sub conditione


Car. XVII. fol 277 b.


1. Quando assis& mortis antecessoris vertitur in


jur&tam, et tenet breve assise, et cadit
eausa donationis in assisam


2. Si bastardia cadit in assisam
8. Qusestio de custodia, utrum tenementum. dE


quo assis& arramatur, teneatur in socagio,
vel per servitium militare


4. Exceptio venditionis


Cap. XVIII. fol. 278 b.


1. Inter quas personas non jacet assisa mortis


antecessoris

2. Casus, quod soror de eodem paire et eadem
matre prefertur masculo de diverso patre
de perquisito  .


Cap. XIX. fol. 280.


1. De exceptione Déster ue in assisa mortis an-


tecessoris


2. De' inquisitione bastardism in tali : 838180


Page


296
298


304


924
328


1.


e» M


TABLE. Ixxxiii


CHAPTER XVI. leaf 276 b.


Of exüiraneous exceptions, as of the exception
of felony


: Concerning divers cases . |
. But if the elder-born is beyond the Sea, i cund


the jurors have doubted whether he be alive
. or dead, let conditional seysine be uiii
to the minor


CHAPTER XVII. leaf 277 b.


. When an assise of mortdancester is turned into


& jury, and the writ of assise holds good,
- and the cause of the donation falls into the
assise


. If bastardy falls into an assise :
. À question concerning wardship, whether the


tenement, concerning which an assise is
instituted, is held in socage or in military
tenure


. Àn exception of à sale


CHAPTER XVIII. leaf 278 b.


. Between what persons an assise of mortdan-


cester does not lie


. À ease, in whieh & sister of the same father


and the same mother is preferred to a male
of a different father in E AE to property
acquired


CHAPTER XIX. leaf 280.


. Of an exception of bastardy in an assise ol


mortdancester


; Concerning. an inquest of bastardy i in sueh an


assise


307


313


323


Ixxxiv INDEX.


LisRI QuARTI TRACTATUS QUARTUS, IN QUO TRACTATUR
' DE CONSANGUINITATE.


Car. I. fol. 281.


Page
. Breve de consanguinitate — . . 1 . 982


—


Car. II. fol 281 b.


. De intentione petentis et de responsione
tenentis . : . . 986


m


2. Responsio ad tale bievo €
3. De exceptione paritatis, quee est in personas
descendentes de eodem stipite ; 338
4. Quid juris, si postnatus et propinquus petet
versus remotum, sicut versus tertium fra-
trem e . . . 946
5. Quid juris, si warrantus vocetur frater, Side:
licet postnatus, et warrantizaverit — . . 948
Car, IIT. fol. 283.
l. De exceptionibus contra breve .  .  . 350
Car. IV. fol. 283 b.
l. An breve de consanguinitate verti Agen in


breve de recto . : : : . 954


CaP. V. fol. 284.


l. Breve de seysina antecessoris, qui obiit de -
communia pasturse seysitus . ; 358

9. Forma brevis, ubi quis moritur seysitus de
communia pasture, si seysina deforcietur
heredi, et de consanguinitate . . 4 —

9. Forma brevis de recto . à; à . 960


TABLE/ Ixxxv


THE FounrH TREATISE OF THE FounTH Book, WHICH


C5 t9


TREATS OF CONSANGUINITY.
CHAPTER I. leaf 281.


. À writ of cosinage .


CHAPTER Il. leaf 281 b.


. Of the declaration of the claimant and the


answer of the tenant .


. The answer to such a writ
. Concerning an exception of parity, which ls


against persons descended from the same
Stock .


. Whatis the right, if à youligetcborg and: near


heir claims against & remote heir, as against
& third brother


. What is the right, if a brother, to wit, the


. younger-born, i8 called to warrant, and has
' warranted


CHAPTER III leaf 283.


. Of exceptions against the writ


CHAPTER IV. leaf 288 b.


. Whether à writ of cosinage can be turned


into à writ of right


CnuaPTER V. leaf 284.


. ÁÀ writ concerning the seysine of an ancestor,


who has died eyed of common of per
ture


. The form of a writ, wien 8, person TT Beyhed


of common of pasture, if the heir be dis-
bturbed in his seysine, and concerning cosin-


. The form of & writ of right


Page


393


947.
349


351


355


359


Iixxxvi INDEX.


Car. VI. fol 984 b.


| Page
1l. De brevi quo warranto ; ; . 960
Car. VII. fol. 285.
1. Si damna veniunt in judicium in assisa
mortis antecessoris . ; ; i . 9062


LrBRI QUARTI TRACTATUS QUINTUS, IN QUO TRAC-
TATUR DE ÁSSISA UTRUM.


Car. I. fol. 285.
l. Utrum tenementum sit libera eleemosyna — . 366


Car. II. fol. 286.


1l. De modo procedendi et respondendi . ' 872
2. Ubi jacet hsc assisa, ubi non i —
3. Qualiter proceditur ad assisam ..  .  .. 376
4. Alia forma in modum jurate  .. ; . $878


Car. III. fol. 287.


1l. De remediis, quse competunt persons, sicut
laico . ; . 978

2. Sj tenementum poterit ücdidére ut eschzpta, . 3980

3. Breve quod terra reddatur rectoris ut escheeta 382


CAP. IV. fol. 288 b.


1. De ceonvictione sive attincta juratorum, qui
male juraverint. . 388
2. Quando locus est CURVAS: et quando non 396
3. Àd quem pertinet capere convictionem et
certifioationem . . . 406
4. Breve ad summonendum viginü quatuor . 408
5. Aliud breve de  assis& mortis anteces-
sors .  . : à ; . 410


TABLE. ]xxxvii


CHAPTER VI. leaf 284 b. |
Page


l. Of the writ of Quo warranto . P ; . 9861
| CHAPTER VIL leaf 285. |
l. If damages come into judgment in an assise of


mortdaneester . . ; ' ; . 29038


THE FrrTH TREATISE OF THE FouRTH BOOK, WHICH
TREATS OF THE ÁSSISE OF UTRUM.


CHAPTER L leaf 285.
1. Whether the tenement be frankalmoigne . 967


CHAPTER II. leaf 286.


1. Of the mode of proceding and of ddnde . 978
2. Where this assise lies, and where not

3. How proceedings are to be taken for an assise 377
4. Another form after the manner of & jury . 379


CmAPTER IIL. leaf 287.
1. Of the remedies, to which a parson is entitled


just as à layman . 979
2. If the tenement can fall in as an Eachodt . 381
3. A writ that land be restored to the rector as
an escheat . | . 888
: CHAPTER IV. leaf 288 b.
1. Of the convietion'or attaint of the jurors, who
.  havesworn wrong .. 389
2. When there is place for à eonvietion, and hen
nob . 397
8. To whom it appertains to take a  eonvietion
and acertification — . . 407
4. À writ to summon twenty-four 409


5. Another writ concerning an assise of mortdan-
cester . . : ; , . 411


lxxxviii INDEX.


Page
6. Breve de assisa ultims prsesentationis . . 410
7. Qualiter accipi debet convictio . |.  . 412


8. De sacramento viginti quatuor .. . 07. 414


Car. V. fol. 292 b.


1. Quz sit poena convietorum . ; : . 418
2. Qualiter exeusantur : —
3. Breve si, cum viginti quatuor i uide Ent
duodecim de perjurio, dicant  disseysiti
quod plene non habent seysinam suam . 420
4. Breve cum duodecim emendaverint —..  . 422


Car. VI. fol. 293.


l. De remediis et exceptionibus per quas differ-


tur convietio . —.  .  . .  . 424
2. De remedio certificationis — . | 496
9. Breve si duodecim summonendi aont ad cer-

tificandum . : ; ; . -—


, 4, Similiter de assisis quibuscunque ; ; . 490


Car. VIL fol. 294.


l. Breve de novo formatum, si post convictionem
arramatam contingit mori aliquem eorum,


inter quos assisa capta fuerit . . 480
2. Ahud de assis& mortis antecessoris ad con-
vincendum duodecim . , : . 4382


Car. VIII. fol 294 b.


1. Quod non est assisa capienda super assisam,
nec convietio super convictlionem  . . 484


E


Q2 t9


TABLE. Ixxxix


. Á writ for an assise of last presentation
. In what way the conviction ought to be ac-


cepted


. Concerning the oath of the twenty-four . ;


CHAPTER V. leaf 292 b.


. What is the punishment of the convicted
. In what way they are excused
. À writ if, when the twent-four have acqüit-


ted the twelve of perjury, the parties dis-
seysed say, that they have not nid their
Seysine


, À writ, when the isélve dues isendod dom


verdict


CHAPTER VI. leaf 298.


. Of the remedies and the exceptions whereby a


conviction is put off .


. Of the remedy by a certification ;
, ÀA writ, if twelve are to be summoned is


certify


. In like manner conestning assises of any kind


CHAPTER VII. leaf 294.


. À writ drawn up anew, if, after a conviction


has been instituted, it happens that any one
dies of those, between whom the assise has
been taken


. Another writ eoncerning an assise of mort-


dancester to conwict twelve


CHAPTER VIII leaf 294 b.


. That an assise is not to be taken on an assise,


nor & conviction on a conviction


431


498


435


xe


d


OQ» Oc B 25


INDEX.


Ubi capi debet assisa super assisam, et ubi
non, et ubi in assisa novse disseysino

Ubi in.assisa mortis antecessoris .

. Ubi in assisa ultimze pc

. Ubi in assis& utrum,

. Quod non capistur convietio super convic-
tionem


Page


LisRI QUARTI TRACTATUS SEXTUS, IN QUO TRACTATUR


Q2 b9


DE ACTIONE Doris.
Car. I. fol 296.


. Ubi actio dotis potest terminari .
. Breve de dote rationabiliter constituta .


Cap. IL & IIL fol 296 b.


. Qualiter mulier proponere debet inténtionem
. De visu petendo
. De vocatione waranti


Car. IV. fol. 297.


. De exceptionibus generalibus contra breve,


sj warantum non habuerit


Car. V. fol 297 b.


. Quod mulieri petenti dotem non tenetur


quis respondere sine waranto de dote sua,
non. magis quam ipsa mulier debet re-
spondere sine waranto suo


. Si warantus fuerit ad fidem regis Franoism
. Breve ad producendum haeredem ad waran-


tum de dote


458


460
462


464


O5 CO m C2


TABLE.


When an assise ought to be taken on an
assise, and when not, and when in an assise
of novel disseysine

. When in an assise of mnortdarncester

. When in an assise of last presentation

. When in an assise of Utrum .

. That a eonviction is not taken on & con isto


THE SrxTH TREATISE OF THE FouRTH BOOK, WHICH


E


. Of general exceptions against the writ, if [the
.  . 4869


TREATS OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER.


CHAPTER I. leaf 296.


. Where an action for dower may be determined
. À writ of dower reasonably appointed .


CHAPTERS II. & III. leaf 296 b.


. In what manner à woman ought to propound


her declaration .


. Of claiming a view ;
. Of the calling of à warrantor .


CHAPTER IV. leaf 297.


tenant] has not à warrantor


CHAPTER V. leaf 297 b.


. That to à woman .claiming dower a person is


not bound to answer without & warrantor
for her dower, no more than the woman
herself ought to answer without her war-
rantor


. If the warrantor shall be in the fly of the


king of France .
. À& writ to produce the heir as 8 sarranbor
concerning dower


451


461
463


465


xell INDEX.


Page
4. Si alium produxerit quam verum 464
5b. De duabus mulieribus contendentibus ds dote 470


Cap. VI. fol. 299 b.


1. Cum proposita fuerit intentio mulieris, aut
tenens statim. restituat, vel excipiat et
ostendat quod dotem habere non debeat,


vel warantum vocet. . , . 44
2. Si warantus vocatus non venerit, cape per
tale breve. : —


3. Quod uxor recuperabit super tenentem vel

super hswredem, secundum quod fuerit do-

tata nominatim, vel non nominatim . . 4176
4. Quod non remanet actio mulieri, cum recu-

pereverit dotem ; 0 —
5. Breve de seysina facienda viulieri, cum re-

cuperaverit dotem  . —
6. Breve, si de tertia parte dotis non | tiominate

recuperaverit, et inde feoffatus tenens in

pace, et. haeres faciat dotem mulieri petenti 480
7. Breve, ubi mulier recüperaverit dotem suam

ut de dote nominata super hzredem, quod

ipsa recuperet, et hseres faciat excambium

feoffato ad valentiam ; 482
8. Ratio quare mulier recuperat dotem nomi-

natam, si alienata fuerit, et de dote non

nominata nisi excambium. Item expecta-

tur quandoque stas in s dotis spe-

ejali ratione . ; 484
9. Cum autem mulier recuporat bou suam

sive de dote nominata sive non nominata,

et versus eum qui warantizat, ei, warantus

non habeat terram in comitatu illo in quo


TABLE.


. If she has produced another than the true one
. Concerning two women contending for dower.


CHAPTER VI. leaf 299 b.


. When the declaration of the woman has been


propounded, let the tenant either at once
restore, or except and. show that she ought
not to have dower, or let him call a warrantor


. If the warrantor having been called, shall not


have come, the cape by & writ of this kind


. That the wife shall recover against the tenant


- or the heir, according as she has been en-
: dowed specifically, or not specifically .


. That the action of the woman for her dower


: is not stayed on account of the dn of
the warrantor


. À writ for giving seysine to à woman, RES


she has recovered dower


; A. writ, if the woman has recovered the third


part, where her dower has not been speci-
. fied, and the feoffee thereof may hold it in
peace, and the heir must provide a dower
for the woman claimant


. ÀÁ writ, where à woman has soedvered hr


' dower as for specified dower against an
heir, that she recover and the heir make
. eompensation to the feoffee up to the value


. The reason why à woman recovers her spe-


481


488


eifled dower, if 1t has been alienated, and |


of dower not specified only an equivalent.
Likewise majority is sometimes waited for
. in a petition for dower for a special reason .


. But when a woman recovers her seysine either


of dower specified or dower not specified,
and against him who warrants it, and the
warrantor has no land in the county, in


Q 1802, g |


485


xclv


10.


1E.
12.


INDEX.


petitur unde possit warantizare, sed in alio
comitatu, ubi terram habuerit, fiat tale
. breve. i
Breve, ubi mulier reeuperat uH uum suam
de dote nominata  . ; "
De modo assignandi dotem
Quod finis factus in curia domini vegis non
&ufert dotem nominatam .


CaP. VII. fol. 301 b


. Exceptiones contra mulierem petentem dotem


Cap. VIII fol. 302.


Exceptio quod nunquam fuit desponsata tali


viro


. De exceptione eontra matrimonium
. Breve de mittendo inquisitionem ad curiam


Christianitatis . ; :


. De officio ordinari
. Facta probatione in curia Christianitatis et


inquisitione, breve per quod summoneatur
pars . |


. Breve de seysina facienda mulieri, Si inqui- .


sitio fecerit pro ea :
Si summonitus non venerit, nec se essonia-
verit .


. Si probatur in curia Christianitatis, " dum


mulier sit in veniendo versus curiam, mo-
riatur tenens  . ; à ;


490


10.


&


7.


8.


TABLE.


which the elaim is made, wherewith he can
warrant, but in another county where he
has land, let à writ of this kind issue


.À writ where à woman recovers her seysine of


specified dower .


. Of the mode of assigning dower
12.


That a fine made in the court of the king
does not take away specified dower


J. CHAPTER VIL. leaf 301 b.


. Exceptions against a woman claiming dower .


. CHAPTER VIII. leaf 302. '


Án exception, that she was never espoused by


^ the said man


. Of an exception against a 8 marriago. i
. À writ to send an inquest to & court of Chris-


. tianity


Concerning the office of the ordinary
. Proof and an inquest having been made in


the court of Christianity, a writ whereby a
party is summoned

À writ to give seysine to the woman, if the
inquest has made for her

If the parity summoned has not come nor
essoined himself.

If it is proved in the court of Christianity,
and whilst the woman is in the course of
coming to the court, the tenant dies .


g 2


491


509


xcvi INDEX.


Page
Car. IX. fol 308 b.

l. Si dieat, ubicunque fuerit desponsata, nun-

quam fuit.ei dos constituta, vel quod non
ad ostium ecclesie. ltem ubi conceditur |
matrimonium et excipitur contra dotem . 508
2. Item dicere potest, quod aliter dotata fuit, et
si dicit. non nominatim, responderi poterit


de tertia parte, vel hujusmodi . ; . 514
3. Quod inquiratur per patriam, ubi secta defe-
cerit et alia probatio à . 016


Car. X. fol. 305.


l. Si de modo constitutionis dotis proferatur


instrumentum in re aliena a . 518
2. De eujus assensu fit talis constitutio dotis . 520
3. Si de consensu patris vel matris vel alterius

amici dotata fuit ; . 522


4. De exceptione contra mulierem sic j dotatatii c 524
5. Inquirendum, si dotata fuit per assensum . —


Car. XI. fol. 3006.


1. Quod competit exceptio hs;redi ex pluralitate
mulierum dotem petentium 524
2. Quod mulieri petenti dotem objectum. fuit, |
quod alia mulier ratione ejusdem viri
habuit dotem, et quod duabus mulieribus
non fuit concedenda. i 530
8. Breve ad hoc, scilicet de duabus mulieribus. 532
4. Consulti fuerunt justiciarli, qualiter proce-
dendum esset in tali inquisitione facienda 584


TABLE.


: CHAPTER IX. leaf 303 b.


l. If he should say, wherever she was. espoused
dower was never appointed to- her, or not
at the door of the church. Likewise when
the marriage is conceded and dd is
made against dower . :

2. Likewise he may say that she was otherwise
endowed, andif he should say not specifically,
it may be answered with the third part, or
such like

3. That an inquest be made by tho countzy, sd
à sect and other proof a are deficient .. i


CHAPTER X. leaf 305.


1 1f concerning the mode of the appointment of
dower an instrument is produced, referring
.to the estate of another person .

2, With whose consent such an Ld of
dower is made

9. If she has been endowed with da nent of

^ the father or. mother or other friend .

4. Of an exception against & woman so endowed.

6. Àn inquest is to be made, if she was endowed
"with the assent of certain persons


CHAPTER XI. leaf 300.


1. That the heir may except on account of &
plurality of women claiming dower .

2. That to &à woman claiming dower it was ob-
jected, that another woman in respect of
the same husband has had dower, and that
it 1s not to be allowed to two women. ,

À writ for this, to wit, concerning two wives .

The justiciaries were consulted, in what way
proceedings should be had in in E such
an inquest. . ; :


xcvii


Page


509


515


517


519


521


xeviii | INDEX.


Page
Car. XII. fol. 307 b.


1. Exceptio contra mulierem, si aliquando
contra mulierem petentem dotem fuerit
sententiatum causa matrimonii . ; . $86

9. Competit exceptio contra mulierem ex taci-
turnitate . 538

3. Si due mulieres dotegm- petant, non inultum:
refert de prioritate . ; Xx

4. De duabus mulieribus — dotem petentibus
ratione unius viri, que illarum in pos-
sesione fuerit tempore mortis obtinebit . 540


Car. XIII. fol. 308.


l. Item competit exceptio ex eo quod dicitur,
*mulier petit," responderi poterit quod
petitio nulla est, quia vir suus die quo
eam desponsavit nee postea aliquid juris
habuit in terra illa per quod dotare pos-
seb i3 542

2. Cum contra inüliereni p exceptio
de consuetudine civitatis vel burgi, tune
fiat breve ballivis civitatis. 546

3. Si summonitus ad respondendum in placito
dotis excipiat, quod nihil teneat, vel nisi
ad terminum, vel in villenagium, vocetur
warantus . ; 548

4. Exceptio contra saüliéren, si petat edi
tatem de feodo militari, et quod non nisi
de tertia . ; 550

5. Exceptio, quod vir suus PEU URN fuit inde
feoffatus, quod inde eam posset donare . | —


TABLE.


CHAPTER XII. leaf 307 b.

 l. Àn exception against the woman, if ever a

sentence in a cause of matrimony has been

given against the woman claiming dower .
2. Àn exception may be made against a woman

| for her taciturnity


3. If two women claim dower, 1t dues not aui -


matter as to priority . s
4. Of two women claiming dower in »Gospedt of
one.man, she, who was in possession of him
. at the time of his death, shall prevail


CHAPTER XIII. leaf 308.


1. Likewise an exception may be raised upon the
words that *a woman claims," it may be
answered that her claim is null, because
her husband neither on the.day when he
espoused her nor afterwards had any right
in the land, whereby he could endow her .

2. When an exception is propounded against a
' woman concerning the custom of a city or
& borough, then let à writ go to the bailiffs
of the ety .

9. If the person summoned to answer in à , plea
of dower excepts, that he holds nothing or
only for a term or in villenage, let & war-
rantor be called . ;

4, Àn exception against à woman, if she claims
& moiety of. à military fee, and that. she
can only claim a third

5. An exception, that her husband was never en-
feoffed thereof, so that he could endow her
therewith .


543


547


INDEX.


6. Breve ad hoe, quod inde nunquam fuit sey-


rf


situs quod, &c. .

Exceptio, si tenuit in villenagio, vel hoc
fuit jus alterius uxoris, vel nisi ad ter-
minum annorum vel ad vitam vel hujus-
modi .


. Quod potest cognoscere, ES seysitus fuerit


de feodo, sed antequam illam desponsaret,
illam dederat ita, &c.


. Ad hoe responsio et replicatio
Replicatio uxoris, si ex dolo vel negligentia


viri seysitus amitteret, ut uxorem defrau-
daret de dote habenda post mortem


. Si vir alienaverit terram suam antequam de-


sponsaret .


. Exceptio conira mulierem, quod vit suus


feloniam fecerit .


. Responsio mulieris
. Si filius alicujus et hszres ants dotis Assig-


nationem feloniam fecerit.


. Contra mulierem * unde nihil habet" .
. De replicatione mulieris
. Si terra, de qua dotem petit, commissa » fuit


ad firmam et ad terminum


. S&j dos, que petitur, in confinio duorum
comitatuum, de qua facienda fuerit in-


quisitio


Car. XIV. fol 312b.


. De seysina facienda mulieri, si non sit quod


opponi possit, quare dotem non habeat


Page


674


TABLE.


6- A writ for this, that he was never ids


:1u


— thereof, that, &c.
An exception, if he held ibi in villenage, or
it was the right of another wife, or he held


it only for a term of years, or for life, or
guch like


. That he may acknowledge, that he Was seysed


as of fee, but before he espoused her, he
had so given it, &e.-


. Àn answer to this and a reply ;
. The reply of the wife, if the husband having


been seysed has lost his seysine through
fraud or negligence, that he might defraud
his wife of her enjoyment of dower after
his death .


. If the husband has alienatod dis land bafore


he espoused his wife .


. Án exception against the woman, that her


husband has committed felony .


. The answer of the woman
. I£. the son and heir of any one -Bfore the


assignment of dower has committed
felony


. Against à woman, * ' whereof she has nothing "
. Concerning the reply of the woman ;
. If the land from which she claims dower lisa


been leased to farm or for & term


. If the dower which is claimed is on the con-


fines of two counties, E which the
inquest i is to be held .


. CHAPTER XIV. leaf 312 b.


. On giving seysine to the womam, if there can


. be nothing objeeted to her having dower .


Page


557


675


e


INDEX.


. Si dos ei recognita fuerit et reddita in


curia .


CAP. XV. fol. 313.


. Qualiter mulier poterit suam dotem amittere,


cum fuerit in possessione, et ex quibus
causis


. Qualiter dotem surtit sülior


Car. XVI. fol 313.


. De recto de dote ad terram petendam que
pertinet ad dotem, cum cessaverit breve de


dote .


. De formanda et proponenda, intentione mu-


lieris .


. De intentione proposita .


Cap. XVII. fol. 314.


. De exceptionibus contra mulierem petentem,


et de amensuratione dotis


. Responderi poterit, quod plene habet dotem


suam, et ideo oportet quod fiat extensio
et admensuratio


. Breve de admensuratione dotis in diversis


comitatibus


. De officio vicecomitis, &. .de modo procedendi
. Cum partes presentes sunt, modus per quem


proponat querens intentionem suam.


Car. XVIII. fol. 315.


. Quid pertineat ad mulierem facta constitu-


tione dotis et assignatione, et de vasto in
dote . á 3 ; .


Page


578


578
580


580


9082
584


9086


594


TABLE.


. If her dower has been recognised and restored
to her in court : : : .


CHAPTER XV. leaf 318.


. How a woman may lose her dower, when she
is in possession of it, and from what causes
. In what way à woman loses her dower .


CHAPTER XVI. leaf 318.


. Of à writ of rgght to dower to claim land,


which appertains to dower, when à writ of .


dower has ceased
. Of forming and propounding the decbasston
of the woman


ciii
Page


579


579
581


. Upon the declaration having been propounded 585


CHAPTER XVII. leaf 314.


. Of exceptions against a& female claimant, and

of admeasurement of dower.  .

. It. may be answered, that she has fully her

dower, and accordingly itis incumbent that

there be an extent and an admeasurement .

. À writ for the &admeasurement of dower in

divers counties .

. Of the office of the viscount and of the mode

of proceeding

. When the parüies are present, the manner
whereby the claimant should PORE his

declaration !


' CHAPTER XVIII. leaf 315.


1. What appertains to & woman upon the ap-
pointment and assignment of dower, and of
waste in dower . «


587


591


593


505


eilv


INDEX.


. Cum mulier in dote vastum fecerit et de-
. Structionem, de prohibendo ne vastum faciat |
. Si non omittat quin vastum faciat, forma


brevis quod fiat de attachiando mulierem


4. De modo procedendi in hujusmodi placito,


«0 00 * OQ» e


:10. S


eum post dilationes comparuerit


. Responsio mulieris contra querelam

. Fiat visus de vasto et fiat inde inquisitio

. Item respondere potest ad vastum mulieris .
. Uterque ponere se possit in patriam


Breve de videndo vastum per vicecomitem
et patriam, et remittat E dad
ticiariis

i mulier de vasto convincatut, m poa
sequatur


. Breve de apponendo forsctario :
. Refert, utrum quis vastum fecerit in EEGUH


vel alieno .


. Quid est vastum, et quid exilium.


Car. XIX. fol. 817.


. Si eustos vastum fecerit in alieno, sicut in


terra quam tenuit nomine Busto. breve
ne faciat


. Si eustos convincatur, que poma eau ins


Car. XX. fol. 317.


. Mortua muliere, ad quem revertitur dos
. Si heres donationem fecerit in vita mulieris,


et attornavit mulierem donatorio


610


614


Qx


T


TABLE.


. When à woman has caused waste and destruc-


tion in her dower, of POE her from
causing waste


. If she does not cease from causing waste, the


form of & writ for attaching à woman


. Of the mode of proceeding in such a plea,


when after some delays she has appeared .


. The answer of the woman to. the complaint .
. Let à view be had of the waste, and let there


. be an inquest thereupon


: Likewise the woman may a io the charge


of waste


. Each may put dignaslyes upon an iiguost
. À writ to view the waste by the Visecount and


the country, and let him remit the Pen
to the justiciaries


. If the woman be n of m lat


penalty follows .


. À writ for appointing a forester
. It is of importanee, whether & person has com-


mitted waste in his or in another's estate .


. What is waste, and what is exile


CHAPTER XIX. leaf 317.


. If & guardian has caused waste in another's


estate, as in land which he has held in the
name of guardianship, à writ that he should
not do it


. If & guardian be convicted, what penalty


follows


CHAPTER XX. leaf 317.


. To whom the dower reverts on the death of


the woman


. If the heir has made a donátion] in the lifetime


of the woman, and has attourned the woman
to the donee


611


615


evi Z INDEX.


3. De dote data vivente uxore, qu: dotem .
tenuit, et cujus servitium attornatum fuit
donatorio, et sic non ad hsredem . . 0614


FiNIisS TRACTATUS SEXTI LIBRI QUARTI.


B |. TABLE. evii
3. Concerning dower given away during the life-
time of the woman who held the dower,
and whose service has been attourned to

the donee, and so not to the heir ; . 615


HERE ENDS THE SrxrTH TREATISE OF THE FOURTH
d Book.


RES


HENRICI DE BRACTON


DE


LEGIBUS ET CONSUETUDINIBUS ANGLLE, -


HENRICUS DE BRACTON


ON THE


. LAWS AND CUSTOMS 0F ENGLAND.


Q 1302. Wt.2164. A


HENRICI DE BRACTON


DE


LEGIBUS ET CONSUETUDINIBUS ANGLLA,


TRACTATUS SECUNDUS LIBRI QUARTI :


IN QUO TRACTATUR DE ASSISA ULTIMZE PRZESENTATIONIS.!


f. 238.


AZATAUVAVASMAVAVEVASMATMEEAVEMA MA WEM RWA MEM


Car. I.
Dictum est supra qualiter subveniendum est ei, qui
injusto & sine judicio disseysitus fuit de aliquo teíito
vel de servitute aliqua qus pertineat ad teütum in


fundo alieno, & quse consistit in jure: Nune autem


dicendum est de pertinentiis qui consistunt in jure &
in proprio, sicut de seysina presentandi, ubi s. quis
impeditus fuerit quo minüs uti possit seysina propria
vel alicujus antecessoris sui; Cüm autem presentave-
rint ad aliquam ecclesiam vacantem, ad quam ipse vel
antecessores sui presentaverint tempore pacis, cüm pro-
priam seysinaà habere debeat quis, vel antecessoris sui
qui ultimó presentaverit, nisi ille qui ipedit vel defor-
S. : ^
ceat docere possit certis ratioibus quare no debeat, q
quidé decidi et determinari poterit p assisà ultime
presentationis utrag, parte vel altera tatu id in curia
postulüte, Sed videdü est primó cui copetit hujus-


! Hic incipit Secundus "Tractatus Libri Quarti de Assisa Ultime Pre-
sentationis. M.S. Rawl. C. 160.


.Bayerische
Staatsbibliothek
München


THE FOURTH BOOK


Or


HENRICUS DE BRACTON


ON THE


LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF ENGLAND.
THE SECOND TREATISE,


WHICH TREATS OF THE ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION.


4 NFNUVANSFANI SEINE NÉE INSBINZSAESEONZ SEISIUIG VENUS SN NZSCNSIAIU NISI 09


CHAPTER I.


It has been above explained in what manner suecour — 1
is to be afforded to him, who has been disseysed tor- entitled -
tiously and without a judgment from any tenemenü or an assise ,
from any servitude in another's ground, which apper- ee
 tains to à tenement, and which consists in & right. "We f.9237 b.
must now explain concerning the appurtenances, which
consist in & right and in property as concerning the
seysine of presenting, where, for instance, a person has
been impeded from using his own seysine or the seysine
of an ancestor. For when they have presented to a
vacant church, to which he himself or his ancestors have
presented in time of peace, when he ought to have his
own seysine or that of his ancestor, who has last pre-
sented, unless he who impedes or deforces him can show
by certain reasons wherefore he ought not, which indeed
may be decided and determined by an assise of last pre-
sentation, each party or one of them only demanding
that in court, But we must see first, who is entitled to f 23,

A 2


Britton, i iv.
ch. i. $8 2
and 8.

J'leta, 317.


9.
Breve de
assisa ul-
tima pre-


sentationis.


4 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS.


modi assisa, quia non competit cuilibet de populo, nisi
ei qui semel nomine pprio presentaverit, ut heredes!
nomine successionis, de seysina ppria vel alicujus áte-
cessoris sui jure hereditario succedit, ad q ptinet advo-
eatio. Et q dicit de uno, dici poterit de pluribus &
eontra plures, cüm sint quasi unus heres: quia nullus
sine participe vel cohsrede assisam portare poterit vel
respodere, no magis quà in aliis assisis. Et si plures
participes p assisam recuperaveri t, nullus sine alio
prsesentabit, nee ratione sesnecie, nec maj joritatis, nec
pluralitatis : qa aut omnes comunicant aut nullus. Aliis
aute qui tenet p feoffamentü & no p descensum nun-
quà competit, antequa semel presentaverint: da de
seysina eorü quorü heredes nó sunt petere non possunt
p assisam, no magis quà p breve de recto. It& nec ei
qui tenet ad vità quocüq modo & non p descensum,
sicut nomine dotis vel ad terminü. Subvenit eis tame
alio modo ut infrà dicet.


Rex viec. salute. Si talis fecerit te securum de cla-
more suo psequedo, tune suimoneas &e. xii. liberos &
legales homines de visineto tali gq sint cora justiciariis
nostris ad pximà assisam cu in partes illas venerint,
vel apud Westminster immediaté, vel alibi tali die,
parati saeraméto recognoscere quis advocatus tepore
pacis prssentavit ultima psonà qus mortua est ad
ecclesià de tali loco, quee vacat (ut dicit) & cujus ad-
vocatione ide talis dicit ad se ptinere. Et interim
ecclesia illa videit & nomina eorum imbreviari faciat.
Et suimoneas p bonos suimonitores talem, qui advoca-
tione illa ei deforceat, q tune sit ibi auditurus illa
recognitione, & habeas ibi sumonitores & hoc breve.


! * ye] hgeres," MS. Rawlinson, C. 159.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 5


an assise of this kind, because it is not allowable to any
one of the people, excepting to him who has once pre-
sented in his own name or as heir in the name of his
succession, of his own seysine or who succeeds by right
of inheritance to the seysine of his ancestor, to whom
the right of advowson belongs. And what is said of
one may be said of several, and against several, when
they are as ib were one heir, for no one without his
parcener or coheir can bring an assise or reply to one,
no more than in other assises, nd if several parceners
recover [the advowson] by an assise, none shall present
without the others, neither by reason of seniority, nor
of majority, nor of plurality, because they all commu-
nieate or none. But for others, who hold a tenement
by feoffment and not by descent, it is never competent,
before they have once presented, because they cannot
claim by an assise the seysine of those, whose heirs they
are not, no more than by & writ of right. Neither is it
eompetent for him who holds for life in any way, and
noi by descent, as in the name of dower or for a term.
They are aided, however, in another way, as will be
explained below. |


The king to the viscount greeting. If so-and-so has , ?-

. . . A writ
given you security to prosecute his claim, then summon concerning
&c. twelve free and loyal men of such a neighbourhood t7 assise of

. TP . Bt presen-
to be before our justiciaries at the next assise when tation.
they shall come into those parts, or at Westminster
immediately, or elsewhere, on such a day, prepared to
recognise on oath what advocate presented in time of
peace the last parson who is dead to the church ot such
a place, which is vacant (as is said), and of which the
said so-and-so says, that the advowson belongs to him.

And in the mean while let them view that church and
cause their names to be entered on the writ. And sum-
mon by good summoners such & person, who deforces
him of that advowson, that he be there to hear the
recognition, and have there the summoners and this writ,


6 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS.


Teste &e. Per hoc aute qd' dicit deforc. videt qui-
busdü q querens innuat p hoc q deforcians sit in sey-
sina, sicut in brevi de recto, sed revera non est ita,
sed satis deforceat qui possessorem uti seysina non
pmiseri& omninó vel min? comodé impediat prwsen-
tando, appellando, impetrando, secundüm  q dicit, satis
facit disseysina, qui non permisit possessore vel comode,
licet omninó non expellat.
Denba4o Ad primum diem poterit uterq, se essoniare si volu-
procedendi erint, si autem ambo fecerint defalta, vacuü erit placitu
tod o: & cadit breve. Si sauté impediens tantü preesens sit,
cito, p judiciü recedet sine die. Si aute queres tantum
presens sib & impediés no, tüc videdu erit inprimis
an impedies sumonit? sit vel no. Si aute sumonit?
fuit & sumonitio testata p idoneos sumonitores, qui
examinat testentur suimonitioné, tüc resumoneat impe-
diens. Si aute no fuerit suinonit? vel suinonitio testata
vel fort presés fuerit primo die & causat? fuerit q
nullà omninó habuit suinonitione vel minus ratioabile
sumonitioné habuerit, habeat aliu dié rationabile.  Tes-
tata igit sumonitione vel no dedicta ab aliquo resumo-
neat p tale breve.


24. Rex vie. sal. Sumoneas p bonos sumonitores À. q
Sideio"! sit corü justiciariis nfis apud tal& locü auditurus recog-


impediems nitionem ultimse presentationis quàm B. in eadé curia
m[nmum PE Eu . - t9 e 5€ .e . .
dicin sum. DÍ& corà eisde justiciariis nostris versus eum arramavit,


a ganigi qui advocatus esü tépore pacis &c. ut supra. Et ad
non vene- dimi. -— - . - . - 9 * c eec .
rit qualiter 0Stedenduü quare no fuit corà eisde justiciariis nostris


sit resum- apud tale locu tali die sieut sumonitus fuit. Et habeas
monendus. |


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 7


Witness &c. But from the circumstance that the word
* deforees" is used, it seems to some that the plaintiff
intimates that the deforcer is in seysine, as in a writ of
right, but in truth this is not so, but he satisfies the
word * deforces," who shall not permit the possessor to
use his seysine at all, or to his inconvenience impedes
him by presenting, by appealing, by suing out a writ,
according to what is said that a person sufficiently
causes a disseysine, who does not allow a person to use


. his seysine at all or not Penvemensis although he does


LI


not altogether expel him.


On the first. day each party may essoin himself, if he — a.
wishes, but if both parties make default, the plea will D. bum


be vacated and the writ falls. But if the disturber only proceeding
be present, he shall retire without & day by a judgment. !* 5. Plea
But if the plaintiff alone be present, and the dirturber kind.
not, then it is to be seen in the first place whether the .
disturber has received a summons or not. But if he has

been summoned, and the summons is attested by fitting
summoners, who having been examined testify to the
summons, then let the disturber be resummoned. . But

if he has not been summoned or the summons has not

been attested, or by chance he was present on the first

day, and :has alleged as an exeuse that he has not had

any summons at all, or not a reasonable summons, let

him have another reasonable day. "The summons there-

fore having been attested, or not gainsayed by any
person, let him be resummoned by such a writ.


The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good ,, ac B
summoners Á. that he be before our justiciaries at such forcer or
a place to hear a recognition of last presentation, which picea
B. in the said court before our said justieiaries has insti- come on
tuted against him, who is the advocate in time of peace das ora à
&c. as above. . And to show eause why he was not before summons,
our said justieiaries at such a place on such a day, as he?" be


was summoned. And have there the summoners and this summoned.


8, DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS.


ibi sumorn! & hoc breve. Ad quem dié si venerit,
causari no poterit sumon? quin pcedat assisa, sive tes-
tet prima sumon sive secüda sive nulla, cu die habu-
erib rationabile & seiverit se esse suimon vel scire de-

f.238 b. buit. Si autem omninó non venerit, tunc capiatur
assisa per defaltà si juratores presentes fuerint, & sic
terminetur negotium. Si autem presentes non fuerint,
tune preeipiatur vic. quód habeat corpora eorum ad
alium diem. Ad quem diem sive venerint sive non,
ante omnia capiatur assisa, cüm tantum operatur ejus
absentia quàm presentia, eüm nihil dicero possit in
odium defaltze quare assisa remaneat, nisi forté ad
cerlifieandum juratores, si charta habeant vel aliquid
tale intervenerit.


ud Rex vic. salutem. Preecipimus tibi quód venire facias

vicecomes &€. À. B. C, vel q habeas &c. corpora A. B. C. recog-

venire fa- pjtorum assise ultimze preesentationis, quz: summonit&

ciat Jura- . . . NN .

tam: esb in curia &c. coram justieiariis &c. inter A. que-
rentem & B. impedientem de advocatione ecclesi, de
M. & ad ostendendum quare non fuerunt &ec. ad talem
diem & loeum sieut summoniti fuerunt, & si ulteriüs
defaltam fecerint tunc in fine brevis it& dicatur, & ad .
audiendum judicium suum de pluribus defaltis. Dica-
tur etiam in fine brevis (si opus fuerit) & tot & tales
tam milites quàm alios liberos, legales & discretos
homines de pximo vicineto in assisam illam ponas, &
ilos habeas coram preefatis justiciariis nostris ad prse-
fatum diem, ad faeiendam illam recognitionem simul
eum juratoribus priüs electis, & q interim illam eccle-
siam viderint, & ita g assisa illa non remaneat pro
defectu recognitorum. Velsie: & aliter. Et loco talium


! * summonitores," MS. Rawl. C. ? * summonitio," id.
160,


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 9


writ, On which day if he has come, the party sum-
moned may noti allege any cause why the assise should
not proceed, whether he calls in evidence the first sum-
mons or the second summons or none at all, since he has
had a reasonable day, and knew that he had been sum-
moned or ought to have known it. But if he has not f 238b.
come at all, then let the assise be held by default, if the
jurors shall be present, and so let the business be ter-
minated. But if they shall not be present, then let a
precept issue to the viscount, that he have their bodies
there on another day. At which day whether they have
come or not, let the assise be held before all things, since
his absence works the same effect as his presence, since
he can say nothing in hatred of the default wherefore
the assise should be stayed, except by chance to certify
the jurors, if they have & charter, or something of the
kind has intervened.


The king to the viscount greeting. "We enjoin you
that you cause to come, &c. A., B., C., or that you have tmt vi
&c. the bodies of A., B., and C., as recognisors of an assise viscount
of last presentation which has been summoned in court, jury eo
&c. before the justieiaries, &c. between A. as plaintiff, come.
and B. impeding him in the advowson of the church of
M., and to show cause why they were not, &c. on & cer-
tain day and ai a certain place as they were summoned,
and if they shall make further default, then in the end
of the writ let it be so said, and to hear judgment
against them for several defaults. Let it also be said at
the end of the writ, if it be requisite, and place so many
and such, as well knights as other free, loyal, and dis-
creet persons of the nearest neighbourhood, on that
assise, and have them present before our aforesaid jus-
. Uüeiaries on the aforesaid day, to make that recognition
together with the jurors already elected, and that mean-
while they should view that church, so that the assise
shall not be stayed from failure of the recognisors.
Or thus: and otherwise. And in the place of such as


l0 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS.


qui de assisa amoventur, eo q suni certa ratione sus-
pecti, vel quia sunt homines vel parentes talis, vel alio
modo inutiles vel essoniabiles, vel loco talium qui mor-
tui sunt, ponas tot & tales legales & discretos milites
alios eüm priüs electis, & tales &c. ut supra. Ei sum-
moneas per bonos summonitores talem, si fort& absens
fuerit eo die, q sit. coram &c. ad audiendum assisam
illam, & ad ostendendum quare non fuit &c. & talis
summonitio fi& ex abundanti. Et habeas ibi summon
& hoc breve &e. T. &e. Et licet ultima clausula
habeat locum in omnibus assisis qus capiendsz sunt
per defaltam, sicut assisa mortis antecessoris &e. &
alie, si ad primum diem se essoniaverint & diem
habuerint per esson suum, & ad quem non apparue-
rint, capiatur assisa per defaltam statim, non jacebit
resummonitio. ltem si comparuerint & juratores non,
semper habebit unicum esson quotiens in curia copa-
ruerit, & diem habuerit.


Ex premissis satis apparet quando & quoties jacet


etresum- resumonitio, & quotiens assisa& capitur extra com vel


ticijariis itinerantibus in com ad omnia placita non
habet locü resumonitio nec xv. dierum diffusa dilatio,


g4. ubi tenens in assise mortis antecessoris vel impediens
Fleta, 318. & deforcians, ut hic manentes sint & etiam res de qua


agitur in eodem eom tempore itinerationis, non magis
quàm conira minorem, sed statim capiatur assisa& post
' prima defaltà sicut assisa novze disseysins. Et q nulla
debet fieri resumonitio in itinere justiciariorum in prs-
dieto easu cüm partes prssentes sint in coim, & res


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 1l


are removed from the assise, on the ground that they
are suspected for a certain reason, or that they are the
liege men or relations of such an one, or in some other
way are unavailable or essoniable, or in the place of
such as are dead, place so many and such other loyal
&nd disereet knights with those previously elected, and
such, &e, as above. And summon by good summoners
sueh an one, if by chance he should be absent on that
day, that he be present, &e. to hear that assise and to
show cause wherefore he was not there, &c., and such a
summons is made to be more sure. And live there, &c.
the summoners and this writ, &e. And although the
last clause has a place in all assises, which are to be
held by default, as the assise of the death'of an ancestor
and others, if on the first day they have essoined them-
selves and had a day (assigned to them) through their
essoin, and upón which day they have not appeared, let
the assise be forthwith held by default immediately, no
resummons $hall take place. Likewise if they have
appeared and the jurors have failed to appear, he shall
always have a single essoin as often as he shall appear
in eourt and had a day assigned to him.


From the premises it is apparent when and how e.
often a resummons lies, and how often an assise is held M eie
outside the eounty or before four justiciaries assigned monses
thereto: but before the justiees itinerant going into the 21 Pleas
county io hear all pleas à resummons has no place, nor kind.

& diffuse delay of fifteen days, where the tenant in an
assise of the death of an ancestor or the disturber and
deforcer as here are stationary, and also the thing itself
which is at stake, in the same county at the time of the
circuit, no more than against à minor, but let the assise
be held after the first default, as an assise of novel dis-
seysine. And that no resummons ought to take place
on the circuit of the Justiciaries in the aforesaid case,
when the parties are present in the county and the


thing which is at stake, may be seen in the Iter of


f. 239.


Britton, iv.
ch. i. 8 4.


12 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS.


de qua agit, videri poterit in itinere M. de Pateshul
de ultimo itinere suo in com Sussex. anno regni regis
H.10. Assisa mortis antecessoris, si Adam de N. Et
q contra illum qui est infrà setate non jacet resumoni-
tio, pbatur in ultimo itinere M. de P. eode tempore
in cofi Susséx.  Ássis&à mortis antecessoris, si Thorn
de Colvile. Item eadem ratione nec jacet contra mi-
norem, cüm tantum operetur tenetis absentia .quàm
presentia. Jtem propter contumaciam non jacet re.
summonitio, ut si tenens vel impediens ad diem sum-
monitionis comparuerit & cotumaciter recesserit, post-
quam visus fuerit à justiciariis in curia qui recordu
habeant, statim capiatur assis& sine resummonitione,
ut de eodem itinere ipsius M. & eodem tempore in com


. Norff. Assisa mortis antecessoris, s Bartholomeus de


Britton, vi.
ch. vill,


Waterdene. Ite in qualibet assisa preter assisam
nove disseysinse primó die jacet essoü vel resummo.
nitio, sed ad alium diem post esson non jacebit resum-
monitio nec e contrarió esson postb resummonitionem,
sed statim per defalta capiatur assisa (secundüm quos-
dà) sed tame jacet assisa de servitio domini regis post
esso & post resummonitionem in qualibet assisa, ubi
utrumq, jacuerit, preterquam in assis& ultimse preesen-
lationis, dum tamen warantum ad diem suum habue-
rit. Et quód essoüi de servitio domini regis, post esso-
nium de malo veniendi locum habere non debeat, sed
quód statim capietur assisa post primum essoü per
defaltam : inveniri poterit de termino sancti M. anno
regis H. qui nunc est secundo. ltem quód in itinere
aliquando jacet essoü & post essoi resummonitio &
iterum post resummonitionem essofl, ut de servitio
domini regis: dum tamen essoniatus warantum habeat
breve domini regis, preter assisam nov:e disseysine &


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 13


Martin de Pateshull in his last Iter in the county of
Sussex, in the tenth year of the reign of king Henry, in
an assise of the death of an ancestor, if Adam de N.
And that a resummons does not lie against hinmi who is
under age is proved in the last Iter of Martin de Pate-
shull at the same time in the county of Sussex, in an
assise of the death of an ancestor, if Thomas de Colvile.
Likewise in the same way it does not lie against &  f.»39,
minor, since the &bsence of the tenant has the same
effect as his presence. Likewise a resummons does not
lie on account of contumacy, as if the tenant or the
disturber shall have appeared on the day of the sum-
mons and contumaciously departs after he has been seen
by the justieiaries in court who have a record, let the
assise be held forthwith without a resummons, as in
the same Iter of the said Martin and at the same time
in the county of Norfolk, in an assise of the death of
an ancestor, if Bartholomew of Waterdene. Likewise
in every assise, except an assise of novel disseysine, on
the first day an essoin or resummons lies, but no resum-
mons lies for another day after an essoin, nor on the
contrary does any essoin lie after & resummons, but the
assise shall be held forthwith by default (according to
some), but nevertheless an assise lies concerning the
king's service after an essoin and after a resummons in
any assise where either would have lain, except in an
assise of last presentation, provided however he have a
warrantor upon his day. And that an essoin on the
king's service ought not to have place after an essoin on
& hindrance by the way, but that the assise should be
forthwith held after the first essoin by default, may be
found in Michaelmas term in the second year of the
king, who now is. Likewise that on the circuit some-
limes an essoin lies, and after an essoin & resummons,
and again after & resummons an essoin, as on the king's
service, provided. the party essoined has à warrant [in]
& writ of the lord the king, except in an assise of novel


Am


Britton, iv.
ch. i. S 4.


14 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS. '


ultime pressentationis, qus excipitur ex certa causa &
necessitate in omnibus assisis: probatur in ultimo iti-
nere M. de P. in cof Suff. JAssisa mortis antecessoris,


si Radulphus de Wadleyham, et hoc bene potuit esse


hac ratione, quia tenes fort manes fuit extra com &
in servitio domini regis. Contrarium tamen inveniri
poterit in eom Kanc. de itinere M. de P. anno regis
H. 11. incipiente 12. de termino S. M. quód in itinere
nulla jacet resummonitio. ltem si semel summonitus
fuit & post esson vel resummori comparuit & warantuü
vocaverit, vel diem habuerit, & &d diem datum non
comparuerit, nulla ibi resumonitio sed statim capiatur
assisa p defalta, & infrà pleniüs dicet de warantis non
cadendis! in assis& mortis antecessoris. Et qus híc
dicta sunt de resumonitionibus infradict? sufficiant de
omnibus assisis. lte g in assis& ultimee preesentationis
post summonitionem & resummonitionem jacetí essof
de malo veniendi, habuit summonitus diem p esso
suum, da allocatum fuit ei essoiü suum, & tunc venit
alius à latere & dixit q prseesentatio non ptinuit ad
sumonitum sed ad ipsum, ut de termino S. T. anno
regis H. 2. Assisa ultime pressentationis inter Wilh.
Buk. & priorem S. N. Exon de ecclesia de Cheyley
in coi Somerset. Si autem post suimonitiones & re-
sumonitiones & essonia non venerit deforeians, vel cüm
venerit respondere noluerit vel contumaciter recesserit,
capiatur assis& versus eum per defaltam, quia absentia
ejus habetur pro presentia, quia si alius ei daretur
dies, in odium defalte recluderetur ei via dicendi co-


1 «€ de warantis vocandis." MSS. ? «infra dieta." MSS. eadem.
Rawl. C. 160 & 159.


-—


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 15


disseysine and of last presentation, which is excepted
for a certain cause and necessity in all assises, is proved
in the last Iter of Martin de Pateshull, in the county of
Suffolk, in an assise of the death of an ancestor, if Ralph
of Wadleyham, and this could well be for this reason,
because the tenant was by chance remaining out of the
eounity and in the service of the lord the king. The
contrary, however, may be found in the county of Kent,
in the Iter of Martin de Pateshull, in the eleventh and
twelfth year of king Henry in St. Michael's term, that
in the Iter no resummons lies, Likewise if he has once
been summoned, and after an essoin or resummons he
has appeared and vouched a warrantor, or has had a
day, and on the given day has not appeared, there is no
resummons in that case, but let the assise be held at
once by default, and below it will be further discussed
concerning warrantors being called in an assise of the

death of an ancestor. And what is here said of re-
 summonses may suffice as if below said concerning all
assises. Likewise because in an assise of last presen-
tation after the summons and the resummons an essoin
lies of hindrance in coming, the party summoned has
had a day through his essoin, because his essoin has
" been allowed to him, and then there has come a col-
lateral party, and he has said that the presentation
does not appertain to the party summoned but to him-
self, as in Holy Trinity term in the second year of king
Henry, in an assise of last presentation between William
Buk. and the prior S. N. of Exeter, concerning the
church of Cheyley in the county of Somerset. But if
after the summonses and resummonses and essoins the
deforeer has not appeared, or when he has appeared he
has refused to answer or has contumaciously departed,
let the assise be held against him by default, because
his absence is taken to be [the same] as his presence,
beeause if another were given to him, in hatred of his
defaulu he would be barred of the way of speaking


16 DE ASSISA ULTIME PRJ/ESENTATIONIS.


ira assisam quare remaneret. ltem cim presens sit
& concedit assisam simplieiter, vel si aliquid dieat
contra assisam, nisi dieat quare remaneat assisa, pcedat
assisa hoc modo si juratores presentes fuerint: si au-
tem non, dabit partibus alius dies, ad quem possunt
.£299b. partes se essofi si voluerint ut priüs, & habebunt alium
diem ad quem procedet assisa, vel per defaltam, vel.
alio modo, nee poterit deforciüs vocare warantum, cüm
assisa generaliter faciat pro quolibet qui jus habet


praesentandi.
7. Cüm autem juratores presentes fuerint, nee sit ali-
2. quid quod exeipi poterit contra illos ut supra, jurare


fatorum in debent hoe modo. Hoc auditis justiciarii, quód veri-

assisa ulti- ! TP ,

me pre. U&tem dicam de assisa ista de ecelesia vel capella, unde

sentationis. visum feci per preeceptum domini regis, & pro nihilo
omittà &e. ut supra. Et omnes alii juratores jurabunt


ui supra.


8. Cüm autem juraverint, audire debent formam brevis,
Devere- (& justieiarii debent eos instruere quantum ei licitum
torum. fuerit, & predicere eis quód sibi provideant de veri.

tete dicenda propter absentiam deforeiantis, qui si
presens esset possit eos in multis certificare. Habito
igitur inter eos juratores tractatu & deliberatione cüm
venerint coram justiciariis ad veritatem  dieendam,
dicere poterunt per sacramentum suum, quód talis
querens prwesentavit ultimam personam quse mortua
est ad predictam ecclesiam & tempore pacis, s. talem
nomine, qui ultimó obiit persona in eadem eeclesia, &
admissus fuit ad presentationem suam, vel dicere pos-
- gunt, contrarium, quód talis talem non presentavit nec


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 17


against the assise why it should be stayed. Likewise
when he is present and concedes the assise simply, or if
he states anything against the assise, unless he can state
wherefore the assise should be stayed, let the assise pro-
ceed: in this manner if the jurors are present; but if
they are not present, let another day be given to the


parties, a& which the parties may essoin themselves if


they wish as before, and they shall have another day at
which the assise shall proceed either by default or in
another way, nor shall the deforcer be allowed to vouch
à warrantor, since the assise generally makes for him
. whoever has the right of presenting. |


But when the jurors shall be present and there is
nothing which can be excepted against them as above,


f. 239 b.


7
Of the
oath of


they ought to swear in this manner: Ye hear this, the jurors


Justieiaries, that I will speak the truth concerning this
assise about the church or chapel, of which I have made
& view according to the precept of the lord the king,
&nd for nothing will I omit, &c. as above. And all the
other jurors shall swear as above. |


But when they have taken the oath, they ought to
hear the form of the writ, and the justiciaries ought, to


in an assise
of last
presenta- -
tion.


8.
Of the ver-
dict of the


instruet them how much was allowable to him, and jurors.


warn them that they should take care to speak the
truth on account of the absence of the deforciant, who
if he were present could certify them on many matters.
After, therefore, the said jurors have discussed and deli-
berated amongst themselves, when they have come be-
fore ihe justiciaries to declare the truth, they will be
able to say upon their oath that so-and-so, the plaintiff,
presented the last parson who is dead to the aforesaid
'ehureh and in time of peace, to wit, so-and-so by name,
who was the last who died parson in that church, and
was admitted to his presentation, or they may say the
eontrary, that so-and-so did not present such & person
nor any other, but another person presented him, &c.
Q 1802. B


18 DE ASSISA ULTIMZE PRJESENTATIONIS.


alium, sed alius illum presentavit &c. ltem dicere
possunt omnes rationes quare przesentatio pertineret ad
querentem, quas quidem ille deforciasns proponere pos-
sib si presens esset & ostendere quare injusté non
deforeiaret, ut si post presentationem illam, de qua
agitur, ille querens vel antecessor suus qui preesentavit
post presentationem illam advocationem illa dederit
per se, vel tenementum illud ad quod pertinet advo-
catio dederit eum omnibus pertinetiis suis sine aliqua
retentione in feodo, vel donee providerit, ad vitam vel
ad terminum, seeundüm quod infrà dicetur pleniüs.-
Item non sufficit dicere juratoribus quód talis vel an-
tecessor suus justb przsentavit, nisi doceant q defor-
eians injuste presentationem illam deforciavit. Item
non suffücit! quód juste, nisi doceant quód deforcians
injuste preesentationem illam deforciaverit. ltem non
sufficit, quód injust?, nisi doceant juratores quód ei
deforeiata sit qui queritur, ad hoc quód aliquid capiat
per assisam, licet aliis hoe prodesse possit qui jus ha-
bent, quia omnes articuli in brevi contenti possunt
esse veri. Sed tamen inquirere oportet utrum defor-
cians juste deforciaverit vel injuste, & similiter si ad
querentem pertineat querela. Item dicere possunt q


. nihil sciverint omninó quis illum presentavit, qui ul-


timó obiit persona. Et si nullo modo aliquid certum
dicere sciant de eo, tunc de necessitate recurrendum
erit ad seysingm alterius persons ante eum, ut aliqua
certitudo habeatur de presentatione & de persona pree-
sentati. Et si de tali adhuc certitudo haberi non pos-
sit, adhue recurratur ad superiores quatenus cursus
temporis hoc pmittit, quoad assisam, & cüm ulteriüs
procedi non possit, tune deinde recurratur ad proprie-
tatem & ad breve de recto, ut per hoc terminetur


! € ftem non sufficit down to * deforciaverit," omitted. |. MSS. Rawl.
C. 160 & 159. |


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 19


Likewise they may state all the reasons why the presen-
tation belongs to the plaintiff, which the said deforcer
could propose if he were present, and show why he did
not unjustly deforce him, as if after the presentation
which is at issue, the plaintiff or his ancestor who pre-
sented after that presentation gave the advowson by
itself, or gave the tenement to which the advowson be-
longs with all its appurtenances without any retention
in fee, or until provision had been made, for life or for
& term, aecording to what will be said more fully below.
Likewise it is not sufficient to say to the jurors that the
said person or his. ancestor rightfully presented, unless
they show that the deforcer has wrongfully deforced
ihe presentation. Likewise it is not sufficient to say
*rightfully, unless they show that the deforcer has
wrongfully deforced that presentation. Likewise itis not
sufficient to say ** wrongfully," unless he can show to the
jurors that he who complains has been deforced, so that
he may take any thing by the assise, although this may
profit others who have the right, because all the articles
- contained in the writ may be true. But it is incum-
bent to inquire whether the deforcer has rightfully
or wrongfully deforced, and in like manner if the com-
plaint belongs to the plaintiff Likewise they may say
that they know nothing at all as to who presented him,
who was the last who died parson. And if they cannot
in any manner say anything certain concerning him,
then of necessity they must have recourse to the sey-
sine of the other parson who was before him, that some
certainty may be had concerning the presentation and
the parson who was presented. And if no certainty can
be arrived at respecting such parson, recourse must be
had to former ones, as far asthe course of time will
allow this, regards the assise, and when further pro-
ceedings cannot be had, then at last recourse must be
had to the property and to a writ of right, that by this
: | B 2


i Mu soos - i o


MM. E DELE ICE dO ECKEN E COMES AEn LE ESCLUSO cun d Sc ME CCS red TUTUP epuewer-r t.c cm o --—- 9 —
ES - 3 ! t.


20 DE ASSISA ULTIMJ£ PRJESENTATIONIS.


proprietas & assisa. ltem si juratores dubitaverint ad
proprietatem,! utrum talis vel antecessor suus preesenta-
verit an alius talis vel quis, querens per hoc nihil
consequitur, quasi deficiente probatione sua, quia quo-
tienscunq, dubitatur an quid sit, perinde est ac si. non

f.240. essetillud. Item erit? etsi personam querentis omninó
ignoraverint, vel si cognoverint personam ejus, nesciunt
tame si unquam preesentaverit, vel nesciunt, licet per-
sonam ejus cognoverint, si sit filius & hseres illius qui
ultimó presentavit, & cujus seysinam petit, & perinde
scire non possunt si ad ipsum pertineat actio vel que-
rela, iis autem intellectis de facili perpendi poterit pro
quo judicabitur per assisam.


Ca». II.
1l. Cum autem uterq presens fuerit, querens & defor-
m cians, & deforcians dicere velit contra assisam, oportet


pars com- primó quód querens audito brevi suo profundet inten-
f judicio, tionem suam hoc modo, & doceat quód ad eum per-
proponat (ineat actio. Certa itaq, debet esse intentio & narra-
Gntonem tio, & certum fundamentum, & certa res qu: deducitur
suam. — jn Judicium & vera probatio pro petente vel querente,
xara i'vel ad minus presumptio, cui semper standum erit,
Fleta, 990. donec tenens vel deforeians excipiendo & exceptionem
probando docuerit contrarium. Ille autem qui per hane
assisam ad fundandam intentionem suam, docere debet
de cujus seysina profert assisam, utrum de ppria sey-
sina qualitereunq, teneat in feodo, vel ad vitam, vel ad


terminum, ré corporalem ad qué ptineat advocatio, vel


1 * ad proprietatem," omitted, M8. ? «illud idem erit." MS. Rawl.
Rawl. C. 160. C. 159.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 21


means the property and the assise may be determined.
Likewise if the jurors have doubted as to the pro-
perty, whether such & person or his ancestor presented -
or some one else, the plaintiff gains nothing by this,
his proof as it. were failing, because as often as it is
doubted whether a thing be so, it is the same as if it
were not. Likewise it will be so, if they are alto-
gether ignorant of the person of the plaintiff, or if they
have known him personally, and are nevertheless igno-  f.240.
rant whether he has presented or not, or are ignorant,
although they may know him personally, if he is the
son and heir of him who last presented, and whose sey-
sine he claims, and accordingly cannot know if the
action or the plaint appertains to him, but if these
things are ascertained it will be easy to determine for
whom judgment will go by the assise.


CHAPTER II.


But when each is present, the plaintiff and the de- 1. |
forcer, and the deforcer wishes to speak against the as- 2n pa
sise, ib 1s incumbent in the first place that the plaintiff ar fied
after his writ has been heard should found his statement jet the "E
in this manner, and show that the action appertains to Plaintiff :
him. His statement and declaration ought to be cer- his decla-
tain, and the foundation certein, and the thing which is retion-
brougbt under judgment certain, and the proof for the
claimant or plaintiff true, or at least the presumption,
which is always to be maintained, until the tenant or
the deforcer by excepting and proving his exception has
shown the contrary. But he who proceeds by this assise
to found his statement ought to show of whose seysine
he brings the assise, whether of his own seysine in
whatever way he may hold in fee or for life or for &

"term of years the corporeal thing to which the advow-


29 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRZESENTATIONIS. ,


ad ipsam advocatione, s. jus advocationis sine re vel
corpore, eui adhsereat. ltem si de seysina alicujus an-
leeessoris, oportet illü docere se esse hseredem illius
antecesoris cujus petit seysinam separatim & p se sine
alis, vel cum aliis in comuni absq, separatione, ubi
plures sunt quasi unus hzeres, oportet q omnes nomi-
nétur, vel in comuni & separatim,? & successive: in
quo casu, sufficit si ille querat ad quem ptineat pre-
sentatio ea vice, vel si jus presentandi de seysina
unius antecessoris pluribus descendat capitibus sed
quasi uni heredi, & faeta divisione inter cohsredes
hereditatis remaneat tota advocatio & presentatio uni
cohzredi. Item designare oportet quse vel qualis per-
sona ultimó obiit persona, & de qua morte, sive obierit
de morte naturali sive civili: & ita facta examinatione,
& sic fundata intentione, de facil perpedi poterit
utrum presentatio & actio ptineat ad querentem sepa-


Éatim per se simpliciter vel in communi, vel etiam in :


communi cu &alüs sed vieissóim & successivó.


Car. III.
Cum autem querens intentione sua sic fundaverit, &
eiie eh docuerit q ad ipsu ptineat presentatio, & pducat pba-


ceptionibus tionem, s. assisam, oportet g deforcias excipiat contra


deforma . JN . .
contra que. 1tentioné, quare assisa debeat remanere. Sunt quidem


rentem se- plures exceptiones, quarum quzdam dilatorie & quz-
irren dam pemptori»: & pemptoriarum qusedam sunt pemp-
brevis. — torisee jurisdictionis & quzedam brevis, sed sunt dilatorisze


judici & non tangut ipsam actionem nec intentionem


1 *ve] ipsam advocationem," ? * vel separatim." MS. id.
MS. Rawl. C. 159.


r-—*


ART oo mp tti a Rp ptg 7 n PPPHERET QUUD Ra PUPA tg


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 23


son belongs, or the advowson itself, that is the right of
advowson without a thing or body, to which the advow-
son adheres. Likewise if of the seysine of any an-
cestor, it is incumbent that he should show that he is
ihe heir of that ancestor, whose seysine he claims sepa-
rately and by himself without others, or with others in
 eommon without separation, where several are as it
were one heir, it is incumbent that all be named either
in common and separately and successively, in which
case it is sufficient, if he claims to whom the presenta-
ton pertains for that term, or if the right of presen-
tation from the seysine of one ancestor descends to many
heads, but as it were to one heir, and a division having
been made of the inheritance amongst the coheirs, the
entire advowson and presentation remains with one co-
heir. Likewise he ought to designate what and what.
sort of parson died the last parson thereof, and by what
death, whether he died by a natural or by a civil death,
and upon an examination having been so made, and the
Statement [of claim] having been so founded, it may
easily be determined whether the presentation and the
action appertains to the plaintiff separately by himself
simply or in common, or also in common, with others,
but in turn and successively.


CHAPTER III,


But when the plaintiff has thus founded his declara- —— 1i.
tion, and. shown that the presentation belongs io him, ile -—
and produces his proof, to wit, the assise, it is incumbent exceptions
that the deforcer except against the declaration why ips "T
ihe assise should be stayed. There are indeed several plaintiff
exceptions, of which some are dilatory and some per- M ding
emptory, and of the peremptory exceptions some are articles of
against the jurisdiction and some against the writ, but TENOR
they are dilatory of the judgment and they do not touch


the action itself nor the declaration any more than other


24 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS.


non magis q alive dilatorie, & sunt primó & in prin-


. eipio proponedz, secundüm q inferius: dicetur de ex-


f. 240 b.
rd. lv.
ch lax S 2.


]
|
!


ceptionibus, & superiüs dictum est in parte, de quibus
superfluu esset hic repetere, sicut de brevi & psonis:
dum tamen exceptiones que generales non sunt, quz
lantum a&ngüt assisam istam & non alias ppter
plures articulos in brevi contentos, de quibus p ordi-
nem est pcedendum.  Cotinetur etiam in brevi (quis
advocatus) Advocatus autem dici poterit ille ad quem
ptinet jus advocationis alicujus ut ad ecclesia prssen-
teb nomine proprio & non alieno, & dicitur (quis ad-
vocatus) ad differentia illorum dq presentant nomine
alieno, qualis est custos ratione custodie. Custos aute
non est advocatus, sed ille cujus nomine prewsentant.!


. Item dieitur (quis advocatus) ad differentiam eorum


quodamodo qui tenent ad firmam ad terminü annoru.
Item ad differentiam eorum qui tenent ad terminum
vitcte quacunq, ratione, vel qui tenent p intrusionem
vel disseysinam, qui nunquam fprssentaverint in vita
sua nec tempore quo fuerint in seysina OCüm autem
semel prssentaverint & ita sint in seysina preesen-
tandi, sunt quasi advocati, quoad seysinà prseesentandi
quamdiu vixerint & fuerint in possessione rei ad quam
pünuerit rei advocatio: cüm non poterit quis priüs
presentare vel habere ptinentias, antequam habuerit


eorpus q sequuntur püinentis. Est igitur verus advo-


catus ad quem  ptinet pprietas & seysing ex nomine
pprio sibi & heredibus suis & non alieno, ut prwedictü
est. Item quasi &dvocatus & non verus, qui creditur
esse advocatus & non sit, tantum ppter seysinam prz-
sentandi, & tenementum quod possident, licet in sey-
sina sint nomine proprio & non alieno, & sic poterit quis


! * preesentat," MS. Raw]. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 95 -


dilatory exceptions, and they are to be propounded in
the first place and at the commencement, according to


what will be said below concerning exceptions, and has .


been said above in part, concerning which it would be


superfluous to repeat here, as concerning the writ and .


the persons, provided they are exceptions which are not
general, which touch only that assise and not others, on
account of several articles contained in the writ, con-
cerning which proceedings must be in order. "There is
. eontained likewise in the writ [the words] * who is the
* advocate." But he may be called the advocate, to
whom pertains the right of any advowson that he
' Should present to the church in his own name and not
in another', and he is called the advocate in distinction
from those who present in another's name, such as a
guardian by reason of guardianship. But a guardian is
not an advocate, but he in whose name they present.
Likewise & person is called an advocate in distinction
from those who hold for à term of years. Likewise in
distinction from those who hold for the term of their life
for whatever reason, or who hold by intrusion or by dis-
seysine, who have never presented in their lifetime, nor
during the time when they have been in seysine. But
when they have once presented and are thus in seysine of
presenting, they are asit were advocates as regards the
seysine of presenting as long as they live and are in
possession of the thing to which the advowson of the
thing appertains, since & person cannot present or have
the &ppurtenances, before he has the substance which
the appurtenances follow. He is therefore the true ad-
vocate, to whom the seysine and the property belongs in
his own name for himself and his heirs, and not in
another's name, as aforesaid. Likewise he is as it were
an advocate, but not & true one, who is believed to be
an advocate and is not so, only on aecount of the sey-
sine of presenting and the tenement whieh they possess,
although they may be in seysine in their own name and
not in another's, and so a person may be a true advocate


f.240b.


26 DE ASSISA ULTIMJB PRJESENTATIONIS.


esse advocatus verus imperpetuum vel non verus sed ad
lempus. Sed cüm tales semel presenta verint, & illi ad
quos ré iranstulerint semel presentaverint & moriatur
vel possidere desierint, qualiter subvenitur pprietario si
ecclesiam vacare cotigerit, satis ex premissis trahi poterit
ad exemplum. Et quod dictum est de illis qui possi-
dent nomine proprio, dici poterit de illis qui possident
"ct F^ nomine ecclesie sue. ltem (tempore pacis) q dicitur
ad differentiam eorü qui! fiunt tempore belli, q idem -
est quod tepore guerrino, q nihil differt à tempore juris
& injurie. Est enim tempus injurie, eàm fuerint op-
pressiones violente, quibus resisti non potest, & dis-
seysine injuste. Sed omne tempus possit esse tempus -
guerrinum, et possit esse tempus pacificum, non autem
simpliciter, sed ad quosdam & non ad omnes, uti enim
quidam possunt jure suo tam tempore belli sive guer-
rino, quàm tempore pacis, u& si cüm uti velint? jus
uno tempore vel alio violenter vel injuriosé non impe-
diatur, & tune erit tempus pacis in utroq, tempore.
Et si e contrario, tunc erit tempus belli in utroq, tem-
pus enim pacis videri poterit & designari hoc modo,
poterit enim quis ante guerram generale pacific? presen-
tare sine aliqua contradictione. Et eodem modo pote-
rit tempore guerre. té post guerram eodem modo, &
quzelibet istarum presentationu sufficiens erit quantum
ad seysinam presentationis & bona, quia nulla istarum
dici poterit injuriosa vel violenta, Et vice versa quo-
cunq, tempore adhibeatur violentia, talis seysina dici
poterit injuriosa, & ideó quasi nulla: càüm tempore
belli et non pacis sit acquisita, & sic:uno & eodem
lempore poterit esset? tempus pacificum & guerrinum


l« que," n Itawl. C. 160. | 9? «esse, id.
2 « velit," |


Un Dr Len.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 97


in perpetuity or not a true one, but only for & time.
But when such have once presented, and those to whom
they have transferred the property have once presented
and died or ceased to possess, in what way aid is afforded
io the proprietor, if it should happen that the church
becomes vacant, may be sufficiently deduced from the
premises by way of example. And what has been said
concerning those who possess in their own name, may
also be said concerning those who possess in the name
of their church. Likewise (in time of peace) which is
said in distinction from those things which are done in
time of war, which is the same as in & warlike time,
which differs in no respect from a time of right and of
wrong. For it is & time of wrong when there are
violent oppressions, against which resistance is not pos-
sible, and wrongful disseysines. But every time may be
& warlike time, and may be a pacific time, not however
simply, but relatively to certain persons and not to all,


for some may use their right as well in time of war or -


in warlike time, as in time of peace, as if, when they
wish to use their right at one time or another they are
not impeded violently or wrongfully, and then it will be
a time of peace during each time, And if on the con
trary, then it will be a time of war in each time, for a
time of peace may be seen and designated in this
manner, for & person will be able before a general war
io present peaceably without any contradiction. And
he may be able in the same manner in time of war.
Likewise after the war in the same manner, and any of
those presentations will be sufficient as regards the sey-
sine of the presentation, and will be good, because none
of them can be called wrongful or violent. And vice
versá at whatever time violence may be applied, such a
seysine may be called wrongful, and accordingly as it
were null, since it has been acquired in the time of war
and nob of peace, and so at one and the same time there

may be to certain persons & peaceable and a warlike


f. 241.


Britton, iv.
ch. iii. $ 4.


Concil.
Lateran.
a? 1179.


9S8 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRAESENTATIONIS.


quibusdam, sie et quibusdam non, quamvis guerra dicat
generalis. Et etiam tempore guerrino sicut tempore
pacis possunt fieri donationes & contractus de volun-
iate dantis & accipientis sicut tempore pacis. Et vice
versa, eodem modo tempore pacis fieri possunt oppres-
siones injustv, rapinz, disseysinz injuriose sub specie
pacis, sicut tempore guerrino. Et ideó ex iis que
fiunt quolibet tempore, judicari debet utrumq, tempus,
scilicet qualiter si& quibusdam pacificum, & quibusdam
guerrinum, ut ex hoc detur exceptio deforcianti, vel
non detur. Item (presentavit &c.) Refert igitur
utrum talis persona presentata admissa fuerit ad prze-
sentationem talis vel non, quia non sufficit pressentare
personam, nisi ad przesentationem admissa fuerit prs-
sentata: quia cüm duo fuerint à diversis presentati,
oportet quód unus admittatur, & alius recusetur.  Po-
terit etiam esse quód nullus eorum admittatur, licet
unus presentantium jus habeat presentandi, cüm prop-
ter lapsum temporis de constitutione Lateranensi, si
partes fuerint diseordes ultra sex menses, tamen!
propter minorem statem, ut si contra minorem pra-
sentantem prolate fuerint charte antecessorum, ad quas
minor ante :etatem respondere non possit. Et quo
casu, pertinebit ad ordinarium collocatio, nisi partes
consenserint de una persona idonea presentanda, salvo
jure cujuslibet cüm minor ad :etatem pervenerit &
reservata quadam minima pensione usq, ad statem ut
salvum sit jus presentandi ei qui per assisam obtinu-
erit, & ut illam tune conferat cui voluerit. Item duo
possunt presentare simul, & quorum unus jus habebit
& alius non, vel uterg, aliquam seintilam juris, si in


——— A — — —À —À— — — ——— — ———— —— —— — ——À ———À ——— ——


1 * tum," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 29


time, and in like manner to others not, although there
may be à general war. And likewise in time of war as
in time of peace there may be donations and contracts
with the willingness of the giver and of the receiver, as
in time of peace. Jnd vice versà in the same manner
. in time of peace there may be wrongful oppressions,
rapine, wrongful disseysines under the appearance of
peace, as in time of war, and therefore from the circum-
Stances of each time, each time ought to be judged, to
wit, in what manner i& may be peaceful to some, and
warlike to some, that thereupon an exception may be
granted or not against the party employing force. Like-


wise (he presented, &c.). It matters, thérefore, whether -


such a person, who has been presented, was admitted at
the presentation of so-and-so, for it is not sufficient to
present a person, unless upon the presentation the person
presented has been admitted ; because when two persons
have been presented by different persons, it is incum-
bent that one be admitted and the other rejected.
Because it may happen that neither of them is ad-
mitted, although one of the presenting parties has the
right of presenting, as well on account of the lapse
of time according to the Lateran Constitution, if the
parties are discordant beyond six months, as on account
of the minority (of the advocate), as if the charters
of ancestors have been produced against & minor pre-
senting, to which a minor cannot make answer before
he has come of age. And in which case it will apper-


tain to the ordinary to collate a person there, unless the -


parties agree to present a fit person, saving the right of
each party, when the minor has come of age, and re-
serving a& certain very small payment until he comes of
age, that the right of presenting may be saved to him
who has obtained it by an assise, and that he may then
confer ib upon whom he will. Likewise two persons
may present at the same time, and of whom one will
have right and the other not, or each will have some


f. 241.


Britton, ib.
S 5.


30 DE ASSISA ULTIME PRJESENTATIONIS.


elerieum consentiant sine aliqua discussione juris, non
erib standum juratoribus in tali presentatione, cüm sit
incerta, sed ad seysinam illius advocati de quo haberi
possit certitudo, & qui de jure sibi competente, licet
cum contentione vel sine, ultimo prsesentavit. ltem
esto quód quis sine contradictione semel preesentavit,
& alius vacante iterum ecclesia impedimentum oppo-
nàt, & deinde assensum prabeat prssentationi ejus qui
priüs presentavit: non tamen propter hoc, scilicet talem
assensum, mutatur status presentantis vel minuitur,
cüm iterum ecclesiam vacare contigerit, quia aliud est
assentire & aliud consentire.  Assentire enim potest
quis per se ecàüm jus non habeat presentandi nec sibi
aliquid retinet tacito vel expressé, licet dicat, salvo
jure meo imposterum. Sed si sit aliquis in possessione
presentandi, & assensum ei qui proprietatem habuit vel
consensum présentandi simpliciter & sine alia protes-
tatione, sibi prejudieat imperpetuum, & hoe potiüs
diei debet consensus quàm assensus, cüm ille qui jus
habet possessionis consentit cum eo qui habet proprie-
latem. Si autem hoc fecerit cum tali protestatione, ut
si dicat, consentio preesentationi tus, salvo jure meo
imposterum, per hoc retinet sibi totum jus quod ha-
buit, tàm super possessione, quàm super proprietate.
Est enim jus possessionis & jus proprietatis, & idem
erii & melius si exprimat jus utrumq, & dicat salvo
mihi jure meo imposterum, tam super possessione, quàm
super proprietate. Et de hac materia inveniri poterit
in itinere in comitatu Kanc. anno regis Henrici trice-
simo secundo incipiente tricesimo tertio in quindena
s. M.  Assisa ultime presentationis capta inter W.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 31


spark of right, if they agree upon a clerk without any
discussion of their right, the jurors cannot rely on such
& presentation, since it is uncertain, but upon the sey-
sine of that advocate concerning whom certitude may
be had, and who last presented upon his own right,
although with or without a contention. Likewise let it
be that à person has presented once without any contra-
dietion, and another person on the church being again
vacant opposes an impediment, and then gives his as-
sent to the presentation of him who before presented,
the status of the presentor is not on that account, to
wit, on aecount of such assent, changed or impaired,
when it shall have happened that the church is again
vacant, because it is one thing to assent, and another
thing to consent. For a person may assent by himself
when he has no right of presenting, nor does he retain
anything for himself tacitly or expressly, although he
may say, saving my right for the future." Butif any
person be in the possession of the presentation and gives
his assent. to him who has the property, or his consent
io his presenting simply and without any other protest,
he prejudices himself for ever, and this may be caljed
consent rather than assent, since he who has the right
of possession consents with him, who has the property.
But if he shall have done this with such a kind of pro-
lest, as if he should say, *I consent to your presenta-
* tion, saving my right for the future," he thereby
retains for himself all the right, which he had, as well
upon the possession as upon the property. For there is
the right of possession and the right of property, and it
will be the same and better, if he expresses both rights,
and should say, * saving to myself my right for the future,
* as well upon the possession as upon the property." And
on this matter there will be found in the iter in the
county of Kent, in the thirty-second and thirty-third
year of king Henry in the quinzaine of St. Mary, an
assise of last presentation held between William Bard.


f. 241 b.


Britton, ?b.
S 5.


32 DE ASSISA ULTIME PRJESENTATIONIS.


Bard. & hsredem de Meanton de ecclesia de Suter-
lege in cof Norff Item continetur in brevi (persona
que) mortua est) personam dicit ad differentiam vicarii,
quia de morte vicarii vel de vicaria non jacebit assisa.
Item non jacebit assisa de ecclesiis probendatis gene-
raliter, nisi forté firmarius intervenerit ab initio in
Dbendatione, si pbendata fuerit in absentia alicujus,
dum fuerit agens in partibus remotis, vel infrà :eta-
tem, vel in eustodia, seceundüm quod inveniri poterit
in rotulo de placitis quze sequuntur regem anno xvi.
Item non jacebit de aliqua capella, quze mero jure sub-
jecta fuerit & pertinens ad aliam jurisdictionem ma-
tricis ecclesie, nisi sit it& quód querens contendat
illam esse matricem ecclesiam, vel si capella gaudeat
aliquo speciali privilegio, ut si sit capella domini regis,
quie nulli subjecta est ecclesie nec ad aliquam perti-
net, sed ecclesia poterit esse pertinens ad capella talem ;
ptinere autem poterit capella ad matricem ecclesiam,
ut predictum est, vel tantum esse pensionariam &
aliquid dare in signum subjectionis, & de hujusmodi
capella non competit assisa advocationis matricis ec-
clesi:e/ versus eum qui habet advocationem capelle,
sed ei competit contra omnes cüm diversi sint advo-
cati, advocatus ecelesite & advocatus capelle, secus
tamen erit si utrag unum habuerit advocatum. Item
non jacebit assisa de ecclesia vel capella ubi nulla
constructa est, licet aliquando fuerint & nunc cecide-
rint, quamvis adhue locus sacer maneat. Item dicitur
(que mortua est) hoe est sive morte naturali sive
civili. Civili ut si se transtulerit ad religionem, vel
resignaverit, vel sj fecerit quod tantundem valet, ut si


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 33


and the heir of Meanton concerning the church of Suter-
lege in the county of Norfolk. Likewise there is con-
tained in the writ, * the parson who is dead ;" it speaks
of a parson as distinguished from a vicar, for an assise
will not lie concerning the death of à viear or concerning
& viearage. Likewise an assise will not lie concerning
.ghurches which have been constituted * prebends" gene-
rally, unless by chance a lessee (of the tithes) has inter-
vened from the commencement at the constitution of the
prebend, if it has been constituted a prebend in the
&bsencee of any one, whilst he was active in remote
parts, or was under age, or in wardship, aecording to
what may be found in the Rolls of the Pleas which fol-
low the king in his sixteenth year. Likewise it shall
not lie concerning any chapel, which of mere right is
subject to and appurtenant to another jurisdiction of a
mother church, or if the chapel enjoys any special privi-
lege, as if it be a chapel of our lord the king, which is
subject to no church nor appertains to any one, but a
chureh may be appurtenant to such & chapel; a chapel
may likewise be appurtenant to the mother church, as
aforesaid, or may be only & pensioner and pay something
as a sign of subjection, and concerning & chapel of this
kind the advocate of the mother church is not en-
titled to an assise against him who has the advowson
of the chapel, but the latter is entitled against all,
since the advocates are different, the advocate of the
church and the advocate of the chapel; it will be
otherwise, however, if both have had one advocate.
Likewise an assise will not lie concerning a church or
chapel where none has been constructed, although they
may have onee existed and have now fallen down,
although the site still remains sacred. Likewise it is
said, * who is dead," that is, either by a natural death or
by a civil death. By a civil death, as if he has trans-
ferred himself to & religious order, or has resigned, or if
he has done what is equivalent, as if he has married a
. Q 1802, re.


f. 241 b.


Dritton, 1v.
oh. iii. 5 5.
Yleta, 122,
& 9.


34. DE ASSISA ULTIM;E PR/ESENTATIONIS.


uxorem duxerit, vel aliquid fecerit propter quod eecle-
siam retinere non possit. Item (ad talem ecclesiam
quee vacat ui dieitur) & ideó videndum quse vacat &
quie non, ut si omninó vacet vel personatus tantum
in quo casu procedet assisa ac si omninà vacaret. 5Si
autem aliquid inde prestetur pro bono pacis vel no-
mine simplicis beneficii, & ille qui hoc perceperit mori-
atur, propter hoe non vacat personatus nec ecclesia.
Et illud idem dici poterit de vicario, qui si moriatur
totum hoc accrescit persons, quia vicaria consolidari
debet cum pprietate sive personatu, & hoe dico, nisi
taxata fuerit! per ordinarios, ad rationabilem sustenta-
tionem viearii. Item refert utrum tota ecelesia v&c&-
verit vel aliqua pars ecclesire, ut si assisa proferatur
de tota ecclesia non vacet? nisi medietas vel tertia pars
vel quarta. Et si de advocatione contentio habeatur
utrum vacet vel non, super hoe erit ordinarius con-
sulendus, opiscopus vel alius qui super hoe habeat cog-
nitionem, quia laicus de hoe eognoscere non potest, non
magis quàm de matrimonio contracto vel soluto. Et
quód ad episcopum pertineat cognitio, videri poterit
de termino s. T. anno regis H. 4. mn cori Wygori de
ecclesia de Eldersen de R. de Bragel q a&liunde non
expedit quidem, quia ecclesia fort? incumbrata est per
episcopum, vel archidiaconum, vel alium ordinarium,
vel fort? episcopus admittit clericum ad presentationem
alicujus, qui jus non habet in presentatione, in preju-
dicium veri patroni, in quibus casibus non expedit
mandare episcopis, quia - de facili non reseribent veri-
tatem, ub possint tueri factum proprium, & ideà melius
est (ut videt) si dubitetur uirum vacet an non, q in
hoc dubio procedet assisa, €& müdetur episcopo q ad-


NNMERO EE D


1 Fleta, 122, $ 9 has the reading , ** taxata fuerit" is also the read-
« et hoc ubi taxata fuerit," and Brit- | ing of MS. Rawl. C. 160.
ton accords with Fleta. "Ubi,  ?*'et non vacet." MS. Rawl C.
159.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. a5


wife or done something, wherefore he cannot retain the
church. Likewise * tosuch a church, which is vacantas it
* is said," and accordingly itis to be seen which is vacant,
and which not, as if it be altogether vacant or only the
parsonage, in which case the assise will proceed.as if it
were altogether vacant. But if any payment be made
therefrom for the good of peace or in the name of a
simple benefice, and he who has receeived it dies, neither
. the parsonage nor the church is thereupon vacant. And
the same thing may be said concerning a vicar, who if
he dies, the whole aecrues to the parson, because the
viearage ought to be consolidated with the property or
the parsonage, and this I say unless it has been taxed
by the ordinaries for the reasonable support of a vicar.
Likewise it matters whether the whole church has been
. vacant, or some part of the church, as if an assise is
brought concerning the whole church and only à mediety
or & third part or & fourth part is vacant. And if a
contention be had concerning the advowson, whether it
is vacant or not, the ordinary will have to be consulted
thereon, the bishop or another, who may hold cognisance
thereof, because a layman cannot hold cognisance thereof,
any more than of à marriage contracted or dissolved.
Ànd that the cognisance belongs to the bishop may be
seen from the term of Holy Trinity in the fourth year
of king Henry, in the county of Worcester, concerning
the church of Eldersen, concerning R. de Bragel., that for
other reasons it is not expedient, because the church is
perhaps encumbered by the bishop or by the archdeacon,
or by some other ordinary, or by chance the Bishop
admits & clerk at the presentation of some one, who has
no right to the presentation, to the prejudice of the true
patron, in which cases it is not expedient to commit it
to the bishops, because they might easily not return the
truth, so that they might maintain their own act, and
therefore it is better (as it seems), if it be doubted
whether it is vacant or not, that in this state of doubt
the assise should proceed, and a mandate be sent to the
c 2


f. 242.
Britton, ib.


8 9.


Britton, 7».
$ 10


36 DE ASSISA ULTIM;JE£ PRJESENTATIONIS.


mittat, qui si non admiserit, sumoneatur q sit ad
ostendendum quare non, et in quo casu perveniri po-
terit usq, ad incumbramentü factum per episcopum vel
alium ordinarium tollendum. Et tunc tenetur episco-
pus deliberare ecclesiam, :vel dare aliam presentato
equivalentem, ut satisfaciat prsesentato. Debet etiam
clerieum admissum p episcopum compellere quod teneat
ad verum patronum ut satisfaciat patrono. Et notan-
dum quod ecclesia potest vacare de jure & non de facto
(ut predictum est), & potest de jure simul & de facto,
& sic justé vacat. Item si vacaverit de jure & de
facto, statim capiatur assisa. Si autem de jure vacet
& non de facto, quia incumbrata est, sine periculo capi
poterit assisa ut inquiratur de incumbramento, & sic
agat querens versus eum qui incumbravit ad tollen-
dum: ut si episcopus instituerit clericum ante lapsum
sex mensium vel ad presentationem ejus qui non ha-
buerit jus presentandi. Item si clericus se intruserit
propria autoritate sine episcopo, vel sine alio ordinario,
in quo casu capiatur assisa sicut de ecclesia vacante.
Institutio veró clerici in ecclesiam est quasi matrimo-
nium spirituale, & sicut episcopus habet cognitionem
de contractu matrimonii in causa bastardie & cogni- .
tionem, ita habebit cognitione de dissolutione si matri-
monium dissolvatur, q quidem locum haberet in hoc
casu, & ideó non pertinent cognitio? ad judicem secu-
larem, eüm multum non differant spirituale matrimo-
nium & carnale, & unde si rex propria autoritate in-
quirat & judicet ecclesiam esse vacantem, càüm non sit,
& mandaverit q episcopus admittat & si non admise-


1 « et conjunctionis." MS. Rawl. ?* pertinet? | MS. Rawl. C.
160.


C. 159.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 34


bishop to admit, who if he has not admitted, may be
summoned to attend and show cause why he has not so
done, and in which case one may arrive at the removal
of the eneumbrance caused by the bishop or other ordi-
nary. And then the bishop is bound to deliver the
church or to give another equivalent church to the per-
Son presented, that satisfaction be made to the presentee.
He ought likewise to compel the clerk admitted by the
bishop that he should hold of the true patron, that satis-
faction be made to the patron. And it is to be noted
that à church may be vacant of right but not in fact (as
aforesaid), and it may be vacant both of right and in
fact, and so it is justly vacant. Likewise if it be vacant
of right and in fact, let an assise be held immediately.
But if it be vacant of right but not of fact, because it is
encumbered, an assise may be held without peril that
an inquiry be held concerning the incumbrance, and so
. the plaintiff may proceed against him who has encum-
bered it in order to remove the inecumbrance, as if the
bishop has instituted a clerk before the lapse of six
months or at the presentation of him who had not the
right of presenting. Likewise if & clerk has intruded
himself of his own authority without the bishop or
without any other ordinary, in which case let an assise
be held as if concerning a vacant church. But the
institution of a clerk into a church is as it were a spi-
ritual marriage, and as the bishop has cognisance con
cerning a contract of marriage in & cause of bastardy
and of affinity, so he will have cognisance concerning
the dissolution if it be dissolved, which indeed would
have place in this case, and therefore the cognisance
does not pertain to the secular judge, since a spiritual
marriage does not differ much from & carnal one, and
hence if the king by his own authority should inquire
and adjudge that à church was vacant, when it was not
so, and has commanded that the bishop admit, and if
the bishop has not admitted, the bishop will not on that


f. 242.


Britton, i5.
S )2.


1l.
De excep-
tionibus
contra as-
sisam.


f. 242 b.


38 DE ASSISA ULTIM/E PRJESENTATIONIS.


rit, non erit episcopus propter hoc puniedus, licet non
obediat, & qui dixerit illam vacare, hoc doceat per
literas ordinarii: quia ad episcopum pertinet cognitio
de vacatione & mandato ipsius debet fides adhiberi, &
secundüm hoe procedet assisa vel remanebit. Et tale
mandatum episcopi non semper sufficit plené ad pro-
bationem sine aliis adminiculis, licet sufficiat ad pre-
sentationem, quz quidé aliquando veram pbationem
admittit in contrarium. tem dicitur (advocatione cu-
jus idem talis dieit ad se pertinere) ex quo quidem
elici potest, quód oportet querentem docere q ad ipsum
pertineat actio & querela in fundatione intentionis suse.
It& dicitur (q t&lem advocationem ei deforciat) oportet
querétem docere rationem in intentione sua, quare sibi
impedientem habeat obligatum, q seysinam preesenta-
tionis suse impediverit, per hoc etiam q dicitur q ad-
voeationé illam ei deforciat, dicunt quidam q per hoc
inuitur impedientem esse in seysina & querentem extra,
ad q respondere poterit q satis deforciat, qui omninó
uti non permittat vel modo debito, licet omninó non
expellat, ad similitudinem ejus quod dicitur supra de
nova disseysina qualiter sit in principio.


CAP. IV.


Ex omnibus prsdictis articulis, qui in brevi conti-
nentur, plures elici possunt exceptiones ad assisam
omnino perimendàa vel differenda ; sed si ille impediens
omnes prsedietos articulos concesserit, excipere possit
conira assisam q ille qui portat assisam de seysina &
presentatione antecessoru suorum, post presentatione


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 39


aecount have to be punished, although he does not obey,
and he who has said that it is vacant, let him prove it
by the letters of the ordinary ; because the cognisance
of the vacancy pertains to the ordinary, and faith ought
to be given to his mandate, and according to it the
assise should proceed or be stayed. And such a man-
date of the bishop does not always suffice fully for proof
without other supports, although it may suffice for a
presentation, which sometimes admits of a true proof
to the contrary. Likewise it is said, *the advowson of
* which such a person says that it belongs to himself ; "
from which it may be elicited, that the plaintiff ought
to show that the action and complaint pertains to him- '
self in the foundation of his declaration. Likewise it is
said, * who deforces him of such an advowson ;" it is in-
cumbent that the plaintiff should show in his declara-
tion the reason wherefore he holds that the defendant
impedes him, that he has impeded the seysine of liis
presentation, by this also which is said that " he deforces
* him of that advowson," some say that by thisis meant
that the impeder is in seysine and the plaintiff out of
seysine ; to which it may be answered that he sufficiently
deforces who does not permit bim to use it either at all
or in due manner, although he does not altogether expel
him, after the likeness of that which has been said con-
cerning novel disseysine, in what manner it may be in
the beginning.


CHAPTER IV.


From all the aforesaid articles, which are contained 1i.
in the writ, many exceptions may be elicited either to d
destroy the assise or to delay it; but if the disturber against the
has admitted all the above articles he may except 75,
against the assise that he, who brings the assise con- ^
cerning the seysine and presentation of his ancestors,


has after that presentation given that advowson by


Britton, l.


iv. ch. iv.


$1.


40 DE ASSISA ULTIMA PILESENTATIONIS.


illam dedit advocationem illam per se vel cii teüto ad
q advoeatio ptinet ipsi impedienti vel alicui antecesso-
rum suorum per charta qua proferat, & qus hoc tes-
tatur. Et unde bene cocedere potest q talis antecessor
presentavit justé, sed de crmetero presentare non potest
predieta ratione. Et unde videndum inprimis an ille
eontra quem excipitur plene sit :etatis vel infrà statem.
Si aute plene etatis fuerit, bené potest cognoscere


-ehartam & donum, sed replicare poterit contra excep-
tionem q post chartam illam, presentavit ile talem


N. qui ad prs:sentationem suam fuit admissus, & ita
q charta illà vacua & donum nullum, & hoc probare
poterit p assisam captam in modum juratze & non in
modum assise, nisi ita sit q querens habeat pro se
triplicationem, ut si dicat, q quamvis charta vacua sit
& donum nullü p secundam fprwsentationem ipsius
donatoris, cüm post illam preesentatione fecerit eide
tali & antecessoribus suis aliam charta de donatione
novà, & ita q prssentatio ptinet ad ipsum, vel dicere
potest q primam chartam confirmavit & fecit eam va-
lidam p confirmationem, qus invalida faeta fuit p no
usum & p secunda presentationem, & hoc offerat pbare
p assisam & p testes in charta nominatos, si alius
simpliciter negaverit chartam & confirmationem, nisi
it& sit.q velit quadruplieare & docere se post hsec
omnia przsentasse. Si autem triplieare voluerit & con-
cedere post primam chartam factam esse presentatio-
nem, & chartam sic esse vacuam, sed postea impetravit
super eu breve de warantia charte, ad q talis vel an-
tecessor suus summonitus fuit in curia, chartam illam
cognovit & donü & ita q finis factus fuit, & cyrographu
quoddam pfert q testat q predictus talis cognovit
predictam advocatione esse jus suum ut illam quam
habuit de dono suo. Ad q responderi poterit q finis


OF ÁN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 41


itself or with & tenement to which it appertains to the
disturber himself or to one of his ancestors by a deed
which he produces, and which testifies this. And hence
he may well concede that such an ancestor justly pre-
sented, but cannot present now for the reason aforesaid.
And hence we must see in the first place whether he
against whom the exception is raised is of full age or
under age. But if he be of full age, he can well ac-
knowledge the deed and the gift, but he may reply
against the exception that after that deed he presented
so-and-so N., who was &dmitted upon his presentation,
and so that the deed is void and the gift is null, and
this he will be able to prove by an assise held after the
"manner of a jury and not after the manner of an assise,
unless it be that the plaintiff may reply, as if he should
say that although the deed was void and the gift null
on account of the second presentation of the donor him-
self, since after that presentation he made to the same
s0-and-so and his ancestors another deed of à new dona-
tion, and so that the presentation belongs to him, or he
may say that he confirmed the first deed and made it
valid by his confirmation, which had become invalid. by
non-user and by a second presentation, and this he may
offer to prove by an assise and by the witnesses named
in the deed, if the other shall have simply denied the
deed and the confirmation, unless 1t should be that he
wishes to rejoin and to show that he has presented after
allthese events. But if he has wished to reply and to -
concede that & presentation was made after the first
deed, and the deed was thus void, but that he after-
wards sued out against him & writ of warranty of
charter, to which so-and-so or his ancestor was sum-
moned into court and there acknowledged the deed and
the donation, and so that a fine was made, and he pro-
duces à certain chirograph, which testifies that so-and-so
aforesald acknowledged the said advowson to be his
right as that which he had from his donation. To


Britton, i).
S 3.


f. 243.


492 DE ASSISA ULTIM/E PRJESENTATIONIS.


& cyrographü ei nocere non debet, quia omninó depen-
det ex donatione quadam imperfecta, eo g idem talis
qui cyrographum profert nullam habuit seysinam, &
ideó cüm charta vacua sit & donum imperfectum quia
sine seysina, & ideó petat judicium : quia eüm princi-
pale, scilicet donum non valet, nec ea qua sequuntur
& ex dono dependent valere debent, scilicet finis nec
cyrographum. Item esto q quis dederit manerium eum
advocatione alieui in feodo sibi & hsredibus suis, &
antequam ecclesia vacaverit, ile cui donatum est, &
antequam prwsentavit, manerium cum pertinentiis ad
aliu trastulerit, & tunc primu ecclesiam vacare conti-
gerit, primus donator presentat, primus donatorius simi-
liter & secundus similiter, sed non ad omnes pertinet
presentatio, quero igitur guis eorum alteri debeat
preferri? Et sciendü q non primus donatorius, qui
nunquam presentavit nec seysinam habuit, & q non
habuit ad alium transferre non potuit. Igitur est va-
eua donatio quantum ad primum & secundum dona-
torem.  Remanet igit de necessitate cum donatore qui
semper remansit in possessione presentandi, ex quo
donatorius illam ad aliü trastulit ante prs:sentationem
& ante usum, & sic dici possit de pluribus usq, in
infinitum. — Item esto q secundus donatorius aliquo
easu vellet warantum vocare primum donatorium, non
valeret vocatio, eüm secundus donatorius in possessione
non sit, nec potest quis alium defendere in possessione
nisi eum qui fuerit in possessione, càm warrantia nihil
aliud sit quàm possidentem defendere: sed si de facto
warantisaverit & warantum ulterius vocaverit primum
donatorem, nec ipse ei warantisare tenetur, tum quia


1 c« donatorium," MS, Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 438


which i& may be answered that the fine and the chiro-
graph ought not to hurt, him because it depends alto-
gether from a certain imperfect donation, inasmueh as
he who produces the chirograph had no seysine, and
therefore since the charter is void and the donation im-
perfect because it is without. seysine, and therefore he
claims judgment, because when the principal thing, to
wit, the donation is not valid, those things which follow
and depend on the donation ought not to be valid, to
wit, the fine and the chirograph. Likewise let be that
some one has given a manor with an advowson to a
certain person for himself and his heirs and before the
church has become vacant, he, to whom the donation has
been made, and before he has presented, has transferred
the manor with its appurtenances to another, and it has
then happened that the church becomes vacant for the
first time, the first donor presents, the first donatory in
like manner, the second donatory in like manner, but
the presentation does not belong to all, I ask, therefore,
who of them ought to be preferred to the others? And
it is to be known that not the first donatory who
has never presented nor had seysine, and he could not
transfer to another what he never had. "The donation is
therefore void as regards the first and second donatory.
It therefore remains of necessity with the first donor
who has always remained in possession of the pre-
sentation, inasmuch as the [first] donatory transferred
it to another before presentation and before use, and so
it may be said of several persons without end.  Like-
wise let it be that the second donatory in any case
wished to call to warranty the first donor, the call would
not be valid, since the second donatory is not in posses-
sion, nor ean any one defend another in his possession
excepting him who hus been in possession, since à war-
ranty is nothing else than to defend & possessor; but if
he has in fact warranted and has further called the first
donor as & warrantor, he is neither himself bound to


f. 243.


44. DE ASSISA ULTIME PRASENTATIONIS.


non possidet, tum quia revocare non potest, nec reha-
bere potest seeundus donatorius q nunquam habuit nec |
habere potuit. Sed esto q primus donator secundo
donatorio confirmavit donum primi donatorii, adhuc
non convalescit donum propter confirmationem, cüm
donum sit alienum & non ipsius confirmantis, nec ali-
eujus antecessoris sui, & quia nullum nec inceptu nec


Britton, ib. pfectü. — Et si uterq, presentaverit tam confirmans


84 and 5.


Si PEN


quàm ille cui confirmatur, confirmans per assisam ob-


. Vinebit. Item si ille secundus donatorius presentaverit


de facto & cüm ita in seysina fuerit, advocationem ad
alium . transtulerit qui similiter preesentaverit, & ita
fuerit in seysina prwsentandi, & .contingat ecclesiam
vacare, & primus donator presentaverit, & ultimus
donatorius, si uterq, illorum assisam ultimse presenta-
tionis arramaverit, ultima seysina preeferri debet prime,
nec erit assis& postmodii capienda super assisam, sed
primus donator sibi perquirat (si voluerit) per breve
de recto super ipsa proprietate, & sibi ipsi imputare
poterit propria negligentia! super ipsa possessione, et
de hae materia supra de donationibus.


Item cüm charta proferatur (ut predictum est) con-


proferatur, tr& assisam, si omninó dedicatur, oportet q probetur


oportet


quod pro-


betur per
testes in
charta


per testes in charta nominatos, et p assisam captam
in modum jurat», nisi fort? ille contra quem pfertur
infrà statem extiterit, qui ad chartam respondere non


nominatos. poterit ante statem. Et ideó de necessitate oportet
1 m 5b. deferre assisam usq, ad etatem, sed de consilio curis


provideatur de pensione retinenda (sicut preedictu est)
&d cautelam. Si autem nulla charta contra minorem,
tune procedat assisa in minore setate nec remanebit


! * propriam negligentiam," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 45


warrant it to him, as well because he does not possess
as because he eannot revoke, nor can the second dona-
tory recover the thing which he never had nor could
have. Bui let it be that the first donor has confirmed
to the second donatory the donation of the first dona-
tory, the donation is not yet validated through the con-
firmation, since the donation is that of & stranger and
not of the party confirming, nor of any ancestor of his,
and because it is null, neither begun nor completed.
And if each has presented, as well the confirmer as the
person to whom it is confirmed, the confirmer shall ob-
tain it by an assise. Likewise if the second donatory
has presented in fact, and when he was thus in seysine,
has transferred the advowson to another, who has in like
manner presented and so was in seysine of the presen-
tation, and it happens that the church is vacant, and
the first, donor has presented and the last donatory, if
each of them has set up an assise of last presentation,
the last seysine ought to be preferred to the former, nor
shall an assise be afterwards held upon an assise, but
let the first donor, if he wishes, proceed by writ of right
upon the property itself, and he may impute to himself
his own negligence upon the possession itself, and con-
cerning this matter [we have treated] above concerning
donations.


Likewise when a charter is produced (as aforesaid) un
against the assise, if it be altogether denied, it is ineum- ;e; ne o pro-
bent that it, be proved by the witnesses named in the ad 1s
charter, and by an assise held after the manner of a jury, that $t be
unless by chance he against whom it is produced should proved by
be under age, who cannot answer to the charter before nesses
he has come of age. And therefore it is of necessity neun
incumbent to defer the assise until he has come of age,
.but with the advice of the court let provision be made
for retaining & pension (as aforesaid) for caution's sake.

But if no charter is produced against a minor, then let


the assise proceed in the ease of à minor, nor shall it be


Britton, ib.
S Ts


Britton, ib.


8 8.


f. 243 b.


46 . DE ASSISA ULTIME PR/ESENTATIONIS,


assisa, si finis et cyrographum factum fuerit in curia
düi regis, càm minor infrà statem debeat ad quam-
libe& finem respondere. Si autem majori objiciatur
charta antecessoris (ut supra dictum est), à majore vel
minore si dedicatur, probetur. Si autem non conceda-
tur, si dicat! q vacua sit per presentationem subse-
quentem et aperte? adversa negetur prssentatio post
ehartam, pcedat assisa in modu jurate de consensu
partium sub iis verbis, scilicet utrum donator qui
assisam portat przsentavit &d eandem ecclesiam, post-
quam chartam illam & donum fecerat predicto tali, vel
non, ut idem talis dicit. Item respondere poterit quis
conira assisam g pcedere non debeat, quia ille qui
pfert assisam vel aliquis antecessorü suorü teütum
(ratione cujus presentat) tali dedit et alienavit cum


omnibus pertinentiis suis sine aliquo retenemento quo-


eunq, modo alienationis, ita vendidit illud ei qui non
presentat vel alicui antecessorum suorum, sive fuerit in
possessione presentandi sive non, sine aliqua retentione
vel exceptione, vel dimisit ad terminü vite vel annor,
et id quandoq, p chartas et instrumenta declarari pote-
rit, si in judicio pferatur: et quo casu, pcedet assisa
sine die, si fiat disputatio de veritate et fide instru-
mentorum, si falsitatis arguantur, vel per assisam cap-
tam in modum jurate si partes consentiant poterit
negotium terminari. Et notandum quód charte & in-
strumenta ante judicium sunt exhibenda, si autem
post, locum habere non possunt, quia sub pretextu :
instrumentorum postea compertorum & éxhibitorum
sententia lata retrahi non debet. Item excipi poterit
contra assisam, quód ille qui profert assisam nihil ha-
bet in manu de tenemento suo ad quod pertinet advo.


! * sed dicatur," MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ? *a parte," id.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 47


stayed, if a fine and chirograph have been made in the


court of the king, since a minor under age ought to
answer to every fine. But if the charter of an ancestor
be objected to a person of full age (as abovesaid), if it be
. denied by à major or à minor, let it be proved. But if
ib be not conceded, if it be said that it is void through
a subsequent presentation, and & presentation after the
charter be denied by the adverse party, let an assise
proceed after the manner of à jury with the consent of
the parties under these words, to wit, whether the donor
who brings the assise presented to the church after he
had made that charter and donation to so-and-so afore-
sald or not, as the said so-and-so says. Likewise a
person may answer against the assise that it, ought not
to proceed, because he who brings forward the assise or
some one of his ancestors gave the tenement (by reason
of which he presents) to so-and-so, and alienated it with
all its appurtenances without retaining anything what-
soever in the mo«e of alienation, [or] he so sold it to
him who does not present or to some one of his an-
eestors, whether he was in posssssion of the presentation
or not, without any retention or exception, or he leased
for a term of life'or of years, and this can be made clear
by charters or instruments, if it be brought forward in
judgment; and in which case the assise shall proceed
without a day, if there be & discussion concerning
the truth and the faith of the instruments, if they be
charged with falseness, or the business may be terminated
if the parties consent through an assise held in the
manner of & jury. And it is to be noted that the
charters and instruments are to be exhibited before the
judgment, but if afterwards, they can have no place,
beeause & sentence once passed cannot be retracted
under the pretext of instruments afterwards found and
exhibited. Likewise an exception can be taken to the
assise, that he who brings forward the assise has in his
hand nothing of the tenement to which the advowson ap-


f. 243 b.


48 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS.


catio, quia illud amisit per judicium vel per disseysi-
nam, vel alio quocunque modo, quamvis jus habeat in
tenemento & in pertinentiis primó recuperare debet
tenementum ad quod pertinet advocatio, & tune postea
presentet & non ante. Et de hac materia in rotulo
de termino Sancti Michaelis anno regis H. tertio inci-
piente quarto in cofà Norf de Thoi Bardolf. ubi ob-
jectum fuit prssentanti quód nullam terram habuit
in villa in qua ecclesia sita fuit, ad quod responsum
fuit & recognitum ab eo qui tulit assisam, quód nul-
lam terram habuit in villa illa, sed antecessores sui qui
inde fuerint disseysiti, & unde cecidit assisa, quia ad-
voeatio fuit de pertinentiis, quod quidem non esset si
doceri posset contrarium. tem si aliquis presentatio-
nem suam semel retinuerit per assisam, & proprietarius
petat advocationem vel tenementum ad quod advocatio
pertinet per breve de recto, & pendente placito incipiat
ecclesia vacare, petens ille presentare non poterit, an-
tequam advocationem vel tenementum disrationaverit.
Item contra assisam replicari poterit, quód ille qui
assisam profert, nec aliquis antecessorum suorum, jus
vel seysinam habuerit in advocatione, de qua agitur,
nisi ad vitam tantum quacunque ratione, vel ad ter-
minum, ita quód nihil juris descendere poterit ad hz-
Britton, ib. redes. Si mulier autem post mortem viri sui waranto
suo de dote sua prsesentanti & seysinam suam vel
antecessorum suorum per assisam petenti respondeat,

quód prsesentatio ad ipsam pertineat excipiendo ratione

. dotis sue quàm habet in villa in qua ecclesia sita


Rritton, 7b.
9.


est.
3. Et unde impetravit super warantum suum breve
sn 49 Quare impedit, videndum erit inprimis qualiter sit dos


tione eccle- constituta, ut si habuerit tertiam partem alicujus villi,
site nostre.


! *gi mulier "aliqua." MS. Rawl. C. 160. The paragraph (3) should
commence here.


OF AN ASSISE ÓF LAST PRESENTATION. 49


pertains, because he lost it by à judgment or by a dissey-
sine or in some other way, although he has the right
to the tenement and the appurtenances, he ought in
the first place to recover the tenement to which the
advowson appertains, and let him present afterwards,
but not before. And on this matter there is à some-
thing in the Roll of St. Michael's term in the third and
fourth year of king Henry in the county of Norfolk,
concerning Thomas Bardolf, where it was objected to
the presentor that he had no land in the vill, in which
the ehurch was situated, to which i6 was answered and
acknowledged by him who brought the assise, that he
had no land in that vill, but his ancestors had who had
been disseysed thereof, and hence the assise lapsed
because the advowson was of the appurtenanees, which
would not be so, if the contrary could be shown.  Like-
wise if à person has once retained his presentation
through an assise and the proprietor claims the ad-
vowson or the tenement to which the advowson belongs
through à writ of right, and whilst the plea is pending
the chureh begins to be vacant, that claimant cannot
present before he has deraigned the advowson or the
tenement. Likewise against the assise it may be re-
plied, that [neither] he who brings the assise nor any
of his ancestors had the right or the seysine in the ad-
vowson, which is the subject of the. action, except for
life only in whatever manner or for a term, so that no
right could descend to his heirs. But if à woman after
the death of her husband should answer to her warran-
tor for her dower presenting and claiming by an assise
his own seysine or that of his ancestors, that the pre-
sentation belongs to her, by excepting by reason of her
dower which she has in the vill in which the church is
situated, | | '


And whereupon she has sued out against the same |, 9.

. . mE : ikewise
warrantor & writ of Quare émpedát, it wil have to be concerning
seen how the dower has been appointed, as if she have *be advow-

Q 1302. D


f. 244.


50 DE ASSISA ULTIME PR;/ESENTATIONIS.


& petat quód ratione illius partis possit presentare
saltem tertia vice, vel si de toto manerio fuerit dotata
integré nulla faeta exceptione cum omnibus pertinen-
tiis, vel excepta advocatione. Si autem de toto mane-
rio integro sine exceptione, tunc valebit ei su& actio.
Si autem excepta advocatione non, nisi aliquid agatur
vel! in contrarium ex speciali conventione. Si autem
dotata fuerit de tertia parte, tunc nihil juris habet in
presentatione licet ecclesia sita sit in sua tertia parte,
nisi hoc eveniat ex aliqua specialitate, s. q dotata fue-
rit de tertia parte cum tota advocatione in quacunq,
parte ecclesia sita fuerit, sed alio modo no valebit ei
su&à actio, tü da epus non admittit clericos ad particu-
las, licet patiat section? nec plura habeat capita sicut
monstrum. Et q epus non admittit particulas, videri
poterit de termino s. H. An. regis H. 14. in cofi Suff.
de Maria de Walenus, Herb. de Alez? tü quia ratione
terti:]e partis nihil juris clamare poterit omninó in
advoc. nec in parte nec in toto certis vicibus, nisi sit
aliqua specialitas d hoc inducat ut dict est, sicut videri
poterit p exemplu.  Costitutio enim dotis similis est
quodammodo donationi. Esto igitur q quis habeat
maneriü cum advocatione & totum dederit diversis vel
uni per particulas retenta sibi aliqua minima portione,
& sic dederit quamlibet partem cum omnibus perti-
nentiis suis, nulla facta mentione de advoeatione, re-
maneat semper advocatio cum parte retenta, cüm spe-
cialiter non transferatur, secundàüm quod videri poterit
infrà de jure dotium.


! * vel," ommited MS. Rawl. C. ? * Herberto de Ázelym," id.
160.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 5l
*.


the third part of a certain vill and claims that by reason son of our


of that part she may present at least for the third turn, church.


or if she has been endowed entirely"with the whole
manor no exception having been made with all its ap-


purtenanees, or with the advowson excepted. Butifshe


has been endowed with the whole manor without excep-
tion, then her action will be valid. But if with the
exception of the advowson not so, unless something be
arranged to the contrary by a Special convention. But
if she has been endowed with the third part, then she
has no right to the presentation although the church be
situated in her third part, unless this arises from some
specialty, to wit, that she was endowed with the third
part together with the entire advowson in whatever part
the ehurch may be situated, but. in any other way her
action will not be valid, as well because the Bishop does
not admit elerks to parcels [of a preferment], although it
may admit of being cut into parcels, nor has it several
heads like & monster. And that a Bishop does not
admit to parcels may be seen in St. Hilary term in the
fourteenth year of king Henry in the county of Suffolk
in the case of Maria de Walenus and Herbert de Alez,
as well because by reason of her third part she eannot
claim any right at all to the advowson either in part
or in whole for certain turns, unless there be some
specialty, which induces this as it is said, as may be seen
by an example. For the constitution of dower is some-
thing similar to a donation. Let it be therefore that
8 person has a manor with an advowson and has given
the whole of it to different persons or to one in par-
cels having retained for himself some very small parcel,
and so has given some part with all its appurtenances,
no mention having been made of the advowson, the
advowson wil] always remain with the part retained
. Since i6. has not been specially transferred, according to
what may be seen below concerning the right of dowers.


D 29


f. 244.


4  . ltem queri potest si marito, qui per legem Anglis
De diversis : ! nam ;
usibussu. Lenet, detur assisa ultimse presentationis de seysina,


perhujus: quam simul habuerunt & ipse & uxor sua in vita uxo-
modi ma-


/! terade ris vel si competat heredibus, & ei p consequens
! — ultima prze- - 2 cl : EC |
!  Sentatone, DOInine heredü, videt potius q ei copetat breve (Quare


| 592 DE ASSISA ULTIMA PRZESENTATIONIS.
|
(


| i impedit) nomine suo, cüm nunquàa preesentaverit per
| | Se, quàm assis&a nomine heredum: hsredes enim bene
possunt esse plense setatis sieut infrà statem. Item si
quis terram teneat de hereditate uxoris sus, quz hre-

redes habuerit de alio viro, per legem Anglie, & cüm

semel per se contulerit ecclesiam & càm ita fuerit in

possessione presentandi, advocationem illam dederit ali-

cui loco religioso vel prsesentaverit vel alio modo alie-

naverit, & hzseres post mortem talis assisam ultime
presentationis de seysina antecessoris sui quàm paras-

tri sui, eadit assisa, si cognoscat przsentationem suam

& donum parastri sui, propter seysinam illius talem

qualem, & agendum erit de vice & proprietate. Et sie

diei poterit (ut videtur) de omnibus aliis qui tenent
advoeationem ad terminum vits», cüm semel preesenta-

verit! nomine pprio: secus autem erit de eo qui pre-

sentat nomine custodis, quia hoc facit nomine alieno.

Item esto quod quis tradat alicui tenementum aliquod

cum advocatione donec ei provideatur, & advocationem

dederit antequam provisum fuerit, & ille cui data fuit
presentaverit, & tune deinde provisum fuerit, revoca-

tur donatio & advocatio per breve de ingressu, sed non

per assisam: quia talis dare non poterit ad remanen-

tiam. De hac materia habetis anno regis H. 7. in coi


1 «* presentaverint," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


' OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 58


Likewise it may be asked if to a husband who holds 4.
by the law of England there be given an assise of last edid
presentation concerning the seysine which they both uses upon
had, himself and his wife, in the lifetime of his wife, or id
if it is competent to the heirs and to himself conse- EHE
quenily in the name of the heirs, it seems rather that p
he is entitled to & writ of Quare impedit in his own
name, since he has never presented by himself, than to
an assise in the name of the heirs, for the heirs may .
well be of full age as under age. Likewise if any one
holds land by inheritance of his wife, who had heirs by
another man, according to the law of England, and
when he has once by himself conferred the church and
when he is thus in possession of the presentation, he
has given that advowson to some religious place or has
presented or has alienated it in some other manner, and
the heir after the death of such an one [has brought]
an assise of last presentation concerning the seysine of
his ancestor or his step-father the assise fails, if he
acknowledges his presentation and the gift of his step-
father on account of his seysine whatever it may be,
and the action will have to be brought for the turn and
for the property. And so it may be said (as it, seems)
eoncerning all others who hold an advowson for the
term of their life, when they have once presented in
their own name, but it will be otherwise with him who
presents in the name of his wardship, because he does
this in another's name. Likewise let it be that & person
delivers to some one a tenement with an advowson until
provision has been made for him, and has given the ad-
vowson before provision has been made, and he to whom
he has given it has presented, and then at length pro-
vision has been made for him, the donation and the
advowson are revoked by à Writ of Entry, but not by
an assise; because such & person cannot give for ever
and ever. Concerning this matter you have & case in
the seventh year of king Henry in the county of


Britton, ib.


8 12.


f. 244 b.


54 .DE ASSISA ULTÍMJE PRJESENTATIONIS.


Bed. de Falcano de Briante & priore de Neveham.
Assisa ultimee presentationis, de ecclesia de Haspeele.
Item esto quód aliquis qui jus nec titulum habuerit
in advocatione presentaverit dum verus heres fuerit
infrà etatem & in custodia alicujus, & cüm ad setatem
pervenerit ecclesia vacaverit & uterg, presentaverit &
assisam  portaverit, ille qui ultimó  presentavit per
assisam retinebit, donec hsres sibi de jure perquisive-
rii, et! de termino s. H. an. regis H. nono in com
Lincolü de priore de Osneby & Conano de Weleton de
ecclesia de Weleton. Item esto q quis clericum pre-
sentaverit, qui ad prsesentationem suam fuit admissus,
& venit tunc quis à latere & clerico instituto moverit
questionem & ipsum gravet per clericum alium, &
postea inter eos convenerit q ille qui questionem mo-
verit iterum de facto presentet clericu institutum epi-
scopo loci, qui ipsum admiserit in prejudicium primi
presentatis, & ita remaneat talis psona tota vita sua
bis presentatus, & bis institutus, si ille qui ultimó
presentavit postmodum vacante eeclesia ex tali pre-
sentatione agere velit per assisam, non audietur, quia
presentatio super presentationem de eodem facto & ea-
dem re & de eadem presentatione facta non valebit:
ut de termino P. anno regis H. nono in com Norff.
Assisa ultimze preesentationis inter Matildam de Roches-
ford & Robertum de Tunston de ecclesia de Tunston.
]tem esto quód quis presentaverit ad eclesiam vacan-
tem & pendente presentatione antequam clericus ad-
mittatur contingat presentantem mori, e& eo mortuo
ratione custodie presentat custos alium clericum, et
durante contentione inter clericum presentatum à pa-


1 €« ut," MS. Rawlinson, (C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 55


Bedford concerning Fulk de Briant and the prior of
Neveham, an assise of last presentation concerning the
church of Haspeele. Likewise let it be that some one,
who had neither the right nor the title to the advowson,
has presented whilst the true heir was under age and in
the wardship of some one, and when he has come of age
the chureh has become vacant and each has presented
and has brought an assise; he who has last presented
shall retain by the assise until the heir has proceeded
for himself of right, [as may be seen] in the term of
St. Hilary in the ninth year of King Henry in the
eounty of Lincoln concerning the prior of Osneby and
Conan de Weleton concerning the church of Weleton.
Likewise let it be that some one has presented a clerk,
who upon his presentation has been admitted, and some
collateral claimant comes forward, and the clerk having
been instituted he raises a question and burdens him by
another clerk, and afterwards it is agreed amongst them
that he who has raised the question should present in
fact à second time the instituted clerk to the bishop of
the place, who admits him to the prejudice of the
first presentor, and so such parson remains for all his life
twice presented and twice instituted, if he who last
presented upon the church becoming vacant wishes to
proeeed by an assise upon such a presentation, he shall
not be heard, because & presentation made upon a pre-
sentation from the same fact and on the same thing and
concerning the same presentation shall not be valid; as
in Easter term in the ninth year of king Henry in the
eounty of Norfolk, an assise of last presentation between
Matilda de Rochesford and Robert de Tunston concern-
ing the church of Tunston. Likewise let it be that
some one has presented to a vacant church, and whilst
the presentation is pending before the clerk is admitted,
it happens that the presentor dies, and upon his death
by reason of his wardship the guardian presents another
clerk, and during the contention between the clerk pre-


f. 244 b.


Britton, :5.
$ 13.


56 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRASENTATIONIS.


trono et eustodem, contingat quód heres perveniat ad
etatem & tertium presentaverit, vel se teneat ad pre-
sentationem primam ' antecessoris sui, videndum est
eujus presentatio debet pr eferri, & sciendum quod here-
dis presentatio, e& non custodis, nec antecessoris etiam,
quia ultima presentatio preferetur. Et de hae mate-
ria inveniri poterit in itinere abbatis de Radinge et
M. de Pateshul in com Wygorn.  Assisa ultime pre-
sentationis, de ecclesia Sanct» Marise de Wichio. Item
alius casus in itinere M. de Pateshul in coii Kanc.
inter priorem de Lewes et Wilhelmum de Arbervil de
ecclesia de Stokshyre, ubi idem prior .arramaverit
Assisam ultimw preesentationis versus eundem Wilhel-
mum, et idem Wilhelmus cognovit presentationem
ipsius prioris, sed dicebat, quód fuit tempore quo pater
suus fuit infrà setatem & in custodia archiepiscopi
Cantuariensis, alterius scilicet quàin ipsius prioris qui
questus fuit. Et unde quia cognovit presentationem
prioris in cujus custodia non fuit, quia pater suus fuit
in alterius custodia quàm prioris, recessit prior quietus
in seysina sua, salva tamen Wilhelmo questione super
proprietate. ltem esto quód manerium aliquod integre
eum advocatione ecclesi; & aliis pertinentiis suis de-
tur ad firmam person: ejusdem manerii, quo casu non
poterit illa eeclesia conferri antequam vacaverit, nec
vacare poterit nisi post& mortem rectoris vel si se dimi-
serit, quod quidem facere non possit nisi in fraudem
iradentis (ut videtur) quo casu videndum esset si hoc
faceret in fraudem vel necessitate ductus certa ratione:
Sj autem in fraudem, non valet resipgnatio; si autem
necessitate vel certa ratione compulsus, hoc posset sus-
tineri.. Sed quid si in vita sua alii dimiserit termi-


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 57


sented by the patron and the guardian, it happens that
the heir has come of age and has presented a third clerk
or keeps himself to the first presentation of his prede-
cessor, we must see whose presentation ought to be
preferred, and it is to be known that the presenta-
tion of the heir, and not of the guardian nor of the
predecessor even, because the last presentation shall be
preferred. And on this matter something will be found
in the iter of the abbot of Reading and Martin de
Pateshull in the county of Worcester, an assise of last
presentation, eoncerning the church of St. Mary of
Wichio. Likewise another case in the iter of Martüin
de Pateshull in the county of Kent between the prior
of Lewes and William of Aberville concerning the
church of Stokshyre, where the prior instituted an
assise of last presentation against the said William, and
the said William acknowledged the presentation of the
prior himself, but said that it was at & time when his
father was under age and in the wardship of the arch-
bishop of . Canterbury, to wit, à different person from the
prior himself, who had claimed. And hence because he
acknowledged the presentation of the prior in whose
guardianship he was not, because his father was in the
guardianship of another person than the prior, the prior
withdrew quieted in his seysine, saving to William the
question respecting the property. Likewise let it be
that a certain manor in its entirety with the advowson
of the church and other its appurtenances is given to
farm to the parson of the same manor, in which case the
church cannot be conferred before i& has become vacant,
nor can it become vacant except through the death of
the rector, or if he shall have resigned it, which he
cannot do except as & fraud against the lessor (as it
seems), in which case it is to be seen if he should do this
fraudulently or led by necessity in & certein manner;
but if fraudulently, the resignation is invalid; but if
through necessity or in a certain manner compelled, this
may be sustained. But what if during his life he has


f. 245.


o8 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS.


num suum, & ipsum mori contingat infrà terminum
suum, & hoe videndum erit utrum hoe fecerit in frau-
dem vel necessitate, & facta inquisitione secundüm hoc
judieare oportebit. Item esto quód in testamento suo
terminum suum alicui legaverit vel illum reliquerit
executoribus disponendum, videndum erit tune si ipsi
conferri! possent ecclesiam & prssentare, nescio quare
non, càm ille qui ad firmam tradidit in traditione illa
nihil excepit, nec íiraditioni legem apposuit. litem
vice versa si terminus concedatur alicui alii à rectore
primo, & ille firmarius postea concedit terminum suum
rectori, id idem erit observandum (ut videtur) quod
in primo casu. ltem esto quód terminus preteriit &
infrà terminum illum inceperit ecclesia vacare, vel
post terminum antequam proprietarius sibi poterit per-
quirere, & firmarius presentaverit, & pendente presen-
tatione firmari incipiat proprietarius possidere, & tunc
presentaverit nomine suo, przsentatio sua prevalebit,
quiequid autem ante factum fuerit per firmarium ratum
erit ad, similitudinem custodis vel custodie ut supra.
Eodem modo si quis seysinam antecessoris infrà seta-
tem petierit per assisam, pendente placito vacaverit
ecclesia sive infrà setatem sive post, si ex parte cus-
todis nullus admittatur, prseesentatus à proprietario
obtinebit. Idem de termino S. M. anno regis H. vi.
in com Herford. de priore de Lantony, et Waltero
Byseche de ecclesia de Pencombe quód non capitur
assisa ultim:w presentationis in persona ejus, qui est
infrà statem  & petens. Item esto q mulier dotem
habens & advocationem ecelesie presentaverit cleri-
eum ceüm vacaverit, & qui ad presentationem suam


! * conferre," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 59


demised to another his term, and it happens that he
dies within his term, and this will have to be seen into
whether he has done this fraudulently or from necessity,
and after an inquisition has been made aecording to this
it wil be proper to judge. Làkewise let it be that in
his testament he has bequeathed to some one his term
or has left it to his executors to dispose of, it will have
to be seen then whether they can confer the church and
present, I know no reason why not, when he who leased
it to farm excepted nothing in that lease, nor appointed
any eondition to the lease. Likewise conversely if a
term be first granted to any one else than the rector, and
the lessee afterwards grants his term to the rector, the
same thing will have to be observed (as it seems) as in
ihe first case. Likewise let it be that the term has
passed away, and within that term the church began to
be vacant, or after the term before the proprietor could
elaim for himself the lessee has presented, and whilst
the presentation of the lessee is pending the proprietor
begins to possess and has then presented in his own


name, his presentation shall prevail, but whatever has.


been previously done by the lessee shall be ratified after
the likeness of à guardian or à wardship as above, In
the same manner, if any one within age has claimed the
seysine of his ancestor by an assise, whilst the plea is
pending the church has become vacant, whether whilst
he was under age or after he came of age, if no one is
admitted on the part of the guardian, the clerk pre-
sented by the proprietor shall obtain [institution] The
same may be seen in the term of St. Michael in the sixth
year of king Henry in the county of Hertford, con-
cerning the prior of Lantony and Walter Byseche con-
cerning the chureh of Pencombe, that an assise of last
presentation is not held in the person of him who is
under age and a& claimant. Likewise let it be that a
woman having her dower and the advowson of a church
has presented à clerk when it was vacant, and who
upon her presentation was admitted, and the heir her


f. 245.


Britton, 75.
8 14.


Britton, ib.
8 " 1 5.


Britton, ib.


$ 16.


60 DE ASSISA ULTIMJ£ PRJESENTATIONIS.


admissus fuerit, & heres warantus suus de dote sua
advocationem illam postmodum alicui dederit, & vivente
muliere post donationem illam ecclesiam contulerit,
seysinam illam transmittit ad warantum suum heredes!
suos, & unde post talem seysinam necesse habebit do-
natorius habere novam donationem, vel prioris dona-
tionis confirmationem, quia antequam de seysina loqui
poterit, nunquam in causa proprietatis obtinebit. Item
si plures sint cohzredes, quorum quidam plene cetatis
in possessione hereditatis proportione sua, quidam verà
infrà etatem & sub custodia, & non sit nisi unica ec-
clesia que vacaverit, queritur quis preferri debeat in
presentatione, vel si omnes simul presentare debeant
eb consentire, vel quidam eorum prsferri aliis ratione
vsnecie vel pluralitatis? videtur q omnes simul psen-
tare deberent &ut nullus in clericum * consentire, alio-
quin ordinabit episcopus, sive plensz «setatis fuerit sive
non, nisi partita sit hsereditas et divisa, ecüm plene
catis extiterit, vel aliter convenerit inter eos, nec erit
episcopo locus gratificationi, si quilibet eorum vellet
clerieum suum singulariter presentare & per se: quia
nullum talem recipere posset ad presentetionem unius
sine przjudicio alterius coheredis. Aliter autem esse
posset si unus qui totum jus haberet presentandi duos
clericos vel plures simul vel diversis temporibus pre-
sentaret. Item de una vacatione & prwsentatione et
&d unam ecclesiam plures possunt esse querentes &
diversis rationibus, duo enim vel plures petere possunt
presentationem per assisam ratione successionis vel
proprie prsesentationis. Item ung vel plures ratione
dotis vel alio modo tenendi ad vitam secundüm diversa
genera presentandi per breve: Quare impedit, vel Quare
non permittit, vel quia aliquam partem habet ville in
qua sita est ecclesia de qua agitur, & quod vieissim &


1 et heredes," MS. Rawl.C.159. |  ? **et in clericum," id.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 01


warrantor of her dower has afterwards given that ad-
vowson to a certain person, and during the lifetime of
the woman after that donation has conferred the church,
she transmits that seysine to her warrantor and his
heirs, and hence after such a seysine it is necessary that
the donatory have a new donation, or à confirmation of
the prior donation, for before he can allege the seysine,
he ean never maintain his position in & cause of pro-
perty. Likewise if there be several co-heirs, of whom
some are of full age in possession of their inherit-
ance in their proportion, but some are under age and
under guardianship, and there is only & single church
which is vacant, it is asked who ought to be preferred
in the presentation, or if all ought to present to-
gelher and to consent, or some of them ought to be
preferred to others by reason of primogeniture or of
plurality ? it seems that all ought to present together
or none and to agree upon a clerk, otherwise the bishop
shall ordain, whether he be of full age or not, unless the
inheritance is parted and divided, when he shall be of
full age, or i& has been otherwise agreed amongst them,
nor will the bishop be able to gratify any one, if any of
them wishes to present his clerk singularly and by himself,
because he could not receive any such person upon the
presentation of one without prejudice to another co-heir. |
But it might be otherwise if one who had the whole right
of presenting should present two clerks or more at the
same time or at different times. Likewise upon one
vacancy and presentation and in reference to one church
several may be claimants and for different reasons, for
two or more may claim the presentation by an assise by
reason of succession or of their own presentation. Like- '
wise one or more [women] by reason of dower or by some
other mode of tenancy for life according to the different
kinds of presenting by a writ of quare Vmpedát or of
quare mon permAltiit, or beeause he has some part of the
vill in which the church is situated which is the subject
of the action, and that he ought in turn and succes-


5.
Breve epi-
SCOpo,
postquam
recupera-
verit per
assisam
ultime
pressenta-
tionis.


f. 245 b.


1l.
Si mulier
presenta-
verit ra-
tione dotis
sut.


Britton, ib.


17.


62 DE ASSISA ULTIME PRJESENTATIONIS.


successive debeat presentare, et multis aliis rationibus:
quas quidem omnes oportet ! in principio diligenter exa-
minare per ordinem, ut sciri possit (factà examinatione)
ad quos pertineat actio et ad quos non, et de processu
in persona cujuslibet, in literis ad episcopum dirigen-
dis oportet facere mentionem per tale breve exempli
CAUSA.


Rex episcopo tali salutem. Sciatis quód talis in
euria nostra &c. recuperaverit seysinam suam versus
talem per assisam ultime presentationis &c. Sciatis
etiam quód cüm talis? A. B. 'C. summoniti essent co-
rain eisdem justieiariis nostris &e. ad audiendum predie-
tam assisam, scilicet. quis advocatus &e. predieti A. &
B. venerunt et consenserunt in presentationem talis
vel assensum prebuerunt vel recognoverunt &c. tali
presentationem suam et eandem ecclesiam et etiam
predictus C. recognovit coram eisdem  justiciariis q
nihil juris clamat in prssentatione nisi ut procurator
talium, non obstante reclamatione talis, idoneam per-
sonam &c. Et in predicta forma & modo prewdieto
possunt omnes forms brevium de seysina facienda in
uno. brevi comprehendi, sicut infrà dicetur per par-
ticulas.


CAP. V.


Si càüm mulier dotem habens & advocationom cleri-
cum prresentaverit, qui admissus fuerit ad pr:sentatio-
nem suam, & heres & warantus de dote sua advoca-
tionem illam postmodum alieui dederit vel vendiderit,
& vacante ecelesia iterum in vita mulieris alia vice
ilam eontulerit, non obstante donatione heredis ex
pressentatione sua seysinam suam pr:esentandi trans-
mittit ad warantum suum & hseredes suos, & sic erit


—— - —


!* quod. quidem oportet, MS. Sd tales; » id.
Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 603


sively to present and for many other reasons: all of
which he ought to examine diligently at the com-
mencement, in order that it may be known (after an
examination has been made) to whom the action apper-
tains and to whom not, and mention ought to be made
eoncerning the process in the person of each in directing
the letters to the bishop by such a writ for exainple's
sake :


The king to bishop so-and-so greeting. Know yethat 5.
so-and-so has recovered &c. his seysine against such an " EE
one by an assise of last presentation &e. Know ye also after he
that when so-and-so, A. B. C., were summoned before our ui hy
said justiciaries to hear the aforesaid assise, to wit, what an assise
advocate &ce., the aforesaid A. and B. came and con- om
sented to the presentation of the said so-and-so, or gave tion.
their assent or acknowledged &c. in so-and-so his pre-
sentation and the said church, and likewise the aforesaid
C. acknowledged before the said justiciaries that he f.?45b.
claims no right in the presentation except as the proetor
of the said parties, notwithstanding the reclamation of
such an one, that & fit parson, &c. And in the aforesaid
form and in the aforesaijd manner all forms of writ for
making seysine may be comprised in one writ, as will
be explained below by parcels.


CHAPTER V.


If when & woman having à dower and an advowson 1.
has presented a clerk, who has been admitted on her pre- cdit
sentation, and the heir and warrantor of her dower has pr esented
afterwards given or sold that advowson to a certain eon
person, and the church becoming vacant a second time dower.
in the lifetime of the woman, notwithstanding the
donation of the heir from her own presentation she
transmits her seysine of presenting to her warrantor


end his heirs, and so the charter will be void and the


64 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS.


charta vacua & donatio nulla, eàm donatorius loqui
non posset de aliqua seysina. Item respondet aliquis
sic contra assisam & dicat, g iste qui assisam profert
Britton, ib. presentare non posset propter donationem & chartam
m subsequentem, ut supra dictum est, si charta dedici
non possit, cadit assisa, & alius seysinam suam reti-
nebit, cüm sit quasi in possessione, post donationem
& chartam confectam. Si autem omninó dedicatur,
oportet quód probetur per testes in charta nominatos,
& per probos & legales homines vicinos, & e& probata
ulieriàs impediri non poterit sua presentatio. Et non
est consimile de rebus incorporalibus, qu:e traditionem
non patiuntur, ei quod est de rebus corporalibus ubi
nulla est donatio, licet. fiant chartcee & capiantur ho-
magia, nisi subsequatur traditio & corporalis apprehen-
sio ut supra. Si autem donator chartam recognoverit
& dieat quód postea prwsentaret,! hoc dicere oportebit ?
per assisam, nec stabitur simplici verbo suo nec pree-
sumptioni etiam tantum, licet proferat literas ordinarii
quód clerieum admiserit ad prsesentationem suam, nec
erit necesse procedere ad assisam de seysina donatoris,
quia per hoc, quod concedit chartam, excludit se à
seysina & presentatione sua, cüm nihil ostendere pos-
sit post eonfectionem chart: de aliqua seysina.
2 Item si quis tenuerit ad vitam per legem Anglis» vel
Deadvoeca- ,. . . .
tione duty 8llo modo, ecüm advocationem ecelesie semel contulerit,
pereum, & postea advocationem dederit alicui episcopo, forte
bet lem qui illam prsbendaverit, si heres post mortem talis
Angli  assisam ultime presentationis arramaverit, & cognove-
rib presentationem & donum illius qui tenuit ad vitam,
cadit assisa su& super seysinam donatoris qualem qua-


! * preeseutaverit," MS. Rawl. C. ?* «hoc docere oportet" MS.
159. Rawl. C. 160,


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 65


donation null, since the donatory eannot speak of any
seysine. Likewise some one may answer thus against the
assise and may say, that he who brings the assise could
not present on account of his donation and subsequent
charter asabove said, and if the charter cannot be denied, |
the assise falls, and the other will retain his seysine,
since he is at i& were in possession after the donation
&nd the making of the charter. But if it be altogether
denied, i& is incumbent that it should be proved by the
witnesses named in the charter, and by honest and loyal
men of the neighbourhood, and upon its being proved
his presentation cannot be further impeded. And the
case concerning incorporeal things which do not admit
of delivery is not similar to that which occurs con-
eerning ecorporeal things where there is no delivery,
although charters may be made and homages may be
performed, unless delivery and corporeal taking follow
as &bove. But if the donor has acknowledged the
charter, and says that he afterwards presented, it will
be incumbent that he say this by an assise, nor will
his simple word avail nor the presumption even alone,
although he produces the letters of the ordinary that he
admitted a clerk upon his presentation, nor will it be
necessary to proceed to an assise concerning the seysine
of the donor, because by this, that he concedes & charter,
he excludes himself from the seysine and his presenta-
tion, when he can prove nothing concerning any seysine
after the making of the charter.


Likewise if & person has held for his life by the law 2.
of England or in some other manner, when he has once Of 9n ad-
conferred the advowson of & church and afterwards Dig: by
given Xhe advowson to some bishop, who perhaps has holds by
made it a prebend, if the heir after the death of such a the law of
person has instituted an assise of last presentation and has acm
acknowledged the presentation and the gift of him who
held it for life, the assise falls concerning the seysine of
the donor, of whatever kind it may be, as well because


Q 1802. E


66 -. DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRASENTATIONIS.


lem, tum quia ecclesia non vacat, & non competit ei


Britton, iv. remedium nisi super jure per breve de recto. Et de
ch.i*.$19.hac materia, inveniri poterit de termino s. M. anno


f. 240.


regis H. vi circa principium rotuli Ut autem sciri
possit, quis obtinere vel prsferri possit! per assisam &
quis non, per exemplum videndum erit de quibusdam
easibus specialibus qui evenerunt tempore regis inter
certas personas. Esto igitur? quód querens dicat se vel
aliquem antecessorum suorum presentasse certam per-
sona, & inde posuerit se super assisam & juratores
nihil inde sciverint, nec quis ultimam personam psen-
taverit nec aliam ante ultimam & sic nec? deinceps, ut
si dixerit se inde nihil scire, querens nihil capiat per
assisam. De hac materia habetis de termino P. ano
regis H. viii in cofà K. assis& ultime fpsentationis
inter priore de Suth. & Warm de mote Küs. de ecclesia
de Snanth. Ad hoc eti& facit q habetis de termino P.
ano regis H. x. in com Norf. de Sim. de Nod. de ec-
clesia de Judliba, ibi efi dicit, q ubi constare non pos-
sit quis ultim&à psonà psentaverit nec aliam ante ulti-
mam, g tune peedat loquela super recto & super ipsa
pprietate, p illud ideé breve sine alio. Et statim fiat
narratio de seysina antecessoris & de recto de descensu
àd petentem, ac si ab initio placitatus esset super ipso
recto & ponat se tenens (secundüm q elegerit) vel in
magnam assisam, vel defendat se p duellum, & interim
si voluerint consentiant in clericum, alioquin devolve-
tur eollatio ad episcopu, & si in una & eadem villa
sint duo dominia & diversa feoda & unica ecclesia, &


! «quis eapere possit," MS. ? «igitur " omitted MS. id.
Rawl. C. 160. 3 * nec ? omitted MS. id.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 607


the church is not vacant, and he is not entitled to a
remedy except concerning the right by means of a writ
of right, And upon this matter there will be found &
ease in St. Michaels term, in the sixth year of king
Henry, near the commencement of the roll But that
ib may be known who may prevail and be preferred
through an assise and who not, may be seen by an ex-
ample from certain special cases which happened in the
time of the king between certain persons. Let it be
therefore that a plaintiff says that he or some one of
his ancestors presented a certain person, and thereupon
he has put himself upon an assise, and the jurors have
known nothing thereupon, nor who presented the last


parson nor the parson before the last, and so in suc-


cession, as if he shall have said that he knows nothing
thereabout, the plaintiff would gain nothing by the
assise. Concerning this matter you have in Easter
term in the eighth year of king Henry, in the county of
Kent, an assise of last presentation between the Prior of
Southwick and Warin of Monte Cassino concerning the
church of Sneath. "To the same effect is what you have
in Easter term in the tenth year of king Henry, in the
county of Norfolk, about Simon de Nod., concerning the
chureh of Judlibam, for there it is said, that when it
cannot be ascertained who presented the last parson or
the parson before the last, that then the trial should
proceed on the subject of the right and of the pro-
perty by the very same writ without another, And
let the argument at once begin concerning the seysine


of the ancestor and concerning the right by descent to'


the claimant, as if he had been impleaded from the
commencement upon the right itself, and let the tenant
(according as he shall choose) put himself upon the
great assise or defend himself by the duel, and mean-
while if they are wiling let them agree upon a clerk,
otherwise the collation will devolve to the bishop, and
if there be in one and the same vill two domains and
different feuds and & single church, and i& cannot be
E 2


f. 246.


De dona-
tione data


08 DE ASSISA ULTIMJ£ PRJESENTATIONIS.


sciri non possit cujus antecessor ultimó presentavit,
ipse obtinebit in cujus feodo sita est ecclesia, Si a&u-
tem sciri non possit quis ultimó prsssentavit, nec in
cujus feodo sita fuerit ecclesia, nec haberi possit cer-
titudo de prsesentatione, concordet inter se partes &
vicissim prsesentent, quia proinde oportebit eos habere
sequitatem.


Item esto q quis habeat advocationem ecclesise ali-
cujus, & cüm fuerit in possessione presentandi illam


velalienata dederit cu teneméto vel sine in maritagium vel alio


antequam
donator
fuerit in
posses-
sione prs--
sentandi.


modo, & ipse idem, antequam presentaverit, advoca-
tionem illam alicui dederit cum teüto vel sine, & tunc
primó contigerit ecclesiam "vacare, & ille tertius cui
ultimo data fuerit advocatio prsesentaverit, & primus
donator vel ejus hseres, eodem modo primus donato-
rius: primus donator vel ejus hseres omnibus aliis
pferetur in presentatione per assisam, tum quia primus
donatorius nullam seysinam habuerit veram per quam
ad alium transferre potuit advocationem, nec secundus
donatorius potuit accipere, g primus no potuit dare
nec ad alium transferre, de hae materia (ut supra) &
similiter de termino s. M. anno regis H. viii incipi-
ente ix. in coii Bed. de Johanne de Traylie & Priore de
Neveham.  Assisa ultimse preesentationis de tertia parte
ecclesise de Sudmel, ubi prior respondit ad assisam quód
predictus Johannes presentare non potuit, q quidam
Wakerus avus ipsius Johannis qui ultimó prsesentavit
&d predictam tertiam partem dedit advocationem illius
terti,]e partis cuidam Falcans. de Briante, & ipse illam
dedit domui de Neveham, & qui& jam Prior cognovit
quód predictus Walterus fecit ultimam presentationem,
& quód predictus Faleas nunquam presentavit ante-
quam presentationem illam dedit predietee domui, con-
sideratum fuit quod predictus Johannes recuperaret


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 69


known whose ancestor last presented, he shall prevail in
whose feud the church is situated. But if it cannot be
known who last presented, nor in whose feud the church
was situated, nor can there be any certainty concerning
the presentation, let the parties agree together and pre-
sent alternately, because it will thereby result to them
to have equity.

Likewise let it be that some one has the advowson of — 3.
& church, and when he has been in the possession of the p
presentation, he has given it with à tenement or with- tion made
out, as & marriage portion or in some other manner, and P 4len-
the very same person before he has presented to it, has fore the
given the advowson to some one with or without. a » TONeCE:
tenement, and it has then happened for the first time sion of the
that the ehurceh becomes vacant, and the third party to hon. xd
whom the advowson was last given has presented, and the
first donor or his heir, and in the same manner, the first
donatory ; the first donor or his heir is preferred to all
the others in the presentation through an assise, as well
because the first donatory had no true seysine through
which he could transfer the advowson to another, nor
could the second donatory aecept what the first could
not give or transfer to another. On this matter (as
above) and in & similar way in St. Michael's term in the
eighth and ninth year of the reign of king Henry in the
eounty of Bedford, concerning John de Traylie and the
prior of Newenham. Án assise of last presentation con-
cerning the third part of the church of Sudmel, where
the prior responded to the assise that the aforesaid John
could Ànot present, because a certain Walter the grand-
father of John who last presented to the aforesaid third
part gave the advowson of that third part to a certain
Fulk de Briant, and the latter gave it to the house of
Newenham, and because the prior already acknowledged
that the aforesaid Walter made the last presentation,
and that the aforesaid Fulk never presented before he
gave the presentation to the house aforesaid, it was
resolved that the aforesaid John should recover his Sey-


f. 246 b.


7O DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS.


seysinam suam. Ad hoc etiam facit de termino s.
H. anno regis H. ix, & maxime quia primus donato-
rius nec secundus aliquod habuerunt tenementum in
villa, in qua ecclesia fuit sita, ad quod advocatio po-
tuit pertinere. Item ad hoc quód jam ultimo dieitur
facit assis& ultime presentationis in cof Norff de
Waltero abbate de Messendene, & Huberto de Burgo
de ecclesia, de Owelton, ub? idem abbas protulit char-
tam cujusdam Walteri de la Penne qus protestabatur
quód dedit &e. Sed in fine recordi, quia recognitum
fuit q idem Walterus nihil habuit in manerio in quo
ecclesia sita fuit, nec aliquis nomine suo nec ipse
unquam presentavit, consideratum fuit q abbas nihil
caperet. Item ad hune ultimum casum facit expressé
de termino s. H. ano regis H. vi. in cofá Staff. de
Rayn cofi Cestrie & priore de Kenelworth de ecclesia
Destoke, ubi ille qui dedit advocationem nullam sey-
sinam habuerit presentandi, nec aliquod tenementum
in villa ubi ecclesia sita fuit. Item ad hoc facit de
itinere M. de Pateshul in cofi Wygoriü anno regis H.
v., q si aliquis cui data fuerit &dvocatio (antequam
pressentaverit) dederit, non valet. Item ad hoc facit
de termino P. anno regis H. ix. in cofá Cornub. de
Richardo Wyke & priore de Trywardray, assisa ultime
presentationis de ecclesia de Wyke, ubi dicitur q non
valet donatio facta de advocatione, ubi donator tem-
pore donationis nullam habuerit seysinam de aliqua
lerrà ad quam advocatio potuerit pertinere, nec ille
qui dedit nec aliquis antecessor suus nunquam fuit in
seysina preesentandi, licet, multe, confirmationes capita-
lium dominorum & etiam episcoporum intervenerint,
quia donatio omninó nulla, quasi nec incepta nec per-


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 71


sine. To the same effectis & case in St. Hilary's term
in the ninth year of king Henry, and chiefly because
neither the first nor the second donatory had any tene-
ment in the village, in which the church was situated,
to which the advowson could pertain. Likewise to the
same effect with what is just said is the assise of last
presentation in the county of Norfolk concerning Walter
abbot of Messendene and Hubert de Burgh concerning
the church of Owelton, where the same abbot produced
8, charter of à certain Walter de la Penne, which testified
that he gave, &c., but at the end of the record, because
ib was acknowledged that the said Walter had nothing
in the manor in which his church was situated, nor had
any one in his name or himself ever presented, it was
held that the abbot took nothing. Likewise upon this
last ease, another expressly bears in St, Hilary's term in
the sixth year of king Henry, in the county of Stafford,
concerning Ranulf earl of Chester and the prior of
Kenelworth, eoncerning the church of Stoke, where he
he who gave the advowson had no seysine of presenting,
nor any tenement in the vil in which the church was
Situated. Likewise to the same effect is & caso in the


f. 246 b.


iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county of Worcester '


in the fifth year of the reign of king Henry, that if any
one to whom an advowson has been given, gives it
away before he has presented, it is not valid. Likewise
to the same effecti is in Easter term in the ninth year
of king Henry, in the county of Cornwall concerning
Richard Wyke and the prior of Try wardray, an assise of
last presentation concerning the church of Wyke, where
it is said that & donation made of an advowson is not
valid, where the donor at the time of the donation had
no seysine in any land to which the advowson could
pertain, and neither he who gave ib nor any ancestor of
his was ever in the seysine of presenting, although many
confirmations of chief lords and even of bishops had
intervened, because the donation was altogether null,
as if neither commenced nor completed. "Likewise to


72 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS,


fecta. Item ad hoc facit de termino P. anno regis H.
x. in eof Leyc. Assisa ultimse prssentationis inter
Walterum de Kedware & priorem de Sudledhe de ec-
clesia de Seyle, ubi dicitur quód predictus Walterus
nihil capere potuit, quia comes de Ferariis qui mane-
rium illud, ad quod advocatio illa pertinuit, dedit prze-
dicto Waltero antequam presentaret. Item ad hoe
facit de termino s. M. expressé anno regis H. ix. incipi-
ente x. in comitatu Eborü. Assisa ultime presenta-
tionis inter priorem de Lewes & Adam de "Novo Mer-
cato de ecclesia de Hecfenur, ubi sie: quód quidam
avus scilicet ipsius À. ex parte matris presentavit ad
ecclesiam, & postea dedit manerium cum advocatione
in maritagium eum quadam filia sua cuidam. Et ipse
" antequam ecclesia vacaret, terram ipsam cum advoca-
tione ulteriàs dederit in maritagiü cum quadam filia
ipsorum, nec adhuc vacaverit ecelesia tempore istorum,
sed tempore heredum suorum tunc primó vacaverit, &
predietus Adam tulib assisam ultimz preosentationis de
seysina &visul predicti primi donatoris, & per assisam
recuperaverii, non obstante donatione: quia primus
donatorius nunquam seysinam habuerit prsesentandi.


Car. VI.


1l. Non possunt omnes ad quos pertinet presesentatio
Cum qus agere de seysing propria vel antecessorum suorum in
summone- : : PAR à
atur quare Casibus precedentibus: unde illis qui nunquam prssen-
imPedit  taverint eàm ex quacunque causa acquirendi jus ei?
Britton, iv. competat presentandi, sive per judicium reeuperave-
€h.vi. ^ yint, quod nunquam habuerint vel habuerint ad vitam


vel imperpetuum ex causa donationis vel alio modo,


! Hacfeld, MS. Rawl. C. 159. | ?* eis," M8. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 73


the same effect is & case in Easter term in the tenth
year of king Henry, in the county of Leicester, an
assise of last presentation between Walter de Kedware
and the prior of Sudledhe, concerning the church of
Seyle, where it is said that the aforesaid Walter could
take nothing, because the earl of Ferrers, who had the
manor to which the advowson pertained, gave it to the
aforesaid Walter before he presented. Likewise to the
same effect expressly is & case in St. Michael's term in
the ninth and tenth of king Henry, in the county of
York. An assise of last presentation between the prior
of Lewes and Adam of Newmarket, concerning the
church of Hecfenur, where it was thus stated: that a
certain grandfather of the said Ádam on his mother's
side presented to the church, and afterwards gave the
manor with the advowson as a marriage portion with
& certain daughter of his to a certain person. And
before the church become vacant he further gave the land
with the advowson as & marriage portion to a daughter
of those very persons, and the church had not become
vacant during their time, but in the time of their heirs
it became for the first time vacant, and the aforesaid
Adam brought an assise of last presentation upon the
seysine of his aforesaid grandfather the first, donor, and
recovered by the assise, notwithstanding the donation,
because the first donatory never had the seysine of the
presentation.


CHAPTER VI.


It is not every one to whom & presentation may 1.
belong who can bring an action concerning his own Sey- peron is
sine or that of his ancestors in the preceding cases ;summoned
whence those, who have never presented, when from any M
cause of acquisition they are entitled to present, or if
they have recovered by & judgment what they had
never before or had only for life or for ever by reason of


& donation or in some other manner, are entitled to a


(4 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS,


f.247. competit remedium, si fuerint impediti quo minus pree-
sentare possent, per breve quod tale est.


2. Rex vic. salutem. Quia À. fecit nos securos de clam
oue un. &€. pone per vadium &e. ad respondendum eidem A.
pedit. quare impedit eundem A. presentare idoneam perso-

nam ad ecclesiam de M. cujus ecelesie advocationem
idem À. nuper in curia nostra eoram nobis vel coram
justieiariis nostris apud West, vel eoram justiciariis
nostris ad hoc constitutis recuperavit versus eundem
B. vel versus alium talem per assisam ultim:z preesen-
tationis inde inter eos captam, vel per judicium curis
nostre, vel alio quocunq, modo, unde idem 4À. queri-
tur q predictus B. injust& & contra coronam nostram
(vel) in contemptum curis» nostre eum inde impedit,
& habeas &c. |


E Et unde videndum est quid sit impedire, ut sciatur
d £t differentia inter breve Quare impedit, & Quare non
permittit. Impedire autem est ponere pedem in jus
alienum, quod quis habet in jure prssentandi, cum
quasi seysina, & jure quali quali, quia qui impedit
quo minüs quis uti possit seysin& sua, vel quasi im-
ponit pedem alteri juri &ec. Breve quare impedit. Et

ideó locum habet.


. 4 | fi autem nullam omninà habuerit talis presentator
DiüerenÜà soysingm vel quasi, eüm ex causa donationis vel ali-
impeditet unde competat ei jus prsesentandi ratione tenementi
pornitte- quod quis tenuerit ad vitam ex casu aliquo ratione
Britton, ib.dotis! per legem Angliw, vel firmario ratione firme,

vel creditori ratione pignoris, cüm nulla recesserit?
seysina vel quasi, ponere non potuit quis pedem in
jus vel quasi seysinam quam talis priàs no habuit.
Et ideó non habet locum Quare impedit, sed breve


! *ratione dotis! The law in | was probably written before that
respect of dower &nd advowsons | year.
underwent & change in 1259 (48 ? * precesserit," MS. Rawl C.
H. IIL), so that' this passage | 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 75


remedy, if they have been impeded from being able to f. 247.
present by a writ of this kind : |


The king to the viscount greeting. Since Á. has , 2.
given us security for his claim, &c., put under sureties, &c., o; Qui
[B.] to answer to the said A., why he impedes the said Impedit.
À. to present a suitable person to the church of M., the
advowson of. which church the said A. has recovered
lately in our court held before us or before our justiciaries
in Westminster, or before our justiciaries appointed for
that purpose, against the said B., or against some other
certain person, by an assise of last presentation held
between them or by & judgment of our court or in some
other way, whereupon the said AÁ. complains that the
said B. unjustly and against our crown [or] in contempt
of our court impedes him, and have, &e.


And thereupon we must see whatitis *toimpede" s.
that the difference may be known between a writ of Mei
* Quare impedit" and of "Quare non permittit" But pede"
*toimpede" is to place your foot on another's right,
which he has in the right of presenting with a kind of
seysine and right of some kind or other, because he who
impedes another from using his seysine, as i6 were places
his foot upon another's right, &c. . A writ Quareimpedit
has aecordingly place.


But if such à presentor has no seysine atallorasió 4.
were none, when because of & donation or for some other 2 rog
cause he is entitled to the right of presenting by rea- tweena
son of & tenement which he holds for life from some inedit »
cireumstance by reason of dower through the law of Eng- sand a
land, or as & lessee by reason of a lease, or as a creditor pomittic?"
by reason of a pledge, when no seysine or as it were
seysine has taken place, & person could not put his foot
upon a& right or a& kind of seysine which the said person
had not before. And therefore a '* Quare impedit" has


no place, but à writ * Quare non permittit ^ And the


5.
Breve,
quare non
permittit.


76 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRAESSENTATIONIS.


Quare non permittit. Et proprietarius non permittit
uti possidentem suo jure possessionis. Hsec est diffe-
rentia inter Quare impedit, & Quare non permittit.
Hsc dietio impedit componitur de in & pes pedis, &
unde revera ille impedit qui nititur intus pedem po-
nere in jus alienum, ubi nullum jus ei competit, nec
proprietatis nec possessionis: sed cüm aliquado jus
haberet illud totü transtulit ad alium quacunqg, de
causa, sed vel per judicium, cüm fort? aliquando utrü-
que haberet proprietatis & possessionis, jus possessionis
ex quacunq, eausa transtulit ad alium qui nondum
seysina usus est, & cum quis uti non permittat, com-
petit ei contra proprietarium breve Quare non per-
mittit, cum ratione proprietatis pedem habuerit impo-
situm.


Rex vic. salutem.  Prwcipe tali q juste & sine dila-
tione permittat talem presentare idoneam personà ad
ecclesiam talem qus vacat, & ad suam spectat dona-
tionem ut dicit, & unde queritur q predictus talis eum
injuste impedit. Et nisi fecerit, & idem talis fecerit te
securum &c. tunc suf &c. talem q sit coram justiciariis
nostris ad talem locum vel diem ostensurus quare non
fecerit, & habeas ibi suf &c. Et unde videtur qg fere
redit in idem breve Quare impedit, & Quare non per-
mittit. Si autem talis cüm sumonitus fuerit prima die
non veneri& nec se essoniaverit, aliquando (ante con-


ConeilLat, Cllium Lateranense ubi nullum eurrebat tempus contra


AR fol.
240


presentantes) solent impedientes attachiari per plegios
& meliores plegios, & tune solet omnis solennitas at-
tachiamentorü observari. Nunc autem ex causa &
necessitate, oportet maturiüs procedere, quia cüm illud
quod aliàs licitum non esset necessitas facit licitum,


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 74


proprietor does not admit & possessor to use his right of
possession, "This is the difference between & '* Quare
* impedit" and a ** Quare non permittit." "This expres-
Sion * impedit" is composed of ** in " and pes, pedis, and
hence in truth he impedes, who strives to place his foot
inside upon the right of another, when he has no right
either of property or of possession, but when he has had
sometime & right, he has transferred it altogether to
another for some cause or other, or even by & judgment,
when by chance he had sometime both rights of property
and of possession, he has transferred the right of possession
for some cause or other to another person who has not yet
used the seysine, and when a person does not permit
him to use it, he is entitled to & writ against the pro-
prietor of * Quare non permittit, when by reason of his
property he has his foot placed upon it.

The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin such a per- 5.
son that justly and without delay he permit so-and-so to vhs
present a suitable person to such a church which is vacant, does not
and belongs to his donation as he says, and whereof he s
complains that such aforesaid person unjustly impedes
him, And unless he does so and such aforesaid person has
given you security, &c., then. summon, &c. such person
that he be before our justiciaries at such a place and on
such a day to show why he has not done so, and have
there the summoner, &c, And hence it 1s seen that the
writ * quare impedit" and the writ ** quare non admisit "
nearly resolve themselves into the same, But if such a
person when he has been summoned has not come on
the first day, nor has essoined himself, sometimes (before
the Lateran Council when no time ran against the
presentors) the impeders are accustomed to be attached
by sureties and better sureties, and then all the
solemnity of attachments is accustomed to be ob-
served. But now from the cause and the necessity,
ib is incumbent to proceed more early, because since
necessity makes that allowable which otherwise was not


f. 247 b.


6.
Breve si
impediens


78 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS.
propter temporis cursum, primó distringatur impediens
sie, vel q vie. habeat corpus ejus vel quod distringat
eum per terras & catalla g manum non apponat vel q
faciat eum venire: ut de itinere W. de Ralegh in coii
Bed: de Huberto de Vallibus in principio rotuli: &
hoe provenit non per judicium sed per consilium curis
&d malitiam eorum reprimendam qui preesentationes
malitiosà impediüt ut tempus currat. Si autem ille
qui prwesentationem impediverit fuerit infrà statem,
nec habuerit per quod distringi poterit, tunc summo-
neatur ille in cujus manu fuerit & cujus consilio due-
tus, q sit & habeat tali die per tale breve.


Rex vie. salutem, | Summone &c. & ibi habeas B.
qui est infrà statem & in custodia sua, & ideó max-


fuerit infra imé q suo regitur consilio (ut dicitur) ad responden-


seetatem.


Fleta v. c.
26.


dum C. ut supra. Item videtur quibusdam qg advo-
catus semper sumonendus sit & non clericus, quia
clericus nihil clamat in advocatione. Sed revera viden-
dum erit utrum clericus impediat vel patronus, pote-
riti enim quilibet ipsoru impedimentum imponere! suo
lempore, patronus s. ante judicium, & ante jus? pre.
sentandi amiserit, preesentationem? de se fact»e post judi-
cium insistendo. Et unde clericus sumonendus erit
prineipaliter & incidentaliter patronus g sit ad osten-
dendum quid juris clamet in pr«esentatione q semel
amisit per judicium. ltem si patronus qui per judi-


Britton,i5, Clum amiserit vel cüm nullum jus ei copetat ad ec-


8 5.


clesiam non vacante * pressentaverit, et institutum sumo-
niri faciat, quare impediat presentare, respondere
poterit inprimis q ecclesia sive capella non vacat, quo


Reg. 9. E. XV. apparet, ubi legitur,


! * apponere," MS. Rawl. C. 159;
* et clericus post judicium, post-


* opponere," MSS. Glas. et Crewe.


? « antequam," MS. Rawl. id. et
Alia plura.

5 *prosentatione," MS. Rawl. id
sed vox * clericus," manifeste des;
deraturante vocem *presentatione."
Immo linea tota deficit que in M8.


* quam patronus suum jus pre sen-
** tandi amiserit, presentationi de
* ge factee post judicium insistendo."
See Introduction.

* ** vacantem," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 79


allowable on account of lapse of time, in the first place f.247 b.
let the impeder be distrained upon thus, either that the
viscount shall produce his body or shall distrain him by
his lands and chattels since he cannot lay his hands upon
him or make him come, as in the iter of William de
Ralegh in the county of Bedford, concerning Hubert
de Vallibus a£ the commencement of the roll, and this
is forthcoming not through & judgment but by the
counsel of the court to restrain the malice of those who.
malieiously impede presentations that the time may
expire. But if he who has impeded the presentation is
under age, and has nothing upon which a distress can be
levied, then let him in whose charge he is and by whose
counsel he is guided, be summoned, that he be present
and produce him on such a day by & writ of this kind: -


The king to the viscount greeting. Summon, &e. and 6€.
there produce B. who is under age and in his charge AL Titif
and therefore chiefly because he is governed by his pederis
counsel (as it is said) to answer to C. as above.  Lilo- "de" *&*.
wise ib seems to some that the advocate and not the
clerk is always to be summoned, because the clerk
claims nothing in the advowson, But in truth it is
to be seen whether the clerk or the patron impedes,
for each of them may raise an impediment at his own
time, the patron, to wit, before judgment and before he
has lost the right of presenting (and the clerk) by in-
sisting after the judgment upon the presentation made of
himself, and hence the clerk will have to be summoned
principally and incidentally the patron, that he be there
to show what right he claims in the presentation, which
he has once lost by the judgment. Likewise if the
patron, who has lost by the judgment or when he was
not entitled by any right, has presented to a church not
vacant, and has caused the clerk already instituted to be
summoned [to show] why he hinders him to present,
he may answer in the first place that the church or
chapel is not vacant, in which case the ordinary will


80 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS,


casu erit ordinarius consulendus, & seecundàüm mandatu
suü terminabit negotiü. Item dicere poterit g nihil
juris clamat in advocatione, nec aliquem impedit prz-
sentando, eüm ipse sit in possessione rei, & cüm ecclesia
vel eapella non vacet. Eodem modo respondere posset
patronus de non vacatione, si sumonitus esset quare
presentationem impediret tanquam ad ecclesiam vacan-
iem, càm non vacaret. Cüm autem impediens compa-
ruerit, docere poterit multipliciter q injust? non impe-
diverit, tum qui& tenet tenementum, ad q advocatio
pertinet, ex alia justa causa acquirendi imperpetuum,
vel ad tempus, sine alia exceptione cum advocatione
& cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, q quidem multiplici-
ter docere poterit per instrumenta, & aliis pluribus
modis, secundüm g superiüs ppendi poterit manifestó.
Ite impedit patronus sive advocatus advocatum juste
presentantem multis modis, injuste, ut si contra factum
pprium vel antecessorum suorum qui jus suum psen-
tandi dederint vel remiserint presentanti, vel anteces-
soribus suis. ltem injusté si contra jus comune, ubi
quis habuerit tettum ad q ptinet advocatio, sine aliqua
exceptione, ad tempus, vel imperpetuum, vel pendente
lite donec discussum fuerit de jure, sive placitum fue-
rii de ipso tento cum ptinentiis sive tantum de ipsa
advocatione. ltem injusté, si contra ea qu: rite acta
sunt in curia dni regis p judicium vel eoneordiam &
finem factu. Item gravare poterit & vexare clericus
elerieum injusté post presentationem à suo patrono
evietam instituendum vel jam institutum, ad irritan-
dum e& qui in curia regis rit? acta sunt, & quibus
casibus ad auxilium regis erit recurrendum. Item po-


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 8l


have to be consulted, and according to his mandate the
business will be.terminated. Likewise he may say that.
he claims no right in the advowson, nor does he impede
by presenting any one, when he is himself in pos-
session of the thing, and when the church or chapelis
nob vacant. In the same way the patron may answer
as to there being no vacancy, if he should have been
summoned why he impedes the presentation as if to &
vacant chureh, when it is not vacant. But when the
impeder has appeared he may show in manifold ways
that he has not unjustly impeded, as well because he
holds the tenement to which the advowson appertains
or from some other just cause of acquisition in perpetuity
or for a time, without any exception, with the advowson
and with all its appurtenanees, which indeed he may
prove in manifold ways by instruments and in several
other ways, aecording to what may be above under-
Stood manifestly. Likewise a patron or an advocate
impedes an advocate justly presenting in many ways,
unjustly, as if against his own act or the act of his
ancestors who gave or remitted to the presentor or his
ancestors their own right of presenting, Likewise un-
justly, if against the common law, when one has had a
tenement to which an advowson pertains, without any -
excepion, for a time or in perpetuity or pending a law-
suit until the right has been decided after discussion or
& plea has 'been heard concerning the tenement itself
with its appurtenances or only concerning the advow-
son, Likewise unjustly, if against what has been duly
settled in the court of the lord the king by & judgment
or an accord or a fine raised. Likewise & clerk may
aggrieve and harass unjustly a clerk who is to be insti-
tuted or has been already instituted, after à presentation
evieted by his patron, in order to render void those
things which have been duly performed in the court
of the king, and in which cases recourse must be had
io ihe aid of the king. Likewise & bishop may pend-
Q 1302. (F


82 DE ASSISA ULTIM;E PRAESENTATIONIS.


terit episcopus pendente lit? ante lapsum sex mensium

f.248. ecclesiam injusté incumbrare, & ideó fieri deberet inhi-
bitio ne ineumbraret, vel ne clericum admittet ad prz-
sentationem alicujus, donec placitum in curia dii regis
fuerit terminatum : et maximé ante lapsum sex men-
sium, ut si assis& ultim: preesentationis arramata fue-
rit inter aliquos duos vel alios plures, vel placitum
Quare impedit, vel placitum super recto simul & semel,
vel aliquod istorum p se, non poterit ordinarius ali-
quem admittere ad prsesentationem  alieujus partis,
donec placita fuerint terminata, & si càüm super jure
fiat contentio et sciri non possit quis eorum ultimó
presentaverit, si autem constiterit de ultima przsen-
tatione, tunc fiat placitum de ipso jure, si ille qui in
possessione fuerit presentandi presentaverit, tenetur
episcopus clericum admittere non obstante aliqua inhi-
bitione. Et si contentio inde habeatur, procedat assisa
ultime preessentationis, nec impediri debet propter pla-
citum super ipso jure, nec etiam propter placita qualia-
cunque.


Car. VII.


1. à; :
Formabre. Cum quis seysinam suam recuperaverit per assisam,
Mir statim habeat breve ad episcopum de admittendo ido-
reenpera- neam personam ad presentationem suam in hac forma.
tam.


" 2. . Rex venerabili in Christo patri A. eadem gratia
scopo vai Londoi episcopo salutem. Sciatis q talis A. prior in


Md d curia nostra corü justiciariis nostris apud talem locum,
Ingen-
dum. cum recuperaverit Seysinam suam de advocatione talis ec-


quis seysi- elesige (vel sic & melius ut videtur) scilicet, seysinam
nam recue


peraverit preesentationis surge ad talem ecclesiam versus talem p
En ea assisam ultime presentationis inde ibi inter eos capti.
presenta Et ideó vobis' mandamus, q ad presentationem ipsius


tonis. prioris idonea psonà ad eandé ecclesiam | admittatis.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 88


ing & suit unjustly incumber the church before the
lapse of six months, and therefore an inhibition ought f 248.
to issue that he should not incumber it, nor should
admit a clerk at the presentation of any one, until the
plea in the court of the king has been terminated: and
chiefly before the lapse of six months, as if an assise of
las& presentation has been instituted between two or
more persons, or & plea of Quare impedit or a plea of
right together and at the same time, or any of such
pleas by itself, the ordinary will not be able to admit
any one to the presentation of any part, until the pleas
have been terminated, and if when there 1s à contention
about ihe right and it cannot be known who last pre-
sented, if "indeed it has been established concerning the
last presentation, and then the plea of right is raised,
if he who has been in the possession of the presentation
has presented, the bishop is bound to admit notwith-
standing any inhibition. And if à contention thereupon
is raised, let an assise of last presentation proceed, nor
ought it to be impeded on aecount of the plea about.
the right itself, nor on account of any other pleas what-
ever.


CHAPTER VII.


When a person has recovered his seysine by an assise, The frm

. let him have immediately to the bishop a writ to admit hd

& fit person to his presentation in the following form: aedi of
The king to the venerable father in Christ A. by the . 2.

same grace bishop of London greeting. Know ye that a Mira

certain À. prior has in our court, before our justiciaries to the

at such a place, recovered his seysine of the advowson of er did


such & chureh (or thus as it seems better) the seysine of beso AR
his presentation to such & church against so-and-so by an See vatód


assise of last presentation thereupon held there between éeyPihe Dy
them. And therefore we command you that upon the oflast pre-
presentation of that prior you admit a fit person to that Sentation.


F2


84 DE ASSISA ULTIMA PRAESENTATIONIS.


Teste &e. Si veró contingit q recordu debeat in brevi
comprehendi, tune dicatur sie. Rex tali episcopo sa-
lutem.  Seiatis g càm assis& ultime presentationis
sumonita esset in curia nostra cora justiciariis nostris
&c. inter À. querenté et B. deforc. quis advocatus te-
pore pacis presentavit ultim& persona que mortua est
ad tale ecclesiam, recognitum fuit in eadem curia nos-
ira coram eisdem justiciarüis nostris p eande assisam,
q predictus B. presentavit clerieum suum ad eandé
ecclesiam, qui ultimó obiit psona in eade ad presenta-
tione ipsius B., & ideó vobis mandamus quód ad pre-
sentationem predieti B. idoneam personam ad eandem
ecclesiam | admittatis. Teste &c. Si veró quis recu-
peraverit presentationem suam p breve Quare impedit,
vel Quare no pmittió; tunc fiat breve episcopo in hae
forma.


f.248*. Rex tali episcopo salutem. — Sciatis q A. in curia
es 3. — nostra coram &c. per judicium ejusdem curie nostre
quod epi. recuperaverit seysinam suam versus talem de advoca-
adita, Catone talis ecclesie. . Vel sic: recuperavit psentatio-
clericum nem suam ad talem ecclesiam versus talem. Et ideo
son ob-,o VODiS mandamus q non obstante reclamatione ipsius
lamatione B., ad pressentationem ipsius À. idoneam personam ad
aid Peri" eandem ecclesid admittatis. Teste &c. Item si altera

partium per concordiam presentationem retinuerit, sive
sumonitus fuerit ad assisà Quis advocatus, vel ad breve
Quare impedit, vel ad breve Quare non permittit, tunc
fiat tale breve. Rex tali episcopo salut. Sciatis q cu
assisa ultims pressetationis sumonita esset in curia
nostra eoram &c. inter À. querentem & B. impediente
Quis advocatus &ce. ut supra vel sic: ad breve Quare
impedit, vel Quare non permittit. Sciatis q cüm A,
sumonitus esset in curi& nostra coram &c. ad respon-
dendum B. quare impedivit eum injusté presentare
idoneam personam ad ecclesiam de tali loco quse vacat


OF ÀN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 85


church. Witness &e. But if it happens that the record
ought to be comprised in the writ, then let it be said
ihus: The king to such & bishop greeting. Know ye
that when an assise of last presentation has been sum-
moned in our court before our justiciaries &e. between
Á.as plaintiff and B.as disturber, as to what advocate
in time of peace presented the last parson, who is dead,
to that church, it was recognised in the same court of
ours before the said justiciaries by the same assise, that
the aforesaid B. presented his clerk to the same church,
who was the last parson who died in the same at the
presentation of the said B., and therefore we command
you that you admit to the same church a fit person at
the presentation of the aforesaid B. Witness &c. But
if & person has recovered his presentation by a writ of
Quare impedit, or of Quare non permittit, then let a writ
issue to the bishop in this form:


The king. to such a bishop greeting. Know ye that f.248b.-
À. in our court has recovered his seysine against so-and- , 9:4.
so concerning the advowson of such & church. Or thus: the bishop
has recovered his presentation to such a church against *dmita |
so-and-so; and therefore we command you that, not- withstand-
 withstanding the reclamation of B. you admit upon the GE o.
presentation of A. & fit person to that church. Witness but bya
&c. Likewise if one of the parties has retained the jugement
presentation by an accord, or has been summoned to an
assise of Who is the advocate, or to & writ of Quare
impedit, or to & writ of Quare non permittit, then let
there be such & writ: The king to such a bishop greet-
ing. Know ye that when an assise of last presentation
has been summoned in our court before &c. between A.
complaining and B. impeding Who is the advocate &c.
as above ; or thus to the writ Quare impedit or Quare non
permittit: Know ye that when À. has been summoned -
in our eourt before &c. to answer to B. wherefore he un-
justly impeded him in presenting a fit person to the church
of such a place which is vacant, and of' which the said A.


S6 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS.


& cujus advocatione sive preesentationem idem B. dieit
ad se pertinere tali ratione. Idem A. venit in curia
nostra eadem coram prefatis justiciarlis nostris & re-
cognovit & concessit eidem B. presentationé suam ad
predictam ecclesiam. Vel sic: recognovit presentatio-
nem vel advocationem illi? eeclesiz& esse jus ipsius B.
& illam remisit & quietum clamavit &c. Et ideó vo-
bis mandamus q ad psentationem ipsius B. ad eandem
ecclesiam idoneam psonam admittatis. "Teste &c. Et
sciendum g si de vacatione unius ecclesie diversa
brevia à diversis impetrantur, coram uno justiciario, &
diversimodé terminentur & per diversa judicia, ut si
unus recuperaverit p assisam, & alius nihil capere
possit p breve Quare impedit, vel Quare non pmittit,
vel quida psentationi consentiant, vel quidam nihil
clamant in psentatione nomine suo sed alieno, & qui
psentationi consentiant. ltem si assisa capta fuerit p
defaltà & hujusmodi, oportet de omnibus placitis in
" brevi g episcopo dirigit facere mentionem, ut supra
videri poterit pauló ante p exemplum. Queritur au-
tem inter cctera, quare in brevi de admittendo cleri-
cum post captionem assise ultims presentationis in
modum assise, non contineat h:we clausula (non ob-
state reclamatione talis) sicut continet in brevi q mitti
debet ad episcopu, postqua quis recuperaverit psenta-
tionem suam p breve Quare impedit, vel Quare no
pmittit: responderi poterit et sufficienter q breve Quare
impedit, & Quare non pmittit; in se continet certas
psonas & determinatas, inter quas vertit contentio, &
inter quas stare possit judieium q non est in assisa
ultime psentationis, da licet ibi sint certze psonse inter
quas vertit contentio, assisa tamen facit p quolibet de
populo tam p absente quàm p psente, et tà p nó no-
minato in brevi, quàm p nominato ppter virtutem


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 87


says that the advowson or the presentation belongs to
him for such reason. The said A. came in our said court
before our aforesaid justiciaries, and acknowledged and
conceded to the said B. his presentation to the said
church. Or thus: acknowledged that the presentation
or the advowson of the said church was the right of B.
and remitted it and quit-elaimed &e.; and therefore we
command you that upon the presentation of the said B.
you admit & fit person to the said church. "Witness &c.
And it is to be known, that if concerning the vacancy of
one church divers writs are sued out by divers persons
before one justiciary and are terminated in divers man-


ners and by divers judgments, as if one has recovered by


an assise and another can take nothing by a writ of
Quare impedit or of Quare non permittit, or some consent
to a presentation, or some claim nothing in the presenta-
tion in their own name but in another's name, and who
consent to the presentation. Likewise if an assise has
been held by default and of this kind, it is incumbent
to make mention of all the pleas in the writ which is
directed to the bishop, as may be seen a little before by
an example. But it is asked, amongst other things,
wherefore in à writ concerning the admission of a clerk
after the holding of an assise of last presentation in the
manner of an assise this clause, *notwithstanding the
* reclamation of so-and-so," is not contained, as it is con-
tained in the writ which ought to be sent to the bishop,
after & person has recovered his presentation by & writ
of Quare impedit or of Quare non permittit: i6 may
be answered and sufficiently that & writ of Quare im-
pedit and of Quare non permittit contains in itself
certain and determinate persons, between whom the con-
tention turns and between whom the judgment may stand,
which is not so in an assise of last presentation, because
although there are there certain persons between whom
the contention turns, the assise nevertheless makes for
any one of the people as well absent as present, as well
for any one not named in the writ as for one named in


f. 249.


4.
Ubi sunt
participes


88 DE ASSISA ULTIME PRJESENTATIONIS.


hujusmodi dictionis (quis) qus distributiva est, & cer-
tas psonas non complectit. Et unde non sufficeret
dicere (non obstante reclamatione talis nominati in
brevi) eü possit reclamare alius quicunq, nó nominatus
si assis& faceret p eo. Sed esto q assisa non sit capta
in modum assise sed in modü jurate, ut si dno ap-
ponet charta, vel conventio, vel conditio, vel hiodi,
tune dicat, non obstante reclamatione talis qa no dicit
indeterminate quis advocatus, ut probat in rotulo de
termino s. T. & s. M. ano regis H. 3. incipiente 4.
in eofi Oxoü inter Robertu de Harpd. et Reginaldü
de Albo monasterio.  Assisa ultime presentationis, de
ecclesia de Harpd. et ita fieri debet (ut videtur) in
quolibet judicio ubi assisa nó capit in modü assise.
Item poterit esse alia forma concordie, ubi contentio
fuerit p assisam inter plures unu jus habetes quasi unus
heres, p assisam ultime psentationis, vel p breve Quare .
impedit, vel Quare non permittit, Si unus ex pluri-
bus consentire voluerit! remanebit presentatio, et epi-
seopus eeclesie providebit, nec poterit sibi vendicare
privilegium, ztas, nec dignitas, nec psonarum plurali.
ias, quia &ut omnes cosentiant aut nullus.  Consen-
tire tamen possunt multipliciter, & formetur breve
semper secundüm formà consensus, consentire enim
poterit unus ex pluribus tali modo, s. q nunquam con-
sentiet in clerieü quem participes psentaverint priüs,
sed libenter in alium consentiet quà? ipsi participes
sui eligent & presentabunt, & tune fiat breve in hac
forma.


Rex tali episcopo salute. Sciatis q ecüm A. sumoni-
tus esset in curia nostra coram &c. ad respondendum
. & C. uxori sue, quare ipse impedivit eos presentare


1 * noluerit? MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ? *quem," MS. id.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 89


it, on the strength of this expression (any one), which is
distributive and does not comprise only certain persons;
and hence it would not be sufficient to say (notwith-
standing the reclamation of such a person named in the
writ) when somebody else may reclaim, who. is not
. named, if the assise should make for him. But let it be
ihat the assise has not been held in the manner of an
assise, but in the manner of a jury, as if a charter, or à
convention, or & condition, or something of that kind, be
opposed to the lord, then let it be said, notwithstand-
ing the reclamation of so-and-so, because i6 does not say -
indeterminately what advocate, as is proved on the
roll of Trinity term and Michaelmas term in the third f. 249.
and fourth year of king Henry, in the county of Oxford,
between Robert de Harpdown and Reginald of the White
Monastery, an assise of last presentation concerning the
church of Harpdown, and so it ought to be (as it seems)
in any judgment where an assise is not held in the man-
ner of an assise. Likewise there may be another form
of an accord where there has been a contention by an
assise bebween several persons having one right, as if a
single heir, by an assise of last presentation, or by a writ
of Quare impedit or of Quare non permittit: if one out of
several is unwilling to consent, the presentation shall be
stayed, and the bishop shall provide for the church ; nor
can any thing claim for itself a privilege, neither age,
nor dignity, nor plurality of persons, because all must
consent or none. But they may consent in manifold
. ways, and the writ may always be shaped according to
the form of the consent, for one out of several may con-
sent in such manner, to wit, that he will never consent to
the elerk whom his partners have previously presented,
but he will willingly consent to any other, whom his.
partners shall choose and shall present, and then let the -
writ be drawn in this form:


The king to such & bishop greeting. Know ye that


4.
when À. has been summoned into our court before &c., bun a"


to answer to B. and C. his wife, why he impeded them partners in


in presen-
tatione.


5.
Breve de
quatuor
sovoribus

uarum


q
duc habent ,


virum et
due non.


90 DE ASSISA ULTIME PRJESENTATIONIS.


idonea personà ad ecclesiam talem, que vacat, & cujus
eeclesi:;e. advoceationis ipsi B. & C. petüt duas partes.
Ide A. venit in eadem curia nostra, & dixit g justé
impedivit, quia jus psentandi ad tertiam ptem  ptinet
ad ipsum, eo q pticeps predictorum B. & C. Adjecit
etiam g nunquam in clericum que ipsi B. & C. pre-
sentaverant consentire, eo q ipse minus idoneus fuit
ub dicebat, in aliu. tamen à primo ab eisdem B. & C.
presentatu (du tamen idoneus esset) consentiret. Et
ideó vobis mandamus, q si predicti B. & C. in una
persona idonea consenserint, & illa vobis simul cum
predieto A. comuniter presentaverit, tune ad presen-
tationé eorü omnium psona illa ad eandem ecclesiam
admittatis. Si aute in pson& talem idem À. consentire
noluerit: ut covenit, tunc (non obstante reclamatione
ipsius À.) ad presentationc ipsoru B. & C. idoneam
persona quà ipsi elegerint, ad eandeé ecclesiam admit-
tatis. Teste &c. Eodé modo fiat de pluribus partici-
pibus si eósenserint de psentando alternis vicibus suc-
cessivé, & inseratur in brevi tota forma concordise. Si
quatuor sorores participes, quarum duse viros habeat &
du: non, simul cum viris petierint seysinam presen-
tanti! versus aliquos, & per assisam recupaverint, tunc
fiat breve epo in hac forma.


Rex tali epo salute, Sciatis q A. & B. uxor ejus
C. & D. uxor ejus E. & F. sorores ipsaru B. & D. in
curia nostra &e. recuperaverüt seysinam presentationis
suze versus S. & G. p assisam ultime presentationis
inde ibi inter eos capta presentib? H. & I. simul cü
predicto G. cotra assisam illà, et cocedentib? iisdé A.


! * priesentandi," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 91


in presenting à fit person to such & church, which is the presen-
vacant, and of the advowson of which church B. and ation.
C. claim two parts. The same À. came into our court
and said that he rightfully impeded them, because the |
right of presenting to the third part pertains to him,

" inasmuch as he is à parcener with the aforesaid B.
and C. He added also that he would never consent
to the clerk whom B. and C. had presented, inasmuch
as he was not fit, as he said, nevertheless he would
consent to another from the first if presented by the
said B. and C. (provided however he was fit) And
therefore we command you, that if the aforesaid B.
and. C. shall consent to the same fit person, and shall
have presented him to you, in common with the said
À., then upon the presentation of all of them you
admit that person to the church. But if the said A.
shàll be unwilling to consent to such a person, accord-
ing a8 i& has been agreed, then (notwithstanding the
reclamation of the said À.) you should admit upon the
presentation of the said B. and C. a fit person, whom
they may have chosen, to the said church. — Witness, &c.
In the same way let it be done with several parceners,
if they have consented to present in alternative turns
suecessively, and let there be inserted in the writ the
whole form of the aecord. If four 'sisters who are
parceners, of whom two have husbands and two have
not, have claimed together with the husbands seysine
of the presentation against certain persons, and have
recovered by an assise, then let a writ issue to the
bishop in this form :


The king to such & bishop greeting. Know ye that
A. and B. his wife, C. and D. his wife, E. and F. tho A wit
sisters of B. and D.,in our court, &c, have recovered four e]
seysine of their presentation against S. and G. through of whom
an assise of last presentation there held between them, hisbends
H. and L. being present together with the aforesaid Q,, "nd two


against that assise, and conceding to the said A. and


f. 249 b.


6.
Breve 81
concordia
fiat.


902 DE ASSISA ULTIME PRJESENTATIONIS.


& B. C. & D. E. & F. presentatione sua ad eade ec-
clesia, et ideó vobis mandam? q ad presentationé prz-
dictorü A. & C. ratione predictorü B. & D. uxorü
suorü & ad psetatione predictoru E. & F. idonea psona
ad eandé ecelesià a&dmittatis Si auté post assisam
capta covenerib int ptes p cocordia de aliqua pésioe
augeda de gratia et ordinatioe epi, tüc fiat breve in
hae forma.


Rex tali epo vel ejus officiali salute.  Seiatis q post
assisa ultie psétationis capta int A. querete et B. ipe-
diete de tali ecclesia p justiciarios nostros ad hoc assig-
natos p peeptü nfm, coveit inter eosde A. & B. in curia
nostra corá nobis de eadem ecclesia, s. q przedict? B.
recognovit advocationem illius ecclesie esse jus ipsius
A. salva tü eidem B. abbati vel priori & successori-
bus suis quadam annua portione vi marcarü quàm
idem B. & predecessores sul inde percipere consueve-
runt, et quàm predictus À. eidem B. recognovit ut
idem B. dicit, e& quam etiam idem A. augeri desiderat
usq ad C. s. si predictus B. hec (salva honestate epi-
scopi) de gratia possit obtinere. Et ideó vobis man-
damus (g non obstante reclamatione ejusdem B.) ad
presentationem ipsius A. idoneam personam ad eandem
ecclesiam admittatis. Salva tamen eidem B. dieta
portione sex marearum ceü augmentatione predicta, si
illam de gratia vestra & cum honestate possit obti-
nere, Si quis per judicium recuperet presentationem
ratione firme quàm habuerit de aliquo manerio cum
omnibus pertinentiis suis, nulla faeta exceptione, tune
fiat breve episcopo in hac forma.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 98


B., C. and D., E. and F. their presentation to the said
church, and therefore we command you that upon the
presentation of A. and C. in regard of B. and D. their
wives, and upon the presentation of the aforesaid E.
and E, you admit & fit person into the church. But
if after the holding of the assise it has been agreed
amongst the parties by an accord concerning the in-
erease of any pension of favour and by the ordinance
of the bishop, then let à writ issue in this form :


The king to such a bishop or his official greeting. f 249 v.

Know ye that after holding an assise of last presenta- x A T
tion between ÀÁ. the plaintiff and B. the impeder con- an accord
cerning such a church by our justieiaries assigned to be made.
that purpose by our precepit, ib was agreed between the
said À. and B.in our court before us concerning the
said ehurch, to wit, that the aforesaid B. acknowledged
that the advowson of that church was the right of
the said A.,saving however to the said B. the abbot
or prior and his successors à certàin annual portion of
six marks; which the said B. and his predecessors have
been aecustomed to receive therefrom, and which the
aforesaid .À. acknowledged to the said B. as the said
B. says, and which also the said A. desires to increase
up to & hundred shillings, if the aforesaid B. can
(saving the honesty of the bishop) obtain this by favour.
And therefore we command (that notwithstanding the
reclamation of the same B.) you admit a fit parson to
the said church on the presentation of the said A.
Saving however to the said B. the said portion of
six marks with the aforesaid augmentation, if he can
. obtain this of your favour and with honesty. If any
one recovers by a judgment a presentation by reason
of & lease which he had of a certain manor with all
its appurtenances, no exception having been made, then
let à writ issue to the bishop in this form:  .


..


94 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRAESENTATIONIS.


in Rex tali episcopo salutem. Seiatis q À. in curia

Pru. nostra coram justielariis nostris &c. per consideratio-

raione — nem ejusdem curie nostre recuperavit seysinam pre-

frm*. ^ sentationis sus ad talem ecclesiam, versus B. e& r&-
tione q predictus A. habet manerium de N. ad firmam
de predieto B. eum omnibus suis pertinentiis, nulla
facta exceptione, vel quibusdam specialiter exceptis,
nulla tamen mentione facta de advocatione, sicut patet
manifest? per chartam ipsius B. quam idem A.in ea-
dem curia nostra, eoram eisdem justiciariis nostris
ostendit, & etiam quam idem B. in eadem curia recog-
novit. Et ideó vobis mandamus (quód non obstate
reclamatione ipsius B.) ad prwesentationem predicti A.
ratione prsediete firms (secundüm q  predietu est) .
idoneam psonà ad eandem ecclesiam admittatis. T. &c.
Si minor infrà statem assisam portaverit, & proferan-
tur eontra ipsum charte antecessorum suorum ad quas
ipse infrà zetatem respondere non possit, vel si aliquis
contra ipsum proferat breve Quare impedit, & chartam
exhibeat in judicio ad quam respondere non possit
minor, et ita q de necessitate oporteat placitum rema-
nere usq, ad etatem, proviso tamen q ei qui est infrà
cetatem nihil juris depereat, & ita q de consilio curie
eligant partes clericum, et comuniter prrsentent, reser-
vata tamen quadam minima pensione (ut superius
dictum est) eat breve ordinario loci in hac forma.


8. Rex tali episcopo salutem.  Seiatis q càm À. qui


Breve de ost infrà setatem in curia nostra cora justiciarlis nos-
admittendo , , . : :
elerico, ubi iris &e. peteret versus B. advocationem talis ecclesise


pM per assisam ultimze presentationis ibi inter eos suino-


elerieum  nitam, & tandem convenit inter eos q ipsi idoneam


Lum personam comuniter prwsentarent ad eandem ecclesiam,
?


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 95


The king io such a bishop greeting Know ye 7.
that A. in our court before our justieiaries, &c., by the na a
opinion of our said court has recovered seysine of his by reason
presentation to such & church against B. on these 9f? lese
grounds that the aforesaid À. has the manor of N.

upon à lease from the aforesaid B. with all its appurte-
nances, no exception having been made, or certain
special exceptions only having been made, no mention
having been made of the advowson, as is evident clearly

by the charter of the said B. which the said À. showed

in the said court of ours before our said justiciaries,

and which also the said B. acknowledged in the same

court. And therefore we command you that (notwith-
standing the reclamation of the said B.) you admit a

fi& parson to the said church upon the presentation of

the said À. by reason of the aforesaid lease (according

to what has been said above). Witness, &c. If 8 minor

under age has brought an assise and there are produced
against him the charters of his ancestors to which he
himself being under age cannot make answer, or if any

one brings against him a writ of quare 4mped4t and
exhibits a charter in judgment to which a minor cannot

make answer, and so that of necessity it is ineumbent

ihat the plea should be stayed until he comes of full

age, provided however that he who is under age lose
nothing of his right, and so that with the advice of

the eourt the parties should elect & clerk and present

him in eommon, reserving however some very small
pension (as said above), let & writ go to the ordinary

in this form :


The king to sueh a bishop greeting. Know ye that — &.
when À. who is under age claimed in our court before A. VTit to
our justieiaries, &c., against B. the advowson of such clerk,

a church by an assise of last presentation there sum- hero the
moned between them, and it was at length agreed sgreo upon
between them that they should in common present a eeu df


fit person to the said church saving to each his right, 4 minor,


qui non
potest ad
chartas


respondere.


Alia forma
de eodem.


f. 250.


06 DE ASSISA ULTIMJZE PRZESENTATIONIS,


salvo jure utriusq eorum, cüm idem A. qui nune est
infrà zetalem pervenerit ad zetatem. Et ideó vobis
mandamus, q ad presentationem ipsorum À. & B. salvo
jure utriusq, ipsorum, càüm idem À. ad statem perve-
nerit (secüdüm qg predietum est) idoneam personam
ad eandem ecclesiam admittatis. TT. &c.


Rex tali episcopo salutem. Sciatis q càm A. custos
fili & hsredis B. sumonitus esset in curia nostra
coram justieiariis nostris &e. ad respondendü tali ab-
bati Quare impedivit eundem abbatem presentare ido-
neam personà ad ecclesiam de N. qus vacat, et cujus
eeclesi:e advocationem idem 4A. dicebat ad se pertinere
ratione dicti heredis : ipse abbas venit in curia eadem,
et ostendit chàrtas antecessoris talis dieti heredis, p
quas dicebat jus advocationis ejusdem ecclesi: ad se
plinere. Tandem veró convenit inter eosdem abbatem
& A. de comuni consensu q ipsi comuniter inter eos
clerieum eligant, & eundem vobis prsesentent, salvo
tamen unieuig ipsorum abbatis et hwredis jure suo
imposterum, tam super possessione q super pprietate,
& it& q neutri ipsorum aliquid juris depereat, posses-
sionis vel pprietatis, càm predictus hsres ad hesredita-
tem pervenerit. Et ideó vobis mandamus q ad presen-
tationem przdietorum abbatis et A. idoneam personam
ad eandem ecclesiam admittatis, salvo jure cujuslibet,
cüm predictus hzeres ad statem pvenerit, secundàm q
predictum est. "Teste, &c. Et q de comuni consensu
eligi debet clericus et comuniter prseesentari propter
minorem setate hseredis, habetis de termino S. Michae-
lis; anno regis H. 14 incipiente 15. in cof Derby,
assisa ultime  presentationis de ecclesi& de Eltdene.
Item aliud breve de eadem materia, ubi preesentatur
clerieus de communi consensu eorum qui sunt plenz
setatis, ubi placitum fuit per breve de recto.


ON AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 97


when the said À. who is now under age has arrived at who can-
full age. And therefore we command that upon the "i ME
presentation.of the said A. and B. saving the right of

each of them, when the said À.shall arrive at full age
(aecording to what has been said above), you admit a

fit person to the same chureh. Witness, &c.

The king to such & bishop greeting. Know ye that , 9.
when À. the guardian of the son and heir of B. had 20e
been summoned into our court before our justiciaries, the same.
&c., to answer to abbot so-and-so why he impeded the
said abbot to present a fit person to the church of N,
which is vaeant, and of which church the said A.said  f.250.
that the advowson belongs to him by reason of the said
heir. "The said abbot came into the said court and
showed the charters of the ancestor of the said heir, by
which he said that the right of the advowson of the
said church belongs to him. At length however it
was agreed between the said abbot and A. that with
their common consent they should choose a clerk in
common between them and should present the same to
you, saving however to each of them the abbot and the
heir his right for the future as well to the possession as
to the property, when the heir aforesaid shall have
attained full age. And therefore we command you that
upon the presentation of the aforessid abbot and A.
you admit & fit person to the said church, saving the
right of each, when the aforesaid heir shall have arrived
atfullage as aforesaid. Witness, &c. And that a clerk
ought to be chosen with their common consent, and be
presented in common on aecount of the minority of the
heir, you have & case in St. Michael's term in the 14th
and 15th years of king Henry in the county of Derby,
an assise of last presentation concerning the church of
Eltdene. Likewise another writ on the same matter
where & elerk is presented with the common eonsent of
those who are of full age, where there has been a plea
by writ of right.

Q 1302. a


Bayerischo —
Staatsbiblio:nek


München


98 | DE ASSISA ULTIMA PRJESENTATIONIS,


10. Rex tali episcopo salutem. Sciatis q convenit in
Decli^? curia nostra coram justiciariis &c. inter A. petentem


do,ubi quis & B. deforciantem de advoeatione ecclesi;o. de N. cum
disnueit pertinentiis, unde placitum fuit inter eos in eadem
munias- curia, scilicet q- preedieti A. & B. idoneam personam


sensu plu-

rium,qui ligant ad ipsum & eandé! ecclesiam unanimiter pre-

sunt t plene sentent, salvo jure cujuslibet. Et ideó vobis mandamus

is q ad prsesentationem ipsorum À. & B. (salvo jure
eujuslibet seeundüm q predictum est) idoneam psonam
ad eandem ecclesiam admittatis. Teste &c. ltem re-
tenta prima forma, si sit tertius qui remittat jus suum
de eadem ecclesia, tunc primó dicatur sub una et eadem
forma brevis, scilicet.


1. | Rex &e Sciatis q ita convenit in curia nostra coram
Breve ub &e, inter A. petentem & B. deforeiantem de advoca-
mititjus tione talis ecclesie, unde placitum fuit inter eos &e., s.
igi q predictus A. remiserit & quiet elamaverit D. ét
participi- hzeredibus suis? ipsi B. et hseredibus suis totum jus &


Brei: clameum &ec. Convenit etiam iter eundem A. petente
in eundem. & C. deforceantem de advocatione pdict ecclesise cum per-
tinentiis, & unde placit fuit inter eos &c., s. q predicti
À. & C. idoneam personam eligant comuniter &c. ut
supra, Et ideó vobis mandamus (q non obstante re-
clamatione ipsius B.) ad presentationem ipsorum A. &
C. (salvo jure cujuslibet ut predictum est) idoneam
personam ad eandem ecclesiam admittatis. "Teste &oc.
Si quis impedimentum apposuerit presentanti, qui est
in seysina manerii qualitercunq, ad quod ptinet advo-
catio, & similiter psentat clericum ea ratione, quia dicit
se jus habere in manerio, & cu assisa ultimse prwsen-


! * eligant et ipsum ad eandem," ? « D), et heredibus suis," omitted
MS. Rawl. C. 160. M.S. Reg. 9. E. xv.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 99.


The king to such an one greeting. Know ye that it 10.
was agreed in our court before our justieiaries, &e., ipie
between A. as plaintiff and B. deforcing him from the admission
advowson of the church of N. with its appurtenances, sies lerk,
whence it was pleaded between them in the same court, Person is
to wit, that the aforesaid A. and B. should choose a fit ccn
person and present him unanimously to the said chure Mecha
saving the right of each. And therefore we command of several
you that upon the presentation of the said A. and B. ho are of
(saving the right of each as aforesaid) you a&dmit & fit S
person to the same church. Witness, &c. Likewise the
first form having been retained, if there be à third party
who remits his right to the same church, then let it be
said in the first place under the same form of the writ,


io wit:


The king, &c. Know ye that it has been so agreed 11.
in our court before &c, between A. the plaintiff and A writ
B. the deforeer, concerning the advowson of such a remits his
chureh, whereof there was & plea between them, &c., iced
to wit, that the said À. has remitted and quit-elaimed out of four
to the said B. and his heirs all the right and claim, PUT erers,
&c. It is also agreed between the said A. the plaintiff agree upon
and C. the deforeer, concerning the advowson of the poron
aforessd church with its appurtenances, and whereof
there was & plea between them, &e., to wit, that the
aforesaid À. and C. should choose & fit person in com-
mon, &c. as above, And therefore we command you
that (notwithstanding the reclamation of the said B.) at
the presentation of the said A. and C. (saving the right
of each as aforesaid) you admit a fit person to the same
church. Witness  &c. 1f any one has raised an impe-
diment to the presentor, who is in seysine in any way
whatever of the manor, to which the advowson apper-
tains, and in like manner presents a clerk on the ground,
that he says that he has the right in the manor, and
when an assise of Jast presentation or à judgment makes |


a 2


Wet 1 EM TTG D. MEUS TUNES MS THEME ETE VIS oem


12.
Cum quis
preesenta-
vérit ad
ecclesiam,
antequam
recupera-
verit ma-
nerium, ad
quod per-
tinet ad-
vocatio.

f. 250 b.


13.
Si episco-
pus non
admiserit
clericum
ad manda
tum regis.


100 DE ASSISA ULTIME PRJESENTATIONIS.


tationis vel judicium faciat p eo qui est in seysina, fiet
epo breve in hace forma.


Rex tali epo salutem. — Ostensum est nobis ex parte
À. q cum ipse teneat tale manerium cum advocatione
ecclesiz;e & cum omnibus aliis pertinentis suis, & B.
qui manerium illud in curi& nostra &c. clamat ut jus
suum vobis clerieum suum psentaverit ea ratione, q
dicit se jus habere in manerio illo, licet nihil habeat
in seysing de eodem manerio, nec de aliquibus ejus-
dem manerii ptinentiis, sicub&, idem B. in cuf ní& nu-
per reeognoverit, psentationem dieti A. impedit &
injuste. Et quia constat nobis tum p recognitione
ipsius B. tu p hoc q petit maneriü illud ut jus suum
cum ptinentüs suis, q idem B. nullam habet inde
seysinam, vobis mandamus (q non obstante reclama-
tione ipsius B.) ad presentationem ipsius ÁÀ. idoneam
psonam ad eande ecclesiam  admittatis. Teste &c.
Quód si episcopus ad tale mandatum clericum preesen-
tatum minim? admiserit, fia& ei aliud breve in hae
forma.


Rex tali episcopo salutem. Satis recolimus vobis
alias dedisse in mandatis, q no obstante reclamatione
B. ad prssentationem A. idoneà psonam ad tale ec-
clesiam (qus vacat) admitteretis, cujus ecclesise advo-
cationem idem A. in curia nostra nuper recuperaverit
versus eunde B. p assisam ultime prssentationis &c.
p judicium ejusdem curie nostre. Et super hoc os-
lensum est nobis ex parte ipsius À. q idem B. prze-
sentationi ipsius À. impedimentum opposuit ea ratione,
q idem B. in curia nostra corà &ce. manerium illud
ad q advocatio illa ptinet clamat, ut jus suum, & quia
ide B. manerium illud adhuc nondum recuperavit, nec


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 101


for him who is in seysine, let there issue to the bishop &
writ in this form :


The king to such a bishop greeting. It has been 15.
shown to us on the part of A. that when he holds such aus
a manor with the advowson of the chureh and with &ll presented
its appurtenances, and B. who claims that manor in our ris d
court, &c. as his right, has presented to you his clerk on has re-
the ground that he says that he has the right in that vecicm
manor, although he has none of the seysine of that towhich
manor nor of any of the appurtenances of the same '!e aad
manor, as the said B. has recently acknowledged in our tains.
court, he impedes the presentation of the said A. and 54908.
unjustly. And because it is evident to us as well by
the acknowledgment of the said B. as by this cir-
cumstance that he claims that manor as his right with
all its appurtenances, thát the said DB. has no seysine
thereof, we command you that (notwithstanding the
reclamation of the said B.) you admit a fit person to the
said church upon the presentation of the said A.  Wit-
ness, &c. But if the bishop upon such a mandate has
not admitted the clerk so presented, let there issue to
him a writ in this form :


The king to such a bishop greeting. We well recol- - as
lect that we have issued & mandate on another occasion, pishop has
that notwithstanding the reclamation of B. you should not admit
admit a fit person to such & church which is now va- upon the
cant on the presentation of A., of which church A, has kings,
lately recovered the advowson in our court against the
said B. by an assise of last presentation, &c. by the judg-
ment of our said court. And upon this subject it has
been shown to us on the part of the said A. that the
said B. has opposed an impediment to the presentation
of the said À. on this ground, that the said B. claims in
our court before, &e. as his right, the manor to which
that advowson appertains, and because the said B. has
not as yet recovered that manor nor any of its appur-


14.
De pro-
hibitione
facienda
judicibus,
Sij clericus
alium
clericum
implaci-
taverit.


l.
Prohibitio
81 clericus
ab eo im-
placitatus !
qui amisit,


. implacita-


verit cleri-
cum ejus,
qui per
judicium
recuperas-
verit.


Glanville,
]. 1i; c. 13.


102 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS.


aliquid de pertinentiis suis, e& advocatio illa sit de
ejus pertinentiis, vobis mandamus, q non obstáte re-
clamatione ipsius B. &c.


Si elerieus ab eo prszsentatus qui judiciü amiserit
clerieü presentatü ab eo qui jus presentandi evicit
in eausam traxerit coram quibuseunq, judicibus, ad
impediendum e& qus in curia domini regis rite acta
sunt, fiat judicibus prohibitio, nee procedant per tale
breve.


Car. VIII.


Rex tal & conjudicibus suis salutem. ^ Ostensum
est nobis ex parte ÁÀ.q càüm aliquando in curia nostra
coram justiciarüis nostris &e. arramasset versus C. as-
sisam ultimz preesentationis, quis advocatus tempore
pacis &e. ad ecclesiam talem, et idem B. non dedi-
ceret, quin clericus qui ultimó obiit persona in eadem
ecclesia prsesentatus esset per ipsum À. & ad prze-
sentationé su&m admissus, & unde in eadem curia
nostra consideratum fuit q predietus À.in seysina sua
remaneret, et iià q ad mandatum nostrum et ad prse-
sentationem suam episcopus loci clericum admitteret,
& admisit quendam C. D. qué predictus. B. qui prze-
sentationem illam amisit aliquando presentaverit, pre-
dictum C. eoram vobis trahat in placitum de eadem
eeclesia autoritate literarum domini pape. Et si idem
B. eor&à vobis obtineret. in causa memorata, irritare
possent? ea qus in curia nostra ritià sunt acta, &
cüm hoe esset manifesté econtra corona & dignitatem
nostram, vobis mandam? qg in causa illa non pcedatis
de eztero, propter q ad vos nos capere debeamus?
Teste &c. ltem aliud breve de eadem materia.


? * posset," MS. Rawl. C. 160.
3 * propter quod ad nos capere
* debeamus," MS. Crewe.


! «praesentatus? seems to be
required by the text instead of
** jmplacitatus."


OF AN.ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 103


tenances, and that advowson is one of its appurtenances,
we command you that notwithstanding the reclamation
of the said B., &c. |


' If the clerk, presented by him who has lost the judg- — 14.

ment, has dragged into a suit before other judges the Mir
clerk presented by the party, who has won the right of tion to the
presentation,in order to impede the proceedings which ]?0899 1f


have been duly carried out in the court of the king, then has im-


let there issue to the judges a prohibition, and let them veio
not proceed upon such a writ. clerk.


CHAPTER VIII.


The king to so-aànd-so and his associate justiciaries
greeting. lI& has been shown to us on the part of A. 1
that when he sometime instituted an assise of last pre- i P ie,
sentation in our eourt before our justiciaries, as to what clerk pre-
advocate in the time of peace, &c. to such a church, Y
and the said B. did not gainsay that the clerk who last hes lost,
died parson of the said church had been presented by Blended
the said À., and had been admitted on his presentation, the clerk
and thereupon in our said court ib was resolved that the ds i Mis
said À. remained in his seysine, and so that upon our e by
mandate and at his presentation the bishop of the place UE
should admit his clerk, and he has admitted a certain C.
and D., whom the aforesaid B. who lost the presentation,
has sometime presented, drags the aforesaid C. before
you into à plea concerning the same church by the au-
thority of letters of the lord pope. And if the said B.
should prevail before you in the eause mentioned, he
may render void those things which were duly con-
dueted in our court, and since this would be manifestly
against our crown and dignity, we command you that
in this cause you do not proceed, inasmuch as we ought
totakeitunto ourselves. Witness, &e. Likewise another
writ on the same matter.


A. prohibi- |


rio e cul aa ccc cma dl D seca nc Lider I tr pcr


104 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE£ PRZESENTATIONIS,


2. Rex talibus judicibus salutem. ^ Prohibemus vobis
ibiliono, ne teneatis placitum coram vobis in curia Christia-
dum quis nitatis de advocatione talis ecclesie et de tali ecclesia
usiuben de cujus advocatione nuper placitum fuit in curia nos-
tem. ira coram nobis &c, inter À. de N. querentem vel

petentem & B. eustodem C. fili & h:sredis talis, im-

f.251. pedientem ratione talis juris q idem B. dicebat eun-
dem C. habere in advocatione illa. Et unde inter
eosdem À. & B.in eadem curia nostra convenit coram
nobis, ita q uterq, illorum consensit in talem clericum
eo q placitum terminari non potuit, nec res in judi-
cium deduci, cüm przdietus C. (de quo dicitur quód
jus habet in advocatione illa) adhuc sit infrà zetatem,
quia si placitum illud coram vobis in curia Christia-
nitatis procederet, idem C. de advocatione illüà dum
sit infrà statem posset damnum ineurrere, & placita
de advocationibus spectant ad coronam & dignitatem
nostram. Teste &e. Qui veró, si ad talem prohibitio-
nem desistere noluerint, attachientur, vel episcopus ha-
beat eos ecüm laicum feodum non habuerint, ut infrà
de prohibitionibus pleniüs, Si quis semel per assisam
seysinam preesentandi recuperaverit & ille versus quem
recuperaverit petere inceperit advocationem per breve
de recto, et pendente placito inceperit iterum vacare
ecclesia, et uterq, ipsorum prwsentaverit, ille przeferri
debet qui ultimó presentavit, & fiat breve ad episco-
pum hae forma.


Rex tali episcopo salutem.  Ostensum est nobis ex


Cum quis parte À. quód cüm ipse nuper in curia nostra &c.
per assisam A .
Tecupera- recuperasset przsentationé suam ad ecclesiam talem


net versus DB. per assisam ultimo» prsesentationis inde ibi
Püm fuerig inter eos captam, & clericus ad presentationem suam


E peel admissus esset ad ecclesiam illam ad mandatum nosirü,


brevede  & idem PB. cüm jam incepit placitare per breve de


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 105


The king to such judges greeting. We prohibit you — &,
not to hold a plea before you in. the court of Chris- Of Las
tianity concerning the advowson of sueh & church and ong asa
concerning such a church concerning the advowson of PPP
which there has lately been a plea in our court before under age.
us, &c. between À. de N. complaining or claiming, and
B. the guardian of C. the son and heir of s0-and-so im-


peding, by reason of such a right which the said B. f 251.


. asserted that the said C. had in that ehureh.  Ánd where-


. upon it was agreed between the said A. and B. in our
said court before us, so that each of them consented to a
certain clerk, inasmuch as the plea could not be termi-
nated, nor the matter brought into judgment, since the
aforesaid C. (concerning whom it is said, that he has
the right in that advowson) is still under age, because
if that plea should proceed before you in the court
of Christianity, the said C. may incur damage concern-
ing that advowson, whilst he is under age, and all pleas
concerning advowsons concern our crown and dignity.
Witness, &e, Who indeed, if upon such a prohibition
they are unwilling to desist, let them be attached, or let
the bishop produce them when they have no lay feud,
as below concerning prohibitions more fully. If any
person shall have once recovered by an assise seysine of
à presentation, and he, against whom he has recovered
it, shall begin to claim the advowson by a writ of right,
and whilst the plea is pending the church has begun
again to be vacant, and each of them has presented, he
ought to be preferred who presented on the last occasion,
and let & writ issue to the bishop in this form.

The king to such a bishop greeting. It has been S: Es
shown to us on the part of A. that when he lately in Person has
our court, &c, had recovered his presentation to such a aepo
church against B. by an assise of last presentation held sise, and
thereon there between them, and a clerk upon his pre- rici ei
sentation had been admitted to that church upon our has been


mandate, and the said B. when he has already begun to i


recto,


incipiat


ecclesia
vacare.


].
Breve de
summo-
nendo epi-
Scopum,
qui ad
mandatum
domini
regis cleri-
cum ad-
mittere
recusavit.


Britton, iv.
ch. vi. S 7.


f. 251 b.


106 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS.


recto super ipsa! proprietate, et contigerit illam, eccle-
siam iterum vacare pendente placito super recto, idem
B. ratione juris quod dicit sibi competere, cüàm nullum
adhue sciverit? clericum suum presentat ad ecclesiam
memoratam ut presentationem ipsius impediat, de quo
constat q sib in possessione presentandi. Et ideó vo-
bis mandamus (q non obstante presentatione & recla-
matione ipsius B. nec etiam prohibitione nostra si
quam habueris ne clericum admittatis donec placitu
super recto determinetur) ad presentationem ipsius A.
idoneam personam ad eandem ecclesiam admittatis, nisi


forte sit aliquis alius à prsdieto B. qui preesentationi
ipsius A. legitimum impedimentum opponat. Teste


&c.,


CA». IX.


Si, cüm episcopus vel alius ordinarius regiu suscepit


mandatum de admittendo elerieum ad ecclesiam, eleri-


cum non admiserit, ad quzrelam patroni presentantis
sumoneatur episcopus, q sib coram justiciariis ad osten-
dendum quare non admiserit per tale breve. Rex vic.
salutem. Si À. fecerit te securum de clamore suo pse-
quendo, tune sumoneas per bonos sumonitores talem
episcopum, q sit coram ;justiciariüis nostris tali loco,
tali die, ostensurus quare ad prsesentationé ipsius A.
non admisit idoneam personam ad mandatu nostrü,
ad talem ecclesiam, cujus eeclesie advocationem pre-
dietus ÁÀ. in euria nostra eoram eisdem justiciariis nos-
iris recuperaverit versus B. per judicium ejusdem curis
nosirz, vel p fine inter eos factum, vel per assisam
ultime presentationis inter eos captam, vel alio quo-
cung, modo, et habeas ibi sumonitores et hoc breve,


; down to *super recto," omitted
1« » éc E: ,
super ipsa? down to * com MS. Rawl. C. 160.


« ?» 1
petere," omitted MSS. Crewe ? ^ adhuc habuerit," MS


et Reg. 9, E. xv. *''super ipsa" . Crewe.


* adhuc evicerit," Reg. 9. E. xv.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 107


*»


plead by & writ of right about the property itself, and of right,
ib has happened that the church is again vacant pend- o epa
ing the plea about the right, the said B. by reason of again to be
the right which he says belongs to him when as yet ES
he has gained none, presents his clerk to the church

above mentioned that he. may impede the presentation

of him, respecting whom it is clear that he is in posses-

sion of the presentation. And therefore we command

you that (notwithstanding the presentation and recla-

mation of the said B. and also notwithstanding our
prohibition, if you have any, not to admit a clerk until

the plea about the right is determined) you admit a fit

person to the same church upon the presentation of the

said A., unless' there be some one else than the aforesaid

B. who opposes & legitimate impediment to the. pre-
sentation of the said A; Witness, &c.


| CuaPTER IX.
If when the bishop or other ordinary has received ^ 1.


the royal mandate concerning the admission of a clerk 2 .
to a.chureh, he has not admitted him, at the complaint moning a
of the patron presenting him lei the bishop be sum- i» Loon
moned, that he be before the justiciaries to show where- the man
fore he has not admitted him, by a writ of this kind : (4$ of our
The king to the viscount greeting. 1f A. has given kin lss
you security for pursuing his claim, then summon by admit a
good summoners such a bishop, that he be before our cler.
justiciaries at such a place on such & day, to show
"wherefore upon the presentation of tho said A, he has

not admitted a fit person at our mandate to such a
church, of which church the aforesaid A. has recovered

the advowson in our court before our said justiciaries
against B. by & judgment of our said court, or by a fine

made between them, or by an assise of last presentation f.251 b.
held between them, or in some other manner, and have


there present the summoners and this writ. Witness,


Si pluries
mandatum
fuerit offi-
cialibus.


93.
Si episco-
pus fecerit
defaltam.


108 DE ASSISA ULTIMA PRZESENTATIONIS.


Teste &c. Aliud bfe de eodem. Rex vic. salutem. Si
A. fecerit te securum &e. tune suimoneas talem episco-
pum q sit ostensurus &c. ut supra, idoneam personam
ad ecclesiam de N. quz vacat, ut dicitur, desicut idem
À. seysinam advocationis ejusdem ecclesie coram jus-
tieiariis nostris ad hoc assignatis recuperaverib per
assisam ultimz preesentationis, versus B. inde ibi inter
eos captam, et habeas ibi sumonitores &ec. Idem de
eodem, s. ubi manerium aliquod datum sit in marita-
giu cum aliqua filia alicujus cum advocatione & aliis
pertinentiis suis, & cüm  eeclesia vacaverit, opponat
impedimentum donator presentationi donatorii, et eo in
curia domini regis diseusso, em semel mandatum sit
episcopo vel suis officialibus quàd ad prewsentationem
donatoriüi clerieum admittant, & ipsi nihil inde fecerint,
sumoneatur episcopus per tale breve.


Rex vicecoi salutem. Suinoneas per bonos suimoni-
tores talem episcopum quód sit coram &c. ad respon-
dendum A. quare ad presentationem suam non admit-
tat idoneam personam ad talem ecclesiam sicut semel
officialibus suis & secundo eidem episcopo mandavimus,
cujus ecclesi; advocationem B. nuper in curia nostra
&ec. recognovit et concessit eidem A. in maritagium
eum filia sua tali ut pertinet ad tale manerium, quod
idem B. dederit eidem A. priusquam idem B. clericum
suum ad eandem ecclesiam presentasset, et per quam
presentationem idem episeopus clericum ipsius À. ad


eandem eeclesiam differt, admittere, ut idem A. dicit.


Et habeas ibi summonitores. "Teste &c.


Episcopus cüm sumonitus fuerit venit aut non venit,
nec per se nec se excusat per nuntium, nec per esso-
niatore, quo casu procedatur ad defaltam, et attachie-


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 109


&c. Another writ concerning the same. The king to
the viscount greeting. If A. has given you security, &c.,
then summon such a bishop that he be there to show,
&c., as above, a, fit. person to the church of N. which is
vacant, as he says, since the said À. has recovered by an
assise of last presentation against B. held thereon there
between them the seysine of the advowson of the said
church, and have there present the summoners, &c. The
same concerning the same, to wit, when a certain manor
has been given as à marriage portion with & daughter
of some one with the advowson and the other appur-
tenanees of it, and when the church has become vacant,
the donor has raised an impediment to the presentation
of the donatory, and that having been discussed in the
court of the lord the king, when & mandate has once
been sent to the bishop or to his officials that, upon the
presentation of the donatory they should admit the
€elerk, and they have done nothing thereupon, let the
' Bishop be summoned by a writ of this kind :


The king:to:the viscount greeting. Summon by good — a.

summoner&'$üch a bishop that he be before, &e. to ha men-
. n " na8

answer to À; wherefore upon his presentation he does been sent

not admit a fit person to such a church as we have once Dore than.

sent our mandate to his officials and a second time to officials.

the bishop, of which church B. has lately acknowledged

in our court and conceded the advowson to the said

À. as & marriage portion with so-and-so his daughter, as

it appertains to such à manor, which the said B. gave to

the said A. before the said B. presented his clerk to the

said church, and through which presentation the said

bishop delays to admit the said clerk to the said church,

as the said À. says. And have there present the sum-

moners, &c. Witness, &c.


"The bishop when he has been summoned either comes "b
or does not come, neither makes he by himself or by a bishop has


messenger or by en essoin any excuse, in which caso mede de-


M


Cum epi-


4.


Scopus


comparue-


rit.


f. 252.


110 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRAESENTATIONIS.


tur, ut infrà de altachiamentis, eb. omnis solenitas et
ordo attachiamentorum observetur, nec erit dilatio pe-
rieulosa presentato nec przsentanti, quamvis sumptuosa,
cüm post judicium in curia domini regis redditum, non
currit tempus sex mensium. Si autem episcopus se
essoniaverit, bene jacet.


Cüm autem venerit, aut pretendit rationem sufficien-
lem quare presentatum non admisit, quo casu indem-
nis remanebit. Si autem minüs sufficientem vel om-
ninó nullam, in misericordia domini regis remanebit.
Minus sufficientem, ut s&i dicat quód presentatum non
potuit admittere propter appellationem, ' quam clericus
illius qui amisit interposuit. Et illa ideó minüis suffi-
ciens est, quia per literas domini regis constare potuit
episcopo, quód ille qui appellantem presentavit, nihil
juris habuit in prisenaMone. Sufücere autem videt,
ut si dicat episcop? q non sit ei imputandum q cleri-
cum non admisit, sed ipsi presentanti: quia primó
presentavit À. et postea mutata voluntate preesentavit
B. contra quem idem A. appellavit et prosecutus est
appellationem suam, & contra talem appellationem non
potuit admittere predictum PB. secundó presentatum.


"Item dieere poterit q ecclesia non vacat, nec multo


tempore vacavit ad presentationem ipsius talis, quia si
assisa inde capta fuit, 'capía fuit per defaltam, vel in
absentia veri patroni qui nihil dicere potuit conira
assisam. ltem concedere potuit q vacavit, et quód
quidam presentavit publice, & q faeta fuit inquisitio
post longum intervallum eum debita solennitate, neo
fuit aliquis qui se opponeret presentationi, preesen-
tando nec appellando in ipsa presentatione talis, nee
in inquisitione, nec in ipsa institutione. Et quo casu,


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 111


. proceedings go on to a default, and let him be attached,
as below concerning attachments, and let all the solem-
nity and order of attachments be observed, nor shall the
delay be perilous to the party presented nor to the pre-
senter, although it be expensive, since after the judg-
ment returned in the court of the lord the king, the time
of six months does not run. But if the bishop has
essoined himself, it lies well.


When, however, he has come, he either holds out à 4.
sufficient reason wherefore he has not admitted the party Mishon e
presented, in which cease he will remain indemnified. appeared.
But if he has alleged an insufficient reason or. none at
all he wil remain at the mercy of the king. Insuffi-
cient, as if he should say that he could not admit the
party presented on account of the appeal which the clerk -
of him who has lost [the suit] has interposed. And that
is insufficient for that reason, because through the letters
of the lord the king it could be clear to the bishop, that
he who presented the appellant, had no right in the pre-
sentation. But it seems to be sufficient, as if the bishop
should say that it is not to beimputed to him that he has
not admitted the clerk, but to the party presenting him ;
because he first, presented À., and then having changed
his intention he presented B., against whom the said A.
appealed and prosecuted his appeal, and against such an
appeal he could not admit the aforesaid B. the second .
presentee. Likewise he may say that the church is not
vacant, or it has not been vacant long for the presenita-
tion of the said so-and-so, because if an assise has been
held thereon, it has been held by default, or in the
absence of the true patron who could say nothing against
the assise. Likewise he may concede that it has been
v&cant,and that some one has presented publicly, and
that an inquisition has been held after a long interval f. 252.
with due solemnity, nor was there any one who opposed
the presentation by presenting or by appealing upon
the presentation of so-and-so, nor upon the inquisition
nor upon the institution Ánd in which case let the


112 DE ASSISA ULTIMJE PRJESENTATIONIS.


doceat querens contrarium si possit, s. quód dolosa fuit
presentatio et clandestina inquisitio et institutio nec
solennis, vel etiam doceat se semper reclamasse et
appellasse in prsesentatione, et in inquisitione et in
ipsa institutione, et inde habeat probationes et sectam
sufficientem. Et si episcopus contra hoc se defendere
non possit, deliberet ecclesiam vel conquerenti satis-
faciat alio modo. — Et ista ad presens sufficiant exempli
causa.


OF AN ASSISE OF LAST PRESENTATION. 113


plaintiff prove the contrary, if he can, to wit that the
presentation was deceitful and the inquisition and the
institution elandestine and not solemn, or even let him
Show that he has always reclaimed and appealed against
the presentation, and at the inquisition, and at the insti-
tution itself, and let him produce thereon his proofs and
his sufficient suite. And if the bishop cannot defend
himself against this, let him deliver the church or satisfy
the plaintiff in some other manner. And these things
may suffice for the present by way of example.


Q 1802. H


L.


l.
De prima
seysina


TRACTATUS TERTIUS
LIBRI QUARTI


IN QUO TRACTATUR


DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS."


Car. I.


Supradietum est de seysina propria, eüm quis injust?
disseysitus fuerit per violentiam omnino, vel impeditus


postmor- quo minüs commode uti possit seysina, qualiter resti-


tem ante-
cessoris.


tuatur: nune autem dicendum de seysina aliena et
propinqua, s. alicujus antecessoris premortui, qualiter
hzeredibus propinquioribus aequiratur. De iis, de qui-
bus antecessor obiit seysitus ut de feodo quacunq,
ratione vel quocunque titulo, sive consistant in ocor-
pore sive in jure, hzres propinquior eandem habebit
seysinam quam antecessor habuit, eb si plens setatis
extiterit, eb vacuam possessionem invenerit, si tempore
mortis antecessorum ?* dominus presens non fuerit, bene
licebit ei se ponere in seysinam, dum tamen paratus
sib facere domino suo capitali quod de jure & secun- .
dàm legem terr: facere debebit, càm ipsum ad domi-
num recognoverit. Eodem modo, si tempore mortis
antecessoris in seysina inventus fuerit cum ipso ante-
cessore cujuscunq, setatis extiterit, & ad hseredem re-
cognitus fuerit, & dominorum poterit resistere violenti:,
si nitantur eum ejicere cüm plen:s setatis extiterint


!« Hie incipit tertius tractatus ? « antecessoris," MS. Rawl. C.
« ]ibri quarti de assisa mortis ante- | 160. Reg. 9. E. xv.
* cossoris," MS. Rawl. C. 160. 3 « extiterit," MSS. eadem.


THE THIRD TREATISE


OF


THE FOURTH BOOK


WHICH TREATS OF


AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER.


CHAPTER I.


We have spoken above of one's own seysine, when 1 -


one has been unjustly disseysed by violence altogether m


or only impeded from using conveniently the seysine, sine after
how it should be restored: now indeed we must speak tbe death
of the seysine of another and a near relative, to wit, of cestor.
some ancestor predeceased, how it is acquired for the
next heirs. Of those things, of which an ancestor died
Sseysed as of & feud in whatever manner and by what-
ever title, whether they consist in a substance or in à
right, the next heir shall always have the same seysine

as his ancestor had, and if he should be of full age and

has found the possession vacant, if at the time of the
death of the ancestor the lord was not present, it will

be allowable for him to put himself into seysine, pro-
vided however he is prepared to do towards his chief
lord what of right and aecording to the law of the land

he ought to do, when he has acknowledged him as his
-Jord. In the same manner, if at the time of the death

of the ancestor he has been found in seysine with the
ancestor himself, of whatever age he may be, and he has
been acknowledged as the heir, he will be able to resist

the violence of the lords, if they endeavour to eject him,
when they are of full age. Butif they be under age,

H 2


f. 252 b.


Britton, iii.
8 4.


ch. vi.


"rd


116 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


Si autem minoris statis, tunc non priüs habebit domi-
nus custodiam terrarum vel corporis quàm ceperit
homagium heredis. Si autem dominus capitalis tales,
ceüm in seysina fuerint & hzredes, contra eorum volun-
tatem ejecerit, sive ipsos hseredes recognoverit sive
non, per assisam nov:ze disseysinz seysinam suam reha-
bebunt, cüm plenz setatis extiterint. Si autem minor
ejectus fuerit, habebit duo remedia, assisam videlicet
nov: disseysinze, vel mortis antecessoris, quameung
istaru elegerit. Et si in una defecerit, regressum habe-
bit ad aliam, ordine tamen observato. Et cüm tales
haeredes ita in possessione extiterint, non denegabitur
domino capitali simplicem habere seysina, ut pro dio
recognoscatur, ita tame q inde nihil capiat, nec aliqué
inde à possessione amove&at conira ipsorum heredum
voluntatem. Et quamvis à quibusdam dieat q cápitalis
dominus debeat habere primam seysinam post morte
tenentis sui, fallit. tamen in hoc casu, quia primam
habere non possit, licet habere possit cum hseredibus
ut dictum est communem. Si autem sit heres appa-
rens unus vel plures unum jus habentes, et de quibus
dubitetur an sint heredes vel non, vel &d hsredes non
recognoscantur, statim sibi perquirant per assisam mor-
tis antecessoris & doceant se esse hseredes per assisam.
Si autem dubitetur an presentes, qui se faciunt hrere-
des, heredes sint vel non, quia hzres & frater antena-
tus profectus fuit in Terram Sanctam forté, et nesciatur
si vivus sit vel non, fiat presentibus seysina p düm
capitalem & per assisam sub tali conditione, q si ante-
natus redierit, q ei restituatur hzreditas sine placito,
cüm bene constat q talis sib hseres si vivus extiterit.
Si autem dis capitalis primam seysinam habuerit, duo
contendant de hseredibus, quorum quilibet se gerat pro


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 11^.


then the lord shall not have the custody of the lands or
of the person before he has taken the homage of the heir.
But if the chief lord has ejected so-and-so against their
will, when they were in seysine and were heirs, whether
he has acknowledged them as heirs or not, they shall
regain their seysine by a writ of novel disseysine, when
they shall be of full age. But if à minor has been
ejeeted, he shall have two remedies, to wit, an assise of
novel disseysine, or an assise of mortdancester, which-
ever of these he shall choose. And if one shall fail him,
he shall have recourse to the other, observing, however,
the order. And when such heirs shall have been in pos-
session, it shall not be denied to the chief lord to have
a simple seysine that he should be acknowledged as
lord, so however that he shall therefrom derive nothing,
nor shall remove any one from his possession against the
will of the heirs themselves. And although it be said
by some that the chief lord ought to have the first sey-
sine after the death of his tenant, it fails, however, in


f. 252 b.


this case, because he cannot have the first, although he


may have & common seysine as it is said with the heirs.
Butif there be an heir apparent, one or several having
one right, and concerning whom it is doubted whether
they are heirs or not, or they should not be acknow-
ledged as heirs, let them immediately claim for them-
selves by an assise of mortdancester, and show by the
assise that they are heirs. But if it be doubted whether
the present persons, who make themselves out to be heirs,
are heirs or not, because the heir and elder brother has
gone perchance on a journey to the Holy Land, and it is
unknown whether he is alive or not, let seysine be made
to those who are present by the chief lord and by the
assise under this condition, that if the elder born shall re-


turn, that the inheritance shall be restored to him with-


out a suit, since it is well known that he is heir, if he
be alive. But if the chief lord has had the first seysine,
and two contend as heirs, of whom each holds himself


118 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS,


hzrede, s. postnatus cum primogenito, legitimus cum
bastardo, nulli eorum facienda erit hsereditatis restitu-
iio, antequam constiterit quis eorum sit hzres propin-
quior vel justior, quod si fecerit, & heredi non legi-
timo seysinam fecerit, & homagium suum ceperit, si
conira petitione legitimi heredis vocet ad warrantum,
warrantizare tenet de jure, licet warrantizationi sic
respondeat q homagiü talis ceperit salvo jure cujuslibet,
quia male salvat jus veri hsredis, ex quo homagium
ceperit non legitimü et ipsum inducit in seysin&à ad
exhereditationem veri heredis, eüm seit vel scire debet
alium esse hs:redem, vel impuné retinere posset seysi-
nam, donec ei de veritate constaret, q quidem locum
habere posset,si dubium esset an alius heres esset vel
non, cüm nullus compareat vel contendat.


n3 Si autem dis capitalis vacuam invenerit possessio-
icis nem post mortem tenentis sui, tenere se poterit in
vacuam — seysina &bsq, alicujus injuria, donec constiterit ei quis
sysnam, Sib hzres legitimus, Et eim constiterit ei quis sit
Britton, ib. hzeres legitimus, donec ad ipsum venerit facturus ei
Glenville sicut diio q de jure facere debebit, & maxim? si ipsum
ix.c.6. ad düm recognoscat, poterit enim contentio esse inter
plures de jure dominii, de qua nihil ad presens. Cüm
autem düs vacuam habuerit seysinam, ut predictum
est, h;eres sine voluntate ipsius ingredi non poterit, q
si fecerit super seysinam capitalis dii, & dominus eum
ejecerib: vel si ipse hzres dominum capitalem ejecerit,
& ipse dominus statim eum rejecerit, ipse hseres per
assisum non recuperabit, ut de libero tenemento suo,
quia vacuam seysinam no invenit, sed si dominus capi-
talis heredem ejicere non possit, ejici debet ex officio


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. l19


out to be heir, to wit, the second born with the first
born, the legitimate with the bastard, restitution of the
inheritance is not to be made to any of them, before it has
been made clear which of them is the next or more law-
ful heir, which if he has done and he has given seysine to
a non-legitimate heir and has taken his homage, if against
the claim of the legitimate heir he is called to warrant,
he is bound of right to warrant, although he may thus
respond to the warranty, that he took his homage saving
the right of every one, because he saves badly the right of
the true heir, since he took the homage of a non-legitimate
heir and admitted him into seysine to the disinheritance
of the true heir, when he knows or ought to know that
another was the heir, or he might with impunity have
retained seysine, until it had been made clear to him
concerning the truth, which indeed might have place,
if i& was doubtful whether there was another heir or
not, since none appeared or disputed.


But if the chief lord has found the possession vacant
after the death of his tenant, he may keep himself in sey-
sine without injury to any one, until it has been made
clear to him who is thelegitimate heir. And when ithas
been made elear to him who is the legitimate heir, until
he shall have come to him intending to do to him as his
lord what he ought of right to do, and chiefly if he has
acknowledged him as his lord, for there may be a con-
tention between several persons concerning the right of
domain, concerning which nothing for the present. But
when the lord has had the vacant seysine, as aforesaid,
the heir cannot enter without his will, which if he shall
have done against the seysine of the chief lord, and the
lord shall have ejected him, or if the heir himself shall
have ejeeted the chief lord, and the lord himself shall
have forthwith re-ejected him, the heir shall not recover
by an assise, as of his free tenement, because he has not
found the seysine vacant, but if the chief lord cannot
eject the heir, he ought to be ejected officially by a


2.
If the chief
lord has
found the
Seysino
vacant.


f. 253.


120 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSOBIS.


Superioris, cüm per assisam recuperare non possit.
Cüm autem dominus capitalis sic se posuerit in seysi-
nam vacuam, aut constat ei quis sit heres, aut nescit
herede, vel si duo vel plures contendant de hzeredi-
tate, & nescit quis eorum sit heres propinquior, vel si
sciat quis sib propinquior, nescit tamen an sii superstes
necne, plena; setatis vel no, cüm hseres sit ages in re-
motis partibus, si capitalis dominus nomine suo ingre-
diatur possessionem, statim acquiritur heredi possessio,
etiam hsrede ignorante, quasi animo & corpore procu-
ratorio. Eodem modo si heres prssens sit, major vel
minor. Si autem nullum sciat heredem, vel &i sciat,
nescib utrum vivus sit vel mortuus, vel si dubitaverit
quis ex pluribus qui se faciunt heredes heeres sit pro-
pinquior, nulli istorum acquirit! liberum tenementum
ex sSeysina su&, cüm nomine nullius certe persons
ingressus sit possessionem, & in quibus casibus tenere
se poterit in possessione, sine juris injuria, donec ei
constiterit de herede. Et unde si nullus heres appa-
ruerit, possit talis hereditas esse eschaeta sua, & si
ejiciatur, recuperabit seysinam suam ut de libero tene-
mento suo per assisam novse disseysins, donec ei con-
stiterit de hsrede. Item esto quód capitalis dominus
in seysina invenerit fratrem postnatum vel bastardum,
qui se facit legitimum  hs;redem, quzsritur an talem
ejicere possit sine judicio & impune? cüm sit alius
hseres apparens, & videtur quód non, quia hoc pertinet
ad heredem & non ad dominum capitalem, quia tales
cüm ejecti fuerint, assisam portabunt contra dominum
capitalem, & non competit domino contra tales excep-
tio liberi tenementi, vel bastardie, de hoc nihil ad


! * acquiritur," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 121


superior, since he cannot recover by an assise. But
when the chief lord has so put himself into a vacant sey-
sine, he is either certain who is the heir, or he does not
know the heir, or if two or more dispute the inheritance,
and he does not know which of them 1s the next heir, or
if he knows who is the next heir, he does not however
know whether he is surviving or not, of full age or not,
when the heir is actively employed in remote parts, if the
chief lord enters into the possession in his own name,
the possession is forthwith acquired for the heir, even
whilst the heir is ignorant, as it were with the intention
and person of & proxy. ln the same way if the heir be
present, major or minor, But if he knows of no heir,
or if he knows of one, he does not know whether he is
alive or dead, or if he has doubted who out of several,
who make themselves out to be heirs, is the nearest
heir, he does not acquire for any of them the free tene-


ment by his seysine, since he has not entered into


possession in the name of any certain person, and in
which cases he can maintain himself in possession with-
out injury to right, until he has ascertained respecting
an heir. And hence if no heir shall appear, the said
inheritance may be his escheat, and if he be ejected, he
shall recover his seysine as of his free tenement by an
assise of novel.disseysine, until he has ascertained
respecting an heir. Likewise let it be that the chief


lord has found in seysine à younger born brother or a.


bastard, who makes himself out to be the legitimate heir,
it is asked whether he can eject such a person without
a judgment and with impunity when there is another
heir apparent, and it seems not so, because this apper-
tains to the heir and not to the chief lord, because such
persons when they have been ejeeted, will bring an


assise against the chief lord, and the lord is not en-


titled to raise against such persons an exception of
freehold or of bastardy, in this he is not at all con-
cerned when there is an heir apparent, but if there be


f. 253.


1292 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


eum cüm sit heres apparens, si autem nullus h:zeres
appareret, hujusmodi exceptiones domino competerent
pro defectu hzeredis, & hzc dico, nisi tales diu in pos-
sessione extiterint per impotentiam vel negligentiam
domini capitalis, quód sine judicio ejici non possunt.
Si autem verus heres bastardum in possessione inve-
nerit, vel hzredem propinquum, scilicet postnatum in
absentia domini capitalis, statim & recenter eum ejiciat
antequam longam & pacifieam habeat seysinam & sic
liberum tenementum ex tempore quod sufficit pro
titulo, quod quidem facere non poterit post tempus,
nec recuperabit per assisam novze disseysinse, quia jus
merum quod descendit vero heredi no statim conjun-
gitur eum seysina, nec competit vero hsredi conira
tales assisa mortis antecessoris post logam & pacificam
seysinam, ad seysinam antecessoris acquirendam, cüm
omnes descendant ab uno stipite, ex persona ejus qui
ultimó obiit seysitus de predicta heereditate, sed locum
habebit breve de recto, sieut inferiüs apparebit in
tractatu de consanguinitate. Sed si verus heres tales
statim & recenter ejicere non possit, si sibi statim
pquisiverit, bene jacebit assisa mortis antecessoris inter
eos per diligentem impetrationem : quia sic interrum-
pitur eorum possessio, quia liberum tenementum habere
non poterunt, & sic pares esse no poterunt cum pro-
pinquiore herede quoad jus possessionis, antequam
liberu tenementum acquisierit ex tempore & longa pos-
sessione:! quod quidem esse poterit cüm longam &
pacificam possessionem habuerit? Item esto q absente
capitali düo frater bastardus fratrem bastardum inve-
neri in seysina, & si tale ejecerit, videndum erit an
recuperare debeat p assisam non obstante exceptione
de libero tenemento, quia si opponatur, locum non
habebit: quia licet disseysitus bastardus sit, tamen non


* tenementum acquisiverint," MS.
Crewe. .

. 3* habuerint" MS. Crewe et
Reg. 9. E. xv.


lf tenementum acquisitum ex
* tempore et longá possessione
* habuerint, MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER, 1298


no heir apparent, the lord would be entitled to raise
those exceptions from failure of heirs, and these things
I say, unless the said persons have remained long in
possession through the powerlessness or negligence of
the chief lord, so that they cannot be ejected withóut
& judgment. But if the true heir has found à bastard
in possession, or & near heir, to wit, à younger born
brother in the absence of the chief lord, let him forth-
' with and recently eject him before he has had a long and
peaceable seysine and so the freehold from a time which
suffices for a title, which he cannot do after a time, nor
shall he recover by an assise of novel disseysine, for
the mere right which descends to the true heir is not
forthwith conjoined with the seysine, nor is the true
heir entitled to an assise of mortdancester against such
persons after a long and peaceable seysine, in order to ac-
quire the seysine of an ancestor, when all descend from
one stock, from the person of him who died last seysed
of the aforesaid inheritance, but a writ of right will
apply, as will be seen below in the treatise on consan-
guinity. But if the true heir cannot eject forthwith
and recently such persons, if he has forthwith claimed
it for himself, an assise of mortdancester will well lie
between them through a diligent suing out [of à writ];
because their possession is thus interrupted, because
they will not be able to have the freehold and so they
cannot be on an equality with the next heir as regards
the right of possession, before he has acquired the free-
hold by time and long possession, which indeed may be
when he has had a long and Ppeaceable possession.
Likewise let it be that in the absence of the chief lord
& bastard brother has found & bastard brother in sey-
sine, and if he has ejected him, it is to be seen whether
he ought to recover by an assise notwithstanding an
exception concerning the freehold, because if it be
objected it will not have a place ; because although the
person disseysed be & bastard, nevertheless such an


CF puru men o. rp M e e ILU UNO! AD ue Ro S HR o UM EN y 080 RET S EAT. RIS


"^o ou oAEELGEC 0 LM


f. 253 b.


Britton, iii.
ch. vi. S 1.


124 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


competit disseysitori talis exceptio, cüm sit bastardus,
& maximé in odium spoliationis: sed cüm constiterit
per assisam quód uterq, sit bastardus, habita hinc inde
copensatione bastardie, melior erit conditio primi pos-
sidentis, & maxim? ejus qui causam & autoritate habu-
erit à capitali domino. Cüm autem contigerit quód
dominus capitalis primam habuerit seysinam & vacuam,
& sit aliquis extra seysinam qui se facit heredem, &
capitalis dominus recognoscit eum ad hsredem, si hz-
res plenze setatis extiterit, statim capiat dominus capi-
talis homagium suum, & restituet ei hereditatem,
accepta securitate de relevio suo & fidelitate & sacra-
mento de servitiis quze ad dominum pertinent de prze-
dicta hsereditate faciendis. Si autem infrà statem
extiterit, statim & ante omnia homagium suum capiat,
& tune demum ha&beat custodiam & maritagium. Si
autem talem ad heredem non cognoverit, cujuscunq,
etatis fuerit hseres, tune primó locum habebit assisa
mortis antecessoris versus dominum capitalem, sicut
versus quemlibet extraneum, & it& q si dum dominus
capitalis primam seysinaà habuerit, & de hsrede con-
süteriti & seysinam ei malitiosé facere distulerit, &
vastum & destructionem fecerit, cum ipso tenemento
damna restituat, sicut fieri debet in assisa novsee dis-
seysinz, licet non habeatur in usu, ad malitiam domi-


. norum reprimendam, qui res hareditarias per primam


seysinam suam convertunt in przedieta, sicut videri
poterit in eustode, qui eustodiam habet hereditatis cum
herede vel sine, si vastum fecerit vel destructionem,
damna restituit & amittit custodiam.


1 *in predictam," MS. Rawl. C. 160. *in propria," Reg. 9. E. xv.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 195


exception (of bastardy) does not become the disseysor,
since he is à bastard, and chiefly in hatred of the spolia-
tion; but when it has been ascertained by an assise
that each is à bastard, the compensation of bastardy
weighing equally on either side, the condition of the
first possessor will be the best, and chiefly of him who
had a cause and authority from the chief lord. But
when it has happened that the chief lord has had the first
. Sseysine and that à vacant seysine, and there is some
person outside the seysine who makes himself out to be
the heir, and the chief lord acknowledges him as the
heir, if the heir be of full age, let the chief lord at once
take his homage and restore to him the inheritance,
having obtained security for his relief and his fealty,
and an oath concerning the performance of ihe services
which appertain to the lord from the aforesaid inherit-


ance. But if he be under àge, let him forthwith and


before all things take his homage, and then at length
let him have the custody and the maritage. But if he
has not acknowledged the said person as the heir, at
whatever age the heir may be, then in the first place
an assise of mortdancester will have place against the
chief lord, as against any stranger, and so that if whilst
the chief lord has had the first seysine and the heir has
been ascertained, and he has maliciously delayed to give
seysine to him and has caused waste and destruction,
he shall make good the losses with the tenement, as
ought to be done in an assise of novel disseysine,
although it is not in use, in order to repress the malice
of lords, who convert hereditary things through their
own first seysine into their own, in like manner as


may be seen in the case of & guardian, who has the


guardianship of the inheritance with or without the
heir, if he has caused waste or destruction, he restores
the losses and loses the guardianship.


f. 253 b.


1296 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


CA». II.


1. Cum autem (ut predictum est) ad hsredem non
DeimP* Qocenoseatur, statim recurrat ad superioris auxiliü, sive
brevis. — Slb. unus, sive plures participes unum jus habentes,
"eri quorum nullus sine alio assisam portare poterit, & si

omnes in brevi non nominentur, pro uno tantum. cadit
breve, nee ecàm non nominetur non erit sumonendus
quód sequatur eum participibus, sicut inferiüs observa-
tur in quibusdam casibus. Facta igitur impetratione,
de officio vic. satis constare poterit per ea qus supe-
riüs fiunt in aliis assisis. Forma autem brevis talis
est.


2. Rex vic. salutem. Si talis fecerit te securum de
via clameo suo prosequendo &c. tunc sum per bonos sumo-
anteces- — nitores xii. liberos & legales homines de visneto de
NE tali villa, q sint coram justiciariis nostris ad primam

assisam, cüm in partes illas venerint, parati sacramento
recognoscere, si talis pater vel mater, vel avunculus,
vel amita, frater, vel soror ipsius talis, fuit seysitus
Glanville, vel seysità in dominico suo ut de feodo, de tanto
Xii.c.5. (err, & tanto redditu cum pertinentiis in tali villa,
de quo obiit. et si obiit post ultimum reditü regis I.
Dm x patris nostri de Hibernia in Anglià (& tepore regis
Edwardi mutatus fuit terminus iste post coronationem
regis H. patris ipsius regis Edwardi) & si preedictus
talis ejus heres propinquior sit. Et interim terram
illam vel tentum unde redditus ille provenit videant,
& nomina eorum imbreviari facias. Et summone per
bonos summonitores talem, qui terram illam tenet vel


! « de quo obiit seisitus post ulti- | Rawl. C. 160. 'The same reading

* mum reditum regis Johannis pa- | is also found in Sir Thomas Crewe's

* tris nostri de Hibernia in An- | MS. in the British Museum, viz.,

.* gliam, et si predictus talis ejus | Add. MSS. 118358. p. 111. dorso.
* heres propinquior sit," "MS. | See Introduction.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 197


CuaPrER II.


But when (as aforesaid) he be not acknowledged as — 1.
heir, let him have recourse at once to the aid of a fog
superior whether there be one or several parceners sumg out
having one right, none of whom can bring an assise ms
without the others, and if they are -not all named in
the writ, the writ fails for one only, nor when he is not
named will he not have to be summoned, that he should
follow with the parceners, as is observed below in cer-
lain cases. The suing out of the writ having taken
place it will be sufficiently clear concerning the office
of the viscount from what has been said above in the

.Other assises. But the form of the writ is of this nature:


The king to the viseount greeting. lf so-and-so has 2.
given you security for prosecuting his claim, &c., then itid
summon by good summoners twelve free and loyal men of mort-
of the neighbourhood of such a vill, that they be before 39ncester.
our justiciaries at the first assise, when they have come
into those parts, prepared to acknowledge on oath if the
father or mother of so-and-so, or his uncle or aunt, or
the brother or sister of the said so-and-so was seysed in
domain as of & feud, of so much land and so great a rent
with the appurtenances in such a vill when he died, and
if he died after the last return of king John our father
from Ireland into England! (and in the time of king.
Edward the term was thus altered: after the coronation
of king Henry the father of the said king Edward), and
if so-and-so aforesaid is his next heir. And meanwhile
le& them view that land or the tenement whence that
revenue is derived, and cause their names to be inserted
in the writ. ÀÁnd summon by good summoners such a
person, who holds that land or that rent wherefrom he f 954.


1 This limitation had been intro- | Statute of Westminster I. as stated,
duced by the Statute of Merton, | and so continued down to 32 Henry
20 H. III. It was altered by the | VIII. c. ii. $ 2.


f. 254.


8.
Aliud
breve de
eodem,
qui est
infra sta-
tem.


198 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


redditum ilum unde ei deforc,! quàd tune sit ibi
auditurus illam recognitionem, & habeas ibi summoni-
tores & hoe breve. Teste &c.


Rex vie. salutem. | Summone per bonos summoni-
tores xii. liberos & legales homines de visneto de villa
tali quód sint coram justiciariis nostris ad primam
assisam cüm in partes illas venerint, parati sacramento
recognoscere si talis pater, mater, avunculus, vel amita,
frater, vel soror ipsius talis fuit seysitus in dominico
suo ut de feodo de tanto terre cum pertinentüs in
tali villa, & si idem talis propinquior hseres ejus sit,
& interim terram illam videant, & nomina eorum im-
breviari facias. Eti summone per bonos summonitores
talem qui terram illam tenet, quód tune sit ibi audi-
turus illam recognitionem, & ha&beas ibi summonitores
& hoc breve. "Teste &c. Si autem antecessor ingres-
sus fuerit religionem, & ita quód mortuus sit seculo,
vel profectus in peregrinatione, in quo itinere obiit,
tune variatur breve sie: parati sacramento recognoscere,
si talis pater vel mater, avunculus vel amita, frater
vel soror ipsius talis fuit seysitus vel seysita, in do-
minico suo ut de feodo. de tanto terre vel redditu
cum pertinentiis in tali villa, die quo habitum reli-
gionis accepit, & si habitum suscepit illum post termi-
num ui supra. Et si idem talis &c. ut supra. Vel
sie: die quo iter peregrinationis arripuerit versus Ter-
ram Sanctam, vel Sanctum Jacobum vel alibi, in quo
itinere obiit ut dicitur, & si iter illud arripuit post
ultimum &c. & si idem talis propinquior hsres ejus
sit &c., omnia ut supra. ltem est alius modus & alia
forma ubi plures participes coheredes unum jus ha-
bentes petant per assisam, sicut plures foeminse, qua-
rum qusdam sunt maritate, et qusdam non, tune
dicetur hoe modo. Rex vicecom salutem. Si A. et B.
uxor ejus C. et D. sorores ipsius B. fecerint te secu-


! * deforceat,"? MS. Rawl. C. 160. Reg. 9. E. xv.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 129


i8 disturbed, that he should be there to hear that ac-
knowledgment, and produce there the summoners and
this writ. Witness.


The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good


Aüonis


summoners twelve free and loyal men of the visne of «rit con-
such & vill, that they be present before our justiciaries ipe.


h 3
&t the, first assise when they shall have come into those when he


n he


d
parts, prepared to recognise on their oath, if the father ag er


of so-and-so or his mother or unele or aunt or brother
or sister was seysed in demesne as of & fee of so -


much land with its appurtenances in such a vill, and if
the said so-and-so is his next heir, and meanwhile let
them view that land and cause their names to be in-
Serled in the writ. And summon by good summoners
So-and-so who holds that land, that he be there to hear
that recognition, and produce there the summoners and
this writ. Witness, &c. But if the ancestor has entered
into a religious order and so that he is dead to the world,
or has gone on a pilgrimage, in which journey he has
died, then let the writ be varied thus: prepared to ac-
knowledge on oath, if the father or mother of so-and-so,
or his uncle or &unt, or brother or sister was seysed
in demesne as of & fee of so much land or rént with
its appurtenances in such a vill, on the day on which he
put on the robe of the religious order, and if he put on
the robe after the term as above. And if the said so-and-
S0, &c., as above. Or thus, on the day on which he com-
menced the journey of his pilgrimage to the Holy Land,
or to St. James' or elsewhere, in which journey he died
asit is said, and if he commenced that journey after the
last, &c., and if the said so-and-so is his next heir, &c.,
all.as above. Likewise there is another manner and
another form, where many parcener co-heirs having one
right claim by an assise, as for instance several females,
of whom some are married, and some not, then it shall
be said in this manner: The king to the viscount greet-
ing. If ÀÁ. and B. his wife, C. and D. sisters of B. have
Q 1302. I


f. 254 b.


130 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


rum &c, tune summone &c. quód sint coram &c. pa-
rati sacramento recognoscere si talis pater ipsarum B.
C. et D. fuit seysitus &c. (ut supra) de x. acris terrz
cum pertinentiis in tali villa et si &c. et summonea-
tur tenens sive sib unus sive sit plures qui terram


illam tenent, et ubi plures erunt assise propter plu-


ralitatem tenentium. Item notandum, quód ubi petens
fuerit infrà statem, plegios non inveniet de prose-
quendo, et ideó non dicetur, Si talis qui est infrà
vetatem fecerit te securum &ce. Sed statim dicetur
post (salute) Sum &c. si À. pater talis qui est infrà
seatem fuit seysitus &c. Item nec apponendus est
terminus, quia si petens sit infrà setate, manifest?
apparebit quód talis antecessor minoris obiit post ter-
minum, te est alia forma brevis quod quasi mixtam
habet naturam, habet enim in parte naturam brevis
mortis antecessoris, et in parte naturam brevis de
consanguinitate, ubi hereditas descendat ab uno stipite
ad duas personas, scilicet. que sunt quasi unus heres
per diversas lineas, sicut ad filiam, ubi tenet &ssisa
mortis antecessoris, et ad nepotem ex alia filia, ubi
locum habet consanguinitas de morte avi, et ad quem
gradum assisa se no extendit, e&, unde non dicatur in
forma qua prius, sed variatur iia, scilicet: Si talis
pater, vel mater, avus, vel avia B. vel proavus vel
antecessor, fuit seysitus in dominico &c. Et quod dici-
tur de seysin& avi vel avis ex parte nepotis, dici
poterit de eorum fratribus et sororibus avunculis ipsius
À,. et amitis et consanguineis sive antecessoribus, cüm
sint quasi in uno gradu cum avo & avie, Sed ulte-
riis non tenet breve ascendendo, in eo quod tangit


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 131


given you security, &c, then summon, &c, that they
should be present before, &c., prepared to acknowledge
upon oath, if so-and-so the father of the said B, C,
and D. has beer seysed, &c. (as above), of ten acres of land
with the appurtenances in such a vill, and if, &c., and let
the tenant, whether it be one person or'several who hold


that land, be summoned, and when there shall be several,
assises on account of the plurality of tenants. Likewise .


itis to be noted, that when the claimant is under full
age, he shall not find sureties for prosecuting, and there-
fore it shall not be said, if so-and-so who is under age


has given you security, &c.; but it shall be said im-


mediately after the word ^ greeting," summon, &c., if A.
the father of so-and-so, who is under age, has been sey-
sed, &c. Likewise no term is to be added, because if
the claimant is under age, it will be manifestly evident
. that such an ancestor of the minor died after the term.
Likewise there is another form, which has as it were a
mixed nature, for it has in part the nature of a writ of
mortdancester, and in part the nature of a writ of con-
sanguinity, when the inheritance descends from one


Stock to two persons, to wit, who are as ib were one heir


by different lines, as to & daughter, where an assise of
mortdancester applies, and to à granddaughter out of
another daughter, where consanguinity concerning the
- death of the grandfather applies, and to which degree an
assise does not extend, and wherefore it is not said in the
form as before, but it is varied thus, to wit: if of such
an one the father or mother, the grandfather or the
grandmother B. or the great-grandfather or ancestor was
seysed in demesne, &e. And what is said concerning
the seysine of the grandfather or grandmother on the
part of the grandchild, may be said of their brothers and
sisters the uncles of the said À. and their aunts and
cousins or ancestors, since they are as ib were in the
same degree with the grandfather and grandmother.
But further & writ does not hold in the ascent in so far
I2


f. 254 b.


4.
Breve,
quod mix-
tam habet
naturam
cum morte
anteces-
soris et
cum con-
sanguini-
tate.


132 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


assisam mortis antecessoris, quia assisa ulteriàs non
extenditur. In eo autem quod tangit consanguinita-
iem ulteriüs extenditur descendendo quàm ad nepotem,
quatenus tempus assise assisam mortis antecessoris
permiserit usque ad trinepotem, qui omnes dieuntur
consanguinei. Et de hac materia dicetur. infrà pleniüs


de traetatu de consanguinitate.


In quo casu, cium sit assisa mortis antecessoris con-
jungenda cum consanguinitate, non erit posi reeur-
rendum ad preeipe de cosanguinitate sed ad assi-
sam mortis, quia psona qus propinquior est & facit
&ssisam & trahit ad se personam & gradum remoti-
orem, ut ibi potiüs procedat assis& quàm  preecipe,
quia illud quod est majus remotum non trahit ad se
quod est majus junctum. Sed e contrario in omni
casu, & bené poterit quilibet istarum conjungi cum
alia actione, quia quslibet loquitur de seysina ejus
quam habuit die quo obiit, quod non est in brevi de
recto, & quslibet de possessione & non de proprietate.
Item si hoe, poterit tunc adjungi assise mortis ante-
cessoris quilibet antecessor & successor qui assumi
poterunt in placito de consanguinitate: ut si dicatur,
talis frater vel soror, vel talis nepos vel ulteriüs con-
sanguineus ut in linea infrà, vel talis frater vel soror
& talis antecessor ut in linea supra, & eadem erit
ratio. |


Sunt etiam alia brevia huic aliquantulum similia .de
morte avunculi, & de morte amite, & matertere &
hsereditate partibili, & ubi in omni casu conjungit
nepos cum avunculo vel amita, vel matertera, in assisa
mortis antecessoris ubi non est mixta cum consangui-
nitate, & ubi dicitur: Si A. avunculus, amita, vel ma-
tertera B. & frater vel soror C. cujus hsredes ipsi
sunt fuit seysitus vel seysita in dominico suo ut de


OF'AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 133


as it touches an assise of a death of an ancestor, because
an assise is not extended further. But in so far as it
touches cosinage it is extended further in descent than to
the grandchild, inasmuch as the time of the assise per-
mits an assise of the death of an ancestor as far as the
grandchild's grandehild, who are all' called cousins.
And concerning this matter it will be discussed more
- fully in the treatise on cosinage.


In which ease, since an assise of mortdancester isto be , 4
eonjoined with ocosinage, recourse is not to be had after- us

. wards to s przecipe respecting cosinage, but to an assise of * mixed...

mortdancester, because the person who is the nearest both mort-

makes the assise and draws to himself the person and ds2ceser

the more remote degree, so that an assise rather than a cosinage.

precipe proceeds, because that which is more remote

does not draw to itself that which is more closely joined.

But on the contrary in every case, and any of those may

well be joined with another action, because each speaks

of the seysine of him which he had on the day of his

death, which is not in & writof right, and each speaks of

possession, not of property. Likewise if this be done,

then there may be adjoined to the assise of mortdancester

any ancestor or successor who may be assumed in a plea

of cosinage, if it be said such a brother or sister, or such

a grandson or further kinsman as in & line descending,

or such a brother or sister and such an ancestor as in a

line ascending, and the reason will be the same.


There are also other writs something like these con- 5.
cerning the death of an uncle, and concerning the death t


of a father's sister or & mother's sister and the share- writs on.
able inheritance, &nd where in all cases the grand- Eiern
child is conjoined with the uncle or the father's sister or
the mother's sister in &n assise of mortdancester, where
itis not mixed up with cosinage, and where it is said
if A. the unele, or the father's sister, or mother's sister
B. and the brother or sister C. whose heirs they are


was seysed in demesne as of the fee, &c. But if the


134 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


feodo &c. Si autem hereditas partibilis non sit, &
avunculus de morte patris vel matris, avunculi, amite
vel materter; assisam mortis antecessoris portaverit, &
nepos ex fratre breve de consanguinitate versus domi-
num capitalem & versus extraneas personas de hsere-
ditate non partibili,nepos semper przferetur propter
juris prerogativam, quod ei descendit. Et eodem modo
diei poterit, si uterg, assisam mortis antecessoris arr&-
maverit versus extraneam personam, nepos, s. de morte
avunculi & materterz, et avunculus ipsius de morte
fratris vel sororis, cüm semper responderi possit ad
assisum avunculi, quód avunculus habet nepotem, qui
majus jus habet in tenemento illo quàm habeat avun-
eulus, si terr& non sit partibilis, vel tantundem si terra
sib partibilis, in quibus casibus nihil capiat per assisam.
Si autem aliquis ipsorum petat versus alium per assi-
sam, vel per breve de consanguinitate hrreditatem à
communi stipite descendentem, avunculus versus nepo-
tem vel e converso, nullius tenebit actio in hoc casu,
sed locum habebit breve de recto: secundüm quod
inferiüs dicetur in tractatu de consanguinitate.


Car. III.


f. 255. NE ; ; eee
1. Impetrato igitur brevi mortis antecessoris aliquo


t aeeesd modorum prseedictorum, càüm fuerit vicecomiti exhibi-
Bum es — tum, & electis juratoribus & faeto visu, detur dies
Sd partibus eoram justiciariis eertis die et loco, et suimo-
nembrevis, Deàntur juratores q tune sint ibi ad faciendam illam
e dto- recognitionem. Ad quem diem poterit se tenens esso-

niare si voluerit, unus vel plures separatim, secundium


q separatim tenuerint, & p se, vel simul, & in comuni,


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 185


inheritance be not shareable, and the uncle has brought
. an assise of mortdancester concerning the death of his
father or mother, of his uncle or father's sister or mother's
 Bister, and & grandson by a brother has brought a writ
of cosinage against the chief lord and against extraneous
persons concerning an inheritance not shareable, the
grandson shall always be preferred on account of the
prerogative of right, which descends to him, And in
the same way ib may be said if each has instituted an
assise of mortdancester against an exiüraneous person, &
nephew for instance concerning the death of an uncle
and an aunt, and an uncle of the same concerning the
death of & brother or sister, when it can always be
answered. to the assise of an uncle, that the uncle had
a nephew who had a greater right in the tenement than
the uncle, if the land be not shareable, or so much only,
if the land be shareable, in which cases he would take
. nothing by an assise, But if any of them claims against
another by an assise or & writ of cosinage an inheritance
descending from a common stock, the uncle against the
nephew or the converse, the action of no one will hold
in this case, but à writ of right will have place, aecord-
ing to what will be said below in the treatise concerning
cosinage.


CHAPTER III.


Á writ of mortdancester having been obtained in any  f.255.
of the aforesaid modes, when it has been exhibited to x...
the viscount, and the jurors having béen chosen and a ceedings
view Iinade, & day is given to the parties before the sean
justiciaries on.a eertain day and at & certain plaee, and the suing
let the jurors be summoned that they be there to make Qyoscrs
that recognition. At which day the tenant may essoin ing es-
himself, if he will, one or several separately, according ^^"

as they have been separate tenants, and by themselves,

or together, and in common, so thàt each of them may


2.
De resum-
monitione,


vel extra.


9.
Breve de
resummo-
nitione, si
as8i88 CA-
pienda
fuerit ex-
tra comi-
tatum.


136 "DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


ita q quilibet eorum habeat unicu esso de malo veni-
endi,si fuerint in pvincia, & aliquando de servitio diii
regis, unü vel plura. Si autem ultra mare & ante
sumonitione, tuc de ultra mare habebunt unum diem
brevem vel diffusum secundüm q tenens se essoniaverit
de peregrinatione versus Terram Sanctam, de simplici
peregrinatione, vel de passagio generali, vel ad Sanec-
tium Jacobum, vel citra, ad minus tamen habebit spa-
tium de ultra mare quadraginta dierum & unius ebbs
& unius fluctus, secundüm « inferius dicetdr pleniüs
de esson. Si autem primo die non venerit nec se
essoniaverit, tune statim resumoneatur. Et si assisa
capi debeat in cof, precipiatur vicecom q faciat ipsum
resumoniri etiam sine brevi.


Et reverg ubieunq, capiatur extra cof post esso,
vel resumofti, vel diem datum, vel waranti vocatione:
semper incipi debet in cof & ideó si fieri debet re-
sumonitio fier debet in eof, sed si &d resummonitio-
nem detur dies exiíra com, tunc necésse erit q fiat
resummonitio per breve, ut sciri possit extra com p
breve, quid vicecomi fecit de resumonitione Breve au-
tem tale erit.


Rex vie. salute, Sumone per bonos sumonitores À.
q sib cora justieciariis &c. tali loco tali die auditurus
recognitione assise mortis antecessoris, quze summonita
est in curia nostra coram prefatis justiclarlis nostris
de tanto terre vel redditus cum pertinentiis in tali
loco in tali villa, & ostensurus quare non fuit coram
eisdem justiciariis nostris apud talem locum tali die,
sicut alias sumonitus fnit, et habeas ihi sumonitores


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 197


have & single essoin of hindrance in coming, if they have
been in the province, and sometimes an essoin on account
of the king's service, one or more. But if he has essoined
himself as beyond the sea and before the summons, then
he shall have a day on account of absence beyond the
sea, & shorb or a diffuse one according as the tenant has
. essoined himself on account of a pilgrimage to the Holy
Land, or a simple pilgrimage, or a general passage, or to
Saint James, or on this side, nevertheless he shall have
at least à space of forty days beyond the sea and one
ebb and one flow of the tide, according as shall be ex-
plained more fully below on the subject of essoins. But
if he has not appeared on the first day nor has essoined
himself, then let him be forthwith resummoned. . And if
&n assise ought to be held in &à county, let it be enjoined
to the viscount that he cause him to be resummoned
even without à writ.
And in truth whenever the assise is held beyond the
county after an essoin or.& resummons or à day given Uo: - :
or à warrantor called, it ought always to be commenced summons,
in the county, and therefore if.a resummons ought to to wit tat
take place, i& ought to be made in the county, but ifa the county
upon the resummons a day be given outside the county, ?F Fey ono
then it will be necessary that à resummons be made by
a writ, that i6 may be known outside the county by à
writ, what the viscount has done concerning the resum-
mons. And the writ shall be of this nature:
The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good
summoners Á. that he should be before the justiciaries
ab such a place on such a day in order to hear the recog- necam
nition of an assise of mortdancester which has beon resum-
summoned in our court before our justiciaries concerning n
so much land or rent with its appurtenances in such a isto be
place in such & vill, and in order to shew wherefore he PR ung
was not before our said justieiaries at such a place county.
on such à day as he was otherwise summoned, and
produce there the summoners and this writ. Wit-


Britton, 1.


lii. ch. 10.


8 8.


f. 255 b.


-


1838 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


et hoc breve, "Teste &c. Sed refert. quem diem ha-
bere debeat in resumonitione, utrum scilicet quindecim
dierum vel minüs spatium, sed hzc terminari poterint
secundüm q assisa capi debeat in eom vel extra com:
si autem extra com, continebit dilatio spatium quin-
decim dierum, si autem infrà, non erit tam diffusa
dilatio, sed erunt judici! arbitrari,e dependentes ex
justiciariorum voluntate. Post resumonitionem veró
non jacebit essofi, nec post essonium resuimonitio: quia
p esson videtur tenens concedere sumonitionem. Et
ubi jacet resumonitio & ubi non, et in cujus persona,
habetis supra de assisis uliimze preesentationis pleniüs
in principio. Post resumonitionem sive venerit tenens
sive non venerit, capiatur assisa p defaltam, quis, tan-
tum operatur sua absentia quàm presentia : quia si
presens esset, nihil dicere posset in odium defalts
quare assisa remaneret, nisi forté cüm venerit pferat
chartas domini regis per quas dominus rex ei debeat
warantisare, & sine quo dicat q non potest respon-
dere: et idem erit dicendum, si chartas aliorum pro-
ferat & eos. vocaverit ad warantü. Ide in aliis casi-
bus, ubi scilicet &tecessor ille de cujus morte pfert
assisà petens, non tenuit terram illam nisi ad vitam
suam per cyrographum, & fine factu in curia domini
regis, vel si felonia objiciatur vel alia similis exceptio
peremptoria, quód si nulla talis, statim . pro poena
duarum illarum defaltarum capiatur assisa, secundüm
quod fieri debet in assisa ultimse presentationis & aliis
consimilibus, salva domino regi misericordia sua pro
contemptu summonitionis.


l«iuducie.? MSS. Crewe et Reg. 9. E. XV. item MS. Hawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 139


ness, &c. But itis of importance what day he ought to
have in the resummons, whether à space of fifteen days
or less, but these things may be determined according as
the assise ought to be held in the county or beyond it ; but
if beyond it, the delay will contain & space of fifteen days,
butif within it, the delay will not be so diffuse, but the
suspension of proceedings will be arbitrary depending on
the pleasure of the justiciaries. But an essoin will not lie
after & resummons, nor 8 resummons after an essoin, be-
cause by the essoin the tenant seems to admit he summons.
And when a resummons lies and when not, &nd in whose
person, you have above on the subject of assises of last
presentation more fully in the beginning. But after the
resummons whether the tenant has come or has not


come, let the assise be held by default, because his.


absence works as much as his presence; because if he
were present he could say nothing from the odiousness
of his default why the assise should be stayed, except by
chance when he has come, he should produce charters of
the king, by which the king ought to be warrant for
him, and without whom he says that he cannot answer,
and the same will have to be said, if he produces the
charters of others and calls them to warrant, The same
willtake place in other cases, where for instance the
ancestor, concerning whose death the claimant brings
&n assise, did not hold the land except for his life by &
chirograph, and & fine made in the court of the lord
the king, or if felony should be objected or some other
peremptory exception, but if nothing of that kind, let
the assise be held forthwith as a penalty for those two
defaults, according to what ought to be done in an assise
of last presentation and other similar assises, saving
an amercemenit to the lord the king for the contempt
of the summons,


f. 265 b.


l.
Qualiter
petens
debet fun-
dare inten-
tionem
suam par-
tibus com-
parentibus.


Britton, 1l.
iii. ch. x.
$ 18.


140 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


Car. IV. -


Utroq, autem tam petente quàm tenente comparente,
perlecto brevi et àudito, debet petens proponere inten-
tionem suam secundüm formam brevis & fundare eam
sic: Quód pater vel mater vel alius antecessor suus
fuit seysitus vel seysita in. dominico suo ut de feodo
de tanto terrze vel redditus cum pertinentiis in tali
villa die quo obiit, & quód obiit post terminum. Ite
quód ipse sit propinquior hseres & ostendat rationem
quare sit, quee quidem si tenens simpliciter negaverit,
& p omnia vel quendam articulum predictorum, per
assisam poterit veritas declarari, vel si nihil habeat
quod proponat, vel cüm habuerit & nihil proposuerit,
statim procedet assisa per duodecim juratores, contra
quos nihil excipi possit, et no p pauciores, secundüm
q fieri possit in assisa novse disseysinsz per- septem! ad
minis, ut supra per assisam novze disseysinee, & ideó
hie procedat assisa per duodecim ad minis, qui nulla


ratione sint recusabiles ut supra de nova disseysina. .


Jurare autem debent juratores in hac forma. Hoc
audis, justiciarie, quód veritatem dicam de hac assisa,
& de terra vel redditu, vel de tenemento unde tantus


redditus provenit, qui petitur, & unde visum feci per


preceptum domini regis, & pro nihilo omittam quin


veritàtem dicam, sicut me Dominus &e. Et quilibet .


post alium sic: Tale sacramentum &c. ut supra. Et si
quidam de novo appositi fuerint & recenter qui nun-
quam tenementum viderunt, jurare poterunt salvo visu.
Et tune refert utrum eodem die de novo appositi fue-
rint pro defectu aliorum recognitorum, vel ab initio
electi & visum facere noluerint in contemptum: quo
easu 8i recenter assumpti fuerint erit cum eis miseri-
corditer agendum, &d plus & &d minüs secundum ordi-
nationem justieijariorum. Si autem ab initio electi


! * per septem " down to ** disseysines," omitted, MS. Crewe.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. ld


CHAPTER IV.


. Each however, to wit, the claimant as wellasthe tenant |,
appearing ai the. same time, upon the writ having been How the
read aloud, the claimant ought to propound his declaration ought to
and to found it thus: that his father or mother, or somo found his

eeclaration
other ancestor of his, was seysed in his own demesne a8 upon the
of a fee, of so much land or rent with its appurtenances Penribi ap"
in such a vill on the day on which he died, and that he
died after the term. . Likewise that he is the next heir,
and let him state the reason why he is so, which, indeed,
if the tenant simply deny either wholly or as regards
some article of those aforesaid, the truth may be declared
. by an assise, or if he has nothing to state, or if he has
and states nothing, the assise shall forthwith proceed by
twelve jurors, against whom no exception can be taken,
and not by fewer, aecording as may be done in an assise
of novel disseysine by seven at least, as above by.an assise
of novel disseysine, and accordingly let the assise here
proceed by twelve at least, who are refusable on no grounds
as above in novel disseysine. But the jurors ought to
swear in this form : You hear this, justiciary, that I will
. Say the truth concerning this assise, and concerning the
land or rent, or concerning the tenement from which so

much rent is derived, which is claimed, and whereof I
have had a view by the precept of the lord the king, and
for nothing will Ilomit to declare the truth, so may the
Lord me, &c. And each of the others, Such an oath as, &c.,
as above. Ánd ifsome have been added anew and recently,
who have not viewed the tenement, they may swear
* gaving the view." And then it is of importance whether
they have been added anew on the same day from the de-
fault of other jurors, or if they have been chosen from
the commencement and have been unwilling to take &
view in contempt, in which case if they have been recently
assumed, they will have to be amerced more or less
according to the ordinance of the justiciaries, But if
they have been elected and assumed from the commence-


— — MÀ
mm mn mim tt — apum I m a e e s -.


2.
f. 256.


— Si jura-


tores sint
absentes,
breve de
habendo
corpora
eorum.


3.
Si capta
fuerit as-
gisa. per


14929 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSOBIS.


fuerint & assumpti & visum facere ad mandatum vice-
comitis recusaverunt, dupliciter deliquerunt, scilicet de
falso sacramento, & contemptu, & magis ut videtur
quàm ili qui obediunt, licet pejeraverint. Et unde
nescitur, si ejusdem debet esse conditionis cujus sunt
ili qui visum fecerint, cüm de jure conditionis deteri-
oris esse deberent. Facto igitur sacramento (secundüm
quod predietum est) càüm omnes presentes fuerint, si
per omnia convenerit seeundüm eorum veredictum, aut
judieabitur seysina petenti aut tenenti imperpetuum,
vel ad tempus à clamore petentis liberabitur per assi-
sam, & sic absolutio vel condemnatio subsequetur, se-
eundiun quód juratores verum dixerint vel falsum, cer-
tum vel obscurum, ut supra de assisa Et si falsum
dixerint, inde sequetur remedium, ut infrà de convic-
tionibus.


Item licet partes! presentes sint & se posuerint in
assisam, juratores tamen possunt esse absentes qui
declarare deberent veritatem, & 1deó de necessitate ali-
quando ponitur assis& in respectu pro defectu recogni-
torum, & ideà precipiatur vicecomi quód habeat coram
justieiariis corpora recognitorum per hoc breve. Rex
vieecof salutem.  Prsecipimus tibi q habeas coram jus-
ticiariis nostris apud talem locum tali die eorpora A.
B. C. & aliorum nominandorum, recognitorum  assism
mortis antecessoris, quam talis in curia nostra coram
&c. arramaverit versus talem de tanto. terree cum per-
ünentiis in tali villa ad faciendam assisam illam, et
si plures fort? fecerint defaltam, tunc dicatur, & ad
audiendum judieium suum de pluribus defaltis.


Si autem per defaltam capiat assisa, sive tenens pre-
sens fuerit in ipsa captione sive non, vel si presens


! « partes," omitted, MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE ÓF MORTDANCESTER. 148


ment and have refused to take à view upon the mandate
of the viscount, they are doubly delinquent, to wit, in
breaking their oath and in contempt, and more so as it
seems than those who obey, although they have perjured
themselves, And hence itis not known, if they ought to
be in the same condition as those who have taken a view,
since of right they ought to be in & worse condition.
. The oath having then been taken (according to what has
been said above) when all are present, if it has been agreed
wholly according to their verdiet the seysine shall be
&djudged in perpetuity either to the claimant or to the
tenant, or the tenant shall be released for a time from the
claim of the plaintiff by the assise, and so an acquittal or
8 condemnation shall follow according as the jurors have
said what is true or false, certain or uncertain, as above
concerning an assise, And if they have said what is
false, & remedy shall thereupon follow, as below concern-
ing convictions.


Likewise although the parties may be present, and
put themselves on the assise, the jurors nevertheless, who f 256.


ought to declare the truth, may be absent, and therefore im sodlà


. of necessity the assise is respited from default of re- absent
cognisors, and therefore let it be enjoined to the viscount gelves,
that he produce before the justiciaries the persons of the sic
recognisors by this writ. The king to the viscount their per-
greeting. We enjoin you that you produce before our 99?*
justiciaries at. such & place on such & day the persons of

A, B. C. and others to be named, the recognisors of an

assise of mortdancester, which so-and-so in our court
before &c. has instituted against such a person concerning

so much land with its appurtenances in such a vill, to

hold that assise, &nd if several by chance have made
default, then let it be said, *and to hear judgment

* against himself for several defaults" .


But, if the assise be held by default, whether the tenant Ted


has been present at the holding of it or not, or if being n


EN


imd uA v. wu Da. LED UILOC SUED uid io. NS aria fade an aic aec. ooi Mat cel ELM caa adit i1


TELS d


^o A — qua t dp cd quCO r-. UpWNEP UR, usc CEP meet p. yv o


CEPS CEU TN re HN RUE X T. et E Noo a TEN E tor ee tT. ENS
*


defaltam,
vel si sta-
tim tenens
se ponat

in assisam
sine alia
exceptione.
Britton, 1.
lii. ch. x.

S 14.


].
De seysina
facta pe-
tenti per
judicium.


2.
Breve de
seysina
facienda
post cap-
tionem as-
gis.


144 DE ASSISA MORTIS -ANTECESSORIS.


concesserit assisam, & ita capiatur in modum assis,
& non juratz, si juratores in veredicto suo dicendo
Super sacramentuum suum de aliqua exceptione in
quam petens se non posuerit falsum dixerint, locus
erit covictioni, quia neq, tenens sit super exceptione
Status, finis facti, convetionis, rei judicatz, vel hujus-
modi: vel si dixerint de aliqua exceptione verum vel
falsum alia quàm in quam petens & tenens se posu-
erint, si falsum dixerint, locus erit convictioni: quod
lamen non esset, si presens uiraq, pars de communi
consensu, quód it& esset vel non esset, se poneret in
assisam.


Car. V.


Contingit multotiens quód ante judicium partes ter-
minant assisam per concordiam. Sed ante videndum
est qualiter seysina fiat petenti postquam per judicium
recuperaverit. Et sciendum quód petenti fieri debet
Sseysina per tale breve per judicium.


Rex vicecomiti salutem. Scias quód A. in curia
nostra recuperavit seysinam suam versus B. de tanto
lerre cum pertinentiis in tali villa per assisam mortis
antecessoris inde ibi inter eos captam. Et ideó tibi
precipimus, quód prsdieto A. de predicta terra cum
pertinentis sine dilatione plenariam seysinam habere
facias. Item alia forma, ubi eustos abjudicatus est de
custodia su& forte propter vastum (& destructionem
quam feciób in custodia sua, ideó fiat parenti illius
minoris nomine minoris et ad opus minoris seysina


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 145


present he has admitted the assise, and so it be held after by default
the manner of an assise and not of & jury, ifthe jurors tcosnt has
in giving their verdict upon their oaths withoutany ex- at once
ception upon which the tenant has not put himself has Poit on the
said what is false, there will be place for & conviction, assise with-
because the tenant; has not put himself upon an exception er it
of satus, or of a fine having been levied, or of a conven-

tion, or of à previous judgment in the matter: or if they

have said what is true or false upon any exception other

than that upon which the claimant or the tenant has put

himself, if they have said what is false there will be

place for à conviction, which, however, would not be the

case, if each party being present with common consent

that it was so or was not so, has put himself upon the

assise. |


4


CHAPTER V.


It happens on many occasions that the parties before |.
judgment terminate the assise by an accord. But we d der ne
must first see how seysine is to be made to the claimant the claim-
after he has recovered by the judgment. And it is to be pem
known that seysine ought to be made to thé claimant by
the judgment through such a writ.


The king to the viscount greeting. Know that À.in 2.
our court has recovered his seysine against B. concerning n, - Ms lor
80 much land with its appurtenances in such a vill by an seysine
assise of mortdancester there held between them. And holding of
therefore we enjoin you that you cause the aforesaid A. the assise.
. to have plenary seysine without delay of the aforesaid
land with its appurtenanees, Likewise another form,

Where & guardian has been judicially removed from his

guardianship by reason of waste and destruction which

he has eaused in his wardship, therefore let there be

made to the parent of the minor in the name of the

minor and in aid of the r minor seysine by this writ, or
Q180. E


f. 256 b.


9.
Breve si
querens
queratur,
quod sey-
sinam


suam ha-
bere non
possit,


146 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


per hoe breve, vel hoc potest esse quia tenementum
fui socagium & pertinuit custodia ad matrem. . Rex
vicecomiti salutem. Scias quód A. fili N. in curia
nostra coram justiciariis nostris per judicium ejusdem
curie nosire recuperavit seysinam suam versus B. de
tanta terra cum pertinentiis in tali villa, unde prse-
dietus N. pater ipsius Á. obiit seysitus ut de feodo.
Et ideo tibi precipimus quód C. s. tali mulieri custodi
ipsius Á. tanquam propinquiori parenti ex parte ma-
iris, e& eo quàd ipse A. est infrà setatem, de preedieta
terra sine dilatione plenariam seysinam habere facias.
Et non permittas quód A. capitalis dominus feodi
ilius h&beat custodiam illius terre vel hseredis, quia
in prsdieta curia nostra foris judieatur de custodia :
ila, eo quód terra illa teneri debet de socagio. Et
sub eadem forma fieri poterit breve de seysina, ubi
capitalis dominus vastum fecerit et destructione, prop-
ter quod sit foris judicatus, quod quidem fieri poterit
per assisam mortis antecessoris: & tuno dicatur in fine
brevis, foris judicatus est de eads& custodia propter
vastum & destructionem quam fecit in eadem terra.
Teste &c. Et notandum quód in nulla assisa preter-
quam in magna assisa& per breve de recto recupera
aliquis seysinam: per defaltam, quia in aliis assisis
omnib? nulla alia sequitur pcena post defaltam, post
resummonitionem  & essoi, nisi quód capiatur assis&
per defaliam. Si sit aliquis qui queratur post assisam
captam, quód seysinam suam habere non possit secun-
düm quod illam recuperaverit, tunc fiat vicecom breve
in hac forma. |


Rex vicecomiti salutem,  Seias quód justiciarii nostri
qui ultimà itineraverunt in comitatu tuo recordantur
quód A, recuperaverit seysinam suam versus B. de
tante ierra &c. coram eisdem justiciariis nostris apud
N. per assisam mortis antecessoris inde ibi inter eos
captam, & unde idem A. queritur quód idem B. ad-
hue ei deforceat terram illam, vel sio: quód seysinam


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. . 147


. this may be done because the tenement is socage and the
guardianship appertains to the mother. 'The king to the
viscount greeting. Know that A. the daughter of N. in
our court before our justiciaries has recovered by a judg-
meni of our said court her seysine against B. concerning
so much land with its appurtenances in such a vill,
whereof the aforesaid N. the father of the said A. died
seysed as in fee. And therefore we enjoin you that you
cause to be given to C., to wit, such a woman, as guardian
of the said A., as the nearest parent on the mother's side,
and inasmuch as the said ÁÀ.is under age, plenary seysine f. 256 b.
of the aforesaid land without delay, and that you do not
permit that A. the chief lord should have the custody of
the said land or of the said heir, because in our aforesaid
court he has been deprived by a judgment of the said
custody, inasmuch as that land ought to be held in
Socage. And a writ may be issued under the same form
concerning the seysine, when the chief lord has caused
waste and destruction, on account whereof he has been
deprived by a judgment, which may be done by an assise
of mortdancester, and then let it.be said at the end of
the writ, he has been deprived by & judgment of the said
eustody on account of waste and destruction, which he
had eaused on that land. Witness &c. And itis to be
noted that in no assise except in a great assise by à writ
of right does any one recover seysine by default. If
there be any one who complains after an assise has
been held, that he cannot have his seysine according as
he has recovered it, then let à writ go to the viscount
in this form:


The king to the viscount greeting. Know that our — 8.
justiciaries, who went the last iter in your county, record mc.
that Á. has recovered his seysine against B. concerning is com-
so much land &c. before our said justiciaries at N. through des prr
an assise of mortdancester there held thereon between cannot
them, &nd whereof the said A. complains that the said B. iralg ic
still deforces that land from him, or thus, that he cannot


K 2


148 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


suam inde habere non potest, sicut eam recuperaverit,


.. vel non in pace: Et ideó tibi prs;cipimus quód eidem


4.
Breve de
seysina,
ubi tenens
gratis re-
cognovit.


5.
Si justi-
tiarii pro-
pria au-
toritate
scribant
vicecomiti
ex parte
domini
regis.


A. sine dilatione plenariam seysinam habere facias de
predieta terra secundüm quod illam recuperavit, &
ipsum in seysina su& manuteneas & defendas, ne am-
plius inde clamorem audiamus. "Teste &c. ltem alia
forma, si tenens sine captione assise recognoverit ter-
ram esse ipsius petentis.


Rex vicecomiti salutem. Scias, quód cüm assisa mor-
tis antecessoris summonita esset in curia nostra coram
&c. inter Á. petentem & PB. tenentem de tanto terrze
cum pertinentiis in tali villa vel aliter. Scias, quód
cüm ÀÁ. in curia nostra coram &c. peteret versus B.
tantam lerram &c. per assisam mortis antecessoris ibi
inter eos summonitam, idem B. venit in eadem curia
nostra coram &c. & recognovit totam predictam ter-
ram cum pertinentiis esse jus ipsius A. & illam ei
reddidit in eadem curia: & ideó tibi precipimus &c.
ub supra, et si per tale breve seysinam suam habere
non possit, vel uti seysin& phacifiea, solent justiciarii
super hoe scribere vicecom sub nomine suo ex parte
domini regis ita.

Talis et socii sui justiciarii itinerantes in tali comi-
iatu vic. salutem. Scias, quód talis in curia domini
regis coram nobis recuperavit seysinam suam &c. ut
supra. Et it& in alis brevibus omnibus secundüm
formam brevis: & ideó vobis mandamus ex parte
domini regis &c, ut supra. Si quis per concordiam
& finem factum seysinam suam recuperaverit vel in
assisa mortis antecessoris, vel recognoverit terram il-
lam in toto vel in parte esse jus petentis, vel petens
e contrario remiserit & quietum clamaverit jus suum,
vel alio quoeung, modo eoneordaüi fuerint, tota forma


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 149


have his seysine thereof as he has recovered it, or not in
peace, and therefore we enjoin you cause the said A.
without delay to have plenary seysine of the aforesaid
land according as he has recovered it, and that you
maintain and defend him, that we ma&y no more hear &
complaint from him. Witness, &e. Likewise another
form if the tenant without the holding of an assise has
acknowledged the land to be the plaintiff's:


The king to the viscount greeting. Know that when | 4.
an assise of mortdancester was summoned in our courte, T His
before &c., between À. as claimant and B. as tenant of so where a
mueh land with its appurtenances i in such a vill, or other- gard ]
wise. Know that when Á. in our court before &oc., claimed acknow-
against .B. so much land &c. by an assise of mortdancester claim. -
summoned there between them, the said B. came into our

court before &c. and acknowledged that the whole of the
aforesaid land with its appurtenances was the right of

the said À., and he restored it to him in the said court;

and therefore we enjoin you &ce. as above, and if he

cannot have his seysine through such a writ, or enjoy
a-peaceable seysine of it, the justiciaries are accustomed

to write to the viscount under their own name on behalf


of the lord the king thus: .


So-and-so and their associate justiciaries itinerant in 3 "S
such & county to the viscount greeting. Know that such If the ju of
& person in the court of the lord the king before us has hace own
recovered his seysine &c. as above.  Ánd so in all other ii Ped
writs aecording to the form of the writ, and therefore we hn dud
command you on behalf of the lord the king &c. as above. behalf of
If any one has recovered his seysine by an aecord and & ke king
fine levied or in an assise of mortdancester, or has 'ac- j
knowledged the land in whole or in part to be the right
of the claimant, or the claimant on the contrary has
remitted and quit-elaimed his right, or in some other
manner they have come to an accord, let the entire form


of the aecord, aecording to what has been agreed upon


& xXUEm SC SD up ep PTT. .
ce dai cdi AE Lee V I T NT Y c k-9 p Ue "m
' Mot E
U
à


6.

f. 257.
Breve de
Seysina
per con-
cordiam.


150 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSOBIS.


concordie secundüm quod inter partes convenerit inse-
ratur in brevi de seysina facienda tali modo.


Rex vicecomiti salutem. Scias, quód convenit in
curia nostra coram justicieriis &c. inter A. ' petentem
&; B. tenentem de tanto terre cum pertinentiis in tali
villa, unde assisa mortis antecessoris suinonita fuit
inter eos in eadem curia, scilicet, quàd predictus talis
remisit vel recognovit &e. Et sic inseratur tota forma


. eoncordiwe de verbo in verbum, é in fine dicatur: Et


7.
De exten-
sione fa-
cienda, si
forte alia
terra as-
signanda
fuerit in
excam-
bium.


ideo tibi precipimus quàd predicto tali de tota prse-
dicta terrà cum pertinentiis secundum quod predictum
est sine dilatione plenariam seysin& habere facias. Teste
&c. Gi autem petens totum remiserit vel tenens totum
recognoverit et receperit aliquam terram in compensa-
tionem pro remissione vel recognitione, tunc dicatur.


Sciatis quód convenit &e. ut supra, seilicet quód
predietus talis recognovit vel remisit &c. & pro hac
&c. idem B. concessit eidem A. viginti solidatas terrze
f; redditus de terra sua in tali villa. Et ideó tibi
praecipimus, quód assumptis tecum duodecim tam mili-
tibus quàm aliis liberis, legalibus & discretis hominibus
de vieineto illo per quos negotium "illud melius expe-
diri poterit, in propria persona tue aecedas ad mane-
rium illud, & per eorum sacramentum extendi & ap-
pretiari facias viginti solidatas terre & redditus in
preedieto manerio loco competenti, & facta, extensione
& appretiatione, tune per visum recognitorum preedie-
torum habere facias & assignare eidem tali preedietas -
viginti solidat terre & redditus cum pertinentiis per
rátionabilem extensionem. Et quid & ibi; & per quas
particulas terram illam & redditum ei assignaveris no-


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 151


between the parties, be inserted in the writ for giving
Seysine in this manner:


. The king to the viscount greeting. Know thatit has .. 6. .
been agreed upon in our court before our justiciaries &o., à ine
between À. the claimant and B.the tenant, concerning seysine T
so much land with its appurtenances in such a vill hrongh an
whereof an assise of mortdancester has been summoned
between them in the said court, to wit, that such a

person aforesaid has remitted or acknowledged &e. And

so let the whole form of the accord be inserted word for

word, and at the end let it be said, and therefore we

enjoin you that you cause so-and-so to have plenary

seysine without delay of the whole of the aforesaid land

with its appurtenances as aforesaid. ^ Witness &c. But

if the claimant has remitted the whole or the tenant has
acknowledged the whole and has accepted some land in
compensation for the remission or the acknowledgment,

then let it be said.


Know ye that it has been agreed upon &c. as above, 7.
io wit, that so-and-so aforesaid has acknowledged or ecu
remitted &c. and for this &c. the.said B. has allowed to vd i
the seid A, twenty shilling's worth of land and the rente of 57, chonce
his land in such a vill, and therefore we enjoin you, that has to be
having sssumed to yourself twelve as well knights as e
other free, loyal, and discreet men of thaát visne through
whom that business may be better expedited, you go in
your proper person to that manor and by their oaths
cause to be extended and to be appreised twenty shilling's
worth of land and the rents in the aforesaid manor in &
competent place, and upon an extension and. appraise-
ment having been made, then by the view of the afore-
said recognisors cause the said person to have and to have
assigned to him the aforesaid twenty shilling's worth of
land and the rents with the appurtenances by a reason-
able extension. And what and there and by what
parcels you will have assigned that land and rent to him


*


1529 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


bis vel justic. nostris &c. tali loco & tali die, evidenter
& distinct? et apperté per literas tuas sigillates sigillo
iuo et sigillis preedictorum duodecim juratorum & per
duos legales homines ex illis per quorum visum illam
terram & redditum ei assignaveris, et habeas ibi hoc


breve. ot
Car. VI.
1. Item partibus in judicio constitutis multa poterit


"3 LÀ . * e* . e. .
DeezceP, tenens dicere contra psonam justiciarii de jurisdic-


responsi- tione. ltem contra breve impetratum de errore. ltem

opas dieiuq contra psonam petentis, quare non possit petere. ltem

quare de- de minus legitima suionitione. ltem contra personas

beatre-  . — | . .

manere, jur&torum, et hsec sunt quasi exira assisam é& non
tangunt actionem neq, perimunt, sed ad tempus im-
pediunt, secundüm quod in magna parte dictum est
Supra in tractatu de assisa novse disseysinsze, sed quia
superiàs minüs. dictum est de sumonitione, quia nulla
est ibi sumonitio sed attachiamentum, híc in parte
dicendum est. Cüm igitur tenens sumoneatur ad cer-
tum diem q sit ibi auditurus illam recognitionem, tuno
aut est sumonitio illa legitima et rationabilis vel mi-
nus legitima, sive testata fuerit sive non testata: si
aute legitima, tüc procedatur in assisa, si aute illegi-
tima aut est calüniata aut no calüniata. Si aute calu-
niata sit, inquirat à sumonitoribus (facta examinatione
separata) de die & loco & aliis cireumstantiis, & si
facta examinatione constitef sumonitionem esse legiti-
mam, tunc procedat (ut priüs) ad assisam. Si autem


i


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 158


[certify] to us or our justiciaries &c., at such a place and


on such a day, evidently and distinctly and openly by .
your letters sealed with your seal and with the seals of -
the aforesaid twelve jurors and by two loyal men out of

their number, by whose view you have assigned to him -


that land and rent, and produce there this writ.


CnuaPrER VI.


Likewise when the parties are placed in court the
tenant may say many things against the person of the
justiciary concerning his jurisdietion. Likewise against?
the writ sued out erroneously. Likewise against the
person of the claimant, wherefore he cannot claim; Like-
wise eoncerning the summons being not legitimate.
Likewise concerning the persons of the jurors, and these
are rather as i6 were outside the assise.and 'do not touch
nor perempt the action, but for a time impede it, accord-
ing to what has been said in a great part above in the
ireatise concerning an assise of novel disseysine, but
because little has been said above concerning a summons,
because there is no summons there but an attachment,
we must here speak of it in part. When therefore the
iruant is summoned for a certain day that he be there
to hear the recognisance, then that summons is either
legitimate and reasonable or not legitimate, whether it
was attested or not attested ; but if it be legitimate, then
let the proceedings of the assise be continued; but if it
is not. legitimate, it is either impugned or not impugned.
But if it be impugned, let it be inquired into from the
summoners (the examination being conducted separately)
concerning the day and the place and the other cireum-
stances, and if upon an examination having been made it
Shall be established that the summons is legitimate, then
let proceedings be continued with the assise. But if it


Of TN
tions and
replies
st

tha: assise,
wherefore
it ought to
be stayed.


f. 257 b.
Britton, l.
iii. ch. x.


$ 8.


154 — DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


constiterit illam esse illegitima, tunc detur alius dies le-
gitimus secundüm q partes fuerint manentes infrà comi-
tat vel extra. Ad quem diem poterit tenes se essoniare
sl voluerit, si defaltam fecerit non eri& resummonendus,
sed capiatur assisa per defaltam, quia diem datum in.
banco dedicere non poterit nec etiam causari post esso-
nium faetum, quia per essonium concedit summoni-
tionem esse rationabilem. ltem nec post resummoni-
tionem, quia 5i sumonitio fuerit minus rationabilis,
resumonitio & dies datus à judice dici non poterit
minüs rationabilis. ltem si summonitio minis fuerit
rationabilis, sed tamen à tenenté cüm venerit non ca-
lumniata, procedendum erit ac si esset rationabilis nec
si justiclarius illam noverit esse minüs legitimam, non
pertinebit ad ipsum propter hoc dare tenenti exceptio-
nem. ltem cüm ambo presentes fuerint in judicio &
petatur audientia brevis & forté fuerit deperditum per
negligentiam clericorum vel vicecoih, non tamen prop-


"ter hoe remanebit assisa, dum tamen coram justiciariis


2.
Britton, ib.
$ 18.


fuerit semel recitatum & auditum vel in comitat, & ita
q juratores electi fuerint & visus terre factus, si hoc
fuerit coram justiciariis protestatum.


Item cüàm justiciarius assignatus fuerit ad aliquam
assisam capiendam specialiter, si breve originale fuerit
deperditum, tamen non nocet, s&i justiciarius - exhibeat
warantum, càm in waranto contineatur originale, sed
non tenet econtrario, videlicet si warantus deficiat
quód assisa procedat, nisi forté talis sit justiciarius
quasi capitalis à latere domini regis transmissus.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 155


be ascertained that the summons is illegitimate, then let


another legitimate day be appointed aecording as the
parties are residing within the county or are beyond it.
"At which day the tenant may essoin himself, if he will,
if he should make default he is not to be resummoned,
but let the assise be taken by default, because he cannot
deny that a day was given him by the bench, nor allege
an excuse after he has made an essoin, because by an
essoin he admits that the summons was reasonable.
Likewise he cannot after & resummons, for if the $um-
mons was not reasonable, the resummons and a day given
by the judge cannot be said to be unreasonable.  Like-
wise if the summons was not reasonable, but nevertheless
. was not impugned by the truant when he has appeared,

proceedings will be continued as ifit was reasonable, nor
if the justiciary be aware that it is not legitimate will it
. pertain to him for that reason to allow to the tenant an
exception. Likewise when both are present in judgment,
and a shorb audience be prayed and the [writ] has been
lost through the negligence of the clerks or of the vis-
count, the assise shall not for that reason be stayed, pro-
vided it has been once read aloud before the justicia-
ries or in the county, and so that thé jurors have been
chosen and a view of the land made, if this has been
protested before the justiciaries.


Likewise when a justiciary has been assigned to hold


f. 257 b,


specially some assise, if the original writ be lost, never- eu
theless it is not hurtful if the justiciary exhibits his rt has


warrant, since the original writ is comprised in the


not been
exhibited


warrant, but the contrary does not hold good, to wit, if because it


the warrant fails, that the assise should proceed, unless


has been
lost, what


by chance the justiciary be as it were a chief justiciary i in to be


sent from the side of the king himself.


1.
Si tenens


156 | DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


Car. VII.
Item si ambo prsesentes fuerint in judicio petens &


warrantum tenens, habet forté tenens warantum & defensorem, qui


vocaverit
in assisa
mortis an-
tecessoris.


Britton, 1.
iii. ch. xi.


$1.


eum defendere tenetur in seysina sua conira petentem.
Quo casu refert, cüm talem tenens vocaverit ad wa-
rantü, utrum  warantus plenz setatis fuerit vel infrà


setatem, quia si infrà statem, oportet tenentem docere


rationem quare debeat warantizare, & chartas vel ho-
magium captum &b antecessore, vel aliud, ne frivola
sit vocatio vel dolosa, q quidem est in majore, licet
sine charta vocari possit ad warantum per auxilium
curie, si petatur auxilium, si autem non, qui vocavit
faciat eum venire. lllud idem fiat de minore, si con-
Stiteri&b quód debeat warantizare, licet cüm venerit ad
chartas antecessoris sui non teneatur ante etatem
respondere.


Breve enim &d sumonendum  warantum, si fuerit
manens exira comitat, tale erit, si autem infrà, sine
brevi suimoneatur. Potest item unus tenens plures
vocare warantos, qui sunt loco unius heredis, sicut


. unum corpus, & eodem modo plures successivé de wa-
ranto in warantum, & quo casu, si unus ex pluribus


defaltam fecerit, capiatur assisa per defaltam unius ac
si omnes defecissent, sive quidam illorum fuerint infrà
celatem sive non. ltem plures tenentes unum possunt
vocare ad warantum vel plures. Item plures tenentes,
plures warantos. Breve autem de summonendo waran-


tum tale erit.


9.
Breve de
summo-


M


Rex vicecomiti salutem. Summoneas per bonos sum-
monitores À. q sit coram justiciariis &c. itinerantibus


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 157


CHAPTER VII.


Likewise if both should be present in court, the 1.
elaimant and the tenant, the tenant has by chance a D has
warrantor and & defender who is bound to defend him called a


in his seysine against & claimant, In which case, it is; ART.
of importance when the tenant has called such & person of mort-
to warrant, whether the warrantor is of full age or under "^"^*ster
age, because if he be under age it is incumbent on the

tenant to show cause, wherefore he ought to warrant,

&nd to exhibit charters and to prove homage taken by

his ancestor, or something else, to show that the calling

him to warrant is not frivolous nor deceitful, which is

also the case if he be of age, although he may be called

to warrant without charters [being shown] by the aid of

the court, if it be asked for, but if not, let him who

called him cause him to appear. Let the same thing be

done in the case of & minor, if it be made clear that he

ought to warrant, although when he has come to the
charters of his ancestor, he is not bound to answer until

he has come of full age.


But & writ to summon the warrantor, if he be staying
outside the county, should be of this form, but if within Ite m
the county, he may be summoned without a writ. Like- under age,
wise one tenant may summon several warrantors who whatisto
are in the place of & single heir, like one body, and in
ihe same way several successively from warrantor to
warrantor,and in which case if one out of several has  f.258.
made default, let the assise be taken by the default of
one as if they had all made default, whether some of
them have been under age or not. Likewise several
tenants may call one or more to warrant. Likewise
Several tenants may call several warrantors. But &
writ to summon & warrantor shall be of this form:


The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good s,
summoners Á. that he be present before our justiciaries 4 in writ for


ummmon-


158 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


.nendo war- & ad hoc specialiter constitutis, vel justiciariis de
T&nUT. — panco tali loco, tali die &d warantizandum B. tantam
terram cum pertinentiis in tali villa, quam C. in curia
nostra coram eisdem ;justiciariis nostris clamaverit,
versus eundem B. per assisam mortis antecessoris inde
ibi inter eos summonitam. Et unde idem B. in eadem
euria nostra coram eisdem justiciarüs nostris vocavit
ipsum Á. ad warantum versus predictum C. & habeas
ibi summonitores & hoc breve, teste &e. Si autem
plures waranti fuerint voeati manentes in eodem comi-
tat, tune omnes summoneantur simul & per unum
breve. Si autem in diversis com, tunc quilibet wa-
rantus habeat suum breve, ità tamen quód sic sint
interlaqueata, quód in quolibet brevi fiat mentio de
omnibus warantis tali modo. |
4.


Breve de . .
summo- Summoneas per bonos summonitores A. quód sit
vici pd coram &c. ut supra, ad warantizandum B. simul cum
cum voca- C. & D. tantam terram &c. ut supra, ita quód quodli-
tus manens


&textra Det breve respondeat alteri, & quód in uosnet brevi


eomitetum, fiat mentio de quolibet waranto.
interlaque-
atum.


5. — Et ad diem suum poterunt se essoniare simul &
wi iig semel vel vicissim, ita quód quilibet eorum unicum
tionem habeat essonium, antequam ad warantiam respondeant,
were». isi prima die compareant & velint gratis respondere.

. 8i autem ad diem summonitionis comparuerint waranti

& petens, & tenens non, statim procedet assisa, & ca-

piatur per defaltam, si juratores presentes fuerint; &

si non, detur alius dies, & waranti, ecüm se obtulerint

usque ad quartum diem, quarto die recedent quieti de
Briton,i?, W&r&ntia, nec poterit ienens ulteriàs aliquid dicere,
885,0. quare assis& remaneat, Sed quare non recuperat pe-


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 159


&c. itinerant and for this purpose specially sphointed ing à war-
orthe justiciaries of the bench at such a place on such "?^tor
a dày to warrant to B.so much land with its appur-
tenances in such a vill which C. has claimed in our
court before our said justiciaries against the said B. by

an assise of mortdancester summoned thereon ai that
place between them. And whereof the said B. in our

said court before our said justiciaries has vouched the

said A. as & warrantor against the aforesaid C., and pro-

duce there the summoners and this writ. Witness &c.

But if several warrantors have been vouched abiding in

the same county, then let them all besummoned together

and by one writ. But if in different counties, then let

each warrantor have his own writ, in such manner
however that they may be thus interlaced, that in each

writ mention be made of all the warrantors in this


manner: | " 4
inter-
Summon by good summoners A. that he be before &c. laced writ


as above in order to warrant to B. together with C. and Rt
D. so much land, &c. as above, so that each writ may varrentor,


when the
correspond with the other, and that in inn writ there vouchee
is abiding
be mention of each warrantor. | beyon epo
county.


And on their own day they may essoin themselves 5.
together and at the same time or in turns, so that each de essoins
. of them may have a single essoin beforé they answer to vouching
the warranty, unless they appear on the first day and , morrun"
wisli gratuitously to answer. But if on the day of the "^
summons the warrantors and the claimant have appeared,
but the tenant not so, the assise shall forthwith proceed
and be taken by default, if the jurors should be present;
and if not,let &nother day be assigned, and the war-
rantors, when they have presented themselves up to the
fourth day, let them on the fourth day go away quit of -
their warranty, nor shall the tenant be able further to
say anything, wherefore the assise should be stayed.

But why does not the claimant recover forthwith and


E


160 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECKSSORIS.


lens statim & sine assis& per defaltam tenentis? non
videtur ratio quare non, sed quia articuli in brevi
contenti possent esse falsi, quidam vel omnes, & quam-


vis res prima facie desinat esse tenentis, oportet tamen


petentem docere rationem & jus, quare pertineat ad
ipsum. Si autem petens non compareat, expectato
quarto die recedet tenens quietus de brevi illo, & simi-
liter waranti. Si &utem presentes fuerint petens &


tenens & warantus defaltam fecerit, tunc ante omnia


Britton, 1b.


88 7, 8.


f. 258 b.


per defaltam waranti inprimis capiatur assisa, nec pro-
cedatur versus warantum ad aliquam distrietionem per
captionem terrarum vel alio modo ante captionem
assise, & donec sciatur utrum tenens amiserit vel re-
tinuerit per assisam. Si autem retinuerit, tunc non
erit necesse procedere contra warantum in placito
warantie, & unde si primó die capi non possit assisa,
sed detur alius dies vel fortà plures pro defectu recog-
nitorum.vel per essonium tenentis, & ad diem illum,


si ante captionem assise venerit warantus & velit


warantizare & defendere, audiri non debet, antequam
assisa capiatur in modum assise, tum quia diem non
habet ad warantizandum, tum quia amisit per defaltam
sugm omnes exceptiones & omnes defensiones suas, &
ita quód non potest defendere, tum quia nescitur ad
hoc ante captionem assise, utrum oporteat eum de
necessitate defendere vel non defendere. Et quód as-
sisa capi debeat, antequam  waratus respondeat ad
warantiam, postquam comparuerit post defaltam, habe-
tis de termino s. M. ano regis H. 3. incipiente 4. in
com Essex.  Assisa mortis antecessoris si Brianus pater
Henrici, & quia petens recuperaverit per assisam, te-


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 161


without an assise through the default of the tenant?
There does not seem any reason why not, but because
the articles contained in the writ may be false, some or
all, and although the thing at first sight ceases to be the
tenant's, it 1s incumbent however on the claimant to
Show reason and fight why it belongs to him. But if
the elaimant does not appear, after the fourth day has
been expected, let the tenant go away quit concerning
that writ,and in like manner the warrantors. But if
the claimant and the tenant are both present and &
warrantor makes default, then before all things let the
assise be held in the first place in default of the war-
rantor, nor let any proceedings be taken against the
warrantor by distress by seizing his lands or in any


other manner before the holding of the assise, and until -


it be known whether the tenant has lost or kept the
thing by the assise. Butif he has kept it, then it will
not be necessary to proceed against the warrantor in a
pléa of warranty, and whereof if on the first day the
assise cannot be held, but another day is assigned or by
chance several days on aecount of a failure of recog-
nisors or through the essoin of the tenant, and on that
day if before the taking of the assise the warrantor has
come and is willing to warrant and to defend, he ought
not to be heard before the assise is held in the manner
of an assise, as well because he had not & day assigned
to him to warrant as because he has lost by his default
all his exceptions and defences, and so that. he cannot
defend, as well because it is unknown before the hold-
ing of the assise whether he ought of necessity to defend
or not to defend. And that the assise ought to be
taken before the warrantor answers to the warranty,
after he has appeared after & default, you have in the
term of St. Michael in the third and fourth year of king
Henry in the county of Essex, an assise of the death
Of an ancestor, if Brian the father of Henry : and because


the claimant recovered by an assise, the tenant proceeded
Q 1802. L


f. 258 b.


6.
Si waran-
tus defal-
tam fece-
rit, capi-
atur de
terra sua.


. Britton, ib.
8 9. ;


7.
Breve dum
fuerit in
Seysina.


-


162 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


nens processit versus warantum de excambio, & waran-
tus warantisavit & fecit execambium, & alibi in multis
locis. Et ideó non est necessaria ejus presentia ante-
quam venerit. per districtionem, cim tenens amiserit
per assisam. Et unde cüm diem non habeat & dicat
warantiso, reddo et restituo petenti tenementum, facit
manifest disseysinam tenenti, si hoc fecerit conitrà


ipsius tenentis voluntatem, quia cüm teneatur tenen-


iem in possessione su& defendere, nec poterit eum dis-
seysire & peteti restituere, quia& defendere & restituere
eontra voluntatem tenentis non possunt simul stare.


Si autem eaptio assise adjudicata fuerit per defaltam
& assis& capta fuerit & tenes amiserit per assisam,
tune primó procedendum erit versus warantum de
warantia q capiatur de terra in manum domini regis
ad valentiam terre quàm tenens amisit eb non in eo
sensu q tenentem  warantisare possit, i defendere in
sua seysina secundüm $q warantizatio in uno sensu
defensionem habet, e£ secundüm q in alio sensu tene-
tur warantus ad excambium, cüm feoffatum suum non
defenderit, vel defendere non possit, distringatur hoc
modo si terram habuerit in eodem comitatu, q vice-
cof capiab in manum domini regis de terra waranti
ipsius ad valentiam terre quàm tenens amisit per hoc
breve. Í


Rex vieecofi salutem. Cape in manum nostram per
visum legalium hominum de comitatu tuo de terra A.
in balliva tua pro defectu ipsius À. ad valentiam
lentes terre cum pertinentiis in tali villa quam B. in
euria nostra coram justiciariis &c. recuperaverit versus
C. per assisam mortis antecessoris inde ibi inter eos


-


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 163


against the. warrantor for compensation, and the war-
rantor warranted and made compensation, and elsewhere
in many pláces. And therefore his presence is not ne-
cessary before i6 has come to & distress, when the tenant
has lost by-the assise. And hence when he has not &
day and says, I warrant, I render and restore to the
claimant the tenement, he manifestly causes a disseysine
|. to the tenant, if he has done this against the will of the
tenant, for since he is bound to defend the tenant in his
possession, he cannot disseyse him and make restitution
to the claimant, because to defend and to restore against
the will of. the tenant cannot be consistent with one
another.


But if the holding of the assise by default has been . 6.
adjudged a&nd the assise has been held and the tenant dd lu


has lost by the assise, then for the first time proceedings n made de-
Shall be had against the warrantor concerning his war- aue và
ranty, that there be taken into the hand of the lord the n rdc
king as much of his land as shall amount to the valuo^ ^.
. of the land which the tenant has lost, and not in that

sense that he can warrant the tenant, that is defend
him in his seysine according as warranty in one sense
implies defence, and according as in another sense the
warrantor is bound to make compensation, when he has
not defended his feoffee or eannot defend him, let him
be distrained against in this manner if he has land in
the same county, that the viscount take into the hand
of the lord the king so much of the land of the said
warrantor as shall amount to the value of the land
Which the tenant has lost, by & writ of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. Take into our 7.
hand by the view of loyal men of your county so much when he x
of theland of A.in your bailiwiek for the default of in seysine.
the said A. up to the value of so much land with its
appurtenances in such a vill, which B. in our court before
our justiciaries &ec. has recovered against C. by an assise

L 2


Britton, ib.
S 10.


f. 259.


164 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


eaptam, e&. unde idem C. dum fuit inde in seysina
vocavit inde ad warantum praedictum A. versus eun-
dem B. Et sumoneas per bonos sumonitores preedie-
ium AÀ. q sib coram eisdem justiciariis nóstris in tah
loco tali die ad predictum terminum, scilicet de prin-
cipali placito warantie et inde responsurus & osten-
surüs quare non fuit coram eisdem justiciarüis nostris
apud talem locum tali die sieut summonitus fuit, &
habeas ibi summonitores &ec. Si autem terra qus
amittitur et terra qus tenetur &d excambium fuerint
in diversis comitatibus, tunc primó fiat extensio de
lerra quz amittitur, ut tantundem capiatur in manum
domini regis de terra waranti qus ad excambium
tenetur, secundüm quod inferius de districtione wa-
ranti pleniüs dicetur. ltem si plures fuerint waranti
(ut predictum est) tunc (facta extensione) capiatur in
manum domini regis de terris singulorum proportiona-
liter quantum ad singulos pertinebit de warantia, se-
eundüm valorem et szestimationem terre quam tenens
&misit per assisam, quse capta fuit per defaltam ipsius
waranti. Et sie videtur quód habere poterit excusa-
tionem de defalta propter impedimenta, vel restituetur
per defensionem per legem sicut in causa proprietatis,
et ita capi non poterit assisa propter aliquam defal-
tam, quia nulla erit defalta quse defendi poterit per
legem, & sic non erit ille in defalta qui vocavit, quia
secutus est per legem terre, ita quód non est in culpa,
nec warantus in culpa erit, quia summonitionem de-
fendere poterit per legem terre, et ideó qui judicaverit
assisam esse capiendam per defaltam, que nulla est,
malé aget: et iniquum erit quód warantus responsio-
nes suas amittit versus petentem et faciat excambium


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 165


of mortdancester there held thereon between them, and
whereof the said C. whilst he was in seysine thereof
vouched as warrantor thereof the aforesaid À. against
the said B. And summon by good summoners the
aforesaid À. that he present himself before our said jus-
tieiaries at such & place on such a day at the aforesaid
term, to wit, concerning the principal plea of warranty,
and thereof to answer and to show wherefore he was
not present before our said justiciaries at such a place
on such & day as he was summoned, and produce there
the summoners &e. Butif the land which is lost and
the land which is liable for compensation shall be in
different counties, then let an extent be made of the
land which is lost, that so much may be taken into the
hand of the king of the land of the warrantor, which is
liable for compensation, according to what will be said
below concerning the distraint of a warrantor.  Like-
wise if there be several warrantors (as aforementioned),
then, an extent having been made, let there be taken
into the hand of the king of the lands of each so much
in proportion as shall appertain to each for the war-
ranty, according to the value and the estimate of the
. land which the tenant has lost by the assise, which has
been held in default of the said warrantor. And so it
seems, that he may have an excuse for his default on
account of'hindrances, qr he shall be restored by &
defence at law &s in & cause of property, and so the
assise can not properly be held on account of &
default, because there can be no default, whieh can
be defended at law, and so he will not be in default,


who has vouched him, because he has followed him by'


the law of the land, so that he is not in fault nor


"wil the warrantor be in fault, because he will be able -


.to defend the summons by the law of the land, and
therefore he who has adjudged that the assise should be
taken by & default, which is null, will act ill, and it will
be inequitable that the warrantor should lose his an-
Swers against the claimant and make compensation,


f. 259.


: 8.
Aliud
breve de
eodem,
dum fuerit
in seysina.


166 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


eüm defensiones habeat et non sit in culpa. Cüm
autem warantus omninó non venerit, vel cüm venerit
se excusare non poterit de defalta, tunc primó capiatur
assis& per defaliam, ut sciatur an petens jus habeat
petendi vel non, vel si habeat q habeat tenens excam-
bium. Si autem non, q tenens retineat per assisam,
et warantus quietus de excambio, non enim justum
esseb q tenens utrung, haberet tenementum q priüs


tenuit & exeambium, quamvis warantus defaltam fecit.


Et ideó in omni casu capienda erit assisa, eb semper
erià necessarium petenti, q sciat utrum tenens justam


habeat eausam voeandi warantum vel non.


. Rex vie. salut& — Cape in manum nostram per visum
legalium hominum &c. de terra À. per defaltam ip-
sius ÀÁ. ad valentiam tertie partis vel quartz tante
terre cum ptinentiis in tah villa in tali coi, quàm B. in
curia nostra &c. recuperavit versus eum per assisam
mortis antecessoris, e& unde idem C. dum fuit inde in
seysina, vocavit inde ad warantum À. & B. & D. par-
ticipes suos, e£. sumoneas per bonos sumonitores prza-
fatum A. q sit coram eisdem justiciariis nostris apud
talem locum ad prefatum terminum inde responsurus
cum predictis B. et C. & ostensurus quare non fuit
&c. ut supr& Et ad qué diem si non venerit, amittet
terram captam in manum domini regis per defaltam
suam, seeundüm quód assisa fecerit pro tenente vel
petente secundüm unum sensum, quidam eorum vel
omnes, secundüm quod venerint vel non ad diem illum.
Si venerit warantus per districtionem aut statim wa-
rantizat, vel dicit se  warantizare non debere, quia


nihil aliud est dieere in hoc casu, nisi quód ad excam-


bium non teneatur seceundüm unum sensum warantic,


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 167


when.he has defenees and is not in fault. But when
the warrantor has not come at all, or when he has come,
he cannot excuse himself for his default, then let an
assise be first taken by default, that it may be known
"whether the claimant .has the right of claiming or not,
orif he has, that the tenant has a right to compensa-
tion. But if not, that the tenant should retain by the
assise and the warrantor be quit of compensation, for it
would not be just that the tenant should have both
lenements, that which he first held and the compense-
tion, although the warrantor made default. And there-
fore in every case an assise is to be held, and it will
always be necessary for the claimant, that he should
. know whether the tenant has & just cause of vouching
& warrantor.or not.


The king to the viscount greeting. Take into our |^ 8.
hand by the view of loyal men &e. of the land of A. 25er
through the default of the said A. to the value of the the same,
lhird part or the fourth of so much land with its appurte- i is pue
 mances in such a vill in such & county, which B. in our sine.
court &c. has recovered against him, by an assise of
mortdancester,and whereof the said C. when he was in
Seysine thereof called as & warrantor thereof A. and B.
and D. his parceners, and summon by good summoners
the aforesaid A., that he be present before our said jus-
ticlarles &t such & place at the aforesaid term, there to
answer with the aforesaid B. and C. and to show where-
fore he was not &c. as above. Ànd on which day if he
has not come, he shall lose the land seized into the hand

of the lord the king through his default, according aa
the assise has made for the tenant or the claimant ac-
cording to one sense, some of them or all, according as
they have come or not on that day. lf the warrantor
has come through the distress, he either forth with war-
rants or he says that he ought not to warrant, because
there is nothing else to say in his case but that he is not
bound to make compensation according to one sense of


. 168 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


quia warantizare non potest secundüm alium sensum,
i. defendere tenentem in seysina, càm nullus jam sit
in seysina tenens quem defendat. Igitur agendum erit
tantum de excambio, quo casu .si se defendere possit,
quietus recedet de excambio. Si autem se defendere
non possit, tunc statim satisfaciat de excambio suo
feoffato, nisi fort? it& sit quód ulteriàs warantum vo-
eare voluerit, & tune sumoneatur warantus quód sil
lali die tali loco ad warantizandam tali tantam terra
per tali breve.


9. Rex vic. salutem. Summoneas per bonos sumonito-
Breve dé res talem A. quód sit &e. ad warantizandum B, tantam
nendo war- terram &c. quàm C. in curis nostra &ce. clamavit ver-
rantum8d sus T) & quàm idem D. postea amisit per assisam
zandum, mortis antecessoris inde inter przdietos C. & D. cap-
eaptafueri, à. Et unde idem D. dum fuit in seysina vocavit
per defal- inde ad warantum predictum B. et qui postea venit
I "* et terram illam A. warantizavit, & habeas ibi &e. Ad

quem diem si non venerit, procedatur contra ipsum ad
defaltiàm &c. ut supra. Et deinde eàm venerit, aut
Statim warantizat aut dicit quód warantizare non de-
f£.2595. bet quia nihil tenet de eo, nec servitium ei facit nec
homagium. ltem etsi ei warantizare teneret, tamen
ipse D. ubi ipse respondisse potuit ad assisam, si ad
diem suum venisset, defaliam fecit, & ita quód per
defaltiam suam capta fuit assisa, per quam amisit! ex-
ceptiones & defensiones suas contra assisam, quod sibi
Britton, ib.ipsi debet imputare. Et si idem A. gratis warantiza-
dd verit B. & ulteriüs warantum vocaverit, eadem poterit
ei fieri responsio qus facta est ipsi B. Item esto
quód warantus, cüm ad primum diem defaltam fecerit,


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 169


ihe warranty, because he cannot warrant according to
another sense, that is to defend the tenant in his seysine,
since there is no tenant now in seysine, whom he should
defend. Therefore the compensation only is to be
sued for, in which case, if he can defend himself, he will
relire quib concerning the compensation But if he
cannot defend himself, then let him forthwith satisfy
his feoffee concerning the compensation, unless by chance
it so happen that he wishes further to vouch & :war-
rantor, and in that case let the warrantor be summoned,
that he be on such a day at such a place to warrant to
80-and-so so much land by a writ of this kind :


The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good , E T

 Summoners 80-&nd-so Á. that he be present &c. to war- summon a

rant to B.so much land &c. which C. in our court &c. "^mm,

has claimed against D., and which the said D. has after- when an
wards lost by an assise of. mortdancester thereon taken $S5se bos

between the above-mentioned C. and D. And whereof by default

the said D., when he was in seysine, vouched as & War-,nig,

rantor the above-mentioned B., and who afterwards

came and warranted that land to A., and produce there

&e. At which day if he has not appeared let proceed-

ings go on against him to & default &c. as above. And

thereupon when he has appeared either he forthwith

warrants or he says that he ought not to warrant, be-

cause he holds nothing from him, nor does he do service iid

or homage to him. Likewise although he may be bound

to warrant for him, nevertheless the said B., when he

eould have.answered at the assise, if he had come on

the day assigned to him, made default, and so that

through his default the assise was held through which

he has lost his exceptions and defences against the

assise, which he ought to impute to himself. And if

the said A. has gratuitously warranted to B., and further

has vouched à warrantor, the same answer may be

made to him which was made to the said B. Likewise

let i& be that à warrantor, when he has made default on


170 |: — DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


ad alium diem ante captionem assise, postquam semel
adjudicata fuit assisa capienda, de facto warantizaverit
ipsi tenenti; & per warantizationem ita consideratum
fuerit, quód si tenens amiserit quód warantus ei face-
ret warantiam suam & exeambium, & ile idem waran-
tus eodem die alium warantum' vocaverit, & capta sit
assisa eodem die, postquam petens recuperaverit versus
tenentem, statim summonitus fuit secundus warantus
ad warantizandum primó: ut in rotulo Sancte Trini-
iatis anno eodem, ad quem diem non venit secundus
warantus postquam se essoniaverit, iià quód precep-
tum fuit vicecomiti quód haberet eorpus ejus. Et ad
quem diem venerit secundus warantus, ut de termino
Saneti Michaelis proximo sequente anno eodem, & pri-
mus warantus petiit versus eum excambium terrse;
quam tenens amisit versus petentem per assisam mor-
lis antecessoris. Eti unde idem tenens vocavit ipsum
primum warantum ad warantizandum versus petentem,
& quia ei warantizavit, & vocavit secundüm warantum
versus petentem, & qui venit & noluit respondere ad
breve suum nisi curia consideraret, quia ille primus
warantus terram illam warantizaverat tenenti, et post-
ea per defaliam suam propriam amisit per assisam,
absque eo quod ipsum secundum warantum vocasset
ad warantum, dum fuit in seysina, & de sicut per
defalium suam capta fuit assisa, & ita quód tenens
amisit, & ita quód tenens est nune exírg& seysinam,
quod quidem primus warantus per attornatum suum
cognovit, consideratum fuit quód secundus warantus
non responderet, & quód primus warantus in miseri-
cordia Casus iste inveniri poterit in rotulo de ter-
mino Saneti Hilari anno regis Henrici sexto in comi-
tatu Midd.  Assisa mortis antecessoris si Áluricus Huse,


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 171 .


the first day, has in fact warranted to the said tenant
on another day before the holding of the assise, after it
has been once adjudged that an assise is to be held, and
by the act of warranty ib was thus held that, if the
tenant lost, the warrantor should make good to him his
warranty and compensation, and that the same war-
rantor on the same day has vouched another warrantor,
and the assise has been held on the same day, after the
claimant has recovered against the tenant, the second
warrantor was forthwith summoned to warrant in the
firsb& place, as in the Rollof Holy Trinity in the same
year, on which day the second warrantor did not come
after he had essoined himself, so that it was enjoined to
the viscount to produce his person. And on which day
ihe second warrantor has come, as in the term of St.
Michael next folowing in the same year, and the first
warrantor has claimed against him compensation for
the land which the tenant has lost to the claimant by
an assise of morüdancester. And whereof the said tenant
has called the said firs& warrantor to warrant it to him
against the claimant, and because he bas warranted it
to him, and has vouched the second warrantor against
the claimant, and who has come and been unwilling to
answer to his writ unless the court should so hold,
because the said. first warrantor had warranted the land
to the tenant, and afterwards through his own proper
default he lost it by the assise, without his having
vouched the said second warrantor to warrant it, whilst
he was in seysine, and since the assise was taken
through his default, and so that the tenant lost, and so
that the tenant is now out of seysine, which indeed the
firsi warrantor knew by his attorney, it was held, that
the second warrantor should not answer, and that the
first warrantor wasamerciable. That case may be found
in the Roll of St. Hilary term in the sixth year of king
Henry in the county of Middlesex, an assise of mort-
dancéster, if Aluric Huse, who held some land of Matilda


f. 260.


Britton, 1.
lii. ch. xi.
S 16.


172 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS,


qui terram de Matilda de Albo Monasterio tenuit, &
qui. vocavit ad warantum Wilhelmum de Albo Mo-
nasterio. Et quod dicitur de defalta unius waranti,
cüm unus tantum vocetur a&d warantum, ilud idem
dici poterit de defalta unius vel duorum ex pluribus
warantis quód capienda est assisa si unus ex pluribus
defaltam fecerit. Ex preemissis igitur patet manifestó,
quód cüm warantus defaltam fecerit primo die & ad-
judieatum sit quód assis& capiatur per defaltam, &
assisa eodem die capi non possit, sed differatur captio
usqué in alium diem, & waràntus tune venerit per
distrietionem, vel sine, & warantizare voluerit ante
captionem, bene poterit, non tamen ad defensionem ut
tenentem defendat, vel quód aliquid dicat contra assi-
sam, sed ut excambium faciat si tenens amittat per as-
sisam, & multó fortiüs post captionem assise, quia tunc
non erib quis in possessione quando possit defendere,
tenetur tamen &d excambium propter warantiam. Et
si ulteriàs per hoc, quod sic warantizavit quoad ex-
cambium velit warantum vocare, non proderit ei sicut
patet superiüs per exemplum, càüm ex culpa su& non
sit in seysina nec quasi, nec etiam suus feoffatus quem
wárantus suus possit defendere in seysina. Et quód
assisa capi debeat per defaltam waranti statim post


defaltam, habetis de termino Saneti Michaelis anno


regis Henriei decimo secundo incipiente decimo tertio
in eom South.  Ássisa mortis antecessoris, si Robertus
filius Cinul de tenemento de Denemede, unde Herber-
tus filius Richardi, qui terram illam tenuit, vocavit
inde ad warantum priorem de S. Lando de Bothomapo,!
qui post essonia su& de ulüra mare & citra defaltam
fecit. Et unde consideratum fuit quód assisa procede-
ret per defaltam ipsius prioris, & quia Herbertus ami-


! * Rothomago," MSS. Reg. 9 E. xv. et Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 173


of the White Monastery, and she called as warrantor
William of the White Monastery. And what is said
concerning the default of one warrantor, when one only
is called to warrant, the same may be said of the default
of one or two of several warrantors, that the assise is to
be taken, if one out of several has made default, From
the premises therefore it is manifestly clear, that when
& warrantor has made default on the first day and it
has been adjudged that the assise should be held by
 default,and the assise could not be held on the same
day, and the holding of it was deferred to another day,
and the warrantor then came through a distress, or
without it, and was willing to warrant before the hold-
ing of it, he may well do so, not however for the defence
that he may defend the tenant, or that he may say any-
thing against the assise, but that he may make compen-
sation if the tenant should lose by the assise, and much
more 80, after the holding of the assise, because there
wil not be any one in possession whom he can defend,
he is: bound however to make compensation on account
of the warranty. And if further he wishes to vouch a
"warrantor for this reason that he has warranted as far
as compensation is concerned, it will not profit him, as
is evident above by an example, since from his own
fault he is not, in seysine nor as i& were s0, nor even his
feoffee, whom his warrantor can defend in his seysine.
And that an assise ought to be taken by default of a
warrantor immediately after the default, you have &
ease in St. Michael's term in the twelfth and thirteenth
;years of king Henry in the county of Southampton, an
assise of mortdancester, if Robert son of Cinul concern-
ing the tenement of Denemede, whereof Herbert the son
of Richard, who held that land, vouched as à warrantor
thereupon the prior of St. Lando of Rouen, who after
his essoins of beyond the sea and within the sea made
default. And whereupon it was held that the assise
Should proceed by default of the said prior, and because


f. 260.


174 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSOBIS,


sib per assisam, habuit recuperare suum versus priorem.
Et unde verum est, quód non erit assisa capienda,
nisi tunc demum cüm warantus defaltam fecerit post-
quam warantum vocaverit, sive warantus venerit sive
non, quód capietur assisa: ut de termino Sancte Tri-
nitatis anno regis Henrici decimo septimo in cofü
Buck.  Ássis& mortis antecessoris si Rogerus de Est-


. wieham, & idem dici poterit de utroque, si warantus


10.
S1 warran-
tus defal-
tam non
fecerit.


& tenens defaltam fecerit. Item si tenens tantum, &
warantus presens sit, vel absens, non refert; quia
warantus quietus de warantia, cüm non sit aliquis qui
sequatur versus eum. Item esto quód warantus ad
primum diem venerit, & se defenderit de warantia,
non est aliquis ipsorum tenentis &ut waranti qui dicere
possit contra assisam quare remanere debeat: tenens
non potuit, quia defensionem suam posuit in waran-
tum, quam quidem resumere non potest. Warantus
&utem non tenetur dicere contra assisam nec defendere,
quia defendit se de warantia, nihil igitur superest
nisi quód per defaltam utriusque capiatur assisa.


Si autem warantus defaltam non fecerit) sed prinro
die comparuerit post essonia & dilationes, preesentibus
petente & tenente, aut statim warantizat, aut ostendit
rationem quare warantizare non debet. Et si statim
warantizaverit, respondere poterit conira assisam, &
dicere quare remanere debeat imperpetuum, vel ad
tempus, càm omnes habeat exceptiones & defensiones
quas principalis tenens haberet, (ut infrà dicetur) &
forié plures Et cüm sit quasi tenens, cüm tenentem
teneatur defendere in seysina. Et sic potest defendere
Statim, nisi ipse warantum unum vel plures, quem ad


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 175


Herbert lost by the assise, he had his recovery against
ihe prior And hence it is true, that an assise is not
to be held unless then at length, when the warrantor
has made default, after he has vouched & warrantor,
whether the warrantor has come or not, that the assise
Should be taken, as in the term of Holy Trinity in the
seventeenth year of king Henry in the county of Bucks,
&n assise of mortdancester if Roger of Estwicham, and
ihe same may be said of both, if the warrantor and the
lenant have made default. Likewise if the tenant alone
makes default and the warrantor should be present, or
if he should be absent, it is not of importance, because
the warrantor will be quit of his warranty, since there
is no one to sue him. Likewise let it be that the war-
rantor has come at the first day and has defended him-
Self concerning the warranty, there is not either of the
said tenant or warrantor who can say against the assise
Wherefore i6 ought to be stayed: the tenunt could not
because he placed his defence upon the warrantor, which
indeed he cannot resume, But the warrantor is not
bound to speak against the assise nor to defend, because
he defends himself concerning the warranty. Nothing
therefore remains except that. through the default of
both the assise should be taken.


But if the warrantor has not made default, but has 10.
appeared on the first day after the essoins and the delays absdbdnn
the claimant and the tenant being present, he either nu a
forthwith warrants, or he shows cause wherefore he "
ought not to warrant. And if he has forthwith war-
ranted, he can answer against the assise and say where-
fore it ought to be stayed in perpetuity, or for a time,

Since he has every exception and defence which the
principal tenant has (as will be explained below), and
perhaps more, and since he is as it were a tenant, since
he is bound to defend the tenant in his seysine. And
80 he may defend him forthwith, unless he claims one
or more warrantors, whom he wishes to name for his


f. 260 b.


176 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


defensionem propriam velit nominare, petat. Potest


enim warantus, cüm warantizaverit & sit quasi domi-
nus litis, warantum ulteriàs vocare, & iste warantus
cüm warantizaverit, alium, & sie in infinitum succes-
sivé vocare, & qualiter summoneri debent per auxilium
curi, vel sine, & qualis distrietio, sequi debeht sum-
monitionem, facilé patet ex prseemissis: hoe tamen ad-
jecto, quàd ille, qui warantizaverit,in brevibus summo-
nitionis & districtionis semper habebitur pro tenente,
et de illo eui warantizatum est nulla fiat mentio, sed
domi remanebit, donec terminetur placitum inter pe-
tentem & warantum, quia subiit defensionem. Et si
plures vocati fuerint de waranto in warantum, & ulti-
mus defaltam fecerit, capi debet assis& per defaltam,
et per omnia observari debet sicut superiüs dictum est.
Item eüàm plures sint waranti, et ultimus tenentem
defendere non possit, vel si assisa per defaltam wa-
ranti capiatur, & ultimus warantus de excambio faci-
endo se defendere non possit, faciet; excambium suo
feoffato, & illud idem excambium deveniet ad primum
tenementum, de manu in manum, de waranto in wa-
rantum, secundüm quod inferiüs pleniüs dicetur de
warantis. Si autem unus ex pluribus warantis, vel
plures, fuerit infrà setatem, omnium illorum «eetates
expectabuntur. Si &utem unus ex pluribus petentibus
in communi ante captionem assise moriatur, non tamen
propter hoc cadit breve, nec remanebit assisa mortis
antecessoris, ut de itinere W. de Ralegh in comitatu
Warr. assisa mortis antecessoris, cireà medium rotuli.
Illud idem observari debet, ut videtur, si moriatur
unus ex pluribus tenentibus simul, & in commuui. Si
&utem divisa sit hsereditas vel tenementum inter plu-
res participes, quod priüs fuit commune, si unus mo-


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 177


own defence. For & warrantor, when he has warranted
and thus become as it were master of the suit, may
vouch & further warrantor, and that warrantor, when
he has warranted, may vouch another, and s0 each may
suecessively vouch another, and in what way they ought
to be summoned by the aid of the court or without it,
and what distress ought to follow the summons, is easily
evident from the premises, with this addition that he,
who.has warranted, shall always in the writs of sum-
mons and of distress be taken to be the tenant, and no
mention should be made of the person, to whom the
warrant has been given, but he shall stay at home, until
the plea is terminated between the claimant and the


warrantor, because he has undertaken the defence. And


if several are vouched to warrant successively, and the
last has made default, the assise may be held by default,
and throughout there ought to be observed what has been
specified above. Likewise when there are several war-
rantors and the last cannot defend the tenant, or if the


assise is held by default, and the last warrantor cannot


defend himself from making compensation, he shall make
compensation to his feoffee, and that same compensation
Shall pass from hand to hand, from warrantor to war-
rantor, to the first tenant, according as it will be ex-
plained below concerning warrantors. But if one out of
several warrantors or several shall be under age, the full
age of all shall be waited for. But if one out of several
elaimants in common should die before the holding of
àn assise, the writ does not fall on that account, nor
Shall the assise of mortdancester be stayed, as in the
iter of William de Ralegh, in the county of Warwick, an
assise of mortdancester, about the middle of the roll.
The same practice ought to be observed, as it seems, if
one out of several tenants together and in common
should die. But if the inheritance or tenement should
be divided between several parceners, which was for-
merly held in common, if one dies, the assise and the
, Q 1802, M


f, 260 b.


f. 261.


178 ^' DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


riatur, cadit assisa & breve. Et quid si vir & uxor
simul vocentur de feoffamento uxoris: lieet vir moria-
tur, non tamen propter hoe cadit breve vel e converso.
Si autem petens vel tenens vel uterque moriatur, tunc
eadit loquela omninó, quasi deficiente fundamento. Si
autem unus warantus vel plures ex pluribus morian-
tur, tunc referb, utrum "warantizaverit vel non, si au-
tem non warantizaverit,non cadit breve per mortem
waranti, sed incipiet tenens vocare suum heredem de
novo. Si &utem warantizatum fuerit, seceundüm quos-
dam, eàüm warantus sib quasi tenens & principalis, &
eium tenens posuerit in warantum defensionem suam
omninó, nec illam resumere possit, quod quidem non
est in primo casu, et sic quasi mortuus, & quasi ad
placitum cadit breve, & sic alio brevi opus erit. Si
autem warantus unus, vel unus ex pluribus, cüm plu-
res suecessivé vocentur, se defenderit de warantia, quód
warantizare non debeat, nulla alia subsequitur pcena,
nisi quód capiatur assisa per defaltam, & semper tenens
conservabitur indemnis per excambium, cüm ei fuerit
semel warantizatum. Et quód assisa sic capi debeat
statim per defaltam waranti, habetis de itinere Mar-
tini de Pateshul in comitatu Eborum, anno regni regis
Henrici decimo.  Assisa mortis antecessoris, si Wal-
terus Chamlenger, Ad hoc facit de itinere Wilhelmi
de Ralegh in comitatu Buckingham, si Simon de
Hokedes, assisa mortis antecessoris, ubi dicitur quód
si warantus warantizare non debeat, quód nulla sub-
sequitur poena, nisi quód assisa capiatur. Et est ratio,
quód warantus in assisa defendere debeat contra assi-
sam, & dicere quare debeat remanere. Sed si nihil
dicere sciat, procedit assisa, et assisa aufert vel dat in
eausa possessionis In causa proprietatis respondet


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 179


writfall And what if a husband and wife are vouched
together concerning a feoffment of the wife, although the
husband should die, the writ does not thereupon fall,
nor the converse. But if the claimant or the tenant or
both should die, then the suit falls altogether, as if the
foundation failed. But if one warrantor or several out
of several should die, then it is of importance whether
he has warranted or not, but if he has not warranted,
the writ does not fall through the death of the war-
rantor, but the tenant shall begin to vouch his heir


anew. Butifhe has warranted, according to some, since .


the warrantor is as i& were the tenant and principal,
&nd since the tenant has placed all his defence upon his
warrantor, nor can he resume it, which is not so in the
first case, and so he is as it were dead and the writ falls
as ib were with the plea, and so there is need as it were
of another writ. But if one warrantor or one out of
several, when several are vouched successively, has de-
fended himself against the warranty, that he ought not
to warrant, no other penalty follows except that the
assise is held by default, and the tenant will always be
kept indemnified by an exchange, when once & warrant
has been given to him. And that an assise should be
thus forthwith held upon default of à warrantor you
have in the iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county of
York, in the tenth year of the reign of king Henry, an
assise of Mortdancester, if Walter Chamlenger. "This is
supported by the iter of William de Ralegh in the county
of Buckingham, if Simon de Hokedes, an assise of Mort-
dancester, where it is said that if & warrantor ought
not to warrant, that no penalty follows, except that the
assise shall be held. And the reason is because the
warrantor in an assise ought to defend against the assise,
and allege wherefore it should be stayed. But if he
knows nothing to allege, the assise proceeds and the
assise takes away or gives in à cause of possession. In
& cause of property the warrantor answers and shall de-
M 2


f. 261.


11.
Si assisa
tangat re-
gem, et di-


- enttenens,


quod sine
rege re-
spondere
tion potest.
Capiatur
nihilomi-
nus, sed
ponatur
judicium
in respec-
tum, quo-
usque do-
minus rex
inde pre-
cepit vo-
luntatem
suam.
Britton, 1.
lii. ch. xi.
$ 22.


ib. S 94.


»p


180 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


warantus & defendet ipsum jus, & quare petens jus
non habeat tenetur docere, quod si facere non possit,
amittit tenens, cüm sit indefensus.


Item càüm quis warantum ita quasi vocaverit, & dicat
quód sine domino rege respondere non possit, quia
tenementum de quo assisa arramata est, teneat ad
voluntatem domini regis, capiatur assisa statim, & in-
quiratur per assisam de seysina antecessoris ipsius
petentis & si petens sit hsres propinquior, ut tune
audita domini regis voluntate vel statim  recuperet
petens, vel differatur judicium pro voluntate domini
regis, ut de itinere M. de Pateshul in cofü Kanc. anno
regis H. xii. Assisa mortis antecessoris, si Robertus de
Wylington. ltem cüm warantus summonitus venerit
ad warantizandum, & contentio habeatur de warantia
eo quód homagia & charte deducuntur, et ita quàd
sine diffieultate & dilatione non possit placitum de


. warantia terminari, quia dubium est utrum tenens pos-


sib per assisagm retinere vel non, solet assis& capi, ut
scire possit cum quo remanere debet seysina, ut secun-
dum hoc procederetur in placito warantim, vel non.
Assisa& mortis antecessoris, si Brianus. Item notandum
quod propter ineumbramentum tenentis alicujus, non
lenetur dominus feoffator warantizare,si ad warantum
vocetur, s. ubi antecessor ejus qui petit per assisam
mortis &ntecessoris fuit in seysina post donum factum -
ab eo qui vocatus est ad warantum, sicut videri pote-
rit. Esto quód quis aliquem feoffaverit de x. acris, &
ille feoffatus suus alium feoffaverit ulterius, qui inde
obierit seysitus, hs:erede suo infrà zetatem existente, si
dominus capitalis ceperit illa x. in manum suam, et
heeredem non eognoverit ad hsredem, vel illa x. ulte-


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 181


fend the right itself &nd he is bound to show why tho
claimant has no right, which if he cannot do, the tenant
" since he is undefended.


the sr because he holds the tenement, respecting t touches
which the assise has been instituted, at the will of the br r9
lord the king, let the assise be forthwith held, and let tenant snyt
inquiry be made through the assise eoncerning the sey- cannot
sine of the ancestor of the claimant and if the claimant eM
is the next heir, that thereupon, upon hearing the will king, let
of the lord the king, either the claimant may forthwith the assise
recover, or judgment be deferred for the will of the king, theless
as in the iter of Martin de Patsshull in the county of E as
Kent, in the twelfth year of king Henry, an assise of ment be
Mortdancester if Robert de Wylington. Likewise when "Pied
& warrantor after summons has come to warrant, and a lord the
contention take place eoncerning the warranty inasmuch Ed
- as homages and charters are brought forth, and so that his will
the plea of warranty cannot be determined without dl
difficulty and delay, because it is doubtful whether the

lenant ean retain it or not by an assise, an assise is
usually held, that i6 may be known with whom the
seysine ought to remain, that according to this the pro-
ceedings should be bad in the plea of warranty or not.

An assise of Mortdancester, if Brian. Likewise itis to

be known, that on account of the encroachment of a
tenant, the lord the feoffor is not bound to warrant

him, if he be vouched to warrant, to wit, where the an-
cestor of him who claims by an assise of Mortdancester

was in seysine after the donation made by him, who is
vouched to warrant, as may be seen. Let it be that a

person has enfeoffed another with ten acres, and his

feoffee has further enfeoffed another, who has died seysed
thereof, his heir being under age, if the chief lord has

taken those ten ácres into his own hand and has not
acknowledged the heir as heir, or has further given


182 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


rius alicui dederit, & heres assisam super eum arra-
maverit, & talis warantum vocaverit suum feoffatorem,
non audietur propter suum proprium incumbramentum.
Quis teneatur ad warantiam, & quis non, infrà dicetur
pleniüs in tractatu de warantis, in causa proprietatis.
Item esto quód cüm dominus proprietatis vel capi-
talis terram de qua assisa impetranda erit dederit ad
firmam, videndum erit utrum impetrari debeat super
firmarium vel super dominum capitalem. Et videtur
prima facie super dominum capitalem, quia firmarius
nihil habet nisi tantum usum fructum, & proprietarius
habet in dominico tenementum. Et ideó quia firma-
rius non possit tenementum deducere in judicium, sed
contra, si impetratum sit super proprietarium, et ipse
amittit per assisam, sic amittet fructuarius usum fruc-
lum sine regressu versus suum warantum, quod qui-


dem esset iniquum. Re vera impetrari poterit super


f. 261 b.


4


utrumque, sed non simul, sed per se super proprieta-
rium, cum protestatione tamen ante captionem assise,
quód fructuarius de termino suo habeat versus eum
regressum, ltem si impetretur super firmarium, vale-
bit impetratio, sicut videri poterit per exemplum.
Item si capitalis dominus vendat alicui custodiam ali-
cujus terre, si heres eüm ad statem pervenerit por-
iaverib assisam super tenentem, & cüm sit plen:ze setatis
et paratus probare statem suam, non erit tenens audi-
endus, si veli& dominum capitalem vocare ad warantum,
propter aliquam conventionem inter eos factam, ut si
dicat, quód ei teneatur warantizare usq, ad certu ter-
minü, vel ultra :setatem, & cüm talis conventio no
tangat heredem, procedat statim. assise, & tenens agat
de eonvétione versus suum warantum, si sibi viderit
expedire, quia ille qui petit assisam mortis anteces-


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 183


those ten acres to another, and the heir has instituted
an assise against him, and the said person has vouched
his feoffor as his warrantor, he shall not be heard on
account of his eneroachment. Who shall be. bound to
warrant and who not in à cause of property, shall be
discussed more fully in the treatise upon warranties.
Likewise let it be that when the lord of the property
or the chief lord shall have granted on a lease the land
concerning which an assise is to be sued out, it is to be
seen whether i& ought to be sued out against the lessee
or against the chief lord. And it seems at first sight it
should be against the chief lord, because the lessee has
nothing but the usufruet, and the proprietor has the
 tenement in demesne. And for this reason, because the
lessee cannot bring the tenement into judgment, but on
the contrary, if the writ be sued out against the pro-
prietor, and he loses it by the assise, the lessee would
lose his usufruct without any recourse against his war-
rantor, which would be inequitable. In truth it may be
sued out against both, but not together, but separately,
against the proprietor, with & protest before the taking
of the assise, that the lessee should have recourse to him
for his term. Likewise if it be sued out against the
lessee, the suing out shall be valid, as may be seen by
an example. Likewise if the chief lord should sell to
any one the custody of any land, if the heir, when he
has come of age, has brought an assise against the tenant,


and since he is of full age and prepared to prove his age,


the tenant is not to be heard if he wishes to call tho
chief lord to warrant him on account of an agreement
made between them, as if he should say, that he is
bound to warrant it to him for a certain term or beyond


full age, and since such an agreement does not touch the.


heir, let &n assise at once proceed, and let the tenant
bring his action concerning the agreement against his
warrantor, if it seems to him to be expedient, because
he who claims an assise of Mortdancester claims nothing


f. 261 b.


1.
De excep-
tionibus
proponen-
dis contra
assisam
mortis an-
tecessoris.


2,
De morte
quarum
persona-
rum capi
debet as-
S188.


Britton, 1.


iii. ch. xii.


8 1.


184 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


soris nihil clamat in custodia, nee venditor tenetur ei
warantizare nisi custodiam tantum, & non tenementum
in dominico. |


Cap. VIII. | :


Cum autem in assisa mortis antecessoris nullum
warantum habuerit, vel càm habuerit, nullum vocat, quia


in propria persona velit potiüs subire defensionem, &


ei mulie competant responsiones ex articulis in brevi
contentis, exceptiones inprimis proponat illas, dicitur
€m inprimis, si talis pater vel mater &c. Et unde
inprimis videndum est de morte quarum personarum
capi debeat assisa, & sciendum quód de morte patris,
& mairis, fratris, & sororis, avunculi, & &mite.


Et ita sicut limitatur assisa in certas personas, ita
limitatur inter certos gradus, quód superiüs ascendendo
non extenditur ad avum, nec inferiàs descendendo ad
nepotem, quia de morte avi nunquam tenebit assisa,
nec eodem modo de morte nepotis, licet nepos habere
posset assisam de morte avüculi vel amite. ltem
nunqua tenebit assisa inter conjunctas personas fratres
& sorores, nepotes & neptes, pronepotes & proneptes,
& gie inferiüs descendendo, nec etiam consanguinitas
de aliqua hsreditate, vel de aliquo quod descendat
hereditarié de communi stipite, sed tantum breve de
recto: tamen versus exiraneas personas locum habebit
assisa, quatenus se extendat, & quas personas! assisa
se non extendit locum habebit consanguinitas, quse


omninó trahit originem de iura sicut inferius pleniüs


apparebit.


! * et &d quas personas," MS. Reg. 9. E. XV.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. | 185


in his custody, nor is the vendor bound to warrant to
him any thing but the EN alone, and not the tene-


n ment i in demesne.


CHAPTER VIII.


But when the tenant in an assise of mortdancester 1.
has no warrantor, or if he has one, he does not vouch him, kidsp ael
: because he wishes to undeftake in his own person his dé- propoun-
fence, and he is entitled to many answers to the articles aet
contained in the writ,and to many exceptions, let him of mort-
in the first place propound them, for it is said in he TAncester.
first place, if the father or mother of so and so &c.

And hence it is to be seen in the first pláce concerning
the death of what persons the assise should first be held, -
and it is to be known that it is to be held concerning the
death of the father and mother, brother and sister, uncle


and aunt.


And so, as the assise is limited to certain persons, so ib $,
is limited to certain degrees, that in ascending upwards Mas a
ibis not extended to & grandfather, nor in descending death of
downwards to a grandson, because an assise will never udo.
hold concerning the death of a grandfather, nor in the assise
same wáy concerning the death of a grandson, although 2"£ht to
a grandson may have an assise concerning the death of
an uncle or aunt. Likewise an assise will never hold
between persons privies in blood, brothers and sisters,
grandsons and granddaughters, great-grandsons and great-
granddaughters, and so in descent lower, nor even a writ
' of eosinage concerning any inheritance or concerning any
thing which descends by inheritance from & common
stock, but. only a writ of right, but against outside per-
sons an assise will have place, as far as it will extend,
but as regards the persons to whom the assise does not
extend, & writ of cosinage will have place, which derives
its origin altogether from the assise, as will appear more
clearly below. |


186 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


^ CAP. IX.


Es Proposita autem intentione petentis, oportet eum
ipu fundare & probare, scilicet per assisam in modum as-
bare debet siszo, omnes brevis articulos, scilicet, quód talis ante-
suam 1in- e . . . e . P"
tentionem, CesSsor eujus seysinam petit, fuit seysitus in dominico
suo ut de feodo, & die quo obiit, & quód post termi-
num (cum assisa ista sicut & alie infrà certum ter-
minum limitatur) Et si in uno articulorum istorum


defecerit, cadit assisa, &c si in omnibus defecisset.


f. 262. Dicitur autem, si talis pater &c. fuit seysitus, seysi-
| ?. — tus iamen poterit quis esse corpore.& animo simul
"is quo . die quo obiit, seeundàm quod seysina acquiritur cor-
obiit. pore & animo, & it& poterit retinere corpore & animo

simul & corpore tantum sine animo post mortem,
donee corpus à seysina efferatur. ltem eodem modo
retineri possit seysina animo sine corpore ante mortem,
verbi gratia. Esto quód quis peregre profect? sit, vel
ad nundinas, nemine in possessione sua nomine suo
relicto, & in itinere antequam redierit moriatur, nihi-
lominus seysitus moritur. ltem si per paupertatem
possessionis dereliquerit, & it& quod dominus capitalis
pro defectu servitii tenementum suum in manum suam
ceperit & retinuerit, vel alio excolendum dederit, vel
(quod plus est) alium feoffaverit, satis moritur tenens
seysitus, quia &nimo retinet civiliter, licet. corporaliter
non fuerit in possessione naturaliter, quod tamen non
esset, si ei offerenti scilicet, domino capitali servitium
cum arreragiis dum vixit seysina esset ei denegata,
luc esset disseysitus, & seysitus non moreretur. ltem
satis seysitus moritur, qui secundo die, vel tertio, vel


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 187


CHAPTER IX.


the writ, to wit, by an assise in the manner of an assise, claimant
to wit, that the said ancestor, whose seysine he claims, e wA
was seysed in his own demesne as of the fee and on the declara-
" day on which he died, and that after à term (since that ax
assise like other assises is limited within a certain term):

and if he should fail in any of these articles, the assise

falls as if he had failed in all.


But it is said, if the father of so-and-so &c. was seysed, f. 262.
but & person may be seysed in body and in mind to- ^?
gether on the day on which he died, according as seysine nid m
. may be aequired with the body and with the mind, so it the day on
may be retained corporeally and mentally together, or y2i£h he
corporeally only without the mind after death, until the
body is carried forth out of seysine. Likewise in the
same way the seysine may -be retained mentally without
the body before death, for instance. Let it be that a
person has gone from home or to market, nobody having
been left in his name in his possession, and on the way
before he has returned, he has died, nevertheless he has
died seysed. Likewise if through the poverty of his
possession he has abandoned it, and so that the chief
lord from default of his service has taken the tenement
into his hand and has retained it, or given it to another
to cultivate, or what is more, has enfeoffed another with
it, the tenant dies sufficiently seysed, because he retains
it civily with his mind although he is not corporeally
in natural possession, which however would not be the
ease, if to him offering to the chief lord the services with
the arrears, whilst he was alive, seysine had been denied
io him, then he would have been disseysed, and would
not have died seysed. Likewise he dies sufficiently
seysed, who on the second or third day or further, as


188 DE ASSISA. MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


ulteriüs quamdiu licuerit ei qui rejectus est recéter
rejicere, vel si in tali languore fuerit constitutus, q
Sibi perquirere no possit, ut si fuerit essoniatus de
malo lecti, vel in tali infirmitate q memoriam a&mise-
rij quia cum talis animo & corpore semel seysinam
acquisivit, & si dum fuit in seysina talis infirmitas
supervenerit, quód memoriam amiserib, quia nunquam
durante tali statu poterit desinere animo possidere, &
satis moritur seysitus. ldem est, si quis donationem
fecerit per chartam, & ita quód. finis & cyrographum
in euria domini regis intervenerit cum omni solenni-
tate, si nulla subsequitur seysina, vel minüs sufficiens,
ut si donator statum non mutaverit quantum ad usum
in toto nec in parte, cüm usus fuerit post donationem :
per se, vel cum donatorio, in propria persona, vel per
suos & it& q donatori? vacuam possessionem non ha-
buerit. Item. non refert qualem seysinam antecessor
habuerit, vel per disseysinam, vel per intrusionem, vel
per dominu, vel per non dominum, & ita q quasi de
feodo moriatur seysitus, & unde si ejectus esset dum
viveret, seysinam suam recuperare posset per assisam
novas disseysine, non tamen ut de libero tenemento,
uií si teneret. ad vitam, scilicet. sibi & hseeredibus suis
ut de feodo, et hzc est regula generalis. Quis teneat
ad vita et quis in feodo, supra satis videri poterit ple.
niüs in titulo de donationibus. Item non refert utrum
quis moriatur seysitus in propria persona, vel in per-
sona tutoris, vel procuratoris, ut si procurator nomine
domini sui stipulaverit et acquisiverit, e& dominus suus
ratam habuerit acquisitionem cüàm sciverit, vel si pro-
curator dio ignorante acquisiverit, & &nte seysinam
moriatur diüs, satis moritur seysitus, quia factum pro-
curatoris sui nunquam facere poterit irritum. ltem &


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 189


long as it was allowable for him who has been rejected
to reject recently, or if he was established in such lan-
guor that he could not claim for himself,as if. he had
been essoined as bedridden, or in such infirm health that
he had lost his memory, for since such a person has ac-
quired seysine with his mind and his body, and whilst
he was in seysine such aninfirmity overtook him, that
he lost his memory, for during such a state he never
could cease to possess mentally, and he dies sufficiently
seysed. It is the same if any one has made a donation
by & charter, and so that à fine and & chirograph in the
Court of our lord the King has intervened with all
solemnity, if no seysine follows or an insufficient seysine,
as if the donor has not changed his status as regards the
use of it neither in the whole nor in part, when he has
used it after the donation by himself, or in conjunction
with the donatory, in his own person or through his
agents, and so that the donatory never had & vacant
possession of it. Likewise it does not matter what sey-
sine the ancestor had, whether by disseysine or by


. intrusion, or through the lord, or through one who was


not the lord, and so that he died seysed as it were of the
fee, and from which if he had been ejected, whilst he
was alive, he would have been able to recover his seysine
by an assise of novel disseysine, not however as of a free-
hold, as if he held it for life, to wit, for himself and his
heirs as in fee, and this is the general rule. Who holds
for life and who in fee may be seen sufficiently above in
the title * Of Donations" Likewise it does not matter
whether & person dies seysed in his own: person, or in
the person of & tutor, or of an agent, as if an agent in
the name of his principal has stipulated and has ac-
quired, &nd his principal has ratified the acquisition
when he has known it,or if the agent whilst his prin-
eipal is ignorant has acquired a thing, and the principal
dies before seysine, he dies sufficiently seysed, because he
. Dever eould have made the act of his agent void. —Like-


f. 262 b.


Britton, 1.
lii. ch, xii.
8 4.


190 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


eodem modo ex persona tutoris sicut procuratoris mori
poterit quis seysitus, ut si tutor vel custos aliquem
minorem recognoverit ad heredem, & sub nomine talis
minoris se posuerit in seysinam, licet minor in propria
persona sua possessionem non apprehenderit (quod ple-
rique faciunt) satis moritur seysitus ex seysina custo-
dis, & talem seysinam transmittit &d heredes, & illud
idem dici possit de curatore, qui sub nomine minoris
fuerit in seysina rat&one socagii, vel ratione feoffa-
menti. Si autem custos minorem ad hzredem non eog-
noverit, cüm custos in seysina fuerit hereditatis, licet jus
proprietatis ad talem hzeredem minorem descenderit &
sie obierit, nihil &liud transmittit ad heredes suos
propinquiores nisi id quod ipse habet, scilicet, jus me-
rum & proprietatem, seysinam autem quam non habet
non transmittit nec jus possessorium. Oportet igitur
recurrere ad seysinü ejus, scilicet &ntecessoris minoris,
qui ultimó obiit seysitus, da oportet de necessitate
quód seysin& sequatur jus merum, & in fine ibi rema-
neat, & illud idem dici poterit de majore, quod dicitur
dé minore.


Plures ita mori possunt seysità de una et eadem re
ut de feodo, ex diversis feoffamentis. Et unde &
ordine debito agant hsredes, & petant quilibet per
assisam, in fine redibit seysina sive possessio ad pro-
prietatem, et sic de seysina ejus qui ultimó obiit sey-
situs erit incipiendum, et de assisa ultima gradatim &
per ordinem usque ad primam. Item ad ultimam
Seysinam erit recurrendum unius videlicet ex pluribus
feoffatis simul ex una donatione, quia nullus ex taliter
feoffatis de morte alterius habebit assisam, sed h:zre-
des eorum, si talibus fiat donatio et eorum hseredibus,
scilicet de morte illius tantum qui ultimus ex omnibus


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 191


wise and in the same mànner a person may die seysed
in the person of à tutor as of an agent, and if the tutor
or guardian has acknowledged a certain minor as heir,
and under the name of such minor has placed himself in
seysine, although the minor in his own proper person
has not taken possession (which most persons do) he
dies sufficiently seysed from the seysine of the guardian,
and he transmits such seysine to his heirs, and the same
thing may be said of & curator, who ünder the name of & f.262 b.
minor has been in seysine by reason of socage, or by
reason of feoffment. But if the guardian has not recog-
nised the minor as heir, when the guardian has been in
seysine of the inheritance, although the right of property
has deeended to the said minor heir, and he has then
died, he transmits nothing else to his next heirs except
that which he himself has, to wit, the mere right and
property, but he does not transmit the seysine which he
does not possess nor the possessory right. It is incum-
bent therefore to have recourse to the seysine of him, to
wit, of the ancestor of the minor who died last seysed,
because it is incumbent of necessity that the seysine
Bhould follow the absolute right, and in the end should
rest there, and the same thing may be said of a person
of majority, as of minority.


Several persons may thus die seysed of one and the s.
same thing as in fee from different feoffments. And nélics d
hence if the heirs proceed in due order, and each claims
by an assise, the seysine or possession will finally return
to the property, and so & beginning must be made from
the seysine of him, who died the last in seysine, and from
this last seysine step by step and in order up to the first
Seysine, And recourse must be had to the last seysine,
of one, to wit, out of several enfeoffed together by one
donation, because none of such feoffees will have an as-
8ise concerning the death of the other, but their heirs, if
the donation has been made to the said persons and
to their heirs, to wit, concerning the death of him only,


4


192 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


obiit & non de morte aliorum premortuorum, ut videri
poterit si fiat donatio viro et uxori simul & eorum
heredibus, vel concubinz & pueris.suis nominatis, vel
non nominatis, et eorum hzredibus, et cüm omnes in
Seysina fuerint, vel quidam eorum, nullus ex persona
alterius vel morte habebit assisam, quia omnes feoffati
sunt simul habendi & tenendi, nec totum nec partem
separatam, nec per se, sed ut quilibet ipsorum totum
habeat cum aliis in communi. Et càüm unus moriatur
: non descendit aliqua pars hszredi morientis, nec sepa-
rata, nec in communi ante mortem omnium, sed pars
illa.communis per jus acerescendi accrescit superstiti-
bus, de persona a&d personam usque ad ultimum super-
stitem: & càm ille ultimus obierit, tunc primó locum
habebit assisa mortis antecessoris in personis hseredum,
& sic ad ultimam seysinam, quicunque talium premo-
riatur, semper ad ultimam seysinam! erit recurrendum.
Sed esto quód hores per errorem, de morte patris vel
matris preemortus assisam portaverit, cüm portare de-
beret de morte ejus qui ultimó obiit, quzritur an
restitui possit. Et unde videndum est utrum tempes-
tivé ante captionem se retraxerit vel non. Si autem
se retraxerit, ad aliam assisam regressum habebit. Si
&utem non, quia assis& super assisam, de eadem re, et
de eadem morte, non erit capienda, non magis quàm
assisa novse disseysinz, inter easdem personas, & de
eodem facto, sibi ipsi imputet quia erravit. Si autem
sie fiat donatio pluribus suecessivé, seilicet. tali & hse-
redibus suis quos de carne sua procreatos habuerit, &
. si non habuerit, vel càm habuerit & defecerint, tune
tali & hseredibus suis eodem modo, & sic de pluribus:
si primus, cüm tales habuerit, seysitus moriatur, sta-
tim competit assisa suis hseredibus. Si autem nullos
omninó habuerit, vel càüm habuerit defecerint, tune
descendit jus ad alios feoffatos, non ex «causa succes-


! « n]timam assisam," MS. Bawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 198


who died the last of them all, and not concerning the
death of the others predeceased, as may be seen, if a
donation be made to & man and his wife together and
io their heirs, or to & concubine and her children by
name or not by name and io their heirs, and when all
have been: in seysine or some of them, none shall have
&n assise from the person or death of the other, because
all have been enfeoffed to have and to hold together,
neither the whole nor & part separately, nor by them-
selves, but that each of them should have the whole in
eommon with the others. And when one dies, no part
descends to the heir of the deceased, neither separate
nor in common before the death of all, but that common
part by right of accretion accrues to the survivors, from
person to person down to the last survivor, and when
that last survivor has died, then for the first time an
assise of mortdancester will hold good in the persons
of the heirs, and so recourse must be had to the last sey- -
sine. Whoever of them may have predeceased, recourse
must always be had to the last seysine. But let it be
that an heir by error, has brought an assise concerning
the death of his father or mother predeceased, when he
ought to have brought it concerning the death of him
who died last, it is questioned whether he can be re-
Stored. And hence it is to be seen whether he has with-
drawn himself seasonably before the holding of the assise
or not. If indeed he has withdrawn himself, then he
may have recourse to another assise.. But if not, because
&n assise upon an assise concerning the same thing and
concerning the same death is not to be held, any more
than an assise of novel disseysine, between the same
persons and concerning the same fact, he must impute to
himself that he has missed his way. Butif there be thus
made a donation to several persons successively, to wit,
to so-and-so and his heirs whom he has procreated of
his own flesh, and if he has not had any, or when he has
had them and they have failed, then to so-and-so and


his heirs in the same way, and so concerning several: if
Q 1302. N


f. 263.


4.
Si quis
donatio-
nem fece-
rit ad vi-
tam suam
alicui tan-
tum sine
hzrede,
vel alicui
et hzre-
dibus suis.


194 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


sionis, ut. locum .habeat assisa mortis antecessoris, sed
ex causa prims donationis, & per modum feoffamenti, .
& alio brevi opus erit. Item potest quis ita dare q

nec ipse nec donatorius nec heredes ipsorum habebunt
assisam mortis antecessoris, ut si quis ita dicit, Do
libi talem rem ad vitam meam. Si donatorius super-
vixerit donatorem, hzredi donatoris non eompetit as-
sisa, sed breve ad terminum qui preeteriit, cum res donata
sit liberum tenementum ipsius donatoris, & terminus
ipsi donatorio.


Si autem donatorius in vita ipsius donatoris obierit,
tune distinguendum erit utrum donatio facta fuerit
donatorio tantum vel donatorio & Mhsredibus suis, si
tantum donatorio, tunc revertitur res donata ad dona-
torem, ex quo heredes sui in donatione non sunt com-
prehensi, quia locü no invenit per modum donationis,
quód ad alium possit descendere vel reverti quàm ad
eum à quo processit. Si autem donatorio & heredibus
suis, si ipse defecerit & h:wredes sui in vita donatoris,
tunc fieb eodem modo quo superiàs proximo dictum
est. Si autem ipse donatorius vel hsredes sui vel
ambo supervixerint, tune revertat res donata ad dona-
torem vel hsredes suos per breve de ingressu ut supra.
Si autem càüm donatorio & hsredibus suis facta fuerit
donatio ad vitam donatoris, si donatorius preemoriatur,
heredes sui ei succedunt jure hsreditario, quamdiu
donator vixerit, sieu&, ad feodum, & post mortem do-
natoris desinit esse feodum donatorii, & incipit esse
feodum donatoris. Si autem sic faeta sit donatio ad


: a or ua. etm sos


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 195


the first, when he has had several, dies seysed, his heirs
are at once entitled to an assise; But if he has had no
heirs at.all, or when he has had them, they have failed,
then the right descends to the other feoffees, not on the
ground of succession, that an assise of mortdancester
may take place, but on the ground of the first donation, f.263.
and by means of a feoffment, and there will be need of
another writ. Likewise a person may so give, that
neither himself nor the donatory nor the heirs of either
shall have an assise of mortdancester, as if a person shall
thus say,I give you such & thing for my lifetime. If
the donatory has survived the donor, the heir of the
donor is not entitled to an assise, but to a writ for the
term which has passed, since the thing which was the
subject of the donation is à free tenement of the donor
himself, and the term is a donation to the said donatory.


Butif the donatory has died in the lifetime of the us
donor, then a distinction will have to be made whether pas ads
the donation has been made to the donatory alone or to Frac d
the donatory and his heirs, if to the donatory alone, then. time to
the thing given returns to the donor, since the heirs are Mono bs
not comprised in the donation, for through the mode of out his
donation it does not find place that it can descend to iini) p
another or return except to him, from whom it has pro- and his
ceded. But if to the donatory and his heirs, if he him- heirs.
self and his heirs have failed during the lifetime of the -
donor, then it will take place precisely as has been just
BSiated above. Butif the donatory himself or his heirs
or both have survived, then let the thing which was the
Subject of donation be restored to the donor or his heirs
by a writ of entry as above. But if when & donation
has been made to à donatory and his heirs for the lifo-
time of the donor, if the donatory predeceases, his heirs
succeed to him by right of inheritance, as long as the
donor may live, as to & fee, and. after the death of the
donor it ceases to be the fee of the donatory, and it

begins to be the fee of the donor. But if the donation
be thus made for the lifetime, &c., as above. Likewise
"2 N29.


n
*
j
!
Ü
u


CET COIT
.


U———MÁÁÁR— —M—MMM mtem m ue cw Rm e


ce einl tn ROSR Saar ur Mii


5.
Quid sit
domini-


cum.


— —


- — —— —


196 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


vitam &c. ut supra. Item dicitur in dominico suo


videndum est igitur inprimis quse possunt haberi in
dominico. Et sciendum est quód tam tenementa quàm,
redditus, & omnia alia, de quibus haberi possit assisa
nove disseysinze de libero tenemento, sive teneantur
ad vitam sive in feodo: & de his que in feodo
tenentur, sequitur assisa mortis antecessoris, & datur
heredibus quicunque fuerint in possessione.


Item dominicum accipitur multipliciter. Est autem
dominicum quod quis habet ad mensam suam & pro-
prie, sieut sunt. Bordiandes Anglice, Item dicitur do-
minicum villenagium, quod traditur villanis, quod quis
tempestivé & intempestivé resumere possit pro volun-
iate sua & revocare. ltem potest dici dominicum, de
quo quis habet liberam tenementum, & alius usum
fructum. Item dici poterit dominicum, de quo quis
habet liberum tenementum & alius custodiam. Eodem
modo dici poterit dominicum, de quo quis habet libe-
rum ieütum & alius cur&, sicut dicit de custode &
eur&tore, & unde unus datur.à jure & ali? ab homine.


" Et generaliter qualitercunq, quis feoffatus fuerit in qua-


eunq, hora, in feodo sibi & hswredib? suis, vel si ex
causa successionis, it& q assisà nove disseysine habere
posset, si ejectus esset dum viveret, competit heredi-
bus suis assis& mortis antecessoris post mortem suam
si seysitus moriatur Et sciendum quód dominicum
dicitur ad differentiam ejus quod tenetur in servitio,


. & unde dieitur tota die, quód videndum erit quid quis


teneat in dominico, & quid in servitio. Et regulariter
verum est, quód dominicum dici potest, omne illud
tenementum, de quo antecessor obiib seysitus ut de
feodo, sive cum usu fructu vel sine, & de quo si ejec-
tus esset dum viveret, recuperare posset per assisam


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 197


it is said *in his demesne." We must see therefore what :
things may be held in demesne. And it is to be known
that tenementis as well as rents, and all other things,
concerning which an assise of novel disseysine from .a
freehold may be held, whether they may be held for life
or in fee, and eoncerning those things which are held in
fee, an assise of mortdancester follows, and is allowed to
the heirs whoever may be in possession.


Likewise * demesne " is taken in manifold senses. But E
that is * demesne " which & person has for his own table demseenc:
and as property, such as are * Bordlandes" in English.
Likewise & villenage is called * demesne" which is de-
livered to villeins, which & person may take back and
revoke in season and out of season according to his own
will Likewise that may be called * demesne" of which
one has the freehold and another the usufruct. Likewise
that may be.called demesne of which one person has the
freehold and another the custody. In the same way a

thing may be called demesne, of which one has the free- -

hold, and another the care, as is said of a guardian and
a curator, and of whom one is given by the law and the
other by man. And generally in whatever way a per-
son has been enfeoffed in whatever hour, in fee to himself
and his heirs, or if on the ground of succession, so that he
might have had an assise of novel disseysine, if he had
been ejected whilst he was alive, his heirs are entitled
io an assise of mortdancester after his death, if he died
inseysine. And itis to be known that this is called
demesne to distinguish it from that which is held under
Services, and whence it is said throughout the day, that
i& must be seen what & person holds in demesne, and
What under service. And regularly it is true that the
term * demesne " may be applied to every kind of freehold
of which an ancestor died seysed as in fee, whether
with the usufruct or without it, and from which if he
had been ejeeted, whilst he was alive, he, might have
recovered by & writ of novel disseysine, although
another person. might have the usufruct thereof, and f.268 b.


f. 263 b.


Britton, l.
iii. ch. xv.


8$ 1, 2.


198 |  . DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


nov: disseysinc licet alius inde haberet usum fruc-
tum, & unde ad declarationem seysin; antecessoris
statim competit heredi assisa mortis antecessoris, si
impeditus fuerit, ut seysinam habeat de tenemento,
sicut antecessor suus habuerit, & quod ad heredem
recognoseatur, salvo firmario termino suo. Et si ter-
minus preeterierit, & firmarius forte tenementum ultra
terminum retinere contenderit, vel illud ad alium infrà
lerminum. vel post transtulerit, competit hsredi assisa


nove disseysine si voluerit, & sic de seysina ejus qui .


infrà setatem fuerit, si infrà statem obierit, competit
heredi suo de morte sua assisa mortis antecessoris,
non obstante usu fructu quem firmarius vel custos


perceperit, & de quo antecessor minoris die quo obiit.


seysinam non habuit, nec ipse minor dum vixit, quia
elsi in propria persong& usus non fuit, tamen utitur
per alios qui sunt in seysina nomine suo, quia iste
facit, cujus nomine fit, & si non utuntur per se, utun-
tur per alios, sieut videri poterit de illis qui tenent
in villenagio, ipsi utuntur & fruuntur, sed non nomine
proprio sed domini sui, & unde licet alius usum fruc-
ium habuit die quo obiit antecessor, dici poterit quód
seysitus obiit in dominieo suo ut de feodo, habito
respectu ad liberum tenementum & ad feodum, & non
ad usum, & ita quód assisa non determinet usum, non
magis quàm si tenementum teneretur in villenagio, &
poterit quis tenere tenementum in dominico & in
feodo, & alius in servitio, vel quoad usum. Item unus
tenere poterit in feodo quoad servitium, sicut. dominus
capitalis, & non in dominico, & alius in feodo & in
dominico & non in servitio, sicut liberé tenens ali-
cujus, & unde lieet tenens vendat alicui tenementum
suum, non tamen ille qui emit intrat in feodum do-
mini capitalis, cüm ipse nihil inde habeat nisi tantum
servitium, & nihil in dominico nisi tantum in servitio,


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 199


whence upon the declaration of the seysine of an an-
eestor the heir is forthwith entitled io an assise of
moridancester, if he has been impeded from having
Seysine of the tenement like his ancestor has had,
and to be acknowledged for the heir, saving to the
lessee his term. And if the term has passed away, and
thelessee by chance has contended to retain the tene-
ment beyond the term, or has transferred it. to another
within the term or after it, the heir is entitled to à writ
of novel disseysine, if he wishes it, and so concerning tho
seysine of him who was under age, if he has died under
age, his heir is entitled upon his death to an assise of
mortdancester, notwithstanding the usufruct which a
lessee or & guardian may derive, and concerning which
the ancestor of the minor on the day on which he died
had not seysine, nor the minor himself whilst he was
alive, for although he did not use it in his own name,
nevertheless he uses through others who are in seysine
in his name, for he does a thing, in whose name it is
done, and if they do not use it by themselves, they use
ib by others, as may be seen concerning those who hold
in villenage, they have the use and the fruits, but not in


their own name, but in the name of their lord, and hence
 &lthough another person had the use and the fruits on


the day in which the ancestor died, it may be said that


he died seysed.in his demesne as in fee, regard being had


to the freehold and to the fee, and not to the use, and
S0 that the assise does not determine the use, no more
than if the tenement was held in villenage ; and a person
may hold a tenement in demesne and in fee, and another
in serfage or as regards the use. Likewise one may hold
8 tenement in fee as regards a service, as & chief lord,
and not in demesne, and another in fee and in demesne
and not in service, a& the free tenant of any one, and
hence although the tenant sells to some one his tenement,
he who buys notwithstanding does not enter into the fee
of his chief lord, since he has nothing therefrom except
80 much service, and nothing in demesne excepting so


f. 264.


900 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


sed tantum in feodum & dominicum tenentis, & tenens
nullam injuriam fecit domino capitali, licet ei damnum
faciat, quia habere poterit servitium suum & distrin-
gere feodum suum, quicunque illud teneat, & ideà
poterit tenens vendere tenementum suum quando vo-
luerit & cui, nisi ab initio inter eos modus adjiciatur
ne possit, alioquin faceret. tenenti suo disseysinam.


. Ttem dicitur (ut de feodo) quod quidem oportet
petentem probare sicut alios articulos. Videndum est
igitur quid teneatur in feodo & quid sit feodum. Et
sciendum quod feodum est id, quod quis tenet ex qua-
cunque causa sibi & heredibus suis, sive sit, tenemen-
ium sive redditus, ita quod redditus non accipiatur
sub nomine ejus qui provenit ex camera alicujus, sicut
alibi plenius dictum est supra de assisa novse dissey-
singe. Item dicitur feodum alio modo ejus qui alium -
feoffat & quod quis tenet ab alio, ut si qui dicat,
talis tenet de me tot feoda per servitium militare.
Et unde ex pr:emissis colligi potest, quód unus potest
esse seysitus de aliqua terra vel redditu in dominico
suo ut de feodo, & de libero tenemento simul, vel
tantum ut de feodo vel non in dominico, vel tantum
ut de libero tenemento & in dominico, non tamen in
feodo, sicut dici poterit de illis qui tantum tenent ad
vitam quacunque ratione. Et eodem modo potest quis
esse seysitus ut de: feodo & de libero tenemento quoad
proprietatem & in dominico, & alius ad nullum isto-
rum sed quantum ad usum fructum, sicut firmarius
sive fructuarius, qui tenet ad certum terminum anno-
rum. ltem dicitur (ut de feodo) ita quód (ut) pona-
tur pro (quasi) & denotet similitudinem, vel quód (ut)


.denotet ipsam veritatem. Ipsam veritatem, sicut de


ipsis dici poterit qui justum habent titulum & justam
causam possidendi ab eis qui jus habent conferendi &
tune pro (sieut) ut supre& Item similitudinem, pro


——— mU
eame tm cuin
1
"


| OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 201
1


much in service, but only into the fee and demesne of
the tenant, &ànd the tenant does no injury to the chief
lord, although he may cause him loss, because he may
have his service and distrain his fee, whoever holds it,
and therefore the tenant may sell his tenement when
and to whom he may wish, unless from the commence-
ment a mode has been added between them that he
cannot, otherwise he may disseyse his tenant.

Likewise itis said ^as of a fee" which it is incumbent |, 6.
for the claimant to prove just as the other articles. It is fee, dose
to be seen therefore what is held in fee and what is a fee.
And itis to be known that a fee is that which any -
person holds from whatever cause for himself and his
heirs, whether it be a tenement or & rent, so that the
rentis not received under the name of that which is
derived from the chamber of some one, as has been
explained .more fully above, concerning an assise, of
novel disseysine. Likewise & thing is said in another
manner to be & fee of that person who enfeoffs another,
and which a, person holds from another, as if there be one

. who says, so-and-so holds so many fees from me by mili-
" tary service. And hence from the premises it may. be
gathered, that one person may be seysed of a certain
. land or rent in his own demesne as in fee and as a free-
hold at the same time, or only as in fee and not in
 demesne, or only as & freehold and in demesne, not
however in fee, as ma&y be said of those who hold only
forlife for whatever reason. And in the same manner
& person may be seysed as in fee and in the freehold, f.264.
as regards the property, and in demesne, and. another
in none of these but only in the usufruct, as & lessee
or fruetuary, who holds for a certain number of years.
. likewise it is said *as in fee" so that *as" is used
for *as if" and denotes similitude, or that * as" denotes
ihe truth itself The truth itself; as may be said of
those who have & just title and & just cause of posses-
Sion from those who have & right of conferring,
&nd then it is used for *just as,' as above. Like-


202 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS,


(quasi) sicut .de illis dici poterit qui ingrediuntur sine
causa & sine justo titulo, vel frater postnatus antenato
excluso, vel soror propria autoritate & per donationem
faetam à non domino. ltem si per conditionem, ita
quód talium ex fortuns; insidiüs dependeat seysina.
Item si bastardo fiat donatio & hseredibus suis, & cüm
nullum habeat de corpore suo, ingrediatur filius suus
bastardus, & uxorem ducat, & heredes habeat de cor-
pore suo, si tales moriantur in seysina, moriuntur
seysiti in dominico suo ut feodo, & ibi accipitur (ut)


pro quasi.
-" 7. Item dicitur die quo obiit, vel die quo habitum
obit. ^ religionis assumpsit. Item die quo iter peregrinatio-


nis arripuit, in quo itinere obiit, unde videndum erit

de die qualiter dies aecipiatur. Est enim dies solaris

& dies lunaris, secundàm quod Deus divisit lumen à

tenebris, ex quibus duobus diebus efficitur unus dies,

qui dieitur artificalis ex die precedente & nocte sub-
inffa/ sequente, qui constat ex xxiii horis Hora autem fit
[359 b. ex" quadraginta! momentis.


8. Dies autem artifieialis dividitur in quatuor partes.
hice Et est una pars qus incipit in crepusculo, & termi-
dies. natur ad mediam noctem: & alia quc incipit & media

nocte, & terminatur in aurora: & tertia qus incipit
ab aurora, & terminatur in meridie: & quarta qus
incipit à meridie & terminatur ad noctem, & quelibet
pars in se continet sex horas. Et unde sive quis obi-
Briton,l erit die solari sive lunari, moritur eodem die artificiali,
MEINES qui pro uno die computatur. Et unde quacunq, hora
obierit quis tali die artificiali, sive die sive nocte,
moritur semper quasi in die. Et unde non est ne-
cesse apponere in brevi nocte qua obiit, quia semper


!* quadraginta." This reading | Concerning the legal division. of
in letters is also found in MS. Rawl. | the hour into forty moments, which
C. 160; but in MS. Rawl. C. 159 | was known to Accursius, see the
the reading is in numerals, sc. xl'^. | Introduction.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 208


wise similitude for *as if" as may be said of those who
enter without & cause and without à just title either à
second brother to the exclusion of & firstborn, or a sister
of her own authority and by a donation made by one
who is not the owner, Likewise if through a condition,
80 that the seysine of such persons depends upon the
snares of fortune. Likewise if & donation be made to
& bastard and his heirs and when he has none of his
own body, his son who is & bastard enters and marries &
wife and has heirs of his body, if such persons die
in seysine, they die seysed of the demesne as in fee, and
there *as" is construed *^as i£"


Likewise i& is said, ^on the day on which ho died," O" tbe day
or * on thé day on which he assumed the religious dress." he died.
Likewise * on the day on which he commenced a foreign
« journey, in which journey he died," hence we must see
concerning the day in what sense the term *day" is
received. For there is & solar day and & lunar day, ac-
cording as God has divided the light from the darkness,
out of which two days one day is made up, which is
ealed an artificial day made up of the preceding day
and the following night, which consists of twenty-four
hours. But an hour is made up of forty moments.


8
But the artificial day is divided into four parts. And In what

there is one parb which begins with the nightfall, and day is

ends with midnight, and another which begins at mid. *€^9Píed.

night and ends at daybreak, and a third which begins

with daybreak and terminates with midday, and a fourth

Which begins at midday and terminates at nightfall, and

each part contains in itself six hours. And hence if à

person dies in the solar day or in the lunar day, he dies

on the same artificial day, which is computed as one

day. And hence at whatever hour a person has died on '

Such an artificial day, he dies always as i6 were on the

day. Hence it is not necessary to insert in the writ

the night on which he died, because he always dies on


204 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


morit die artificiali. Ad hoc autem quod h:wres seysi-
nam antecessoris sui recuperetb per assisam qualem
habuit antecessor, suffieib (ut quidam dicunt) quód
talis antecessor suus aliqua hora diei illius in seysina
extiterit, licet, ante mortem suam aliqua hora diei
tenementum illud ex causa donationis, vel alia quali-
cunq, ad alium transtulerit, tum propter brevem seysi-
nam, tum quia die quo obiit aliqua hora in seysina
fuit. Et unde dicunt, quód hoc satisfactum est brevi
& assise, nec est necesse (ut dicunt) inquirere utrum


talis seysitus obierit necne, ex quo in brevi non dis-


f. 264 b.


9.
Si de usu
seysing in


tinguitur. Sed revera (quiequid dicatur) videndum
erit utrum seysitus obierit necne, quia cüm dicat die
quo obiit seysitus, oportet quód seysitus obierit, alio-
quin cadit assisa, sicut videri poterit manifeste, Quia
esto quód quis in crepusculo vel aurora seysitus fuerit
de aliquo tenemento, ut de libero tenemento suo & in -
dominico suo ut de feodo, & tenementum illud dederit
alicui & transtulerit àanimo donandi, & ille cui datum
fuerit illud recipit animo retinendi & possidendi, &
jus conjunctum simul cum seysina in persona dona-
torii, statim facit liberum tenementum ei qui recipit
& dominicum, & nihil remanet cum donatore, nisi
tantum nudum dominium, cüm uno tempore & una
hora transferat quiequid habet ad donatorium, si talis
sic feoffatus aliqua hora diei vel noctis fuerit in sey-
sina,

De usu vero, si donatorius non statim utatur non
es& multum curandum, quia potest quis sufficientem


assisa que- habere seysinam, licet non statim utatur. Nec mul-


ratur, de
hoc non
est curan-
dum.


tum est de substantia, sed aliquando vestimentum pro-
bet, & post imaginariam donationem seysin&m declarat,
quod quidem faciat, & eodem modo captio expletiarum.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 205


the artifieial day. But with the object that the heir
should recover by the assise the seysine of his ancestor
such as his ancestor had, it is sufficient (as some say)
that such & person his ancestor was in seysine at some
hour of that day, although before his death at some hour
of that day he may have transferred that tenement by way
of donation or in some other way to another, as well on
account of his brief seysine, as because he was in seysine
on some hour of the day on which he died. And hence
they say, that by this the writ and the assise is satisfied, -
nor is it necessary (as they say) to inquire whether such
person died seysed or not, since no distinetion is made in
the writ. But in truth (whatever may be said) it is to
be seen whether he died seysed or not, because when it
says on the day on which he died seysed, it is incumbent
that he should have died seysed, otherwise the assise falls,
as may be clearly seen, Because let it be that at nightfall
or at daybreak a person was seysed of a tenement as his
freehold and in demesne as in fee, and he gave that
tenement to & certain person and transferred it with the f.264 b.
intention of making & donation of it, and he to whom it
was given receives it with the intention of retaining it
and of possessing it, and the right conjoined together

. with the seysine in the person of the donatory at once
makes it & freehold to him who receives it and a de-
mesne, and nothing remains with the donor, except the
bare demesne, since at one time and at one hour he
iransfers whatever he has to the donatory, if such a
person so enfeoffed: has been in seysine at any hour of
the day or night.


But concerning the use, if the donatory does not im- Ita m


, mediately use it, it is not of much significance, because am
& person may have a sufficient seysine, although he does the assise
not use it. Nor is it much of the substance, but some- tpe uro of"

à : . . e use of
times the clothing proves it, and after an imaginary theseysine,
donation makes clear the seysine, which indeed the Qo. t;
taking of the profits does [make clear] and in the. same b paid to

"n it.


206 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS,


Et eodem modo quo seysina juncta juri liberum facit
lenementum vero heredi, eàm descendat hsreditas ad
eum statim & sine mora in ipsa conjunctione, ita facit
Seysina juncta cum jure statim liberum tenementum,
Si conjuncta transferatur ad alium per eum qui dáre
potest, & qui omnia habet, scilicet seysinam & jus &
liberum tenementum, & qui hsec omnia habet, omnia
statim transferre potest & sine mora si velit, sine ali-
qua retentione vel exceptione, vel quód ei nihil rema-
neat preter solum nudum dominium. Et cüm itá


transtulerit (facta traditione) statim quasi nudus rece-


dit, nihil secü portans prseter nudum dominium, &
donatorius (facta traditione) sie existens in possessione
vacua, nihil possessioni suze contrarium inveniens vel
rebelle, statim in ipsa hora habet liberum tenementum,
secundüm quod videri poterit manifest. Esto quód
donalio facta sib mane, & donatorius in seysina usq,
&d horam primam vel tertiam, & donator facta tradi-
lione recesserit, & postea poenituerit se fecisse dona-
tionem, & statim revertatur post horam tertiam volens
ingredi, non admittatur, violentiam adhibens violenter
repellatur, queritur per assisam quód injust? sine ju-
dicio sit ejectus, respondet donatorius ad assisam quód
non, quia gratis dedit, et gratis tradidit et gratis ex-
ivit, e& quód non sit ei injuriatum, quia hoc voluit.
Videtur igitur quod assisa nove disseysine remanere
debeat, non obstante aliqua exceptione tenere seysins :
cüm alis exceptio contra faetum proprium donatoris
locum habere non debeat, quamvis in suo casu locum
habeat contra factum alienum, Et unde videtur, quód


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 207


manner. And in the same way in which the seysine
joined to the right makes a freehold to the true heir,
when the inheritance descends to him forthwith and
without delay in the very conjunction, so the seysine
joined with the right makes forthwith a freehold, if
when conjoint it is transferred to another by him who
has power to give, and who has every thing, to wit, the
seysine &nd the right and the freehold, and he who has
all these may forthwith transfer them all and without
delay, if he wishes, without any retention or exception,
or because nothing remains for him but only the nude
dominion. And when he has so transferred (the transfer
having been made), forthwith he withdraws as it were
naked, carrying away with him nothing but the bare
. demesne, and the donatory (upon the transfer having
been made) being thus established in the vacant posses-
sion, finding nothing contrary to or rebellious against
lis own possession, forthwith at the very hour has the
freehold, according to what may be seen clearly. Let it
be that the donation may be made in the morning, and
the donatory has been in seysine at the first or the third
hour, and the donor having made the transfer has with-
drawn, and has afterwards repented that he had made
the donation, and returns forth with after the third hour,
wishing to enter, and he is not admitted, in applying
violence he is repelled with violence, he complains by
an assise, that he has been unjustly ejected without a
judgment, the donatory answers to the assise that it is
not so, because he has given it of his own aecord and he
has transferred it of his own accord and has gone forth
from it of his own aecord, and that no injury has been
done to him, because he so willed it. It appears there-
fore thát the assise of novel disseysine ought to be
. stayed, notwithstanding any exception of a tender sey-

Sine, since such an exception cannot have place against

the proper aet of the donor, although in his ease it.
would have place against the act of another. And


f. 265.


208 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS,


ea ratione qua cadit assisá in persona donatoris, eadem
ratione tenere debet et procedere pro donatorio, ad
recuperandum, si fort donator ipsum ejiciat sine judi-
dieio in eodem casu. Sequit ergo ex premissis, qg tam
modieum tempus suffieit ad habendum liberum tene-
mentum, et q de uno et eodem die possunt esse sey-
siti ut de feodo et diverso tempore, et quod de uno
dicitur, de duobus vel pluribus dici poterit, si prse-
dicto modo quacunq, hora diei fuerint in seysina et in
seysina obierint. Et unde mortuo donatore eodem die
donationis, et donatorio vel pluribus donatoriis, si te-
nementum successivé ex causa donationis ad plures de
persona in personà translatum fuerit et eodem die
moriantur, e& unde si omnes heredes versus capitalem
dominum seysinam antecessorum suorum petierint per
assisam, videndum erit quis eorum presferatur, si dica-
tur quód hsres primi donatoris, quia fuit in seysina
&ntecessor suus aliqua hora diei, illud idem dici pote-
rit de herede primi donatorii & secundi, quia anteces-
sores eorum fuerint in seysina aliqua hora diei, & sic
deinceps de aliis. Ad quod responderi poterit, quód
re vera ille preeferri debeat aliis, cujus antecessor fuit
in seysina aliqua hora diei & seysitus obiit, hoc etiam
videri poterit manifestó de eo cujus'antecessor fuit in
seysina aliqua hora diei & obiit seysitus, aut iter
peregrinationis seysitus assumpsit in quo itinere obiit,
quia poterit hodie iter arripere & eodem die de quo
profectus fuerit vel in crastino, poterit dare et secundo


die inori, et ideó licet aliqua hora diei quo iter assump-


serit seysitus fuerit, tamen nullam seysinam iransmit-
tit ad heredes, quia seysitus non moritur. Et hoc
dico si donatorius post donationem aliqua hora diei


per traditionem in seysina fuerit. Illud etiam dici


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 209


hence it appears that for the reason for which the
. assise abates in the person of the donor, for the same
. reason it ought to hold good and proceed on behalf of the
donatory, in order to recover, if by chance the donor has
ejected him without & judgment in the same case. It
follows therefore from the premises, that so moderate &
time suffiees to hold a freehold, and that on one and the
same day they may be seysed as in fee and at a different
time, and that what is said of one person may be said of
iwo or more, if in the aforesaid manner they have been in
Seysine &t any hour of the day and have died in seysine.
And hence upon the donor having died on the same day
of the donation, and the donatory or several donatories,
if the tenement has been transferred successively by
way of donation to several persons from person to person,
and they die'on the same day, and thereupon if all the
heirs claim against the chief lord the seysine of their
ancestors by an assise, it is to be seen who of them
should be preferred ; if it be said that the heir of the
first donor, because his ancestor was in seysine at some
hour of the day, the same may be said of the heir of
the first, donatory and of the second, because their an-
cestors were in seysine at some hour of the day, and so
In succession of the others. To which it may be an-
swered, that in truth he ought to be preferred to the
others, whose ancestor was in seysine at some hour of
the day and died whilst so seysed, or undertook a jour-
ney of pilgrimage whilst seysed, in which journey he
died, because he might to-day commence a journey, and
on the same day on which he set forth or on the morrow
he might give the thing, and on the second day might
die, &nd therefore although he was seysed at some hour
of the day on which he commenced his journey, never-
theless he transmitted no seysine to his heirs, because he
does not die whilst seysed. And this I say, if the dona-
tory after the donation was in seysine by delivery at any


hour of the day. 'Phis also may be said of him whose .


Q1302 : o


f. 265.


To LS T ER m0 0 0c co "YT. Ww -


210 DE ASSISA MOBTIS ANTECESSORIS.


poterit de eo cujus antecessor habitum religionis as-.
sumpsit, & eodem die in seysina extiterit, & eodem
die ante assumptionem habitus dederit, heres ejus -
nihil capiat per assisam, quia antecessor seysitus habi-
tum non assumpsit, & unde videtur (& verum est)
quód nullus per assisam obtinebit, nisi heres ille cujus
antecessor seysitus obiit. Et sciendum quód ille, qui dat
& qui dare potest, transfert jus quod habet, sive fuerit
jus possessorium sive jus merum, hoc est si dederit
proprium statim facit liberum tenementum, si autem
alienum, non sic. Qus autem seysina dici debeat
firma & bona & que tenera, supra videri poterit in
titulo de donationibus, ubi inveniri poterit de hac
materia.


10. Item fit mentio de termino, & tunc fiant ea quse
Dete" — supra in aliis assisis. Item continetur in brevi (& si
talis sib hs;eres propinquior) ad quod videre oportet de
differentia & qualitate hsredis, de legitimo vero & bas-

tardo pertinet ad tractatum de bastardia, ut infrà dice-

tur pleniàs, ubi apponitur! bastardia in modum ex-
eeptionis. ltem primus sive propinquior heres dici
poterit, quem nemo antecedit, supremus quem nemo
sequitur. Item heredis appellatio non solum ad proxi-
mum heredem sed ad ulteriores refertur, nam & hi:ere-

dis hseres deinceps heredis appellatione continentur?

Sed tamen hic tangendum erit in parte qui sunt filii

& hsredes, & qui filii & non heredes, & qui nec filii

nec heredes. Et unde sciendum, quod liberorum qui-

dam sunt fili & hseredes, sieut sunt illi qui ex justis
nuptiis procereatà sunt & progeniti, à patre & maire

vel altero ipsorum hereditatem habentibus, quia hzres
dieitur &b hereditate & non hsreditas ab hsrede.
Item e converso fili & non hsredes, ut si nulla sit


1 * opponitur," MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ? continetur," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


lar (cR C 0:
* w^ E D


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 911


ancestor assumed the religious habit, and on the same
| day was in seysine and on ihe same day before the
assumption of the habit gave the thing, his heir shall
take nothing by an assise, because his ancestor did not
assume the habit when seysed, and hence it appears
(and it is true) that no one shall obtain by an assise,
' except the heir, whose ancestor died whilst seysed. And
itis to be known that he, who gives and who can give,
. transfers the right which he has, whether it was & pos-
sessory right or & mere right, that is, if he has given
his own property, he forthwith makes it a freehold, but
if another person's property, not so. But what seysine
ought to be called firm and good and what tender, may
be seen &bove in the title concerning donations, where
there may be found a discussion on this matter,


Likewise there is mention of & term, and then let those ^ 10.
things be done, which have been mentioned above in other lug à. (itn
assises, Likewise there is contained in the writ *and if
* such person be the next heir,"in regard to which we must
see concerning the difference and the quality of an heir,
but concerning 2 true heir and a bastard 1t appertains to
the treatise on bastardy, as will be explained more
fully, where bastardy is objected in the manner of an
exeeption. Likewise he may be called the first or the
next heir, whom no one precedes, the last whom no one
follows. Likewise the appellation of heir is not only
referred to the next heir, but to more remote heirs, for
the heir of an heir in succession is contained under the
appellation of aà heir, But here we must touch in part
who are sons and heirs, and who are sons and not heirs,
and who are neither sons nor heirs. And hence wemay
know, that of children some are sons and heirs, such as
are those who areprocreated and begotten out of lawful
marriage, from 8 father and mother or one of them hav-
ing an inheritance, because the heir is so called from
the inheritance, and not the inheritance from the heir.
And likewise conversely sons and not heirs, as if there

|. 02


-FiULA WD oL .———EGLOum.- W4o331w 1S -


(c0 -— A


219 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORBIS,


hs;reditas descendens nec ex parte pairis nec ex parte
. matris. ltem poterit esse hzres ex parte patris tan-
tum & filius, cüm haereditas tantum descendat à patre
& non à maire, & sic filius matris & non heres &
e contrario: si hzreditas descendat tantum ex parte
matris, si autem ex parte utriusq, tunc erit filius &
heres utriusq. ltem sieut ab initio poterit quis esse
filius et heres unius vel utriusg, ipsorü (ut preedictü
est) eodem modo desinere possit esse filius & hzeres,
u& si pater & mater, vel eorü alter totam dederint
hzreditatem, nihil relinquentes heredi nec in dominico
nec in servitio, cum is quasi sine caus& heres dice-
f:265 b. batur, eüm jam non subsistat. ltem ubi quis primó
genuerit fillam qui hsres dici possit propinquior, si
masculus supervenerit, desinit esse hsres. Item ubi
filia heres fuerit & per ne, aliis filiabus supervenien-
libus non erit hzres per se, sed cum aliis in com-


p"


muni. tem hseredum quidam sunt propinqui eum —.—


propinquioribus, sicut frater vel soror patris vel matris
cum eorum filis vel filiabus. Item propinquiores sunt
filii vel filize, eonfratres vel sorores in linea transver-
sali, càm 'sint in linea recta descendente à patre vel
matre, quia omnes hsredes in linea recta descenden-
ies excludunt à successione omnes transversales. Item
in linea recta descendente sunt propinqui & propin-
quiores, ut si plures filii venientes ab eo à quo de-
scendit hzreditas, omnes quidem sunt propinqui, sed
antenatus propinquior propter statem.


l1. Item si unus filius vel plures, vel unus fius &
Dequali- plures filize, si plures filii & una filia vel plures, mas-
tate ere- " ] . . . . .
dum. culi semper erunt propinqui cum primogenito, & filie


hswedes remoti. Si autem nullus masculus eum pri-


.OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 918


be no inheritance descending, neither on the side of the

1 father nor on the side of the mother. Likewise he may

be heir on the side of the father alone and. son, when the
inheritance descends to him only from the father and not
from the mother, and so he would be the son of his mother
and not her heir, and contrariwise, if the inheritance

. descended only from the side of the mother, but if from
the side of each, then he will be the son and heir of each.
Likewise, as from the commencement & person may be
the son and the heir of one or each of them as aforesaid,
in the same way he may.cease to be the son and the
heir, and if his father and mother, or one of them, has
given away the entire inheritance, leaving nothing for
ihe heir neither in demesne nor in service, when he as
ib were without a cause was called heir, when already it
does not exist. Likewise where one has begotten a f.265 b.
daughter, who may be called the next heir,if & male is
born after her, she ceases to be heir. Likewise where
& daughter has been heir and by herself, upon other
daughters being born she will not be heir by herself, but
in eommon with others. Likewise of heirs, some are
near with nearer heirs, as & brother or sister of & father
or & mother with their sons or daughters. Likewise,
sons and daughters are nearer heirs [than] brothers and .
sisters in & transverse line, since they arein a right line
descending from the father or mother, because all heirs
descending in a right line exclude from the succession all
transverse heirs. Likewise in & right line descending
there are near and nearer heirs, as if there are several
sons coming from him from whom the inheritance de-
scends, they are all near heirs, but the first-born is the
next heir on account of his age.


Likewise if one son or several, or one son and several 1l.
daughters, if there are several sons and one daughter or
more, the males will always be near heirs with the he

. first-born son, and the daughters will be remote heirs.
But if there be no male with the first-born son, but only


Of the
mus of


214 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


 mogenito, sed tantum filia vel filie, tunc erunt filiw
heredes propinqui cum masculo, & masculus propin-
quior antecessori propter sexum. Item si plures sint
fili & hereditas descendens partibilis sit, omnes sint
propinquiores ratione hzoreditatis que in se habet par-
titionem, & si filie. sint, sunt heredes própinqui. Si
autem nulle, tunc frater vel soror antecessoris, si au-
iem plures sint filio, licet hsereditas ex se non habeat
partitionem, tamen partitur ratione filiarum, quz sunt
quasi unus heres, & in quo casu, quslibet illarum est
heeres propinquior antecessoris, frater veró & soror pro-
pinqui Item sunt propinqui & propinquiores, ita sunt -
remoti & remotiores. Remoti veró post propinquos,
Scilicet. fratres, sorores, avunculos vel amitas, sunt eo-
rum fili vel filie, nepotes .scilicet. & - neptes, remotiores
veró eorum fili vel filie, sicut pronepotes & pronep-
les, & sic deinceps eorum filii & filie in infinitum,
Et sic perpendi poterit, quis sit hzres propinquior &
qua ratione, Et sciendum quod aut sexus, aut stas,
aut linea, aut hrsreditas partibilis, sut pluralitas fzemi-
narum facii heredes propinquiores, quantum ad jus
Suecessionis; non autem quantum ad jus sanguinis,
seeundàm quod inferiàs dicetur. ltem sunt propin-
quiores, quantum ad jus & quantum ad seysinam, quia
seysinam semper sequi debet jus. Et eo deficiente qui
propinquior est antecessori, sive propinquior sib per se,
sive cum alio, sine herede de corpore suo, & incipit
postnatus post eum esse propinquior antecessori qui
in seysina est, & à quo descendit jus hereditatis ad
ipsum, & sie deficientibus propinquioribus successive,
cim semel inceperint esse quilibet post alterum vivente
antecessore, Semper incipit& esse hsres propinquior ei
qui est in possessione hereditatis, heres qui fuit priüs
antecessori propinquus, sive in linea recta descendente,


pe d


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 215


& daughter or daughters, then the daughters will be near
heirs with the male, and the male nearer to the ancestor
on aecount of his sex. — Likewise if there be several sons
and the descending inheritance is shareable, they are all
nexi heirs by reason of the inheritance, which is capable
of partition, and if they are daughters they: are near
heirs. Butif there are none, then the brother or sis-
ler of the ancestor, but if there are,several daughters,
although the'inberitance is not of itself shareable, never-
theless it is shared by reason of. the daughters, who are as
1t were one heir, and in which ease each of them is the
next heir of the ancestor, but the brother and sister are
near heirs, Likewise there &re near and nearer heirs, so
there are remote and more remote heirs. Remote heirs
indeed after near heirs, to wit, brothers, sisters, uneles and
aunts, and their sons or daughters, grandsons, to wit, or
grand-daughters, but, still more remote are their sons and
daughters, to wit, the great-grandsons, and great-grand-
daughters, and so in succession their sons and daughters
to infinity. And so it may be well weighed, who is the
next heir, and for what reason. And itis to be known
that either sex or age or line or a shareable inheritance
or à plurality of females makes heirs nearer as regards


the right of succession, but not as regards the right of


blood, according to what will be explained below. Làke-
wise they are nearer as far as regards right ànd as
regards seysine, because right ought always to follow


. Seysine, Ànd when he fails who is nearer to the ancestor,


whether he be nearer alone or with another, without any
heir of his body, and the next born after him begins to
be nearer to the ancestor who is in seysine, and from
whom descends the right of inheritance to himself, and so
the nearer heirs failing successively, when once they have
begun to be heirs one after another during the lifetime of
the ancestor, the heir who was previously next to the
ancestor always begins to be the nearer heir to him who
is in possession of the inheritance, whether he is in &


f. 266.


12.
De hoc,
quod dici-
tur in
brevi; sum-
moneas
&c. tales,
qui tenent,
&e.


216 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


sive in linea transversali: ita tamen quód linea recta:
semper excludat transversalem, & sicut ex premissis
perpendi poterit manifest. Item si descendat hsredi-
tas ad primogenitum non habentem hseredem ex se,
incipiunt fratres sui postnati vel sorores ejus esse hz-
redes sui propinqui, & desinunt esse hseredes patris
communis vel alterius antecessoris. Sed tamen primo-
genitus post eum incipit esse propinquior, quia senior.
Et generaliter verum est, quód ille propinquior est
heres in omni easu ad quem jus merum descendit,
sive sib verus heres sive pro herede, sive loco here-
dis, sieut est, dominus propter feloniam tenentis sui,
quia nullus potuit esse propinquior, qui jus merum
habuit! Et. eodem modo tenendum erit de remotis
hseredibus in infinitum, sicut dicitur de propinquis, de
quibus infrà pleniüs dicetur de successoribus.


Dicitur etiam in brevi  Sümoneas &ce. talem vel
tales qui terram illam vel redditu tenent, &e. Et
unde videndum an totum teneant sicut antecessor te-
nuit vel ejus partem & non totum, secundàüm quód


antecessor tenuit, cujus seysinam ipsi heredes petunt.
Et sciendum quód multipliciter poterit esse illud totum,


vel potest peti illud totum sub uno toto, ut si quis
petat aliquod manerium eum pertinentiis vel alio modo,
vel decem libratas terre cum pertinentiis, vel unam
carucatam terre cum pertinentiis vel alio modo, & non
refert utrum hoc faciat, an per simile Et unde cüm
petens visum facere debeat juratoribus, oportet q jura-
tores videant quid & quantum posuerit in visu suo,
& utrum totum q ipse antecessor tenuit, & secundüm
q tenuit, vel non, quia totum debet petere p assisam
q antecessor tenuit, & secundüm q tenuit, vel excipere


! * non habuit," MSS. Reg. 9, E. xv. et Crewe et Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 217


right line descending or in & transverse line; so however
that the right line always excludes the transverse line, and
as may be manifestly concluded from the premises. Like-
wise, if the inheritance descends to the first-born not
having &n heir from himself, his after-born brothers or his
sisters begin to be his near heirs, and they cease to bo
the heirs of the common father or other ancestor. But, f.266.
nevertheless, the first-born after him begins to be the
nearer heir, because he is the senior. And it is generally
irue that he is the next heir in every case to whom the
.absolute right descends, whether he be the true heir or &
representative of the heir or à substitute for the heir, as
. 1s & lord on account of the felony of his tenant, for no
one can be nearer who has not the absolute right.
And in the same way we must hold concerning remote
heirs to infinity, as is explained concerning near heirs,
concerning whom & more full statement will be made
concerning SUCCessors.


It is said also in the writ, *Summon" &e. *such
" person or persons who hold that land or rent" And Concem-
hence it is to be seen whether they hold the whole as wich io
the ancestor held it or & part of it and not the whole, E inue
according as the ancestor held it whose seysine the heirs s Rozison;
themselves claim. And it is to be known that the a
whole may be so in many ways, or the whole may be who hold,"
claimed under one whole, as if any one should claim a **
cerbain manor with its appurtenances or in another
manner, or ten librates of land with its appurtenances,
or one carucate of land with its appurtenances or in
some other manner, and it does not matter whether he
does this or very like it. And hence when a claimant
ought to make & view for the jurors, ib is incumbent
that the jurors should see what and how much he has
plaeed in his view, and whether the whole which the
ancestor himself had and according to what he held or
not, because he ought to claim the whole by the assise
Which his ancestor held and according to what he held


Britton, 1.


ii. ch


$8 1,2.


218 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


si aliquid inde alienatum fuerit post seysinam anteces-
soris, vel translatum, alioquin de jure debet cadere
breve. fSi autem petat heres seysinam antecessoris
sui versus unum per plures particulas, sive particule
ille sint diversi generis sive unius, quzlibet particula
per se habet suum totum per se, sive fuerint in uno
loco sive in diversis, e& si aliquam particularum ista.
rum nO teneat tenens integré, cadit breve quoad illud
totum illius particule, & tenet quoad alias pticulas
integras, q licet sit unica persona qu: petat, & unica
quse teneat, tamen diverse erunt actiones & plures,
licet consimiles, propter plures particulas, ac si esset
si quis peteret unam rem divisam inter plures, plures
erunt actiones, propter plures particulas, & plures per-
sonas. Si autem petat quis versus unum unam parti-
culam per plures particulas numero, sicut unam caru-
catam ex pluribus, per plures virgatas, vel unam
virgatam per plures acras, si totum mon tenuit tenens,
cadit breve. ltem quod dictum est de parte dici pote.
rib de toto, vel quia nunquam tenuit inde aliquid, vel
si tenuit, rem ad slium transtulit, & ita desiit tenere;
& quo easu, videndum erit quo tempore desiit tenere,
& quando ad alium res translata fuerit, utrum viz.
ante impetrationem brevis, vel post, quia si ante, tunc
non erit tenens in dolo, & sic nec in culpa. Si autem
post impetrationem diligentem & prosecutionem timens
futuram litem & controversiam motam, ne cum ipso
agatur, mutandi judicii causa rem ad alium transtule-
rit, nihilominüs pro possessore judicabitur, & non solum
ile qui transtulit, sed ille ad quem transfertur pro


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 219


or to except if any thing haa been alienatéd after the
Seysine of the ancestor, or transferred, otherwise of
. right the writ ought to abate. Butif the heir claims
the seysine of his ancestor against one person for many
parcels [of land], whether those parcels are of different
kinds or of one kind, each parcel has by itself its own
entirety by itself, whether they are in one place or in
different places, and if the tenant does not hold any of
those parcels entirely, the writ abates as regards the en-
tirety of that parcel and holds good as regards the other
entire parcels, because although it be & single person
who claims, and & single person who holds, nevertheless
there will be different and several actions, although
alike, an &ccount of the several parcels, as if ib were the
ease that & person claimed one thing divided amongst
Several persons, there will be several actions on account
of there being several parcels and several persons. But
if a person claims againsb& one person one parcel by
several parcels in number, as one carucate out of several
by Several virgates or one virgate by several acres, if the
tenant has not held the whole, the writ abates. Likewise
what is said of & part may be said of the whole, either
because he never held any thing thereof, or if he held
it, he has transferred it to another, and so has ceased to
hold it; and in which case it must be seen at what time
he ceased. to hold it, and when the thing was transferred
to another, whether for instance before the suing out of
the writ, or after it, because if before, then the tenant
will not be guilty of fraud, and so not in fault. But
if after a diligent suing out and prosecution [of the
writ] fearing the future lawsuit and the controversy


Which has been raised, he has transferred the thing to .


another with the object of changing the judgment, that
the action should not be maintained against himself,
nevertheless he shall be adjudged the possessor, and not
only he who has transferred, but he to whom it has been
transferred, according to the pleasure of the claimant


c-—A —— WEE dp hA lL ——— $9
- nd
E x 3


920 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTEGCESSORIS.


voluntate ipsius petentis, unus scilicet eorum vel uter-
que, Si autem pelens negligens fuerit vel in impe-
iratione vel in prosecutione, hoc erit ei imputandum,

f.266b. de negligentia vero vic. non erit ita quoad suinionitio-
nem & offieium vie. Si autem sit dominus capitalis
qui teneat, licet. totam rem non teneat, sed aliquam
partem, procedet assisa contra ipsum, pro ea parte
quam tenet: ut de itinere M. de P. in com Wart
anno regis H. b. Et quód assisa cadere debeat ratione
plus petitionis, ubi petens plus petierit quàm tenens
lenuerit: habetis in itinere W, de Ralegh. in cofi Leyc.
de Humfredo de Leyce. & Juliana uxore ejus, circa
finem rotuli. Item esto quód tenens dicat, q totum
tenementum non teneat & juratores qusesili nesciant
uirum teneat. vel non, cadit assisa propter incertitudi-
nem, ut de ultimo itinere W. de Ralegh. in com North.
de Wilhelmo de Camera.


Car. X.


l. Proposita igitur intentione petentis, & fundata sic

De réP?9'- super quolibet articulo brevis ut predictum es: opor-
nentis ad tebit tenentem, cüm warantum non habuerit nec defen-
erue soré, ad singulos articulos respondere p ordinem, &
excipere contra omnes vel quosdam, quare actio vel

assis& procedere non debeat, et docere contrarium vel
diversum, & ad exceptionem suam defendendam vel pro-

banda ponere se super assisam, & probare per assisam

in modum assise, càüm nihil valeat excipere, nisi pro-


betur exeeplio in modum assise vel jurate. Ad pri-


mum igitur articulum sie erit respondendum.


-i
$
l


. .OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER, 221


himself, one, to wit, of them or both [shall be so ad-
judged]. PButif the claimant has been negligent either
in the suing out of the writ or in the prosecution of
the suit, this will have to be imputed to himself, but
concerning the negligence of the viscount it will not be
So, as regards the issuing of the summons and the duty
of the viscount. But if it be & chief lord who holds,
although he does not hold the entire thing, but some
part, the assise shall proceed against him for that part
which he holds, as in the iter of Martin de Pateshull in
the county of Warwick in the fifth year of king Henry.
And that the assise ought to abate by reason of too
large & claim, where the claimant claims more than the
tenant held, you have in the iter of William de Ralegh
in the county of Leicester concerning Huinfrey de Ley-
cester and Juliana his wife near the end ofthe Roll. Like-
wise let it be that the tenant says, that he does not hold
the entire tenement, and the jurors when asked know
not whether he holds it or not, the assise abates from
uncertainty, as in the last iter of William de Ralegh in
the county of Northampton concerning William de


Camera.


CHAPTER X.


The declaration of the claimant having been pro-
pounded and founded on each article of the writ as


f. 266 b.


l.
Concerning


the answer


aforesaid, i6 will be incumbent on the tenant when ho ofthe


has no warrantor nor defender, to answer to each article
in order, and to except against all or some, wherefore
the action or assise should not proceed, and to show the
contrary or something diverse, and to put himself on an
assise to défend or prove his exception, and to prove by
àn assise in the manner of an assise, since it is of no
value to except, unless the exception be proved in the
manner of an assise or & jury. To the first article
therefore it will have to be answered thus:


tenant to


the articles
of the writ.


--
— ———
Ld


umm cale oca amd LP EE
I
—


E — oe ——— c 2l


2.
Ad hoc
quod dici-


brevi, si
talis ante-
cessor, &o.,


et quod


non jaceat
exceptio.


uo l.


lii.


85 1,2.


299 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS,


Dicitur enim, si talis antecessor fuit seysitus, sicut
pater vel mater & sic deinceps, quód inter petentem
& tenentem non poterit assis& procedere: quia tene-
mentum, de quo assis& arramata est, descendit à pre-
dicto antecessore quasi de communi stipite ad predic-
tum tenentem, & it& q assisa& non jacet inter eos sicut
inter convictas! personas, cüm tantundem juris habeat
lenens in terrà sive in tenemento petito, quantum &


?*i ipse qui petit, & ideà propter paritatem juris non


poterit assisa terminare seysinam, quia si tenens. petat,
responderi poterit q tantundem juris habet tenens in
tenemento petito, quantum & petens, & ideà, q alia
actione opus erit scilicet per breve de recto, quod
utrumq, terminat, possessionem scilicet & proprietatem,
& q ideó remanere debeat assisa. Ad quam quidem
exceptionem, poterit petens sie respondere replicando,
q nihil juris clamat per descensum de communi süi-
pite, immó per feoffamentum factum à comuni ante-
cessore et hoc paratus sib probare p testes, & chartas
vel instrumeéta, secundüm q magis sibi videt expedire,
& super feoffamento erib pcedendum, secundüm g in-
feriüs pleniüs dicetur ad convincendum dictum repli-


Britton, ib. cantis.  Triplicari autem poterit super replicatione,


8 4.


f. 267.


quód donatio illa nulla esse debet, quia talis anteces-
Sor, qui dedisse debuit, semper fuit in seysina, & nun-
quam exivit à seysina nec statum mutavit in aliquo,
quin ipse in seysina remansisset per se vel per suos
nomine suo. Et tenens doceat contrarium si possit
vel diversum. Infrà de hac materia pleniüs. Item si
Soror contra sororem vel particeps contra participem:
quia locum habet breve de rationabili portione, quia
quilibet est hseres propinquior propter jus quod com-
muniter descendit omnibus, sicut uni, propter unitatem


l1 «t inter convinotas," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


2C CIS nv iE


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 298


j| Forit is said, if such an ancestor was seysed,as & 2.
TE ^. father or mother and so on in succession, that an assise AE
E eannot proceed between the claimant and the tenant, seid in the
because the tenement concerning which the assise has his M.
been instituted descends from the aforesaid ancestor, as it sneestor,"
were from a common stock, to the aforesaid tenant, and NU. d
so that an assise does not lie between them as between pA
persons privies in blood, since the tenant has as much
right in the land or in the tenement claimed as the per-

son himself who claims, and therefore on accout of the

parity of right an assise cannot terminate the seysine,
because if the tenant claimed, it might be answered that

the tenant hasas much right in the tenement claimed, as

the elaimant, and therefore that there will be need of
another action, to wit, by & writ of right, which deter-

mines both, to wit, the possession and the property, and

that therefore the assise ought to be stayed. To which
exception the claimant may answer thus in replication,

that he claims no right by descent from a common stock,

but by & feoffment made by a common ancestor, and this

he is prepared to prove through witnesses and charters

or instruments, according as may seem to himself more
éxpedient, and he must proceed upon the feoffment,
aecording to what will be stated more fully to refute the
assertion of the replicant. But the tenant may iriplicate

on the replication, that the donation ought to be null,
because the said ancestor, who must have given it, was
always in seysine, and never went out of seysine, nor
changed his state in any respect, but himself remained

in seysine by himself or by his agents in his name.

And let the tenant prove the contrary if he can, or
something diverse. Below on this matter [it will be
explained] more fully. Likewise if a& sister against a

Sister or & parcener against a parcener, because & writ

*for & reasonable portion" applies, because each is a

next heir in virtue of the right which deseends in £267.
common to all as to one, on aecount of the unity of


*


4 Abs
" Su «A ers -
* e ^m * *
He "E ;
- ,
- * H . "n
—— —— c -—i : - *
TAM e RE
——" "
E -
- e cu
A — 3
en E 5
Ep EN a A E
e$ D


994 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


.juris. Et propinquior esse potest valde remotus quoad
jus, lieet non quoad seysinà, si non appareat alius
propinquior, licet bastardus, quia filius esse non potest
nec heres.


Car. XI.
€ Dicitur autem supra de morte quorum competat
MS MAUR assisa, Nune autem dicendum quibus personis, quia


eui com- dicitur, talis &ntecessor talis: quia ex hoc possunt
petit assisa . " : .
mortis an- COmpetere exceptiones tenenti & responsiones, Et sci-
tecessoris: endum g assisa competit filio vel filie vel filiabus si
plures nascatur, de morte patris, vel matris, sed non
competit nepotibus neq, neptibus ex eis de morte pre-

dietorü, avi vel avie, s. nisi aliis psonis jungantur, in

quibus tenet assisa ut supradictü est. Item competit

fratri de morte fratris. ltem sorori de morte fratris

vel sororis. ltem nepoti vel nepti de morte avunculi

vel amite, sed non e converso, & ita restringitur assisa

ista infrà certos gradus & certas psonas, & ulterius

non extenditur. ltem. locum habet ista assisa inter
predietas psonas et extraneas psonas quatenus se ex-

tendit, sed ubi assis& locum non habet ultra certos

gradus, locum habebit inter easdem psonas consangui-

nitas, ascendendo usq, ad triavum et descendendo usq,

. &d trinepotem, quia inter quascunq, psonas locum habe-

bit assisa& infrà suos limites: inter easdem locum ha-

bebit eosanguinitas extra. Et vice versa inter quas-

cunq, psonas infrà suos limites locü non habet assisa,

inter eosdem extra nunquam locum habebit consangui-

nitas, sed breve de recto tantüm, sicut inter psonas


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 295


right. And the next. heir may be very remote as re-
gards his right, but not as regards his seysine, if there
: does not appear another nearer heir, although a bastard,
because he cannot be & son nor an heir.


CHAPTER XI.

But it has been stated above, concerning the death of 1.
what persons an assise holds good. Now then we must eiue:
discuss what persons are entitled since it is said * such an who is en-
* ancestor of such a person," because upon this the tenant iniu
may be entitled to exceptions and to answers. Anditis to "e death
be known that a son or à daughter or daughters, if there cestor?
are more than one, are entitled to an assise concerning
the death of their father or their mother, but neither
grandsons nor granddaughters are entitled concerning the
death of the aforesaid persons, namely a grandfather or a
grandmother, unless they are joined with other persons,
in whom an assise holds good as aforesaid. Likewise a
brother is entitled concerning the death of & brother.
Likewise & sister concerning the death of a sister.
Likewise & grandson or & granddaughter concerning the
death of an uncle or an aunt, but not conversely, and so
the assise is restrained within certain degrees and certain
persons, and is not extended further. Likewise that
assise has & place between the aforesaid persons and
.exiraneous persons as far as it extends, but where the
assise has no place beyond certain grades, à writ of cosinage
has a place between the sume persons, by ascending up
as far as the grandfather's grandfather, and in descending
to the grandson's grandson, for between whatsoever per-

* Sons an assise has place within its own limits, between
the same persons & writ of cosinage willhave place out-
Sidethem. And conversely between whatsoever persons
Within its own limits an assise has no place, between the
same persons a writ of cosinage will never have a place,
but à writ of right only, as between the persons above '

Q 1802. : P


f..267 b.


996 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


premnotatas: & secundüm q inferiàs dicetur. Talibus
igitur psonis de morte talium competit assisa (ut prs-
dictum est) contra extraneas psonas: ut si dns capita-
lis in seysina ppria fuerit, vel alia quszvis extranea
psona, sive fuerint fratres uterini de alio patre, vel
alia matre, à quibus hereditas no descendit, quia tales
sunt quasi extranei, cüm no sunt capaces haereditatis.
Item eodem modo & multó fortiüs dici possunt extra-
nei illegitimi et bastardi, quia licet sint uterini, tamen
inter tales (secundüm quosdam) non jacet assisa cüm
sint bastardi, nec ad hoc saliem q p assisam pcedi
possit ad pbandam legitimitatem, quia p hoc terminari
non poterit negotium : quia si talis cohsres se pbave-
rib legitimum, non tamen ppter hoc se pbat heredem
ppinquiorem, licet se pbaverit heredem. Quia si talis
in causa bastardie se pbare possit legitimum, tunc
ulteriàüs locu non habebit assisa, sed &d breve de recto


. erit. recurrendum, ne sub specie possessionis terminetur


pprietas & jus merum, q esse non debet. Sed si bas-
tardia contra tales psonas nominatas objiciatur à psonis
extraneis, tunc in causa bastardie pcedatur sicut inter
alias quascung, psonas. ltem cüm inter easdem psonas
prenominatas non habeat locum aliud breve q de
recto, non erit ibi duellum neg, magna assisa, sed p
narrationem descensus à comuni stipite terminabitur
tam jus possessorium g jus merum, quia facta compu-
tatione de facili ppendi poterit, quis primogenitus et
heres ppinquior et heres justior, tum ppter jus & seta-
tem, tum ppter sexum & consimilem ppinquitatem, tü
ppter lineam rectam & transversalem. Si autem nepos
prius fuerit in seysina recta lea descendendo, exclu-


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 997


noted, and according to what will be said below. Such
persons therefore are entitled to an assise concerning the
death of such persons (as aforesaid) against extraneous
persons, as if a chief lord has been in his own seysine, or
any other extraneous person, or if there have been uterine
brothers from different fathers, or brothers from a different
mother, from whom the inheritance does not descend,
because such persons are as ib were extraneous persons,
since they are not capable of inheriting. Likewise in the
same way and in a much more forcible.manner illegitimate
children and bastards may be termed extraneous, because
although they may be uterine, nevertheless between them
(according to some) no assise lies since they are bastards,
nor for this purpose at least that proceedings may be had
through an assise to prove their legitimacy, because the
business eannot be determined by this means, since if such
8 coheir has proved himself to be legitimate, he does not
thereby prove himself to be the next heir, although
he has proved himself to be an heir. Because if such a
person in à cause of bastardy can prove himself to be
legitimate, then the assise will not further apply, but
recourse must be had to a writ of right, lest under the form
of possession the property and the absolute right should
be determined, which ought not to be, But if bastardy
be objected by extraneous parties against such persons
by name, then let proceedings be had in a cause of bas-
tardy as between any other persons whatsoever. Like-


wise since between the above-named persons no other


writ but one of.right has place, there will be no duel
nor' great assise, but by the narration of the descent
from a common stock as well the possessory right as the
absolute right will be determined, because by making a
computation it can easily be ascertained, who is the
firs& born and the nextheir and the more rightful heir
on the score of right and age, as well as on aecount of sex
and Similar propinquity, as wellas on account of the right
line and the transverse line, But if & grandson has been
P2


f. 267 b.


Infra,

f. 327 b.
Glanville,
vii. 3.


998 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSOBRIS.


dit omninó avunculum à successione si petat versus
nepotem p assisam, quia non jacet. Si autem p breve
de recto, excludit eum omninó tum ratione juris q ei
descendit & non avunculo, tum ratione rectz lines,


.quia omninó excludit transversalem dum aliquis repe-


riatur in ea, masculus vel fcemina, qui erunt ppinqui-
ores ratione predicta, & non solü excludit nepos vel
neptis avunculum et alios remotiores ex linea trans-
versali venientes, eoàm nepos vel neptis fuerint in pos-
sessione: verüm etiam excludunt eorundem pnepotes
& pneptes & omnes alios ex illis descendentes. Cüm
autem avunculus priüs fuerit in possessione hsreditatis
p intrusionem vel alio modo, et nepos petat versus
eum de seysina patris, vel descensu avi, locum non
habebit assisa, sed tantum breve de recto, p q.si com-
pertum fuerit p narrationem q nepos heres fuerit
ppinquior et justior ppter juris przrogativam, tamen
nihil capiat p judieium ppter casum regis! qui hueusq,
se. habuit in contrarium, & remanebit semper judicium
in suspenso, donee contentio (si partes voluerint) p
concordiam terminetur. Et unde videndum, si nepos
& avunculus sub eadem potestate antecessoris simul
fuerint astrarii tépore mortis, eo q ambo reperiuntur in
atrio sive in astro, e£. quo easu ceüm videatur q uterq,
habeat liberum tenementum, statim cüm quilibet eorum
sib rectus hsres et ppinquus: tamen ille prwferri de-
bet qui secum habet juris & pprietatis preerogativam
& rect» lines quos excludit transversalem, s. nepos,
quia in psona ejus conjungitur jus & pprietas cum
Seysina, q quidem non est in psona avunculi, qui non


! * casum regis," "Tho reference Brittany, the son of his elder
here is to the case between king | brother Godfrey. See below, f.


John and his nephew, Arthur of | 327 b., and the Introduction.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 299


first in seysine, by his descent in & right line he excludes
altogether his uncle from the succession if he claims
against the grandson by an assise, which does not lie.
But if by a writ of right, he excludes him altogether as
well by reason of the right which descends to him and
not to his uncle, as by reason of the right line, because
it excludes altogether the transverse line, aslong as any
one i8 found in it, male or female, who will be nearer
heirs for the reason aforesaid, and the grandson or
granddaughter not only excludes the uncle and others
more remote on the transverse line, when the grand-
son or granddaughter have been in possession, but
they also exclude the great-grandsons and great-grand-
daughters of the same and all others descending from
them. But when an uncle has been previously in
possession of the inheritance by intrusion or in any other
manner, and the grandson claims against him upon
the "seysine of his father or upon his descent from
the grandfather, an assise shall not apply, but only
& writ of right, whereby if it be found through the
narration that the grandson is the nearer and more
rightful on account of the prerogative of right, never-
theless he will take nothing on aecount of the case of
the King, which has hitherto ruled to the contrary, and
the judgment will always remain in suspense until
the contention (if they have been willing) is terminated
by an &ecord. And hence we must see, if the grandson
and the uncle under the same power of the ancestor
have been domiciled together at the time of his death,
ins&much as both are found in his hall and on his hearth-
Side, and in which case, since it seems that both have a
free tenement, forthwith as each is & rightful and near
heir, nevertheless he ought to be preferred who has with
him the prerogative of right and of property and of the
right line, which excludes the transverse line, to wit, the
grandson, because in his person are conjoined the right
and the property with the seysine, which is not in the
person of the uncle, who has not anything beyond those


Supra,
f. 64 b.


f. 268.


290 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


habet nisi tantum ea, quce sunt possessionis & non juris.
Et unde, s p nepotem ejiciatur, non recuperabit p
assisam novse disseysinz, tum ppter juris prerogati-
vam in nepote, tum quia vacuam seysinam non habu-
erit. Si autem avunculus ejecerit nepotem, nepos p
assisam recuperabit. Et illud idem erit, si nepos in
seysina extiterit tempore mortis, & avunculus cum
extra fuerit nepotem. ejecerit, & vice versa si avuncu-
lus in seysing & nepos exiíra & avunculum ejecerit,
avunculus p assisam recuperabit, si diu in pacifica sey-
sing extiterit & alias non, ut infrà, salvo tamen nepoti
jure suo super pprietate. Si autem ambo fuerint extra
tempore mortis antecessoris, e& sic neuter astrarius, &
iune aut possessio vacua, aut capitalis dominus, rex,
vel alius extitit in possessione. Si autem vacua, tunc
refert quis eorü se priüs posuerit in seysinam. Si
autem nepos, statim habet liberum tenementum ratione
predieta, & si fuerit ejectus per avunculum, recupera-
bit p assisam. Si autem avunculus se priüs posuerit
in seysinam, & p nepotem statim ejectus & recenter,
p assisam nov: disseysinze non recuperabit versus ne-
potem, licet versus alios. Sed si tempus habuerit p
negligentiam nepotis vel impotentia, cüm seysina sua
substantiam capiat ex tempore, si per nepotem fuerit
eject?, p assisam recuperabit, quia sine judicio ejicitur
licet juste. Si autem seysina vacua non fuerit, cüm
capitalis dominus extiterit in. seysina, sine voluntate
ipsius se ponab in assisam. Refert igitur quis eorum
priüs autoritate diii capitalis fuerit in seysina. Si au-
iem nepos, avunculus nunquam  recuperabit versus


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER., 23]


things, which are signs of possession and not of right.
And hence if he be ejected by & grandson, he shall not
recover by an assise of novel disseysine, as well on
&ecount of the prerogative of right in the grandson, as
because he had not & vacant seysine. But if the uncle
has ejeeted the grandson, the grandson shall recover by
an assise. And the same thing shall take place if the
grandson has been in seysine at the time of the death, and
the uncle who was outside has ejected the grandson, and
-conversely, if the uncle was in seysine and the grandson
outside, and he has ejected the uncle, the uncle shall
recover by an assise, if he has been for along time in
peaeeable seysine, &nd otherwise not, as below, saving
always to the grandson his right upon the property.
But if both have been outside at the time of the death
of the ancestor, and so neither of them is there in domi-
eile, then either the possession has become vacant, or
the.chief lord, the king or some one else has been in
possession of it. But if it has been vacant, then it is of
importance who of them has put himself first into seysine.


But if the grandson, he has forthwith a freehold on the -


ground above stated, and if he be ejected by the uncle,
he shall recover by an assise. But if the uncle has put
himself first into seysine, and has been forthwith and
recently ejected by the grandson, he shall not recover
&gainst the grandson by an assise of novel disseysine,
although he may against others. But if he has had
time through the negligence of his grandson or his
powerlessness, when his seysine has &equired substance
from time, if he has been ejected by the grandson, he
Shall recover by an assise, because he has been ejected
without & judgment although rightfully. But if the
seysine has not been vacant when the chief lord was in
seysine, let him put himself on an assise without waiting
his pleasure, It is of importance therefore who of them
was firsb inseysine by the authority of the chief lord.
But if the grandson, the uncle will never recover against


f. 268.


989 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


eum propter privilegium juris q nepos habet, si autem
avunculus, nepos non recuperabit p assisam mortis
antecessoris, propter paritatem juris possessorii q &vun-
culus habet, nisi sibi statim perquisiverit p assisam,
vel alio modo quód seysinam avunculi fecerit conten-


tiosam. Non habebit igitur remedium nepos nisi p


breve de recto, & sic remanebit avuncul? semper in
Seysina, quia judicium remanebit in suspenso propter
casum regis super jure. De possessione autem & jure
possessorio (ut predictum est) semper habet avuncul?


paritatem. Si autem capitalis dominus neutrum illo-


rum admiserit, donec ei costiterit quis eorum sit hseres
justior, si uterq, petat versus eum per assisam, nepos
praeferri debet propter juris meri prsrogativam, licet
in utriusg persona locum habeat assisa. ltem cüm
neuter ipsorum astrarius. fuerit, & dominus capitalis
. diu tenementum in manu sua tenuerit, & illud post-
modum avunculo p finem quem cum eo fecerit resti-
tuerit, eàm p hoe non sit avunculus astrarius nec in
seysina nisi p faetum aliorum, tunc videtur qg omisso
brevi de recto ppter casum regis, in psona nepotis
locü h&bere posset breve de ingressu, cüm sit extra
seysina. Cüm autem in seysina, non poterit ei prod-
esse aliud breve quàm breve de nova disseysina, ppter
suspentionem judicii Item extraneus dici poterit quoad
assisam mortis antecessoris, licet procreatus sit de ea-
dem maire à qua descendit hereditas, sive masculus
sive foemina, ppter coarcetationem hsredum. Ut si
terra data fuerit in maritagium tali cum tali uxore
sua & heredibus ipsorum conjunctim, omnes alii sunt
extranei, & sie excludit foemina masculum sicut jus
sanguinis.


"


73 Me -


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER, 298


him on account of the privilege of right which the
grandson has, but if the uncle, the grandson will not
recover by an assise of mortdancester, because of the
parity of possessory right which the uncle has, unless he
has forthwith pursued it by &n assise, or in some other
way so that he has made the possession of the uncle a sub-
ject of contest. "The grandson will therefore not have &
remedy except by & writ of right, and so the uncle will
always remain in seysine, because the judgment will
always remain in suspense on the right on aecount of
the case of the king. But as regards possession and pos-
sessory right (as aforesaid) the uncle always has parity.
But if the chief lord has admitted neither, until it has
been made clear to him who of them is the more right-
ful heir, if each claims against him by an assise, the
grandson ought to be preferred on account of the pre-
rogative of abstract right, although the person of each is
entitled to an assise. Likewise where neither of them
has his domicile therein and the chief lord has kept the
tenement for a long time in his own hand, and has
afterwards restored it to the uncle by a fine, which he
has made with him, since thereby the uncle is not
therein domiciled nor in seysine except by the agency of
others, then it.seems that the writ of right having been
omitted on aecount of the case of the king, & writ
of entry may have place in the person of the nephew,
since he is out of seysine. But if he be in seysine- no
other writ can profit him but & writ of novel disseysine,
on account of the suspension of the judgment.  Like-
wise he may be termed an extraneous person as regards
an assise of mortdancester, although he be procreated
from the same mother from whom the inheritance de-
scends, whether he be male or female, on account of the
limitation of heirs. As if the land has been given a$ &
marriage portion to sueh & person with so-and-so his
wife and to their heirs conjointly, all others are ex-
tràneous persons, and so the female excludes the male
just as the right of blood.


De excep-


l.


tionibus
contra
articulos
brevis.


Britton, ].


ill. ch. xiii.


$ 1.


f. 268 b.


284 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


Car. XII.


Redeamus ad exceptiones pponendas contra articulos
brevis. Dicitur enim à petente q talis antecessor fuit


seysitus, ad quod poterit tenens excipere & docere


contrárium vel diversum. Dicere enim poterit q nun-
qui fuit inde in seysina aliquo tempore, & inde se
ponere super assisam, & petens q sit ut priüs, & simili
modo se ponere'super assisam, & sie procedat assisa,
vel dicere possit tenes q si antecessor unquàa fuit in
seysina, hoc fuit nomine alieno ut pceurator, custos, vel


acus vel sie, si in seysing fuit, liberü tentum
| habere non potuit, quia non tenuit tefíitum illud nisi


tad terminum annorum sicut fructuarius, vel in vadium
ut creditor. Item si dieatur q seysinam habuit ex
donatione, excipi possit à tenente q antecessor nun-
quam seysinam habuit. per se nisi simul cu donatore.
Et cüm multe possunt esse exceptiones de hac mate-
ria, istce. tamen suffidiant ad presens exempli causa.
Item dicere poterit tenens excipiendo q si talis ante-
cessor seysinam habuit, nullum habuit in dominico
nisi ad terminu ut firmarius, vel in vadiu ut creditor,
vel hujusmodi, et alius habuit inde liberü teütum.
Item dicere poterit q si talis antecessor liberum tene-
mentum habuerit in dominico, illud non habuit in
feodo q aliquid ei descendere potuit ut heredi, quia
non nisi ad terminum vitee quacung, ratione. ltem si


concedat tenens g in feodo, dicere poterit excipiendo -


q nihil potuit descendere tenéti per assisam ex tali
tenemento, quia tenemeétum illud datum fuit anteces-
Sori prefato & certis heredibus suis et coarctatis, ut
Si tenementum datum fuerit tali antecessori et in ma.
ritagium et heredibus suis de corpore suo exeuntibus,


9 x drur. apfllio the


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 985


CHAPTER XII.


Let us return to the exceptions against the articles of , 1.
the writ. Forit is said by the claimant that such an ceptions
ancestor was seysed, to which the tenant may except sgsinst the
and say the contrary or something diverse. For he may cba is
say that he was never in seysine thereof at any time, and
thereon may put himself on an assise, and the claimant
that he may be as before, and in a similar manner may
put himself upon an assise, and 80 an assise may proceed,
or. the tenant may say that, if his ancestor was ever in
seysine, this was in somebody else's name, as & pro-
eurator, or a guardian, or & curator; or thus, if he was
in seysine he could not have the freehold, because he
held the tenement only for à term of years, as the
fruetuary, or for & pledge as a creditor. Likewise if it
be said that he had the seysine from a donation, it may
be excepted by the tenant, that the ancestor never had
the seysine by himself but only with the donor, And
since there may be many exceptions on this mater,
these nevertheless may suffice by way of example.
Likewise the tenant may say in excepting that, if such
an ancestor had the seysine, he had no tenement in de-
mesne except for a term as & lessee, or for à pledge as a
creditor, or in like manner, and another person had the
freehold thereof. Likewise he may say that, if such an
ancestor had a free tenement in demesne, he had it not
in fee so that anything could descend to him as heir, for f.968 b.
he had it only for the term of his life on whatever
grounds. Likewise if the tenant admits that he may
have had it in fee, he may say by way of exception that
nothing could descend to such & tenant by an assise
from such a tenement, because that tenement was given
to the aforesaid ancestor and to cerüain of his heirs and
those limited, so that if the tenement was given to such
an ancestor as & merriage portion and to the heirs pro-
created out of his body, or to such a person with so-and-


296 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


vel tali cum tali uxore su& et eorum heredibus comu-
nibus & non separatis. Et idem dici poterit de eo et
hseeredib? suis qui feoffatus fuerit p conditionem & per
modum, ubi coarctantur heredes. Item respondere po-
terit tenens & cocedere q talis antecessor obiit seysitus
ut de feodo et in dominico, sed tamen p conditionem
eb modum suspésg est talis heredis successio quoad
Seysinam usq ad tempus incertum, s. ad vitam vel
usque ad certum tempus, s. ad terminum annorum, vel
ad certum tempus sub conditione, s. donec conditio
extiterit vel non extiterit, quam quidem exceptionem
oportet tenentem probare per assisam in modum jurate.
Antecessor quidem ille teiitum illud pignori supposuit
creditori ad certu diem, sub tali conditione, q nisi
pecunia tali die solveretur q tenementum illud rema-
neret creditori in feodo. Et unde videndum, utrum
dies solutionis preeterierit vel nondum advenerit. Et
si prseeterierit, tune videndum erit utrü solutio facta
fuerit vivente debitore vel post mortem vel non. Si
autem facta fuit solutio vel pecunia oblata suo die
sub bonorum virorum testimonio, procedet assisa in
modum jurate de solutione facta, & recuperabit hzeres
per juratam. Si autem soluta non fuerit nec oblata,
tune eadit assisa, & remanebit tenementum creditori,
quia non est satüsfactum conditioni Si autem dies
nondum  preeterierit, tune suspenditur assisa usq ad
diem, et secundüm quod solutio facta fuerit ad diem
suum vel non, procedat assisa in crastino vel remane-
' bit. ltem remanere poterit assisa propter conditionem
& propter modum traditionis, licet antecessor obiit
seysitus ut de feodo, verbi gratia: Quidam A. tradidit
quandam terram B. in vadium, quousq, idem A. red-


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 297


so his wife and their common heirs and not their se-
parate heirs. And the same may be said concerning
- him and his heirs who has been enfeoffed under a con-
dition and under à mode, where the heirs are limited.
Likewise the tenant may answer and.admit that such
an ancestor died seysed as of the fee and in the demesne,
but nevertheless through a condition and & mode the
suecession of such an heir is suspended as regards the
seysine down to an uncertain time, to wit, for his life, or
down to a certain time, to wit, for & term of years, or
down to a certain time under & condition, that is until a
conditional event has happened or has not happened,
which exception indeed the tenant must prove by an
assise in the manner of & jury. The ancestor indeed
has subjected that tenement as & pledge to a creditor
down to a certain day, under such a condition that unless
the money was paid on a certain day the tenement should
remain with the creditor in fee. And hence itis to be
seen, whether the day of payment has passed or has not
yet eome. And if it has passed, then it is to be seen
whether the payment has been made whilst the debtor
was alive or after his death or not atall. But if the
payment has been made or the money offered on the
proper day upon the testimony of honest men, the assise
Shall proceed in the manner of à jury concerning the
payment having been made, and the heir shall recover
by & jury. But if it has not been paid nor offered, then
the assise falls and the tenement remains with the cre-
ditor, because the condition has not been satisfied. But
if the day has not yei passed, then the assise is sus-
pended down to the day, and according as the payment
has been made on the proper day or not, let the assise
proceed on the next day or it shall be stayed. Likewise
àn assise may be stayed on account of a condition and
on account of a mode of delivery, although the ancestor
has died seysed as of fee, by way of example: A certain
À. delivered a certain land to B. in pledge until the said


f. 269.


988 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


deret eidem B. centum mareas cum tali conditione
adjecta, q nisi idem A. redderet eidem PB. illas centum
q terra remaneret predicto B. nulla facta mentione de
heredibus ipsius À. Moritur À. pecuniá non solutà,
heredes ipsius À. petunt per assisam, creditor objicit
conventionem. Et quia predictus À. non solvit in
vita sua et obligatio personalis fuit, nec extenditur ad
heredes licet parati sint solvere, remanebit terra cre-
ditori et hseredibus suis. Idem erit, si obligatio per-
sonalis fuerit quantum ad creditorem cum nulla men-
lione facta de heredibus creditoris. Item poterit
tenementum dari ad firmam creditori sub tali condi-
lione, & ad terminum annorum, quód si contingat
debitorem mori infrà terminum, quód tenementum re-
maneat creditori in feodo vel ad vitam, & tenebit
conventio. ltem vice versa, si tefitum detur in feodo
vel ad vitam, et sie convenerit quód si creditor mori-
atur infrà certum terminum, & quód id quod fuit in
feodo vel ad vitam remaneat ad terminum vel in feodo
alicui alteri, bene tenet conventio. Et si prima facie


debitor moriatur vel creditor vel uterque, locum habeat


assis& mortis antecessoris, quia debitor quodammodo
moritur seysitus ut de feodo. Tamen eliditur assisa
per exceptionem conventionis, ut si hsres debitoris
pro se habeat assisam in modum assise & seysina ei
concessa, creditor vel ejus heredes habebunt contra
assisam exceptionem conventionis in modum jurate, in
quà quide si petens per assisam se ponere voluerit,
denegabit ei actio & assisa, & si tenens exceptionem
conventionis à se propositam per juratam vel alio modo
probare voluerit, sic seysinam amittit quia indefensus
remanebit. S1autem creditor in primo casu ante diem


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 989


À. should render to the said B. & hundred marks with this
eondition added, that unless the said À. rendered to the
said B. those hundred marks the land should remain
with the aforesaid B.,no mention having been made of
the heirs of A. A. dies without the money having been
paid, the heirs of À. claim by an assise, the creditor


raises the agreement as an objection. And because the


aforesaid A. has not paid in his lifetime and the obliga-
lon was personal and is not extended to the heirs,
although they are prepared to pay, the land shall remain
with the creditor and his heirs. The same result will
happen, if the obligation has been personal as far as
regards the creditor with no mention made of the heirs
of the ereditor. Likewise the tenement may be granted
upon à lease to & creditor under such a condition and
for à term of years, that, if the debtor happens to die
within the term, the tenement shall remain with the
creditor in fee and for life, and the agreement shall be
binding. Likewise conversely, if the tenement be granted
in fee or for life and it has been agreed thus that, if the
creditor dies within a certain term, that which was in
fee or for life shall remain for the term or in fee to
some one else, the agreement holds good. — And if at first
Sipht the debtor dies or the creditor or both, an assise of
mortdancester has & place, because the debtor dies in &
certain sense seysed as of fee. Nevertheless the assise
is parried by &n exception of the agreement, as if the
heir of the debtor has on his own behalf an assise in
manner of an assise and the seysine is conceded to him,
the ereditor or his heirs shall have against the assise: an
exception of the agreement in the manner of & jury,
upon which indeed if the claimant by the assise is will-
ing to put himself, an action and an assise shall be
refused to him, and if the tenant has desired to prove
the exception of an agreement as propounded by him
by a jury or in any other manner, he so loses the seysine,
because he will remain undefended. But if the creditor


f. 269.


240 ^ . DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


solutionis moriatur, vel debitor, vel uterq, remanebit
assisa in suspenso usq, ad diem solutionis, quo elapso
aut procedet assisa secundüm quod solutio facta fuerit
vel non, aut remanebit assisa per exceptionem conven-
tionis elisa. ltem sisic detur tenementum ad firmam
& ad terminum sub tali conditione, g si infrà termi-
num. ilum contingat debitorem mori, q remaneat tene-
mentum creditor] ad vitam vel in feodo, vel vice versa,
si contingat creditorem mori infrà certum terminum,
id q datum fuit in feodo remaneat hszredi creditoris
ad vitam, vel id q datum fuit ereditori ad vitam, re- :
maneat ei vel heredi suo ad terminum, bene valebit
conditio, non obstante assisa, opposita exceptione con-
ventionis, & probata ut supra. ltem excipi poterit,
quód lieet talis obiit seysitus ut de feodo, tamen nihil
potuit descendere ad heredem, quia bastardus fuit, &


. inquo casu non est loquela mittenda ad euriam Chris-


9


Dicitur
* do tanta


tianitatis de bastardia convincenda, quia de eo qui
mortuus est convinei non potest ad bastardum, quia
respondere non potest, nec excipere, licet tamen an
talis fuerit inquiri poterit per assisam an talis fuit vel


non in modum jurate captam, si utra pars consen-


serit in juratam, quod siquidem non, fiat ut supra de
eo qui remaneat indefensus. Eodem modo dici poterit
de bastardo, qui feoffatus est tenendum sibi & hseredi-
bus suis, si absque hsrede moriatur. ltem responderi
poterit quód non in feodo sed ut de vadio vel custodia
&c. ut supra. Item quód non in feodo sed de vadio,
sed de ballio sed de traditione, sed ad voluntatem .
concedentis.


Item redeamus ad articulos brevis, scilicet, ubi dici-
tur (de tanta terra cum pertinentiis in tali villa) ut


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 941


in the first case dies before the day of payment, or the
debtor, or both, the assise will remain suspended down
to the day of payment, upon the lapse of which either
an assise shall proceed according as the payment has
been made or not, or the assise shall be stayed parried
by an exception of the agreement. Likewise if & tene-
ment be thus granted on a lease and for à term on such
& condition, that if it should happen that the debtor
dies within that term, then the tenement shall remain to
the creditor during his life or in fee, or conversely, if it
should happen that the creditor dies within a certain
term, that which was granted to him in fee shall re-
main to the heir of the creditor for his life, or that
Which was granted to & creditor for his life, shall re-
main to him or his heir for & term, the condition will be
8 valid one, notwithstanding the assise, an exception of
the agreement having been objected and proved as above.
likewise it may be excepted, that although such & per-
Son died seysed as of fee, nevertheless nothing could
descend to his heir, because he was & bastard, and in
"Which case & cause is not to be sent to the Court of
Christianity to prove the bastardy, because proof may '
LOU be made concerning & dead man that he was a
b&slard, since he cannot answer nor take exception,
seMhough it may be inquired whether he was such by
an assise " whether he was such or not" held in the
manner of a jury, if each party consents to a jury, which
f not, let it be done &s above stated concerning him who
remains undefended. In the same manner it may be
Said of & bastard who has been enfeoffed to hold to him-
self and his heirs, if he dies without an heir. Likewise
it may be answered that it is not held as of- fee, but as -
Ih pledge or guardianship, &c., as above. Likewise that
X is held not of fee, but in pledge, but in bail, but in
deposit, but at the pleasure of the grantor.


i Likewise let us return to the articles of the writ where — 2.
Y is said, **of so much land with its appurtenances in such nre
Q 1302. Q


249 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


terra," utei] error fuerib in tali impetratione, uí si quis posuerit


error fuerit .


in impe-
tratione,
exceptio
propter
errorem.
Britton, ii.
ch. xviii.


81.


f. 269 b.


in breve tenementum pro redditu vele converso. ltem
si redditum pro servitis & consuetudinibus. Item si
fuerit error in quantitate tenementi, ut si quis posue-
rib duas carucatas, ubi antecessor non obiit seysitus
nisi de una. ltem si quis servitium petat sub nomine
annui redditus, qui datur p homagio, cüm & servitium


proveniens ex tenemento aliam habeat causam quàm


annuus redditus qui datur feoffato. Item videat petens
q plus non petat quàm teneat tenens, q si fecerit, .
cadit breve & differtur assisa propter plus petitionis.
Si autem minüs petierit, aliud erit. Item videndum
erit de possessione antecessoris, de quantitate, & qua-
litate, per quos terminos, & qua mensura, et utrum
larga fuerit mensuratio tenementi dati antecessori, vel
stricta, secundüm g petitur per carucatas, vel libratas,
vel virgatas, vel numerum aerarum, vel pro quanto
lenemento antecessor tenementum illud tenuit die quo
obiit, secundüm quod tunc fuit mensuratum, vel stricte,
vel large, & secundüm q tunc fuit, licet ibi fuerit plus
vel minus, quia si plus tüc fuit & tunc sic, non cadit
breve propter largam mensurationem, nee eodem modo
si minus propter strictam. Si autem non teneat tenens
sicut tune fuit, cadit breve propter defectum, sive tunc


ibi plus fuerit sive minus, ut si primó fuit plus quàm


una carucata per largam mensurationem, cadit breve
si aliquid inde deficiat, lieet ibi sit una ecarucata p
Strictam mensurationem. Nec sufficit si dicat petens
q tenens teneat unam carucatam, nisi ilam teneat
Sicut antecessor illam tenuit, strictam vel largam.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 943


* & vill" so that if there has been an error in such & er

suing out of the writ, as if à person has inserted in the that if

writ & tenement instead of a rent or the converse, Like- fhere be an

wise if & rent instead of services or customs. Likewise the suing

if there has been an error in the quantity of the tene- ont ofthe

ment, as if a person shall have stated two carucates, exception
. where the ancestor died seysed of not more than one. s ii

Likewise if & person claims a service under the name of

an annual rent which is given in return for homage,

when the service proceeding from the tenement has &

different cause from that of an annual rent which is

given to a feoffee. — Likewise let the claimant see that

he does not claim more than the tenant holds, which if

he does, the writ falls, and the assise is put off because of

an excess in the claim. But if he has claimed less, it is

different. Likewise it is to be seen concerning the pos-

session of an ancestor, concerning the quantity and the

quality, by what boundaries, and by what measure, and.

whether the measurement of the tenement granted to the.

ancestor was large or strict, according to what is claimed

by carucates, or by librates, or by virgates, or by the

number of acres, or for what quantity he held that tene-

ment on the day on which he died, according to what

was then measured, whether strictly or largely, and $269 p.

aecording to what it was at that time although it may

have been more or less, because if i6 was more then and

such then, the writ does not fall on account of a large

measurement, nor in the same way if less on account of a

Siric& measurement. Butif the tenant does not hold it

now as it was then, the writ falls on account of the

defect, whether there was there more or less at that time,

as if at first there has been more than one carucate by

large measurement, the writ falls if anything is defici-

ent thereof, although there may be there one carucate by

Süricb measurement. Nor is it sufficient if the claimant

Says that the tenant holds one carucate, unless he holds

it as his ancestor held it, strict or large, Likewise what


.Q2


. 244 A DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


Item g dicitur de tenemento, dici debet de pertinen-
tis, q sieut antecessor tenementum illud tenuit cum:
pertinentis & quas habuerit quando obiit, tales peti
possunt, verbi gratia, si priüs ante mortem dedit ad-
voeationem, talis advocatio non debet nominari inter
pertinentias qua$ habuit quando obiit. Et in hoc
easu videndum erit, si tenens non teneat, g aliquando
tenuit post mortem antecessoris, quando desiit possi-
dere, utrü viz. ante impetratione vel post, vel ante
litem iuceptam vel post, & it& q in mora non extli-
teriij excepto eo q si erga dominü capitalem petierit
per assisam, sive. totum .tenuerit sive partem, peedet -


.assisa quandocurq, desierit possidere, dum tamen alius


Britton, iii.
ch. x&i. S 8.


in seysina sit per ipsum de hoc q desierit, de quo si


dubitetur inquiri poterit per assisam, ut de itinere M..
de Pateshul in comitatu Wart anno regis H. 5. ltem -
si tenuit, & dolo desiit possidere, mutandi judicii causa
propter litem futuram, càüm impetratum sit vel incep- -
tum, pro possessore habebitur, & tam iste quàm ille
ad quem res translata fuerit simul vel eorum alter
poterit conveniri pro voluntate petentis. Et ideó cüm.
per talem translationem post impetrationem non desi-
nat possidere, nunquam mutare poterit causam possi-
dendi, nec feodum sibi facere per tale feoffamentum,
& semper erit ut. custos. Et ideó si post tale feoffa-


mentum obierit hszrede suo infrà wtatem existente qui


be


vocatus fuerit ad warantum, non expectabitur setas,
quia antecessor suus non mutavit causam possidendi
per talem translàtionem. Sumi poterit exemplum de
brevi de ingressu post disseysinam, ubi in vita dis-


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 245


is said concerning the tenement, ought to be said con-
cerning the appurtenances, that as the ancestor held that
tenement with its appurtenances, and which he held on
the day on which he died, such may be claimed, for in-
stance, if prior to his death he gave away an advow-
son, such advowson ought not to be named amongst the
appurtenances which he had when he died. And in this
ease ib is to be seen, if the tenant does not hold, what he
held at some time after the death of an ancestor, when
he ceased to possess, whether, to wit, before he sued out &
' writ, or afterwards, or before the comimencement of the
suit or afterwards, and so that he has not been in delay,
excepting in the case that if he has claimed against his
chief lord by an assise, whether he has held the whole or
8 part, the assise shall proceed whenever he has ceased
to possess, provided some one else be in seysine from the
cireumstance that he has ceased so to be, concerning
which if it be doubted, inquiry may be made by an
assise, as in the iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county
of Warwick, in the fifür year of king Henry. Likewise
if he held and through deceit has ceased to possess, for
the sake of changing the judgment with à view to &
future suit, when the writ has been sued out or the suit
commenced, he shall be held to be the possessor, and as
. Well himself as the person, to whom the thing has been
transferred, may be convened together or either of them
according to the pleasure of the claimant. And there-
fore sinee he does not cease to possess by such a transfer
after the suing out of the writ, he can never change the
cause of his possession, nor make it à fee for himself by
Such a feoffment, and he will always be as à guardian.
And therefore if after such & feoffment he has died his
heir being under age who has been called to warrant, his
full age shall not be waited for, because his ancestor did
Dot change the cause of possession by such a transfer.
Àn example may be taken from a writ of entry after a
disseysine, where in the lifetime of the person disseysed


- £270.


8.
Item die
quo obiit.


246 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


seysiti assis& arramata est, & visus terrse fact? est,
vel sine clausulis illis non expectatur setas heredis
disseysitoris, q. quidem fieret, nisi assisa arramata esset,
cüm posset. Et etiam quamvis assis& mortis anteces-
soris arramata non esset erga dominum capitalem,
tamen &i alinaveritj & maximé dum heres fuerit
infrà setatem, & inde feoffaverit alique, & mortuo dio
capitali, hzeres domini capitalis vocetur ad warantum
per chartam patris sui, ppter hoc nó remaáebit assisa
eapieda, sed capieda erit tali modo, q si petens recu-
peraverit salva sib tenenti warantia sua, cüm hseres
dii capitalis ad zetatem pervenerit, ut de ultimo iüi-
nere M. de Patesh. in comitatu Norff. anno regis H.
decimo secundo, assisa mortis antecessoris si Eudo
pater Walteri de 36. acris terre, cum pertinentiis in
Esterbergh, quam terram Ranulphus de Braham tenuit,
qui vocavit inde ad warantum Rogerum le Bigot qui
tunc fuit infrà statem, & per chartam H. Bigot cofü
Norff. patris ipsius Rogeri; & ubi ideó consideratum
fuit quód caperetur assisa, et si Jurati dicerent q Eudo
seysitus obiit ut de feodo & Walterus recuperasset
Sseysinam suam, et quód Ranulphus expectaret usq, ad
exatem Rogeri, et tunc haberet recuperare suum ver-
sus Rogerum de warantia. Item dicitur (in tali villa),
ad q respodeatur ut supra, de nova disseysina, si error
in brevi inveniatur.


Item ad hoc q dicit (die quo obiit) excipi poterit


& responderi, q lieet antecessor aliqua hora diei esset
in seysina, tamen non obiit seysitus, quia cüm mane,
vel alia hora esset in seysina, eodem die dedit terram
ill&m tali hora tertia, & obiit hora nona. Item longé


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANGCESTER. 247


an assise has been instituted, and a view of the land made,
the full age of the heir of the disseysor is not waited
for even without those clauses, which would be done,
unless the assise had been instituted, when it might be.
And also although an assise of the death of an ancestor has
not been instituted against the chief lord, nevertheless if -
he has alienated it and chiefly whilst the heir was under
age, and has enfeoffed some one therewith, and the chief
lord having died, the heir of the chief lord is called to
warrant by the charter of his father, the holding of the
assise shall not be stayed on that account, but it shall be
held in such & manner, that, if the claimant shall recover,
the tenants right to his warranty, shall be reserved, when
the heir of the chief lord has come of age, as in the last
iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county of Norfolk, in
the twelfth year of king Henry, an assise of Mortdan-
eester if Eudo, the father of Walter, concerning thirty-six
acres of land with the appurtenances in Esterbergh, which
land Ranulph de Braham held, who called as warrantor
thereof Roger de Bigot, who was under age, and by the
charter of Henry Bigot earl of Norfolk, the father of
the said Roger, and where it was accordingly held that
an assise should be taken, and if the jurors should say
that Eudo died seysed as of fee, and Walter should
have recovered his seysine, that Ranulph should wait  f.270
until the full age of Roger, and then have his recovery
against Roger concerning the warranty. Likewise it is
said,' in such a vill" to-which it may be answered as
above concerning novel gisseysine, if an error be found
in the writ.


Likewise as to. this which he says, *on the day on Tn .
* which he died " it may be excepted and answered, thab on the day
although the ancestor was in seysine at some hour of the 9n which
day, nevertheless he did not die seysed, because when he
was in seysine in the morning or ab some other hour of
the day, on the same day he gave away that land to so-


&and«so at the third hour, and he died at the ninth hour.


de Suche.


248 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


ante mortem suam dimisit se & terram illam dedit
lenenti ei qui nune tenet per chartam suam quam
profert, et ita q finis factus fuit in curia domini regis,
& cyrographum per breve de warantia charte, et ita
q predictus antecessor in curia domini regis recogno-
vit donum et warantizavit ei terram illam, sicut illam
quam tenuit et habuit de dono suo.


Ad q potest petens replieare et dicere, q quiequid
tenens dicat de donatione vel charta, nunquam seysi-
nam habuit per donum nec per chartam illam, sed ille
qui donasse debuit, semper in seysina remansit post
chartam sicut ante, eb nunquam statum mutavit, sed
ita obiit seysitus ut de feodo, et inde ponit se super
assisam. Dicere etiam poterit q finis et cyrographum
ei nocere non debeant, càm dependeant ex dono q
prineipale esse debuit, q quidem nullum est, et cüm
principale non subsistat, ea quz sequuntur locum ha-
bere non debent. ltem dicere possit et firmare inten-
tionem suam, q breve de warantia charte per falsam
suggestionem fuit impetratum, p hoc q dedit curis
domini regis intelligi, q fuit in seysina et non fuit, et
unde cyrographum g subsequitur ex teli falsitate &
deceptione valere non debet. Item nec recognitio


. facta ab eo qui donasse debuit (q talis fuit in seysina


cüm non esset) valere debet, quia non convenit naturs&e
confessio nec veritati, et g talis ita obiit seysitus petit
assisam. Ad q si tenens se tenuerit ad finem et de
replicatione petentis se noluerit ponere in assisam, in-
defensus remanebit, et sic amittet p judicium sine
jurata vel assisa, indefensus enim esse poterit petens
conira tenentem quoad exceptionem, eodem modo quo


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 249


Likewise long before his death he released himself and ,
gave away that land to the tenant, who holds it now by

his eharter which he now produces, and so that & fine

"was levied in the court of the lord the king, and à chi-
rograph by a writ of warranty of the charter, and so

that the ancestor aforesaid in the court of the lord the

king acknowledged the gift and warranted to him that

land, as land which he held and had of his gift.


To which the claimant may reply and say, that what- 4.
ever the tenant says of a donation and a charter, he The eae
never had seysine by gift or by that charter, but he de Suche.
who ought to have given it away remained always in
seysine after the charter as before, and. never changed
his status, but died seysed of it as of fee, and thereon he
puts himself upon an assise. He may also say that a
fine and. chirograph ought not to harm him, since they
depend upon & gift which ought to be the principal
thing, which indeed is null and since the principal
thing does not subsist, those things which follow cannot
have place. Likewise he may say and strengthen his
declaration, that the writ concerning the warranty of &
charter has been obtained under a false suggestion, inas-
much as he gave it to be understood by the court of the
lord the king, that he was in seysine, and he was not
80, and hence the chirograph which follows from such &
falsehood and deception ought not to avail Likewise
the recognition made by him who ought to have given
it away "that he was in seysine, when he was not,"
ought not to avail, because the confession does not agree
with nature nor truth, and he claims an assise that so-
and-so died so seysed. "To which if the tenant has kept
himself to the end and has refused to put himself on the
assise concerning the replication of the claimant, he will
remain without defence, and so will lose by à judgment
without & jury or an assise, for the claimant may be
without defence against the tenant as regards the ex-
ception, in the same manner in which the tenant may be
without defence against the claimant as regards the


5.
Propin-
quus heres
et alius
adeo pro
pinquus.


f. 270 b.


250 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


eb tenens conira petentem quoad actionem, si actioni
sive intentioni petentis respondere noluerit, & illud
ide dici poterit de replicatione et triplicatione, et. ulte-
riüs. Cüm autem tenens gratis se posuerit in assisam
vel juratam, p hoo terminabitur negotium de seysina.
Item dicere possit q non obiit seysitus antecessor, dà
longe ante morté suam fuit disseysitus et sibi pquirere
noluit in vita sua ppter suà negligentiam, vel non
potuit ppter suam impotentiam, et sic cadit in assisam -
mortis antecessoris finis factus assise nove disseysinz.
Item dicere poterit q ille de cujus morte pfert assisam
vivus est.


It$ ad hoc q dicit (ppinquior heres) oxeipi potest
et responderi q alius est ppinquior, licet ipse petens
ppinquus sit, vel ppter etaté vel sexum ut supra. Ite
dicere potest q si talis ' sit ppinquior, alius est adeó
ppinquus, càm terra sit partibilis et qui non nomina-
tur in brevi. Ite dicere potest q ille qui petit sicut
heres ppinquior nO potest, esse heres ppinquior nec
ppinquus nec remotus, quia villanus, et sie cadit in
assisam. mortis antecessoris qusstio status, et qualiter
determinari debet illa exceptio perpendi poterit ut
supra in tractatu de nova disseysina. ltem si quis
in &ctione proprietatis per breve de recto petierit id
q quis tenuerit in dominieo in dominico, et id quod


in servitio in servitio, id q semel in servitio petierit,


nunquam postea petere potest in dominico. Secus
iamen est in causa possessionis, ut si quis petat per
assisam mortis antecessoris, .poterit petens corrigere
errorem, & non tenet talis replicatio in causa proprie-
tatis.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 251


action, if he is unwilling to answer to the action or the
declaration of the claimant, and the same thing may be
said concerning the replication and the triplication, and
further. But when the tenant has gratuitously put
. himself upon an assise or & jury, the affair concerning
the seysine will be thereby terminated. Likewise he
may say that the ancestor did nob die seysed, because he
was disseysed long before his death, and was unwilling
to elaim iü for himself in his lifetime on account of his
negligence, or he could not from his powerlessness, and
S0 & fine made of an assise of novel disseysine falls into
an assise of mortdancester. Likewise he may say that
he, concerning the death of whom he has brought an
assise, is alive.


Likewise with regard to what he says, * the next heir,"


i& may be excepted to and answered, that another is heir, sud
nearer, although the.claimant is & near heir, either on nother


equally


aecount of age or of sex as above. Likewise he may near.


Say that if so-and-so is à next heir, another is equally
near, since the land is partible, and who is not named
in the writ. Likewise he may say that he who claims
as next heir cannot be the next heir nor & near heir nor
& remote heir, because he is à villein, and so a question
of status falls into an assise of mortdancester, and how
that exception ought to be determined may be ascer-
tained above in the treatise on novel disseysine.  Like-
wise if any one in an action of property has claimed
through à writ of right in demesne that which & person
held in demesne, and in service that which a person


held in service, he can never afterwards claim in


demesne that which he has once claimed in service. Tt
is otherwise however in & cause of possession, as if &
person has claimed by an assise of mortdancester, he
may in claiming correct his error, and such a replication
is. not. binding in & cause of property.


f. 270 b.


6.
Exceptio
super id
quod dici-
tur *' talis
tenet."


l.
Exceptio,
ei petens
remisit vel
confirma-
vit, post-
quam jus
ad eum
descendit.


252 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


Item (quam terram talis tenet), ad quod potest ex-
cipi & responderi à tenente, quod totam non teneat,
cum tota ab eo'petatur, nec in tenemento nec in ejus
pertinentiis, sicut illam petit, nec sicut antecessor illam
lenuit. Item si dicat quód totum tenementum non
teneat, sed alius talis, & ex adverso respondeatur q
ile talis villanus sit ipsius tenentis, & de eo teneat
in villenagio, nisi ille qui hoc exceperit statim habeat
probationes ad manum, parentes vel alias, recedet te-
nens quietus de hoc brevi: ut de itinere abbatis de
Rading ei M. de Pateshul in coi Warr, assisa mortis,
si Fredericus.


Car. XIII.


Prater exceptiones & responsiones qus: nascuntur ex
articulis brevis, sunt alive exceptiones plures, quasi
extra vagantes, que proveniunt à casu sive ab eventu,
& quarum qusdam differunt assisam ad tempus &
quaedam breve perimunt, & quzdam assisam. Si autem
breve perimant propter errorem, tunc fiat ut supra in
aliis assisis. Videndum est igitur quando & p quas
exceptiones cadit assis& inprimis, et sciendum quód
respondere poterit tenens et excipere, g licet omnes
articuli supradicti in brevi contenti veri sint, tamen
ille qui nune petit ut hsres propinquior non habet
actione per assisam, quia alius hseres ppinquior ante
ipsum petentem intercedens, & qui antecessoré com-
munem (de cujus morte nunc petens pferi assisam)
supervixit, licet seysinam non haberet, totum jus suum
in possessione & in proprietate quod ei descendit vel
descendere potuit remisit, & quietum clamavit prz-
dieto tali tenenti, Et inde habeat probationem, char-


! * ve] alios," MS. Rawl. C. 159. .


|


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 953


Likewise * which land.such an one holds," to which it 6.
may be excepted and answered by the tenant, that he Tied
does not hold the whole, when the whole is claimed from that which
him, neither as regards the tenement, nor its appur- 4 i
tenances, as he claims it, nor as his ancestor held it.an one
Likewise if he should say that he does not hold the ^ *
whole tenement, but another person, to wit, so-and-so,
and it be answered from the adverse side that so-and-so
is a villein of the tenants, and holds from him in villen-
age, unless he who has made this exception has proofs
at hand, his parents or others, the tenant shall go away
quiet as concerns this writ, as in the iter of the abbot
of Reading and Martin de Pateshull in the county of
Warwick, an assise of mortdancester, if Frederick.


CHAPTER XIII.


Besides the exceptions and the answers which arise ,. ione
on the articles of the writ, there are many other excep- tion, if the
tions, as if out of the way, which arise out of accident or claimant
the event, and of which some put off the assise for a leased or
time, and some are fatel to the writ,and some to the vp dade
assise, But if they are fatalto the writ on account of the right
an error, then let it be done as above stated in other d e
assises. We must see, therefore when and by what him.
exceptions the assise fails in the first place, and it is to
. be known that the tenant may answer and except, that
although all the above articles contained in the writ are
irue, nevertheless he who now claims as nexi heir has
no right of action by an assise, because another heir
nearer and. intervening before the claimant, and who
survived the common ancestor, concerning whose death
the claimant propounds an assise, although he had not
seysine, released allhis right in the possession and in
the property, which descended to him or could descend
io him, and quit-claimed such aforesaid tenant. And


he thereupon produces proof, a& charter or an assise, io


M mime. m i me


" 954 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSOBIS.


Britton, iii.
ch. xi. $12.


f. 271.


Britton, iii.
ch. xx.$ 9.


tam vel assisam, ad quod habeat petens si possit repli-
cationem. liem potest tenens excipere et respondere,
quód sine domino rege non debet respondere, quia
terram illam tenet de dono domini regis ut in serian-
tia, vel de eschaeta sua, vel alio modo: quo casu,
requirenda erit voluntas ipsius domini regis. Item
eodem modo si de alio teneat quàm de domino rege,
si confirmationem habeat ipsius domini regis, dum
iamen per confirmationem talem tenetur dominus rex
ad excambium sine eo non respondebit. Si autem non
ieneatur ad excambium, sine eo respondebit. tem
excipere potest & dicere, quód terram illam tenet de
dono alicujus post mortem talis antecessoris sicut ali-
cujus fratris ipsius petentis antenati, si replicetur quód
donare non potuit: triplieetur quód pater eorum com-
munis dedit, & licet donum non valeret quasi imper-
fectum, quia talis antecessor donator seysitus obiit,
ille frater antenatus, licet. seysinam non haberet, illud
donum petris sui confirmavit, & quod ab initio inva-


lidum fuit quia imperfectum, per confirmationem vali- -


dum fecit & pfectum, quia confinnatio supplevit de-
fectum. Item respondere poterit q terram illam tenet
de dono antecessoris, de cujus morte petens pfert assi-
sam. Quo casu, si replicetur q in vita talis nunquam
seysinam habuit, triplicari poterit à tenente g ille
petens donum patris vel alterius antecessoris, licet non
plenum vel non pfeetum, tamen sicut aliquod & incep-
tum confirmavit. Item respondere poterit qg pater
petentis per assisam villanus fuit, & ideó quód hzres
esse non possit. Ad q si replicetur à petente q licet
lalis antecessor su? villanus esset, tame liberatus fuit
à villenagio cum tota sequela sua quocüq, modo libe-
rationis, & cum patri vel alteri antecessori suo com-


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 25b


which let the tenant produce, if he can, a replication.
Likewise the tenant may excepi and answer that he
cannot answer without the lord the king, because he
holds that land from the king's gift as in serjeanty or as


his escheat, or in some other way, in which case the


pleasure of the king will have to be requested.  Like-
wise in the same way if he holds it from some one else
than the lord the king, if he has the confirmation of the
"lord the king, provided that by such confirmation the
lord the king is bound to make compensation to him,
he shall not answer without him. But if he is not
bound to make compensation, he shall answer without
him. Likewise he ean except and say, that he holds
that land from the gift of some one after the death of
ihe said ancestor, as of some elder-born brother of the
claimant himself, if it be replied that he could not give
ib away, ib may be triplicated that their common father
gave it away, and although the gift was not valid being
imperfect, because such ancestor died seysed of it, the
elder-born brother although he had not seysine, con-
firmed the gift of his father, and what was at the com-
mencemen(t invalid because imperfect, he made valid and
perfect by his confirmation, because his confirmation
Supplied the defect. Likewise he may answer that he
holds that land by the gift of his ancestor, concerning
whose death the claimant propounds an assise. In which
case if it be replied that such a person never had seysine
in his lifetime, it may be iriplieated by the tenant that
he claiming the gift of his father or other ancestor,
although not full nor perfect, nevertheless confirms it as
Something commenced. Likewise he may answer that
the father of the party claiming by an assise was a
villein, and thérefore that he could not be the heir. To
Which if it be replied by the claimant that although such
ancestor of his was a villein, nevertheless he was freed
from villenage with all his descendants in some way or
Other of freedom, and since his father or other ancestor


f. 271.


956 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


peteret assisa nove disseysinz, si de tenemento illo
disseysitus esset, & per assisam recuperare posset, ea-
dem ratione competere deberet filio tale! & heredi vel
filie sicut sequele suse assisa mortis antecessoris de
tetto de quo pater sic obiit seysitus ut de feodo. Filii


veró sive filie villani sub potestate domini sui sine


manumissione in villenagio manentes si pquisitum
fecerint extra villenagium, nullum habebunt hszredem
nisi dominum suum, dum tamen in vita villani in
manum suam ceperit illud tentum vel post mortem.


2. Item si soror contra sororem petat p assisam tefibum
Excepti, Q descendat à communi stipite, excipi poterit à sorore
ubi non
jacet assisa tenente q assisa non jacet ppter paritatem juris, cüm
m quelibet illarum quoad seysinam & quoad jus sit heres
soris. propinquior, & ideó q agi oportet de jure p breve de
Britton, i5. propatre.? Item si dus sorores petant simul p assisam,
S quarum una sit legitima & altera bastarda, et cüm

juratores hoc testati fuerint, & q una illarum ante
sponsalia nata fuit & alia post, nihilominüs pcedet
assisa é&& utraq, p assisam recuperabit, salvo jure cujus-
libet imposterü, & ita q soror legitima cüàm voluerit


& ad statem pervenerit agat contra sororem.p breve


de recto, & opponat bastardiam sorori tenenti repli-
eando: ut de itinere M. de P. in com Suff assisa
morlis antecessoris de quadam Mabilia & Johanna.
Consue- Illud etiam dici poterit (ut videtur) de villano parti-
iude C^" cipe cum liberis, quia eadem ratio & idem jus, secun-
düm q observatur in coii Cornubie de consuetudine
quze talis est, q si liber homo ducat nativam aliquam


in uxorem ad liberum teütum & liberum thorum, si


1 « tali? MS. Rawl. C. 160. 3 « proparte," MSS. Rawl. C. 160
and 159.


m TE ETENUee o E PTNDN


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 257


was entitled to an assise of novel disseysine, if he had
! been disseysed from that tenement, and might recover
E it by an assise, for the same reason his said son and heir

.  orhis daughter as his descendant was entitled to an
assise of mortdancester concerning the tenement of which
the father so died seysed as as of fee. But the sons or
daughters of a villein. remaining under the power of their
lord without manumission in villenage, if they have
made an acquisition out of villenage, shall have no heir
but their lord, provided always he has taken the tene-
ment into his hand in the lifetime of the villein or after
his death.


Likewise if a sister claims against & sister by an assise 2.
& tenement which descends from a common stock, an uou auis
exception may be raised by the sister who is the tenant, an assise
that an assise does not lie on account of the parity of scd
right, since each of them as regards the seysine and as does not
regards the right is a next heir, and therefore that the !*
trial of right should be conducted by a writ of propor-
lion. Likewise if two sisters claim together by an assise
of which one is legitimate and the other à bastard, and
when the jurors have testified to this, and that one of
them was born before espousals and the other after them,
nevertheless the assise shall proceed and both shall re.
cover by the assise, saving the right of each afterwards,
and so that the legitimate sister, when she wills and after
she has come of age, may proceed against her sister by
& writ of right, and object bastardy to her sister tenant
in her replication, as in the iter of Martin de Pateshull
in the county of Suffolk, an assise of mortdancester con-
Cerning à certain Mabilia and Johanna. But this may
also be said as it seems concerning & villein parcener
With free men, because there is the same reason and the.
same right, according to what is observed in the county
of Cornwall by & custom which is of this kind, that if a
free man brings a nief as his wife to a free tenement and
& free bed, if two daughters are proereated from them,


Q 1302. | R -


f. 271 b.


958 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


ex eis dus jpoereantur filie, una erit libera & altera
villana, quia ibi partiti sunt pueri inter liberum pa-
iren & düm uxoris villane, sed in hoc casu videtur
q ita debeat observari ut supra. ltem potest tenens


respondere heredi petenti p assisam & concedere qg


haeres sit, sed seysinam. habere non possit usq, ad
iempus: ut de itinere W. de Ralegh in coim Buck.
assisa mortis antecessoris, si Alicia. Ad q replicari
poterit à petente g teütum illud retinere non poterit
p legem Anglie, quia prolem non habuit cum uxore,
& si pueros habuit, convicti sunt &d bastardos. ltem
Sj pueri mortui sunt in utero, vel nati monstruosi.
Item si concedatur q talis obiit seysitus ut de feodo,
lamen hzredes nihil capere poterunt per assisam, quia
&ntecessore mortuo tenens g priüs tenuit ad terminum
Statim ex conventione & pacto incontinenti apposito
incepit possidere ad vitam vel in feodo. Et unde si
heres inceperit p assisam petere, obstabit ei imperpe-
tuum vel ad tempus exceptio conventionis, quia statim
eb sine mora in morte ipsius antecessoris sine tempore
vel aliqua solennitate incipit tenens possidere ex ipsa
conventione, quia si in feodo, jus quod descendere
deberet heredi statim descendit possessori. Et eodem
modo dici poterit de terra date pignori quod remanéat
creditori si pecunia suo die soluta non fuerit vel certze
psonze à certa persona etiam sine die ut supra. Et
etiam quód creditor incipit possidere in feodo in ipsa
morte debitoris si sine die, vel in crepuseulo si ad diem,
eàm tota dies cedat solventi: et. ita eodem modo quo
priàs statim & sine mora descendit jus merum ipsi
creditori. ltem si quis petat per assisam versus uxo-


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 959


one shall be free and the other a villein, because there
the ehildren are shared between the free father and the
lord of the villein woman, but in this case 1t seems, that
it ought to be observed as above. Likewise a tenant
may answer to an heir who claims by an assise and
&dmit that he is the heir, but that he cannot have
seysine for à time, as in the iter of William de Ralegh in
the county of Buckingham, an assise of mortdancester,
if Aliee. To which it may be replied by the claimant
that he cannot retain that tenement by the law of
England, because he had no offspring with his wife, and
if he had sons, they are proved to be bastards. Likewise
if the boys have died in the womb or have been born
monsters. Likewise if it be admitted that so-and-so
died seysed as of fee, nevertheless his heirs can take
nothing by an assise, because on the death of the ancestor
the tenant immediately from an agreement and a pact
forthwith added, began to possess for life or in fee that,
which he previously held for & term. | Ánd hence if the
heir begins to claim by an assise, the exception of the
agreement will be in his way in perpetuity or for a time,
because forthwith a&nd without delay on the death of
the ancestor without time or any solemnity the tenant
begins to possess from that agreement, because if in fee,
the right which ought to descend to the heir descends
forthwith to the possessor. And in the same way it
may be said of land given as a pledge, that it remains
- With the creditor, if the money has not been paid on its
proper day or to & certain person by & certain person
even without & day as above. And likewise that the
Creditor commences to possess in fee at the death of the
debtor if the debt is without a day, or at nightfall if the
debt is payable on a day, since the whole day is allowed
to the payer, and so in the same way in which the
absolute right descends to the creditor forthwith and
without delay. Likewise if any one cleims by an
assise against & wife, who holds in the name of dower,
R 2


f. 271 b.


260 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


rem qus tenet nomine dotis, id quod plus teneat quàm
ad ipsam pertineat tenere nomine dotis, quia ibi locum
habet amensuratio.


.8. Item non jacet assisa, si soror petat per assisam
be pit versus nepotem filium sororis sus, cui si replicando
mortis ^ objectum fuerit quód hsres esse non possit eo quód
ance9" — pater suus villanus fuit, si nepos dicat quód ipse liber
Sit. & hsres legitimus matris suze & etiam hseres ipsius
amite petentis, non jacebit assisa, quia ista responsio

spectat ad jus: ut de itinere Martini de Pateshull in

comitat Lincolnie aro regis Henrici 10. assis& mortis
antecessoris, si Agnes filia Eve de Benyngworth. Item
remaneat assisa, si mulieri petenti per assisam objicia-

tur q sororem habuerit, de. qua sunt pueri superstites,

qui tantundem juris habent quantum habet illa quz

petit. Ad quod si respondeat quód tales pueri villani

sunt & ex villana progeniti, licet. hoc &liquo modo
constiterit, assisa remanebit, quia hoc totum pertinet

ad jus, ut supra de eodem: ut de itinere Wilhelmi de

Ralegh in coii Buck. assisa mortis antecessoris, si Hen-

rieus Russel. Item impeditur assisa, si petenti per

assisam objiciatur quód pater suus villanus fuit, & ipse

contra, quód statu liber fuit & statu liber obiit, & extra
potestatem domini sui. Et quia petitus in servitutem
perquisivit sibi breve de pace usq, ad adventum jus-
Üeiariorum & pacem habuerit, sed ante adventum eo-

^ rum obiit in statu libero, & sic processit assis& non
obstante illa exceptione. Item si frater antenatus filium -
habuerit vel filiam, nepotem vel neptem, & frater post.
natus de morte fratris medii petat per assisam versus
extraneam personam, si filius vel alius hzres ex fratre
antenato mortuo producantur, vel aliquo modo consti-


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 261


that which she holds in excess of what it belongs to her
E to hold in the name of dower, because an | admeasurement
| has a place there.
| Likewise an assise does not lie, if: & sister claims by & &n — 3.
i assise against a nephew the son of a sister, to whom if Misa
) by way of replication it has been objected that he cannot mortdan-
be the heir, inasmuch as his father was a villein, if the orici
nephew says that he is himself free and the legitimate
heir of his mother, and also the heir of the aunt herself
who is the claimant, the assise shall not lie, because
that response has regard to the right, as in the iter of
Martin de Pateshull in the county of Lineoln in the
tenth year of king Henry, if Ágnes the daughter of Eve
of Benyngworth. Likewise let the assise be stayed, if
to à woman claiming by an assise it be objected that she
had & sister of whom there are surviving children, who
. have as much right as she who claims. "To which if she
should answer that such children are villeins and be-
. gotten of à villein woman, although this may have been
in some manner established, the assise shall be stayed,
because all this appertains to the right, as above con-
cerning the same, as in the iter of William de Ralegh in
the county of Bucks, an assise of mortdancester, if Henry
Russell Likewise the assise is impeded, if to the claim-
ant by an assise it be objected that his father was a vil-
lein, and he himself says on the contrary that he was of &
free status and died in a free status and beyond the power
of his lord. And because having been claimed into ser-
vitude he obtained for himself à writ of peace until the
arrival of the justiciaries, and had peace, but before their
arrival he died in à free status, and so the assise pro-
eeeded notwithstanding that exception. Likewise if an
elder-born brother has had a son or & daughter, à grand-
Son or à granddaughter, and an afterborn brother eleims .
àn assise concerning the death of an intermediate brother
against an extraneous person, if the son or other heir of
the elder-born brother who is dead be produced, or it


f. 272.


262 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


terit quód talis! extiterint per juratores cum sacra-
meto vel sine, cadit assisa. Si autem non produean-
tur, vel constare no possit.quód tales extiterint, vel


fort& juratores dubitaverint utrum ita sit vel non, tunc
: inter partes procedet assisa. ltem cadit assisa, si tenens


excipiat quód ille qui petit vel alius heres propinquior
alia vice movit ei litem de eadem terra, & tune remi-
sit jus, vel si hoc fecerit sine lite non refert, dum
tamen hoec probari possit quocunq, modo. Item si per
judicium vel eoncordiam ei remansit tenementum. ltem
cadit assise, si ordo brevium non servetur, ut si cüm
primó egerit per breve de recto, & postea agere velit
per assisam. Item non jacet inter fratrem antenatum
& postnatum cüm fpostnatus in seysina fuerit, nec e
contrario de morte fratris medii & ubi frater antena-
tus non possit esse hseres & dominus, càüm locum ibi


"habeat breve de recto & non assisa mortis antecessoris:


ut de itinere episcopi Dunelmens. & M. de Pateshull
in comitatu Eborum anno regni regis H. quarto, as-
sisa mortis antecessoris, si Rogerus de Maundeville.
Item non jacet assisa, ubi petitur per assisam tene-
mentum in dominieo ab eo, qui nihil habet in domi-
nico nisi tantum servitium: ut de itinere abbatis de
Rading & Mart. de Pateshull in comitatu Hereford,
assisa mortis antecessoris, si Wilhelmus Nowell Item
cadit assis& propter confirmationem factam ab eo, qui
irritare posset donum & revocare, nisi ipse petens do-
cere possit manifestó quód antecessor suus, de cujus
morte profert assisam, seysitus fuerit de terra illa &
inde seysitus obierit. Item cadit assisa propter con-
suetudinem loci, ut in civitatibus, burgis, & villis &
terris, & tenementis qus sunt de perquisito, sicut in


! * tales," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTEB. 268


has been established in any way that such existed by


jurors with or without an oath, the assise falls; But if


they are not produced or it cannot be established that
any such existed, or by chance the jurors have doubted
whether it was so or not, then the assise shall proceed
between the parties. Likewise the assise falls, if the
tenant should except that he who claims or another next
heir has on another occasion raised a suit against him
concerning the same land, and then renounced his right,
or if he has done this without a lawsuit it does not matter,
provided this ean be proved in any way. Likewise if
the tenement has remained with him through a judgment
or an accord. Likewise the assise falls, if the order of
the writs is not observed, as if when he has first pro-


: eeeded through a writ of right and has afterwards de-


Sired to proceed by an assise. Likewise it does not lie
between an elder-born and a younger-born brother when
the younger-born has been in seysine, nor on the con-
trary concerning the death of an intermediate brother,
and where the elder-born cannot be the heir and the
lord, since & writ of right has à place there, and not an
assise of mortdancester, as in the iter of the bishop of
Durham and Martin de Pateshull in the county of York
in the fourth year of the king, an assise of mortdan-
cester, if Roger de Maundeville. Likewise an assise does
not;lie where à tenement in demesne is claimed by him
who has nothing in demesne but only a service, as in the
iter of the abbot of Reading and Martin de Pateshull
in the county of Hereford, an assise of mortdancester,
if William Nowell. Likewise the assise falls on account
of & confirmation made by him, who can invalidate the
gift and recall it, unless the claimant can prove mani-
festly that his ancestor, concerning whose death he pro-
pounds the assise, was seysed of that land and died
Seysed of it. Likewise the assise falls on account of the
custom of the place, as in cities, boroughs, and vills and
lands and tenements which have been purchased, as in


f. 272.


4.
Ubi cadit
assisa.


264 .DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


civitate London & alibi de terris & tenementis quse
vendi possunt sicut catallum. De alis veró qus hse-
reditarié descendunt bene jaceret assise, quia legari
non possunt non magis quàm alie terre forinseez in
quibus jacere deberet assisa, quia legari non possunt,


nee videtur ratio quare non. Revera terminatum est


quód potest legari ut catallum tam hereditas quàm
perquisitum per baroü London, & burgenses Oxon, &
ideó verum est quód in burgis non jacet assisa mortis
antecessoris. ltem nec in dominicis domini regis jacet


8ssisa mortis antecessoris nec nov:e disseysinse, quia ibi


non est liberum tenementum sed villenagium privile.
giatum, nec etiam breve de recto magnum, quia loco
omnium accipitur parvum breve secundiun consuetudi-


nem manerii, vel aliud breve formatum, licet aliquando


jaeeat in membris: ut de itinere abbatis de Rading
& M. de Pateshull in comitatu Leyces. assisa mortis
antecessoris, si Gilbertus.


Item cadit assisa si petatur tenementum vel servi-


tium per assisam ab eo qui nihil clamat in tenemento.


Item si petat tenementum in dominico ab eo qui nihil
tenet nisi in servitio & homagio. ltem si partim pe-
tat in servitio de eo qui tenet tenementum in domi-
nico, responderi potest quód nihil clamat in servitio
nisi tantum in tenemento. Si autem petat tenemen-
tum ubi tenens nihil habet nisi servitium, respondere
potest quód nihil clamat in tenemento nisi tantum in
servitio & homagio, vel in neutro, & ideó sine die.
De hae materia habetis in itinere abbatis de Rading
& M, de Pateshull in comitatu Wari, assisa mortis, si
Wilhelmus Turpin. ltem cadit assisa, si dieat petens
quód petit id, quod tenens tenet in dominico, in domi-
nico, & id quod tenet in servitio, in servitio, non va&-


-*-


,
n
j
i
"n
1
:
0
!
i
|
1
!


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 265


the city of London and elsewhere concerning lands and
tenements which may be sold like & chattel. But con-
cerning other things which descend by inheritance an
assise would, well lie, because they cannot well be be-
queathed no more than other forinsec lands in which an
assise ought to lie, because they cannot be bequeathed,


, nor does there seem any reason why not. In truth it


was determined by the barons of London and the bur-
gesses of Oxford what may be bequeathed as a chattel, as
well inheritance as property purchased, and therefore it
is true that in boroughs no assise of mortdancester lies.
Neither. does an assise of mortdancester or of novel dis-
seysine lie in the demesnes of the lord the king, because
it is not there a free tenement bui a privileged villenage,
nor does à great writ of right, because in the place of all
there is accepted a little writ according to the custom of
the manor, or another writ in à special form, although it
lies sometimes in the members, as in the iter of the abbot
of Reading and Martin de Pateshull in the county of
Leicester, an assise of mortdancester, 1f Gilbert.


Likewise an assise falls if & tenement or service is
claimed through an assise from him who claims nothing
in the tenement. Likewise if he claims a tenement in
demesne from him who holds nothing except in service
and homage. Likewise if he claims partly in service


- from him who holds the tenement in demesne, it may be


answered that he claims nothing in service, but only in


4.
Where an
assise falls.


the tenement. But if he claims the tenement, where


the tenant has nothing except the service, he may an-
swer that he claims nothing in the tenement, but. only
in the service and homage, or in neither, and therefore
he'is without a day. On this subject you have a judg-
ment in the iter of the abbot of Reading and Martin de
Pateshull in the county of Warwick, an assise of mort-


dancester, if William Turpin. Likewise an assise falls


if the claimant says that he claims in demesne that
which the tenant holds in demesne, and in service that


f. 272 b.


960. DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


let; quia oportet petentem ita petere & tali modo per
omnia, secundüm quod antecessor inde seysitus fuerit
die quo obiit, scilicet. totum in dominico secundüm
formam brevis. ltem cadit assisa, si petens petat per
assisam quod per judicium amisit, quia cadit assisa
propter exceptionem rei judieatse, & agat si voluerit
de falso judicio. De hae materia invenitur in rotulo
de placitis que sequuntur regem anno regni regis


Henrici vicesimo primo in comitatu Eborum, assisa


mortis si Stephanus de Pulthorp. Item cadit assisa
propter incertitudinem, ut si ille qui petat nesciat


juratoribus rem petitam ostendere vel designare, nec


quid nec quantum petierit, nec ubi nec in quo loco.
Jtem remaneat assisa propter assisam qus przcessit


inter easdem personas de eodem tenemento & de eadem .


Seysina, quia assis& super assisam capi non debet, se-
eundüm quod inferiàs dicetur pleniüs. Sed si probari
possit aliquo modo, ut si talis natus fuerit in aliquo
comitatu ubi breve domini regis non currit, mittant
justiciarii de consilio curie ad comitatum in quo talis
natus fuerit ad inquirendam veritatem super articulo


illo tantum, & inquisità veritate procedant justiciarii


pro vel eontra. Breve quidem tale est.  Vicecofi salu-
tem. Scias quód cüm assisà mortis:antecessoris sum-
monita esset &ce. & sic totum factum de hae materia
ut supra de assisa& nov: disseysins, & inde sine brevi
poterit negotium & inquisitio fieri, si justiciarii vene-
rint personaliter ad comitatum illum. Et sciendum
quód primi juratores qui ignorant non dant nec aufe-
runt, quia jus merum revertitur ad dominum eapitalem


por


adn A cr mal co EN


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 267


which he holds in service, it does not avail, because it is
incumbent that the claimant should so claim and in such
manner throughout in all things, according as the ancestor
was seysed thereof on the day on which he died, to wit,
the whole in demesne according to the form of the writ.
Likewise the assise falls, if. the claimant claims by an
assise what he has lost by & judgment, because the
assise falls on aecount of the exception that the matter
has been adjudicated, and let him proceed, if he pleases,
for a false judgment. On this subject there is found a
judgment in the Roll of the Pleas which follow the king
in the twenty-first year of the reign of king Henry in the
county of York, an assise of mortdancester, if Stephen
de Pulthorp. Likewise an assise falls on account of
uncertainty, as if he who claims knows not to show or
designate to the jurors the thing claimed by him, nor
what nor how much he has claimed, nor where nor in
what place. Likewise the assise should be stayed on
&ccount of an assise, which has preceded between the
same persons concerning the same tenement and con-
cerning the same seysine, because an assise ought not to
be held upon an assise, according to what will be said
below more fully. But if it can be proved in any way,
as if so-and-so was born in some county where the writ
of the king does not run, let the justiciaries upon the
advice of the court send to the county, where so-and-so
was born, to inquire into the truth upon that article
only, and upon the truth having been inquired into, let
the justiciaries proceed for or against. The writ indeed
is of this kind: To the viscount greeting. Know, that
when an assise of mortdancester had been summoned &c.,
and so the whole act upon this subject as above upon an
assise of novel disseysine, and hence the business and
inquisition may be held without a vrit, if the justiciaries
have come personally to that county. And it is to be
known that the firs& jurors who know nothing neither
give nor take away, because the mere right reverts to


f. 972 b.


268 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


cüm sit pro hsrede, & ideó nullus poterit esse heres
propinquior licet propinquus quo ad seysinam, quia
nulli descendit jus merum. ltem cadit assis& propter
plurium hzredum conjunctionem, qui sunt quasi unus
heres & unum jus habentes, sive sint petentes sive
lenentes, si omnes in brevi non nominentur, secundüm
quod inferiüs in brevi! pleniüs dicetur in tractatu de
exceptionibus. ltem petens nihil eapiat per assisam
ubi juratores ipsum non cognoverint, vel si cognoverint
personam, nesciunt si sit heres vel non; vel si scive-
rint quód sit hsres, nesciunt tamen utrum propinquus
vel remotus, quia quotienscunque dubitatur an quid sit,
perinde est ac si non esset illud. Et quia, si juratores
nihil sciverint vel dubitaverint, nihil probant dictum
petentis, & sic deficit probatio licet jus non deficiat.
Item si dicant juratores quód .ille qui petit, fratrem
habet antenatum in partibus transmarinis (ut credunt)
sed nesciant utrum mortuus fuerit vel non, sed bene
dicant quód si mortuus esset, iste qui petit esset heres
propinquior, tune per offieium judicis detur seysina
petenti sub tali conditione, quód si frater antenatus
vivus redierit, quód frater postnatus qui petit sine
placito restituat ei seysinam suam cüm redierit, & sic
erit in pendenti seysina fratris postnati, donec de morte
fratris antenati constiterit. De hac materia habetis de
itinere Wilhelmi de BRalegh in comitatu Buck. assisa
mortis si Richardus Faber. Et quid si frater postna-
tus sic moritur seysitus relictis hzredibus infrà setatem
existentibus, & tunc redeat frater antenatus, vel si
heredes plenz sint setatis, quszeritur an sine judicio
possint expelli? videtur quód bene possunt, quia pater


1 * jn brevi," omitted MS. Rawl. C. 160.


i
i
!
|
'


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 269


the chief lord, since he is in the place of an heir, and
therefore no one can be a nearer heir although & near
heir as regards seysine, because the mere right descends
to no one. Likewise an assise falls on account of the
conjunction of several heirs, who are as it were one heir
and having one right, whether they are claimants or
tenants, if they are not all named in the writ, according
to what will be explained below in à writ more fully in


the treatise on exceptions. Likewise a claimant gains


nothing by an assise, where the jurors have not had any
knowledge of him, or if they have knowledge of his
person do not know whether he is the heir or not, or if
they know that he is an heir they know not whether he
is a near or & remote heir, because as often as it is
doubted whether a thing be, it is the same as if it were not,
and because if the jurors know nothing or have doubts,
they do not prove the statement of the claimant, and so
the proof fails, although the right may not fail  Like-
wise if the jurors should say that he who claims has an
elder-born brother in transmarine parts (as they believe),
but they know not whether he is dead or not, but they


. say well that if he is dead, he who claims is the next


heir, then through the office of the judge let there be
given seysine to the claimant on this condition, that if
the elder-born brother should have returned alive, the
after-born brother who claims shall restore to him with-
out a plea his seysine when he has returned, and so the
seysine of the after-born brother will be suspended until
it has been ascertained concerning the death of the elder-
born brother. On this subject you have a judgment in
the iter of William de Ralegh in the county of Bucks,
an assise of mortdancester,if Richard Faber. And what,
if an after-born brother dies so seysed leaving heirs who
are under age, and then the elder-born brother should
return, or if the heirs should be of full age, it is ques-
tioned whether they can be expelled without a judg-
ment. It seems that they may well be so, because their


5.
Si felonia
objecta
fuerit.


f. 278.


270 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


eorum, qui inde seysitus obiit nullum habuit feodum
in vita fratris antenati, nisi eonditionale. Item! casus.
Filius & heres interficit patrem, descendit jus hzredi
non obstante felonia & cum eo remanet donec convin-
eatur, & eo convicto & in seysina existente retrohabi-
tur tempus usque ad perpetrationem feloniem, & nihil
descendet ad hzeredes propter seysinam. Si autem
nullam seysinam habuefit, & postnatus assisam porta-
verit de seysina patris communis.


ltem cadit assisa propter feloniam objectam & con-


victam, ut.si antecessor de cujus seysina petitur, vel
ille qui petit per assisam, vel alius heres intercedens
qui &ntecessorem supervixerit, vel si utlagatus fuerit
propter contumaciam licet de felonia non convictus, vel
si convictus fuerit & ad pacem restituatur, cadit assisa :
& quamvis quis feloniam fecerit & antequam eonvin-
catur objecerit fort? ante mortem patris vel alterius


" antecessoris, de cujus morte assisam protulit, procedet


assisà & non remanebit.


Item differtur assisa, ut si duo petant unum & idem
lenementum versus eundem per assisam, ad ultimam
assisam erit recurrendum, & differri debet prima usque
ad captionem secunde, quia non debet unus de eodem
tenemento duobus simul respondere, & hoe sive petant
per assisam de seysina unius antecessoris vel duorum.
Et si de seysina duorum, primó debet procedere assisa
de seysina ejus qui ultimo obiit seysitus: ut de itinere
abbatis de Radinge in comitatu Hereford anno regis
Henrici quinto incipiente sexto, assisa mortis anteces-
soris, si Laurentius Galant. Item'cadit assisa per sey-


! « Item casus " down to * communis? omitted, MS. Rawl. C. 159.


Ron oci ami m
LLaLAL.Z


alChoMA RM m mme [ms m sinas Amm


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER, 971


. father who died seysed thereof had no fee in the lifetime

. of his elder brother, except a conditional one. Like-
wise & case. À son and heir slays his father, the right
descends to the heir notwithstanding the felony, and
remains with him until he is convicted, and upon his
conviction and his being in seysine the time is traced
back to the perpetration of the felony, and nothing will
descend to the heirs on the ground of seysine. But if
he had no seysine, and the after-born son has brought
an assise concerning the seysine of their common father.


Likewise the assise falls on account of an objection of — 5.
felony and a convietion for it,and if the ancestor from iar ed
whose seysine the claim is made, or he who claims by the objected.

, &ssise, or another intervening heir who has survived the . f 273.
ancestor, or if he has been outlawed on account of con-
iumacy although not convicted of felony, or if he has
been convicted of felony and restored to the king's peace,
the assise falls, and although à person has committed a
felony and before he is convicted has raised the objec-
üon by chance before the death of the father or other
ancestor, concerning whose death he has propounded an
assise, the assise shall proceed and not be stayed.


. Likewise the assise is deferred, if two persons claim ,,. 9.
one and the same tenement against the same person by clot by
&n assise, recourse must be had to the last assise, and the ?? (E
first ought to be deferred until the holding of the second, due
because one person ought not to have to answer at the
Same time to two persons concerning the same tenement,
and this whether they claim by an assise from the sey-

Sine of one ancestor or of two.  Ànd if from the seysine
of two, the assise ought to proceed in the first instance
concerning the seysine of him who died last seysed, as
in the iter of the abbot of Reading in the county of
Hereford, in the fifth and sixth years of king Henry, an
assise of the death of an ancestor, Lawrence Galant.
Likewise the assise falls through the seysine of an heir


4.
Qualis
seysina
habita
tollit sey-
sinam.


272 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


sinam alieujus hzredis habitam post mortem alicujus
antecessoris cujus seysina petatur, quia si heres cüm
semel seysinam habuerit donationem! fecerit, si ad as-
sisas recurrere posset, à se rite factas irritare posset.
Videndum est igitur qualis seysina tollit assisam &
quz» non. Et sciendum quod si seysina momentanea
fuerit quód tenens in tam modico tempore donationes
fecisse non potuit & alienationes, vel si forté infrà
setatem fuerit quód donationes &b eo factz tenere non


debeant, vel si per modicum tempus post mortem


antecessoris sui per intrusionem vel per disseysinam &
postea ejectus recenter, vel cium disseysitus recupera-


. verit versus ipsum per assisam nov: disseysince, non


obstante tali seysina ipse hseres habebit assisam mortis
àntecessoris, quia talis seysina quam priüs habuit con-
vieta est ad nullam, sive injuriosam, tum quia parva
fuit intrusio, tum quia e& durante nulla facta fuit
donatio ab hsrede, nec alienatio nec possessionis mu-


" tatio. Et si aliquis inde ejectus fuerit, recuperat sey-


sinam suam adeó plene & integre sicut illam amisit.
Sed cim heres petat post talem disseysinam. per assi-
sam mortis antecessoris, & objiciatur ei quód assisam
mortis antecessoris demeruit, eo quód sine judicio pro-
pria autoritate sibi usurpavit quod per assisam petere
debuit, si obstare debeat talis exceptio? non video
quare non. Si quis autem exceptionem seysins priüs
habit» opposuerit, oportet duo probare, quód in seysina&
extiterit & quód donationes fecerit dum fuit in sey-
sina, & quód talis statis extiterit quód donationes
facte revocari vel irritari non possunt, alioquin non
valebit exceptio. Et unde si hwres hoc negaverit, per
assisam captam in modum juratz veritas declarabitur.
Si autem objiciatur seysina quam quis habuerit dum


1 * donationes," MS. Rawl. C. 160 and 159,


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 273


had after the death of an ancestor whose seysine is

claimed, because if the heir, when he once had seysine,

has made donations, if he could have recourse to assises
. he might invalidate what he had duly made.


We must see thereforé what seysine takes away an 7.
assise, and what not. And itis to be known that if the pedea
seysine be momentary, that the tenant could not in so ifit has


short & time have made donations and alienations, or if une
by chance he was under age that donations made by sn assise.
him ought not to be binding, or if he was seysed for a
short time after the death of his ancestor by an intrusion
or à disseysine and was afterwards ejected recently, or
when the person disseysed has recovered by an assise of
novel disseysine, notwithstanding such a& seysine the
heir himself shall have an assise of mortdancester, because
the said seysine which he had was proved to be null or
unjust, as well because the intrusion was slight, or
because, whilst it lasted, no donation was made by the
heir, nor alienation, nor change of possession. Andif any
one has been ejected therefrom, he recovers his seysine
as fully and entirely as he lost it. But when the heir
claims after such & disseysine by & writ of mortdancester,
and it is objected to him that he is not deserving of an
assise of mortdancester, because that without a judgment
of his own authority he has usurped to himself that
which he ought to have claimed through an assise, if
such an exception ought to stand in his way? I do not
see why not. But if & person has opposed an exception
of seysine previously had, he ought to prove two things,
that he has been in seysine, and that he has made dona-
tions whilst he was in seysine, and that the said person
was of such an age that the donations made by him can-
not be revoked or invalidated, otherwise the exception
will not avail And hence if the heir has denied this,
the truth shall be declared by an assise taken in the
manner of à jury. But if the seysine be objected which
& person has had whilst under age, it will not hurt,
Q 1302. S


f. 273 b.


274 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


fuerit infrà setatem, non nocebit: quia non obstante
tali seysina, si infrà setatem donationes. fecerit, illas
revocare poterit per assisam mortis antecessoris, vel per
breve de ingressu, vel per breve de recto: secundüm
quod elegerit, sive donationem,fecerit custodi suo sive
ali, nisi càm plens» setatis extiterit donationes illas
confirmavet.  Assisam veró nove disseysinz contra
tales non habebit, quamvis! infrà :setatem gratis exi-
vit. Si autem custos dederit dum hzeres fuerit infrà
setatem, habebit heres assisam nove disseysine & om-
nia alia remedia supradicta. Et notandum quód sey-
sina prehabita tollit heredi assisam mortis antecesso-
ris, cujuscunq, fuerit statis, si fuerit justa, licet pareat
ei assisaà. novz disseysins, ea ratione quód conjuncta
est possessio cum ipso jure: & ideó si recenter post mor-
iem! antecessoris ejectus fuerit heres, habebit utramq,
secundüm electionem suam, quia sese compatiuntur &
nulla earum excludit aliam de recenti seysina, ordine
lamen servato. Si autem fuerit injuriosa, non tollit
assisam, quia non facit liberum tenementum :hzredi,
quia non possunt conjungi juri, nee valet conjunctio,
cüm possit seysina revocari, nec valet juncta nisi jure
juncta. Igitur càm heres seysinam antecessoris sui
injuste sibi usurpaverit per disseysinam, talis seysina


nulla erit, quia non facit heredi liberum tenementum,


& ideó non tollit assisam mortis, quia judicatur ad
nullam. Item si cüm justa fuerit & hxres donationem
fecerit dum fuerit infrà statem, tunc erit donatio in-
valida, ex quo revocari poterit ab hszrede. Et ideó
licet talis donatio revocari non possit per assisam novse


! * quia quamvis," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ABSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 275


because notwithstanding such seysine, if he has made
. donations whilst under age, he may revoke them by an
assise of mortdancester or by & writ of entry,or by &
writ ofright; aecording as he has chosen, whether he
has made the donation to his guardian or to another
person, unless he has confirmed those donations after he
has been of full age. But he shall not have an assise of
novel disseysine against such persons, because, although
whilst under age, he has gratuitously gone out of them.
. But if the guardian has given them whilst the heir was
under age, the heir shall have an assise of novel dissey-
sine, and all the other remedies aforesaid. And it is to
be noted that a previous seysine takes away from the
heir an assise of mortdancester, of whatever age he may
have been, if it was just, although an assise of novel
disseysine is at his demand on the grounds that the pos-
session has been conjoined with the right itself, and
. therefore if the heir has been recently ejected after the
death of the ancestor, he shall have either according to
his election, because they help one another and none of
them exeludes the other concerning the recent seysine,
order however having been observed. But if it has


been unjust, it does not take away an assise, because it


does not constitute a free tenement to the heir, for they
cannot be conjoined to the right, nor does the conjunc-
tion avail since the seysine may be revoked, nor does
the joining avail unless it be & just joining. Therefore
when an heir has unjustly usurped the seysine of his
ancestor through a disseysine, such & seysine will be
null, because it does not constitute to the heir a free


tenement, and therefore it& does not take away an assise


of mortdancester, because it is adjudged to be null.

Likewise if when it has been just and the heir has made

& donation whilst he was under age, then the donation

will be invalid, inasmuch as it ean be revoked by the

heir. And therefore although such a donation cannot

be revoked by an assise of novel disseysine on account
Ss 2a


f. 278 b..


276 — DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


disseysine propter factum proprium quale quale, non
tamen tollitur assisa mortis antecessoris ad seysinam
 prehabitam rehabendam.  Cüm autem heres plene
s,etatis in seysina fuerit justa, quse revocari non possit,
& donationem fecerit, tenet donatio & tollit assisam.
Si autem ejectus fuerit injuste, habebit assisam nove
disseysinze & tollitur assisa mortis antecessorum prop-
ler seysinam preehabitam & justam. Si autem injuri-
osa fuerit (ut supra predictum est) non tollit assisam
mortis antecessoris, cüm sit nulla (ut supra), & si cüm
justa fuerint fiant donationes tempore congruo & locum
habere possit assisa mortis antecessoris, sic posset hs-


res omnes donationes suas rite factas per assisam revo-


care, quod esse non debet. Et hsc est causa quare
seysina przehabita tollit assisam mortis antecessoris &
non alia. ltem cadit assisa per exceptionem villenagii,
ut si villanus sub potestate domini sui constitutus ter-
ram aliquam acquisiverit pro denariis suis tenendam
liberé & ita obiit seysitus, si dominus suus (sub cujus
potestate moritur) se posuerit in seysinam post mortem
talis, filius villani per assisam mortis antecessoris non


reeuperabit versus dominum suum, hoc recognito quód


pater suus villanus & sub potestate domini sui obierit,
ut de ultimo itinere M. de Pateshull in comitatu Suff.
assisa mortis, si Wilhelmus de Carleton, quia ubi nulla
assisa novse disseysinz in persona antecessoris, ibi erit
nulla assisa mortis antecessoris in persona hsrédis sed
e contrario. Sed contra esset, si exirg potestatem do-
mini sui extiterit & in statu libero, & petitus in servi-
tutem & perquisiverit sibi breve de pace & sic obierit
&nte iter justiciariorum. Si autem sub potestate con-
stitutus sibi breve de pace perquisiverit, non valet:


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER, 277
of his own act whatever may be its legal quality, never-
theless an assise of mortdancester to have again the
seysine previously had is not taken away. But when
the heir being of full age has been in just seysine, which
cannot be revoked, and has made a donation, tho dona-
tion holds good and takes away an assise. But if he
has been ejected unjustly, he will be entitled to an assise
of novel disseysine, and an assise of mortdancester is
taken away on account of the previously had seysine,
which was also just. But if it were unjust (as afore-
said) it does not take away an assise of mortdancester,
since it. is null (as above) ; and if, when it has been just,
donations are made at a suitable time, and an assise of
mortdancester may have place, an heir may so revoke
by an assise all his donations though duly made, which
ought not to be. And this is the cause why the pre-
viously had seysine takes away an assise of mortdan-
cester, and not any other. Likewise an assise falls
through an exception of villenage, and if a villein
established under the power of his lord has acquired
some land in return for his own money to be held freely
and has died 80 seysed, if his lord (under whose power he
dies) has placed himself in seysine after the death of such
a person, the son of the villein shall not recover by an
assise of mortdancester, upon its being acknowledged .
that his father was & villeim and died under the power
of his lord, as in the last iter of Martin de Pateshull in
the county of Suffolk, an assise of mortdancester, if
William of Carleton, because where there is no assise of
novel disseysine in the person of an ancestor, there will
be there no assise of mortdancester in the person of the
heir, but the contrary. But it would be otherwise if he
were beyond the power of his lord, and in a free condition
and claimed unto servitude, and he had obtained a writ of
peace and so had died before the iter of the justiciaries.
But if whilst established under the power of his lord
he had obtained à writ of peace, it does not avail, unless


f, 274.


278 * . DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


nisi procedat petitio per breve de nativis. ltem cadit


assisa aliquando propter incertitudinem, ut si tenens
dicat quód totam terram non teneat, & juratores qu:z-
Siti cum sacramento vel sine dicant quód nesciant: ut
de itinere W. de Ralegh in comitatu North. si Wil-
helmus de Camera. ltem cadit assis& propter defectum
nature vel sensus ipsius tenentis, ut si omninó audire
vel loqui non possit, ut si sit surdus vel mutus natu-
ràliter ità quód omninó audire non possit neq, loqui,
quod non est de eo qui tardé audit vel loquitur: ut
de itinere de W. de Ralegh in comitatu North. assisa
mortis antecessoris inter Radulphum Basset & Thomam
de Pietesse. Si autem à casu venerit illa surditas,
tune non cadit assisa sed erit differenda quousq, status
ipsius tenentis melioretur. Et quod dietum est de
surdo & muto, dici poterit de furioso, secundàüm quod
gavisus fuerit aliquando dilucidis intervallis. Item
cadit assisa propter continuationem seysine donatoris,
verbi gratia. Pater dedit filio quandam terram & simul
remanserunt in seysina, filius premoritur vivente paire
relicto herede, si heres petat per assisam, non valet
propter seysinam patris continuatam, quàm corpore &


animo retinuit: ut de ultimo itinere M. de P. in com.


Suff assisa mortis antecessoris, si Rogerus Battayl Si
autem pater premoriatur, heres ipsius obtinebit per
assisam propter seysinam patris continuatam usq, ad
mortem. ltem cadit assisa ratione juris & :sesnecis,


.ut si frater petentis antenatus premortuus filium reli-


querit superstitem & de quo doceri possit quód super-
stes sib per juratores cum sacramento vel sine. Si
&utem nihil horum doceri, possit, vel si juratores dubi-
faverint uirum it& sit vel non, tunc procedet assisa


M cz
t


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER, 279


& petition precedes by a writ of naifty. Likewise the


assise fall sometimes from uncertainty, as if the tenant
should say that he does not hold the whole land, and the
jurors when questioned with or without an oath should
Say that they do not know, as in the iter of William de


Ralegh in the county of Northumberland, if William de -


Camera, Likewise the assise falls on account of a defect
of nature or sense of the tenant himself, as if he is alto-
gether unable to hear or to speak, as if he be deaf or
dumb naturally so that he is altogether unable to hear
or to speak, which is not the case with him who hears
or speaks slowly, as in the iter of William de Ralegh in


X*he county of Northumberland, an assise of mortdan-


cester between Ralph Basset and Thomas de Pictesse.
But if that deafness has come on from aceident, then the
assise does not fall, but is to be deferred until the con-


ditàion of the tenant himself is ameliorated. .And what '


is said of a deaf and dumb person, may be said of a
madman, according as he has sometimes enjoyed lucid
intervals. Likewise the assise falls on account of the
continuance of the seysine of the donor, for example:


. A father gave to à son some land, and they remained


together in seysine, the son predeceases his father and
leaves an heir, if the heir claims by an assise, it is of no
availon account of the continued seysine of the father,
whieh he retained both personally and mentally, as in
the last iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county of
Sussex, an assise of mortdancester, if Roger Battayl.
But if the father predeceases, his son. shall obtain by an
assise on aecount of the seysine of his father continued
to his death. Likewise an assise falls by reason of right
and primogeniture, as if an elder-born brother of the
claimant having predeceased him has left & son sur-


' . viving, and concerning whom it can be proved that he


is surviving by jurors with an oath or without. But if
none of these things can be proved, or if the jurors have
doubted whether it be so or not, then the assise shall


280 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


inter eos qui presentes sunt. ltem cadit assisa, S1 à
tenente objiciatur quód petens vel alius heres propin-
quior alias movit ei litem de eadem terra, & quód tunc
remansit ei terra per judicium vel duellum vel mag-
nam assisam, vel finem factum, recognitionem, quietam
clamantiam, vel alio quoeunq, modo qui probari possit
per assisam captam in modum jurate. Item cadit
assisa propter ordinem brevium non observatum, ut si
priüs implacitaverit petens ipsum tenentem per breve
de recto vel de ingressu, ita quod visus petitus sit vel
warantus vocatus: ut de itinere Wilhelmi de Ralegh
in eomitatu Buck. assisa mortis, si Richardus Avenel.
Idem erit, si essonium intervenerit, ut de itinere Mar-
tini de Pateshull in comitatu Kanc. anno duodecimo,
assisa mortis antecessoris, si Manasserus de Hastings.
Item cadit' assisa, si tenens teneat de ballivo domini
regis, vel si chartam domini regis habuerit per quam
dominus rex ei teneatur ad warantum & exeambium,
nisi petens docere possit quód antecessor suus inde
obiit seysitus post illius charte. confectionem.


Car. XIV.


1.
pii iat Datur etiam exceptio tenenti propter minorem «seta-
81 con & . L LÀ . hd :
minorem, iem suam sive sint ibi plures tenentes sive unus. Et
qi Lean quandog, major petit per assisam mortis antecessoris
petatur — Versus minorem, quandoq, minor contra majorem, quan-


perassisam dooue minor contra minorem. Et sicut distinguuntur
mortis à : ps MN:

majore, — £etates & persons, ita oportet distinguere tenta, utrum
lens S tefitum quod petitur per assisam teneatur in socagio,
etatis. — vel burgagio, vel per servitium militare. Item utrum
f274b. ille qui tenet fuerit infrà statem, vel ille qui petit.


Item videndum erit de quibus tenementis respondebit


LI LC


e DE E DE. a a0


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 281


proceed between those who are present. Likewise an
assise falls, if it be objected by the tenant that the
claimant or another next heir has at another time
brought a suit against him concerning the same land,
and that on that occasion the land remained to him
through a judgment or a duel, or à great assise, or the
levying of a fine, a recognition, a quit claim, or in some
other way, which may be proved by an assise held after
the manner ofa jury. Likewise an assise falls on ac-
count of not observing the order of the writs, as if the
claimant has impleaded the tenant by a writ of right or
of entry, so that a view has been claimed or a warrantor
called, as in the iter of William de Ralegh in the county
of Buckingham, an assise of mortdancester, if Richard
Avenel The same will happen, if an essoin has inter-
vened, as in the iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county
of Kent in the twelfth year, an assise of mortdancester,
if Manasser of Hastings. Likewise an assise falls, if the
tenant holds of the bailiff of the lord the king, or if he
have & charter of the lord the king by which the lord
the king is bound to him to warrant and to compensate,
unless the claimant can show that his ancestor died
seysed thereof after the making of that charter.


CHAPTER XIV. l.
An excep-
Àn exception is also given to a tenant on account of tion, if a


, , claim is
his minor age, whether there are there several tenants Or made


only one. . ÀAnd sometimes à major claims by an assise unge a


of mortdancester against & minor, sometimes a minor who is


against a major, sometimes & minor against a minor. ruis e
And as ages and persons are distinguished so we must an assise


distinguish the tenement, whether for instance the tene- Piso
ment which is claimed by an assise is held in socage or by a mejor,
in burgage or by military service. Likewise whether he hee d
who holds it is under age, or he who claims it. Like- f 274».


wise we must see concerning what tenements he shall


"


282 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS,
ante plenam statem, & de quibus non, & ad qux brevia
& ad quse non.


Si minor petat contra minorem per assisam mortis
antecessoris & qui proximus :etati non fuerit, minor


summonitus se essoniare non poterit contra minorem,


non magis quàm contra majorem, si constiterit ipsum
esse minorem, si autem non constiterit,allocatur quan-


 doq, essonium quasi per ignorantiam, nisi sit qui cau-


satur minorem etatem, sed conira minorem qui petit
in eausa possessionis nunquam allocabitur essoniü fac-
tum à majore nec à minore. Sed cüm ante plenam
etatem viginti & unius anni peti possit burgagium &
socagium contra majorem, quiero an eodem modo pos-
Sit contra minorem ante plenam statem viginti & unius
anni in causa proprietatis & in causa possessionis?
Non possit (ut videtur) de aliquo, de quo antecessor
seysitus obiit ut de feodo: secus esset si ad terminum
vite vel annorum, vel in custodia, vel in vadio per
finem vel conventionem & hujusmodi. Cüm autem
comparuerit, si constiterit ipsum esse minorem, non
respondebit de aliquo tenemento in aliqua causa pos-
sessionis vel proprietatis, antequam fuerit plenz etatis,
sive illud tenementum fuerit socagium, burgagium, vel
feodum militare, licet diverse sint setates ad petendam
seysinam antecessoris contra minorem antequam respon-
debit, seceundüm quod tenementa sunt diversa, & secun-
dàüm quod causa fuerit possessionis vel proprietatis,
quia ante plenam statem viginti & unius anni, potest
heres petere seysinam antecessoris sui in causa pos-
sessionis per assisam mortis antecessoris contra majo-
rem, n causa veró proprietatis petere non potest
major nec minor conira minorem per breve de recto,
qualecung, fuerit tenementum, antequam minor tenens


1 * minorem," MS. Rawl. C. 160. *Sed cum" down to * hujusmodi "
omitted, MS. Rawl. C. 159. :


FA m rercss Ae CE


2a
Uo EF mm ooo pen ins CMT em UU w—— Y
]
t
E
F


" OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 283


answer before he is of full age, and concerning what
not so, and to what writs, and to what writs not so.


If & minor claims against a minor by an assise of , ?2.
mortdancester, and who is not very near to full age, the ni eunE
minor when summoned cannot essoin himself against Met a
the minor, no more than against & major, if it has been mm
established that he is & minor, but if it has not been
so established, an essoin is sometimes allowed as 16 were
through ignorance, unless there be some one who alleges
as an excuse his minority, but against a minor who
claims in à cause of possession an essoin will never be
allowed whether made by & major or a minor. But
since before the full age of twenty-one years a burgage
or à socage tenure can be claimed against & major, I
question whether in the same way it can be claimed
against a minor before the full age of twenty-one years
in à cause of property and in & cause of possession. [t
can be claimed (as it seems) concerning any thing of
which an ancestor died seysed as of fee; it would be
otherwise if he held it for the term of hislife or fora
term of years or in guardianship or as a security through
a fine or a convention and such like. But when he has
appeared, if it has been established that he is a minor,
he shall not answer concerning any tenement in any
cause of possession or of property, before he be of full
age, whether that tenement has been a socage or a burgage
tenement, or & military fee, although there may be di- ,
verse ages to claim the seysine of an ancestor against &
minor before he shall answer, according as the tenements
may be diverse, and aecording as the cause.may be one
of property or of possession, because before the full age
of twenty-one years an heir may claim the seysine of
an ancestor in & cause of possession through an assise
of mortdancester against & major. But in a cause of
property neither & major nor & minor can claim against
a minor by a writ of right, whatever may be the cha- .
racter of the tenement, before the minor tenant shall


f. 275.


284 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


plenam statem habuerit viginti & unius anni. Et
eüm sie minor obtinuerit per assisam ante plenam
celalem in causa possessionis, non respondebit ad assi-


sam in eadem causa possessionis, si ab eo peteretur


per assisam, scilicet in burgagio, & socagio ante rmta-
tem talium. In feodo veró militari non ante plenam
eviatem respondebit, scilieet viginti & unius annorum!
non magis quàm ei respondebitur. Si autem petat per
assisam feodum militare, nec magis respondebit ad
assisam in feodo militari ante plenam statem viginti
& unius anni, quàm si peteretur per breve de recto
in causa proprietatis. Item quód minor petere non
potest per assisam cum effectu antequam fuerit plenz
setatis secundüm diversitatem tenementorum, hoc verum
est si petat contra custodes, quia si ipse primá facie
habeat actionem, custos habebit contra eum exceptio-
nem, scilicet quód non antequam plenz setatis fuerit,
& ita ante statem non respondebit. Si autem petat
per assisam versus exiraneas personas & versus capi-
talem dominum suum qui negaverit ipsum esse hzre-
dem, bene potest petere quolibet tempore per assisam,
eujuseunqg, fuerit setatis. Sed quicung, sit qui petat
versus eum & pater suus inde obierit seysitus ut de
feodo, ante plenam statem non respondebit, secundium
quod tenementum fueriü tale vel tale, nec in causa
possessionis non magis quàm in causa proprietatis.
Item in assis& habenda est ratio prioritatis & posteri-
tatis, seeundüm quod supradictum est. Si autem capi-
talis dominus vel alius qui custodiam habuerit per
ipsum aliquem feoffaverit de terra minoris dum fuerit
infrà statem, & feoffatus per eustodem moriatur relicto
herede infrà statem existente, cüm ad statem perve-
nerit primus hsres petat per assisam versus ultimum
heredem feoffati vel per aliud breve, quód reddat tali
qui plenz zetatis est (ut dieitur) remanebit assisa quo-


—


! * gcilicet viginti et unius annorum," omitted MS. Ttawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 285


have the full age of twenty-one years. And when the
minor shall have so prevailed through an assise before
he is of full age in à cause of possession, he shall not


answer to an assise in the same cause of possession, if it


be claimed against him by an assise, to wit, in burgage
and in socage tenure before the full age of such. But in
a military fief he shall not answer before the full age, to
wit,of twenty-one years, no more than he can demand
an answer. But if he claims & military fief by an
assise, he shall not answer to the assise any more in the
case of a military fief before he is of the full age of
twenty-one years,than if.a claim were made by a writ
of right in à cause of property. Likewise that & minor
cannot claim by an assise with effect before he is of full
age according to the diversity of tenements, this is true
if he claims against guardians, because if he has at first
sight an action, the guardian will have against him an
exception, to wit, that he cannot bring an action before
he is of full age, and so he shall not answer before that
age. But if he claims by an assise against extraneous
persons and against his chief lord who has denied that
he is heir, he may well claim at any time by an assise,
of whatever age he may be. But whoever he may be
who claims against him and his father has died seysed
thereof as of fee, he shall not answer before he is of full
age, according as the tenement has been such or such,
neither in & cause of possession any more than in a cause
of property. Likewise in an assise regard is to be had
to priority and posteriority, according to what has been
said above. But if a chief lord, or another who has the
wardship, has by himself enfeoffed any one with the
land of à minor, whilst he was under age, and the person
. enfeoffed by the guardian dies having left an heir under
age, should the first heir when he has come of age claim
against the last heir of the feoffee by an assise or by
another writ, that he should restore it to him who is of
full age (asit is said), the assise shall be stayed until the


f. 275.


986 DE ASSISA MORTIS. ANTECESSORIS.


usq, ultimus heres fuerit plense setatis secundüm genus -


tenementi. Si autem ambo fuerint plenz setatis &
ambo petant versus custodem per assisam vel per aliud
breve q reddat tali qui plenz setatis est (ut dicitur)
ultimus heeres priüs obtinebit, & tune demum cadit
&ssisà primi heredis versus custodem, & incipiet de
novo competere versus ultimum heredem qui per assi-
sam obtinuit, & ille tunc vocet ad warantum capitalem
dominum feoffatorem suum. Et cüm ille warantizave-
rit, tunc procedet assisa primi heredis versus eum, &
Si per assisam obtinuerit hsres, tunc faciat warantus
excambium suo féoffato. Item si capitalis dominus
feoffaverit & moriatur herede suo infrà statem exis-
tente & hzres vocatus fuerit ad warantum per eum,
qui feoffatus fuit per capitalem dominum, remanebit
placitum de warantia inter tenentem & hsxredem domini
capitalis usq, ad statem heredis, sed capiatur. assisa:
ut de eodem itinere ejusdem M. anno eodem, assisa
mortis antecessoris, si Eudo pater Walteri, quam terram
Rogerus de Braham tenuit, qui vocavit ad warantum
Rogerum le Bygod filium & hsredem com Hugh! le
Bygod, & qui tunc fuit infrà statem. Et ibi conside-
ratum fuit quód caperetur assisaà non expectata setate,
& ita probatur in pluribus locis. Sed esto quód feof-
fatus moriatur seysitus & hsres ejus fuerit infrà ceta-
tem, stas ejus expectabitur, quia antecessor suus obiit
inde seysitus ut de feodo, & sic de pluribus dici pote-
rib si terra sic data ad plures devenerit. Et quod
suprà dicitur de capitali domino, dici poterit de hzere-
dibus eorum qui moriuntur seysiti ut de feodo sed ad
terminum, & ut de vadio & hujusmodi. Sed quid dice-
tur de disseysitore & intrusore qui moriuntur seysiti
quasi de feodo propter patientiam vel negligentiam
disseysiti. Si autem dominus capitalis premoriatur


1€ Hugonis," MS, Rawl. C. 160.


-———


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 987


last heir has come to full age according to the kind of
tenement. But if both should be of full age and both
should claim against the guardian by an assise or by an-
other writ that he should restore it to him who is of full
age (as it is said), the last heir shall first prevail, and then
. at length the assise of the first heir against the guardian
falls, and he shall begin anew to be entitled to an assise
against the last heir who has prevailed by an assise, and
the latter may then call to warrant him the chief lord
his feoffor. And when he has warranted him, then the
assise of the first heir shall proceed against him, and if
the heir has prevaied by the assise, then let the war-
rantor make compensation to his own feoffee. Likewise
if the chief lord has enfeoffed a person and he dies his
heir being under age, and the heir has been called to
warrant by him, who has been enfeoffed by the chief lord,
the plea concerning the warranty between the tenant and
the heir of the chief lord shall be stayed until the full
age of the heir, but let the assise be held, as in the same
iter of the same Martin in the same year, an assise of
mortdancester, if Eudo the father of Walter, which land
Roger de Braham held, who called to warranty Roger
le Bygod the son and heir of earl Hugh le Bygod, and
who was then under age. And there it was held that
the assise should be taken without waiting for the full
age [of Roger], and so it is approved in many places.
But let it be that the feoffee dies seysed and his heir
is under age, his full age shall be waited for, because
his ancestor died seysed thereof as of fee, and so it may
be said of several persons, if the land so given has
passed to several persons. And what is said above of
& chief lord, may be said of the heirs of those, who die
' Seysed as of the fee but for a term, and as of & pledge and
such like. But what shall be said of a disseysor and an
. intruder who die seysed as it were of the fee on account of
the sufferance or negligence of the person disseysed. But
. if the chief lord predeceases, his heir being under age, the


f. 275 b.


988 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


herede suo infrà statem existente, non propter hoc
remanebit assisa in persona sua, scilicet heredis, licet
conira àssisam respondere no potest: ratio est ad hoc,
quia antecessor suus nunquà seysitus fuit de tenemento
quod warantizare debet in feodo. Et q ita sit, videri
poterit in itinere M. de P. in cofá Suff. an. regis H.
12, assisa mortis antecessoris, si Rogerus de Gloc. Ad
hoc facit in itinere ejusdé anno eodem in coti Norff.
Item si hsres capitalis domini in seysina fuerit &
infrà statem & venerit assisa super eum immediate,
non remanebit assisa propter statem: ut de itinere
M. de P. in coii Kanc. anno regis H. decimo, assisa
mortis antecessoris, si Emma mater Rogeri Illud idem
dici poterit de quolibet herede qui fuerit infrà statem
de omnibus de quibus antecessor suus non obiit seysi-
tus ut de feodo, ubi aute ut de feodo, non respondebit


ad assisam ante plenam statem in causa possessionis


sicut hie, sive illud tenementum fuerit socagium sive
feodum militare, ut. de itinere abbatis de Radinge &
M. de P. in comitatu Leycester, assis& mortis ante-
cessoris, si Walterus filius Wilhelmi. Et eodem modo
dici poterit de burgagio, secundüm diversitatem bur-
gagiil, nec ad breve de recto in causa proprietatis non
tenentur respondere infrà setatem (ut videtur) ante-
quam fuerint plens etatis, scilicet viginti & unius
anni  Cüm autem tales qui tenuerint in socagio vel
burgagio, cm fuerint plens setatis (secundüm  soca-
gium & burgagium), donationes fecerint, queritur an
ilas revocare possunt cüm ad majorem statem perve-
nerint, scilicet. viginti & unius anni, ac si illas fecis-
sent de feodo militari? dico quód non in quibusdam
locis, sicut videri poterit in itinere M. de P. in comi-
tatu Warf? an. regni regis H. quinto, in fine rotuli.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 289


assise shall not on that aecount be stayed in his person,
to wit, of the heir, although he cannot answer to the
assise : the roason for this 1s, that his ancestor was never
seysed of the tenement, which he ought to warrant, in
fee. And that it is so, may be seen in the iter of Martin
de Pateshull in the county of Suffolk in the twelfth year
of king Henry, an assise of mortdancester, if Roger of
Gloucester. On this bears an assise in the iter of the
same judge in the same year in the county of Norfolk.
Likewise if the heir of a chief lord be in seysine and
under age and an assise is brought against him imme-
diately, the assise shall not be stayed on account of his
age, as in the iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county
of Kent in the tenth year of: king Henry, an assise of
mortdancester, if Emma the mother of Roger. The same
thing may be said of any heir, who is under age, con-
cerning all things whereof his ancestor did not die
seysed as of fee, but, when of fee, he shall not answer to
the assise before he is of full age in & cause of possession
&s here, whether the tenement be a socage tenement or
& military fief, as in the iter of the abbot of Reading
and Martin de Pateshull in the county of Leicester, an
assise of mortdancester, if Walter the son of William.
And in the same way it may be said concerning a bur-
gage tenement, according to the difference of the burgage
-Lenure, nor are they bound to answer to a writ of right
in & cause of property under age (as it seems) before
they are of full age, to wit, twenty-one years. But if
such persons who have held in socage or burgage tenure,
When they are of full age according to socage or burgage
tenure, have made donations, it is questioned whether
they ean recall them when they have arrived at majo-
rity, to wit, the age of twenty-one years, as if they had
made donations of & military fief. I should say not in
certain places, as may be seen in the iter of Martin de
Pateshull in the county of Warwick in the fifth year
of the reign of king Henry, at the end of the Roll. But
Q 1302, T


f. 275 b.


8.
Si minor
contra
majorem.


minorem,
quod dis-
tinguen-
dum dé
Seysina
mortui
tenentis.


290 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


He autem qus dieta sunt locum habent in herede
masculo. De fcmina veró herede & infrà statem
existente non omninó sic. De quibus autem minor
infrà etatem respondere debeat dicetur pleniüs infrà,
de exceptionibus.

Si veró minor agat contra majorem, nee tune locum
habebit essonium contra minorem in persona majoris
qui tenent, nec si defaltam fecerit major, locum habe-
bit resummonitio magis quàm essonium. In primo die
capiatur assisa, & ideà, quia si presens esset minor,
nihil dicere posset major quare assisa remaneret. Et
cüm minor per assisam recuperaverit ut de feodo, de
jure & proprietate ante plenam setatem non responde-
bit ad breve de recto nee majori nec minori, sicub nec
de aliquo alio placito, ubi posset sine recuperatione
exhsredari

Si autem minor petat conira minorem per assisam,
bene tenebit ibi assisa in persona minoris petentis.
De minore autem qui est in seysina videndum est,
qualiter adeptus est seysinam, utrum de facto suo
proprio quód disseysinam fecerit vel infrà seteatem sit
feoffatus, de quibus infrà dicetur. ltem si antecessor
suus, cujus seysinam habuerit, obiit seysitus ut. de feodo
vel alio modo. Si autem ut de feodo, non respondebit
ante statem, secundüm quod superiüs dieitur in prin- .
cipio, si major petat contra minorem. Si autem non
in feodo, sed alio modo sieut in vadio, vel ad vitam,
vel ad terminum, vel si minor inde feoffatus fuit: ca-
pietur assis& eodem die, sive venerit sive non, quia
neq, essonium habet locum neq, resummonitio. Sed?
qualiter & per quod breve sumoniri debeat placitum
de warantia, càm hzres domini capitalis ad :etatem


1 * tenet," MS. Rawl. C. 160. ing of MS. Rawl. C. 160, but is
*** Sedqualiteretperquod breve," | omitted in MS. Rawl, C. 159, and
down to * Teste, &c.," is the read- | in MS. Crewe. | '


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 201


these things as stated above have & place in the case
of & male heir, But in the case of & female heir and
one under age itis not altogether so. But concerning
what things & minor heir under age ought to answer
will be stated more fully below, concerning exceptions.


But if & minor proceeds against & major, neither will
an essoin have place in the person of the major who is
the tenant against the minor, nor if the major has made
defaulb will à resummons have place any more than an
essoin, and on the first day let the assise be held, and for
this reason, because if the minor were present the major
eould allege nothing wherefore. the assise should be
slayed. And when the minor has recovered by an
assise as of fee, he shall not answer concerning the
right and the property before his full age to & writ of
right neither to & major nor to a minor, nor concern-
ing any other plea where he might be without recovery
put out of his inheritance.


But if & minor claim against a minor by an assise,
the assise will there hold good in the person of the
minor claimant, But concerning the minor who is in
Sseysine i& is to be seen how he has obtained seysine,
whether by his own act that he has effected a dissey-
Sine, or has been enfeoffed whilst under age, concerning
which it wil be explained below. Likewise if his
ancestor, whose seysine he has, died seysed as of fee or
in some other manner. But if as of fee, he will not
answer before full age according to what is said above in


. the beginning, if à major claims against & minor. But if


not in fee but in some other manner, as in pledge, or
for life, or for & term, or if the minor has been enfeoffed
therewith, the assise shall be held on the same day
whether he has come or not, because neither an essoin


has place nor & resummons. But how and by what


writ the plea concerning warranty ought to be sum-
moned, when the heir of the chief lord has come to
T2


8.
If a minor
claims
againsta& -
major.


4.

Jf a minor
claims

ainst a
md that
8, distinc-
tion is to
be made
concerning
the seysine


0
deceased
tenant.


299 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


pervenerit videndum. Breve tale erit, Summoneas
per bonos summonitores A. filium & heredem B. qui
plenz setatis est (ut dicitur) quód sit &ec. ad waranti-
zandum C. tantum terre cum pertinentiis in tali villa,
quam D. de N. in curia nostra tali apud talem locum
recuperavit versus eundem C. per assisam mortis ante-
cessoris inde ibi inter eos captam. Et unde idem C.
dum fuit in seysing& de eadem terra, vocavit inde ad
warantum przedictum À., & remansit placitum de wa-
rantia per judicium curie nostre usq, ad statem prz-
dicti À., quia priüs respondere non potuit ad warantiam.
Teste, &c.


f. ii Carp. XV.


T is z Cum .autem plures sint tenentes in assisa mortis
sint peten- 8Intecessoris & plures petentes, aut sunt omnes infrà
ad deg setatem vel quidam illorum, & tune videndum si prop-
assisa mor- ter tetatem unius, sive fuerit petens sive tenens, debeat
is niece" remanere assisa, ac si omnes essent infrà statem. Et
. . tune videndum utrum participes fuerint qui petunt
vel qui tenent, vel extranei. ltem si participes, utrum

divisa sit hsreditas vel indivisa, & sive sit ibi unus

hseeres ex pluribus petentibus infrà statem vel plures

vel omnes, non propter minorem etatem petentium
remanebit assise, cüm hereditas fuerit divisa, preter-

quam contra dominum capitalem, quia assisam dedicere

non poterit, quod quidem non erit in causa propriéta-

tis. Si autem tenens fuerit unus vel plures & omnes

infrà setatem, & teneant in communi & pro indiviso,
remanebit assisa usque ad statem omnium, quia sunt

quasi unus heres. Si autem teneant pro diviso & qui-

libet seiat partem suam, quilibet respondeat pro parte

sua, sed setas omnium ipsorum vel unius non erit ex-


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 298


full age, is to be seen. The writ will be of this kind:
Summon by good summoners Á. the son and heir of
B, who is of full age (as is said), that he be present
&c. to warrant for C. so much land with its appurte-
nances in such a vill, which D. of N. in such a court
of ours at such & place recovered against the said C.
by an assise of mortdancester there held thereon between
them. And whereof the said C. whilst he was in seysine
of the same land called the aforesaid A. to warrant, and
the plea concerning the warranty was stayed by & judg-
ment of our court until the coming of age of the afore-
said A., who could not previously have answered to the
warranty. Wiiness, &c. |


CuaPrER XV. E


But when there are several tenants in & cause of 1.
mortdancester and several claimants, they are either all E d
under age or some of them, and then it is to be seen if claimants
on account of the age of one of them, whether he be a nd Several
claimant or & tenant, the assise ought to be stayed as if sn assise
they were all under age. And then it is to be seen dis tan
whether those who claim or those who hold are par- 9ncestor.
ceners or exiraneous. Likewise if they are parceners,
whether the inheritance is divided or undivided, and
whether there be there one heir out of several claimants
under age or several or all, the assise shall not be stayed
on account of the minority of the claimants, when the
inheritance has been divided, except against the chief
lord, because he cannot gainsay the assise, which will not
be the case in à cause of property. Butifthe tenants have
been one or several and all under age, and they hold in
common and in an undivided estate, the assise shall be
stayed until the full age of all, because they are as it
were one heir. But if they hold in divided portions,
and each knows his own portion, let each answer for his
own portion, but the full age of all of them or of one is


294 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS,


pectanda, sive placitum fuerit super possessione vel
" Super proprietate de recto: & quia sunt quasi unus
heres ea ratione quód unum jus habent, nullus sine alio
poterit responderé nec debet, si teneant simul & pro
indiviso. Si autem plures sint filie & hzeredes & petant
per assisam versus capitalem dominum, ille que sunt
plene setatis obtinebunt: ille veró que sunt infra sta-
iem in custodia remanebunt, & successivó cüm ad
etatem pervenerint habeant partem suam per breve-de
proparte & non per assisam, versus exiraneos autem
si petierint, licet infrà etatem fuerint, procedet assisa
non obstante etate. Sunt etiam plures exceptiones &
responsiones conira assisam & que sunt communes ad
omnia placita, de quibus infrà pleniüs dicetur. Si
autem contingat quàd plures sunt participes qui tene-
ant & plures qui petant, & secundüm quod res que
petitur teneatur pro indiviso in communi vel pro diviso,
si aliquis eorum in brevi non fuerit nominatus sive
petens fuerit sive tenens, quid agendum sit in tali
casu infrà dicetur pleniüs, de exceptionibus secundüm
quod hereditas divisa fuerit inter participes. Et in
quo Casu, non oportet in brevi nominare nisi tantüm
ilos qui tenent rem petitam, licet sine participibus
suis respondere non teneantur, & qui per aliud breve


summonendi sunt ad respondendum & sine quibus &e.-
Et sic dici poterit de pluribus participibus, si unus.


petat, quod sine aliis ei respondere ! non debeat. Sed
in hoe casu, nisi omnes qui sequi debent in brevi no-
minentur, cadit breve & assisa. Et eodem modo si
plures tenentes sint qui teneant pro indiviso, nisi om-
nes nominentur, cadib breve omninó. Sed quid si cüm
omnes nominentur in brevi cüm teneant vel petant in


1e responderi," MS. Raw]. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 295


nob to be waited for, whether the plea be about the
possession or &bout the property concerning the right,
&nd because they are all as it were one heir, by reason
that they have one right, none can answer without the
other, nor ought he to answer, if they are tenants together
in an undivided estate. Butif there are several daughters
and heiresses and they claim by an assise against the chief
lord, those who are of full age shall prevail, but those
who are under age shall remain in wardship, and let
them have their part successively when they have come
of age by & writ of partition a&nd not by an assise; but
if they have claimed against extraneous persons, al-
though they may be under age, the assise shall proceed
notwithstanding their age. "There are also several.ex-
ceplions and answers against an assise, and which are
common io all pleas, concerning which it will be ex-
plained more fully below. But if it happens that there
are severalparceners who hold and several who claim,
and aecording as the estate which is claimed is held
undivided in common, or is divisible, if any of them
have been named in the writ whether he be a claim-
ant or & tenant, what is to be done in such a case will
be explained more fully in treating of exceptions, ac-
cording as the inheritance has been divided amongst the
parceners. And in which case it is not ineumbent to
name in the writ any but those who hold the estate
claimed, although they may not be bound to answer
without their co-parceners, and who are to be summoned
by another writ to answer,&nd without whom, &e. And
S0 iv may be said of several co-parceners, if one claims,
that he ought not to answer him without the others.
But in his ease, unless all who follow are named in the
writ,the writ &nd the assise falls, And in the same
manner if there are several tenants who hold an undi-
vided estate, unless all are named, the writ falls alto-
gether. But what if, when all are named in the writ,
since. they hold or claim in common, one should die,


de amet Tuo de aes HEMDEN D 00V


f. 276 b.


bh
De excep-
tionibus
extraneis,
ut de ex-
ceptione
feloniee,


Britton, iii.
ch. xxii.51.


296 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSOBIS.


communi, unus moriatur licet pars morientis per jus
accrescendi accrescere debeat superstitibus cüm obtinu-
erint, tamen cadit breve propter partem morientis
quàm tenuit cüm aliis in communi, & càm pars cujus-
libet ipsorum per hoc quasi ex nova successione aug-


mientetur, alia actione & nova opus erit. Breve autem


de summonendo participe inferius.


Car, XVI.


Dictum est supra de exceptionibus quee proveniunt
ex articulis brevis, ubi capitur assis& in modum assise:
nune autem videndum de exceptionibus qus à casu
proveniunt & aliunde, perimit autem omninó assisam
mortis antecessoris objectio feloniz, ut $i pater, mater,
vel alius antecessor, de morte cujus locum haberet


assisa, feloniam fecerit, quia tales nihil transmittere


possunt ad hseredes suos, si fuerit convieta.  Forisfa-
ciunt enim suis hseredibus quicquid eis acciderit tem-
pore felonig, tam jus quàm seysinam simul, vel etiam


jus merum per se, cüm acciderit sine assis&! Item


non solum quiequid ei accidit, sed quiequid aecidere
potuit ab aliquo antecessore, sicut videri poterit mani-
festà. Esto g filius & hsres in vita patris sui feloniam
fecerit & obierit in vita palris, licet videatur prima
facie q alii post eum Rhseredes patris communis pro-
pinqui incipiant post mortem suam esse propinquiores,
tum quia nihil juris vel seysinme descendere potuit
feloni vivente patre communi, tum quia non expecta-
vit q esset hsres, videtur q tales incipiant. esse - hzere-
des propinquiores, q est verum. Sed si contingat
filum felonis vel alium heredem de morte avi, vel


! ** sine seisina," MS. Rawl. C. 160, and Crewe and Reg. 9, E. xv.


D——


»


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 207


although the portion of the deceased by the right of
&ccretion ought to accrue to the survivors, when they
have prevailed, nevertheless the writ falls on account of
the portion of the deceased, which he held in common
with the others and since the portion of each is aug-
mented by this as ib were from a new succession, there
will be need of another and a fresh action. But a writ
for summoning a co-parcener will be given below.


CHAPTER XVI. .-— f. 276 b.


We have spoken above of exceptions which arise on 1.
the articles of the writ when the assise is held in the Of**-.
manner of an assise. Now indeed we' must see con- exceptions,


cerning exceptions which arise casually and from with- pido uh
out, but an objection of felony puts an end to an assise of felony.
of mortdaneester, as if & father, or mother, or other
ancestor, concerning whose death an assise would have
place, has committed a felony, because such persons
cannot transmit anything to their heirs, if felony has
been proved against them. For they forfeit for their
heirs whatever belonged to them at the time of the
felony, as well the right and the seysine together, or
even the mere right by itself, when ib belonged to them
without the seysine. Likewise not only whatever did
belong to them, but whatever might belong to them
from any àncestor,as may be clearly seen. Let it be
that & son and heir has in the lifetime of his father
committed & felony and has died in tbe lifetime of his
father, although it might seem at first sight that others
who after him are near heirs of & common father
commence to be after his death next heirs, as well be-
eause no right or seysine could descend to a felon whilst
the common father was alive, as well because he did not
wait to become heir, it seems that such others commence
to be next heirs, which is true. Butif it happens that
the son of the felon or another heir upon the death of the


9.
De diversis
casibus.


298 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS,


fratrem felonis de morte patris communis pelere, cüm
felo liberos habuerit, vel si patrem supervixerit, cüm
nullus h;redum istorum poterit esse propinquior hseres
nisi ratione juris meri ad ipsum descedentis, sivé petat
per assisam mortis antecessoris, sive per breve de recto,
cadit ab utroq, cüm sie fieri debeat computatio descen-
sus juris meri ab antecessore saltem. Et unde talis
seysitus fuit; ut de feodo & jure, & de tali descendit
vel descendere debuit tali premortuo, s. qui feloniam
commisit, quod esse non poterit, Et unde si heres
qui feloniam fecerit in viia patris vel alterius anteces-
soris relietis liberis moriatur vel post, cadit omninó
&ssisa in persona aliorum hseredum. Sed conira vide-
tur: ut de itinere W. de Ralegh in cof Kanc., assisa
mortis antecessoris, si Ádhelolphus,? ubi dicitur q felo-
nia antecessoris non impedit seysinam heredis nec
succession. Sed hoo est speciale in coi Kanc. de tene-
mentis, quz tenentur in gavelkynd;? si ille qui felonià
fecerit judicium sustinuerit, quod secus est alibi in
casu supradicto: ut de ultimo itinere M. de P. in coi
Kanc., assisa mortis antecessor!s, si H. filius Yaonis*
de tenemento in Stronby, predictus Henrieus filius
Wilhelmi nomine, qui forisfecit terram, & unde fuit in
seysina, quia falsavit sigillum dni M., & sorores tule-
runt assisam de morte antecessoris, s. patris comunis.


Alius casus. Quidam petiit teiitum quoddam p assi-
S&m mortis antecessoris de morte avunculi sui, respon-
sum. fuit ei ex parte adversa q ipse petere non potuit,
quia ipse avunculus suus habuit quendam fratrem
superstitem, qui fuit heres propinquior. Et ipse econ-
irario replieando respondit, q ipse frater avunculi sui


' 1€ gntecessore. Scilicet, et unde," 3 « A delophus,? MS. Raw1.C.160.


MS. Rawl, C. 160 and Crewe and 5 « gavelykind," MS. id.
Reg. 9, E. xv. | * filius Yuonis," MS. :d.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 299


grandfather, or à brother of the felon upon the death of
the common father claims, when the felon has sons, or if
he has survived his father, since none of those heirs
could.be next heir except in respect of the mere right
descending to himself, whether he claims by an assise of
mortdancester, or by & writ of right, he falls from each,
since the computation of the descent of the mere right
ought to be made from his ancestor, to wit, *and
whereof such a person was seysed as of fee and of right,
and it descends from so-and-so or ought to descend from
80-and-so who is predeceased, to wit, who has committed
the felony," which cannot be. And hence if the heir
who has eommitted the felony in the lifetime of the
father or other ancestor or after it, should die leaving
children, the assise falls altogether in the person of the
other heirs. But it seems to the contrary, as in an iter
of William de Ralegh in the county of Kent, an assise
of the death of an ancestor, if Adhelolphus, where it is
said that the felony of an ancestor does not impede the :
Seysine nor the succession of an heir. But this is spe-
cial in the county of Kent concerning tenements which
aáre held in gavelkind, if he who has committed the
felony has suffered judgment, which is otherwise else-
where in the case above mentioned, as in the last iter
of Martin de Pateshull in the county of Kent, an assise
of mortdancester, if Henry the son of Yao, concerning
& tenement in Stronby, the aforesaid Henry the son of
William by name, who forfeited a land, and of which he
was in seysine, because he forged the seal of Lord M.,
&nd his sisters brought an assise of mortdancester on
the death of their common father. |


Ánother case. .À ceriain person claimed & certain ^ 2.
lenement by an assise of mortdancester on the death of pras
his uncle, ib was answered to him on the adverse side cesses.
that he could not claim, because his uncle had a certain
brother who was his next heir. And he on the contrary


in his replication answered, that the bróther of his uncle


-


f. 277.


300 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


ita fuit mente alienatus q quendam hominé interfecit,
ita q fuit ppetus prisonz deputatus. Et unde judiciü
petitü fuit ex parte adversa, si in vit& avuüculi possit
petere p assisam, judiciü positum fui& in respectum
corá rege, ubi nihil actum fuit, quia fort mulier non
fuit prosecuta: ut de itinere M. de Patesh. in com
Eborum ano regis H. xii, assisa mortis anteeessoris, si
Odo filius Thorsin! Item alius casus. Frater post-
natus petiit terram per assisam mortis versus fratrem
antenatum de seysina fratris medii, quia frater ante-
natus non potuit esse hseres & dominus, licet heres
propinquior, quia non potuit cum eo tenementum re-
manere ppter homagium: ut de itinere episcopi Dun-
el & M. de P. in eoi Eborum anno regis H. 3,
assisa mortis si Rogerus de Amundevil? ubi dicitur q
assisa non jacet, sed habet locum breve de recto. Et
notandu q fratri antenato competit assisa mortis ante-
cessoris versus extraneas personas & non conjunctas
sive ipse:(quieung, fuerit in seysina) feoffator extiterit


Sive aliquis antecessor communis de quo ei descendit


hereditas, non obstáte eo q ipse homagium ceperit vel
antecessor comunis cujus hsres ipse fuerit, & ipse sem-
per habebit primam seysinam, quicunq, fuerit in sey-
sina, conjuncta persona vel alius, dum tamen si con-
juncta persona, tune competit ei breve de recto, si
exiranea, assisa morüis antecessoris. Nec valet excep-
tio si dieatur quód ipse non possit esse hseeres & domi-
nus, quia nulli copetit assisa moriüis antecessoris nisi
primogenito, nec breve de recto, quia ille semper habet
majus jus. Sed cüm ipse seysinam habuerit, tunc


! * filius Thorsini" MS, Rawl. ? ** Amundevyl," MS. :d.
C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 301


was 80 affécted by mental alienation that he killeda .


man, so that he was consigned to perpetual imprison-
ment. And hence judgment was sought by the adverse
party, if he could claim by an assise in the life-
time of his uncle, the judgment was placed by reference
before the king, where nothing was .done, because per-
chance the woman did not follow up the prosecution,
as in the iter of Martin de Pateshullin the county of
York in the twelfth year of king Henry, an assise of
the death of an ancestor, if Odo the son of Thorsin.
Likewise another case. An after-born brother claimed
land by an assise of mortdancester against an elder-born
brother from the seysine of an intermediate brother,
because the elder-born brother could not be both heir and
lord, although he was the next heir, because the tene-
ment could not stay with him on account of the homage,
as in the iter of the bishop of Durham and Martin de
Pateshullin the county of York in the third year of the
reign of king Henry, an assise of mortdancester, if
Roger de Amundevil, where it is said that an assise does


. not lie, but. & writ of right has place. Anditisto be.


noted that an elder-born brother is entitled to an assise
of the death of an ancestor against persons who are ex-
iraneous and not relations, whether he himself (whoever
was in seysine) has been the feoffor or some common an-
cester from whom the inheritance descends, notwithstand-
ing the fact that he himself has received the homage or
the common ancestor whose heir he is, and he shall always
have the first seysine, whoever may have been in sey-
sine, & relation or another person, provided that if it be
& relation, then he is entitled to a writ of right, but if &
stranger in blood, then to an assise of mortdancester.
Nor does the exception avail, if it be said that he can-
not be heir and lord, because no person is entitled to an
assise of mortdancester except the firstborn son, nor to
& writ of right, because he has always the greater right.
But when he has the seysine, then in the first place &


f. 271.


2302 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS,


primó locum habebit versus eum breve de recto pro
hserede propinquiore filio vel filia, fratre vel sorore, &
si excipiat q ppinquior heres sit ppter jus merum,
replieari poterit e contrario ab herede suo ppinquiore,
q ipse non potest esse heres & dominus ppter homa-
giu. Si autem nullum homagium intervenerit, ut si
filio primogenito concedatur tenementum ab antecessore
comuni ad se sustentandum vel p servitio sive homa-
gio, aliud erit, Item eodem modo si heres & filius
primogenitus sequi voluerit versus dominum capitalem
vel extraneum cüm fuerit in seysina: ali hzredes
nunquam actionem habebunt in vita primogeniti, quia


' ille majus jus habet &ec. Et notandum q cüm de manu


sua & seysina semel fiat descensus ad propinquiores
tune existentes, nunquam propter heredem aliquem


magis propinquum supervenientem aufertur. ltem ca-


sus Soror petit per assisam mortis antecessoris ver-
sus nepotem filium sororis su: de morte sororis, qui
respondet ad assisam q fuit filius & heres legitimus
matris sus sororis petentis per assisam, & cui fuit
responsum quód heeres esse non potuit quia pater suus
fuit villanus, & qui? hoc spectavit ad jus, non jacuit
assisa mortis antecessoris: ut de itinere M. de P. in
com Line, ano regis H. x., assis& mortis, si Agnes filia
Elie de Beningwoorth. Sed quare non potuit inquiri
per assisam in modum juratz captam utrum talis esset
vel non, sieut de bastardo, licet de statu alicujus post
mortem suam agi non possit, bene potuit de hoc fieri
inquisitio: ut de itinere ejusdem M. aio regis H. x,
assisa mortis antecessoris, si W. de Carl, & hoc sine
alia pbatione. ltem casus. Mulieri petenti p assisam


l*Item casus, omitted MS. 3 « et quia," MS. Rawl. C. 160.
Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 3808


writ of right 8hall have place against him on behalf of
the next heir, & son or & daughter, a brother or a sister,
and if he shall except that he is the next heir on account
of the absolute right, ib may be replied to him adversely
by his next heir, that he cannot be both heir and lord on
account of the homage. But if no homage has inter-
vened, as if à tenement has been 'granted to & firstborn
. 8on by a common ancestor to support himself or for a
service or homage, it will be another thing. Likewise
in the same manner, if an heir and firstborn son wishes
io do suit to the chief lord or a stranger in blood, when
he is in seysine, the other heirs shall never have an
&ction in the lifetime of the elder-born, because he has
the greater right, &c. And it is to be noted that, when
from his hand &nd seysine there is once & descent to
nexj heirs then existing, it is never taken away on
account of some more near heir supervening. Likewise -
& case, .Á sister claims by an assise of mortdancester
against à nephew the son of her sister upon the death of
the sister, who answers to the assise that he is the son
and lawful heir of his mother, the sister of the claimant
by the assise, and to whom it was answered that he
could not be heir because his father was a villein, and
because this had regard to his right, an assise of mort.
dancester did not lie, as in the iter of Martin de Pates-
hull in the county of Lincoln in the tenth year of king
Henry, an assise of mortdancester, if Agnes the daughter.
of Elias of Beningwoorth. But wherefore could not an
inquisition be made by an assise held after the manner
ofa jury whether he was such or not, as concerning &
bastard, although proceedings cannot be had eoncerning
the status of any one after his death, concerning this an
inquisition could have been properly made, as in the
iter of the same Martin in the tenth year of king Henry,
an assise of the death of an ancestor, if William of
Carlisle, and this without any other proof. Likewise a
case. Toa woman claiming by an assise ib is objected


304 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


objicit q nepotes habet ex sorore, qui tantü juris ha-
bent quantum ipsa petens, replicatum fuit ex parte
petentis q predicta soror desponsata fuit cuidam vil-
lano, et it&à q pueri villani sunt, si de hoc constiterit
p assisam in modum ;jurate captam vel confessionem
£277». puerorum, remanebit assisa: ut de ultimo itinere W.
de Ralegh in coi Buck., assisa mortis, si Henricus
Russel Item alius casus!  Petenti p assisam mortis
objectum fuit q pater ejus villanus fuit, ad q fuit à
petente replicatum g liber fuit, quia franchiatus est q
terra qua petiit descendit ei ex parte matris qus libera
fuit, positum fuit judiciü apud W.? & ibi concordati
sunt: ut de ultimo itinere M. de P. in coim Linc., assisa
mortis si Leonata de tenemento in Weston. $Si quis
se eognoverit in judieio semel ad villanum, semper in
omni casu pro villano judicabitur: ut de itinere M
de P. de loquela, qu; fuit ad judicium in diversis
cof anno regis H. 3. in com Dors. de Hamelino filio


Radulphi.
3. Petenti per assisam objectum fuit q habuit fratrem
eim in partibus transmarinis antenatü, juratores dubitant


pedi in utrum mortuus sit vel non, conceditur petenti seysina
ircsmaci sub tali conditione, q Si redierit frater antenatus q sine
nisetjura- placito habeat seysinam suam: ut de itinere W. de


dubi-
iesus : Ralegh in cof Buck., assisa& mortis, si Richardus * Fa-


peieie E ber. Sed esto g frater postnatus moriatur antequam
vivens &ntenatus redierit (hzrede infrà «setatem existente),


fuerit, fiat quiero an expectanda sit setas propter factum justicia-
minori
seysina — riorum, Eodem modo, si per dominum capitalem habu-


ied oma" erit soror seysinam hereditatis ubi nihil scitur de


l«Ttem alius casus," omitted | ^ :
MS. Rawl. C. 160. E ipei Rawl, C. 160. e


2« quia (Íranchiatus, et quia E
quia franc : q T. M
« terra," MS. Rawl. C. 160. Robertus," MS. Rawl, C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 905


that she has nephews out of a sister, who have as much
right as the claimant herself, it was replied on the part
of the claimant that the aforesaid sister was espoused
to à certain villein, and therefore that the children are
villeins, if this has been ascertained by an assise held
after the manner of a jury or by the confession of the
ehildren, the assise will be stayed, as in the last iter of f.277b.
William de Ralegh in the county of Bucks, an assise of
moridancester, if Henry Russel Likewise another case,
To à claimant by an assise it was objected that his
father was a villein, to which it was replied by the
claimant that he was free, because he was enfranchised,
that the land which he claims descends to him from tho
side of his mother who was free, the judgment was held at
Westminster, and there they came toan accord ; asin the
last iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county of Lincoln,
an assise of mortdancester, if Leonata concerning a tene-
ment in Weston. 1f a person has once admitted himself
in & judgment to bea villein, he will be adjudged in
every case to be a villein, as in the iter of Martin de
Pateshull concerning the trial which was brought : into
court in different counties in the third year of king
Henry, in the county of Dorset, concerning Hamelin the
son of Ralph.


To a claimant by an assise it was objected that he had 3.


an elder-born brother in parts beyond the sea, the jurors But if the
: elder-born


doubt whether he is dead or not, the seysine is allowed is beyond
to the elaimant under a condition, that if the elder-born pe
brother should return, he shall have his: seysine without jurors have


à plea, as in the iter of William de Ralegh in the county Id is
of Bueks, an assise of mortdancester, if Richard F'aber. be alive or
But let it be, that the after-born brother dies before the d
elder-born has returned. (there existing &n heir under seysine be

age), I ask whether the full age of the heiris to be waited pad
. for on account of the act of the justiciaries. In the same
manner, if through the chief lord a sister has had Seysine
of an inheritance, where nothing is known of a brother

Q1302. - U


306 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


fratre utrum vivus sib an mortuus, & ipsa seysita
moriatur (herede infrà szetatem existente) si frater re- .
dierit, qu;ero an sit sias expectanda, cüm jam consti-
terit (sicut. in casu superiore) q antecessores talium
propinquiores hzredes! non fuerint antecessorum pree-
cedentiü. Et revera expectanda erit setas in persona
eorum, eum ipsorum antecessores seysiti obierint quasi
de feodo. Sed contrarium coram rege & consilio suo
apud West. anno regis H. 13. de heredibus Johannis
de Munmew, q stas non expectabitur si justior hzeres
eomparuerit, sed hoc non fuit de jure sed de consilio
eurie & ex concessione antecessoris illius minoris.


CA». XVII.


Ro Vertitur assisa mortis antecessoris multotiens in ju-
Quando | ratam multis de causis, & eodem modo sieut assisa
tisante-  novge disseysinee, secundüm q superiüs dictum est.
Miete Quandog per modum donationis secundüm q poterit
juratam, casus poni, & ubi per modum donationis fcemina prw-


mi fertur masculo in successione, verbi gratia. A. dedit
sis, et ^^ in maritagium cum D. fiia sua quandam terram cui-
donations dam C. & hseredibus ipsorum communibus de ipsis
In 258/5272 duobus exeuntibus, B. habuit quandam filia ex primo
Britoniiü, viro D. nomine, & mortuo primo viro postea nupsit
"T *X! alteri P de quo habuit queda filiü E. noine, mortua B.
& D. filia de primo viro in seysina existente, arrama-
vit E. assisam mortis super eandem D. Ex parte
cujus responsum fuit, q predictus E. nihil juris inde
clamare potuit, quia terra illa data fuit in maritagium
C. patri suo cum B. matre sua & heredibus de ipsis


duobus exeuntibus, responsum fuit ex adverso, quód


! * hgeredes talium," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 907


whether he is alive or dead, and she dies seysed (her heir
being under age) if the brother has returned, I ask whe-
ther the full age of the heir is to be waited for, when it
has been already ascertained (as in the former case) that -
- the ancestors of such persons have not been next heirs of
the ancestors preceding them. — And in truth the full age
will have to be expected in the person of them, as their
ancestor died seysed as of fee. But the contrary was
adjudged before the king and his council at Westminster


.. inthe thirteenth year of king Henry concerning the heirs


of John de Munmew, that the full age should not be
waited for, if a more lawful heir has appeared, but this
was not of right, but of the court's decision and upon the
concession of an ancestor of that minor.


^


CHAPTER XVII.


Àn assise of mortdancester is on many occasions turned
into à jury for many causes and in the same manner as an


assise of novel disseysine, according to what has been said mortdan-


above. Sometimes through the mode of donation accord-


ing as thé case may be put, and where through the mode Suy and
of donation a female is preferred to & male in the succes- qssise ^el


sion,forexample. A. gave as a marriage portion with his


daughter B. & certain land to & certain C.'and to their of the


common heirs sprung from tliem both. B. had à daughter 7


by her first husband D. by name, and her first. husband the assise.


having died she afterwards married another, by whom
She had a certain son E. by name. Upon the death of B.
and upon D. the daughter by the first husband being in
Seysine, E. instituted an assise of mortdancester against
the said D. Upon whose part it was answered that the
aforesaid E. could claim no right therein, because that
land was given as & marriage portion to C. her father
with B. her mother and to the heirs springing from them
both ; it was replied on the opposite side, that it was given
U 2


308 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


alio modo datum fuit in maritagium cum ipsa B.

f.278. matre communi & hsredibus de ipsa B. exeuntibus.

Quo casu, quia fuerint frater & soror de una eademq,
matre quamvis diverso patre, consideratum fuit ultimo
itinere M. de P. in coii Suff. quód assisa non jacuit
inter eos sed quód fieret inquisitio per patriam, & non
p assisam de modo donationis: assisa mortis antecesso-
ris, si Philippa de Cokfend matre Roberti.!

"H Cadit etiam in assisam bastardia, per quod vertitur
Si pastar-  nssisa in juratem, ut si frater antenatus tulerit, assisam
assisam. — super fratrem postnatum de altero viro, vel e converso

de morte matris ipsorum comunis, & respondeatur ab

: antenato q ipse sib primogenitus matris ipsorum, quam-

vis ab altero viro, & replieetur à postnato q ipse

heres esse non possit, quia pater suus matrem ipsorum

ecomunem nunquam desponsavit, hoc per assisam in

modum juratze de consensu utrius, partis captam de-
clarabitur, ut de itinere M. de P. in coii Salop. .


3. Item vertitur assis& in juratam, si quis assisam arra-

Rise 4€ maverit versus dominum suum, & ipse respondeat q
, T" * c . e.
utrumtene- nihil clamat nisi custodiam, & replicetur contra eum
mentum, de . : :
quo PPAR g custodia ad ] ipsum BH pertineat, e) q tenementum
arramatur, illud tenetur in socagio. Ad q si dominus respondeat,
tenentur in : ! . . : à
socagio vel d 1DSe & antecessores sui prius inde eustodiam habue-
person. runt, super uitroq, easu fiet inquisitio per assisam in
ti m ili- . DL e " $ "
tme, —— modum jurate, scilice&, si terra illa sit socagium vel
non, & si sit socagium, tune de seysina talis & ante-


cessorum Suorum,.


4. Item vertitur assisa in juratam propter exceptionem
ExcPi^ venditionis, ut si quis petat per assisam mortis, &
tionis. ^ exeipiatur q petens habuit fratrem antenatum, qui ha-


1 * Philippa de Cokesend mater Roberti," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


^ OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 309


in another manner as & marriage portion with B. their
common mother and to the heirs springing from her body.  f.278.
In which case, because they were brother and sisterfrom
the same mother, though by a different father, it was

held in the last iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county

of Suffolk that an assise did not lie between them, but

that an inquisition should be made by the country and

not by an assise concerning the mode of donation. Àn

assise of mortdancester, if Philippa de Cokfend, the mother

of Robert. |j


Bastardy also falls into an assise, through which the | 2.  -
assise is turned into & jury,as if an elder-born Vrother areae
has brought an assise against a younger-born brother by 2n assise.
another husband, or conversely, concerning the death of
the common mother of them both, and it be answered by
the elder-born that he is the firstborn of their mother,
although by another husband, and. it be replied by the
after-born that he cannot be the heir because his father
did not espouse their common mother, this shall be
declared by an assise held after the manner of & jury
with the consent of each party, as in the iter of Martin
de Pateshull in the county of Salop.

Likewise an assise is turned into à jury if any one has , 9..
instituted an assise against his lord, and the latter answers pie
that he claims nothing but the wardship, and it be idcis
replied to him that the wardship does not belong to him, hired
because the tenement is in socage. To which íf the lord ment, con-
should answer that he and his ancestors have previously which a
had the wardship thereof, an inquisition shall be made eril :
upon each case, by an assise after the manner of a jury, is held in
to wit, if that land be socage or not, and if it be socage, inilio |
then concerning the seysine of such person and of his tenure.
ancestors.


Likewise an assise is turned into a jury on account of 4.


- : : * 4,4 Àn excep-
an exception of a sale, as if any one claims by an assise Gouos


of mortdancester, and i& be excepted that the claimant sale.


4 mL n e ai CM WR EO 8 e Red UM geo a. MAT pego. gue ua AAT ams an ecce Wem mam pre aper yn Farm ratinal, Capp v con coc gay, UU (WE yo mor LL
j


910 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


Britton Hi. bitus fuit pro herede & seysitus de eadem terra, &
$4. . ilam postmodum vendidit ipsi tenenti: ut de ultimo
itinere M. de P. in cof Suff, assisa mortis antecessoris,

si Walter? Curteys. Si autem fiat replicatio à petente,

q talis qui donationem fecisse debuit nunquam fuit

inde in seysing de eadem terra, vel si fuit in seysina

& donationem fecit, ipse donatorius nunquam seysinam

habuit in vita donatoris, vel quid tale. ltem si ante-

 eessor recognoverit vel remiserit & quietum clamaverit.

Item si pueri illius, qui dicit se tenere per legem An-

glie, convieti fuerint ad bastardos. Ite si qusestio

cebatis, quzestio status, conventio sive convictio, finis

faetus, res judicata, vel quid tale qus» pveniut exira

assisá & fuerit disseétio inter partes, ubi tenens dicit

unum & petens contrariü, de consensu partium verti-

tur assisa in juratam, & sic terminatur negotium &

Britton ib, Suffieit exempli causa. Item vertitur assisa mortis an-
i tecessoris quandog, in juratam ppter partum supposi-
tum, utsi eüm verus heres fuerit in possessione, partus
suppositus, scilicet aliquis vel aliqua, qui se fecerint
heredem alieujus eü non sint, portaverint assisam

super veru hered&. Eodem modo ppter partum adul-
lerinum, ut si dum maritus fuerit in remotis agens,

vel tali infirmitate detentus q generare non possit, sit

aliquis qui habeat accessum ad uxorem de quo pregnüs
extiterit, si maritus talem partum statim amoverit cüm

ceditus! fuerit & illi deadvocaverit, ex hoc nascetur

vero heredi exceptio contra assisam. Si aute talem
deadvocaverit, & aliqua p eo faciat presumptio q suus


!*editus" M.S. Rawl. C. 160, ? « advocaviret," M.S. Rawl. C
and Reg., 9 E. xv. 160, and Crewe and Reg., 9 E. xv.


ar e RU CS


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. oll


had an elder-born brother who was held to be heir and
was seysed of that land and afterwards sold it to the
tenant, as in the last iter of Martin de Pateshull in the
county of Suffolk, an assise of mortdancester, if Walter
Curteys. But if & replication be made by the claimant,
that he who ought to have made the donation never was
in seysine of that land, or if he was in seysine and made
& donation thereof, the donatory never had seysine in
the lifetime of the donor, or something of like kind.
Likewise if the ancestor has acknowledged it or surren-
dered it and quit-claimed it. Likewise if the sons of
him, who says that he holds it by the law, of England, have
been proved to be bastards. Likewise if there arises &
. question of age, & question of status, & convention or &
convietion, a fine levied or & judgment pronounced or
something of like kind which are fortheoming outside
the assise, and there has been dissension between the
parties, when the tenant says one thing and the claimant
says another, with the consent of the parties the assise is
turned into & jury, and so the business is settled, and it
is sufficient by way of example. Likewise an assise of
mortdancester is turned sometimes into a jury on account ,
of a supposititious child, as if when the true heir is in
possession, a supposititious offspring, to wit, some boy or
some gir], who has made himself or herself out to be the
heir of some one, when he or she is not so, has brought an
assise against the true heir. In the same manner on ac-
count of an adulterous offspring, as if whilst the husband
has been absent transacting business in remote parts, or
detained by such an infirmity that he could not beget off-
spring, supposing there is some one who has had access to
his wife by whom she has become pregnant, if the hus-
band has removed such offspring immediately after he
has been born, and has disavowed him, there will
arise for the true heir an exception against the assise.
» But if he has avowed such offspring, and some presump-
tion makes in its favour that 36 may possibly be his, off-


319 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


esse possit, licet revera non sit, ut si simul extiterint,
talis p herede judicabitur, licet no sit. Si aute advo-
catio & confessio sus naturz convenire non possit, hoc
est si p unu annü vel biennium absens fuerit & rever-

f.2785. Sus parvulum invenerit ex uxore, vel revera castratus
fuerit vel ita infirmus, quód generare non possit, licet
talem advocaverit, tamen veritas prseferri debet con-
fessioni quae nature non convenit nec rationi, licet
quidam dicunt quód locum habere debeat breve de
recto, quod verum est secundàüm quosdam.


Car. XVIII.


1. Dictum est supra inter quas psonas jacet assis& mor-
miei a tis antecessoris & de morte quarum : nune autem
nonjaceet dicendum est inter quas non jacet, ne cotingat quód
xr e per assisam non terminetur proprietas, quee locum non
cessoris. ^ habet nisi tantüm in eausa possessionis. Et sciendum

q locum non habet inter conjunctas psonas sicut co-
heredes sive sint participes, i. hzereditatis capaces de
aliqua hereditate descendéte ab aliquo comuni ante-
cessore, sive non capaces. Quo casu, si capaces sint co- :
heredes, ut si hsereditas partibilis sit ratione plurium
psonarum sicut filiarum, que sunt quasi unus hreres,
vel ratione ipsiüs hereditatis que in se partibilis est,
locu non habebit assisa sed breve de proparte. Et si
assisa impetretur, eadit opposita exceptione juris meri,
cü quilibet ipsorum sit hsres ppinquior quantum ad
partem suam, respectu eorum qui sunt remotiores in
alio gradu. Si autem plures sint cohwsredes justi &
ppinqui quoad seysinam, omnes tamen non sunt parti-
cipes vel eapaces, sed unus eorum propter privilegium
quod habet (ut superius dietum est), & cui jus merum
descendit, aliis preefertur. Et in quo casu locum non
habebit assisa, cm non determinet nisi possessionem,


sed breve de recto q utrumq, determinat, scilicet sey-


.OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. | 318.


spring. although in truth it be not so, as if they have been
in company together, such offspring shall be adjudged to
be his heir, although it be not his offspring. But if his
avowal and confession cannot consist with the nature of
things, that is, if he has been absent for a year or for
two years, and on his return he has found a little child
born out of his wife, or in truth he was castrated or so f 78b.
infirm, that he could not beget & child, although he has
avowed such child, nevertheless the truth ought to be
preferred to his confession, which does not agree with
the nature of things nor with reason, although some
persons say that à writ of right ought to have place,
which is true aecording to some.


CHAPTER XVIII.


It has been stàted above between what persons an NE
assise of mortdancester lies, and concerning the death of d ns
what persons. Now itis to be stated between whom it sons an


does not lie, lest it should happen that the property is E:
not determined by the assise, which has no place except ee
only in à cause of possession. And it is to be known
that it has not à place between blood-relations such as
coheirs, whether they are coparceners, that is capable of
inheriting any inheritance descending from any common
ancestor, or not capable. In which case,if they are
capable eoheirs, as if the inheritance is shareable in regard

of several persons such as daughters, who are as it were

one heir, or in regard of the inheritance itself which is
shareable in itself, an assise shall not have place, but a

writ of partition. And ifan assise be sued out, it falls

upon the exception of mere right being objected, since

each of them is & mearer heir, as regards his own

share, with respect to those who are more remote in
another degree. And in which case an assise shall not

have place, since it determines nothing but the possession,

buta writ of right which determines both, to wit, the


f. 279.


9314 ' DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


sinam & jus merum, & unde cüm in predictis casibus
incipiat quis agere per assisam, datur tenenti exceptio
conira assisam: & de:hae materia pleniüs dicetur infrà
in tractatu de consanguinitate. ltem sieut non jacet
inter cohzredes legitimos & naturales & capaces parti-
cipes, nec inter tales & non participes, ità nec inter .


legitimos & naturales tantum, sicut inter legitimos &


bastardos, si fratri naturali objiciatur q sit bastardus
vel etià villanus, cüm sciri non possit utrum se pbare
possint legitimos & liberos esse vel non. Et licet se
legitimos & liberos esse pbaverint, non iamen p hoc
se pbant esse haeredes ppinquiores, & sic non poterit
assisa mortis antecessoris terminare pprietatem, & unde
alio brevi, s. de recto, opus erit ad terminandam pprie-
tatem. Et càüm forté se legitimos & hberos esse pro-
baverint, poterunt ulteriüs se pbare hreredes ppinquiores,
ut fila de primo viro excipiat contra fratrem legiti-
mum de secundo viro, q hseres esse non possit, cüm
sit quasi extraneus quoad successionem in hsereditatem
maternam, quamvis filius naturalis et legitimus matris
communis: quia hereditas materna data fuit in mari-
tagium primo viro eum matre comuni & heredibus de
patribus duobus! pvenientibus, & ideó q heres esse
non possit quamvis frater naturalis & legitimus, & unde .
si frater petierit versus sororem p assisam mortis vel
e contrario vel versus exiraneam personam, inter eos
non jacebit assisa mortis antecessoris, cüm frater fortó
docere posset contrarium, & hoc dico nisi cüm soror
existens in seysina excipiendo statim liabeat probatione
ad manum, sicut instrumentum donationis vel aliam
probationem. Si autem versus exiraneam personam,


1 * de ipsis duobus," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE ÓF MORTDANCESTER. 915


seysine and the mere right, and whence when in the
aforesaid eases & person commences proceedings by an
assise, the tenant is allowed an exception against the
assise, and this subject will be more fully discussed below
in the treatise on consanguinity. Likewise as it does
not lie between coheirs, who are legitimate and natural
&nd eapable coparceners, nor between such and those who
are not coparceners, so it does not lie between those who
are legitimate and those who are natural only, as between
legitimate offspring and bastards, if it be objected to a
natural child that he is à bastard or even a villein, since it
cannot be known whether they can prove themselves to be
. legitimate and free ornot. And although they may have
proved themselves to be legitimate and free, they do not
on that account prove themselves to be the nearest heirs,
and so an assise of mortdancester cannot determine the
property, and hence there will be need of another writ,
to wit, of right to determine the property. And when
by chance they have proved themselves to be legitimate
and free, they may further prove themselves to be the
nearest heirs, so that à daughter by a first husband may
except against & legitimate brother by a second husband,
that he cannot be heir, since he 1s as10 were extraneous as
regards the succession to the maternal inheritance, al-
though & natural and legitimate son out of a common
mother, because the maternal inheritance was given as à
marriage portion to the first husband with the common
mother and to the heirs sprung from them both, and there-
fore he cannot be heir although a natural and legiti-
mate brother, and henceif the brother has claimed against
the sister by an assise of mortdancester or the contrary or
against an exiraneous person, an assise of mortdancester
shall not lie between them, since the brother by chance
may prove the contrary, and this I say except when a
sister being in seysine on exceplüng has in her hand the
proof, as for instance the instrument of donation or some
other proof. But if against an exiraneous person, the


f. 279.


316 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


filia prefertur fratri cum probatione tali Si autem
probationem non habuerit, cadit assisa mortis anteces-
soris & agi oportet per breve de recto, & procedet inter
eos magna assisà per hzc verba, scilicet: Utrum ipsa
quae tenens est majus jus habeat in terra illa, sicut in
ila quse data fuerit in maritagium. primo viro suo
cum tali matre communi & hsredibus de ipsis duobus
venientibus, an talis frater de altero viro, qui petit
sicut in illa que data fuit in maritagium cum tali
matre communi & h:sredibus ipsius matris, & non ter-
minabitur negotium in hoc casu per cuntey cuntey!
sicut inter cohswredes. Et eodem modo fiet si objicia-
tur villenagium, vel quód petens genitus fuit de testi-
eulo felonis quoad heredem maternam; secundüm quod
inferiüs dicetur in tractatu per breve de recto. Inter
eoheredes veró non habebit locum assisa mortis, nec
procedet ubi postnatus talem habuerit seysinam ex
tempore, quód à seysina ejici non possit sine brevi düi
regis, & in quo casu cüm per talem seysinam parita-
tem habuerit eum antenato hrrede propinquiore quoad
possessionem, de jure & "proprietate agi non poterit
nisi per breve de recto, nec procedet assis& mortis an-
tecessoris, cüm habeat postnatus tantundem juris quoad
.Seysinam, quantum habet antenatus, & in brevi de
recto terminabitur negotium per cwntey cwntey3 Si
autem non habuerit postnatus talem seysinam longam
(ut prseedietum est) inter presentes, vel longiorem inter
absentes, secundüm quod antenatus agens fuit in par-
tibus remotis vel remotioribus, sieut in Terra Sancta
vel alia peregrinatione in partibus transmarinis longe
vel longius, vel in regno long? vel longius extra cof
vel in cof, vel:in prisona, vel infirmitate gravi deten-
tus, cüm venerit & postnatum recenter ejicere non pos-


? * quoad hereditatem | mater-
nam," MS. Rawl. C. 159.

5 * par counte counte," MS. Rawl.
C. 159. -


1 *par cunte cuntey," MS. Rawl.
C. 160; ** de comitatu in comita-
* tum," MS. Rawl. C. 159.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 917


daughter is preferred to the brother with such a proof.
But if she has not the proof, the assise of mortdancester
falls, and proceedings must be had by a writ of right, and
the great assise must have place between them under these
words: whether she who is tenant has a greater right
in that land, as in land which was given as & marriage
portion to her firs& husband withsuch common mother and
to the heirs springing from them both, or the said brother
by another husband who claims it as in land, which was
given as a marriage partion wijfh such common rmother
and to the heirs of such mother, and the business shall
not be decided in this case by cwntey cwntey as between
coheirs. And inthesame way it shall be doneif villenage
be objected, or that the claimant was begotten of the
testicle of & felon, as regards his maternal inheritance,
aecording to what will be said below in the treatise on &
writ ofright. But an assise of mortdancester shall not
have place between coheirs, where the after-born has such
a Seysine founded on time, that he cannot be ejected from
his seysine without & writ of the lord the king, and in
which case since he has by such seysine a parity with
the elder-born and next heir as regards possession, an
action concerning the right and the property cannot be
had except by à writ of right, nor shall an assise of
mortdancester proceed since the after-born has as much
right as regards the seysine as the elder-born has, and in
a writ of right the writ shall be determined by cwntey
cwntey. But if theafter-bornhas not hadsucha long sey-
sine as stated above in the presence of the parties or &
longer seysine in the absence of the parties, according as
the elder-born who brings the action was in remote or
in more remote parts, as in the Holy Land or some other
pilgrimage in parts far or further beyond the sea, or in
the realm far or further distant, beyond the county or
within the county, in prison or detained by severe illness,
when he has arrived and cannot recently eject the after-


VE TR. UNES c o S Tar Ee S EM RT MU C LR


f. 279 b.


318 .DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


sit, bene jacebit assis& mortis inter tales coh:eredes,
sicut inter extraneas personas. Et quia ex quo post-
natus habere non possit liberum tenementum ex tem-
pore & longa & pacifica seysina, nunquam  paritatem
habebit cum antenato quoad possessionem, sed erit
sieut extraneus quoad assisam mortis, quia seysina su&
nulla est. Idem erit si, cüm antenatus ingredi non
possit, statim sibi perquisiverit breve vel statim con-
tentionem apposuerit, & in quibus casibus interrumpi-
tur possessio postnati, quód nunquam paritatem habebit
cum antenato quoad possessionem. Et eodem modo
Observari poterit inter consanguineos, si agatur per


breve de consanguinitate inter eos. ltem frater ante-


natus feoffat fratrem suum medium cüm sint ires
fratres, aut feoffat eum sine homagio tenere sibi &-
heredibus suis, si talis frater obierit sine herede de
corpore. suo, frater antenatus .& feoffator erit heres
propinquior & cum eo poterib tenementum remanere.
Item eodem modo, si it& feoffaverit tenendi de dominis
capitalibus. ltem si ita fratrem medium feoffaverit -


tenendi sibi & hsredibus suis quos habuerit de cor-


pore suo, si sine talibus obierit seysitus, revertetur .
terra data fratri antenato sicut eschaeta pro defectu
hseredis, lieet alios habuerit remotiores, & evanescit
homagium si forté intervenerit, quod non est in primo
casu. Si autem íratrem postnatum feoffaverit tenendi
Sibi & hsredibus suis quibuscunq, pro homagio & ser-
vitio, ille primogenitus & feoffator erit ejus hsres pro-
pinquior, quia quamdiu fuerit aliquis ex parte antenati,


ille semper aliis prefertur qui sunt in linea iransver-


sali, & jus semper descendit antenato, & cum eo semper
remanebit simul eum seysina, quia primü debet habere


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER, 319


born, an assise of mortdancester will well lie between
such coheirs as between exiraneous persons And
because where the after-born cannot have a freehold from
time and long seysine, he shall never have a parity with
the elder born as regards possession, but he will be as à
Stranger as regards an assise of mortdancester, because
his seysine is null. It will be the same if, when the
elder-born cannot enter, he shall have obtained for himself
forthwith & writ or shall have forthwith given notice
of an action, and in which cases the possession of the
after-born is interrupted, that he will never have parity
with the elder-born as regards possession. And in the
same way ib may be observed between cousins, if pro-


ceedings be had by & writ of consanguinity between'


them. Likewise an elder-born brother enfeoffs his in-
termediate brother when there are three brothers, or he en-
feoffshim without homage to hold for himself andhis heirs,
if such a brother has died without an heir of his body,
his elder brother who is also his feoffor shall be his next
heir, and the tenement may remain with him. Likewise
in the same manner, if he has thus enfeoffed it to be held
of the chief lords. Likewise if he has thus enfeoffed his
intermediate brother, to be held for himself and his heirs
whom he may have of his own body, if he has died seysed
without such heirs, the land given shall return to the
elder brother as an escheat for defect of an heir, although


he may have others more remote, and the homage, if by


chance it has intervened, becomes evanescent, which is


not the fact in the first case. But if he has enfeoffed the:


.after-born brother to hold for himself and his heirs
whomsoever for homage and service, the firstborn who
is the feoffor shall be his next heir, because as long as
there is any one on the side of the elder-born, he is always
preferred to others who are of the transverse line, and
right always descends to the elder-born, and will remain
with him together with the seysine, for he ought to have
the first seysine, and from his hand the land so given will


f. 279 b.


320 . DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


seysinam, & de manu sua ad remotiores deveniet terra
sic data, si sit qui petat, si autem non, semper cum
eo remanebit jus & seysina, cüm non sit heres appa-
rens, vel si appareat, nihil petat, nec à manu sua nec
ab eo descendet jus merum per virtutem descensus,
sed per necessitatem (si sit qui petat), càm antenatus
non possit esse hsves & dominus, quia sese non com-
patiuntur homagium & dominium, quia homagium ex-
pellii rem à manu feoffatoris usq, ad propinquiorem
hzsredem, scilieet ad filios vel filias si fuerint. Si
autem non fuerint, vel cüm fuerint, defecerint, tunc
ad fratrem postnatum, non per assisam mortis sed per
breve de recto, & quia frater postnatus, nec filius nec
filia esse poterunt propinquiores fratri medio sed fra-
ter antenatus, et sic sui erunt heredes ali inferiores,
sed nihil eis descendet jure hereditario in vita ante-
nati nisi per necessitatem, quia non' potest esse domi-
nus & heres, & cüm inferiores hsredes sui per judi-
cium recuperaverint, tunc primó descendet eis jus simul
cum seysina & non ante, & unde si antenatus nullum
habuerit heredem de corpore suo & postnatus incipiat
petere, & antequam obtinuerit in judicio incipiat an-
ienatus habere heredes, cadit actio fratris postnati.
Sed si tunc inceperint esse, càm judicium redditum sit
pro fratre postnato, nunquam ab eo auferetur seysina.
Eodem modo cüm liberi fratris antenati in seysina
extiterint & positi in seysinam (& defecerint, vel si
nunquam antenatus se dimiserit & pueri defecerint,
non competit actio postnato, sed antenatus semper se
defendet erga postnatum in seysina sua per liberos
suos, eo quód sunt hzredes propinquiores.


QF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 821


descend to the more remote, if there be any one who
claims, but if not, the right and the seysine will always
remain with him, when there is no heir apparent, or if
there be an heir apparent, he claims nothing, nor from his
hand nor from him will the absolute right descend in
virtue of descent, but through necessity (if there be any
one who elaims) since the elder-born cannot be heir and
lord, because homage and dominion cannot consist to-
gether, because homage expels the thing from the hand
of the feoffor to the next heir, to wit, to sons or daughters,
if there be any. Butif there are not any, or if they have
failed, when they have been, then to an after-born bro-
ther, not by an assise of mortdancester but by à writ of
right, and because he is an after-born brother, and neither
à son nor & daughter can be next heir to an intermediate
" brother, but an elder-born brother, and so others lower
in the line will be his heirs proper, but nothing will
descend to them by hereditary right in the lifetime of.
the elder-born except through necessity, because he can-
not be lord and heir, and when his proper heirs lower in
the line have recovered by an assise, then for .the first
time, and not before, the right together with the seysine
descends to them, and if the elder-born has no heir of his
own body and the after-born begins to claim, and before
he has obtained & judgment the elder-born begins to have
heirs, the action of the after-born brother falls, But if
they have begun to be, when judgment has been rendered
in favour of the after-born brother, the seyine shall never
be taken away from him. In thesame manner when the
children of an elder-born brother have been in seysine and
have been put into seysine and have died, or if the elder-
born has never surrendered the land and his boys have
died, the after born [brother] is not entitled to an action,
but the elder-born shall always maintain himself against.
the after-born in his seysine through his children, inas-
much as they are nearest heirs.


Q 1302. X


2.
Casus,
quod soror
de eodem
patre et
eadem
matre
prefertur
1nasculo
de diverso
patre de
perquisito.


f. 280.


3292 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


Neptis ex sorore.avunculi ex eodem patre & eadem .
matre, & nepos ex fratre ejusdem ex eodem patre sed
diversa matre, tulerint! assisam mortis antecessoris ver-
sus dominum capitalem neptis, s. ex sorore de morte
avunculi, & nepos ex fratre de morte ejusdem petie-
runt per assisam quandam terram de seysina cujusdam
avunculi Radulphi ipsorum, nepos veró ex fratre dice-
bat se esse hswredem propinquiorem, quia fuit filius
fratris ipsius Radulphi, & neptis ex sorore ipsius Ra-
dulphi non debuit ipsi preferri, & quia ipse masculus
& hores maseuli, & ipsa neptis foemina & proveniens
ex foemina, & ideó. ipse hseres propinquior; ad quod
responsum fuit ex parte neplis q nepos non potuit
esse hseres propinquior, quia idem nepos fuit filius
fratris predicti Radulphi, sed pater ipsius neptis &
predietus Radulphus non fuerunt fratres de uno patre
& una matre, sed de uno patre & diversa matre, &.
q mater sua ipsius neptis, s. & Radulphus fuerunt de
uno patre & una matre, & terra petita fuit perquisi-


ium ipsius Radulphi, & non hereditas descendens ab


aliquo antecessore: & quia hoe dedic& non potuit, con-
sideratum fuit q neptis fuerit haeres propinquior, quia
provenit ex sorore ipsius Radulphi de eodem patre &
eadem matre, & nepos quamvis ex fratre masculus &


. ex masculo, heres remotior, quia ex diversa matre.


Aliud forte dicendum erit de hereditate descendente,
secundüm quosda. Casus iste inveniri poterit in rotulo
de termino P. & s. T. anno regis H. 3. in com Sussex,
assisa mortis si Radul. de Rupe super Gilbertum de
Aquila. Idem diei poterit de hsereditate descendente
Bi frater obierit seysitus, quód soror de uno patre &


: * tnlerunt," MSS. Rawl. C 160 and C. 159.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 923


A .niece out of a sister of an uncle from the same , ?.
father and the same mother, and a nephew by the niic im
brother of the same from the same father but a different ur
mother, brought an assise of mortdancester against & father and
chief lord, to wit, the niece out of the sister concerning is eris
' the death of her uncle, and the nephew by thé brother preferred
concerning the death of the same, and they claimed by - rial "E
an assise certain land from the seysine of a certain father in
Ralph their uncle, but the nephew by the brother said caia
that he was the next heir, because he was the son of the acquired.
brother of Ralph and the niece out of the sister of Ralph
ought not to be preferred to him, and because he was &
male and the heir of à male, and the niece was a female
and the offspring of a female, and therefore he was him-
self à nearer heir; to which it was answered on the part
ofthe niece that the nephew could not be the nearer
heir, because the said nephew was the son of the brother
of the aforesaid Ralph, but the father of the niece and
the aforesaid Ralph were not brothers by one father and
one mother, but by one father and different mothers,

&ànd the mother of the niece and Ralph were by one
father and one mother, and the land claimed was an ac-
quisition made by the said Ralph, and not an inheritance
descending from some ancestor, and since this could not be
gainsaid, it was adjudged that the niece was the next heir
because she sprung from the sister of Ralph by the same
father and the same mother, and the nephew, although  f.280.
a male by a brother and by à male, was à more distant
heir, because out of a different mother. A different
judgment would perhaps have to be pronounced con-
cerning .à descending inberitanee according to some.
Sueh & case may be found in the Roll of Easter and
Trinity Terms in the third year of the reign of king
. Henry in the county of Sussex, an assise of mortdances-
ter, if Ralph de Rupe against Gilbert de Aquila. The
same may be said concerning a descending inheritance,
if a brother died seysed, thaí the sister by one father
x 2


394 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


eadem matre heres propinquior sit de seysina fratris,
quàm masculus frater de altera uxore, & hoc ratione
ventris.


CaP. XIX.


1 Exceeptio bastardie objecta petenti vel tenenti in
Deexcep- . . , , x s . :
tione bas. 898198 mortis antecessoris perimit assisam, & vertit
tardi» i» assisam quandoq, in juratam, quandoq, transmittit cog-
a881S0 mOT- .,. m * qe . .
tis anteces- Dibionem ad curiam Christianitatis, secundüm quod
soris. objecta fuerit sie vel sie, & secundüm quod inferiüs

pleniüs dicetur de exceptionibus, in tractatu de bas-
tardia & ibi pleniüs, & quis possit eam opponere &
cui. Sed refert inter quas personas locum habere de-
beat & tenere in assis& mortis antecessoris. Et scien-
dum quód ubicung, assisa locum habet, & inter quas-
cunq, personas, ibi locum habet exceptio bastardis, &
inter easdem personas. ltem inter easdem personas
ubi locum habet consanguinitas loco assise, & ad quas
assisa se non exiendit: ubi autem locum non habet
assisa nec consanguinitas, ibi nec locum habebit ex-
ceptio bastardise, scilicet ubi agi oportet de necessitate .
per breve de recto, quia exceptio bastardie totum ter-
minat negotium, tam super possessione quam super
proprietate, quod quidem non facit assisa nee consan-
guinitas, nisi tantum super possessione, et unde inter
conjunctas personas locum non habebit, sed tantum inter
extraneas personas, licet videatur in prima facie quód
inter eonjunetas personas procedi possit in cognitione
bastardie, ad hoc quód si ille cui objicitur se legiti-
mum probare non possit, cadat ab actione sua & à
causa, vel seysinam amittat: secundüm quod object&
fueri& petenti vel tenenti, & sic terminetur negotium


d


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 325


and the same mother is à neárer heir to the seysine of
her brother, than & male brother by another wife, and
this by reason of the womb of the mother.


CHAPTER XIX.
An exception of bastardy objected to the claimant or, !


the tenant in an assise of mortdancester puts an end to rr
the assise, and turns the assise sometimes into & jury, and ngo in
sometimes transfers the cognisance to a court of Christi- of mort-
anity, according as it has been objected in this or that ?ncester.
manner, and according to what will be said below on the

subject of exceptions, in the treatise on bastardy and

there more fully, and who may raise the objection and

against whom.  Butit matters between what persons it

ought to have place and to hold good in an assise of
mortdancester And it is to be known that wherever

the assise has à place and between whatever persons,

there an exception of bastardy has a place, and between

the same persons. Likewise between the same persons

where consanguinity has a place instead of an assise,

and to whom an assise does not extend; but where

neither an assise nor consanguinity have place, there
neither an exception of bastardy shall have place, where

the proceedings must of necessity be had by & writ of

right, because an exeeption of bastardy terminates the

whole affair, as well upon the possession as upon the pro-

perty, which neither an assise nor consanguinity does,

except only upon the possession, and hence it shall not

have a place between blood-relations, but only between
Strangers in blood, although it seems at first sight that
proceedings may be had between blood-relations in the
cognisance of bastardy, inasmuch as if he to whom it is
objected cannot prove himself to be legitimate, he would

fall from his action and his cause or would lose seysine,
according asit was objected against a claimant or against

& tenant, and the affair would be terminated according


Jritton, lii.
ch. xxn.


8 a.


f. 280 b.


326 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


seeundüm quosdam &c. Sed quia poterit adeó de
facili se probare legitimum- et facere se conjunctam
personam, et sic provenire .possit in casu! à quo inci-
pere non possit assis& nec locum habere nisi tantum
breve de recto, ideó non tenet exceptio bastardie non
magis quàm assisa. Si veró bastardia objiciatur, quan-
doque terminatur in foro seculari, quandoq, in foro
ecclesiastico : secundüm q inferiüs dicetur pleniüs de
eodem tractatu. Si autem cüm objecta no fuerit, dicant
juratores in veredicto suo quód petens bastardus sit
simpliciter, vel cum tali adjectione, q natus fuit ante
matrimonium, tunc non procedet assisa, quia vacua est
petitio et cadit. Eodem modo dici poterit de tenente,
ut de ultimo itinere M. de P. in coíi Eborum circa
finem rotuli Item eodem modo, si sie objecta fuerit
q petens natus fuit ante matrimonium per duos annos,
vel tres, et partes inde se posuerint in juratam, et.
juratores dieant absque aliqua mentione bastardie quód
talis sit propinquior hsres, et quód antecessor suus
obiit seysitus ut de feodo, & post terminum, ità quód
omnes articuli brevis concurrant, non esset ulteriüs
inquirendum de bastardia, quia legitimitas sic pbatur
indirecté: ut de itinere W. de Ralegh in cofi Kanc.,
assisa mortis antecessoris, si Ádam le Gardener, nec
erit in hae parte locus convietioni propter partium
consensum. Si autem bastardia non objiciatur ut supra,
erit contrarium. ltem videndum erit in persona cujus
procedere debeat inquisitio bastardig, quia refert utrum
ile cui objicitur vel qui objicit majoris sit setatis vel
minoris De eo autem qui est infrà statem & tenens
non pcedit inquisitio ante setatem, ut si custos dieat
q nihil tenet nisi in custodia cum tali qui est infrà


1 * pervenire possit in casum," MSS. Rawl. C. 160 and C. 159.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 397


to some &e. But because he can so easily prove himself
to be legitimate and make himself out to be a blood-rela-
tion, and so may arrive at à case from which an assise
cannot commence nor have place, but only à writ of
right, therefore an exception of bastardy does not hold
good any more than an assise. But if bastardy be ob-
jected, it is sometimes determined in the secular court,
sometimes in the ecclesiastical court, aecording to what
will be stated more fully in the same treatise. But
if, when it has not been objected, the jurors should
s&y in their verdict that the claimant is a bastard
simply, or with this addition, that he was born before
matrimony, then the assise shall not proceed, because
ihe petition is void and falls. In the same manner it
may be said concerning & tenant, as in the last iter
of Martin de Pateshull in the county of York about
the end of the roll Likewise in the same manner
if i& be so objected that the claimant was born two
or three years before marriage, and the parties have
thereupon put themselves on a jury, and the jurors
say without any mention of bastardy that so-and-so is
the next heir, and that his ancestor died seysed as of
fee, and after a term, so that all the articles of the writ
coneur, no further inquiry would have to be made con-
derning bastardy, because his legitimacy is thus proved
indirectly, as in the iter of William de Ralegh in the
eounty of Kent, an assise of mortdancester, if Adam le
Gardener, nor will there be in this part place for a con-
viction on account of the consent of the parties. But if


f. 280 b.


bastardy be not objeeted as above, the contrary will .


happen. Likewise it is to be seen in whose person the
inquisition of bastardy ought to proceed, because it
matters whether he to whom itis objected or he who
objects is of full age or à minor. But concerning him
who is under age and the tenant the inquisition does
not proceed before he is of full age, as if his guardian
should say that he holds nothing except in wardship


3928 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


statem, & excipiatur q talis bastardus sit: ut de iti-
nere M. de P. in eofü Kanc. anno regis H. xi. de
termino s. M.incipiente xii, assis& mortis antecessoris,
si Wilhelmus de Herst, & sic remansit inquisitio usq,
ad statem. In eodem autem itinere videtur contra-
rium, in assis& mortis antecessoris, si H. Paynefore,! de
duobus qui fuerunt infrà statem, & contr& quos pro-
cessit inquisitio super bastardia per assisam, & ubi
objectum fuit quód bastardi fuerunt, & juratores hoc
idem dixerunt, quia nati in adulterio: sed non fuit
contrarium, quia hie petentes & ibi tenentes, & quód
inquisitio pcedere debeat de bastardia versus petentem
qui fuerit inírà statem, quód pater suus super hoc
nunquam desponsavit matrem suam, vel de hoe quód
natus fuit antequam mater sua esset desponsata, pro-
cedet super hoc jurata: ut de ultimo itinere M. de P.
in cofá Salop.
. 29. .  'CTransmittitur quandoq, &d curiam Christianitatis in-
De inquis quisitio bastardie in suo casu, ubi seilicet, matrimo-
terdie in nium sive sponsalia omninó dedicta fuerint in assisa
tal asse ortis antecessoris, seeundüm 4g bastardia objecta fue-
rit petenti vel tenenti, & fiat inquisitio per tale breve:
Rex tali episcopo salutem. Sciatis quod eàm A. in
curia nostra coram &c. peteret versus B. & EJ uxorem
ejus iantam terram eum pertinentiis in tali villa per
assisam mortis antecessoris inde ibi inter eos suinoni-
tam, & versus talem tantam terram cum pertinentiis
in eadem villa ut jus suum, & predicta C. diceret se
esse propinquiorem haeredem A. de cujus morte idem
A. tulit assisam suam: Idem A. objecit eidem C. q
nullum jus habere potuit in terra illa, eo quód bas-
tarda est: & quoniam hujusmodi cause cognitio ad


1 « Payneforer," MS. Rawl.C.160. 3 * hgredem E," MSS. ea-
2 * B, et C." MSS. Rawl. C. 160 | dem. »
and C. 1659.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. . 229


with so-and-so who is under age, and it be excepted
ihat so-and-so is & bastard, as in the iter of Martin de
Pateshull in the county of Kent in the eleventh year of
king Henry in Michaelmas term at the beginning of the
twelfth year, an assise of the death of an ancestor, if
William de Herst, and so the inquisition was stayed
until he was of full age. But in the same iter the con-
irary seems to have been held in an assise of mortdan-
cester, if Henry Paynefore, concerning two who were
underage and against whom an inquisition upon bas-
tardy proceeded by an assise, and where it was ob-
jected that they were bastards,and the jurors said the
same thing, because they were born in adultery ; but it
was not contrary, because here they were claimants and
there tenants, and because the inquisition ought to pro.
ceed concerning bastardy against the claimant who was
under age, upon this that his father never espoused his
mother, or concerning this that he was born before his
mother was espoused, upon this a jury shall proceed as
in the last iter of. Martin de Pateshull in the county of
Salop.


An inquest of bastardy is sometimes transmitted to ?.
the court of Christianity in its own case, where for ed
instance matrimony or espousals have been altogether quest of

. , . , bastardy
denied in an assise of mortdancester, according as bas- in such an
tardy has been objected to the claimant or the tenant, sssise.
and let an inquest be held by such a writ. The king à
to bishop so-and-so greeting: Know ye that when A.
in our court before &c. claimed against B. and C. his
wife so much land with its appurtenances in such a vill
by an assise of mortdancester there summoned thereupon
between them, and against the said parties so much land
with its appurtenances in the said vill as his right, and
the aforesaid C. said that she was the next heir to E.
concerning whose death the said A. had brought his
assise: the said A. has objected to the said C. that he


could have no right in that land inasmuch as he was &


930 DE ASSISA MORTIS ANTECESSORIS.


forum spectat ecclesiasticum, vobis mandamus q convo-
eatis coram vobis convocandis, rei veritatem diligenter
inquiratis, & inquisitionem quam inde feceritis nobis
sciri faciatis per literas vestras patentes. Teste &c.
Et quid fieri debeat ulteriüs, infrà de exceptionibus
pleniüs dicetur, eo adjecto q si tenens petenti objiciat
bastardiam, & petens vice versa tenenti, queritur quis
eorum priüs probare debeat legitimitatem ? & sciendum
q ille qui petit, quia eo non probante legitimitatem
remanebit possessio cum tenente, sive ipse tenes bas-
tardus sit sive non. Contendunt enim: multotiens inter
se petens & tenens (& remanebit possessio! cum te-
nente) sive tenens bastardus sive non, & cim conten-
dant inter se, dicunt:* Si ego sum bastardus & tu
similiter, & priüs? semper inquirendum erit de bas-
tardia,* petentis quàm tenentis, quia si petens jus non
habeat petendi, remanebit in suo loco possessio, ut
predietum est. |


! ** et remanebit possessio " down ? «* et dicunt," MSS. eadem.
to * inter se," omitted MSS. Rawl. 3 * et sic prius," MSS. eadem.
C. 160 and C. 158. * & tam petentis," MSS. eadem.


OF AN ASSISE OF MORTDANCESTER. 381


bastard, and the cognisance of a cause of this kind be-
longs to the ecclesiastical court, we cominand you that,
having convoked before you the persons who ought to
be eonvoked, you inquire diligently into the truth of
the matter, and certify to us the inquisition which you
have held thereupon by your letters patent. Witness
&c. And what ought to be done further, will be stated
below more fully in treating of exceptions, with this
addition, that if the tenant objects bastardy against the
claimant and the claimant eonversely against the tenant,
ibis questioned which of them ought first to prove his
legitimacy, and itis to be known that he who olaims
must do so, because upon his failing to prove his legiti-
macy the possession will remain with the tenant, whe-
ther the tenant be a bastard or not. For the claimant
and the tenant frequently contend between themselves
(and the possession will remain with the tenant) whe-
ther the tenant be & bastard or not, and when they
contend between themselves, they say, * If I am a bastard,
* you are likewise s0;" and an inquiry concerning the
bastardy of the claimant must always be had before that
of the tenant, because if the claimant has no right to
claim, the possession will always remain in its place, as
above said.


f. 981.


1 .
Breve de
consangui-
nitate.


Britton, iii.
ch, xxvi.


8 1l.
Fleta, 306.


TRAOTATUS QUARTUS
LIBRI QUARTI,
IN QUO TRACTATUR


DE CONSANGUINITATE.


Car. I.

Cum assisa& mortis antecessoris infrà certos gradus
limitetur, & locum habeat de morte certarum perso-
narum versus certas personas, & ulteriüs non exten-
ditur, ne semper ad ipsum jus p breve de recto recur-
ratur de seysina qus probari possit de proprio visu
& auditu alicujus, in subsidium assise mortis anteces-
Soris provisum est quoddam breve quod dicitur breve
de consanguinitate, ub causam possessionis terminet in
gradibus & personis, &d quos assisa se non extendit,
de omnibus de quibus antecessor obiit seysitus ut de
feodo, & non ut de mero jure, quia hoc non agitur
nisi tantum de possessione, &d evitandum dubium
eventum duelli & magns assise per breve de recto,
quatenus tempus assise mortis antecessoris permiserit.
Et cü loco assise mortis antecessoris accipi debeat &
teneri de se seysina antecessoris: meritó sequi debet in
magna parte naturam illius assisz, cujus loco sumitur
S. in tempore, ut tempus sive terminum assise non
excedat. ltem in personis, ut locum habeat breve de
consanguinitate exira terminos assise inter easdem


personas, sive majores sint sive minores, inter quas


1« Hie incipit Tractatus Quartus Libri Quarti," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


| . THE FOURTH TREATISE
OF


THE FOURTH BOOK


WHICH TREATS


OF CONSANGUINITY.


CHAPTER I. f. 281.


Since an assise of mortdancester is limited within , .. .
certain degrees, and takes a place concerning the deaths cosinage.
of certain persons against certain persons, and is not ex-
tended further, that. recourse should not always be had
to the right itself by à writ of right concerning a seysine
whieh can be proved by the view and hearing of some
one, in aid of the assise of mortdancester a certain writ
has been provided which is called a writ of cosinage, that
it may determine the cause of possession in degrees and
persons, to which the assise does not extend itself, con-
cerning all things of which an ancestor died seysed as of
fee and not as of mere right, because this proceeding is
only concerning possession, to avoid the doubtful event
of & duel and a great assise, by à writ of right, as far as
the time of an assise of the death of an ancestor will
permit. And since in the place of an assise of mortdan-
cester the seysine of the ancestor ought to be accepted
and held good, it ought deservedly to follow in a great
part the nature of that assise, in the place of which it is em-
ployed, to wit, in time, that it should not exceed the time or
the term of an assise. Likewise in the persons, that the
writ of cosinage should have place beyond the terms of an

. assise between the same persons, whether persons of full
age or minors, between whom an assise has plaee within


f. 281 b.


334 BREVE DE CONSANGUINITATE.


locum habet assisa infrà suos terminos & non inter
alias, sicut inter conjunctas personas (ut przedictum est)
ascendendo ab avo us ad triavum & ulteriüs si tem-
pus permittat, qui omnes sic ascendendo recté dici


poierunt antecessores ad modum assise mortis ante-


cessoris, vel descendendo à nepote usq, ad trinepotem
& ulteriüs, si tempus permiserit: qui omnes rect? dici
poterunt consanguinei, nisi sib qui dieat sic, q omnes
sunt consanguinei tam ascendentes quàm descedentes.
Nec obstare debet q quidam dicunt q per tale breve
de recto quod incipit per precipe, amittunt curiam
suam domini curiarum, quod est & esse possit contra
comunem libertatem (ut dicunt), sed revera non est ita,
q tenentes! ppter seysinam mortis antecessorum 7 suo-
rum semper teneatur? adire curiam dominorum, quia
si plures * competant actiones, unam illarum quam volu-
erit eligere poterit, & ea experiri. Poterit enim quis
habere assisam mortis àntecessoris, nove disseysine, &
breve de ingressu, & breve de recto uno & eodem
tempore, & quam istarum voluerit eligere poterit nec
compelli debet magis ad unam q ad aliam, nec ad


breve de reclo magis q ad assisam. Si auté agere


veli& per assisam nov:e disseysins, sic tollere poterit
curiam díii sui sine injuria alicujus ad breve de recto,
& sic de alis placitis & assisis, & sic no fit dnis
curiarum injuria, si petens p alia brevia agere volu-
erii q per breve de recto, cum ad tale breve non te-
neatur nisi velit. Si aute tempus excedat terminum
assiste mortis antecessoris, locum habebit breve de recto,
cüm petés pbare non possit seysinà de visu & auditu
alicujus pprio sed alieno, scilicet. patris qui vidit, &
hoe filio suo injunxit q testis esse possit. Breve de


! «* petentes," MSS. Rawl. C. 160 5 * teneantur," MS. Rawl. C. 160.
and C. 159. 1 *gj cui plures," MS. Rawl. C.
2* propter seysinum  anteces- | 160.
* gorum," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


da€m — M MAN A USecem nWELIIÁU UIT ns I mpi alie MI E


OF A WRIT OF COSINAGE. 395


its own limits, and not between others as between blood-
relations (as stated above) by ascending from the grand-
father up to the grandfather's grandfather, and further, if
the time should permit, all of whom in so ascending may
be rightly said to be ancestors after the manner of an
assise of mortdancester, or in descending from the grand-
son to the grandson's grandson and further, if the time


shall permit, all of whom may be rightly called cousins, |


unless there be some one who says thus, that all are
cousins as well in the ascending line as in the descending
line. Norought it to bean obstacle that some say, that by
such à writ of right which begins with * Precipe," the
lords of courts lose their court, which is and may be
against the common liberty (as they say), but in truth it
is not so, since the claimants on account of the seysine of
their deceased ancestors are always bound to have recourse
to the court of their lords, because if any one is entitled


to several kinds of action, he may choose that one of them


which he wishes and try it. For a person may have an


assise of mortdancester, an assise of novel disseysine, and


a writ of entry and a writ of right at one and the same
time, and may choose which of them he wishes, nor ought
he to be compelled to have recourse to one. rather than to
another, nor to à writ of right rather than to an assise.
But if he should wish to proceed by an assise of novel


disseysine, he may so set aside the court of his lord


without injury to any one as regards & writ of right,
and so of other pleas and assises, and thus no injury is
done to the lords of courts, if the claimant wishes to
proceed by other writs than by a writ of right, since he
is not bound to such à writ unless he chooses. But if
the time exeeeds the term of an assise of mortdancester,
a writ of right shall have place, when a claimant cannot


» prove his seysine by the view and hearing of any person


of his own knowledge, but upon hearsay, as upon the
knowledge of his father who saw it and communicated it
to his son in otder that he might be à witness. À writ


f. 281b.


1.
De inten-
tione pe-
tentis et
respon-
sione
tenentis.


936 ^" BREVE DE CONSANGUINITATE.


consanguinitate tale est. Rex vic. salute. Precipe A.
q justé & sine dilatione reddat B. tantam terram cum
pünenftiis in tali villa de qua C. consanguineus ipsius
B. cujus heres ipse est vel antecessor talis sine ex-
pressione, vel, cum expressione, s. nepos vel avus suus
fuit seysitus in dominico suo ut de feodo, die quo
obiit (ut dicit) & nisi fecerit & talis fecerit te secu-
rum &c. tunc summoneas talem &c. quód sit osten-
surus quare non fecerit. "Teste &c. |


CAP. II.


Post essoü veró prs;sentibus in judicio partibus, ppo-
nat petens intentione suam tali modo. A. petit versus
B. tantam terram cum ptinentiis in tali villa ut jus
suum, & sie fundat intentionem. Et unde talis nomine
antecessor vel consanguineus suus, eujus hzeres ipse est


 (eü expressione vel sine) fuit seysitus in dominico suo


2.
Responsio

ad tale

breve.


ut de feodo, die quo obiit. Et de ipso tali descendit
jus predietze terre cuidam tali filio & heredi, & sic
deinceps per omnis sieut per breve de recto, sieut in-
feriüs dicetur usq, ad illu qui petit, & q tale sit jus
suum & q talis antecessor ita fuit seysitus offert, &c.


Et B. venit & defendit jus suum &c. & dicit q non
debet ad hoe breve respondere q ipse tenens & petens
sunt de eodem stipite, à quo descendit hereditas pe-
tita, & ita g non valet breve de consanguinitate non
magis inter eos g assisa. Sed videnda est ratio quare.


OF A WRIT OF COSINAGE. 937


of cosinage is of this kind. The king to the viscount
greeting. Enjoin Á. that justly and without delay he
restore to B. so much land with its appurtenances in


' such a vill of which C. the cousin of the said B. whose
 heir.he is, or so-and-so his ancestor without any speci-


fieation, or with a specifieation, to' wit, his grandson -
or grandfather, was seysed in his demesne as of fee, on
the day on which he died (as he says), and unless he so .
does or so-and-so has given security to you &c., then sum-
mon so-and-so that he be present to REM cause why he
has not done it. Wfiness &c.


CHAPTER II.


But after the essoins the parties being present in -
judgment, let the claimant set forth his declaration in P K


laration


. this manner. À. claims against B. so much land with its of the


appurtenances in such a vill as his right, and so founds Meus


his declaration, and whereof so-and-so by name his pii
ancestor or cousin, whose heir he is (with à specification
or without) wás seysed in his demesne as of fee, on the

day on which he died. And from such person the right

in the aforesaid land has descended to a certain so-and-so

as his son and heir, and so in suecession through every

stage as in & writ of right, as will be stated hereafter,

down to him who is the claimant, end that such is his

right and that so-and-so his ancestor was so seysed he

offers to prove &c.


And B. eomes and maintains his right &c., and says ».
that he ought not to answer to this writ bediuse he the dor
tenant and the claimant are from the same stock, from writ.
which descends the inheritance claimed, and so that a writ
of rosinage does not avail between them any more than


&n assise,


Q1302. Y


f 3.
De excep-
tione pari-
tatis, quse
est in per-
Sonas de-
scendentes
de eodem
stipite.


Britton, iii.
ch. xxvi.


85.


f. 282.


398 BREVE DE CONSANGUINITATE.


Poni autem poterit casus in personis trium fratrum
& multis modis: ut si pater comunis moriatur seysi-
tus de aliqua hereditate vel alius antecessor, & post-
natus se posueri& in seysinam totius hzreditatis, cüm
non sit partibilis, vel si pater vel alius antecessor
comunis, vel frater antenatus vel extranea qusevis per-
sona feoffaverit fratrem medium, qui inde obiit seysi-
tus sine herede de se, & antenatus vel postnatus se
ponat in seysina, & primó: sicut E. frater postnatus
ponat se in seysinam, ÀÁ. frater antenatus petat versus
eum per breve de consanguinitafbb, vel per assisam:
respondere poterit idem C. q ad breve de consangui-
nitate no tenetur respondere non magis q ad assisa,
quia ipsi A. & C. antenatus & postnàtus sunt de
eode stipite à quo descendit hereditatis, à patre vel
alio antecessore comuni vel fratre medio. Et ipse C.
tantundé juris habet in predicta hereditate quatum


&d seysina, cüm extiterit in longa & pacifica seysina


inter presentes, & cüm sit justus heres & propinquus
ipsius antecessoris, & adeó propinquus sicut ille A.
frater antenatus, & unde cüm pares sint in jure pos-
sessorio, non vult ei respondere ppter juris paritatem :
& unde si antenatus dicat se esse ppinquiorem, &
nemo poterit esse heres ppinquior nisi ratione juris
meri q ei descendit, & nec assisa. nec consanguinitas
terminare possunt jus merü nisi tantü breve de recto:
ideó de- necessitate cadit assisa & cosanguinitas, &
terminabii negotiü p breve de recto, ubi nec duellü
nec magna assise, sed p cwníe cwntey! omninó, vel q
dicat in fine & ostendat quare hereditas remanere no
possit cum antenato qui est heres propinquior, quoad -


1 € counte counte," MS. Rawl. C. 159, of supra, p. 316.


.
p
|
|


OF A WRIT OF COSINAGE. | 339


Buta case may be supposed in the persons of three Dude
brothers and in many modes, as if à common father ing an


dies seysed of & certain inheritance, or some other ances- of parit,
?


.tor, and. the younger-born has put himself into seysine which is


of the entire inheritance, when it is not. shareable, or if Miss


a father or other common ancestor or an elder-born descended


. .- f th
brother or some stranger in blood has enfeoffed an in- joe sto.


termediate brother, who died seysed thereof without an
heir of his body, and the elder-born or the after-born
brother puts himself into seysine, and in the first in-
stance: as E. the alter-born brother puts himself into
seysine, À. the elder-born brother claims against him by
& writ of cosinage or by an assise; the said C. may
answer, that he is not bound to answer to a writ of


 eosinage, no more than to.an assise, because the said A.


and C. the elder-born and the younger-born are from the
same stock from which the inheritance descends, from a
father or another common ancestor or intermediate
brothér. And the said C. has as much right in the
aforesaid inheritance as far as regards the seysine, since


he has been in à long and peaceable seysine &midst all


the parties present, and since he isa lawfuland near
heir of the said ancestor, and as near as the said A. the
elder brother, and hence since they are peers in posses-
sory right, he does not wish to make answer to him on
account of his parity of right, and hence if the elder-born
says that he is nearer, and no one can be a nearer heir


except in regard of the mere right which descends to
— him, and neither the assise nor the writ of cosinage can


determine the mere right, except only & writ of right; £2.


therefore of necessity the assise and the writ of cosinage


fall, and the business will be determined by à writ of

right, where there is neither the duel nor the great as-

sise, but by cwntey cwntey altogether, or that he should

state in the end and show wherefore the inheritance

cannot remain with the elder-born, who is the next

heir as far as Tgfugo right, because homage has in-
Y 2


same stock.


ELE. ETE NEM UOTIS rs "mM " Em


3940 | BREVE DE CONSANGUINITATE.


jus: d& homagiü intervenit, u& sciatur quis ppinquior,
& p hoc heres. rector. (Sine prejudicio sentetie me-
lioris) videt q no poterit frater postnatus habere ex-


 eeption& paritatis cótra fratre antenatü quatü ad sey-


sinà nisi possessio sua sive seysina loga fuerit &
pacifica inter presentes habita, quia si fuerit brevis
vel interrupta, nó valet: inter presentes dico, da si
quis presens dissimulaverit ad tépus, sibi prejudicat
ppter taciturnitaté, cü vigilantibus jura subveniát.
Secüs auté si inter absentes, ubi tepus no currit: &
ideó nisi talis seysina longa fuerit & pacifica inter
psentes (ut pdietu est) no potest dicere postnatus q
habeat tantü juris Quoad seysinà quàtu antenatus, cüm
seysina sua nulla sit vel no suffiiens cüm sit brevis
vel loga, tame interrupta. Et unde càm longà habu-
erit postnatus seysina & pacifica inter psentes, q sine
brevi ejici no possit quin recuperet p assisam, tic
primü liberu habet teiütum & copetit ei assisa & ex-
ceplio paritatis versus antenatu, et sic no habebit
antenatus actione nisi p breve de recto, & ubi obsta- |
bit ei casus regis! & anted sic habuerit postnatus loga
& pacifica possessione, sed antenatus? postnatü receter
ejecerit, no recuperabit ppter seysina tenera. Si auté
ipsu statim ejicere no possit & receter faciat re co-
tentiosam p interpellatione vel impetratione diligente,
& sic nung habebit postnatus pacificam seysinà & sic
nunquà liberü tentum & p ceonseques nulla seysina.
Sic ergo no copetit ei exceptio paritatis cü no sit in


seysina nisi nuda pedü positione, & üde in hoc casu


bene jacebit inter antenatu & postnatu assisa mortis


! *casus regis," of supra, p. 282. ? « sj antenatus," MS. Ràwl. C.
160.


OF A WRIT OF COSINAGE. 341


tervened, that i& may be known who is the next T
and thereby the more rigbtful heir. (Without prejudice
to & better opinion) it seems.that à younger-born brother
eannot have àn exception of parity against an elder-born
brother as far as regards seysine unless his own posses- :
sion and seysine has been long and peaceably held
amidst the parties present, because if it has been short
and interrupted, it is of no avail amidst the parties
present I say, because if à party being present has dis-
sembled for a time, he prejudices himself on account of
his taciturnity, since laws assist the vigilant. But itis
otherwise amongst the absent, where time does not run,
and therefore unless such seysine has been long and
peaceful amidst the parties present (as said above) the
younger-born cannot say that he has as much right i in
respect of seysine as the elder-born, since his seysine is
null or not sufficient, when it is short or long but inter-
rupted. And hence when the younger-born has hada
long and peaceable seysine amidst the parties present,
that he cannot be ejected without à writ so as to prevent
him recovering possession by an assise, then for the first
time he has à free tenement, and he is entitled to an
assise and an exception of parity against the elder-born,
and so the elder-born shall not have an action except by
a writ of right, and where the case of the king will be
in his way, and before the younger-born has thus had a
long and peaceable possession, if the elder-born has re-
cently ejected the younger-born, he shall not recover on
account of his tender seysine. But if he cannot forth-
with eject the said younger-born and he has made the
estate contentious by an interpellation or a diligent su-
ing out of a writ, the younger-born will thus never have
a8, peaceable seysine, and so never a free tenement, and con-
quently noseysine. He is thus not entitled to an excep-
tion of parity since he is not in seysine except by the bare
planting of his feet upon it, and hence in this case an
assise of mortdancester will welllie between the elder-born


EEEBE 2 x: CCELI il dO ROMA IM CIL ccc nd X IC Dd CINE CLIE ME COL ADEL C RECO
.


f. 282 b.


942 BREVE DE CONSÁNGUINITATE.


atecessoris, sicut cotra quelibet extraneu. Et unde cüm


' talis postnatus donatione fecerit de comuni hsreditate


& vocatus fuerib ad warantu p feoffamentu, videndum
erii quale frater postnatus ante donatione habuerit
seysinà, secundüm q superiüs dietü est, & secundüm
hoc cüm warantizaverit pcedet assisa& versus postnatum


qui warantizavit, vel remanebit, q locu habeat breve


de recto, quia pvenit in eum casum &c. nec poterit
aliquis dare nisi ille qui seysinam habuerit. Cüm fra-
ler postnatus in possessione fuerit hereditatis paterne
& in pacifica seysina, & ita q sine judicio ejici no pos-
sit & f[feoffaverit; inde aliqué, & cüm frater antenat?
assisam mortis antecessoris inde portaverit super feof-
fatu qui feoffatoré suum viz. fratré postnatü inde voca-
verit ad waratü, & qui ei waratizaverit, & postea re-
spodeat ad assisa, g &ssisa mortis antecessoris no jacet
inter ipsü fratre! atenatü ppter paritate juris posses-
sori, sed dicat q no jaceat inter eos assisa nisi tantü
breve de recto, cotétio est inter majores utrü pcedere
debeat assisa vel no, dicüt enira quidà q assisa pcedere
nó debet ppter paritate juris no magis q pcederet si
aliü nung feoffaret, càm ipse postnatus jà p warantia
effectus sit quasi düs & tenens rei, & q pcedendum est
p breve de recto, ubi nee duellü nec magna assisa nisi
iantüu narratio super descensu & ipso jure majore. Et
sunt qui dicunt q p assisam peedendu erit, qa revera
licet frater postnatus warantizaverit, & licet teneatur
defendere possidente in seysina, tamen ipse non possi-
det: quod quidem probari poterit multis rationibus.
Quia tenens qui warantum vocavit, licet ei warantiza-


1 « ipsum et fratrem," M$. Rawl. C. 160.


OF A WRIT OF COSINAGE. 943 .


and the younger-born, as against any stranger in blood,
And hence when sueh à younger-born has made a dona-
tion of the common inheritance and is called to warrant
pursuant to- the feoffment, it will have to be seen what
seysine the younger-born brother had before the donation,
according to what has been said above and aecording to
. this when he has warranted the donation, the assise
shall proceed against the younger-born brother, who
has warranted it, or it shall be stayed, that a writ of


right may have place, because it has arrived at that :


case &c. nor can any one give except he who has the
seysine. When a younger-born brother has been in
possession of & paternal inheritance and in. peaceable
Seysine, and so that he cannot be ejected without a
judgment, and has enfeoffed a&ny one with it, and when
the elder-born brother has brought thereupon an assise of
mortdancester against the feoffee, who has called his
feoffor, to wit, the younger-born brother, to warrant his
feoffment, and who has warranted it to him, and after-
wards answers to the assise, that &n assise of mortdan-


eester does not le between him and his elder-born.


brother on aecount of the parity of their possessory right,
and he says that an assise does not lie between them but
only a writ of right, there is a dispute amongst the elders
whether an assise ought to proceed or not, for some say
ihatan assise ought not to proceed on account of the
pariby of right, no more than if he had not enfeoffed
another, since the said younger-born was already by the
warranty made as it,were the lord agd tenant of the
estate, and that proceedings should be had by a writ of
right, where neither the duel nora great assise would
be had, but only a statement of the descent and the
greater right. And there are some who say that pro-
ceedings must be had by an assise, because in truth


although the younger-born brother has warranted, and .


although he is bound to maintain the possessor in seysine,
nevertheless he himself does not possess, which may be


f. 282 b.


. proved by many reasons. Because the tenant who has :


9044 BREVE DE CONSANGUINITATE.


tum fuerit, tamen à seysina non recedit,sed expectabit.
eventum placiti inter warantum suum et petentem, et
sj warantus suus eum defendere possit, remanebit in
seysina, et'si non, tune primó cüm  warantus suus
eontra se judicium habuerit, ejicietur à seysina, et in-
continenti de terra waranti consequetur excambium.
Et ideó videtur q frater postnatus non est in seysina,
' et. hae ratione q versus eum procedat assisa. Sed
(sine presudicio melioris sententie) videtur, secundüm
ultimum casum, q procedet assisa: maxime quia frater
postnatus non est tenens sed defensor tenentis, & licet
faciat verba defensionis pro tenente, quod videri pote-
rit manifestius ex hoc quod dicitur, q assisa non jacet
inter eos sed breve de recto, qui& ex hoc sequitur, q
si assisa cadere debet in persona postnati eo q tenens
sib secundüm quosdam, per eandem viam resurgere
deberet per breve de recto inter eos, per hóc quod
dicitur, q non jacet assisa inter eos sed breve de recto.
Sed si breve de recto contra ipsum sit impetratum,
non potest procedere, quia ipse revera non tenet, unde
si cadat assisa &' similter breve de recto, sic cadit
actio & versus warantum &é& versus tenentem: quod
esse non debet. Procedat igitur assisa & non breve
de recto in hoc casu. ltem si cadere debeat assisa
inter eos & de necessitate impetretur breve de recto
super tenentem, in electione tenentis erit utrum wa-
rantum vocare voluerit vel non, nec ad hoe compelli
poterit contra voluntatem, & sic procedere debet breve
de recto inter fratrem antenatum petentem & tenen-
tem, sequetur ex hoc quod tenens se defendere poterit
per duellum vel magna assisam, secundüm quod volu-


OF A WRIT OF COSINAGE. 945


ealled à warrantor, although the warranty has been ful-
filled for him, nevertheless does not withdraw from sey-
sine, but. he will await the event of the plea between his
warrantor and the claimant, and if his warrantor can
maintain him, he will remain in seysine ; and if not, then
for the first time, when his warrantor has had judgment
against him, he will be ejected from seysine, and forth with
will obtain compensation from the land of the warrantor.
And therefore it seems that the younger-born brother is
not in seysine, and for this reason that the assise proceeds
against him, but (without prejudice to & better opinion)
ib seems according to the last case that the assise shall pro-
ceed chiefly because the younger-born brother is not the
tenant but the defender of the tenant, and although he
plays the part of defence for the tenant, which may be
seen more clearly from this, that it is said that an assise
does not lie between them, but a writ of right, because it
follows from this, that if an assise ought to fall in the per-
son of & younger-born brother inasmuch as he is the
tenant according to some, through the same way it ought
to revive by & writ of right between them, through this
which is said, that an assise does not lie between them,
buta writof right. But if & writ of right has been
sued out against him, ib cannot proceed, because he
himself is in truth not the tenant, whence if the assise
falls and in like manner the writ of right, so also falls
the action both against the warrantor and against the
tenant, which ought not to be. Let the assise therefore
proceed and not the writ of rightin this case. Likewise
if an assise ought to fall between them and of necessity
& writ of right is sued out against the tenant, it will be at
the election of the tenant whether he will call a warrantor
or not; nor can he be compelled thereto against his will,
and so a writ of right ought to proceed between an
elder-born brother as claimant and a tenant, it will follow
from this that the tenant. may defend himself by the
duel or the great assise according as he wishes, which


Ma coe" coo pnm n 7000 7


4.


Quid juris,


si post-
natus et


946 BREVE: DE CONSANGUINITATE.


erit, q grave esset petenti de tam recenti seysina, Gi
autem frater antenatus priüs se posuérit in seysinam,
& postnatus petat versus eum per assisam vel consan-
guinitatem, ad quod respondere poterit antenatus, q
ad hoc breve respondere non debet ratione supradicta,
quia cum per tale breve nihil petatur nisi seysina
tantum & conjuncta sit seysina cüm ipso jure in sua&
persona, & seysina in hoc casu à jure per se separari
non possit, càm sequi debeat jus in descensu, oportet
q postnatus utrumq, petat tam jus quàm seysinam,
quod quidem per tale breve facere non potest. Recur-
rendum est igitur ad breve de recto quod utrumq, de-
terminat & amplectitur. Quod autem dictum est de
fratre postnato petente & antenato tenente, dici debet
de avunculo petente versus nepotem, et de nepote
petente versus avunculum & alios remotiores heredes
Íratris antenati vel postnati in.linea recta descendente
vel ascendente vel transversali q contra ipsum non
habet locum consanguinitas, cüm  assisa mortis ante-


eessorig locum non habeat infrà suos terminos inler


fratres vel sorores, avunculum vel nepotem, quia jus
non determinat.


Dietum est q non jacet assisa inter heredem pro-
pinquiorem & propinquum, quicunq, eorum tenens fuerit


propinquus Vl petens: videndum erit quid juris, si propinquus


petat ver-
süs remo-
tum, sicut


heres petat versus propinquum, ubi pares sunt in jure -


possessorio cum hzrede propinquiore, scilicet, ubi duo


Miis tag fratres postnati vivente primogenito unus petat versus


tium
trem.


f. 283.


alium per assisam. Et sciendum q assisa non procedit


"inter eos duplici ratione, tum quia quilibet eorum ha-


bet paritatem juris in possessione, tum quia frater
&ntenatus (qui habet jus merum) propinquior est
hsres, nec potest aliquis esse hseres propinquior misi
ille ad quem jus merum descendit, sive sit unus sive


PURERLAONEMEMCONTE S. AN ERERERUTR. ROC FERES GT RES


OF A WRÍT OF COSINAGE. o47


would be grievous for the claimant upon such & recent
"Seysine. But if the elder-born brother has first put him-
self into seysine, and the younger-born claims against .
him by an assise or by & writ of cosinage, to which the
elder-born may answer, that he ought not to answer to
that writ for the reason above stated, because since by
such & writ nothing is claimed except only the seysine,
and the seysine is conjoined with the right in his person, .
and the seysine in this case cannot be separated by itself
from the right, since it ought to follow the right in
descent, itis incumbent that the younger-born should
claim the right as well as the seysine, which he cannot.
easily do by such a writ. Recourse therefore must be
had to a writ of right, whieh determines and embraces
al. But what is said concerning a younger-born brother
as tenant and an elder-born as claimant, ought to be said
of an uncle claiming against a nephew and of a& nephew
claiming against an uncle and other more remote heirs of
an elder-born or à,younger-born brother in a right line
descending or ascending or transverse, that & writ of
cosinage has no place against him, since an assise of mort-
dancester has no place within its limits between brothers
and sisters, an uncle or a nephew, because it does
not determine the right.


It has been stated that.an assise does not lie between What i |
a next heir and a near heir, whichever of them be tho therigho if
tenant or the claimant, it will have to be seen what is born and
the right, if a near heir claims against a near heir, where rds
they are peers in possessory right with a next heir, agsinsta
io wit, where two younger-born brothers during the pei. 5,
lifetime of the firstborn elaim one against the other by sgeinst
an assise, And it is to be known that an assise does not ierant
take place between them for & double reason, as well f 23.
because each of them has a parity of right in possession,
as because the elder-born brother (who has the absolute
right) is the next heir, nor can any one be the next heir


" but heto whom the absolute right descends, whether he be


9


Quid juris
si warran-


348 BREVE DE CONSANGUINITATE.


plures. Nec erit in personis hseredum propinquorum
recurrendum ad breve de recto, quia ad nullum ipso-
rum descendit jus merum, & cim in personis eorum
non habeat locum assisa, ita nec consanguinitas, nec
in personis hsredum ex illis provenientium. Item
cüm locum non habeat inter propinquos, locum non
habebit inter propinquum & remotum, sive remotissi-
mum, nec est igitur consanguinitas. Contra extraneas
veró personas possunt consanguinei petere per assisam
de seysina antecessorum suorum, & in gradibus ad quos
assisa mortis antecessoris se non extendit, petere pos-
sunt per breve de consanguinitate, quatenus tempus
permiserit & probatio, ui predictum est.


Sed esto quód, cüm conjuncta persona frater medius


'vel postnatus in seysina fuerit h:sreditatis à communi


tus vocetur stipite descendentis, et totam vel ejus partem transfe-


frater,
videlicet
postnatus,
et war-
rantiza-


. verit.


rat ad extraneum, & frater antenatus & propinquior
assisam portaverit super tenentem, & ille warantum
vocaverit fratre postinatum & ipse warantizaverit, vide-
tur prima facie quàd cadere debeat assisa, quasi per-
venerit ad eum casum sicut inter fratrem antenatum
heredem propinquiorem & postnatum h:zredem ppin-
quum, & q procedi debeat per breve de recto, ae si
assisa venisset super fratrem postnatum & qui inven-
tus essel in seysina. Sed esto quód cüm frater post-
natus vel consanguineus vocetur ad warantum defaltam
faciat; nonne erit assisa capienda per defaltam in per-
sona tenentis? immó. Et eodem modo cüm waranti-
zatum fuerit, si tenens defendi non possit in seysina,
petens de seysina tenentis recuperabit, & tenens ex-
cambium de waranto. Sed revera non cadit assisa
seeundüm  quosda, quia tenens, licetei wa rantizatum


OF A WRIT OF COSINAGE. 9010


one or several. Nor will recourse have to be had in the
persons of the near heirs to a writ of right, because the
mere right has descended to none of them, and since an
assise has no place in their persons, so neither à writ of
cosinage, nor in the persons of the heirs springing from
them. Likewise since it has not à place between near
heirs, it will not have a place between a near and a re-
mote heir or à most remote heir, nor is there therefore
cosinage. But against strangers in blood cousins may
claim by an assise upon the seysine of their ancestors,
and in degrees to which an assise of mortdancester does
not extend, they may claim by a writ of cosinage, as far
as time and the proof will permit, as has been said
above.


But let it be that when a blood-relation an inter- "


LO


mediate or younger-born brother has been inseysine of de reb
an inheritance descending from & common stock, and ifabrother,
transfers the whole or à part of it to à stranger in blood, en E
and the elder-born brother as next heir has brought an born, is
assise against the tenant, and the latter has called the called t^
younger-born brother as & warrantor and he has war- and has
ranted the transfer, it seems at first sight. that the assise "*'7*nted.
ought to fall, as if it had arrived at a case between an
elder-born brother the next heir and & younger-born

brother à near heir, and that the proceeding ought to be

by à writ of right, as if the assise had come upon the
younger-born brother who had been found in seysine.

But let it be that when the younger-born brother or

cousin is ealled to warrant he makes default, will not
theassise have to be taken by default in the person of

the tenant ? Certainly. And in the same manner when

the warranty to him has been fulfilled, if the tenant can- .

not be maintained in seysíne, the claimant shall recover

from the seysine of the tenant,and the tenant shall

have compensation from the warrantor. But in truth

the assise does not fall'according to. some, because the


tenant, although the warranty to him has been fulfilled,


I.
De excep-
tionibus
contra
breve.


350 BREVE DE CONSANGUINITATE.


sit, non recedet à seysina, sed warantus eü defendere
lenetur in seysina sua, & ideó à tenente non est trans-
lata seysina, & ideó procedit assisa, nisi warantus re-
spondere possit ad assisaàm & docere quare procedere
non debeat, fit tamen contrarium quandoque.


Car. III.


Contra breve de consanguinitate in suo casu respon- :
deri poterit & excipi, sicut contra assisam mortis an-
iecessoris: ut si excipiatur q breve de consanguinitate
non jacet, quia sunt cohsredes & q hsereditas descen-


dat ab uno stipite, & q sanguinitas non jaceat magis


f. 283 b.


quàm assisa, responderi poterit ad hoc à petente, q


benens non est in seysina ut hsres communis anteces-


soris, sed ex causa donationis à communi antecessore
vel ab alio, & q donatio minüs sufficiens est, quia talis
nunquam seysinam habuit in vita donatoris, sed q
donator inde obiit seysitus ut de feodo, & per hoc
tenebit breve & cadet assisa, sed vertetur in juratam
ad inquirendum de feoffamento & seysina. Item re-
sponderi poterit, quód ille qui in seysina est, non est
cohseres sed extraneus, licet filius legitimus, propter
coarctationem hseredum, quia terra data fuit in mari-
tagium cum matre petentis eum tali viro & hseredibus
eorum communibus, & ile qui tenet est de altero viro,
licet de eadem matre, & coheres esse non poterit nec
propinquus nee remotus, propter coarctationem hsre-
dum. Sed si dicatur quód tenens bastardus sit vel
villnus, ita quód hseres esse non possit, ibi cadit con-
sanguinitas sicut caderet assisa: quia talis objectio


OF A WRIT OF COSINAGE. 851


shall not withdraw from the seysine, but the warrantor


is bound to maintain him in his seysine, and therefore |
the seysine is not transferred from the tenant, and there-


. fore the assise proceeds, unless the warrantor can answer
to the assise and show cause wherefore it ought not to
proceed, the contrary however is sometimes done.


CHAPTER III.


Against a writ of cosinage in its own case answers


l.


and exceptions may be made, as against an assise of Ofex-


ceptions


mortdancester, as-if it be excepted that à writ of cosin- against
.age does not lie, because they are coheirs and that the the vrit.


inheritance descends from one stock, and that a writ of
cosinage does not lie any more than an assise, it may be
answered to this by à claimant, that the tenant is not
in seysine as the heir of à common ancestor, but by
reason of donation from a common ancestor or from
. Some other person, and that the donation is not suffi-
cient, because sueh person never Had the seysine in the
lifetime of the donor, and that the donor died seysed
thereof as of fee, and through this the writ shall hold
good, and the assise shall fall, and it shall be turned
into & jury to inquire concerning the feoffment and the
seysine. Likewise it may be answered that he who is
in seysine,is not à coheir but a& stranger in blood, al-
though a legitimate son, on account of the limitation of
the heirs, because the land was given as a marriage


portion with the mother of the claimant with a certain
f. 283 b.


husband and to their common heirs, and he who holds
the estate is by another husband, although by the same
mother, and cannot be a coheir nor a& near heir nor &
remote heir, on aecount of the limitation of the heirs.
But if it be said that the tenant is & bastard or a villein,
S0 that he cannot.be an heir, thereupon the writ of
cosinage falls just as an assise would fall, because such


959  - BREVE DE CONSANGUINITATE.


pertinet ad jus. Et unde si ille, cui objicitur bastar-
dia, se probare possit legitimum, vel ille, cui servitus
objieitur, probare se possit esse liberum, per hoc ter-
minabitur negotium tam super jure quàm super pro-
prietate, quod quidem fieri non poterit per breve de
consanguinitate, nó magis quàm per assisam, quod non
est in easibus precedentibus, quia sicut! in causa pos-
sessionis se probaverit legitimum vel liberum, non
propter hoe se probat heredem propinquiorem, & ideó
recurrendum erit ad breve de recto cüm hoc tangat
jus merum. ltem dicere possit quód antecessor non
obiit seysitus ut de feodo, vel si obiit seysit? ut de
feodo, tam& ille qui petit p breve de cosanguinitate
non est in tali gradu vel linea, q aliquid ei descendere
possit ratione alicujus propinquitatis, quia ex fratre
talis antecessoris postnato. Et ut breviter concludatur,
omnes feré exceptiones quse eompetunt contra assisan:
mortis .antecessoris, competunt contra breve de con-
sanguinitate, cüm sapiat naturam assise. Item per
breve de consanguinitate possunt plures petere sicut
unus, & contra plures sieut contra unum, sieut in
assisa. ltem poterit assis& conjungi cum consanguini-
tate & per unicum breve terminari, ut si soror petat
de morte vel seysina patris vel matris, & nepos &
neptis ex sorore vel ulteriàs. Ut si dicatur s. A. pa-


' ter vel mater B. & avus vel avia, proavus vel proavia


C. cujus hseredes ipsi B. & C. sunt, fuit seysitus in
dominico suo ut de feodo &c. Et forma brevis ut
superiüs in principio, et qualiter per hoe breve pce-
dendum sit, & qualiter contra breve excipiendum, satis
ex premissis sumi poterit exemplum.


! * quia si quis," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF A WRIT OF COSINAGE. 358


an objection strikes at the right. And hence if he, to
whom bastardy is objected, can prove himself to be
legitimate, or he to whom servitude is objected, can
prove himself to be free, thereby the affair shall be ter-
minated as well upon the right as upon the property,
which cannot be done by a writ of cosinage, no more
than by an assise, which lies not in the preceding cases,.
because if in à cause of possession he has proved himself
io be legitimate or free, he does not on that account
prove himself to be the next heir, and therefore recourse
must be had to a writ of right, since this touches the
absolute right. Likewise he may say that his ancestor did
not die seysed as of fee, orif he died seysed as of fee,
nevertheless he who claims by a writ of cosinage is not
in such grade or line, that any thing can descend to him
by reason of any nearness of kin, because he is from a
younger-born brother of such an ancestor. And that it
may be briefly concluded, almost all the exceptions
which are applicable against an assise of mortdancester,
are applicable against à writ of cosinage, since ib savours
of the nature of an assise. Likewise by & writ of cosi-
nage several may claim just as one person, and against
several just as against one person, as in an assise.  Like-
wise an assise may be coupled with a writ: of cosinage,
and may be terminated through a single writ, as if a
Sister claims upon the death or seysine of her father or
of her mother, and the nephew or the niece out of the
Sister, or further. As if 1t be said, to wit, À. the father
or the mother of B. and the grandfather or the grand-
mother, the great-grandfather or the great-grandmother
of C., whose heirs the said B. and C. are, was seysed in
demesne as of fee &c. And the form of the writ is as
above in the beginning, and in what way proceedings
are to be taken through this writ, and in what way ex-
ceptions are to be taken against the writ, & sufficient
example may be derived from what has been said above.


Q 1809. Z


].
An breve
de eonsan-
guinitate
verti possit
in breve
de recto.


Britton, iii.
ch. xxvi.


& 6.


f. 281.


354 BREVE DE CONSANGUINITATE.


CAP. IV.


Item videndum est an breve de consanguinitate
verti possit. p narrationem in breve de recto, sicut
potest per! breve de ingressu in breve de recto, vel
econtrario. Ut si dicat petens p breve de consangui-
nitate in narratione descensus: Et unde talis anteces-
sor suus obiit seysitus in dominico suo ut de feodo, &
postea adjiciat, & de jure. Videtur (et verum est) q
sic transeat de possessione in pprietatem, p hoc enim
q dicit q talis obiit seysitus in dominico suo ut de
feodo, deducit in judicium totum jus possessionis. Et
de hoe q addit de jure, deducit in. judicium jus pro-
prietatis, eb. sic per consequens duo jura, possessionis
viz. et proprietatis, s. jus duplicatum, quod dicitur
Dveit. dveit. Sed quia breve de consanguinitate nihil
determinare potest nisi jus possessorium, et petens in
narratione sua ulteriüs procedit ad jus merum, ad quod
consanguinitas se non extendit non magis quàm assisa
mortis antecessoris, per hoe recedit de brevi suo, &
cadit breve et non erit recurrendum postea nisi ad
breve de recto. Nunquam enim vertitur causa posses-
sionis in causam proprietatis per narrationem ex parte
petentis ut hie,nec e converso. Poterit enim quis ha-
bere liberum tefitum sine usu & expletiis. Et unde
sj quis ejectus fuerit de tali seysina & per assisam
novse disseysin:e petat restitui, nihil aliud dicit in inten-
tione sua nisi quod disseysitus est de libero tenemento
suo. Eodem modo si seysinam petat antecessoris per
assisam mortis, nihil aliud dicit nisi quód antecessor
suus seysitus fuit in dominico suo ut de feodo die quo
obiit. Et unde si mentionem faceret de expletiis cap-
tis & de jure mero, sic dicendo per assisam nov:e dis-
seysinse, de libero tenemento meo unde fui seysitus ut


1 * per," omitted MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF A WRIT OF COSINAGE. 352


CHAPTER IV.


Likewise it is to be seen whether a writ of cosinage mE
may be turned by the statement into a writ of right, as vit t
& writ of entry may be turned into à writ of right, Or MEC
the contrary. As if the claimant by à writ of cosinage turned
should say in the statement of his descent, and hence such ia into P oí
his ancestor died seysed in demesne as of fee, and should right.
afterwards add, and of right. TItseems (and it is true)
that thus the transition is made from possession to pro-
perty, for when he says that such a person died seysed
in demesne as of fee, he brings into judgment the whole
right of possession. And when he adds the words * and
* of right," he brings into judgment the right of property,
and so consequently two rights, to wit, of possession and
of property, to wit, a duplicate right, which is called
Dreit dveit. But because à writ of cosinage can deter-
inine nothing except the possessory right, and the claimant
in his statement proceeds further to the absolute right,
to which a writ of cosinage does not extend any more
than an assise of mortdancester, he thereby recedes from
his writ, and the writ falls, and recourse shall not be had
to anything afterwards but to a& writ of right. For &
cause of possession is never turned into a cause of pro-
perty by the statement on the part of a claimant as here,
nor conversely. For a person may have a free tenement
without the use and the profits, and hence if a person be f. 221.
ejeeted from such seysine, and seeks to be restored by an
assise of novel disseysine, he says nothing in his declara-
tion except that he has been disseysed from his freehold.

In the same way if he claims the seysine of his ancestor
by an assise of mortdancester, he says nothing else
than that his ancestor was seysed in his own demesne as
of fee on the day on which hedied. And hence if he
makes mention of taking profits and of the absolute right,
saying thusin an assise of novel disseysine, * from my free-
* hold of which I was seysed as of a freehold as of right in
| 122


Britton, ib.
S7.


956 BREVE DE CONSANGUINITATE.


de libero tenemento ut de jure, capiendo expletia ad
valentiam &c. vel in assisa mortis antecessoris sic di-
cendo, in dominico suo ut de feodo & jure, capiendo
expletia ad valentiam &c, sic caderet breve propter
jus merum, ut supra dictum est. Et unde videtur
manifesté, quód jus possessorium satis stare posset sine
usu et expletiis, quze. tamen si intervenerint prodesse
poterint e£ non nocere, cüm prwbeant vestimenta pos-
sessioni et jus possessorium declarent. Et vice versa
breve de recto nunquam vertitur per narrationem ad
breve predictum super possessione, in hoc enim pro-
prietas et possessio nihil habent commune. $i quis
enim semel cum effectu agere inceperit p breve de
recto super ipso jure, nunquam redire poterit ad ah-
qua actionem super ipsa possessione, vel si in naira-
tione sua aliquem articulum omittat qui locum habeat
super ipso jure, et si dicat tantü in narratione sua:
Et unde talis antecessor suus seysitus fuit in domi-
nico, vel s&i loquatur de seysina propria, et dicat: Et
unde seysitus fui ut de libero tenemento vel in domi-
nico ut de libero tenemento: nisi mentionem faciat de
jure et de tempore regis, et de expletiis captis, non
valebit: et unde videtur manifestó, quód jus pprietatis
stare non possit sine usu et expletiis, sicut poterit jus
possessionis, ut preedictum est. Relinquitur igitur quód
nulla istarum aetionum verti possit in aliam per nar-
rationem. In jure autem proprietatis vertitur quandoq,
breve de ingressu in breve de recto (ppter longissi-
mum ingressum) de necessitate, quia non poterit quis
probare ingressum de visu pprio et auditu, et vice
versa vertitur quandoq, breve de ingressu in breve de
recto, sed non nisi de voluntate tenentis, cüm tempus
hoc permiserit quód probari possit ingressus de visu
alieujus et auditu, secundüm quod inferiüs dicetur
pleniüs de ingressibus.


OF A WRIT OF COSINAGE, 357


* taking profits to the value, &c." or in an assise of
mortdancester saying thus, ^in his own demesne as of
* fee and of right, in taking profits to the value &c.," the
writ would in sueh ease fall on account of the absolute
right as said above. And hence it seems manifestly that
the right of possession can stand sufficiently without the
use and profits, which however if they have intervened,
may be of service and not do harm, since they furnish
elothing to the possession and declare the possessory right.
And eonversely à writ of Right is never turned by the
statement into à writ as above mentioned concerning the
possession, for in this the property and the possession
have nothing in common. . For if any one has once begun
to proceed effectively by à writ of right upon the right
itself, he will never be able to return to any action upon
the possession itself, or if in his statement he omits any
article which should have place upon the right itself, and
if he should only say in his statement *and hence such
" his ancestor was seysed in demesne," or if he should
speak of his own seysine and should say, *and henceI
* have been seysed as of a freehold, or in demesne as of a
* freehold," unless he shall make mention of the right, and
the time of the king and of taking profits, it shall not
avail: and hence it appears manifestly that the right of
property eannot stand without the use and profits, as the
right of possession may stand, as said above. It remains
therefore that none of those actions ean be turned into
another through means of the statement. But in the
right of property & writ of entry is sometimes turned
into à writ of right (on account of a very long entry) of
necessity, because & person cannot prove entry by his
own sight and hearing, and conversely sometimes à writ:
of entry is sometimes turned into & writ of Right, but
only with the willingness of the tenant, when the time
permits this, that the entry ean be proved by the sight
and hearing of some person, according to what will be
more fully discussed below concerning entries.


358 BREVE DE CONSANGUINITATE.


Cap. V.


. Si quis moriatur seysitus de aliqua communia pas-
Brevede ture ut de feodo, et pertinentem ad liberum tenemen-
x eRM tum suum ex fundo alieno, seysinam suam quam ha-
soris d"i buit die quo obiit transmittit ad hreredes suos. Et si
communia hseres cüm in seysina fuerit uti prohibeatur, non com-
ne pelit ei assisa mortis antecessoris cium sit quasi in jure

possessionis, licet, uti prohibeatur, et pro eo quód uti
prohibitus est, de beneficio principis subvenitur ei per
breve quod tale est, per juratam et non per modum

assiste. Forma brevis talis est.
mi Rex vic. salutem.  Precipe tali, quód juste et sine
brevis ub; dilatione permittat talem hàábere communiam pasturze
f.284b. sux in terra sua de tali villa, de qua talis pater vel
quis mori- mater, avunculus vel amita, frater vel soror vel etia
n do^- antecessor avus vel proavus &e. vel consanguineus vel
communia consanguinea, qui omnes dici possunt antecessores me-
pim ritó, eo quód haredem antecedunt in jure possessorio.
REOLUEN Et unde ciun predictus talis (cujus heres ipse vel
de consan- ipsa est) fuit seysitus vel seysita ut de feodo tanquam
guinitate. pertinente ad liberum tenementum suum in eadem villa
vel in alia, die quo obiit ut dicit. Et nisi fecerit, &
idem talis fecerit te securum &c., tunc summoneas per
bonos summonitores predictum talem quód sit coram
justicilarüis nostris ad primam assisam cum in partes
illas venerint ostensurus quare non fecit, & habeas ibi
summonitores & hoc breve. Quod autem dictum est
de hzrede, diei poterit de successore alicujus, sicut de
rectore alicujus ecclesie cujus preedecessor obiit seysi-
tus de aliqua communia pasture tanquam pertinente


&d ecelesiam suam. Forma brevis talis est.


OF A WRIT OF COSINAGE. | 350


CHAPTER V.


. If any one dies seysed of a certain common of pasture — 1.*
as of fee, and appertaining to his freehold from another iL "
persons ground, he transmits to his heirs his seysine, the seysine
which he had on the day on which he died. And if his ors, o
heir, when he is in seysine, be prohibited from using it, has died
he is not entitled to an assise of mortdancester since he ed
is as it were in the right of possession, although he is pasture.
prohibited from using it, and in respect of that which he

is prohibited to use, he is by the beneficence of the prince

assisted by a writ, which is of this kind, by a jury and

not by means of an assise. The formof the writ is of this

kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin so-and-so ^2.
that justly and without delay he should permit so-and- Js wat.
so to have common of pasture on his land in such a vill, t. 284 b.
of which such person's father or mother, uncle or aunt, vhen a
brother or sister, or even an ancestor grandfather or Fh pem
great-grandfather &c., or a male or female cousin, who * 2m
may be all deservedly called ancestors, inasmuch as they if the heir
precede the heir in possessory right. And whereof when Um
so-and-so aforesaid (whose heir he or she was) was seysed his seysine
as of fee, as appertaining to his free tenement in the same E.
vill or in another on the day on which he died as he says. cosinage.
And unless he has done so and the said so-and-so has
given you security &c., then summon by good summoners
so-and-so aforesaid that he be present before our jus-
ticiaries at the first assise when they have come into
those parts, in order to show wherefore he has not. done
it, and have there the summoners and this writ. But
what has been said of an heir may be said of the suecessor
of any one, as of. the rector of a certain church whose
predecessor died seysed of a certain common of pasture
as it were appertaining to his church. The form of the


writis of this kind.


3,
Forma
brevis de
recto.


1.
. De brevi
quo war-
ranto.


360 BREVE DE CONSANGUINITATE.


Rex vicecomiti salutem — Precipe À. quód juste &
sine dilatione permittat À. rectorem talis ecclesie ha-
bere communiàm pasture sue in terra sua de tali
[^
villa, de qua B. przx:decessor suus quondam rector ejus-
dem ecclesie fuit seysitus tanquam pertinente ad ec-
clesiam suam talem die quo obiit ut dicit, & nisi fece-
rit,sufi &c. ut supra. lllud idem breve locum habere
posset (ut videtur) in personis omnium aliorum, qui


petere possunt terras, tenementa, & jura nomine eccle-
| Si» sus, de quibus possessores sui obierint seysiti ut
. de jure eeclesie su:: ut archiepiscopi, episcopi, ab-
. bates, priores, canonici de ecclesiis preebendatis & alii
ecclesiarum rectores, nescio rationem quare non, càüm
. Uubiq, sit eadem ratio. Ad diem vero sumonitionis po-


terit se deforcians essoniare si voluerit, si autem defal-
tam fecerit (seceundüm quosdam) procedendum erit
propter defaliam, ut capiatur pastura in manum do-
mini regis, ae si actio esset realis, quod quidem esse
non deberet (ut videtur), cüm actio potiüs sit persona-
lis quàm realis, & ita potiàs locum habeat attachia-
mentum quàm captio. Sed sive sie sive non sie, qua-
liter procedi debeat, inferiàs satis apparebit. Sed
qualitereunq, procedatur, per hoc breve no pervenitur
ad causam proprietatis, cüm tantum locum habeat in
causa possessionis, sicut superiüs videri poterit pauló
ante. Et ad hoe breve responderi poterit multipliciter,
sicut de assisa mortis antecessoris, & terminari poterit
per juratam vel inquisitionem secundüm proposita &
objecta.


Carp. VI.


Est etiam aliud breve formatum ad querelam, quod
aliquantulum & in parte sapit naturam brevis mortis
antecessoris, & in parte nov: disseysinz, & quod exir&


BECA N


OF A WRIT OF COSINAGE. 9361


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin À. that
justly and without delay he should permit A. the rector
of such à church to have common of pasture on his land
in such a vill, of which B. his predecessor formerly rector
of the same church was seysed as appurtenant io his
said church on the day on which he died, as he says, and
unless he shall do so, summon &c. as above. The very
same writ may have place (as it seems) in the persons
of all others who ean claim lands, tenements, or rights
in the name of their church, of which their predecessors
died seysed as in right of their church ; as archbishops,
bishops, abbots, priors, canons of prebendal churches,
and other rectors of churches, nor do I know any reason
Wherefore not, since there is everywhere the same rea-
son. At the day indeed of the summons the disseysor
may essoin himself if he wishes, but if he has made de-


fault (according to some) proceedings will have to be


had on aecount of the default, that the pasture may be
taken into the hand of the king, as if it was a real
action, whieh indeed ought not to be (as it seems), since
the aetion is rather à personal than a real action, and so
an attachment should rather take place than a seizure
of property. But whether it be so or not, how proceed-
ings ought to be had, will appear sufficiently below.
But in whatever way proceedings be taken, the parties
do not arrive by this writ to & cause of property, since
it has only a place in a cause of possession, as may seen
above a little before. Arfd to this writ an answer may
. be given in manifold ways, as to an assise of mortdances-
ter , and it may be determined by & jury or an inquest
according to what is propounded and objected.


CuaPTER VI.


There is alsó another writ formed to meet the com-
plaint, which in some slight degree and in part savours
of à writ of mortdancester, and in part savours of novel


3.
'The form
of a writ
of right.


l.
Of the
writ of
Quo war-
ranto.


Britton, l.
1. ch. xx.


81.


f. 285.


].
S1 damna
veniunt in
judicium
in nssisa
mortis
ünteces-
soris.


962 BREVE DE CONSANGUINITATE.


com terminari poterit sine prz;judicio communis liber-
tatis, quod tale est. Si A. filius B. fecerit te securum
&e. tune. summone per bonos summonitores C. quód
sib &c. ad ostendendum quo waranto se teneat in tanta
terra cum pertinentiis in tali villa, quam pr:edictus B.
pater ipsius À. (eujus haeres ipse est) in curia nostra
&c. nuper recuperaverit versus eundem C. per assisam
nove disseysinze inde ibi inter eos captam, & de qua
predictus B. fuit seysitus ut de feodo, die quo obiit,
ut dicitur. Et illud idem esse poterit de communia
pasturz sic: ad ostedendum quare non permittit talem
habere communiam pasture su: in terra sua in tali
villa, quàm talis antecessor suus (cujus heres ipse est)
nuper in curia nostra &c. recuperavit versus talem per
assisam nove disseysine tanquam pertinentem ad tene-
mentum suum de tali villa, & de qua predictus talis
antecessor suus fuit seysitus ut de feodo die quo obiit,
ut dicitur. Et idem dici poterit de quolibet rectore &
de quolibet successore, & habeas ibi &c. Teste &c.


CAP. VIL.


Cum autem petens per assisam recuperaverit, viden-
dum erit an damna veniant in judicium in assisa
mortis antecessoris. Revera hucusq, venire non con-
sueverunt, sed ad reprimendam malitiam dominorum
capitalium, bonum est quód veniant propter vastum &
destructionem. Sed videndum utrum dominus capita-
lis vastum fecerit vel destructionem, vel alius qui se
intruserit, vel titulum habuerit & warantum. Si au-
tem dominus capitalis, tunc refert utrum tempore quo
tenens suus & heres fuerit infrà statem & in custodia
sua, vel plenw etatis, cüm dominus suus se in seysi-


OF A WRIT OF COSINAGE. 363


disseysine, and which may be determined beyond the
county without prejudice to the common liberty, which
is of this kind. If A. the son of B. has given you se-
curity &c., then summon by good summoners C. that he
be present &e. to show by what warrant he keeps him-
self in so much land with its appurtenances in such &
vill,which the aforesaid B. the father of the said A.
(whose heir he is) in our court &c. lately recovered


against the said C. by an assise of novel disseysine, there -


held between them thereon, and of which the aforesaid
B. was seysed as of fee, on the day on which he died, as
itis said. And the same thing may be done concerning
common of pasture thus ; to show wherefore he does not
permit so-and-so to have common of pasture on his land
in such a vill, which so-and-so his ancestor (whose heir


person by an assise of novel disseysine, as appertain-
ing to his tenement in such a vill, and of which so-and-
so aforesaid his ancestor was seysed as of fee on the day
on which he died, as it is seid. Ánd the same may be
said concerning any rector and concerning any successor,
and have there &ec. Witness &c.


CHAPTER VII.


But when the claimánt has recovered by an assise, we
must see whether damages come into judgment in an
assise of mortdancester. In truth they bave not been
accustomed hitherto to come into judgment, but to re-
press the malice of chief lords it is good that they should
come into judgment on account of waste and destruction.
But it is to be seen whether a chief lord has caused
waste or destruction, or another person "who has in-
truded himself, or who had a title and a warrantor. But
if & chief lord, then it matters whether at the time his
tenant and the heir was under age and in his guardian-
Ship, or of full age, when his lord has put himself into


f. 285.


he is) lately in our eourt &e. recovered against sueh a


l.
1t damages
come into
judgment
in an assise
ort-
duRCRUR


3064 BREVE DE CONSANGUINITATE.


nam posuerit, ut. habeat primam assisam. Si autem
nondum fuerit! infrà statem & sit aliquis parens vel
amicus qui de vasto sequatur pro minore, & de vasto
constiterit per inquisitionem vel per visum, dominus
vastum emendabit, sic quód damna restituet, sive vas-
tum fecerit ante prohibitionem sive post, & custodiam
amittet per judicium ad minus ea vice: ut inter pla-
cita quas sequebantur regem coram W. de Ralegh in
comitatu Hunt de Johanne de Daco & filio Radulphi?
de Bray. Si autem hzres sit plens» statis & in sey-
sina, & dominus capitalis se ponat in seysinam cum
eo ratione prims seysinz, si tune faciat vastum &
destructionem, competit hzredi assisa novse disseysinre,
licet à tenemento non expellatur, saltem ut pacem
habeat & liberó teneat, recuperare possit per assisam
cum restitutione damnorum: simplex enim seysina con-
ceditur domino, ut ad dominum recognoscatur, & nullum
vastum nee destructio. Si autem dominus capitalis
vacuam invenerit possessionem, & ecüm se posuerit in
seysinam verum heredem non cognoscat ad heredem
per malitiam, ut destructionis & vasti faciendi liberio-
rem habeat facultatem, si vastum fecerit, & hsres sibi
per assisam  perquisiverit, dominus capitalis damna
restituet eum ipsa res? cüm magis deliquerit quàm si
vastum fecerit, dum hseres esset infrà statem. Si au-
tem cüm dominus capitalis in seysina fuerit nomine
haeredis aliquo modorum predictorum alium feoffaverit,
sive hzres sibi perquisiverit per assisam mortis ante-
eessoris sive nova disseysine, semper venient damna
in restitutionem cum ipsa re, prwedictis rationibus.


*non fuerit MS. Rawl. C. , Pun Prop MSS. Ravi.
160. . . an . i
: 3 *jpsa re," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF A WRIT OF COSINAGE. 965


seysine, that he might have the first assise. But if the
tenant was under age and there is any relation or friend
who will sue for the waste on behalf of the minor, and
waste has been established by an inquest or by a view,
the lord shall make good that waste,so that he shall
restore the losses, whether he has caused the waste be-
fore the prohibition or after it, and he shall lose the
guardianship by à judgment at least on that account:
as amongst the pleas which follow the king, before
William de Ralegh in the county of Huntingdon, con-
eerning John de Daco and the son of Ralph de Bray.
But if the heir be of full age, and in seysine, and the
chief lord puts himself into seysine with him on the
ground of a first. seysine, if he then causes waste and
destruction, the heir is entitled to an assise of novel
disseysine, although he be not expelled from the tene-
ment, at least that he may have peace and have a free
holding, and he may recover his seysine by an assise
with the restitution of his losses, for simple seysine is
allowed to the lord that he may be acknowledged as
lord, but no waste nor destruction. But if the chief
lord has found the possession vacant, and when he has
put himself into seysine he does not acknowledge the
true heir as the heir through malice, that. he may have
& freer faculty of destruction and causing waste, if he
has caused waste, and the heir by an assise has sued for
damages, the chief lord shall restore the losses with the.
estate itself, since he has committed a greater misdemea-
nor than if he had caused waste, whilst the heir was
under age. But if, when the chief lord has been in sey-
sine in the name of the heir, in any of the aforesaid
modes he has enfeoffed another, whether the heir shall
have prosecuted a elaim for himself by an assise of mort-
dancester or by an assise of novel disseysine, the losses
shall always come into restitution with the estate itself
for the aforesaid reasons. |


].
Utrum
tenemen-
tum sit
libera
eleemo
syna. .


Britton, iv.
ch. vii. $ 1.


TRACTATUS QUINTUS
LIBRI QUARTI,


IN QUO TRACTATUR


DE ASSISA UTRUM.


CAP. I.


Est autem inter alias assisas qurzedam  assisa quie
multum habet possessionis & juris, qus utrüq, termi-
nat, possessionem s. et jus, nec ulteriüs qu:eritur de
jure post talem assisam, sive faciat pro tenente sive
pro petente, quamvis aliquando (si juratores malé jura-
verint) agi possit de perjurio et de convictione inter
eos, inter quos capitur assisa. Jus autem aliorum, qui
majus jus habent, non determinat, quia agi poterit
iterum de jure mero, quamvis priüs actum sit de jure
simulato, sieut fuit coram rege apud Woodstocke de
rectore ecclesi: beate Marie Oxoi suecessore Wil-
helmi Hardel, ut infrà dicetur & ponetur casus. Per
assisam istam recognoscitur, utrum tenementum de quo


agitur laycum sit feodum tenentis vel libera eleemo-


syna pertinens ad ecclesiam alicujus rectoris, sive pe-
tens layeus sit sive clericus, quia in utriusq psona
loci habere debeat, sicut primó fuit observatum tem-
pore M. de Pateshull & postea ab eodem prohibitum,
& quód locum non haberet nisi tantum in persona


—— —


1 * Tneipit Tractatus Quintus Jibri Quarti de Ássisa Utrum," MS. Rawl.
C. 160,


E i


THE FIFTH TREATISE


OF


THE FOURTH BOOK,


WIICH TREATS OF


THE ASSISE OF UTRUM.


CHAPTER [.


But there is amongst other assises a certain assise 1.
which partakes much of possession and of right, which bii
determines both, the possession, to wit, and the right, and ment be
after this assise there is no further question respecting MEUM
the right, whether it makes for the tenant or for the
claimant, although sometimes (if the jurors have sworn
ill) proceeding may be had for perjury and for conviction
between those between whom the assise is taken. But
i6 does not determine the right of others, who have the
greater right, because proceedings may be had again
concerning the absolute right, although previous proceed-
ings have been had respecting the feigned right, as took
place before the king at Woodstocke concerning the
rector of the church of the Blessed Virgin Mary at Oxford
the successor of William Hardel, as will be said below and
the case will bestated. By this assise it is recognised,
whether the tenement concerning which the proceedings
are taken is à lay fee of the tenant or free alms apper-
taining to the church of some rector, whether the claim-
ant be a layman ora clerk, because it ought to have
place in the person of either, as was first observed in
the time of Martin de Pateshull, and afterwards was pro-
hibited by him, and which would not have a place except


f. 286,


968 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


rectoris, cui nullum aliud competit remedium nec breve,
nisi agere posset de seysina sua propria. Layco veró
competere possent omnia alia remedia, s. breve de nova
disseysina, mortis antecessoris, de ingressu, & de recto.
Sed ceàm restringendrze sunt lites potiüs quàm laxandz,
ut vitentur duella & magn: assise, & placitum matu-
riüs terminetur, oportet hodie quód breve istud & as-
sisà locum teneat in persona utriusq, tam layci quàm
rectoris, secundüm quod olim fuit observatum: ut de
itinere abbatis de Rading & M. de Pateshull in coii
Wygorü, assisa utrum unum mesuagium, & quód locum
non haberet postea nisi tantum in persona rectoris,
secundüm quod inveniri poterit in ultimo itinere M.
de Pateshull in comitatu Suff. anno regni regis H. 10.
seeundo, de Roberto de Bedentone & Wilhelmo de
Valle, & ubi Robertus cognovit quód nunquam fuit in
Seysina terrse petite. Et videndum est inprimis qui.
bus rectoribus, et quarum ecclesiarum, et de quibus
tenemétis locum habeat assisa, & de qua libera elee-
mosyna. Quia ecclesiarum alia cathedralis, sicut epi-
seoporum, alia regularis sicut abbatum & priorum, alia
parochialis sicut ecclesiarum rectorum, et ideà viden-
dum quibus ex preedietis competit assisa. Et sciendum
quód tantum rectoribus ecclesiarum parochialium, qui
instituti sunt per episcopos & ordinarios ut persons.
Item dici possunt rectores, sicut sunt canonici de ec-
clesiis preebendatis. Item dici possunt rectores vel
quasi, abbates, priores et. alii qui habent ecclesias ad
proprios usus. Et hoc intelligendum est tam de illis
qui medietatem habent alicujus ecclesire qur: dividitur
in duas partes, ratione duorum feodorum et ratione .
duorum patronorum, quia quilibet per se, si jura & res
habeant separatas, per se et sine alio placitare poterit


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 269


only in ihe person of the rector, who is entitled to no
other remedy nor writ. unless he could sue concerning his
own seysine ; but a layman is entitled to all other reme-
dies, to wit, & writ of novel disseysine, of mortdancester,
of entry, and of right. But since lawsuits are to be
restrained rather than encouraged, that duels and great
assises may be avoided and a plea be sooner terminated,
it is incumbent in the present day that this writ and assise
should have place in the person of each, the layman as
wellas the rector, according to what was formerly ob-
served in the iter of the abbot of Reading and Martin
de Pateshul, in the county of Worcester, an assise
whether a messuage, and which would not have place
afterwards except in the person of the rector, according
to what will be found in the last iter of M. de Pate-
shull in the county of Suffolk in the twelfth year
of the reign of king Henry, concerning Robert of Beden-
ton and William de Valle, and where Robert admitted
that he never was in seysine of the land claimed.
And itis to be seen in the first place for what rectors
and of what churches and concerning what tenements
the assise takes place, and concerning what free alms.
Because one church is à cathedral, as of a bishop,
another is à regular church of abbots and priors,
another & parochial church as of church-rectors, and
therefore we must see who of the aforesaid are entitled
io an assise. And it is to be known that only the
rectors of parochial churches are entitled, who have been
instituted by bishops and by ordinaries as parsons.
Likewise they may be called rectors, such as are canons
of prebendal churches. Likewise abbots, priors, and
others who have churches for their own uses, may be
called rectors or as it were rectors. And this is to be
understood as well of those who have the mediety of
any church, which is divided into two parts, by rea-
son of two fees, and by reason of two patrons, be-
cause each by himself, if they have separate rights and
estates, may plead and be impleaded by himself and
Q, 1302. A AÀ


f. 286.


3970 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


et implacitari. Si autem sit aliqua res quse sit vel
esse debeat inter eos, aliud erit, ut de itinere W. de
Ralegh in cofi Leycestt circa medium rotuli, et de
termino S, Trinitatis anno regni regis H. 5, de Gerardo
de Huwell et Richardo rectore medietatis ecclesie de
Claypoll Vicario autem nunquam competit assisa& per
se. Sed refert qualiter quis sit vicarius, ut si quis
aliquam parvam pensione solverit annuatim alicui do-
mui religiosm, sive hoc faciat nomine pensionis vel
nomine simplicis beneficii, non. propter hoe remanebit
assisa in persona vicarii Sed si hoc solvat private
persone nomine pensionis, non competit assisa vicario
sed persons, aliquando tamen competit assis& utrique
tam vicario quàm persons simul, ut de ultimo itinere
M. de Pateshull in comi Suff, assisa utrum una acra
terre &c. Item licet aliquando ecclesia divisa sit inter
duos, sive bona habeant communia sive separata, dum
tamen unicum habeant advocatum, nullus ipsorum sine
alio plaeitare poterit vel implacitari : ut de eodem iti-
nere M. de P. in cof Suff, anno regni regis H. 12,
de libertate Eliens. inter Thomam personam ecclesie
de Framesdon et Robertum filium Alrici. Forma bre-
vis talis est: Rex vicecofi salutem. $i talis persona
ecelesize talis fecerit te securum &oc. tunc sumoneas per
bonos suinonitores xii. liberos et legales homines de
visineto tali, q sint coram justieiariis nostris ad primam
assisam &c. parati sacramento recognoscere, utrum tan-
tum terre cum pertinentiis in tali villa sit libera elee-
mosyna pertinens ad ecclesiam ipsius talis de tali villa,
an laycum feodum talis. Et hoc si pro rectore, si aute
pro layco, tune sie: Si talis layeus scilicet. &e. ut


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 911


without the other. Butif there be any estate which is


or ought to be between them, it will be different, asin  '


the iter of William of Ralegh in the county of Leicester
about the middle of the roll, and in Holy Trinity term
in the fifth year of the reign of king Henry, coneerning |
Gerard de Huwell and Richard the rector of the mediety
of the church of Claypoll But a vicar is never entitled
to an assise by himself. But it matters in what way à
person is a vicar, as if & person has paid a little pension
annually to & certain religious house, whether he does
this in the name of a pension or in the name of a simple
benefice, an assise shall not on that account rest in the
person of a vicar. . But if he pays this to a private per-
son in the name of a pension, the person and not the
viear is entitled to an assise, sometimes: however each
is entitled to an assise together, the vicar as well as the
person, as in the last iter of Martin de Pateshull in the
county of Suffolk, an assise whether one acre of land
&c. Likewise although sometimes a church is divided
between two persons, whether they have the goods in
common or separate, provided however they have a
single advocate, neither of them can plead or be im-
pleaded without the other, as in the same iter of Martin
de Pateshull in the county of Suffolk, in the twelfth
year of the reign of king Henry, concerning the liberty
of Ely, between Thomas the parson of the church of
Framesdon and Robert the son of Alrie. 'The form of
the writ is of this kind. The king to the viscount
greeting. If such à parson of such a church has given
you security &c.,, then summon by good summoners
twelve free and loyal men of such a visne, that they be
present before our justiciaries at the first assise &c. pre-
pared on their oath to recognise, whether so much land
with its appurtenances in such a vill is free alms be-
longing to the church of the said so-and-so of such a&
vill or is the lay fee of so-and-so. And this, if it is for
the rector, but if it is for the layman, then thus ; if such
a layman, to wit, &c. as above, whether so much land
AA 2


9/2 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


supra, utrum tantum terre cu pertinentis in tali
villa sit laycum feodum ipsius talis in tali villa, an
libera eleemosyna pertinens ad ecclesiam talem de tali
villa. Et interim terram illam videant et nomina eo-

rum imbreviari facias, et sumoneas per bonos summo-
nitores predictum talem qui terram illam tenet, quód
tune sit ibi auditurus illam recognitionem, et habeas
ibi sum et hoc breve. "Teste, &c.


Car. II.


1. Sumonitus autem, si ad diem sibi datum non vene-
uu rit, nec se essoniaverit, tunc resumoneatur q sit ad
etrespon- alium diem, ut supra in assis& mortis antecessoris ple-
imd ,DHüs. Si verà comparuerit, multipliciter respondere
ch. vii. — poterit eontra assisam. Inprimis si error fuerit in im-

petratione ut supra. Item q ecclesia talis nunquam
fuit inde in seysina aliqua, si clericus petat. Eode
modo respondere poterit clericus contra laycum, si lay-
cus petat de disseysina sua ppria vel alicujus anteces-
Soris sui, cüm sine seysina petere non' possit. ltem
dicere poterit q nunquam fuit in seysina in dominico,
nisi tantum de servitio.
T: Rm Itc ad hoc q dicit (libera eleemosyna) videndum erit
hme assis, QUz&. & qualis sit, ad hoe quód procedat assise, & utrum
ubinon. terra, data sit ecclesiis parochialibus vel aliis supradic-
f3286b. tis & si ecclesiis parochialibus, utrum sit libera vel
magis libera, secundüm quod data fuerit in dotem
tempore dedicationis vel alio tempore, & in quibus
easibus locum habebit assisa. Et vocari poterit wa-
rantus tam à clerico quàm à layco, & fiat per omnia
ut supradictum est de waranto vocato, u& supra de
assisa mortis antecessoris. Si autem terra data fuerit
eeclesiis cathedralibus vel conventualibus, non jacebit


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 9373


with its appurtenances in such a villis & lay fee of the
Said so-and-so in such a vill, or free alms belonging to
the said church in the said vill. And meanwhile let
them view the land, and cause their names to be inserted
in the writ, and summon by good summoners so-and-so
aforesaid, who holds that land, that he be there in order
to hear that recognition, and do thou have there the
summoners and this writ, Witness &c.


CHAPTER II.


But if the person summoned has not come on the day
appointed to him, nor has essoined himself, then let him Ot de.
be re-summoned thàt he be there on another day, as above proceeding
in àn assise of mortdancester more fully. But if he has answer: ring.
appeared, he may answer in manifold ways against the
assise. In the first place, if there has been an error
in the suing out as above. Likewise that the said
church never was in seysine thereof, if à clerk is the
claimant. In the same manner à clerk may answer
against à layman, if & layman claims upon his own
disseysine or upon the disseysine of some ancestor of his,
since he cannot claim without seysine. Likewise he may
say that he never was in seysine in demesne, but ony' in
Service.


Likewise to this which he says *free alms," we must 23.
see what and of what kind it is for the purpose that the Miis
assise should proceed, and whether the land was given to E where
parochial churches or to others afore described, and if "^
to parochial churches, whether it is free, or more free,
according as it has been given in dower at the time of
its dedication, or at another time, and in what cases an
assise will have place. And à warrantor may be called
as well by a clerk as by a layman, and let it be done in all
things as has been explained above respecting a warrantor
who has been called, as above concerning an assise of
mortdancester. But if the land has been given to
cathedral or conventual churches, an assise shall not lie,


S


Britton, iv.


ch. viii.


———— eo a


374 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


assisa, quamvis in liberam, puram & perpetuam elee-
mosinam; ut de termino P. anno regni regis H. 15,
de correctione erroris R. de Leyliton! in itinere suo in
cofà Sussex de priore de Lewes & Gylberto de Aquila.
Et quamvis hujusmodi terre dentur in liberam elee-
mosinam, non solüm dantur ecclesiis sed & personis
tenendse in baronia, secundüm quod videri poterit per
modum donationis, cüm dicitur: Talis dedit & conces-
sit Deo & ecclesise tali, & tali priori & monachis ibi-
dem Deo servientibus, vel tali episcopo vel suecessori-
bus suis talem terram in liberam, puram, & perpetuam
eleemosinam &e. talibus quidem competunt omnia re-
media quz layco competerent, ut si fuerint in posses-
sione & ejecti fuerint à seysina sua propria, assis&
novs disseysinz, de seysina veró predecessorum suo-
rum breve de ingressu, & breve de recto. Et cüm
habeant tales person: oinnia remedia generalia, quze
quidem layeus haberet, non habebunt recursum ad
singulare beneficium, quod introductum est in favore
alicujus singularis person:e terram petentis nomine
ecclesiee suse, & quse nihi] clamare poterit nisi nomine
ecclesi:e sus, quia in ecclesiis parochialibus non fit
donàtio person: sed ecclesiz;, secundüm quod perpendi
poterit per modum donationis. Item videndum erit
de seysina cujus persone petatur terra in dominico
per assisam, & refert qualiter fuit seysitus, utrum s.


 in.dominico vel servitio. ltem qualiter, utrum vide-


licet. terra data fuerit ecclesise parochiali in liberam
eleemosinam tenenda in dominico, vel tantum per ser-
vitium. ltem utrum sie data fuerit feoffato, quód
omnino tenere debeat de ecclesia, vel quód data sit
ecclesite sub tali conditione, quód ecclesia faciat feoffa-
mentum tenendi de ecclesia, & seceundüm hoe peti
poterit servitium tantüm vel tenementum in dominico.


! « f, de Lexingstone," M.S. Xteg. 9. E. xv,


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 945


although it has been given for free, pure, and perpetual
alms, as in Easter term in the fifteenth year of the reign
of king Henry concerning the correction of the error of
Robert de Leyliton in his iter in the county of Sussex,
eoncerning the prior of Lewes and Gilbert de Aquila.
And although lands of this kind may be given in free
alms, they are not only given to the churches but also
to the parsons to be held in barony, according to what
may be seen by the mode of a donation, when it is said :
Such a person has given and granted to God and to such
& church and to such a prior and monks there serving
God, or to such a bishop or his successors, such a land in
free, pure, and perpetual alms, &c, such persons are en-
titled to all the remedies to which à layman is entitled,
as if they have been in possession and have been ejected
from their own proper seysine they are entitled to an
assise of novel disseysine, and if they have been ejected
from the seysine of their predecessors they are entitled
to a writ of entry and a writ of right. And since such
persons have all the general remedies which à layman
would have, they shall not have recourse to the singular
benefit, which has been introduced in favour of an indivi-
dual parson claiming land in the name of his church, and
who can claim nothing except in the name of his church,
because in parochial churches a donation is made not to
the parson but to the church, according to what may be
inferred from the manner of the donation. Likewise
we must see concerning the seysine of what person the
land is claimed in demesne by an assise, and it is of
importance in what way he was seysed, to wit, whether
in demesne orin servitude. Likewise in what manner
whether the land was given to the parochial church in
free alms to be held in demesne, or only by a service.
Likewise whether it was thus given to a feoffee, that he
ought to hold it entirely from the church, or that it was
given to the church under such a condition, that the
church should make a feoffment of it to be held of the
church, and aecording to this a service only can be


93.
Qualiter
proceditur
ad assisam.


f. 287.


Britton, ib.


8 5.


Ld


376 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


Si autem cüm quis ita feoffatus fuerit sibi & heeredi-
bus suis tenendum de suo feoffatore, & pro habenda
warantia & tuitione de ecelesia aliquem annuum red-
ditum dederit ecclesie, hoec non debet dici servitium,


immó quzedam przstatio nomine eleemosinze. In quo


casu, nihil ampliüs peti poterit nec nomine eschaetz
nec alia ratione, & secundüm predictam distinctionem
de facili perpendi poterit, utrum persona justam cau-
sam habeat petendi in dominico tenementü vel tantüm
servitium. ltem videndum erit à quo terra sic data
fuit ecclesie, s. &àn ab eo qui jus habet, an ab alio
qui jus non habet: in quo casu vocari poterit waran-
tus, secundüm quod fit in aliis placitis & assisis, & si
warantus defaltam fecerit, procedatur ut suprà de wa-
ranto vocato in assis& mortis antecessoris.


Inter alias autem exceptiones & responsiones ex prze-
missis elici possunt exceptiones & replieationes, si partes
voluerint. Si a&utem non sit warantus, nec exceptio
que preponitur, : presentibus i in judicio partibus & jura-
toribus, procedat assis& in modum assise (secundüm
quosdam), faeta tamen expressione tenemenüi petiti
propter visum quem juratores inde faciunt, secundüm
quod fit in aliis assisis supradictis. Forma sacramenti
in assisa ista est secundüm modum istum. Hoc audi-
tis justiciarii quód veritatem dicam de assisa ista, &
de una virgata terre cum pertinentis, unde visum feci
per preceptum domini regis, utrum videlicet przdicta
terra eum pertinentiis sit libera eleemosyna pertinens
&d ecclesiam talem unde talis est persona, an laycum
feodum talis: vel vice versa secundüm quod persona
assisam arramaverit, vel laycus: & pro nihilo omittam
&c. Et secundüm istam formam sacramenti cüm assisa


——


! ** proponatur," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 977


claimed or a tenement in demesne. But if whenany -
one has been so enfeoffed for himself and his heirs to
hold of his own feoffor, and in return for having the
warranty and protection of the church has rendered an
annual rent to the church, this ought not to be called
à Service, on the contrary a certain offering in the name
. of alms. In which case nothing more can be claimed,
neither in the name of an escheat nor for any other
reason, and according to the aforesaid distinction it can
be easily discovered, whether the person had a just
eause of claiming à tenement in demesne or only a
service. Likewise it will have to be seen by whom the
land was so given to the church, to wit, whether by him
who had the right, or by another who had not the right :
in which case à warrantor may be called, according to
what is done in other pleas and assises, and if the war-
rantor has made default let proceedings be had as above
in the ease of à warrantor called in an assise of mort-
daneester.


But amongst other exceptions and answers there may ^ 8.
be elicited from the premises exceptions and replications, e
if the parties wish. But if there be not a warrantor, nor are to be
an exception which may be advanced, the parties and the Mnpeiud
jurors being present in court,let the assise proceed in  f.287.
the manner of an assise (according to some) there having
been made an expression of the tenement claimed on
account of the view which the jurors make thereof,
according to what is done in the other assises aforesaid,

The form of the oath in this assise is according to this
manner. Ye hear this, justiciaries, that. I will say the
truth concerning this assise and concerning a virgate of
land with its appurtenances whereof I have msde a view
by the precept of the lord the king, whether forsooth
the aforesaid land with its appurtenances be free alms
appertaining to such a church, of which so-and-so is the
parson, or alay fee of such an one; or conversely accord-
ing as the parson has instituted the assise or à layman:
and I will for nothing omit, &c. And aecording to this


378 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


capta fuerit in modum assise, sequatur irrotulatio talis
Assisa venit recognitura utrum &c.


4. 8i autem capiatur in modum juratz, cüm assisa ista
Alia ferm? contineat in se possessionem & jus, vel cüm partes se
jurate. — posuerint in juratam de consensu cominuni propter ali-

quam exceptionem incidentem extra assisam, tunc fiat
sacranentum sie in modum jurate, nulla facta men-
tione de visu facto. Hoc auditis justieiari, quód veri-
tatem dieam de hoc quod à me requiretis ex parte
domini regis, & pro nihilo omittam &c. In quo casu,
oportet instruere juratores super quibus dicere debeant
veritatem ita: dicetis super sacramentum vestrum,
utrum tantum terre oum pertinentiis in tali villa sit
libera eleemosyna &e. & secundüm hoc fiat irrotulatio
ita. Jurata venit recogü, si &c., & secundüm veredic-
tum juratorum procedit judicium seeundüm quod scei-
verint, vel ignoraverint, vel dubitaverint.


Car. III.


1. Sunt etiam plura remedia, que competunt persons
zh Qu sicut & layco, scilicet assisa novse disseysine de pro-
competunt pria seysina, si persona fuerit disseysita. Item breve
sicut day co, Xe ingressu de seysina su& propria vel alicujus prede-

eessoris sui. ltem assisa ad recognoscendum utrum &c.,
Britton, iv. heec. omnia competunt persons sicut & layco. Sunt
ch. viii-$3- quadam quse competunt layco & non personze, sicut, in
eausa successionis, ubi fit descensus ab antecessore ad
hzredem, quod quidem esse non poterit in persona, ut
si laycus petat versus personam seysinam antecessoris
sui, quo easu procedendum erit sicut inter alias quas-
cunq, personas. ltem si petat per breve de recto, &


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 379


form of oath when the assise has been taken in the
manner of an assise, let such an entry be made on ihe
. voll: Àn assise came in order to recognise, &c.

But if it be taken after the manner of & jury, since aci
this assise contains in itself the possession and the right, torm after
or when the parties have put themselves on a jury by v dpecad
common consent on account of some incidental exception
outside the assise, then let the oath be taken in this
form after the manner of a jury, no mention having been
made of à view having been taken. — Ye hear this, justi-
eiaries, that I will say the truth concerning this which
is required of me on the part of the lord the king, and
for nothing will I omit, &c. In which case, it is neces-
sary to instruct the jurors on what things they ought to
say the truth, in this manner: ye shall say upon your
. oath, whether so much land with its appurtenances in
such a vill is free alms, &c., and according to this let an
entry be made on the roll: À jury came to recognise,

&c., and according to the verdiet of the jury the judg-
ment proceeds according to what they know or are ig-
norant of or have doubted about.


CnaAPTER III.


Bui there are several remedies to which a parson is 1.
entitled just as a layman, to wit,an assise of novel dis- MN
seysine from his own seysine, if a person has been to which
disseysed. Likewise a writ of entry concerning his own ? PuISon 5
seysine or that of some predecessor of his own.  Like- just as
wise an assise to recognise whether &c., to all these a ^9
parson is entitled just as à layman. "There are some to
which a layman and not a parson is entitled, as in &
cause of succession, where there is & descent from an
ancestor to an heir, which cannot happen in the case of a
parson, as if a layman claims against a parson the seysine
of his ancestor, in which case proceedings must be had
as between any other persons. Likewise if he claims by


1. 287 b.


2.
Si tene-
mentum
poterit


accidere ut


cschaeta,


380 | DE ASSISA UTRUM.


tunc aut habet warantum, aut non habet. Si autem
warantum habeat & ei warantizaverit, procedatur inter
warantum & petentem sicut inter alias personas, & ad
duellum & ad magnam assisam. Si autem warantum
non habuerit, & in propria persona videre! voluerit,
duo habebit remedia per breve de recto, & unum ha-
bere poterit quod elegerit, si tempus probationis per-
miserit quód quis testifieari poterit de suo proprio visu
& auditu, & tunc ponere se poterit in juratam (si
voluerit) utrum terra petita sit libera eleemosyna &c.
an layeum feodum &e. aec si ipse laycus ab initio
peteret per assisam. Et propter hoc non vertitur causa
proprietatis in causam possessionis, licet. utramq, deter-
minat. Si autem elegerit se defendere per duellum,


: vel per magnam assisam (de necessitate) cim non pos-


sib aliquis loqui de proprio visu & auditu, propter
tempus longissimum, bené licebit ei propter necessita-
tem, cüm per assisam non possit, si potestas ordinaria
& consensus patronorum permiserint.


Si quis autem tenuerit de ecclesia aliquam terram
in liberam eleemosynam pro servitio, si contingat talem
feloniam facere, vel mori sine herede, tenementum
illud erit eschaeta ecclesie, sieut cuilibet alterius pri-
vate persons, propter servitium & jus merum, quod
non poterit ad alium descendere, & sic evanescit homa-
gium 'sieut inter alios quoseunq. Si autem ecclesia
vel persona nomine ecelesie nihil perceperit nisi no-


..mine eleemosynze, nihil petere poterunt nomine eschaetz,


sed ad eos pertinebit eschaeta, qui in seysina fuerint
de servitio. Sed esto quód persona, qui nomine elee-
mosy:e aliquid perceperit, se posuerit in eschaetam, &
per negligentia veri domini, sic tenementu illud sibi
ipsi appropriaverit, vel ad alium ex quacunq, causa


! « regpondere," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. . 981


& writ of right, and then he either has or has not à war-
rantor  Butif he has & warrantor, and the warrantor
has fulfilled his warranty, let proceedings be had between
the warrantor and the claimant as between other persons
both up to the duel and to the great assise. But if he
have not a warrantor and has wished to answer in his
own person, he shall have two remedies by a writ of right,
and one he may have which he may choose, if the time
of proof will permit that a person may testify of his own
sight and hearing, and then he may put himself upon
& jury (if he wishes) whether the land claimed is free
alms, &e.,or & lay fee,&c,as if the said layman had
from the commencement claimed by an assise. And on
this account a cause of property is not turned into a
cause of possession, although it determines both. Butif f 287*.
he has chosen to defend himself by the duel, or by the
great assise (of necessity), when no one can speak from
his own sight and hearing on account of the great dis-
tance of time, it will well be allowable for him on ac-
eount of the necessity, since he cannot defend himself
— by an assise, if the ordinary authority and the consent
of the patrons have permitted him.


But if any one has held from 2 church a certain land ,, | ?-

. . T2 Jf the tene-
in free alms for a service, if it happens that such person ment can
commits a felony, or dies without an heir, that tenement fll in as ,
will be an escheat to the church, as to any other private —
person, on aecount of the service and the absolute right,

which ean not descend to another, and so the homage

is evanescent as amongst any other persons whatsoever.

But if the church or the parson in the name of the church

has received nothing except in the name of alms, they

can claim nothing in the way of an escheat, but the

escheat will belong to them, who have been in seysine of

the service. But let it be that the parson who has

received something in the name of alms has put himself

into the escheat, and through the negligence of the true

lord has thus appropriated that tenement to himself, or


8.
Breve,
quod terra


382 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


transtulerit, tenendum de ecelesia & pro certo servitio
simul eum eleemosyna, quzritur an successor ejus per-
sonz;» tenementum illud petere poterit in dominico?
videtur quód sie, propter talem ingressum preedecesso-
ris, quamvis injuriosum quoad verum dominum, donec
ille verus dominus qui jus habet, docuerit tenementum
illud esse eschaetam suam. Et quid si uterq, petat
uno & eodem tempore? queritur quis eorum alteri
preferri debeat? Et revera recurrendum erit priüs
&d ultimam seysinam predecessoris (quamvis injurio-
88m) per assisam, & postea cüm persona obtinuerit per
assisam, locum habebit breve de ingressu versus eum.
Et quid si, cüm tenens primó implacitatus fuerit per


breve de recto, personam successorem vocaverit ad wa-


rantum ? quszritur an warantizare debeat: & tunc
primó videndum est an sit in seysina& de homagio &
servitio tenentis illius, an non: si a&utem sit, tunc
tenetur ad warantiam, saltem vita sua perpetuo quoad
vixerit, & post mortem suam successor suus habebit
actionem, non obstante homagio & servitio facto suo
predecessori. Si autem homagium & servitium non
accepit, non tenetur warantizare (nisi gratis velit), ex
quo petiturus est tenementum in dominieo. Si autem
bastardus aliquis quieunq, clericus vel laycus feoffatus
fuerit tenendi de ecclesia, & heredem non habuerit de
corpore suo, nee terram nec tenementum suum alicui
assignaverit in vita sua per modum donationis, & rec-
tor ecclesi: qui post eum fuerit, ctm tenementum
petierit in dominico, nihil per assisam aequisiverit nisi
tantum servitium, poterit terram illam petere in domi-
nieo versus quemlibet possidentem ut eschaetam suam
nomine ecclesi? suse per tale breve.


Precipe tali, quód juste &c. reddat tali rectori tan-
tam terram cum pertinentiis &e. quàm clamat esse jus


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 383


has transferred it to. another from whatever cause, to be
held of the church and for a certain service together with
the alms, it is asked can the successor of that parson
claim that tenement in demesne?  Itappears to be so on
aecount of such an entry of his predecessor, although
injurious as regards the true lord, until the true lord who
has the right has proved that tenement to be his escheat.
And what if each claims at one and the same time? it
is asked which of them ought to be preferred to the
other? And in truth recourse must be had in the first
place to the last seysine of a predecessor (although injuri-
ous) by an assise, and afterwards when the parson has
prevailed by an assise, à writ of entry against him will
" have place. ÁÀnd what if, when the tenant has been first
impleaded by à writ of right, he has called the parson
successor to warrant, it is asked if he ought to warrant ?
And then it has first to be seen, whether he is in seysine
of the homage and service of that tenant or not. And if
he be, then he is bound to warrant at least during his life-
time perpetually as long as he lives, and after his death
his suecessor will have an action, notwithstanding the
homage and service done to his predecessor. But if he
has not received homage and service, he is not bound to
warrant (unless he wishes gratuitously), since he is about
to claim the tenement in demesne. But if a bastard,
whosoever he be, a clerk or à layman, has been enfeoffed
of land to be held of & church, and has no heir from his
body, nor has assigned the land nor the tenement to any
one during his lifetime by means of a donation, and the
reetor of the church who has come after him, when he
has claimed the tenement in demesne, has acquired
nothing by the assise except only the service, he may
claim that land in demesne against anybody in possession
of it as his escheat in the name of his church by a writ of
this kind.


Enjoin so-and-so, that justly &c. he restore to such a "1 8.
rector so much land with its appurtenances &e. which he B s


984 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


reddatur ut ecclesiz;e sus, & quz ad predictam ecclesiam suam


eschaeta.


f. 288.


reverti debet tanquam eschaeta sua, eo q talis quonda
reetor ecclesie suse prsediete, per quà prsdictus talis
ingressum habuit in terram illam, bastardus fuit &
tenuit de predicta ecclesi& sua, & obiit sine hzrede de
se, ut dicit, & nisi fecerit &c. Item in omnibus assisis
& juratis generaliter, si cüm partes prssentes fuerint
in judicio, detur alius dies ante captionem sine suo
essonio, & concedatur fort? à tenente, quód sive vene-
rib sive non, capiatur assis& vel jurata per defaltam, si
assisa vel jurata per defaltam faciat pro petente, non
precise procedatur ad judicium eodem die, sed detur
alius dies, ad quem si non venerit tenens, tunc capia-
tur terra in manum domini regis pro secunda defalta,
& ipse summoneatur quód sit ad alium diem auditurus
judieium suum de defalta: Ad quem diem sive venerit
sive non, petens recuperabit seysinam suam, & redda-
tur judicium suum. Si autem ulteriüs convenerit, quód
primo die & per primam defaltam capiatur assis& &
reddatur judicium: tune primo die fiet ut convenit,
nec expectabitur alius dies. Cüm autem hujusmodi
&ssis& seysinam importet & jus, ita quód, si tenemen-
tum ad laycum feodum convincatur, ad liberam  elee-
mosynam trahi non possit imposterum, nec e converso,
quiero an locum habere debeat convietio, si duodecim
juratores malé juraverint? & quód locum habere debeat,


Si in modum assise capiatur, probatur in rotulo de


itinere abbatis de. Radinge & Martini de Pateshull
anno regni regis Henrici quinto in comitatu Gloc.,
assisa utrum una hyda terre, eirca principium. Ad.
hoe etiam faeit de termino Saneti Hillarii anno regis
Henriei duodecimo in .cofíi Buck. assisa utrum duse


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. - 3985


elaims to be the right of his church, and which ought to be restored
revert to his church as his escheat, inasmuch as so-and- d xin
so formerly rector of his aforesaid chureh through which cheat.
sueh person aforesaid had an entry on to the land was
& bastard, and held of the aforesaid church and died
without an heir of his body, as he says, and unless he
does &c. Likewise in:all assises and juries generally if,
when the parties are in judgment, another day has  f.»ss.
been allowed before the holding of the assise without its
essoin, and it be conceded. by chance by the tenant, that
whether he has come or not, the assise or the jury shall
be held without default, if the assise or the jury by
default makes for the claimant, proceedings to judg-
ment shall not be had precisely on that day, but another
day shall be given, on which if the tenant has not come,
then let the land be taken into the hand of the lord the
king for the second default; and let the party himself
be summoned to be present on another day to hear his
judgment by default, upon which day, whether he has
come or not, the claimant shall recover his seysine, and
judgment shall be rendered to him. But if it has been
further agreed that on the first day and upon the first
default the assise shall be taken and judgment rendered,
then on the first day it shall be done as agreed upon,
nor shall another day be expected. But since an assise
of this kind imports seysine and right, so that if the
tenemenf$ be proved to bea lay fee it cannot be con-
verted into frankalmoign for the future, nor conversely,
I ask if a conviction ought to take place, if the twelve
jurors have sworn wrong, and that it ought to tako
place, if it has been taken in the form of an assise, is
proved in the rollof the iter of the abbot of Reading
and of Martin de Pateshull in the fifth year of the reign
of king Henry in the county of Gloucester, an assise
whether one hide of land, about the commencement of
the roll For this also mákes a case in St. Hilary term
in the twelfth year of king Henry in the county of

Q 1302. BB


386 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


virgatz terre, & hoe verum est, nisi petatur convietio
per longum intervallum post captionem assise: ut in
eodem iünere in comitatu Gloc, quia post longum in-
tervallum transit judicium in autoritatem rei judicat:w,
tempus tamen non est definitum. Sed in eodem iti-
nere petebatur convictio post lapsum sexdecim anno-
rum, quod tamen non fuit concessum.  Cüm veró ali-
qua predictarum assisarum capiatur in modum assise,
videndum erit à justiciariis & diligenter examinandum
quid & quantum querens posuerit in visu suo, quia
ultra id, quod in judicium deducitur, potestas justicia-
riorum non extenditur, nec etiam sacramentum jurato-
rum, quia lieet querens de majori quantitate disseysi-
tus fuerit, & totum in visu suo non posuerit, in eo
quod excedit non potest justiciarius judicare, nec jur&-
tor jurare, quia non jurat nisi de eo quod ei ostenditur
à querente. Et ideo si ulteriàs extendant sacr&men-
tum, non erit loeus convietioni, eüm saeramentum sit
nullum, sed locus erit assise nove disseysinz contra
juratores tantum, & non contra ilum qui judicatum
recepit. Si autem id quod querens in visu suo pro-
posuerit totum dederit querenti, & ipse querens ea
oeeasione plus occupaverit, ad querelam ejus qui amisit
recentem locus erit certificationi per officium justiciari-
orum, vel locus erit assisee nov: disseysins contra eum
qui oceupaverit: & hine inde post captionem assisarum
locus erit convietioni, si partes voluerint. Item de eo,
de quo juratores visum fecerint, videndum erit utrum
lotum dederit tenenti vel abstulerit, & tunc refert


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 987


Buckingham, an assise whether two virgates of land,
and this is true, unless à conviction is claimed after a
long interval since the holding of the assise, as in the
same iter in the county of Gloucester, because after a&
long interval a judgment passes into the authority of a
matter adjudicated upon, the time however is not de-
fined. But in the same iter à conviction was claimed
after the lapse of sixteen years, which however was not
granted. But when any of the aforesaid assises are
held after the manner of an assise, it will have to be
seen by the justiciaries and diligently examined, what
and how much the plaintiff has placed in his view, be-
eause the power of the justiciaries is not extended
beyond that which is brought into judgment, nor the
oath of the jurors, because although the plaintiff may
have been disseysed of a greater quantity, and has not
put the whole in his view, the justiciary cannot judge
às regards what is in excess, nor the juror swear, be-
cause he does not swear except concerning that which
is pointed out to him by the plaintiff And therefore if
they extend further their oath, there will be no place
for a conviction, since there is no oath, but there will be
place for an assise of novel disseysine against (he jurors
only, and not against him who has received the thing
adjudged. But if he has given to the plaintiff the
whole of that which the plaintiff has propounded in his
view, and the plaintiff himself on that occasion has
taken possession of more, upon the recent complaint of
him, who has lost it, there will be place for a certifica-
tion through the office of the justiciaries, or there will be a
place for an assise of novel disseysine against him who
has taken possession, and on this side or the other after
ihe holding of the assises, there will be place for & con-
vietion, if the parties wish. Likewise concerning that,
eoneerning which the jurors have made a view, it will
have to be seen whether he has given the whole to the
tenant or has taken it away, and then it is of import-
BB 2


f. 288 b.


].
De con-
victione:
sive at-


tincta jura-


torum, qui
male jura-
verint,


988 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


uirum justé vel injuste ad hoc quód sequatur convic-
tio vol non. ltem utrum totum vel ejus partem just?
vel injusté, ut secundüm hoc remaneat unus in mise-
ricordia vel ambo.


CAr. IV.


Cum veró in aliqua przdictarum assisarum contige-
rib, quód juratores falsum fecerint sacramentum & ita
commiserint perjurium, ad querelam ejus qui per assi-
sam amiserit convinci poterunt de perjurio multis mo-
dis, quandoq, per sacramentum 24, quandoq, ex ore
proprio per examinationem judicis, & sine jurata 24,


Britton, iv. & quandoqg, ex propria confessione & propria voluntate,


ch. ix. $ 1.


ut si proprium delictum cognoscant & se ponant in
misericordia domini regis, ut dictum suum possit emen-
dare. Sed in omnibus casibus predictis non erit par
poena infligenda vel eadem, secundüm quod inferiüs
dicetur. Si autem convincendi sint juratores per 24,
videndum erit quód! juratores fuerunt in assisa, ut
quilibet ad minüs duos habeat convictores, & si plures
habeat non nocet, etiam ita quód omnes sint ejusdem
eonditionis ad minüs cujusmodi sunt duodecim jura-
tores, si melioris conditionis esse non possunt. Et cüm
de convictione agatur, possit? esse in causa tam justi-
clarius q jurator, & standum. erit recordo justiciariorum
donec per convictionem mutetur vel teneat. Igitur
ante omnia, & etiam antequam jurata summoneatur,
videndum erit recordum & examinandum, ut si judex
fuerit in culpa, hoe juratoribus non imputetur nec e
converso, & quód penam non sentiat, quia culpa im-

munis extiterit. Judex enim sive justieiarius ad quem -
pertinet examinatio si minüs diligenter examinaverit,


! * Quot," MS. Rawl. C. 160. l possint," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


. OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. ' 9389


ance, whether he has done so justly or unjustly for the
purpose of a eonvieton following or not. Likewise
whether he has given or taken away the whole or &
part of it justly or unjustly, that the one or both may
aecordingly be amerciable.


CHAPTER IV. | |  £288b


But when in any of the aforesaid assises ib has hap- 1.
pened, that the jurors have made & false oath and have ing
thus committed perjury, upon the complaint of him who or atteint
has lost by the assise they may be convicted of perjury ; ic no
in many ways, sometimes by the oath of Uwonty-four, ha id sworn
. sometimes out of their own mouth through the examina- " 9 —
tion of the judge, and sometimes from their own con-
fession and their own will, as if they should acknowledge
their own fault and put themselves on the mercy of tho
lord the king that he may amend their finding. But
neither the same nor an equal punishment ought to be
awarded in all the aforesaid cases, according to what
will be stated below. But if the jurors are to be con-
vieted by twenty-four, it must be seen how many jurors
there were in the assise, that each may have at least two
to convict him, and if he has more it does no harm,
likewise so that all should be of the same condition at
least as that of the twelve jurors, if they cannot be of
a better condition. And when proceedings are taken
for & conviction, the justiciary as well as the juror
may be to blame, and we must abide by the record of
the justiciaries, until i& is changed by a conviction or
it holds good. Therefore before all things and even
before the jury is summoned, the record must be seen
and examined, that if the judge be in fault, this may
not beimputed to the jurors, nor conversely, and that
he may not suffer punishment because he is free from
fault. For the judge or the justiciary, to whom the
examination appertains, if he has not examined with


390 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


occasionem praebet perjurii juratoribus, nec juratores à
culpa liberat nec seipsum. Audito igitur recordo, per-
pedi poterit (& no priüs) utrü assis& capta fuerit in
modum assiste vel in modu jurate, & secundüm hoc
adjudieare convietione vel no adjudicare. Et si in
modum assise capiatur assisa, per jJuratam convincatur
utrum duodecim verum fecerunt sacramentum vel fal- :
sum, sl autem verum, tenebit eorum veredictum, si
autem falsum, convincendi sunt propter perjurium.


. Poterit etiam sacramentum esse falsum & fatuum. Et


Math.
Paris,

&*. 1254.
38 H. III.


f. 289.


eodem modo judicium sive justiciariü sive juratorum.
Committit enim jurator perjurium propter falsum sacra-
métum, ut si ex certa scientia aliter juraverit, quàm
res in veritate se habuerit. Si autem sacramentum
fatuum fuerit licet falsum, tamen non committit per-
jurium, licet re vera res aliter se habeat quàm jurave-
rat, & quia jurat secundüm conscientiam eo q non
vadit contra mentem. Sunt quidam qui falsum dicüt
mentiendo, sed se pejerant, quia contra mentem vadunt.
Sunt etiam quidam qui falsum dicant jurando, sed non


se pejerant, eo quód non mentiuntur nec contra men-


tem vadunt, ecüm credunt ita esse secundüm conscien-
tiam, quamvis res se habeat aliter in veritate. Ut si
quis interrogat quis fuit ad consilium London, & re-
spondeat quis, quód rex & comes Richardus (ut credit)
licet aliter sib in veritate, quód comes ibi non fuerit,
talis non mentitur, & licet, juraverit quód ita sit (ut


. eredit) perjurium non committit. liem vice versa,


dicunt quidam verum & mentiuntur & pejerant eo
quód contra mentem vadunt, quia non credunt ita esse


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 9391


sufficient diligence, affords an occasion for perjury to the
jurors, nor does he free the jurors nor himself from fault.
Upon the record therefore having been read (and not
before), i( may be determined whether ihe assise has
been taken in the manner of an assise or in the manner
of & jury, and aecording to this to adjudge a conviction
or not to adjudge it. And if an assise has been held in
the manner of an assise, let à conviction be made by &
jury, whether the twelve have made a true or a false oath,
but if & true oath, their verdiet shall hold good, but if
a, false oath, they are to be convicted on account of per-
jury. Àn oath may also be false and fatuous. And in


ihe same way the judgment either of the justiciary or.


of the jurors. For à juror commits perjury on account
of a false oath, as if he has sworn a thing of his certain
knowledge otherwise than the thing has been of truth.
But if his oath has been fatuous although false, he does
not however commit perjury although in truth the thing
be otherwise than he has sworn, and because he swears
according to his conscience inasmuch as he does not go
against his intelligence. "There are some who say what
is false in lying, but they perjure themselves, because
they go against their intelhgenee. There are also some
who say what is false upon their oath, but they do not
perjure themselves, inasmuch as they do not lie nor go
against their intelligence, since they believe it to be so
aecording to their conscience, although the thing is other-
wise in truth.  Ásif any one should ask who was at the
Council of London, and some one should answer that the
king and earl Richard were there (as he believes),
although it be otherwise in truth, that the earl was not
there, such & person does not lie, and although he may
have sworn that it was so (as he believed), he does not
commit perjury. Although conversely, some say the
iruth and they lie and they commit perjury, inasmuch
as they go against their intelligence, because they do
not believe the thing to be so as they say, as if à Jew


f. 989.


392 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


sieut. dicunt, ut. si J udeus dieat Christum natum ex
virgine, mentitur: quia contra mentem vadit & non
credit ita esse, cüm ita sit in veritate, & si juraverit,
Britton, iv. perjurium committit. Eodem: modo potest jurator fal-
ch.ix.$2. sum facere juditium & fatuum, càüm judicare teneatur
per verba in sacramento contenta, quz talia sunt: quód
dicet veritatem si talis disseysivit talem, & tune viden-
dum utrum simpliciter dicat sine aliqua rafione dicti
Sui quod talis disseysivit talem, vel quód non dissey-
sivit, quo casu, si revera res aliter se habeat, falsum
sequi poterit juditium, si contra mente jerit fatua!
pronuntiatio justitiarii hcet, non falsa, quia non exami-
navit. ltem eodem modo fatuum poterit juditium esse
juratorum, si non contra mente jerint, et similiter fatua
pronütiatio judicis. Item si dicat, quód talis disseysivit
talé vel non disseisivit, et. ratione dieti sui assignaverit
narrando veritate per ordinem, licet express? non judi-
cent, faciunt tamen quod tantudem valet. Et licet
narratio forte contraria sit saeramento et dicto przce-
denti, tamen falsum non faciunt saerametum, licet fa-
ciunt fatuum juditium, quia loquitur? seeundum con-
scientiam, quia falli possunt in juditiis suis sicut ipse
justitiarius. Et si justitiarius secundum eorum ;judi-
tium pronunciaverit, falsum faciet  pronuntiationem.
Si autem aliter quàm res se habuerit narraverint, aut
hee faciunt ex certa scientia aut justo errore ducti
sunt. Et si examinati, cüm justo deducantur errore,
dietum suum emendaverint, hoc bene facere possunt
ante judicium & impuné, sed post juditium non sine
poma. Si autem in falsitate permanserint et ex certa


1 ** et fatua," MS. Rawl. C. 160. | . ? *loquuntur," M.S. idem.


un


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 2393


should say that Christ was born of a virgin, he lies be-
cause he «goes against his intelligence and does not
believe it to be so, although it be so in truth, and if he
has sworn.so, he commits: perjury. In thesame manner
& juror may make a false and fatuous judgment, when
he is bound to judge by the words contained in the
oath, which are of this kind, that he shall speak the
truth, if such an one has disseysed so-and-so, and then it
is to be seen whether he simply says without any reason
for his saying that such an one has disseysed so-and-so,
or that he has not disseysed him, in which case if the
thing is otherwise in truth, a false judgment may follow,
if à fatuous sentence of the justiciary, although it be not
false, has gone against his intelligence, because he has
not examined. Likewise in the same manner the judg-
ment of the jurors may be fatuous, if they have not
gone against their intelligence, and in like manner the
sentence of the judge may be fatuous. Likewise if he
should say that such a person disseysed so-and-so or did
not disseyse him, and has assigned & reason for his so
saying by narrating the truth in order, although they
do not expressly judge, they nevertheless do what is
equivalent. And although the narration be by chance :
contrary to their oath and precedent saying, neverthe-
less they do not make a false oath, although they mako
à fatuous judgment, because he speaks aceording to his
conscience, because they may: be deceived in their judg-
ments just as the justiciary himself. And if the justiciary
should pronounce according to their judgment, ho will
make & false pronouncement. But if they have nar-
rated the matter otherwise than it has happened, they
either do this from their certain knowledge or have been
induced by just error. And if upon examination, when
they are led away by just error, they have corrected
their saying, this they may well do before judgment and
with impunity, but after judgment not without a penalty.
But if they have persisted in their falsity and from their


394 DE ASSISY UTRUM.


scientia sua falsum dixerint, sed non ante judicium,
ore tenus convinci possint, post juditium convinci po-


. terunt per juratam. Item in culpa poterit esse judex


Britton, ib.
$ 5.


sive justitiarius et non jurator, ut si cum jurator veri-
tatem dixerit et rationem dicti sui assignaverit et jus-
titiarius pronuntiaverit in contrarium, et hoc facit ex
certa scientia. In hoc casu tenebitur ex malefito malé
pronuntiando et pervertendo scienter justum judicium
jurstorum, et sie non erunt juratores in culpa, sed jus-
titiarius. Si autem hoc fecerit per ignorantiam vel
per imperitiam, tenebitur ex quasi malefitio, sed cum
eo propter imperitiam, mitiüs erit egendum! quoad
ponam. Examinato igitur (ut predictum est) recordo,
aut statim concedatur convictio, aut penitus denegetur.


.Esto etiam quód juratores minus bene examinati ob-


f. 289 b


seurum dixerint, vel ad interrogata non responderint
plené vel dubie, vel justo errore ducti veritatem non .
dixerint in parte vel in toto, tunc examinato recordo
(ut predictum est) locus erit potiüs certificationi quàm
convictioni ex tali eausa, ut de incerto faciant certum,
et de dubio verum, et de errore revocentur ad verita-
tem. Cüm igitur petatur certifieatio, non debet de
facili concedi eoram alio quàm coram ipso qui ceperit
assisam, et hoc nisi ex aliqua causa suspitionis. Et si
coram alio capi debeat, non priüs concedatur quàm
videatur recordum et examinetur: ut superius obser-
vatur de convietione, et si recordum fuerit sufficiens
et planum, non erit necesse quód fiat certifieatio, eüm
juratores recordum suum sive dietum mutare non pos-
Sit? nec in dicto suo variare contra recordum justitiari-


! *ggendum," MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ? «* possint," MS. id.


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 395


own certain knowledge they have said what is false,
they may be convicted orally but not before judgment,
and they may be convicted after judgment by a jury.
Likewise the judge or & justiciary and not juror may
be in fault, as if when a juror has said the truth and


has assigned the reason for his saying, and the justiciary '


has pronounced sentence to the contrary, and this he
does from certein knowledge. In this case he shall be
responsible for malice in pronouncing sentence wrongly,
and in perverting knowingly the just judgment of the
jurors, and thus the jurors will not be to blame but the
» justiciary. Butif he has done this through ignorance
or from inexperience he shall be responsible for à kind
of malice, but he shall be treated more mildly as regards
the punishment on account of his inexperience. Upon
the record having been examined (as said above), the
conviction should be forthwith conceded or entirely re-
fused. Let it be also that the jurors having been badly
examined have answered obscurely, or have not replied
to the interrogatories fully, or have replied doubtfully,
or induced by a just error, have not spoken the truth in
part or in the whole, then upon the record having been
examined (as said above), there will be place for à certi-
fication rather than for & conviction from such a cause,
that they may make a certainty out of an uncertainty,
and a truth out. of & doubt, and may be recalled from
error to truth. "When therefore a certification is asked
for it ought not to be easily granted before any one
else than before him who held the assise, and this only
on some cause of suspieion. And if it must be held
before somebody else, let it not be allowed before that the
record is seen and examined, as has been above observed


concerning aconvietion, and if the record be sufficient:


and full, there will be no necessity that a certification
Should be made, since the jurors cannot change their
record nor their finding, nor vary in their finding against
the record of the justiciaries, for if i& were so, their


f. 289 b,


AS RTI d e ETMET NITURETIETT S P WS IM STINET I ERA RR T I E ME T ey ETE S IS ARTI LE e E Lire t M APR or uy arri di ad QoS qi Duda ee NEU Ne. POEYr T ts mo o. TU e nia Macer Pap a Ra
,


396 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


orum, quod si ita esset, sic praeferetur eorundem dictum
& in nullo valeret recordum. Et si contingat quód di-
cant contra recordum, sie se ipsos ore tenus convincunt.
Supplere autem possunt in certificatione defectum, ut
si minus dixerint, vel obscurum, vel si justo errore
dueti fatuum fecerint sacramentum, vel in narratione
facti vel in juditio, dictum suum emendare poterunt
ante judicium & impuné, sed post juditium non sine
peena, cüm se inde posuerint in misericordia! domini
regis, & poenam perjurii non evadent quoad redemptio-
nem, dum tamen infames non effidantur secundum
quod de illis observatur, qui jurant salvo visu. Si
autem omnia plana fuerint in recordo & plena, non
est locus certificationi, sed querens agat de convictione
si voluerit.


2 Ut pleniüs autem sciatur, quando sit locus convic-
Rumdo tioni &; quando non, videndum erit per recordum utrum
convictione assisa capta fuerit in modum assise vel in modum


i ea jurate, opposita exceptione vel non opposita. Item
utrum assisa capta fuerit in presentia tenentis vel eo
absente. Si autem fuerit ibi exceptio pposita, aut est
peremptoria tantum brevis & non actionis, propter
errorem qui provenit ex ipso nomine vel loco, sicut
comitat vel ville, & qui non tangit assisam: hic cüm
assis& & actio integra remaneat, non erit locus convic- .
tioni licet, juratores falsum dixerint vel erraverint, quia
non cadit nisi tantum breve durante assis& in suo
statu, & de hujusmodi veritate inquiritur ita bene
quandoque sine sacramento, quandoque cum  sacra-
mento. Si autem exceptio fuerit peremptoria tam as-
sis;e quàm brevis propter errorem rei, ut si quis petat


! « misericordiam," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 397


word would bé preferred, and the record would be of
no value. And if they should say contrary to the re-
eord, they thereby convict themselves as far as their
words are concerned. But they may supply in the cer-
lification what is defective, as if they have spoken in-
sufficiently, or what is obscure, or if led by a just error
they have made a fatuous oath, or in the narration of
the fact or in the judgment, they may amend their
finding before judgment and with impunity, but after
judgment not without & penalty, when they have put
themselves upon the mercy of the lord the king, and
they shall not escape the penalty of perjury as regards the
redemption of it, whilst however they shall not be
rendered infamous according to what is observed con-
cerning those who swear saving the view. But if all
things are plain on. the record and are full there is no
place for a certifieation, but the plaintiff may proceed
for à convietion, if he wishes.


Tbat it may be more fully known when there is 2.
 plaee for a conviction and when not, it will have to be (jor,


seen by the record whether the assise was held after place for a
the manner of an assise or after the manner of a jury, ood when"
after an exception had been objected or not.  Like- not.
wise whether the assise was held in the presence of

ihe tenant, or whilst he was absent. But if an ex-

ception has been propounded, it is either peremptory

only as regards the writ and not the action, on. ac-

eount of an error which has arisen as to the name or

the place, as of the county or of the vill, and which

does not touch the assise: here since the assise and the

action remain entire, there will be no place for à con-

viction, although the jurors have found falsely or have

erred, for only the writ falls, the assise continuing in

lis own state, and concerning & iruth of this kind an
inquest is well made sometimes without an oath, some-

time with an oath. Butif the exception has been per-
emptory against the assise as well as the writ on account

of an error in the thing, as if & person claims by an


f. 290.


398 | DE ASSISA UTRUM.


per assisam tenementum sibi, ubi petere deberet reddi-
ium, si juratores dicant pro petente, locus erit convic-
tioni, si assis& capiatur in modum assise, secus si in
modum juratz, & sic per assisam vel juratam termina-
bitur actio. Si autem breve competens fuerit, & cüm
querens vel petens intentionem suam proposuerit &
articulos brevis, excipiat tenens contra articulos brevis
& contra intentionem, & illos in toto vel in parte ne-
gaverint, tunc oportebit querentem vel petentem inten-
tionem suam probare per assisam, quo casu, si juratores
male juraverint, locus erit convictioni quia capitur
assis& de articulis supradictis in modum assise. Si


autem talis sit exceptio, quze non tangat aliquem arti-


culum brevis, & si ex toto concedatur intentio queren-
tis & querela justa videatur, tamen elidi poterit per


. exceptionem: ut si incidat alia actio opposita in modum


exceptionis, ut si tenens dieat se esse in possessione &
just? per conventionem sive conditionem, & hoc pro-
bare paratus sit, sic eliditur actio & assisa preecedens,
cüm denegari non possit. Oportet igitur probare con-
ventionem, quz est alia actio & exiüra assisam, & quse
multas habet probationes: probatur enim quandoque
per instrumentum & per testes, quandoque per assisam
in defectu instrumentorum captam in modum juraie
& non 8ssise, de consensu & voluntate utriusque par-
tis, quia oportet de necessitate quód consentiant, & si
proponens probare voluerit quod dieit, exceptio erit
nulla, & querens obtinebit. Si &utem querens se po-
nere voluerit in juratam, denegabitur actio, in quo casu
propter consensum non erit locus omninó convictioni.


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 999


assise & tenement for himself where he ought to claim &
rent, if the jurors find for the claimant, there will be a
place for conviction, if the assise be held after the manner
of an assise, otherwise, if held after the manner of a
jury, &nd so the action will be terminated by the assise
or the jury. But if the writ has been suitable, and
when the plaintiff or claimant has propounded his decla-
ration and the articles of the writ, the tenant should
except against the articles of the writ and against the
declaration, and has denied them in the whole or in part,
then it will be incumbent on the plaintiff or claimant to
propound his declaration by an assise, in which case, if
the jurors have sworn wrong, there will be place for
a, conviction, because the assise 1s taken upon the articles
above said after the manner of an assise. But if the
exception be such as does not touch any article of the
writ, and if the declaration of the plaintiff be altogether
conceded, and his complaint appears to be just, never-
theless it may be parried by an exception, as if another
action be incident objected after the manner of an ex-
ception, as if the tenant should say that he is in posses-
sion and justly so through an agreement or under a
eondition, and he is prepared to prove this, the action
is thus parried and the preceding assise, when it cannot
be denied. It isineumbent therefore to prove the agree-
ment, which is another proceeding andis outside the as-
sise, and which has many proofs, for it is proved some-
times by an instrument and by witnesses, sometimes by
an assise in defect of instruments held after the man-
ner of & jury and not of an assise, with the consent and


will of either party, because it is incumbent of necessity |


that they should consent, and if the party propounding
it has wished to prove what he says, an exception will be
null, and the plaintiff shall prevail. But ifthe plaintiff
wishes to put himself on a jury, an action will be denied
to him, in which case on account of his consent there will
be no place for a convietion. "The same thing will result


290.


400 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


Illud idem erit, si status opponatur in modum excep-

tionis. Et stat si! assisa, si querens personam habeat

standi in juditio & quód petere non possit per assisam,

oportet quód tenens probet illum esse talem, & quia

ex toto conceditur intentio querentis, si personam ha-

beat in judicio standi, quo probato vel non probato
terminabitur actio. Probare enim poterit tenens excep-

tionem suam multis modis per parentes, si illos statim

Britton, iv.habuerit ad manum, & si non, ad alium diem. Sed
m 38 ^ admitti non deberet talis probatio per parentes, si con-

| tigerit postmodum quàd de statu ageretur, nisi oppo-
sita esset a domino contra servum existentem sub
potestate sua, & in quo casu, uno juditio terminaretur |
status & assisa, quod quidem non esset si esset extra
potestatem domini '& juditium peteret, si ponere se
deberet in assisam de statu ante restitutionem, ad quod
quidem compelli non deberet, nisi hoc de voluntate
Sua procederet, cüm alia actione opus esset. Si autem
nullos parentes habuerit, tunc per instrumentum ex-
ceptionis & cüm nullam aliam habuerit, tunc in fine
per assisam, contra quam querens replicare poterit
multis modis de libertate, & probare se liberum per
parentes, vel per instrumentum manumissionis, vel per
privilegium, vel quód sit: in statu libero extra potes-
tatem dominorum, in quibus casibus, se defendere po-
terit si replicationem probaverit. Si a&utem nullam
habuerit, vel cüm habuerit illam non proposuerit, tunc
ad ulümum per assisam in modum jurat» captam
judieabitur, nec per hoc ei prejudicabitur imposterum
quoad statum, sive jurata faciat pro eum? sive contra
ipsum, nee erit locus convictioni, quia non capitur in
modum assise, nec servitus opposita tangit assisam
magis quám conventio, sed assisa semper manet inte-


! « si? omitted, MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ? « pro eo," M.S. idem.


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM, 401


if status be objected after the manner of an exception.
And the assise stands, if the plantiff is of & personal
condition to sue in court, and that he cannot claim by
an assise, it is ineumbent on the tenant to prove him to
be such, and because the declaration of the plaintiff is
conceded entirely, if he is of à condition to sue in court,
upon proof or disproof of which, the action will be ter-
minated. For the tenant may prove his exception in
various ways by his kinsmen, if he has thém immediately
at hand, and if not, on another day. But such a proof by
his kinsmen ought not to be admitted, if it should happen
afterwards that there should be an aetion respecting his
status, unless it is objected by à lord against a serf who
is under his power, and in which case, the status and the
assise will be determined by one judgment, which would
not be the case, if he was beyond the power of the lord
and claimed a judgment, if he ought to put himself upon
an assise respecting his síatus before restitution [of his
goods], to which indeed he ought not to be compelled,
unless it has proceeded from his own will, since there
would be need of another action. But if he has no
kindred, then by an instrument of exception,and when
he has no other, then finally by an assise, against which
the plaintiff may reply in several modes concerning his
freedom, and may prove himself to be free through his
kinsmen, or by an instrument of manumission, or by a
privilege, or that he is in & free condition beyond the
power of his lords, in which cases he may defend himself,
if he has proved his replication. But if he has none, or
when he has it, he has not brought it forward, then at
the last he shall be judged by an assise held after the
manner of a jury, nor shall this prejudice him for the
future as regards his status, whether the jury finds for
him or against him, nor shall there be place for a
conviction, because it is not held after the manner of
an assise, nor does the objection of servitude touch the
assise more than & convention, but the assise always
Q 1302. Cc


409 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


pm ib. gra, licet per exceptionem elisa. Si autem capta fuerit
7


f. 290 b.


assisà in.absentia tenentis, vel si cüm presens fuerit
non exceperit, sed statim se posuerit in assisam, sive
juratores dicant pro uno sive pro alio in articulis bre-
vis & falsó, vel dicant forté conventionem intervenisse,


 . vel quód querens servus sit vel bastardus, cüàm non


sit, vel aliud quid tale, quod posset esse exceptio si

proponeretur & tenente, locus erit convictioni quia
capta est ista assisa, in modum assise & non jurate,
quasi consensu querentis sive parentis! non inierveni-
ente. Si autem cüm tenens absens sit nihil dicatur
contra assisam, ex providentia boni & discreti justiti- '
&rii tenentur juratores reddere rationem dicti sui, &
si postmodum de convictione agatur, exeusare poterit
juratores justa ignorantia, & justus error. In assisis
autem omnibus preter magnam assisam locus erit con-
victioni generalitér, nisi vertatur assisà in juratam
propter aliquam qusestionem incidentem, quz probari
debeat per instrumenta & per testes vel per juratores
(ut praedictum est) Et in magna assisa ideo non jacet
convietio, quia cüm petens offerat se disrationare dic-
ium suum, oportet quód tenens se defendat vel per
duellum vel per magnam assisam, per quod istorum
duorum elegerit, & càüm de voluntate sua se capiat ad
&ssisam, illam recusare non poterit, quod si fecerit,
videtur quód defensionem suam reproba,verit, sicut in
assisis observatur, ubi quis se ponat in juratam aliqua
ratione (ut predietum est) non poterit juratorum dic-
tum postmodum reprobari? q si faceret, nihil aliud
esset g facere probationem suam nullam, et ideo non
&dmittitur convictio. Et sciendum quód sunt assise
sive jurat e sive inquisitiones de transgressionibus et


! * petentis, MS. Rawl, C. 160. | ?*'reprobare," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 408


remains entire, although parried by an exception. .Butif
the assise be taken in the absence of the tenant, or if
when being present he has not raised an exception but
has forthwith put himself upon an assise, whether the
jurors find for one or for the other upon the articles of
ihe writ and falsely, or if they say by chance that a
convention has intervened, or that the claimant is a serf
or & bastard, when he is not so, or something else of such
sort that it might be an exception, if ib were propounded
by the tenant, there will be place for.à conviction, be-
cause that assise has been taken after the manner ofan
assise and not of a jury, the consent as i& were of the
plaintiff or claimant not intervening. But if when the
tenant is absent, nothing is said against the assise, by the
providence of a good and discreet judiciary the jurors are
bound to give a reason for their finding, and if afterwards
proceedings are taken for their conviction, a just ignorance
and just error may excuse the jurors. But in all assises
except a great assise there will be place for & conviction
generally, unless the assise is turned into a jury onaecount
of some question arising which may be proved by instru-
ments and by witnesses and.by jurors (as aforesaid). And
in & great assise a convietion does not lie for this reason,
because when the claimant offers himself to deraign his
finding, it is incumbent on the tenant to defend himself
either by the duel or by the great assise, by whichever of
these he may choose, and when of his own will he betakes
himself to an assise, he cannot refuse it, but if he should
do 8o, it seems that he has disapproved his own defence, f. 290 b.
as 1s observed in assises, where a person has put himself
on & jury, he cannot afterwards (as said above) for any
reason disapprove the finding of the jurors, which if he
Should do, i6 would be nothing else than to render his
proof null and therefore a conviction is not admitted.
And itis to be known that there are assises or juries
or inquests concerning irespasses and other things,
Likewise there are purgations, as if & crime or mis-
cca


Britton, iv.
ch. xi.
88 2 and 3.


404 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


alis. Item sunt purgationes, ut si crimen imponatur
vel delictum, purgatio erit probatio innocentis. ltem
est defensio contra prsesumptionem, quae nec dicitur
jurata sive inquisitio nec purgatio, scilicet ubi quis
dicit aliquid esse & inde producit sectam, exinde sequi-
tur defensio contra sectam, quasi probatio contra prse-
sumptionem, & quandoque &dmittuntur plures defen-
siones quandoqueé pauciores contra sectam, secundum
quod alibi dicetur. Est tamen quedam jurata, qure
aliquando &dmittit convictionem, ut si fiat jurata de
aliquo, quod tangat dominum regem et facit contra
dominum regem, convinci poterunt juratores per alios;
ut coram Martino de Pateshul de Henry de Movewe-
dene, qui aliquando fuit in custodia domini regis tem-
pore Huberti de Burgo. Jurata veró sive inquisitio
non admittut convietionem, et si calumnientur certa
ratione, sequitur emendatio et mutatio juratorum vel
aforciamentum. Si autem in juramento vel juditio
aliquando erratum sit: videndum erit si error sit ex-
eusabilis vel crassa ignorantia ad hoc quód mitigetur
poena, ut si factum de facili sciri non possit nisi per
presumptionem, ut si conventio vel contractus aliquis
factus sit in occulto, ità quód pauci presentes extite-
rint, talis error excusabilis est: si autem in publico
et palam et hoc ita, quód omnes de patria hoc scive-
rint, et soli juratores hoc ignoraverint vel inde dubi-
taverint, non exeusantur à perjurio, quia talis crassa
est ignorantia. Si autem juratores faetum narraverint,
sicut veritas se habuerit, et postea factum secundüm
narrationem suam judicaverint etin juditio erraverint,
juditium potius erit fatuum quàm falsum, cüm credant
tale judicium sequi tale factum. Et si justitiarii se-
cundüm eorum dictum juditium pronunciaverint, falsam
faciunt pronuneiationem, et ideo sequi non deberent
eorum dietum, sed illud emendare tenerentur per dili-


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 405


demeanor be imputed, the purgation will be the proof of
innocence. Likewise there is à defence against & pre-
sumption, which is called neither a jury nor an inquest
. mor aà purgation, to wit, where a person says that a thing
is so and thereon produces a sect, thereupon there follows
8, defence against the sect, asit were proof against pre-
sumption, and sometimes several defences are admitted,
sometimes fewer against a& sect, according to what will
be said below. There is however a certain jury, which
sometimes admits & conviction, as if & jury be had -
concerning something which touches the lord the king,
and makes against the lord the king, the jurors may be
convicted by others, as before Martin de Pateshul con-
cerning Henry de Movewedene, who was sometime in the
wardship of the lord the king in the time of Hubert de
Burgh. But a jury or an inquest does not admit ofa con-
viction, and if they are in à certain manner perverse, an
amendment and & change of the jurors or a reinforcement
follows. Butif there has been in some respect an error in
the oath or in the judgment, it must be seen whether the
error be exceusable or erass ignorance,in order that the
penalty may be mitigated, as if the act cannot be easily
known except by à presumption, as if & convention or
. Some contract has been made secretly so that few persons
were present, error in such a case will be excusable, but
if it has been done publicly and openly and so that all of
the country know it, and the jurors alone have, been igno-
rant of it or have doubted of it, they are not excused of
perjury, beeause it is erass ignorance. But if the jurors
have narrated the faet as the truth has been, and have
afterwards judged the fact aecording to their narrative,
and have erred in their judgment, their judgment will
rather have been fatuous than false, when they believe
such à judgment to follow such a fact. And if the jus-
lieiaries have pronounced judgment according to their
finding, they make a false pronouncement, and there-
fore they ought not to follow their finding, but would be
bound to amend it by diligent examination of it. But


406 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


gentem examinationem. $i autem dijudicare nesciant,
recurrendum erit ad majus consilium. Item est quod-
dam sacramentum, quod defertur à parte parti in ju-
ditio vel a judice parti, in quo nulla sequitur convic-
tio. Salis est enim, quód Deum expectent ultorem.
Item de damnis nulla erit convictio sed potiüs locum
habet certificatio, ut si juratores nimis gravaverint
disseysitorem in damnis, & in quo casu possunt cer-
tifieare justiciarios in quibus & de quibus tot damna


 provenerint, & tale sacramentum  deferetur & judice


3.

Ad quem
pertinet
capere
convic-
tionem

et certifi-
eationem.?


f. 291.


jurstoribus ac si dubia dicerent vel obscura.


Videndum est etiam cui competat querela super
convietione: & sciendum q ei competit, cui competit
àssisa vz. qui in seysina fuit nomine proprio & non
alieno, ut procurator vel familia, Item competit ei
conira quem prefertur assis&. Item videndum ad quem
pertinet capere convictionem & certificationem, & sci-
endum quód ei qui cepit assisam, quia ipse magis
noverit veritatem, & hoc nisi aliqua certa ratione
suspectus habeatur, & etiam sine alio brevi cüm po-
lestatem habeat terminandi negotium, quia ad ipsum
pertinet plenaria potestas judicandi in ung assisa sicut
in pluribus, nisi aliquid excipiatur specialiter in brevi
de war&to, quia etsi aliqua causa licet simpliciter ali-
cui delegetur, omnia videntur ei coricessa, sine quibus
causa explicari non possit. Cüm igitur convietio &
cerüficatio dependeant ex assise, nec sine convictione
vel certificatione plen? terminari possit assisa, meritó
pertinebit ad ipsum capere convietionem & certifica-
tionem, eui competit plena jurisdietio capiendi assisam.
Item videndum, infra quod tempus capi debeat, & sci-


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 407


if they know not how to judge between them, they must
have recourse to & greater council Likewise there is:&
certain oath which is tendered by & party to à party in
judgment or by a judge to & party, in which there is no
conviction. For itis sufficient for them to wait for the
vengeance of God. Likewise there shall be no conviction
concerning damages, but a certification has rather place,
as if the jurors have pressed too heavily on the disseysor
with damages, and in which case they may certify the
justiciaries in what matters and concerning what matters
the damages have arisen, and an oath of such kind shall
be administered by the judge to the jurors, as if their
finding was dubious or obscure.


We must see also who is entitled to complain eoncern-
ing & conviction, and it is to be known that he is en- To von
titled to do so, who is entitled to bring an assise, to wit, MER
he who was in seysine in his own name and not inískes,
another's name, as an agent or à domestic servant. Like- and a cer-
wise he is entitled, against whom an assise is preferred. fification.
Likewise we must see to whom it belongs to take.a
conviction and a certification, and it is to be known that
it belongs to him who has taken the assise, because he
knows more the truth, and this unless he is for some
certain reason regarded with suspicion, and even without
another writ, since he has the power to determine the f 291.
business, seeing that there pertains to him plenary power
of judging in one assise just as in several, unless some-
thing be excepted specially in the writ of warranty, .
because although a certain cause be simply delegated to
some one, all things seem to be allowed to him, without
which the cause cannot be unravelled. Since therefore
a convietion and a certification depend on the assise,
. &nd the assise cannot be fully determined without &
convietion and a certification, it will deservedly apper-
tain to him to take & conviction and & certification,
who is entitled to the full jurisdiction of taking an
assise, Likewise we must see, within what time it
ought to be taken, and itis to be known that it ought


Breve ad
summo-
nendum
viginti-
quatuor.


408 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


endum quód statim & recenter post captionem assise
Bb eo qui cepit assisam, alioquin transibit judicium
assise in rem judicatam, ita q sine speciali precepto
domini regis post tempus capi non possit. Item ubi
capi debeat, in coii vel extra, secundü quod fieri debet
de assisis. Et sciendu q pro voluntate domini regis
vel justiciarii in cofi vel extra, ubicunq, assisa capta.
fuerit in cofü vel extra, cüm dependeat ex assisa sicut
facit certifiatio. Et si ad hoc se habeat comunis
libertas, q assise extra cof capi non debeant, non
sequitur quód propter hoc remaneant juratz in cofü
capiendz, aliud enim habet privilegium assisa & aliud
Jurata. Breve siquidem de sumonendo viginti quatuor
&d convineendum duodecim tale est.


Rex vie. salutem. Si telis fecerit te securü de cla-
more suo prosequendo, tunc suimoneas per bonos sum-
monitores xxiii. legales milites de visneto de tali
villa, quód sint coram justiciariis nostris ad primam
assisam cim in partes illas venerint, parati sacramento
recognoscere, si talis injusté et sine judicio disseisivit
predictum talé de libero tenemento suo in teli villa
pos6 primam coronationé nostram apud Westminster,
unde talis queritur quàd juratores assisee nove dissey-
sinm, qu: inde sumonita fuit & capta inter eos coram
justicieriis nostris ultimà itinerantibus in cof tali,
falsum fecerunt sacramentum. Et interim diligenter
inquiras qui fuerunt juratores illius assis, & eos
habeas ad prsefatam assisam coram prefatis justicia-
riis. Et summoneas per bonos suinonitores prefatum
talem, quód tunc sit ibi auditurus illam recognitionem.
Et habeas ibi summonitores & hoc breve & nomina
militum. T. &c.


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 409


to be taken forthwith and recently after the taking of
the assise by him who took the assise, otherwise the
judgment of the assise will pass into an adjudicated case,
so that without a special precept from the lord the king
ib cannot be taken after time has elapsed. Likewise
where it ought to be taken, in the county or beyond it,
according to what ought to be done in assises. And it is
to be known that it is to be taken according to the
pleasure of the king or of the justiciary in the county or
beyond it, wherever the assise has been taken iu the
county or beyond it, since it depends on the assise as the


certification does.  Ánd if the common liberty has a bear--


ing on this, that assises ought not to be held beyond the
county, it does not follow that on that account juries are
bound to be held in the county, for an assise has one pri-
vilege and a jury another. The writ, for instance, for
summoning twenty-four to convict twelve is of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. lf so-and-so has
given you security for prosecuting his complaint, then
summon by good summoners twenty-four loyal knights
of the visne of such a vill, that they be present before
our justiciarles at the first assise when they shall have
come into those parts, prepared on their oath to recog-
nise, if so-and-so unjustly and without a judgment has
disseysed the person aforesaid from his free tenement in
such a vill since our first coronation at Westminster,
whereof so-and-so complains that the jurors of the assise
of novel disseysine, which was summoned thereupon and
held between them before our justiciaries on their last
iter in such a county, have made a false oath. And
meanwhile inquire diligently who were the jurors of that
assise and have them [in attendance] at the  afore-
said assise before the aforesaid justiciaries. .Ánd sum-
mon by good summoners so-and-so aforesaid that he be
there to hear that recognition. And have there the
summoners and this writ and the names of the knights.
Witness &c.


4.
AÀ writ to
n


twenty-


four.


5.
Aliud
breve de


410 DE ASSISÀ UTRUM.


Aliquando fit hoc breve pro disseysitore, aliquando :
pro disseysito, aliquando pro communia pasture & tur-


assisa mor- barize, & fossato levato, & hiis similibus. Rex vic. salu-


tis ante-
cessoris.


f. 291 b.


6.
Breve de
8s51sa
ultime
pressen-
tationis.


tem. Si talis fecerit te securum de clamore suo prose-
quendo, tune sumoneas per bonos sumonitores xxiiii.
legales milites de visneto de tali villa, q sint coram justi-
ciariis nostris ad primam assisam cüm in partes illas -
venerint, parati sacramento recognoscere si talis pater,
mater, avüculus vel amita, frater vel soror predicti talis
fuit seysitus vel seysita in dominico suo ut de feodo de
tanto terree cum pertinetiis in tali villa die quo obiit,
& si obiit post prima coronationem  R. regis avüuculi
nostri & siideé talis ppiquior ejus hzsres sit, unde ipse
talis querit q juratores assisee mortis &tecessoris, quee inde
summonita fuit & capta inter ipsum talem & talem
coram justiciarlis nostris ultimó itinerantibus in com
tali, falsum fecerüt sacramentu. Et interim diligenter
inquiras qui fuerunt juratores illius assise, & eos ha-
beas ad prefatà assisam coram prwfatis justiciariis, &
summoneas per bonos summonitores predictum talem
q tunc sit ibi auditurus illam recognitionem, & habeas
ibi summonitores, & hoe breve & nomina militum. T.
&c.


De assisa vero ultime prsesentationis sic: Si talis
fecerit ie securum &e.  Summoneas &c. quód sint
parati sacramento recognoscere quis advocatus tempore
pacis presentavit ultimam personam &e. Et sic totam
formam brevis originalis, ut suprà de aliis assisis. Si
&utem super assisam &d recognoscendum utrum: eodem
modo. Et per hoc g forma brevis originalis inseri
debet in brevi de convictione, videtur aperté quód
convielio tantum locum habeat de articulis in brevi-
bus assisarum contentis, ubi nulla objiecitur exceptio,


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 411


Sometimes this writ is used for the disseysor, some- ^ 5.
times for the disseysee, sometimes for common of pasture "uu
and of turbary, and the raising of a foss and such like. cerning
The king to the viscount greeting. lf so-and-so has picti
given you security for proseeuting his claim, then sum. dancester.
mon by good summoners twenty-four loyal knighis from
the visne of that vill, that. they present themselves be-
fore our justiciaries at the first assise when they have
come into those parts, prepared on their oath to recognise
if so-and-so the father, or the mother, or the uncle or
the aunt, or the brother or the sister of such person
aforesaid was seysed in his demesne as of fee respecting
so much land with its appurtenanees in such a vill on
the day. on which he died, and if he died after the first
coronation of king Richard, our uncle, and if such person
aforesaid is his next heir, whereof such person aforesaid
complains, that the jurors of the assise of mortdancester,
which was summoned thereon and held between such
person aforesaid and so-and-so before our justiciaries on
their last iter in such à county, have made a false oath.

And meanwhile do thou inquire who were the jurors
of that assise, and have them present at the aforesaid
assise before our aforesaid justiciaries, and summon by f. 291b.
good summoners so-and-so aforesaid that he be there to
hear that recognition, and have there the summoners ,
and this writ and the names ofthe knights. Witness &c.


Concerning an assise of last presentation thus: if so- ^ €.
and-so has given you security &ec. Summon &c. that A e i
they be prepared to recognise in their oath what advo- of last pre-
. eate in the time of peace presented the last parson? ^^ inm

And so the whole form of the original writ, as above
concerning other assises. But if upon an assise of recog-
nising whether [land is& lay fee or free alms] in the
same way. But hereby inasmuch as the form of the
original writ ought to be inserted in the writ for à con-
vietion, it seems openly that a conviction only has place
concerning the articles contained in the writs of assises,
where no exception is objected, but it is held after the


7.
Qualiter
accipi


419 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


sed capitur in modum assise. Et quód ubi excipitur
de conventione vel opponatur causa status vel hujus-
modi, locum non habeat convictio, quia si opponitur,
tune vertitur assisa in juratam ad inquirendum de
exceptione si dedicatur, vel non fiat secundum con-
ventionem, & eo q necessitas juris partes ad hoc com-
pellit. Ad diem summonitionis bene se poterit esso-
niare ille, qui summonitus est ad audiendam illam
recognitionem, quia omnes quos recognitio tangit inter-
esse debent, poterit enim summonitus multa dicere
quare non debeat convietio procedere, vel si procedere
debeat, dicere possit contra juratores & alia plura pro-
ponere, quare convictio remanere debeat ad tempus vel
imperpetuum. Et excipi poterit per eum qui recupe-
raverib per assisam, ub si damna fuerint restituta in
parte vel in toto, quia ante statum ejus plené resti-
tutum non procedet convictio, sieut nec placitum ali-
quod motum per eum qui amisit per assisam super
proprietate. Item cadit convictio, si ille, qui de falso
Sa&eramento queritur, autoritate propria & sine judicio
se posuerit in seysinam de tota re vel ejus parte ali-
qua. Presentibus itaque partibus, si viginti quatuor
non venerint, dabitur alius dies, & viginti quatuor
attachiétur q sint ad illum diem. Presentibus autem
juratoribus & querente, si summoniti non venerint,
attachientur, si autem querens non venerit, prswsenti-
bus juratoribus & illo de quo queritur, recedet jurata
sine die (expectato tamen quarto die) & summonitores
similiter, & querens & plegii sui de prosequendo in
misericordia regis.


Cüm autem partes in judicio comparuerint, in pre-
sentia xii. & viginti quatuor imprimis audiatur Tecor-


I RUE. E. Phal: uia de MO ME NE e rers


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 413


manner of an assise  Ánd that when an exception is
taken concerning à convention or a& cause of satus is
objected or such like, a conviction has no place, because
if it be objected, then the assise is turned into a jury to
inquire concerning the exception if it be gainsaid, or if it
is not raised aecording to the convention, and inasmuch
as the necessity of the right compels the parties thereto.
Upon the day of the summons he who is summoned to
hear that recognition may well essoin himself, because all
the persons whom that recognition affects ought to be
present, for the party summoned may be able to say
many things why the conviction should not proceed, or
if it ought to proceed, he may speak against the jurors
and propound many other things wherefore & conviction
ought to be stayed fora time or in perpetuity. And
exception inay be taken by him who has recovered by
the assise, as if damages have been restored in part or in
whole, because before a full restitution of his state
a conviction 'shall not proceed, no more than a plea
moved by him who has lost by an assise upon the pro-
perty. Likewise a conviction falls, if he, who complains
concerning & false oath, has put himself into seysine of
the whole estate or à part of it by his own authority
and without & judgment. Upon the parties therefore
being present, if twenty-four have not come another day
will be given, and the twenty-four will be attached that
they should be present on that day. But upon the
jurors being present and the plaintiff, if those who have
been summoned have not come, they shall be attached,
butif the plaintiff has not come, whilst the jurors are
present and the party against whom the complaint is
made, the jury shall go away without a day (the fourth
day having however been waited for) and the sum-
moners in like manner, and the complainant and his
sureties for the prosecution shall be at the king's
mercy. |


But when the parties have appeared in judgment in rq E
the presence of the twelve and of the twenty-four, let way the


debet
convictio.


f. 292.


414 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


dum assise secundum quod capta fuerit, & inquiratur
& querente in quo vel in quibus xii juratores falsum
fecerint sacramentum, in uno articulo brevis, vel in
pluribus, vel etiam in qusestionibus & exceptionibus
ineidentibus, si assisa capta fuerit in modum assis,
& ubi nulla pposita fuit exceplio & tenente secundum
dicta post sacrament à juratoribus, & in quo casu lo-
cus erib convietioni si juratores male juraverint in
exceptionibus, sicut in articulis principalibus in brevi
contentis: & secundum quod ita fuit, sicut querens
dicit, vel non, procedat jurata per sacramentum viginti
quatuor. Jurare autem debet in modum jurate, &


. non in modum assise hoc modo.


Hoc auditis justiciarii, quod veritatem dicam de hoc
quod à me requiretis ex parte domini regis, & pro
nihilo omittam &c. Et alii post eum jurabunt sicut
in alis juratis. Et cüm juraverint, justiciarius osten-
dat eis formam querele, & super quibus dicere debe-
ant veritatem, scilicet utrum ille qui queritur injusté
fuerit disseysitus vel non, & rationem dicti sui (si
necesse fuerit) tenentur assignare, & secundum quod
dixerint pro una parte vel pro alia, sequetur absolutio
vel condemnatio. Forma veró irrotulationis talis esse
debet. Jurata viginti quatuor ad convincendum xii,
venit recognitur&, si À. injuste & sine judicio &c. vel
alio modo, seeundum diversitatem assisarum et formam
brevis de convictione. Et unde talis queritur quod
juratores talis assise. nuper capte coram justiciariis
talibus falsum inde fecerunt sacramentum, eo quód
dixerunt quód preedietus talis disseysivit talem injusté
& sine judicio & non disseysivit eum sieut alius talis
dieit, Et unde idem talis dicit quód ita fuit vel ita,


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 415


the record of the assise be first read aloud according as it conviction
has been held, and let it be inquired from the com-3 rud
plainant in what thing or in what things the twelve jurors

have made a false oath, in one article of the writ or in

several or also in the incidental questions and excep-

tions, if the assise has been held after the manner of an

assise, and where no exception has been propounded by

the tenant according to the findings, after the oath of

the jurors, and in which case there will be place for &
conviction if the jurors have sworn wrong in the excep-

tions, as in the principal articles contained in the writ.

And according as it has been so as the plaintiff says, or

not,let a jury proceed by the oath of the twenty-four.

But it ought to be sworn after the manner of à jury and

not of an assise, in this manner. |


Ye hear this, justiciaries, that, I will speak the truth , 9...
concerning this which you shall require from me on the ing the
part of the lord the king, and for nothing will I omit ?*tb-
&e. And the others after him shall swear as in other 595
juries And when they have sworn,let the justiciary
show to them the form of the complaint, and on what
matters they ougbt to say the truth, to wit, whether he
who complains has been unjustly disseysed or not, and
they are bound io assign the reason of their finding
(if it be necessary) and according as they have found for
one party or the other, an acquittal or à condemnation
willfollow. But the form of the enrolment ought to be
of this kind. A jury of twenty-four came to hold &
recognition for the conviction of twelve, if A. unjustly
and without & judgment &ce., orin any other manner
according to the diversity of assises and the form of the
writ of conviction. And whereof such à person com-
plains that the jurors of such an assise lately held before
such our justiciaries have made a false oath, inasmuch
as they have said that such person aforesaid has dissey-
sed so-and-so unjustly and without & judgment, and he
has not disseysed him as so-and-so says. And whereon
Such person aforesaid says that it was in this manner


416 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


et sic tota irrotulanda erit narratio respondentis et
exeipientis contra juratores. Et càüm xxiiii. veredictum
suum dixerint, dictum suum affirment rationibus et
presumptionibus, et dilipenter sunt a justiciarüis exa-
minandi, et szpius interrogandi de veritate, eo quód
nulla sequitur convictio et quia sepius decipiuntur
xxiiii. sicut xii. et falsum quandoque faciunt sacra-
mentum, vel fatuum sicut ipsi xii et quandoque xxiiii.
falsum dicunt ubi xii. verum dixerint. [In dicendo
veró veredietum suum, aut omnes coneordes sunt, aut
quidam concordes et quidam discordes, si autem dis-
cordes, associentur eis ali pro afforciamento, ut supra
dietum est de assisis. Si autem nihil sciverint nec
scire possint de veritate, per interrogationes sive exa-
minationes, sive xii. verum dixerint sive non, rema-
nebit suo loco possessio, quia querens nihil probat.
Idem erit si dubitaverint, utrum ita sib sicut querens
proponit vel non, quia querens non probat: quoties
enim dubitatur an quid sit, perinde est ac si non
esset illud. Si autem concordes veritatem dixerint et
idem quod xii. juratores, vel idem et plura quàm xii.
dixerunt, eonsiderandu erit quód xii. bene juraverunt
et quód tenens remaneabí in seysina, et querens cus-
todiatur in prisona gravi poena pecuniaria redimendus.
Si autem contraria dixerint xii, scilicet quód talis fuit
disseysitus vel non disseysit?, per hoc remanebunt con-
victi, e& considerandü erit quàd predicti xii. Juratores
male juraverint, et quód querens recuperet seysinam
suam, & ille tenens in misericordia, et juratores si
presentes fuerint custodiantur, et si absentes, capian-


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 417


.orin that manner, and so the whole pleading of the


respondent and of the exceptor against the jurors will
have to be enrolled. And when the twenty-four have
given their verdict, let them affirm their finding by reasons
and by presumptions, and they are to be diligently ex-
amined by the justiciaries, and to be questioned repeatedly
concerning the truth, inasmuch as no conviction follows,
and because twenty-four are frequently deceived just as
twelve, and sometimes make a false oath or a fatuous
oath just as the twelve, and sometimes the twenty-four
say what is false, whilst the twelve have said what is
irue. Butin pronouncing their verdict they are either
allof accord, or some are of accord and the others are
in disaccord, but if they are in disaecord let others be
associated with them as a reinforcement, as has been
said above concerning assises. But if they have known
nothing nor can know any thing about the truth, by
means of questioning and of examining, whether the
twelve have spoken the truth or not, the possession shall
remain in its place, because the complainant proves
nothing. The same thing will happen if they have
doubted, whether it is as the complainant propounds, or
not, because the complainant proves nothing. For as
often as it is doubted whether a thing be so, it is the
same as ifit were not so. Butif they agree in their find-
ing of the truth and find the same as the twelve jurors,
or the same or more than the twelve jurors have found,
it will have to be considered that the twelve have sworn
well, and that the tenant' should remain in seysine, and
the plaintiff be kept in custody in prison to be redeemed
at & heavy pecuniary penalty. But if they have found
the contrary to the twelve, to wit, that so-and-so was
disseysed or not disseysed, they shall thereby remain
convicted, and it will have to be held that the aforesaid
twelve jurors have sworn wrong, and that the plaintiff
should recover his seysine, and the tenant be in mercy,
and the jurors, if they are present, be kept in custody,
Q, 1302. DD


415 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


tur. Si autem viginti quatuor juratores varia dixerint
€t diversa, dum tamen in principali conveniant, secun-


cordes non fuerint in 888188 capienda sed discordes
poterunt viginti quatuor quosdam liberare, et, quosdam
damnare, sicut accidit de Alberto comite Somers,


Car. V.


f 2026. | Pona& autem convietorü in predictis assisig talis

|. — erit, q inprimis capiantur & in Prisonam detrudatur &
e "on. Omnes terrm sue & catala in manum domini repi
victorum. capiantur, donec ad voluntate domini regis redimantur,


testimonium recipientur, quia qui semel convictus est
de perjurio prsesumitur q iterum velit pejerare.


1. Exeusantur tamen quoad infamiam, sed non quoad
ped poenam redemptionis illi, qui juraverjnt Salvo visu, & qui
tur. de novo assumpti sunt in lpsa captione 8581ste, quia tales


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 419


and if absent, be captured. But if "m iwenisdin
jurors have found variously &nd diversely, whilst how-
ever they agree in the principal matter, according as
they have found for one party or for the other party,
their verdict will be valid. If by chance the twelve
have not been of accord in taking the assise, but have
been in disaccord, the twenty-four may set free some of
them, and condemn the others, as happened in the case
of Albert earl of Somerset.


CHAPTER V.


But the punishment of those who are convicted in the f. 292 b.
aforesaid assises will be such, that they shall be first eu
seized and thrust into prison, and all their lands and y aper
'chattels taken into the hands of the king, until they are ep
redeemed at the pleasure of the king, so that nothing victed.

remains to them but their bare tenements, and. they in-
cur perpetual infamy, and lose the law of the land, and
S0 that they can never be admitted to an oath, because
in other respects they shall not be oath's-worth, nor be
received to give testimony, because he who is once con-
victed of perjury is presumed to be always disposed io


commilb perjury.


They are excused however as far as regards infamy,
but not as regards the penalty of redemption, who have ur
sworn saving the view, and who are assumed anew àre exou-
during the holding of the assise, because such persons s
may not undeservedly be ignorant of the truth, which is
not to be understood of those who were first chosen and
summoned to make a recognition, and who have neg-
lected to make a view, because if this were allowed to
them, they might make a profit of their neglect, which
ought not to be the case. Likewise milder proceedings
may be taken with those as regards their character,
although not as regards the penalty of redemption, who
after the holding of the assise before their conviction

D D 2


490 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


decepti) dictum suum emendare curaverint, ut inter
placita quse sequütur regem, an. regni sui vicesimo
primo, de assisa capta cor& S. de Ropelay! & sociis
suis in cofi Lyne. de Làberto filio Lamberti, & unde
jurate viginti quatuor ad convincendum xii. summonita
fuit coram rege extra cof, & ubi ante convicetionem
Se posuerint juratores in misericordiam domini regis,
& ubi gravitér redempti fuerunt. Item mitius agi
poterit quàm cum predietus juratoribus, cum illis, vz.
qui sponte sine querela vel convictione lesam habent
conscientiam de sacramento, cüm dueti fuerint justo
errore, dietum suum ceorrexerint, & in misercordiam se
posuerint. Cüm autem capta fuerit jurata viginti qua-
tuor extra cof & illud idem dixerint viginti quatuor
quod xii. vel si eüm jurata capta fuerit in cofá, dicat
querens q seysinam suam plené non habuerit, tunc
fiat ei breve de habenda seysina in hac forma.


3 Rex vicecomiti salutem. Seias quód, càm jurata


Breve, si NT TT ; As" ;
eum viginti viginti quatuor militu summonita esset in curia nostra


quatuor  &e. ad convincendu xii. juratores assisa? novse dissey-
seq" gine nuper summonitze & capis corà justiciariis nos-
UM tris talibus apud tale locum, inter À. querentem & B.
$jurio, ai tenente de tanto tenemento vel tanto terre cum per-
ad tinentiis in tali villa, predicti viginti quatuor venerint
quod plene in eadem curia & super sacramentum suum illud idem
nonhabent dixerunt quod preedicti xii. juratores, s. q preediotus
ysinam : $7.9 . a
suam. B. disseysivit predictum A. de tali tenemento, tanta
terra vel redditu. | Etí quia idem A. questus fuit q
non habuit plené seysinam suam de omnibus que
predicti xii. juratores ei dederüt per assisam, tibi prze-
eipimus g idem tali Á. plenariam seysinà de omnibus
terris & tenementis & serviciis qus preedieti xii jura-
tores ei dederüt per assisam, sine dilatione habere


facias. Vel sie: Et ideo tibi precipimus quód eidem


! * Symond de Poppelay," MS. ? « assiste," MS. Rawl. C. 160.
Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 491


(having been as it were deceived) have taken care to
amend their finding, as amongst the pleas which follow
the king in the twenty-first year of his reign, an assise
held before Simon de Ropelay and his associates in the
county of Lincoln concerning Lambert the son of Lam-
bert, and whereof a jury of twenty-four were summoned
to convict twelve before the king beyond the county, and
where before their conviction the jurors put themselves
upon the mercy of the lord the king, and where they
were heavily redeemed. Likewise proceedings of a&
milder nature than as regards the aforesaid jurors may
be had towards those who spontaneously and without a
complaint or conviction have their consciences wounded
about their oath, when they have been led by a just error,
and they have corrected their finding and put themselves
upon the king's mercy. But when a jury of twenty-four
has been held outside the county and the twenty-four
have found the same verdict as the twelve, or if when
the jury has been.held within the county, the plaintiff
says that he has not fully had his seysine, then let à writ
issue to him concerning his having seysine in this form.


The king to the viscount greeting. Know thou that, s.
when & jury of twenty-four knights had been sum- Ed
moned in our court, &c., to convict twelve jurors in an twenty-
assise of novel disseysine lately summoned and held before asi
such our justiciaries at such a place, between À.as plaintiff the twelve
and B. as tenant concerning such a tenement, or concerning te parties
so much land with its appurtenances in such a vill, the disseysed
aforesaid twenty-four came in the same court, and upon thay jl
their oath said the very same thing as the aforesaid dim d
jurors, to wit, that the aforesaid B. has disseysed the afore- jine, Á
said À. of such & tenement, of so much land or rent: and
because the said A. complained that he had not fully
seysine of all the lands and tenementis and services
which the aforesaid twelve jurors gave to him by the
assise, cause him without delay to have seysine of them.


Or thus, and therefore we enjoin you that you give with-


" A.


499 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


tali À. plenaria seysinà de omnibus terris, tenementis,
& serviciis qus predicti duodecim juratores ei dede-
runt per assisam illà sine dilatione &ce. Et ipsum in
seysina sua &c. ltem si post captionem assise ante
convietionem se posuerint duodecim juratores in mise-
ricordia domini regis & dictum suum emendaverint,
iune fiat tale breve de seysina habenda.


Rex vicecoih salutem. Seias quód, càm jurata 24.
sumonita esset ad convincendum 12. coram justieiariis '
nostris apud talem locum, ad recognoscendum utrum
tantum terre cum pertinentiis in tali villa esset lay-
cum feodum talis de tali villa vel libera eleemosyna
pertinens ad ecclesiam vel capellam talem de tali villa,
unde predictus talis questus fuit, quód juratores assism,
qu:e inde summonita fuit & capta apud talem locü
coram justiciariüis ibidem itinerantibus, falsum fecerunt
sacramentum, predicti xii. juratores venerunt coram
eisdem justiciarlis nostris, & cognoverunt quód malé
inde juraverunt, et qui p transgressione sacramenti sui
finem nobiscum fecerunt. Et super hoc venit idem,
pro quo fecit assisa, s. & recognovit eidem querenti
lotam przdictam terram cum pertinentiis tenendam per
idem servitium quod inde fecerat ante captionem as-
sisse.  Ideà tibi precipimus quod przdicto tali sine
dilatione plenariam seysinam inde habere facias. Teste,
&e. Si autem plures sunt querentes, tunc fiat cuili-
bet eorum seysina de certa parte. Et tune dicatur
quód predictis A, B. & C. sine dilatione plenaria
seysinam inde habere facias, scilicet predieto A. de
tanto terre & B. de tanto terre et C. de tanto terrm.
Teste, &ec. Item possunt fieri brevia, ubiq, et diver-
simodé, seeundüm diversitatem judiciorum et concordisze


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 498


out delay to the said À. plenary seysine of all the lands,
tenements, and services, which the aforesaid (twelve

jurors gave to him by that assise, &c., and himself in his
seysine, &e. Likewise if after the holding of the assise

before the conviction the twelve jurors have put them-

selves on the mercy of the court and have amended their
verdiet, then let à writ of this kind for having seysine  f.298.
issue.

The king to the viscount greeting. Know thou that, , E
when a jury of twenty-four had been summoned to con- when the
. vict twelve before our Justiciaries at such & place, toi"? ——
make a recognition whether so much land with its ap- ded their
purtenances in such a vill was a lay fee of so-and-so in Neuen
such vill or free alms appertaining to such & church or
chapel in the said vill, whereof the aforesaid so-and-so
has complained, that the jurors of the assise, which was
summoned thereon and held at such & place before our
justiciaries there itinerant, made a false oath, the afore-
said twelve jurors have come before our said justiciaries,
and have acknowledged that they swore wrong thereupon,
and have made a fine with us on account of the trans-
gression of their oath. Jnd thereupon came the same
person in whose favour the assise was made and he ac-
knowledged to the said plaintiff the whole of that land
with its appurtenances to be held by the same service,
which he had rendered thereon before the taking of the
assise. "Therefore we enjoin you that you cause the
aforesaid so-and-so without delay to have plenary sey-
sine thereof. Witness, &e. But if there are several
plaintiffs, then let each of them have seysine made to
him of & certain part. And then let it be said [in the
writ] that you cause the aforesaid A.B. & C. without
delay to have plenary seysine thereof, to wit, the afore-
said A. of so mueh land, and B. of so much land, and C,
ofso much land. Witness &c. Likewise the writs may
be made for every place and in divers manners according
to the diversity of judgments and the accord.


diis, et
acceptioni-
bus per
quas dif-
fertur con-
vietio.


Britton, iv.


ch. ix. S 9.


494 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


CAP. VI.


Inter eztera veró videndum, an differri possit con-
vietio ad tempus ope alicujus exceptionis, et est ve-
rum g sie, S. si objecerit tenens super quem venit con-
vietio contra juratores q certis rationibus suspecti sunt,
vel minüs idonei Item si seysinam suam plen? non
habuerit sicut illam recuperaverit coram  justiciariis
suis in parte vel in toto. Item si non sit eis satis-
facbum de damnis suis in parte vel in toto, et. multas
alias habere poterit exceptiones contra convictionem si
voluerit. Item impedit convictionem re disseysina,! ut
si ille qui per assisam amiserit iterum fecerit dissey-
sinam versus eundem in toto vel in parte, quia sine
judicio jus sibi usurpavit et ante convictionem, et ille
qui sie sibi jus usurpavit de falso convincendo, quere-
lam suam amittit. ltem si quis in misericordiam in-
ciderit pro disseysina, non remanebit misericordia exi-
genda, si ille qui amiserit quzsiverit convictionem.
Differri autem non debet: quia certum est per assi-
sam de disseysina facta, et de sequenti misericordia :
incertum tamen est si xii convinci possunt per jura-
tam vel non, unde tenendum est certum et non in-
certum. — Multi enim convietionem et certificationem
requirunt, non ut per convietionem seysinam suam
rehabeant, sed ut exactionem misericordie extinguant,
vel saltem differant per cautelam. Item videndum si
subsequatur remedium post veredietum xxiiii. jurato-
rum et post judicium inde factum. Ad quod viden-
dum utrum ille de quo queritur et xii. juratores con-


. vincendi in omnes juratores consenserint vel non, vel


* redisseysina," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 493


CHAPTER VI.


Amongst other things we must see whether & convic-

tion can be put off for a time by the help of an exception, remedies,

and it is true that itis so, to wit, if the tenant upon and the
Rus . : . exceptions

whom the conviction comes has objected against certain whereby a

jurors, that they are suspected for certain. reasons, or Yee 3

are unfit. Likewise if he has not fully had his seysine,

according as he has recovered it before his justiciaries

in part or in whole. Likewise if they have not been

satisfied for their damages in part or in whole, and he

may have many otherexceptions against a& conviction, if

he wishes. Likewise a renewed disseysine impedes a con- :

viction, as if he, who has lost by the assise, has made a

second time a disseysine against the same person in whole

or in part, because he has usurped to himself the right

without a judgment and before a conviction, and he, who

has thus usurped to himself the right of convicting of

falsehood, loses his own plaint. Likewise if any one has

become liable to be amerced for a disseysine, the amerce-

ment shall not remain to be enforced, if he who has lost

has applied for & conviction. But it ought not to be

deferred, because it has been ascertained through the

assise concerning the fact of the disseysine, and the con- .

sequent amercement. It is however uncertain if the

twelve can be convicted by a jury or not, wherefore the

certain is to be maintained and not the uncertain. For

many persons apply for a conviction and a certification,

not that they may recover their seysine by a conviction,

but that they may extinguish the enforcement of the

&mercement, or at least defer it by & caution. Likewise

it is to beseen if & remedy follows after the verdict of

the twenty-four jurors and after the judgment pronounced

thereupon. In regard to which it is to be seen, whether

he, concerning whom complaint is made, and the twelve

jurors to be convicted, have consented to all the twenty-

four jurors or not, or have shown that several for a cer-


496 DE ASSISA UTRUM,


docuerint plures certa ratione esse amovendos, q si
eis fuerit denegatum, et sub tali suspitione procedat,

f.293b. jurata erib omninó revocanda, quis non fit sine juris
injuria, & amoveantur suspecti, & ali loco ipsorum
substituantur, qui veritatem rei deponant ex integro.
Et si in tales ab initio cosensum fuerit, sed per jus-
ticiarlos malé examinati & maleé instrucü, erit eis sub-
veniendum, ut errorem suum corrigant & emendant,
secundüm quod factum fuit coram ipso domino rege
in presentia Simonis de Segrave apud Woostoke in
jurata xxiii. ad convincendum xii. in com Buck., inter
Galfridum de Maundevill & Adam de Bono Fossato.
Et unde convictio priüs capta fuit apud Windeslore
coram Egelardo de Cygony! & sociis suis.


?2. — ltem sub specie certificationis, poterit aliquando ad-
De remedio hib . . . . . - . : .
certiáca- Dlberi remedium post convictione, propter insufficientem
tonis. examinationem justiciariorum in convictione, ut pre-


Brito» iv. dicbum est. Ut si jurata xxiii. dubi$ dixerint, vel
Pe obscuré, vel varié, & in quo casu, possunt xxiiii su-
: moniri ad certifieandum de sacramento, quod inde
fecerunt sicut in quacunq, assisa. Sed primó viden-
dum qualiter sumonendi fuerint juratores ad certifi-
candum in assisis quibuseunq, & postea in juratis
xxiii. ad convineendum. Forma brevis de sumonendo
juratores in assisis ad certificandum talis est.
3. Rex vic. salutem.  Prsecipimus tibi quód habeas
Breve si . bic Rr cid .
duodecim COram nobis vel justiciarüs nostris &c. corpora A. B.
adt C. recognitorum novse disseysine sumonite & capte
ad certii- Coram talibus justiciariis ultimó itinerantibus in com


candum. tuo inter B, querentem & C. tenentem de tenemento


l*Elegardo de Cygony," MS. | in the MS. Plea Roll. of 18 H. III.
Rawl. C. 160. 'The same person | printed in vol. ii. Appeudix iii.
is probably here meant, who is | He is styled E. de Syngoy in Brac-
styled Engelardus de Cygoigny | ton's text, fol. 417, below.


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 427


tain reason are to be removed from the list, which if it
be refused to them and the conviction proceeds under
such à suspicion, the jury will have to be entirely ve-
called, because it has not proceeded without injury to f.293 b.
right, and let the suspected persons be removed, and
others substituted in their place, who may depose to the
iruth of the matter afresh, And if they have consented
to such persons from the commencement, but they have
been badly examined and badly instructed by the justi-
ciaries, they must helped, so that they may correct and
amend their error, according to what was done before the
lord the king himself in the presence of Simon de
Segrave at Woodstoke, in a jury of twenty-four to convict
twelve in the county of Buckingham, between Galfridus
de Maundevill and Adam of Good Dyke. And whereof
& conviction was previously taken at Windeslore before
Egelard de Cygony and his associates.


Likewise under the form of a certification, a remedy
may sometimes be applied after & conviction on account Otde. by
of an insufficient examination on the part of the jus-a certifica-
ticiaries in the conviction, as aforesaid. sif & jury of 2l
twenty-four have spoken dubiously, or obscurely, or
variously, and in which case the twenty-four may be
summoned to certify concerning the oath, which they
made thereon as in any assise whatsoever. But in the .
first place we must see in what manner the jurors ought
to be summoned to certify in any assises whatsoever,
and afterwards in juries of twenty-four to convict. The
form of & writ for summoning jurors in assises to certify
is of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you
A A if
that you have present before us or our justiclaries &c. twelve are
the persons of A., B., C. the recognisors of & novel dis- to be sum-
moned to
Seysine Bustinoned. and held before such justiciaries On certify.
their last iter in your county, between B, as plaintiff and


C. as tenant concerning & tenement in such a vill, or


hs.


498 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


in tali villa, vel sic: preecipimus tibi q diligenter in-
quiras, qui fuerunt recognitores assise nove disseysinze
&e. (ubi scilicet non cóstiterit curie de nominibus) &
tunc totum ut supra: ad certificandum prefatos jus-
tieiarios nostros apud Westm de sacramento quod inde
fecerunt, vel sic: pleniüs de assisa illa, & interim
predictum tenementum in manum nostram capias, &


illud in manu nostra salvo custodias, quousq, aliud


inde preceptum nostrum habueris. Precipimus etiam
tibi quód habeas coram praefatis justiciariis &e. corpus
talis ad audiendum inde considerationem curie nostre,
& similiter judicium suum de pluribus defaltis, & ha-
beas ibi nomina recognitorum, & hoc breve. Teste, &c.
Brevius tamen poterit fieri breve in eadem forma. In
eadem forma fieri poterit de omnibus aliis assisis sicut
mortis antecessoris, & in alis in quibus jacet convictio
per xxiii. Et tune si sumoneantur primó justiciarii
&d faciendum recordum, in fine sumoniri poterunt re-
cognitores ad audiendum recordum illud, & si plures
fecerint defaltas, tunc ad audiendum judicium de plu-
ribus defaltis. Et semper ante omnia videndum erit
recordum, ut sciri possit an juratores malé juraverint,
ut tunc veniat jurata xxiiii. ad convincendum. Si au-
iem dubie vel obseuré, quód tunc veniat eadem assisa
&d certificandum, & hoc ppter culpam juratorum. Si
autem fiat querela de processu justiciarioru, tunc sumo-
neatur recordum. Si autem pveniat querela post co-
juraverint, vel pro certa ratione suspecti & non amoti
vel minüs sufficienter examinati, sub specie certifica-
tionis, cüm non sit locus covictioni, sunt iterum ad cer-
tificadum covocandi, & res ad debitum statum revoce-


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 499


thus: we enjoin you that you diligently inquire who
were the recognisors of the assise of novel disseysine
&oc. (where forsooth it is not elear to the court concerning
the names), and then the whole as above: to certify our
aforesaid justiciaries at Westminster concerning the oath
which they have made, or thus: more fully concerning
that assise, and in the meanwhile take the aforesaid
tenement into our hand and keep it safely in our hand
until you have another precept from us thereupon. We
enjoin thee also that thou have before our aforesaid
justiciaries &c. the body of so-and-so to hear the decision
of our court thereon, and at the same time its judgment
concerning defaults, and have there the names of the
recognisors and this writ. Witness &c. But & shorter
writ may be drawn up in the same form. In the same
form it may be done in all other assises as in that of mort-
dancester, and in others in which a conviction by twenty-
four lies. Ánd then if the justiciaries are first sum-
moned to make a record, at the end the recognisors may
be summoned to hear that record, and if several have
made default, then they may be summoned to hear judg-
ment concerning several defaults. | And always before
everything the record must be read, that ib may be
known whether the jurors have sworn wrong, and then
let à jury of twenty-four come for the purpose of con-
vieting. But if they have sworn dubiously or obscurely
that then the same assise shall come to certify, and this
on account of the fault of the jurors. But if there be
& complaint concerning the procedure of the justiciaries,
then let à record be summoned. But if the complaint is
brought forward after à conviction by the oath of twenty-
four jurors, either that they have sworn wrongly, or are
for & certain reason suspected and have not been re-
moved, or have been insufficiently examined, under the
form of a certification since there is not place for &
conviction they are again to be convoked to certify,
and let the matter be recalled to its due state, according


430 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


tur, secundüm q superiüs pauló ante factü est p tale
breve in forma supradicta.


f. 294. Precipimus tibi g dilgenter inquiras, qui fuerüt
" id recognitores juratce xxiii ad convincendum xii quse
1mauiter


de assiss Duper sumonita fuit & capta cora talibus justiciariis
ni de tanto teüto vel terre cum ptinentiis in tali villa,
..  & illes habeas coram nobis vel talibus justiciariis, ad
certificandu przfatos justiciarios nostros de sacramento
quod inde fecerunt, & de quibusdam articulis convic-
lionem ilam tangentibus. Et unde talis quzritur! q
predicti 24. juratores, pro magna parte certa ratione
suspecti, non erant amoti, vel sic: Et unde idem talis
dicit Q predicti 24. minüs plen? examinati fuerunt, &
eliam poterit plures causas sufficientes przetendere, per
quas corrigi poterunt dicta juratorum. Et interim
diligenter inquiras, qui fuerunt recognitores ejusdem

assisee &c. ut supra.


Car. VII.


| 1. Contingit multotiens q, cüm post captione assise
rat bad arramata fuerit jurata 24. ad convincendum 12. in qua-
matum,si Cunq, assisa, q ante captioné assise moriatur aliqua
E lc partium. Quo casu, durum esset querenti si convictio
arramatam ppter hoc remaneret: unde de consilio provisum est,
pus E q, càüm nihil sit quod querenti imputari debeat prop-
quem eo- ter negligentiam vel alio modo, provideatur ei per breve
pem ppc quod tale esi. Rex vic. salutem. Si A. fecerit te
Papa fue- securum de clamore suo &c. tune sumoneas per bonos

suimonitores 24. legales milites de com tuo de tali vis-

neto, q sint coram justiciarüs &c. parati sacramento


recognoscere, si B. pater, vel mater, vel alius anteces-


1 * queritur," MS. Rawl. C, 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 491


to what has been said a little before by & writ of this
kind in the form above said.


We enjoin you that you diligently inquire who were t. 294.
the recognisors of the jury of twenty-four to convict,, BES
twelve, which was lately summoned and held before such manner
justieiaries concerning such a tenement or so much land ??neerning
with its appurtenances in such a vill and have them any kind.
before us or such justiclaries, in order to certify the
aforesaid our justiciaries concerning the oath which they
have made thereupon, and concerning certain articles
iouching that conviction. And whereof so-and-so com-
plains that the aforesaid twenty-four jurors, suspected
for the great part for a certain reason, were not removed:
or thus, and whereof the said so-and-so says that the
aforesaid twenty-four were not fully examined, and he
may allege many sufficient causes, wherefore the findings
of the jurors may be corrected. And meanwhile dili-
gently inquire who were the jurors of the same assise
&oc. as above.


CHAPTER VII.


It happens very frequently that, when after the taking ze
of an assise & jury of bwenty-four has been instituted àrawn up
to conviet twelve in any assise, that before the holding me
of the assise one of the parties dies. In which case it conviction
would be hard for the plaintiff, if the conviction should Seid.
on that account be stayed, whence it has been provided it happens
by the council, that when there is nothing that ought to t dies,
be imputed to the plaintiff on account of his negligence between
or in any other manner, provision should be made for his "hom the
case by & writ of this kind: The king to the viscount taken.
greeting. If A. has given you security concerning his
claim &c. then summon by good summoners twenty-four
loyal knights of your county from such a visne, that
they be present before the justiciaries, &c. prepared on


their oath to recognise, if B, the father or the mother or


432 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


sor C. eujus heres idem C. est, injuste & sine judicio
disseysivit ipsum À. vel D. de N. filium & hseredem
ipsius Á. vel non, & unde assisa novs disseysinz alias
vel nuper sumonita fuit & capta coram dilecto & fideli
nostro tali; & per quam assisam idem B. recuperavit
seysina suam de preedicto tenemento versus predictum
A. cujus heres idem D. est, si heres queratur. Et
unde idem À. questus fuit g juratores przedictee assise
falsum fecerunt sacramentum, ita q jurata 24. ad con-
vincendum 12. arramata fuit coram fideli & dilecto
nostro tali, & remansit capienda eo q predictus B.
obiit ante captionem illus juratz, & interim diligen-
ter inquiras qui fuerunt juratores sive recognitores
illius assise, & illos habeas ad przfatam assisam co-
ram prefatis justiciariis. Et sumoneas per bonos sumo-
nitores predictum C. filium, vel fratrem vel sororem,
vel nepotem, vel neptem predicti B., s. si hseres teneat,
vel si ille qui disseysinam fecit, vel heredes ejus rem
disseysitam ad alium transtulerint, tunc sumoneatur
tenens sic. Et sumoneas &c. qui teütu illud tenet de
dono ipsius B. vel de dono talis filii & heredis ipsius
B. q tune sit ibi auditurus illam recognitionem, &
habeas ibi nomina militum, & hoe breve. Teste, &c.
Si autem 12. juratores malé juraverint in assisa mortis
antecessoris, & cüm arramata fuerit jurata 24. moriatur
una partium.


xi "P Rex vie. salutem. Si ÁÀ. fecerit te securum de cla-
merda LR more &c. tune summoneas &c. 24. legales milites de
tisante-  visneto tali, quód sint coram justiciariis &e. parati
Cessoris e e

ad convin- S&cramento recognoscere, si B. pater C. de -N. fuit sey-
cendum — situs in dominico suo ut de feodo, de tanto terre &c.


luodecim.
TUH* die quo' obiit. Et si obiit post &ce. Et si predictus


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 439


other ancestor of C., whose heir the said C. is, has un- .
justly and without & judgment disseysed the said A. or
D. de N,, the son and heir of the said A. or not, and
whereof an assise of novel disseysine at another time or
lately was summoned and held before our beloved and
faithful so-and-so, and by which assise the said B. reco-
vered his seysine of the aforesaid tenement against the
aforesald A. whose heir the said D. is, if the heir com-
plains. And whereof the said AÀ. has complained that
the jurors of the aforesaid assise have made a false oath,
So that à jury of twenty-four has been instituted to con-
viet the twelve before our faithful and beloved so-and-
so, and its holding has been stayed inasmuch as the afore-
said B. has died before the holding of that jury, and in
the meanwhile inquire diligently who were the jurors or
recognisors of that assise, and have them at the afore-
said assise before our aforesaid justiciaries. And sum-
mon by good summoners the aforesaid C. the son, or the
brother, or the sister, or the nephew, or the niece of the
aforesaid B., to wit,if the heir is the tenant, or if he who
has made the disseysine or his heirs have transferred
the thing disseysed to another person, then let the tenant .
be summoned thus: and do thou summon &c. him, who
holds that tenement by the gift of the said B. or by the
gift of so-and-so, the son and heir of the said B., that he
be then there in order to hear that recognition, and have
there the names of the knights and this writ. "Witness
&c. If however the twelve jurors have sworn wrong in
an assise of mortdancester, and when & jury of twenty-
four has been instituted one of the parties dies:


The king to the viscount greeting. If A. has given ^ 8.
you security concerning his claim &c., then summon &c. d
twenty-fourloyal knights from such a visne, that they cerning an
be present before our justiciaries &c. prepared by their mei ad
oath to recognise if B. the father of C. de N. was seysed vester to
in his demesne as of fee, of so much land, &c. on the wedos
day on which he died. And if he died after &c. And


Q 1302, EE


434 : DE ASSISA UTRUM.


f.294b. C. propinquior hsres ejus fuit. Et unde assisa mor-
tis antecossoris nuper vel aliquando suionita fuit &
capta &c. Et secundüm formam istam formentur bre-
via de omnibus assisis, de quibus locum habeat con-
vietio, ubi una partium moriatur ante captionem illius
jurato, & inseratur semper tota vis brevis originalis,
secundüm quod superiüs videri poterit.


CAP. VITI.
1, Non est assisà capienda super assisam, non magis
hdi ioa quàm convictio super convietionem.  Assisa veró novze


cepienda — disseysinz, cüm semel capta fuerit inter certas personas,
sihm, neo de certa re, sive tenemento, sive pasture, inter easdem
convietio personas de eadem re, & eodem facto, & eodem modo
visionem, disseysinze, cüm petens semel recuperaverit per assi-
victionem. y , p ei recupera P
Sam, si iterum fiat disseysina recenter vel post longum
intervallum, locus erit redisseysinze & non assise nove
disseysins, si iterum) disseysitus conqueri voluerit de
redisseysina, si autem assisam impetraverit de secunda
disseysina, & dicat quód alias tenementum illud recu-
peravit per assisam, non erit ulteriüs assisa capienda,
sed remanebit, si factum justiciariorum & rotulos vo-
caverit ad warantum, quód si nihil horum fecerit, pro-
cedet assis&, secundüm quod fuerit impetrata, & sibi
imputet, qui exceptionem de assisa capta priüs non
Britton,iv. apposuit. Et quid si opposuerit, & justiciarii excep-
iu tionem illam non admiserint, tunc injuriatum erit que-
renti, & &d querelam ejus factam justiciarüs rettabitur.


Sed eüm non opposuerit talem exceptionem, & postea


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 435


if the aforesaid C. was his next heir, and whereof an f. 294b.
assise of mortdancester was lately or sometime sum.
moned and taken &e. And according to this form let

writs be prepared concerning all the assises concerning

which a conviction has place, where one of the parties

dies before the holding of that jury, and let the whole

tenor of the original writ be inserted, EN to what

may be seen above.


CuaPrER VIII.


Àn assise is not to be taken on an assise, any more mii.

P . je an
than & convietion on a conviction. But an assise Of assise is
novel disseysine, when it has once been held between Tm i
certain persons, 'eoncerning a certain thing, whether a assise, nor
tenement or a pasture, if between the same persons con- D iepiiua
cerning the same thing and by the same act and by the conviction.
same mode of disseysine, when the claimant has once
recovered by an assise, & disseysine be again effected
recently or after à long interval, there will be plaee for
& redisseysine and not for an assise of novel disseysine,
if the person disseysed a second time has wished to com-
plain respecting & redisseysine. If, however, he has
sued out an assise concerning a second disseysine, and
should say that he has otherwise recovered that tene-
meni by an assise, an assise will not have to be con-
tinued any further, but will be stayed, if he has invoked
as & warrant the act of the justiciaries and the rolls, but
if he has done none of these, the assise shall proceed
according to what has been sued out, and let him impute
it to himself, who has not raised an exception concerning
an assise having been previously held. But what if he
has raised the exception and the justiciaries have not
admitted it, then injury will have been done to ihe
plaintiff, and upon complaint having been made by him
the justiciaries shall be prosecuted. But when he has
noi raised AS such exception, and it is afterwards

EEZ


f. 295.


436 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


inveniatur quód alia assisa inde priüs capta fuit, que
quidem contraria fuit ultimse assise, ut si in assisa
novae disseysine dicant juratores primi quód non dis-
seysivit, & ultimi contrarium, prima per ultimam non
convincitur, quia assis& non convincit assisam, nec agi-

tur de eonvietione. Sed si ille qui amisit per ultimam -
velit agere de perjurio & convictione, ben? licebit ei,
& si ille qui amisit per primam velit agere de per-
jurio.de prima, non licebit, quia assisa illa per lapsum
temporis transiit in autoritatem rei judicate. Item
dieitur (si inter easdem personas), hoc verum est sive
assisa novse disseysine vel mortis antecessorum, sive
alia queecunq, ut si assisa nove disseysinre de tene-
mento, vel communia pasture proferatur, & unus ex
pluribus eohseeredibus vel participibus, qui jus habue-
rint in comuni in tenemento de quo disseysina facta
est, versus unum recuperaverit per assisam, & alius
particeps postmodum eundem disseysivit de eodem
tenemento, & disseysitus cüm impetraverit sibi per
assisam, vel cüm querelam fecerit de redisseysina, non
erit altera assisa ulteriüs capienda de eadem re, licet
ibi sint diversa capita, quia eadem persona censentur
ppter unieum jus q habent, sicut videri poterit de
pluribus cohsredibus participibus, & unde sicut versus
unum recuperaverit, ita recuperabit versus omnes.
Idem veró dici poterit de assisa novse disseysinsm de
comunia pasture, ubi plures cohsredes, sive participes
sive alii tenuerint in comuni aliquod tenementum, in
quo unus vel plures habere debeant communiam, si
unus particeps disseysinam fecerit sine suis participi-
bus, vel sine consensu suorü participu, disseysitus ver-


-


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 4937


found that another assise has been previously held
thereon, which was contrary to the last assise, as if in
an assise of novel disseysine the first jurors should say
that he did not disseyse, and the last the contrary, the
first are not convicted by the last, because an assise does
not convict an assise, nor is the proceeding for & con-
vietion. But if he who has lost by the last assise
wishes to proceed for perjury and a conviction, it shall
well be allowable to him, and if he who lost by the first
wishes to proceed for perjury concerning the first, it will
not be allowed to him, because that assise by lapse of
time has passed into the authority of a thing adjudged.
Likewise itis said (if between the same parties), this
is true whether it be an assise of novel disseysine or
of mortdancester or any other whatever, as if an assise
of novel disseysine concerning a tenement or common of
pasture has been brought forward, and if one out of
several co-heirs or co-parceners, who have a right in
eommon in the tenement from which a disseysine has
been effected, has recovered against one by an assise,
and another co-parcener has afterwards disseysed the
same person from the same tenement, and when the dis-
seysed person has sued out & writ for an assise, or when
he has made a complaint concerning the redisseysine,
there is not to be held a further assise upon the same
matter, although there be there divers heads, because
they are considered to be the same person on aecount
of the single right which they have, as may be seen
concerning several co-heirs co-parceners, and hence as
he will have recovered against one, so he will recover
against all The same thing indeed may be said con-
.cerning an assise of novel disseysine from common of
pasture, where several co-heirs or co-parceners or others
have held some tenement in common, in which one or
more ought to have community, if one parcener without
his co-parceners has effected a disseysine or without the
consent of his co-parceners, the party disseysed shall have


f. 295.


2.
Ubi capi
debet as-
Sisa super
assisam, et
ubi non,
et ubi
in assisa
nove dis-
Reysinm,


438 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


sus illum tantum habet actionem, & non versus alios
participes, & cüm semel recuperaverit versus unum per
assisam, si alii participes eundem postmodum disseysi-
verint de eodem tenemento, non erit assisa capienda
super assisam, sed sine assis& recuperabit per assisam
precedente, quia omnes participes sunt quasi unica
psona propter jus unu, licet diversa capita. Et si as-
sis& capta esset super assisam, ita et de eade re, et
de eodem jure, et quasi inter easdem personas dicere
posset secunda assis& contrarium prime, & sic esset
prima eaptio frivola sive nulla.


Poterit tamen capi assisa post assisam de eadem re,
sed tamen inter diversas personas, quia ratione diver-
Ssarü personarum non erit actio una sed diversa, ut .
contingit szpius in assisa novse disseysins, ubi plures
disseysinc facte sint de eadem re, cum ad plures
manus devenerint! per plures disseysinas. Ut si A.
fecerit primam disseysinam, & B. disseysiverit À., & C.
disseysiverit B., et sic ulteriüs, ubi plures erunt dis-
seysine é& disseysitores & plures assise propter diver-
Sas personas, & plurg& placita facta quamvis de eadem
re. ltem capi poterit assisa& super assisam inter easde
personas de eodem facto, propter diversitatem rei, ut
si quis fuerit disseysitus & p assisam recuperaverit, si
occasione illius seysinz; plus occupaverit quàm ad illum
pertineat & quàm recuperaret per assisam, post inter-
valli capi poterit assisa, quia alia est res, & ideó
diversa assisa. Si autem inde fiat querela recenter,
locus erit certificationi per assisam & juratam,? ut
sciatur quid & quantum ille qui recuperavit posuerit


! * devenerit," MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ? * juratores," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 439


an action against him alone, and not against the other
co-parceners, and when he has once recovered by an
assise against one, if the other co-parceners have dis-
seysed the same person afterwards from the same tene-
ment, an assise will not have to be taken after an assise,
but without an assise he shall recover through the pre-
ceding assise, because all the co-parceners are as it were
a single person on aecount of one right, although they
are different heads. And if an assise has been held upon
àn assise, in this manner the second assise may, concern-
ing the same thing and concerning the same right and
as lib were between the same persons find the contrary
of the first, and so the first holding of an assise will have
been frivolous or null.


But an assise may be taken after an assise concerning 2.
the same thing, but nevertheless between different per- When an
sons, because by reason of the diversity of persons it ought to
will not be one action but divers, as happens repeatedly be taken
in an assise of novel disseysine, where several dissoy- sise, and
sines have been effected concerning the same thing, ie: 2
when they have come into several hands by several dis- in an as-
Seysines, Ás if Á. has effected the first disseysine, and aou dix
B. has disseysed A., and C. has disseysed B., and so seysine.
further, where there shall be several disseysines and dis-
Seysors and several assises on account of divers persons,
and several pleas made although on the same subject.
Likewise an assise may be taken upon an assise between
the same persons concerning the same act, on account
of the diversity of the thing, as if & person has been
disseysed and has recovered by an assise, and on the
occasion of that seysine has occupied more than apper-
tains to him, and than he recovered by the assise, after
an interval an assise may be taken, because the thing is
different and therefore the assise is different. But if
there be made complaint recently, there will be place for
& certification by an assise and jury that it may be


known what and how much he who has recovered has


3.
Ubi in
assisa
mortis ane
tecessoris.


440 . DE ASSISA UTRUM.


in visu suo & quantum ei dederüt. ltem capi poterit
assisa post aliam inter easdem personas & de eadem
re, ppter diversum factum, sed tamen post longü tem-
poris intervallum, quia post primam disseysinam &
ultimam medio tempore fieri poterit possessionis per-
mutatio, & ille, qui priüs fuerit disseysitor, per trans-
lationem fieri poterit verus possessor. Item inter eas-
dem personas et de eade re capi possit assisa super
assisam, ppter diversum modü disseysinz, ut si quis
primó omninó ejectus à possessione per assisam recu-
peraverit, et postea ab eodem post intervallum impe-
ditus, quo minüs uti possit vel commodé, per eundem
eapi possit assisa super assisam propter diversum modu
disseysinze. Et eodem modo si primus disseysitor uti
voluerit in tenemento, quod tenens per assisam recu-
peraverit, carucatam imponendo conira voluntatem te-
nentis, vel averia immittendo a&d pastura, vel aliam
servitutem imponendo tenemento quod liberum esse
debet, de tali modo disseysinz post intervallum capi
poterit assisa super assisam.


In assis& veró mortis antecessoris non est assisà
capienda super assisam de eadem re inter easdem per-
sonas, licet ben? possit inter diversas. Duo enim
heredes portare poterunt diversas assisas de eadem re,
de morte duorü antecessorum simul & semel Et quo
casu, de ultima seysina erit judicandu, de seysina
veró duorü antecessorü no erit capienda assisa sup
&ssisa inter easde psonas de eadé re, ut si aliqua terra


data fuerit À. & B. uxori sus, si À. prius moriatur


seysitus, adhuc non copetit hseredi assisa de morte A.


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 441


placed in his view and how much they have given to him.

Likewise an assise may be taken after an assise between

the same persons and about the same thing, on account

of & diverse act, but nevertheless after à long interval

of time, because after the first disseysine and the last, in

the intermediate time a change of possession may take

place, and he who was formerly a disseysor may by a

transfer have become the true possessor. Likewise be-

tween the same persons and concerning the same thing

an assise may be taken upon an assise on account of

& diverse mode of disseysine, as if a person, who has

been at first altogether ejected from possession, has reco-

vered by an assise, and afterwards has been impeded by

the same person after an interval from using the thing

altogether or for his convenience, an assise upon an

assise may be taken by the same person on account of

ihe different manner of the disseysine. And in the

same way if the first disseysor has wished to make use

of the ténement, which the tenant has recovered by an

assise, by imposing & carucate against the will of the

tenant, or by sending cattle in to pasture, or by impos-

ing some other service on the tenement, which ought to

be free, concerning such a mode of disseysine an assise

upon an assise may be taken after an interval.

But in an assise of mortdancester an assise is not to be  3..

. . . When iu

taken upon an assise concerning the same thing between ap assise

the same persons, although it well may between different of mort-

. . : . dancester,

persons. For two heirs may bring different assises con-

cerning the same thing, concerning the death of two

ancestors together and at one time. — And in which case

judgment will have to be given concerning the last sey-

sine, but concerning the seysine of the two ancestors an

assise will not have to be taken on an assise between the

same persons concerning the same thing, as if à certain

land has been given to À, and to B. his wife, if A. should

die first seysed of it, the heir is not yet entitled to an

assise concerning the death of À. during the lifetime of B.


f. 295 b.


4.
Ubi in
assisa ul-
timz pr:e-
sentationis.


Quod non
capitur
convictio
super con-
victionem.


442 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


in vita ipsius B. nec e eontrarió. Sed cüm uterg, mo-
riatur, de seysina ejus qui ultimó moritur seysitus,
copetit hz:redi assisa mortis antecessoris: sed si assisa
fecerit cotra: heredem propter donationem ipsius qui
ultimó obiit seysitus, non erit recurrendum ad aliam
assisam de morte illius qui primó obiit. Item si terra
data fuerit ita alicui in maritagium cum uxore sua,
non erit assisa mortis antecessoris capienda nisi tan-
tum de morte matris, & unde si per assisam de morte
matris nihil ceperit, ad seysinam de morte patris re-
currere non poterit per assisam.


Item in assisa ultimze presentationis non erit assisa
capienda super assisam, si de alia captione excipiatur.
Si autem per errorem capiatur, ecàüm nulla facta sit
mentio de prima, locus erit convictioni de secunda, non
de prima: cim nulli eorum sit de jure fides adhibenda.


In assisis veró ad recognoscendum utrum, nuquà erit
assisà capienda super assisam, licet aliquando locum
habeat convictio, quia jus determinat & possessione, &
dat exceptionem, & statim transit in autoritatem rei
judicatz.


Ite no erit capienda covietio sup convietione, non
magis qm assis& super assisam. Et unde videndu erit
8i covietio sequatur covictione, utrü eadé sit assisa de
qu& priüs capta fuit convictio, & eadem res vel diversa,
& utru ille & esdem personz vel diverse. Si autem
ung & eadem persona & eadem res, & eadem assisa,
nunquà capietur cóvietio super convictioné, lieet alio
modo sequatur emedatio sub specie certificationis p
examinationé, secundü quod in captione assisarum ob-


Uv.


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. | 448


nor the contrary. But when both are dead, the heir is

entitledto an assise of mortdancester concerning the sey-

sine of him who died last seysed, but if the assise has f.295 v.

made against the heir on account of the donation of him

who died last seysed, recourse will not have to be had to

another assise concerning the death of him who died first.

Likewise if land has been so given to any one in maritage

with his wife, an assise of mortdancester will not have to

be taken except only concerning the death of the mother,

and whereof if he has taken nothing by the assise con-

cerning the death of the mother, he will not be able to

have recourse to an assise on the death of the father.
Likewise in an assise of last presentation an assiseis ^ 4.

not to be taken on an assise, if any exception is raised 4, Senso df

concerning the holding of the first. But if it be taken lsst pre-

through error, when no mention has been made of the "^ ^9?

first assise, there will be place for a conviction concern-

ing the second, but not concerning the first, since faith

is not of right to be given to either of them.


But in assises to recognise whether [a tenementisa& 5.
lay fee or frank-almoigne], an assise will never have to Mie
be taken on an assise, although & conviction has some- of Utrum.
times plaee, because i& determines the right and the
possession, and it supplies an exception, and it forth with
passes into an adjudged case.


Likewise & conviction will not have to be taken on a NUS
conviction, no more than an assise on an assise. And conviction
hence we must see if a conviction follow a conviction, eds —
whetheritis the same assise concerning which a con- conviction.
viction has previously been had, and the same thing or
divers, and whether he and the same persons or divers.
Butifit be one and the same person and the same thing
and the same assise, & conviction will never be taken on
a conviction, although an amendment may follow in an-
other manner under the form of a certification through
àn examination, aecording to what is observed in the


444 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


servatur. Si autem diverse sint persone, & res diversc,
& assise diverse (secundum q videri poterit multotiens
per reeorda) bene sequitur convictio super convictio-
nem. Ex captione autem unius assise quandoque se-
quitur una convietio quandoq, dus (ut videtur) secun-
dum quod juratores totam rem quam querens posuerit
in visu suo parti uni dederint vel abstulerint, vel
secundu quod ejus partem quod quis posuerit in visu
suo parti uni dederint, vel abstulerint, & quo casu,
duz sequuntur convietiones (ut videtur), ub si juratores :
totum dedisse debuerunt vel abstulisse, ubi dederunt
parte vel abstulerunt, secundu q "videri poterit per
exemplum.  Á. posuit in visu suo duas carucatas ter-
re, & juratores dicunt q non fuit disseysitus nisi de
una tantü, Á. recuperat per assisam unam iantü ver-
sus B. & uterj in misericordia, B. propter injustam
detentionem de una carucata, & À. pro falso clamore
de alia, À. postea dicit q juratores male juraverint, eo
quód non dederunt ei duas carucatas terre, & querit
convietione, & B. similiter, eo quód ei abstulerunt
unam carucatam, cüm nullam disseysinam fecerit ut
dicit, & sic videtur prima facie quód due convictiones
sequi debeant unica assisam & unicum veredictum, &
si dus convictiones sequi debeant, tune videndü erit
utrum expediri debeant per unicam juratam, vel per
duas. Sed si per duas, ex hoc sequi posset quód qui-
libet illarü alteri posset esse cotraria, & sic nunqua
pduci posset negotium ad effectum. Et si examinatio
interveniret, vix aut nunquà possent jurat; convenire,
quia diffieile est, pluralitatem convenire, sicut, universi-
tate. Meliüs est igitur quód per unic&à juratam pcedat
conv'etio, dm per duas, propter unicà assisam. té


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 445


holding of assises. But if there be different persons
and different things and different assises (according to
what may be seen manywise by the records) & con-
vietion follows properly on & conviction, But from the
holding of one assise sometimes there follows one con-
vietion and sometimes two (as it seems), according as
the jurors have given to one party or taken away from
one party the whole thing which the plaintiff has placed
in his view, or aecording as they have given to one
party or taken away from one party a portion only of
that which a plaintiff has placed in his view, and in
which case two convietions follow (as it seems), as if the
jurors ought to have given or to have taken away the
whole, where they have given or have taken away &
portion, according to what may be seen by an example:
À. has placed in his view two carucates of land, and the
jurors say that. he has only been disseysed of one
carucate. À. recovers by the assise one carucate only
against B. , and each is amercible, B. on account of his
unjust detention of one carucate, and À. for his false claim
concerning the other. À. says afterwards that the jurors
have sworn wrong, inasmuch as they have not given to
him the two carucates, and he seeks a conviction; and
B. ina similar 1nanner, inasmuch as they have taken
away from him one carucate, since he has made no dis-
seysine as he says, and so it appears at first sight that
two convietions ought to follow a single assise and &
single verdict ; and if two convictions oughíi to follow,
then we must see whether they ought to be dispatched
by & single jury or by two. But if by two, it may
thereby follow that one of them may be contrary to the
other, and so the business be never brought to an effective
conclusion. And if an examination should intervene,
the juries could seldom or never agree, because it is
difficult for & plurality to agree just as & whole body.
It is better therefore that the conviction should proceed
by a single jury than by two, on aecount of the single


f. 296.


Britton, iv.
ch. xii. S 5.


446 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


esto q A. portet assisam super B. de una carucata
lerre.  À. reeuperat p assisam unà carucatà versus B.
Item À. occasione unius carucate quam recuperavit,
oceupat aliam quam in visu suo non posuerat, de una
earucata autem competit convictio B. de qua juratores
juraverüt, de alia veró occupata competit ei assisa
nova disseysinz : & si procedat assisa novse disseysince
de carucata occupata, & juratores malé juraverint de
ea, copetit B. alia convictio: quo casu sequuntur duse
jurate & duse convictiones, quia diverse sunt assise,
& diversa tenementa, & diversi jurati: & bene proce-
dunt dus, si diversis temporibus capiantur. Et sic
poterant inter easdem personas dus sequi convictiones,
dum tamen diverse sint res, & diverse assise, &
diversi jurati, si autem uno tempore capi debeant,
bené poterit uterq, per juratam unicam expediri —Con-
tingit multotiens quód càüm juratores senserint & per-
ceperint se malé jurásse in toto vel in parte, si pceni-
tentia ducti veniant & velint emendare dictum suum,
queritur an possint? 'AÁd quod erit distinguedum,
utrum hoc fecerint ante juditium redditum, vel post:
si ante, bene poterunt: ut de itinere M. de P. in com
Lincoln. assis& mortis, si Petrus filius Wymundi de
terra in Hoggestorp, dicebant ibi q decepti fuerunt,
sed redempti fuerunt: & hsc fuit ante juditium, quia
dietum fuit q illi, qui amisisse debuerunt per primum
dictum suum, tenerent in pace. Si autem post judi-
ttum, non erit locus poenitentis, quia stabitur juditio,
& ille cótra quem judicatum fuerit pquirat sibi (si
voluerit) per convietionem, & ille qui p juditiu obti-
nuit, utatur seysina sua donec amiserit p convictione.
Si autem se abstinuerit ex secundo juditio, & perqui-
siverit sibi per certificationé, tunc si juratores tenue-


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 447


assise. Likewise let it be that A. brings an assise
against B. for one carucate of land. A. recovers by the
assise one carucate from B. Likewise A. on the occasion
of the one carucate which he has recovered occupies
. &nother carucate, which he has not placed in his view.
B. is entitled to à conviction concerning the one carucate
concerning which the jurors have sworn, but concerning
, the other occupied by A. he is entitled to an assise of
novel disseysine, and if an assise of novel disseysine pro-
eeeds concerning the carucate occupied by A. and the
jurors have sworn wrong concerning it, B. is entitled
to another conviction, in which ,case two juries and
two convictions follow, because the assises are different,
and the tenements are different, and the jurors are
different; but if they are to be taken at the same
time, both may well be dispatched by a single jury. It
happens manywise that when the jurors have felt and
perceived that they have sworn wrong in whole or in
part, if led by repentance they come and wish to amend
their finding, 3t is asked whether they can do so. Upon
which a distinction will have to be made, whether they
have done this before judgment has been delivered or
afterwards: if before, they may well do so, as in the iter
of Martin de Pateshull in the county of Lincoln, an assise
of mortdancester, if Peter the son of Wymund, concern-
ing à land in Hoggestorp, they there said that they had
been deceived, but had been redeemed, and this was
before judgment, because it was found that those, who
ought to have lost by their first finding, should keep their
land in peace. But if after judgment has been given,
there will be no place for repentance, because the judg-
ment must be maintained, and he against whom it has
been adjudged may seek redress for himself by a con-
viction, and he who has gained his suit by the judgment,
may enjoy his seysine until he loses it by a conviction,
But if he has abstained from a second judgment, and has
sought redress for himself by a certification, then if the


f. 296.


448 DE ASSISA UTRUM.


rint se ad primum dictum suum, ille qui amisit per
primum juditium agat de convictione. Si autem se
non tenuerint ad primum dictum suum, sed ad secun-
: dum: tunc ille qui amisit per secundum juditium
perquirat convictionem.


OF AN ASSISE OF UTRUM. 449


jurors have kept themselves to their first finding, he
who has lost by the first judgment may proceed for a&
eonvietion. But if they have not kept themselves to
their first finding, but to their second, then he who has
lost by the second judgment may apply for a conviction.


Q 1802. FF


f. 296.
1l.
Ubi actio
dotis po-
test ter-
minari.


f. 296 b.
Britton, v.
ch. iv. S 1.


TRAOTATUS SEXTUS
LIBRI QUARTI,


IN QUO TRAOTATUR


DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


Cap. I


Dietum est supra de acquirendo rerum dominio, &
causis acquirendi rerum dominia: & qualiter acquirun
tur res ex cgusa dotis, & qualiter dos constituitur, &
qualiter assignetur mulieri post mortem viri, & de qui-
bus rebus, et de quibus non, cüm fuerit dos deliberata
et sine eontentione: Nune autem dicendum est si con- .
tentiosa fuerit et non deliberata, qualiter recuperanda
si& dos per actionem dotis, ideo de actione dotis viden-
dum, ubi debeat intentari et terminari Et sciendum,
quód aetio dotis ubi mulier nihil habet, non potest
alibi terminari qm in curia domini regis, et ideo, quia si
mulieri dotem petenti objiciaturg nunquam fuit viro
(eujus nomine dotem petit) legitimo matrimonio copulata,
vel si dug: mulieres contendant inter se in dotis peti-
tione qui illarü sib uxor legitima, demandari debet
inquisitio facienda episcopo loci vel alio ordinario, à
rege et à nullo alio, & plures possunt esse causs alis.
Si autem aliquam parte habuerit de dote, tune locu


THE SIXTH TREATISE


OF


THE FOURTH BOOK,


WHICH TREATS OF


AN ACTION FOR DOWER.


CHAPTER I. f. 296.


We have spoken above concerning the acquiring gj. ,q
the dominion of things, and the cause of acquiring the action for
dominion of things, and in what manner things are ac-g9 qo 4
quired by reason of dower, and in what manner dower mined.
is appointed, and in what manner it may be assigned to
& woman after the death of her husband, and of what
things it may be assigned and of what things not, when
dower is delivered and without contention: we must now
however say, if dower has become a subject of contention
and has not been delivered, how dower 1s to be recovered
by an action for dower. We must see accordingly con-
cerning an action for dower, where it ought to be insti-
tuted and determined, and it is to be known that an
action for dower, where & woman has nothing, cannot be
determined anywhere else than in the court of the lord
the king, and for this reason, because if it be objected to
a woman cleiming dower that she was never coupled in
lawful matrimony to the man, in whose name she claims
dower, or if two women contend between themselves in
. & claim of dower, which of them is his lawful wife, the f.296 b.
inquesb ought to be committed to the bishop or other
ordinary of the place by à mandate from the king and
from no one else, and there may be many other causes.

But if she has had any part of the dower,then there is no
FF


Britton, ib.
S 3.


2.
Breve de
dote ratio-
nabiliter
constituta.


459 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


no habet istud breve de recto de dote, ubi nee duel-
lum, nec magna assisa, nec essoniü de malo lecti locu
habet. Si autem de dote sua nihil fuerit ei assigna-
ium, tune copetit ei actio dotis versus quoslibet pos-
sidétes, g ei restituatur dos sus& cu fructibus medio
tempore pceeptis, & percipiendis, à tempore mortis viri
sui: nisi ipse qui in possessione extiterit justam ha-
beat causam litigandi & resistendi: ut si warentu
habuerit, & cüm illum vocaverit & per juditium amise-
rit, escambiu suü consequetur. Et si unus vel plures
deforciàtes fuerint in uno com degentes, omnes simul
in uno brevi poterunt coprehendi, si &utem in diver-
sis cof, tunc fiant brevia diversa propter diversitatem
eomitatuü. Forma brevis talis est.


Rex vic. salutem.  Precipe À.q justé &c. reddat B.
que fuit uxor C. rationabilem dotem suam, que eam
eotingit de libero teneméto quod fuit ipsius C. quoda
viri sui in tali villa: & si plures fuerint tenentes, tüc
sie. Precipe &c. tali,q justé &e. ut supra, & ita de-
inceps, ut omnes qui tenentes sunt & manentes in
eodem cof comprehendantur in brevi, & tunc dicatur:
Et unde nihil habet ut dicit, & ita quód hzc dictio
(nihil) referatur ad dotem, & non ad villam nomi-
natam, in qua dos est quae petitur, & tune sic: &
unde queritur quód przdietus talis ei deforceiat. Et
nisi fecerit, & prsedicta B. fecerit te securü de cla-
more &c. tune summoneas per bonos summonitores prz-
fatü À. vel prefatos tales (si plures sint) quód sint
coram justiciariis nostris apud West. tali die, vel ad
primam assisam cüm in partes illas venerint, osten-
suri quare non fecerint, & habeas ibi summonitores


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. '458


place for à writ of right concerning dower, where neither
battle nor the great assise nor an essoin of a sick bed has
any place. But if no part of her dower has been assigned
to her, then she is entitled to an action for dower against
any persons in possession of it, that her dower be re-
stored to her with all the profits which have accrued in
the meantime or are to aecrue since the death of her
husband ; unless the person who is in possession has &
just cause of litigation and resistance, as if he has &
warrantor, and when he has called him and he has lost
by the judgment, he will obtain an equivalent. And if
there be one or more deforcers living in the same county,
they may be all comprised in one writ; but if in differ-
ent counties, then let different writs issue on aecount of
ihe different counties. The form of the writis of this
kind |


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin A. that 2.
he justly &e. restore to B. who was the wife of C. her 4, Wr of
reasonable dower, which belongs. to her from the free reasonably
tenement which was C's., formerly her husband, in such "? E
a vill: and if there be several tenants then thus: Enjoin
&oc., so-and-so, that he justly &c., as above, and so in suc-
cession, so that all who are tenants and remaining in the
same county be comprised in the writ, and then let it be
said, and whereof she has nothing as she says, and so
that this term * nothing " is referred to the dower and

not to the vill mentioned, in which is situated the dower
"which is claimed, and then thus: and whereof she com-
plains that so-and-so aforesaid has deforced her, and
unless he do so and the aforesaid B. has assured you of
her elaim &c, then summon by good summoners the
aforesaid Á.,orsuch persons aforesaid, if there are several,
that they be before our justiciaries at Westminster on
such à day, or at the first assise when they shall have
come into those parts, in order to show wherefore they
have not done 80, and have there the summoners and this


454 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


& hoc breve. "Teste &c, Et notandum quód breve
istud loeum habet, tam ad dotem nominatam recu-
perandam ám non nominatam, quamvis non exprima-
tur in brevi, quód nominatim inde dotata fuerit: quia
hoe in narratione supplebitur. Si autem ad diem
summonitionis non venerit nec se essoniaverit, capia-
tur terr& in manum domini regis per defaltam, se-
eundüm quod observatur de defaltis per breve de recto.
Si autem se essoniaverit ad primu diem, dabitur ei
alius dies per essoniuim suum, ad quem diem si de-


 faltam fecerit, fiat ut, supra. Et quo casu, recupera-


Y.
Qualiter
mulier
proponere
debet in-
tentionem.

f. 297.


bit mulier dotem per defaltam, sive defaltam fecerit
antequàm  comparuerit, sive posi, per magnum cape
vel per parvum. ltem recuperabit mulier dotem pro
defectu waranti, ubi tenens petit auxilium curie, &
non esb secutus versus warantum: ut coram M.! anno
decimo, de Alex. de Walepole & Gracia uxore ejus
versus Johannem filium Roberti.


Car. II. & III.


Cum autem partes in juditio comparuerint, propo-
nat mulier per se vel per attornatum suum intentio-
nem suam in hune modum, cüm dotem petierit non
nominatam. Hoc vobis ostendit B. qus fuit uxor C.
quod A. injuste deforeeat ei tertiam partem tante
terre cum pertinentiis in tali villa, & ideó injuste,
quia prs;dictus C. quondam vir suus inde eam dotavit .
ad ostium ecclesie, quando eam desponsavit, & qui
inde eam dotare potuit, & si hoc cognoscere voluerit
hoe gratum ei erit, et si non, habet sufficientem dis-
rationationem, vel inde producat sectam sufficientem.


! « coram M. de P.," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 455


' writ. Witness, &e. And it is to be noted that this
writ has place, as well to recover a dower which is speci-
fied as a dower which is not specified, although it be not
expressed in the writ, that she had been specifically en-
dowed thereof, because that will be supplied in the
pleadings. Butif on the day of the summons he has not
come, nor has essoined himself, let his land be taken into
ihe hand of the king by default, aecording to what is
Observed in defaults by a writ of right. Butif he shall
have essoined himself on the first day, another day shall
be given to him through his essoin, upon which day if
he shall have niade default, let it be done as above.
And in which case the woman shall recover her dower
by default, whether he has made default before he has
appeared, or after by the great cape or the little cape.
Likewise the woman shall recover her dower through
failure of & warrantor, where the tenant has claimed the
aid of the court and has not followed it up against a
warrantor as before Martin in the ninth year (of the
king), concerning Alexander de Walepole and Grace his
wife against John Robertson.


. CHAPTERS II. AND III.


When indeed the parties have appeared in judgment, 1.
let the woman propound by herself or by her attorney mi
her declaration in this manner, when she shall have woman
clatmed à dower without specification. B. who was the Secun
wife of C. declares to you that A. unjustly deforces her her deola-
of & third part of so much land with its appurtenances "^?
in such a vill, and unjustly for this reason, because the
aforesaid C. formerly her husband endowed her with
it at the door of the church, when he espoused her, and
who could endow her with it, and if he will acknowledge
this, it will be grateful to her, and if not, she has a suffi-
cient deraignment,or may produce thereon a sufficient


sect. The declaration of the woman in the case of g


f. 297.


456 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


Formatur etiam aliter intentio mulieris in dote nomi-
nata hoc modo, scilicet, B. qua» fuit uxor C. de N.
petit versus A. tale manerium vel tantam terram cum
pertinentiis in tali villa ut dotem suam, unde przdic-
tus C. quondam vir suus eam nominatim dotavit ad
ostiü ecclesie die quo eam desponsavit, et sicut ille
qui eam inde dotare potuit. Et si &c. ut supra. Et
ita variatur intentio & petitio dotis, licet non varietur
breve.  Exceptio contra mulierem quód petere non
possit per se, vel quia virum habet non sine viro, vel
si cum viro petat, non habet probationem. Item quód
non sine waranto de dote sua.


Et ostensa taliter mulieris petentis intentione, pote-
rit bene tenens visum petere, si velit, sic dicendo sim-
pliciter, Peto visum: vel dicendo sie, Peto visum de
lota terra, unde talis petit tertiam parte in dotem. Si


: gutem dicat, Peto visum de tertia parte quam talis


Britton, v.
ch. v. $ 1.


petit in dotem, denegabitur ei visus. Et post visum
petitum, jacebit essof sieut in aliis placitis.


Et post esson & dilationes legitimas poterit tenens
warantum vocare, si warantum habuerit, vel respondere
in propria persona sua, & exceptiones proponere si
quas habuerit. Si autem 'warantum vocaverit, tunc
fiat breve de summonendo warantum in hac forma.
Sed si nesciverint! warantum nominare, mulier statim
recuperabit dotem suam, et tenens in misericordia: ut
de. itinere M? in cof Suff, anno xii,de Agneta que
fuit uxor Rufi & Rogero de Berners Rex vic. salutem.
Summoneas per bonos summonitores C. de N. quod sit


. eoram justiciariis nostris &e. tali die ad warantizan-


dum A, tertiam partem vel tantam terram cum perti-


1 « pesciverit," MS. Raw]. C. 16U. ?*de itinere M. de P.," MS.
** Sed si nesciverint?' down to * De | Rawl. C. 160.
* Berners," omitted in MS. Reg. 9.
E. xv.


$55 y COXNUROUES A Wee AP am je ma c ME. ANTO VUES CLA erm em COME WAV se e LR M er ae m e UR


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 457


specified dowry is also drawn up in another form, to wit:
B. who was the wife of C. of N. claims against À. such à
manor or so much land with its appurtenances in such a
vill as her dower, wherewith the aforesaid C. formerly
her husband endowed her specifically at the door of the
church on the day on which he espoused her, and as he
who could endow her therewith. And if &e, as above.
And thus the declaration and elaim of dower is varied,
though the writ may not be varied. Àn exception against
a woman that she cannot claim by herself, or because
she has & husband not without her husband, or if she
claims with her husband, she has no proof. Likewise that
she cannot claim without à warrantor of her dower.


And upon the declàration of the woman the claimant


Of dus


being thus stated, the tenant may claim a view, if he ing a view.


wishes, by simply saying thus, ^I claim a view," or by
saying thus, I claim a view of the whole land, whereof
so-and-so elaims a third part as her dower. But if he
should say, I claim a view of the third part which so-and-
so claims as her dower, the view shall be denied to him.
And after the view has been claimed, an essoin will lie
as in other pleas.


And after the essoins and legitimate delays the tenant
may calla warrantor,if he has one, or may answer in


9.


Of the
calling


his own person, and propound exceptions, if he has any. of ies
TAnior


But if he has called à warrantor, then let & writ be
issued for summoning the warrantor in this form. But
if they cannot name a warrantor, the woman shall re-
cover immediately her dower, and the tenant shall be
ab mercy: 88 in the iter of Martin in the county of Suf-
folk in the twelfth year, concerning Agnes, who was the
wife of Rufus, against Roger de Berners. The king to
the viscount greeting.  Summon by good summoners
C. of N., that he be present before our justiciaries, &c.
on such a day to warrant to À. the third part or so


much land with its appurtenances in such a vill, which


1 LÀ
De excep-
tionibus


458 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


nenüiis in tali villa, quam B. qua» fuit uxor C, in euria


nostra coram justiciarüs nostris &c. clamat in dotem


versus predictum À. Et unde idem A. in eadem curia
nostra eoram eisdem justiciarüss nostris vocavit eundem
C. ad warantum versus predictum B. Et habeas ibi
summonitores & hoc breve. Teste &ec. Ad quem diem
se poterit uterq, essofi, sicut alibi de warantis.


Car. IV.


Si autem tenens warantum non habuerit, tunc aut


mulieri petenti restituat dotem, aut proponat excep-


generalibus tiones, si quas sibi viderit esse competentes. Et in-


contra
breve, ei
warantum
non ha-
buerit.


f. 297 b.


. Britton, v.
ch. x. $ 1.


primis proponat exceptiones contra breve, qus sunt
generales ad omnia placita, ut si error inveniatur &
hujusmodi. Et tune proponatur (si aliqua fuerit) spe-
elalis &d hoc breve, ut si partem dotis habuerit, cadit
breve: ut de itinere M. de P. in comitatu Eborum,
anno regni regis Henrici tercio, de Alicia quse fuit uxor
Ads filia Petri, Ad hoc facit quod habetis in eodem
itinere de Alicia quz fuit uxor Hugonis de Alencester,
& alibi per totum, ex quo continetur in brevi quód
nihil habet, quia mendax precator carere debet impe-


iratis, nec valere debet. mulieri petenti talis replicatio
si dicat, q nihil dotis habeat in tali villa, licet in.


alia, eüm hec dicto! (nihil) respiciat tantum dotem?
in quibuscung, villis, & non unicam partem in una
villa, secundum quod probatur in ultimo itinere M.
de P. in coii Lync., de Helewiza, quz fuit uxor Was.
Sed refert utrum aliquid habuerit ante brevis impe-
trationem vel post. Si post impelrationem, licit? re-
cipere poterit partem quando voluerit. Si autem ante
impetrationem partem receperit ad cautelam, poterit


! * dictio," MS. Reg. 9. E. xv.
?« totam dotem," MS. Reg. 9. E. xv., et MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 459


—. B. who was the wife of C. claims in our court before
our justiciaries &e. as her dower against the aforesaid
A. And whereof the said À. in our same court before
the same justiciaries has called the said C. as a warrantor
against the aforesaid B. And have there the summoners
and this writ. Witness, &c. Upon which day each may
essoin himself, as elsewhere concerning warrantors.


CHAPTER IV.


But if the tenant has not a warrantor, then let him Of n audi
either restore to the woman her dower or let him pro- exceptions
pound his exceptions against the writ, which are general ui writ
against all pleas, as if an error should be found and such if [the
like, and then let a special exception (if there be any) nnt)
be propounded against this writ, as if she has had a part s warran-
of her dower, the writ abates : as in the iter of Martin de Vn
Pateshull in the county of York, in the third year of
the reign of King Henry, concerning Álice who was the
wife of Adas and the daughter of Peter, "This is sup-
ported by what you have in the same iter concerning
Alice who was the wife of Hugh of Alencester, and
elsewhere throughout the whole, since it is recited in
the writ that she has nothing, because & mendacious
suitor ought to be deprived of what she has obtained, f. 297 b.
nor ought such a replication to avail à woman as
claimant, if she should say that she has nothing of
dower in that& vill although in another, since this
phrase *nothing" regards only dower in certain vills,
and nota single part in one vill, according to what is
proved in the last iter of Martin de Pateshull in the
county of Lincoln, concerning Elouise, who was the wife
of Wasa. But it matters whether she has had something
before the suing out of the writ or afterwards. f after
the suing out, she might lawfully receive & part when
She pleased. Butif she has received a part before the
suing out for a caution, she may represent him in the


460 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


ilum qui restituerit in brevi exprimere, ac si non
restituisset, & sic dicere & respondere ad exceptionem,
quód talis ei satisfecit. Si autem illum in brevi non
nominaverit, obstabit exceptio & cadit breve.


Cap. V.
Ol Proposita igitur intentione mulieris, si nihil sit quod
Quod excipi poterit contra breve, tunc inprimis petatur à


vat
petenti . tenente, quód mulier dotem petens ostendat warantum


dotem PO? guum per quem dotem petit, ut sciri" possit quid juris
quis re- habeat in duabus partibus, quia quicunq, mulieri do-
spondere tem deforciaverit alius ab herede, nunquàm mulieri
to de dote respondebit nisi voluerit sine waranto de dote sua,
E non magis quàm ipsa mulier, si implacitata esset de
quam ipse dote su& aliis sine waranto suo responderet, et inde
vaediad aliquando datur eustodi exceptio cotra muliere petente
deresine dote, q priüs dotem non habeat antequam hzredeé pdu-
kin : n — eat: ub si illum frauduléter subtraxerit et occultaverit
vel alienaverit, si hoc probari possit quód p eam sub-

. tractus fuerit vel amotus, & si inde dubitetur, veritas

per patriam poterit declarari , e& medio tempore actio

dotis remanebit in suspenso. Et q warantus exigi

debet, ut sciri possit quid juris habuerit in duabus
partibus: pbatur de termino Sancti M., anno regis H.

xiii. incipiete xv. in com Warfi, de Johanne filio El-

fridi, ubi dicitur quód quedam mulier petiit dotem

versus aliam mulierem de tenemento, de quo vir suus
feoffatus fuit per virum mulieris tenentis, cui ipsa in

vita su& cotradicere non potuit: & unde ipsa tenens


recuperaverat seysinà suam erga virum mulieris pete-


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. - 401


writ who has restored it, as if he had not restored 1t, and
. 80 say and answer to the exception, that such person has
satisfied her. But if she has not named him in the writ,
the exception will be an obstacle, and the writ will
abate.


CHAPTER V.


The declaration of the woman having been propounded,
if there be nothing which can be excepted against the m—
writ, then let it be in the first place claimed by the 4 woman
tenant, that the woman who claims dower disclose cleiming
her warrantor through whom .she claims dower, that Petnun ds
it may be known what right he has in the two notbound
parts, because whoever other than the heir deforees a without a
woman of her dower,shall never answer to the woman, z5rrantor
unless he wishes so, without a warrantor concerning her dower,
dower, no more than the woman herself if she be im- "GL me
pleaded about her dower shall answer to other persons woman
without her warrantor,and hence an exception is some- dim
times allowed to a guardian against & woman claiming answer
dower, that she cannot have dower before she produces Mec
the heir; as if she has fradulently withdrawn or hidden rentor.
or alienated him, if it can be proved that he has been
withdrawn or removed by her; and if there be doubt
thereon, the truth may be declared by the country, and
meanwhile the action for dower shall remain in sus-
pense. Ard that a warrantor ought to be required, that
ib may be known what right he has in the two parts,
is proved in the term of St. Michael in the fourteenth
.and fifteenth years of king Henry,in the county of
Warwick, concerning John the son of Elfrid, where it is
said that a certain woman claimed dower against another
woman from a tenement, wherewith her husband had
been enfeoffed by the husband of the woman the tenant,
whom she during his lifetime could not contradict, and
whereof the said tenant had recovered her seysine


against the husband of the woman the claimant. And


f. 298.


2.
Si waran-
tus fuerit
ad fidem
regis |
Francie.


462 | DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


tis Et unde ubi manifestum fuit, quód mulier petens
habere non potuit dotem, quia hseres viri sui nihil
juris habuit in duabus partibus. Idem (ut videtur)
dici poterit de muliere, cujus vir feloniam fecerit, quia
heres felonis nihil juris habet in duabus partibus. Et
quód talis amittere debet dotem, pbatur de termino
Ernaldo de Cameriü in coin Kanc. in placito dotis,
nec mulier regressum habebit de warantia versus capi-
talem dominum, eujus eschaeta terra illa fuerit: nec
&d dotem recuperandam, quia ipse non est heres, nec
tenet.ut hsres, sed ut eschaetam suam pro defectu
hzredis. Quod quidem dici non poterit de eschaeta
de bastardo, quia ibi est capitalis dominus loco hsere-
dis quantum ad dotem restituenda, quia si ibi sit
heredis defectus, tamen non est ibi delictum. Idem


 erib de terra data in maritagio, licet revertatur pro


defectu hzredis, uxor dotem obtinebit.


Item si warantus fuerit ad fidem domini regis Fran-
cie, & excipistur de waranto, remanebit dotis exactio
in suspenso imperpetuum, vel ad tempus saltem, donec
terre fuerint communes. Et quód dotem habere non
debeat, inveniri poterit de termino Sancti H. anno


' regis H. xvii. in coii Lyne. et North, de Eudone de


Calethorp, quia vir suus ad idem judicabitur quantum
ad duas partes, licet jus habeat. Et sicut dominus
capitalis haberi debet loco heredis & loco waranti, ad
quem terra revertitur pro defectu hzeredis, eodem modo
habere debet assignatus per modum donationis. Si
mulier! dotem suam habere non possit, quia est in
partibus transmarinis in Terra Sanota, expectandü erit


1 « Si mulier? down to ** Roberti Bryton," omitted MS. Reg. 9. E. xy.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 468


whereof ib was manifest that the woman the claimant
could not have her dower, because the heir of her hus-
band had no right in the two parts. The same as it
appears may be said of a woman, whose husband has
committed felony, because the heir of & felon has no
right in the two parts. And that such à woman ought
to lose her dower is proved from St. Michael's term in
the fourteenth and fifteenth years of king Henry, in the
ease of Ernaldus de Camerina, in the county of Kent,
in à plea of dower; nor shall the woman have recourse
for her warranty against the chief lord, whose escheat
that land has become, nor for the recovery of her dower,
because he is not the heir nor does he hold it as heir,
but as his escheat from failure of heirs. Which cannot
be said concerning an escheat in the case of a bastard,
for there is & chief lord in the place of an heir as far as
restoring the dower, because if there be a failure of heirs,
there is however no delict there. The same will happen in
the case of land given as à marriage portion, although it f. 298.
may revert [to the lord] through failure of an heir, the
wife shall obtain her dower.


Likewise if the warrantor shall be in the fealty of

. the king of France, and exception be taken against Uno rrantor
. warrantor, the exaction of dower shall remain in sus- ded be
pense in perpetuity, or for a time only, until the lands f, fealty oc
shall have become common. — Ànd that she ought not to the king
have dower may be found in the term of St. Hilary in ied
ihe seventeenth year of king Henry in the county of
Lincoln and Northampton, eoncerning Eudo de Calethorp,
because her husband shall be judged in the same manner

as regards the two third parts, although she has the

right. And as a chief lord ought to be considered in the

place of an heir and in the place of à warrantor, to whom

the land reverts from failure of an heir, & person assigned

by means of à donation ought to hold it in the same
manner. lf & woman cannot have her dower because

[the heir] is in parts beyond the sea in the Holy Land, he


92.
If the


464 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


in causa dotis, donec venerit: ut de itinere M. de P.
in com Eborü anno regis H. tertio, de Matylda qus
fuit uxor Roberti de Haywarde et Alexandro filio
Radulphi. Item si tenes sine waranto respondere no-
luerit, ità nec ejus warantus eum warantizabit, quia
habet illud idem remediu: vt de itinere M. de P. in
cofü Lynce. anno regis H. quarto, de Dernia, que fuit
uxor Roberti Bryton. Cüm aute hujusmodi exceptio
proponatur cotra mulierem, non erit omni tempore in


potestate sua pducendi heredem et warantü de dote


sua, & ideo fiat breve vic. in hac forma.


mcs - Rex vic. salutem. | Sümoneas per bonos summonitores
producen- À. de N. q sit eoram justiciariis, &e. ad warantizandü
es un B. que fuit uxor C. de N. dotem ipsius B. quà in
warantum €8dem curia nostra &c. clamat versus D., e& unde idem
dedote. T) dieit qg non vult ei inde respondere sine waranto
suo de dote sua &c, et habeas &c. "Teste &c. Item
notandü, q si aliquando competat domino capitali hujus-
modi exceptio contra mulierem, q warantü ostendat de
dote sua, non tamen competit ei, cui ille dominus ca-


pitalis custodiam alicujus terre dimiserit, ut de termino:


S. M. an. regis H. 8. incipiéte ix. in cofà Wari, de
Johanne de Mart et Eva uxore ejus et. W. de Can-
tulupo.


4. Cüm aute objiciatur hujusmodi exceptio mulieri, et
deest , Contétio habeatur inter coheredes, quis eorum rectior
quam hseres, pendéte litigio remanebit dotis actio: et eodem
Ve". modo sj mulier pregnans petens vel alia (ut videtur)


donec de partu consüterit, quia si falsum warantum


hd
4
*


b


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 465


must be awaited in & cause of dower, until he arrives : as

in the iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county of York

in the third year of king Henry, concerning Matilda who

was the wife of Robert de Hay warde, against Alexander

| the son of Ralph. Likewise if the tenant is unwilling to

| answer without & warrantor, and his warrantor will not

' warrant him, because he has that same remedy, as in the
iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county of Lincoln, in

the fourth year of king Henry, concerning Dernia, who

was the wife of Robert Bryton. But when this kind of

exception is propounded against & woman, it will not

always be in her power to produce the heir and warran-
tor of her dower, and so let à writ issue to the viscount


in this form.
The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good — s.
| summoners À. of N. that he be present before our jus- sil


Üiciarles &c. in order to warrant to B. who was the wife the heir
| of C. of N. the dower of the said B. which she claims infa —
our court, &c. against D., and whereof the said D. says concerning


that he is no& willing to answer thereon without her "^
-warrantor concerning her dower &c.,and have &c.  Wit-

ness &e. Likewise it 1s to be noted, that if a chief lord

is sometimes entitled to an exception of this kind against

8, woman, that she should show & warrantor for her dower,

he however is not so entitled, to whom that chief lord

has demised the custody of a certain land, as in the term

of Saint Michael in the eight and ninth years of king
Henry, in the county of Warwick, concerning John de
Marre and Eve his wife against William of Cantelupo.


But when this kind of exception has been objected to 4.
the woman, and there has been a contention amongst the BN
coheirs which of them is the more right heir, the action another
for dower will abate pending the litigation, and in the Usnthe —
same way if & pregnant woman be the claimant or
another as it seems, until the birth has been ascertained,
. because if she has named or produced a false warrantor,


Q 1802. | GG


f. 298 b.


466 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


nominaverit vel pduxerit, scilicet aliü quàm verum
heredem, amittit dotem: ut de ultimo itinere M. de
P. in eof Eborü anno regis H. x. de quadam Juliana,
qui dotem petiit. Et quid, si contentio habeatur inter
cohzredes quis eorü heres legitimus sit, remanere de-


bet loquela de muliere dotem petente, donec discutia-


tur quis hsres rectior secundu quod inveniri poterit
inter placita quee sequuntur regem anno regis H. xxi,
assisa mortis antecessoris in cof Bark, de Galfrido
filio Johannis & Gunora de Bendenger. Item de hac
materia, de termino Pasche an. regis H. viii in cof
Bark. de Gunora que fuit uxor! I. filii H. et Matylda
de B. Et unde Meiylda respodit q Gunora doté ha-
bere nó debuit, quia pdict? I. fuit vir suus & non
ipsius G. & unde Galfridus filius ipsius Matyldse et


ipsius Johannis, qui fuit in custodia talis, fuit waratus |


suus de dote sua, & vocavit ipsum ad warantum ver-
sus pradictam Gunoram, & unde predicta QG. dixit
quód predieta Matylda warantum habere non debuit,
quia ipsa nunquàm fuit sponsa ipsius Ihohannis, p q
ipse Galfridus debet esse warantus suus, sed dixit ipsa


. Gunora quód ipsa fuit sponsa ipsius Ihohannis & de eo


habuit prole talem, s. Et Matilda dixit quód ipsa fuit
sponsa ipsius Ihohannis & in seysina de eo tempore
mortis suc, & q in vita ipsius Ihohannis nunquà fuit
matrimoniu inter eos accusatum vel solutü. tem filius
alicujus mulieris poterit esse warantus alterius mulie-
ris de dote sua, sed mulier nullà dote habebit, ut si
divoreiu fact fuerit inter aliquos propter consanguini-
iate, compaternitatem, vel aliam affinitatem, vel aliam


1* uxor Johannis fili Hugonis et Matilda de Berners" MS. Reg..
9. E. xv.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 407


to wit, another than the true heir, she loses her dower,


as in the last iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county .


of York in the tenth year of king Henry, concerning
& certain Juliana, who claimed dower. And what if


a contention should take place between coheirs as io


which of them is the legitimate heir, the suit concerning
the woman claiming dower ought to stand over, until
ib should be discussed who is the more right heir,
according io what may be found amongst the pleas
which follow the king in the twenty-first year of king
Henry, an assise of mortdancester in the county of
Berks, concerning Godfrey the son of John and Gu-
nora de Bendenger. Likewise on this matter in Easter


term in the eighth year of king Henry in the county


of Berks, concerning Gunora who was the wife of John
the son of Hugh against Matilda de Berners. And
whereupon Matilda answered that Gunora ought not to
have dower, because the aforesaid John was her husband,
and not-the husband of the said Gunora, and wherefore
Godfrey, the son of the said Matilda and the said John,
who was under the guardianship of so-and-so, was her
warrantor for her dower, and she called him to warrant
against the aforesaid Gunora, and whereupon the afore-
said Gunora said that the aforesaid Matilda ought not
to have & warrantor, because she was never the spouse
of the said John, wherefore the said Godfrey ought to


f. 298 b.


- be her warrantor ; but the said Gunora said that she was .


the spouse of the said John, and she had by him such
offspring, to wit. And Matilda said that she was the
spouse of. the said John and in seysine of him at the
time of his death, and that during the life of the said
John the matrimony between them was never challenged
nor dissolved. Likewise the son of & certain woman
may be the warrantor of another woman concerning her
dower, but the woman shall have no dower, as if a
divorce has taken place between them on account of
consanguinity, compaternity, or any other affinity or
| Ga 2


— — — —
A
'
L]


mE X ld dio Er D


Britton, v.
ch. ii. $ 2.


-— t


468 . pE ACTIONE DOTIS.


causam quücung, & qu:z multiplex est; si vir aliam
postmodum duxerit uxorem, filius prime» mulieris hrz-
res remanebit, sed mater dotem suam non habebit,
quia duze mulieres de eadem hszreditate ratione unius
viri dotem non habebunt: nec debet h:zeres aliquis
duabus mulieribus doté petentibus respondere, secundü
quod inferius dicetur, quia ubi nullum matrimoniü, ibi
nulla dos, et sic à contrario sensu ubi matrimonium,
ibi dos. Et ideo in prima uxore quàdiu duravit ma-
trimonium ; duravit dotis constitutio et exactio. Et
eodé modo (ut videtur) dici poterit, si mulier serva
copulata sit libero et ducta in libero tenemento, q lo-
cata sit libero thoro, quód partus habebit h:reditate,
& mater nullaà dotem, quia mortuo viro suo libero
redit in pristinum statum servitutis, nisi heres ei do-
tem fecerit de gratia: quia dotis natura est, ut durante
matrimonio duret dotis exactio, soluto matrimonio sol-
vatur, quia sine eo esse non potest, sed est divortiü et
separatio thori quia non potest quis habere duas uxo-
res simul & semel legitimas, licet aliquando plures
habeat de facto, non tamen de jure habere poterit nisi
unam, càüm matrimoniü sit conjunctio viri et mulieris
individuam retinens consuetudinem vitze ; non dicit
virorum et mulieris nec viri & mulierum, quia nec
unus vir plures mulieres, nec una mulier plures viros
habere potest de jure, potest tame de facto habere
plures, & unam tantu de jure, & ita quód aliquandc
nulla illarum qu: petit poterit esse legitima, quia illa
quz» legitima est non est presens vel premortua, e*
unde quz semel illegitima est nunquàm legitima fieri
potest, ita quód nulla illarum quse petit dotem obti-
nebit. |


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. . 469


any other eause whatsoever, and which are manifold:
if a husband has afterwards married another wife, the
son of the first wife shall remain heir, but his mother
shall not have dower because two women shall not
have dower from the same inheritance by reason of
one husband, nor ought any heir to answer to two
women claiming dower, according to what will be stated
below, because where there is no matrimony, there is no
dower, and so in the opposite sense where there is
matrimony, there is dower. And therefore in the case
of the first wife, as long as matrimony lasted, the appoint-
ment and the exaetion of dower lasted. And in the
Same way, as it appears, ib may be said, if à female serf
be coupled with a free man and be conducted into a free
tenement and placed in & free bed, that the offspring
shall have the inheritance, and the mother no dower,
because upon the death of her free husband she returns
bo her former state of serfdom, unless the heir grants to
her dower as an aet of grace; because the nature of
dower is, that whilst matrimony lasts, the exaction of
dower lasts, when matrimony is dissolved, it is dissolved,
because ib cannot exist without it, but there is divorce
and separation from bed, for & man cannot have two
legitimate wives at once and together, although he may
sometimes have more than one in fact, he cannot how-
ever have of right more than one, since matrimony is
the joining together of & man and woman maintaining
a&n indivisible habit of life: ib is not said to be the
joining together of men and a woman, nor of à man
and women, because neither can one man have of right
several wives, nor one woman have several husbands, he
may however.have in facet several wives, and one only
of right, and in such à manner that sometimes none of
those who claim can be & legitimate wife, because she :
who is the legitimate wife is not present or is prede-
ceased, and whereupon she, who is once illegitimate, can
never become legitimate, so that none of those who claim
shall obtain dower.


5.
De duabus
mulieribus
contenden-
tibus de
dote.


f. 299.


Britton, v.
ch. x. 8$ 11.


470 DK ACTIONE DOTIS.


De duabus mulieribus de dote sua ratione unius viri
contendentibus, tenens neutri earum respondebit, donec
in foro eeclesiastico discussum fuerit, qua illarum uxor
legitima dici debeat, & qus in petitione dotis debeat
prevalere: ut inferius plenius dicetur in fine. Cüm
igitur dieat tenens quód non debeat duabus mulieribus
vel pluribus respondere, inprimis videndum an sit con-
tentio de hereditate inter duos vel plures, qui dicunt
se esse heredes legitimos.  Cüm igitur de successione &
de dote simul & semel qusstio habeatur, semper prz-
judicialis erit actio hereditatis, et priàs terminari
debet: ne si contingat mulieres ad curiam Christia-
nitatis transmitti ad probandum quse illarum sit le-
gitima, et una illarum se probet esse legitimam in foro
ecclesiastico, & h:sres alterius mulieris in foro seculari
se probaverit hzredem legitimum, sie contingeret alium
esse warantum alterius mulieris de dote sua, quod esse
non potest. Igitur cüm qualibet illarum ab initio
dieat fillum suum esse warantum de dote sua, ad
vitandum illud inconveniens, oportet ut priüs discutia-
tur, quis h:res legitimus et cujus mulieris debeat esse
warantus de dote sua, & per hoe terminabitur quiestio
dotis. Cüm autem unus heredum fuerit in possessione
hereditatis, justé vel injustó, & mater sua in posses-
sione dotis, & mulier quee nihil habuerit dixerit se esse
legitimam & petat dotem, ostendat primó warantum de
dote sua. Et si filium vel filiam nominaverit, suspen-
datur dotis petitio & filius vel filia petat totam hseroe-
ditatem, s. duas partes super filium alterius mulieris,
et si ipse hereditatem obtinuerit, per consequens ma-


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 471


In the ease of two women contending for their dower
in respect of one man, the tenant shall answer to neither
of them, until it has been discussed in the ecclesiasti


wife, and which ought to prevailin a claim for dower,
as wil be stated below more fully at the end. When
the tenant accordingly says that he ought. not to
answer to two women or more, we mus see in the first
place whether there is contention about the inheritance
between two or more, who say that they are the legiti-
mate heirs. When, therefore, there is à question at one
and the same time about the succession and about dower,
the action for the inheritance will always precede and
ought to be determined first, lest if it should happen that
ihe women are transmitted to the ecclesiastical court to
prove which of them is the legitimate wife, and one of
them proves herself in the ecclesiastical court to be the
legitimate wife, and the heir of the other woman has
proved himself in the secular court to be the legitimate
heir, it might so happen that there was another warrantor
of the other woman for her dower, which cannot be.
Therefore when each of them says from the beginning
that her son. is her warrantor for her dower, in order to
avoid that inconvenience, it. is incumbent that it should
first be settled who is the legitimate heir and of which
woman he ought to be the warrantor for her dower, and
thus the question of dower will be determined. But
when one of the heirs shall be in possession of the in-
heritance, justly or unjustly, and his mother in the posses-
sion of the dower, and tho woman who has nothing says
that she is the legitimate wife and claims dower, let her
firs& show & warrantor for her dower. And if she has
named a son or à daughter, let the claim for dower be
suspended, and let the son or daughter claim the entire
inheritance, that is, two parts against the son of the
other woman, and if he shall obtain the inheritance, his
mother will obtain her.dower as & consequence without


5.
Concern-
Ing two
women


Sod contending
court which of them ought to be called the legitimate for dower.


f. 299.


479 . JpE ACTIONE DOTIS.


ter dotem obtinebit sine alia probatione. Et poterit
quandóque utraq, nominare unum warantum, cüm una
habuerit filium et alia nullum, ut si quis primó con-
traxerib eum aliqua consanguinea, vel alia aflinitate
conjuncta, secundum quod inferiüs dicetur, et inter eos
celebrato divortio ceótraxerit eum alia, nihilominus de
prima erit proles legitima, non obstante divortio. Et
si prolem non habeat de secunda, vel si habuerit, sem-
per erit warantus de dote secunde uxori ille qui exi-
vit de prima, cum sit heres legitimus defuncto patri
quoad successionem, propter ignorantiam utriusqué pa-
rentum. vel alterius, & infra plus de hac materia. Et
ubi sunt plures mulieres dotem petentes & plures hze-
redes de hsreditate contendentes, priüs terminari debet
quis rectus heres, ratione supradicta, & p consequens
justus warantus de dote. Et sive sit Justus heres sive
non, semper judicabitur ille p waranto, ad quem tertia
pars reverti debet post mortem mulieris, sive sint hs-
redes apparentes sive non, ut si debeat h:ereditas ad
dominü capitalem reverti sicut eschaeta.  Fallit tamen,
u& si à viro feoffatus fuerit quis qui terram amiserit,
versus mulierem dotem petentem, & ubi excambium
consequi non poterit versus herede, & ideo dos rever-
titur, quia ab eo proficiscitur, & sicut heres legitimus
dici poterit, quia ex justis nuptiis procreatus est, ita
legitima uxor: diei poterit, ubi intervenerit legitimum
mairimonium, & sic in dote prseferenda.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 4138


any other proof — And sometimes both women may name
one and the same warrantor, when one has had a son
and the other none, as ifa person has first contracted
matrimony with some kinswoman or another connected
with him by affinity, according to what will be stated
below, and à divoree between ihem having been pro-
nounced, he shall have contracted maitrimony with an-
other, nevertheless the offspring by the first wife will be
legitimate, notwithstanding the divorce. And if he have
not offspring by the second woman, or if he have, he
who was born of the first woman shall always be war-
. rantor for the dower of the second wife, since he is the
legitimate heir on the death of his father in what
regards the suecession, on account of the ignorance of
both parents or of one of them, and there will be found
more below on this matter. And where there are several
women claiming dower and several heirs contending for
the inheritance, it ought first of all to be determined
who is the right heir, for the reason aforesaid, and con-
sequently the rightful warrantor of dower. And whether
he be the rightful heir or not, he will always be ad-
judged to be the warrantor, to whom the third part
ought to revert after the death of the woman, whether
there are heirs apparent or not, as if the inheritance
ought to revert to the chief lord as an escheat. It fails, .
however, as if & person has been enfeoffed by the hus-
band and has lost the land againsta woman claiming
dower, and where he cannot obtain compensation from
the heir, and therefore the dower reverts, because it pro-
eeeds from him, and as an heir may be called legitimate
because he is procreated from rightful nuptials, so a wife
may be called legitimate, where legitimate matrimony
has intervened, and so in dower is to be preferred.


414 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


f. 299 b. Car. VI.


1l. Proposita intentione mulieris, & habito visu (ut prez-


Cum P'o- dictü est) tenens cüm comparuerit aut statim dotem
Rerit restituat, vel excipiat, & ostédat quód mulier dotem


ed habere non debeat, vel vocet warantum, si viderit ex-
auttenens pedire, & sic fiat irrotulatio. À. quz fuit uxor B.
sid - petit versus C. tertiam partem tante terre cu ptinen-
velexcipiat tiis in tali villa, vel tantum terre si dos fuerit nomi-
dir Ouod nata, ut dotem suam, unde predictus B. quodà vir suus
dotem ha- ea! inde dotavit vel nominatim dotavit &c., & tunc sum-
doe ed moneas warantü p breve supradictum quód sit ad cer-
warantum tum die, ad que diem se poterit essoniare sicut in aliis


Teen placitis. Si autem non venerib nec se essoniaveril,
lestata summonitione, capiatur de terra ipsius warati
ad valentia terre petite in manum domini regis p tale
breve.

9. Rex vic. salute. Cape in manum nostram p visum


emen. do egalium hominum de cofá tuo de terra tali p defectu
non vene- tàlis &d valentia tante terre cum ptinentiis in tali
ri; cape — villa, qua A. quee fuit uxor B. in euria nostra &c.
bs ^  elamat in doté versus C. & unde idem C. in eadem
curia &c. vocavit ipsum talem ad warantü versus pre-
Britton, v. dictu C. & diem captionis &c. uti supra. Et summo-
7h $1. neas &o, predictum talem q sit ad talem diem &c. ut
supra. Teste &c. Ad quem dié si no venerit, mulier
recuperabit seysinam suam, & tenens escambiü de terra
waranti, Et licet venerit, si defaltam sanare non po-
terit, amittet eode modo. Sed si cüm venerit statim


warantizaverit, extunc pcedat placitum inter ipsum


!£egm,? M.S. Raw]. C. 160,


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 475


CHAPTER VI. | f. 299 b,


The declaxation of the woman having been propounded — 1.
and a view as aforesaid having been held, let the tenant, Miri
when he has appeared, either except and show that the of the
woman ought not to have dower, or let him call & war- ps been
rantor, if he sees it to be expedient, and so let the en- propoun-
rolment be. A. who was the wife of B. claims against C. "n. ar
the third part of so much land with its appurtenances either at
in such a vill, or so much land, if the dower has been E 2
specified, as her dower, whereof the aforesaid B. formerly collis
her husband endowed her, or endowed her specifically not to have
&c., and then summon the warrantor by the writ above dover or
mentioned that he be present on a certain day, upon calla war-
which day he may essoin himself as in other pleas, But '9ntor
if he shall not have come nor essoined himself, the sum-
mons having been attested, let there be taken of the
land of the said warrantor into the hand of the king
up to the value of the land claimed by a writ of this
kind. mE

The king to the viscount greeting. Seize into our 2.
hand by the view of loyal men of your county of such a E SASS
land, for the default of so-and-so, as much as the value of having
so much land with its appurtenanees in such a vill, bere un
which A. who was the wife of B. claims in our court for not have
her dower against C., and whereof the said C. in the nin
same court &c. has ealled the said so-and-so as his war- a vrit of
rantor against the aforesaid C. and the day of seizure d
&c. as above. And summon &c. the aforesaid so-and-so,
that he be present on such & day &c. as above. Witness
&c. At which day if he shall not have come, the woman
shall recover her seysine and the tenant his compensation


from the land of the warrantor.  Ánd although he


: ghould come, if he cannot cure his default, he shall lose


in the same manner. Butif when he has come he has
forthwith warranted, thenceforth let the suit proceed
between the said warrantor and the woman the claimant,


476 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


warantum & mulierem petents, & tenens domi rema-
neat eu seysina sua, donec constiterit de placito prin-
cipali, & secundü hoc retinebit tenens vel amittet.


8, Et si justam causam resistendi non habuerit, tunc


E necesse habebit recognoscere terram petitam esse do-
bitsuper tem mulieris, & si mulier inde nominatim dotata fue-
pena rit, tenebitur ille qui &misit doté illam deliberare de
Brel m. manu tenentis de cujuscuq, feodo fuerit, & tenens
quodfuerii $cambiü ad valentiam habebit. Si auté non fuerit
dotatt — nominata tuc teneat tenens in pace, & mulier de terra
nomuna- e. e. [] . . . ! LI

tm, ve  Waranti habebit ad valentiam, sive sit hores sive alius,


non nomi- &j sj contentio fiat utrum dos nominata fuerit vel non


"IH nominata, fiat inde inquisitio: & secundi inquisitionem
inde factà judicet.

4. Et seiendü q raró expectatur setas in petitione dotis.

Quoln9n Et unde, si hteres infra setate existens vocatus fuerit


actio mua-. &àd warantu, & p chartarü ostensioné vel alio modo


E constare possit o ille, contra que dos petitur, feoffatus


verit fuerit ab antecessorib? ipsius minoris, sive mulier do-
em , iaa fuerit nominatim vel non nominatim, statim pce-
ch. v. $2. det judiciu, non obstante setate, sicut pcederet versus
majore queeung. Et cüm mulier sic recuperaverit, fiat
ei breve de seysina habenda in hac forma de dote


nominanda.


5. H. Dei gratia &e. Scias q, cüm ÀÁ. que fuit uxor
pide, B. in euri& nostra &e. peteret versus C. tantu terre
facienda eum pertüinétiis in tali villa, ut. doté. sua nominata:
missam ide C. venit in eadé curia, & vocavit inde ad warantu
peraverit
dotem.


- OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. EE rini


and let the tenant remain at home with his seysine,
until the principal suit has been settled, and according
to that [settlement] the tenant shall retain or shall
lose.


And if he have not & just cause of resisting, then he — s.
will be under the necessity of acknowledging that tho Tbstthe
land claimed is the dower of the woman, and if the recover
woman has been endowed specifically therewith, he who ?8?inst the
has lost will be bound to deliver that dower from the the heir,
hand of the tenant of whosesoever feud i& may be, and 2e 9 dmE
the tenant will have compensation for the value. Butif it been en-
has not been specifically named, then let the tenant, hold oeciflcnlly
in peace, and the woman. shall have of the land of tho or not
warrantor the value [of her dower], whether he be the im
heir or another person; and if there be & contention
whether the dower has been specifically named or not,
let there be an inquest thereon, and let judgment be


given according to the inquest thereon held.


And itis to be known that age is seldom waited for ^ 4.


in à petition for dower. And hence if the heir being of dee


age has been called to warrant, and it can be established the woman


either by the exhibition of charters or in any other iud


manner, that he against whom dower is claimed, has not ie
on aeccoun


been enfeoffed by the ancestors of the said minor, ofthe
whether the woman has been specifically endowed or minority
not, the judgment shall forthwith proceed, notwith- dut ies
standing the minority, as it would proceed against any

one of majority, and when the woman has recovered,

let à writ be granted to her for having seysine in this


form concerning the specified dower.


Henry by the grace of God, &c. Know that when A writ
A. who was the wife of B. claimed in our court, &c., mu AE
against C. so much land with its appurtenances in such 8 woman
& vill, as her specified dower: the said C. came into the mr
same court and called to warrant thereon D. the son Pda.


f. 300.


4/8 — DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


D. filiu & herede predicti B. viri ipsi? Á. qui est infra
cate, et qui venit et warütizavit, et nihil ostedit
quare dote sua habere no debuit. Et unde cosideratu
est in eadé curia nostra, q preedicta À. recuperaret sey-
sina suà versus eundeé B. de predicta terra cu ptinentiis,
ut de dote sua nominata, et q predicta! C. habeat de
terra ipsius D. ad valentia, Et ideà tibi precipim?, q

eidé A. de fpdicta terra cu ptinentüs sine dilatione
plenarià seysinà habere facias et eide C. de terra ip-
sius D. excambiü ad valentiam p .visum legalium
hominu & per rationabilem extesionem sine dilatione
assignari facias. Si autem hsres non fuerit infra
setate sed plenss statis, tunc variatur breve in parte
ista, s. Scias quód cüm A. qus fuit uxor B. in curia
nostra &c. peteret in dotem versus C. tantam terram
cum pertinentiis in tali villa, & unde predictus B.
eam nominatim dotavit. Idem C. venit in eadem
curia nostra, & vocavit inde ad warantü D. filium, vel
fratrem, vel alium heredem przdicti B. p quem ipse*
clamat dotem suam, vel sie: D. filium et heredem,
vel fratrem, vel alium heredem ipsius B. ad warantum
ipsius À. de dote sua, qui venit in eadem curia, et
eidem C. terram illam warantizavit, & nihil ostendit,
quare predicta A. terram ilam non haberet ut dotem
suam nominatam, e& unde consideratum est in eadem
curia nostra &c. Per omnia ut supra. Et ita in
primo easu remanebit quilibet eorum taliter in sey-
sina, quousq, idem minor ad statem pvenerit, & ipse
tunc deliberet, si possit, ipsi tenenti terram suam quam
mulier recuperavit, et si illam deliberavit, rehabeat
lerram suam, quam dedit in excambium: sin autem,
remaneat quilibet eorum in tali seysin& tota vita


1 « predictus," MS. Rawl. C.160. |? ipsa," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 4'79


and heir of the aforesaid B. the husband of the said A.
who is under age and who came and warranted, and
showed no reason why she ought not to have her dower,
And whereupon it was considered in the same our
eourt that the aforesaid A. should recover her seysine
against the said B. of the aforesaid land with its appur-


lenanees, as for her specified dower, and that the afore-


said C. should have of the land of the said D. up to the
value. And accordingly we enjoin you that you cause
plenary seysine to be made without delay of the afore-
. Said land to the Said A. with its appurtenances, and that
you eause compensation for its value to be assigned to
the said O. from the land of the said D. without delay
by the view of loyal men and by a reasonable extent.
But if the heir be not under age but of full age, then
let the writ be varied in this part, to wit: Know that
when À. who was the wife of B. claimed in our court,
&c., for her dower against C. so much land with its
appurtenances in such a vill, and wherewith the afore-
said B. endowed her specifically, the said C. came into
our said court, and called to warrant thereon D. the son
or the brother or other heir of the aforesaid B. through
whom she claims her dower, or thus: D. the son. and
heir, or the brother, or other heir of the said B. to war-
rant the said À. for her dower, who came into the same
court, and warranted to the said C. that land, and showed
no cause why the aforesaid A. should not have that land
as her specified dower, and whence it was resolved in
our said court, &c. "Throughout as aforesaid: and thus
in the first case each of them shall remain in such
manner in seysine until the same minor has come of
age, and let him then deliver, if he can, to the said
lenant his own land which the woman has recovered,
and if he has delivered that,let him have back again
his own land which he has given in compensation, but


if otherwise, let each of them remain in such seysine .


during the entire life of the said woman. But if the


f. 800.


480 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


ipsius mulieris, Si vero de tertia parte (dote no
nominata) seysinà recuperaverit mulier versus mino-
rem cüm vocatus fuerit ad warantum, tenens tenebit
in pace terram petitam, et mulier habebit ad valen-
tiam de terra minoris per tale breve.


6. Rex vicecofó salutem. Seias quód cüm A. qu: fuit
RAND 5 uxor B. in curia nostra &ce. peteret versus C. tertiam
parte dotis pàrte tante terre cum pertinentis in tali villa ut
nonnomi- dotem suam, ide C. venit in eadem curia mostra co-
rdg ram &e. et vocavit inde ad warantum D. filium et
Pk inde — hgredem prsdicti B. quondam viri ipsius À. qui est
eoffatus  , : . . . ue .
tenens Infra statem, et qui venit et ei warantizavit, eb qui
inpac? — nihil ostendit quare dotem suam inde habere non
et heres : : .
faciatdo- debuit. Et unde consideratum est in eadé curia nos-
bie we. ra coram &c. quàd predictus C. terram petitam teneat
tenti. in pace, eb q predicta A. habeat de terra ipsius D.

(nomine dotis) ad valentià predietze tertim partis. Et
ideo tibi precipimus quód (facta prius extensione de
predieta tertia parte) eidem A. de terra ipsius B. in
loco eopetenti, ad valentiam  preedictze tertie partis,
per visum legalium hominum (et secundum q preedictü
est) sine dilatione habere facias et assignari. "Teste &c.
Et eode modo variat bie, cüm hsres fuerit plens :reta-
tis, quo variat supra de dote nominata. Et additur
quandog, huie brevi clausula ista. Et unde consideratü
est in ead& curia nostra, quód predicta A. habeat do
terra ipsi? B. ad valentiam predicts tertie partis, si
terra ipsius D. sufficiat ad valentia prwdicetz tertis
partis. Sin a&utem, hoc q defecerit habeat de terr&
ipsius C. secundum quantitatem quse ei defuerit, usq,
ad quantitate illius terti; partis quam predicta A.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 481


woman has recovered seysine of the third part (her

dower not having been specified) against the minor,

when he has been called to warrant, the tenant shall

hold in peace the land claimed, and the woman shall

have up to the value from the land of the minor by a

writ of this kind.

. The king to the viscount greeting. Know that when e;.

A. who was the wife of B. claimed in our court &c. nonu à


against C. the third part of so much land with its ap- has re-


purtenances in such a vill as her dower, the said C. covered
the third


came into our said court before &c, and called thereon part, where ,


to warrant D. the son and heir of the aforesaid B. for- id rr


merly the husband of the said À., who is under. age and been speci-
who came and warranted it to her, and who showed no febsn3
reason why she ought not to have her dower therefrom. thereof
And whereupon it was resolved in our said court before jjj» isum
&c. that the aforesaid C. should hold that land in peace, uam the
and that the aforesaid À. should have from the land of Broridea
the said B., in the name of dower, an equivalent for the um E
said third part. And aecordingly we enjoin you that claimant.
(after an extent has been first made of the aforesaid

third part) you cause without delay an equivalent for

the said third part to be had and assigned by the view

of legal men, and aecording to what has been said above,

to the said À. from the land of the said B. in a suitable

place. Witness &c. And in the same manner the writ

is varied, when the heir has been of full age, as it is

varied above concerning a specified dower. And there

is sometimes added to the writ this clause: And where-

upon it was resolved in our said court that the aforesaid

À. have of the land of the said B. an equivalent for the
aforesaid third part, if the land of the said B. suffices

for the value of the aforesaid third part. But if other-

wise, let her have that which has been wanting from the

land of the said C. aecording to the quantity which has

been wanting up to the quantity of the said third part,

which the aforesaid A. claims as her dower against the


Q, 1302. HH


^2 0 LLLA Lumedi. ullam 2 ma Él ANLEST..—- BD —


f. 300 b.


1^
Breve, ubi
mulier
recupera-
verit
dotem .
suam ut
de dote
nominata
super
heredem,
quod ipsa
recuperat,
et heeres
faciat ex-
cambium
feoffato ad
valentiam.


482 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


clamat in dotem versus predictü C. Et ideo przcipi-
mus tibi, quód prius facta extesione eidem A. &e. ut


'supra ad valentia tertie partis, & eodem modo (quo


predietü est) de terra ipsius D. &c. Et notandü quód,
quamvis ipse tenens principalis fuit infra setate, non
remanebit ppter hoc exactio dotis (ut predictum est),
sive dos nominata fuerit sive non nominata, et sic
remanebit quilibet in seysin& (secundum quod predic-
tum est) usque a&d statem waranti minoris. Et cüm
ad statem pervenerit, tunc deliberet terram, quam
warantizavit, si possit, & rehabeat excambium suum,
vel aliter breve de seysina de eodem.


Rex vicecofi salutem. Scias quód cüm A. qus fuit
uxor B. in curia peteret versus C. tantü terre cum
pertinentiis in tali villa ut dolem suam unde fuit


nominatim dotata, idem C. venit in eadem curia & ,


vocavit inde ad warantum D. filium et herede pre-
dieti B. per chartam ipsius B. patris sui quam protu-
lit. Qui quidem B. cüm presens esset & infra statem
constitutus, consideratum fuit quód eadem À. recupe-
rareb seysinam suam de predicta terra cum pertinen-
tis versus przedictü D. ut de dote sua nominata. Et
quód idem C. habeat de terra, que fuit ejusdem B.
(quee est in eustodia ipsius Á. in tali villa) excambium
ad valentià predict, terre cum  ptinentiis usq, ad
legitimam statem D., et idem D. tüc deliberet prse-
dietà terrà eidem C. in predicta tali villa, & recipiat
predietü excambium si possit. Sin autem, predicta A.
teneat predictam terram tota vita sua. Et "ideà tibi
precipimus q assumptis tecü xii. &e. in ppria psona
iua &ec. ei. p eorum sacramentum &c. et per visum


A


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 483


aforesaid C. And accordingly we enjoin you that after
an extent has been first made [you cause to be assigned]
to the said À. &c. as above to the value of the third part,
and in the same manner as aforesaid concerning the land
of the said D. &c. And it is to be noted that although
the principal tenant has been under age, the exaction of
ihe dower shall not be stayed (as said above), whether
the dower be specified or not specified, and so each shall
remain in seysine according to what has been said above,
up to the majority of the minor who is warrantor. And f.300b.
when he shall have come of age, then let him deliver the
land which he has warranted, if he can, and let him
have back again his exchange; or otherwise & writ of
seysine for the same.


The king to the viscount greeting. Know that when À: — 7.
who was the wife of B. claimed in court against C. so TT
much land with its &ppurtenances in such & vill as her woman ha:
dower, with which she was specifieally endowed, the [e yered
said C. came into the same court and called to warrant as for
thereon D. the son and heir of the aforesaid B. by the V icuia
charter of the said B. his father, which he produced. aging
Which B. indeed, when he was present and was under she re-
age, ib was resolved that the said A. should recover his cover amd
seysine of the said land with its appurtenanees against make com-
the afores&id B. as for her specified dower. And that Peston
the said C. should have of the land which belonged to feoffee up
the said B. (which is in the custody of the said A. in 'efhe
such a vill) an equivalent in exchange for the said land
with its appurtenances up to the legal majority of the
said D., and that the said D. should then deliver the said
land to the aforesaid C. in the aforesaid vill and receive
the aforesaid compensation, if possible. But otherwise
let the aforesaid A. hold the aforesaid land during all
life. And accordingly we enjoin you that having taken
with you twelve persons &c. in your own proper person
&c. and by their oath &c. and by their view you cause to
be assigned to the said C. (aecording to what has been


HH2


484 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


eorüdem de terra ipsius D. in N. quse est in custodia
ipsius À. excambium ad valentiam predicte terrzg
eidem C. (secundum quod predictum est) facias assig-
nari salvo eidem A. blado suo de hoc instanti au-
tumpno de predicto escambio, similiter et freno, si fal-
eatum fuerib& ante susceptionem literarum istarum, et
à solo separatu, alioquin remaneat ipsi C. Teste &c.
Et notádum quód quicunq, fuerit ad warantü vocatus,
cüm warantizaverit, nihil habeat unde faciat excam-
bium, sive in dote nominata sive non nominata, ppter
hoe non amittet mulier dotem suam, sed post mortem
mulieris revertatur dos ad tenentes, nisi priüs fuerit
eis satisfactum de escabio per herede. NNotandü etiam
quód ubieüqué petitur dos versus minore mediate vel
immediate, semper summonend? est custos q sit et
habeat heeedé per tale breve. Sed quid, si custos
alienaverit, ità q non sit in seysina et custodia de
ierra minoris die quo summonitus fuerit, sed ille cui
custodiam dimiserit? hoc non nocebit ei, quia minore
vocavit &d warantu, quia cum custode nullam habet
actionem, sed cum hsrede, quicunq, illum tenuerit, et
eustos semper illum habeat, et hsc vera sunt, sive
unus heres sive plures, vel unus ex pluribus hsredi-
bus fuerit infra setatem. Forma brevis de summoni-
tione. , Rex vicecoi salutem.


8. Expectatur quandóque zetas minoris in dotis petitione
Sede in casu speciali, ub supra de exceptionibus. Jtem ratio
recuperat quaré mulier dotem nominatam recuperat, ad quem-
sc cung, pvenerit, telis. esse poterit, s. quod ex quo dos
tam,si — certa costituta fuerit, mulier statim incipit habere jus
alienata t d . 9 & id. * d it
fuerit, ec € dominiu, & ideó, ad quemcunque pervenerit, recu-


i hries . perabit: vir enim dotem dat & constituit, heres au-
mi- |


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 485


said above) from the land of the said D. in N. which is
in the custody of the said À. an equivalent portion of the
said land in exchange, saving to the said À. his grain-
erop of this coming autumn from the said land assigned
in exchange, and in like manner the hay-erop, if it has
been mown and separated from the soil before the receipt
of these letters, otherwise let it remain for the said C.
Witness, &c. Andit is to be noted that if, whosoever
shall have been called to warrant, he has nothing when he
has warranted wherewith to make compensation, whe-
. ther in the case of dower specified or in the case of
dower not specified, the woman shall not on that ac-
eount lose her dower, but after the death of the woman
let the dower revert to the tenants, unless they have
been first satisfied with & compensation by the heir. It
is also to be noted wherever dower is claimed against an
heir either mediately or immediately, the guardian is
always to be summoned to be present and to produce the
heir by à writ of this kind. But what if the guardian
has alienated the land, so that he is not in the seysine and
custody of the land of the minor on the day on which
he has been summoned, but he is so, to whom he has de-
mised the custody ? this will not hurt the claimant,
ihat he has called the minor to warrant, because he
has no action against the guardian, but against the heir
whoever may keep him, and the guardian must always
produce him, and these things are true, whether there be
one or more heirs or one of several heirs be under age.
The form of the writ of summons. The king to the
viscount greeting. |


8.
The majority of a minor is sometimes waited for in & The reason


petition for dower on special grounds, as above on the


subject of exceptlons. Likewise the reason why a& Mii
woman recovers her specified dower, to whomsoever itg.


may have come, may be of this kind, to wit, that ifit has
been alien-


her speci-
d dower,


from the time a certain dower was appointed the woman ated, anà


immediately commenced to have a right and. ownership,
and accordingly shall recover, to whomsoever it may


not specis


4806 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


nata nii tem tantum dotem assignat. Sed si dos in tertia
Wum.]tem Parte fuerit constituta, non statim incipit mulier jus
expectatur habere propter incertitudinem, quia nescit quam ter-
quan?(q"é tiom partem habere debeat, donec fuerit ei assignata,
petitione et non nisi illam, quz ei per sortem acciderit. Et ideó


Speciali non statim incipit habere jus in ipsa dotis constitutione
rtione. de tertia parte, sicut in dote nominata. Et ideo in
uno casu recuperabit mulier terram petita, & in alio

f.301. casu non nisi escambium. Si veró mulier dotem recu-
peraverit versus aliquem warantiü qui warantizavit, &

waratus nihil habeat in comitatu unde warantizare

. possit, sed in alio comitatu, tunc fiat extesio terre Qm
amisit, secundu quod superius dictum est. Si autem

manens sib infra aliquam libertatem, & tenens qui ami-

sit queratur quód escambium non habuerit, tunc fiat

tale breve episcopo vel comiti, eujus libertas illa fuerit.


CumQuteg , Rex tali episcopo salut&, Seiatis quàüd cüm A. que
mulier fuit uxor B. in curia nostra &c. (ut supra) & unde


recupera prgdietus C. queritur quód idem D. nullum adhue
Seysinam


suam sive escambiu ei inde fecit. Et quia predictus D. nullum


de dot | d
BOMIneS tenementum habet extra libertatem nostrà! (ut audi-


 sivenon vimus) vobis mandamus quód distringatis predictum


nominata . ONE : s
STORE. D. quód sit cora justitiarüis &c. ad faciendum eidem


eum qui C. esceambiü ad valétiam prsedietz tertie partis vel


Meinedu ad ostendendü quare escambiü facere non debeat. Teste


us pda &c. ltem cüm mulier dotem recuperaverit nominatà
ea : : ; apo :
terram in. 1D aliquo cerlo manerio per constitutione dotis sub


comitatu tali conditione, ut si suffieiat pro tertia parte quód
illo, in quo e ! . T" :
etitu, — mulieri remaneat integré, & si manus ibi fuerit: quód


unde Possit defeetus ei perficiatur alibi in loco competenti, & si
zare,sed plus ibi fuerit, quód surplusagium reddatur heredi:


! * vestram," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWERBR. 487


have come: for the husband gives and appoinis the au equiva-
dower, the heir indeed only assigns the dower. But if!ent Like.
the dower has been appointed of a third part, the woman jority is
does not immediately commence to have & right on waited for
account of the uncertainty, for she does not know what in a peti-
third part she ought to have, until i& has been assigned 9n for.
o her, and only that, which shall have fallen to her by s NOM
lot. And accordingly she does not commence to have a ^^^

right in the said appointment of dower of & third part,

as in the case of dower specified. And accordingly in

the one case the woman shall recover the land claimed by

her, and in the other case only an equivalent. But if

the woman has recovered her dower agains& any war-  f.301.
rantor who has warranted it, and the warrantor has

nothing in the county wherewith he can warrant, but in

another county, then let there be an extent, made of the

land which he has lost, according to what has been said

&bove. But if he be commorant within a certain franchise,

and the tenant who has lost complains that he has not
obtained an equivalent, then let such a writ be addressed


to the bishop or the earl, whose franchise it may be.


The king to such a bishop greeting. Know ye,that 9.
when À. who was the wife of B. in our court &c. as above 5st hen.


and whereof the said C. complains that the said D. has dui
made her as yet no equivalent for it. And because the jor of —


aforesaid D. has no tenement within our franchise (as we dower
specified
have heard) we command you that you distrain the or aower


aforesaid D. that he be present before the justiciaries foL speci-


&c. to make compensation to the said C. to the value of against
the aforesaid third part, or to show cause why he ought him who


nob to make compensation. Witness, &e. Likewise it, and the
when a woman has recovered her specified dower in some ye/rantor
certain manor by the appointment of the dower under land in
such a condition, that if it be sufficient for the third DL* Seunty,
part it should remain entirely with the woman, and if it ihe claim
be too litile, that the defect be made up to her from else- i ism
where in a suitable place, and if it be too much, that the : can


surplusage be restored to the heir: according to what may but in ii denn


488 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


inalio X Secundüm quod inveniri poterit de termino Sancte
comitatu "Trinitatis anno regni regis Henrici decimoquarto in
ubi terram : - t

habuerit, comitatu Norff, de Letitia de Eggefend, tunc (facta,
fiatt?lé — prius extensione manerii de valore) fiat, mulieri seysina


breve.
per tale breve.


10. Rex vicecom salutem. Scias quód À. quz fuit uxor
paiied "bi B, in curia nostra &c. per cosiderationem ejusde curie
recuperat DOsire recuperavit seysinam suam versus C. de toto
seysin?m ^ manerio tali cum pertinentiis ut de dote sua, unde fuit
suam de
dote nomi- dotata nominatim, ità tamen quód si manerii illud
nat: sufficiat ad tertià partem omniu terrarü & tenementorü,

qua predictus B. quondam vir ipsius ÀÁ. habuit die
quo eande A. desponsavit, tunc maneriü illud integre
remaneat ipsi ÁÀ. in dotem (secundüm quod predicti
est) si aute maneriü illud excedat valorem tertie par-
tis omniu predictaru terraru & tenementoru, tunc illud
Superplusagiü quod excedit reddatur eidem C.; & si
minus tertia parte ibi fuerit, illud quod defuerit pfici-
atur eidem A. alibi loco competenti de terris & teütis
predicti C. Et ideo tibi precipimus q eidem A. de
predieto manerio (seeundüm quod praedietü est) cum
ptinentiis sine dilatione plenariam seysinam habere
facias, & p sacramentu liberorü & legaliu hominum de
cof tuo extendi facias & appreciari omnes terras, &
omnia tenementa qu:e fuerunt pdieti D. in cofi tuo,
die quo eandem A. desponsavit, in dominicis, villena-
gii, & servitiis liberoru hominum, & in omnibus aliis
rebus quieunq, illa teneat. Et si p predictam exten-
Sionem & appreciationem inveneris, quod predictum


manerium plus valeat qm tertia pars omniu praedictarü


terraru & tefhtoru, tune superplusagiü, quod excedit
valore illius tertie partis, habere facias & assignari


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 4389


be found in Holy Trinity term in the fourteenth year Of another
the reign of king Henry in the county of Norfolk, in the Ciao,
case of Letitia de Eggefend; then after an extent has rioued
been made of the manor as to its value) let seysine be of this


given to the woman by a writ of tnis kind. kind issue,


The king to the viscount greeting. Know that A. 10.
who was the wife of B. in our court, &c., by the resolu- Vit
tion of our said court has recovered her seysine against woman
C. of the whole of such manor with its appurtenances as her seysine
for her dower, whereof she was endowed specifically, on 9: specified
such terms that, if that manor suffices for the third part us
of all the lands and tenements, which the aforesaid B.
formerly the husband of the said À. had on the day
when he espoused the said À., then that manor should
remain entirely with the said A. for her dower (according
to what has bcen said above), but if that manor should
exceed the value of a third part of all the lands and
tenements aforesaid, then let that surplusage which ex-
ceeds be restored to the said C. ; and if there be less than
& third part, let that which is wanting be supplied to
the said À. in some other suitable place from the lands
and tenements of the aforesaid C. And accordingly we
enjoin you that you cause plenary seysine to be made of
the said manor according to what has been said above
with its appurtenanees without delay to the said À., and
that you cause to be extended and appraised by the oath
of free and loyal men of your county all the lands and
all the tenements which belonged to the said D. in your
county on the day on which he espoused the said A., in
domains, in villenages, and in services of free men, and
in all other things whoever may hold them. And if
through the aforesaid extent and appraisement you shall
have found that the aforesaid manor is worth more than
the third part of all the aforesaid lands and tenements,
then that you should cause the surplusage, which exceeds
the value of that third part, to be had and assigned to


11.
De modo
assignandi
dotem.


12.

f. 301 b.
Quod finis
factus in
curia
domini
regis non
aufert do-
tem nomi-
natam.


l.
Excep-
tiones
contra
mulierem
petentem
dotem.


490 ] DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


predicto C. salvo tamé eidem A. mesuagio capitali
illius manorii.

Et si minus ibi fuerit quam predicta tertia pars
(secundüm rationabilem extensione), tunc quod defuit
habere facias eidem À. de hzreditate ipsius C. alibi in
loco competenti. Si autem nec plus nec minus, tunc
de predicto manerio cum pertinentiis se teneat con-
tentam. T. &c.


Quseritur inter alia, &n finis factus in cur regis au-
ferre possit dotem nominatam? ut si vir vel alius de
dote nominata fecerit alienationem quocung, modo, &
finis et cyrographum in curia domini regis intervene-
rii: et verum est quód non, ut probatur de termino
Sanct Trinitatis anno regni regis H. tertio in comi-
tatu Buck, de Alicia qus fuit uxor Symon de Sten-
tenham, & quendam heredem! qui dotem incumbra-
verit (qui etiam deliberare debuit eam si posset) et
feoffato per finem illum fecit escambium ad valentiam,
et mulier teneat tota vita terram illam, et post mor-
lem suam revertatur ad feoffatum et non ad hseredem,
nisi tantum excambium.


Car. VII.


Si contra mulierem petentem dotem tenens warran-
tum vocare noluerit, eüm extraneus tenens vel hsres
ipse in possessione extiterit, excipere poterit multis
modis contra mulierem quare dotem habere non de-
beat peréptorie, vel quare ad tepus differri debet actio
et dotis exactio dilatori&. Dicit enim mulier in inté-
sione sua et fundatione intésionis, quo jure ptineat ad


!« ot hsres, qui dotem incum- | ** posset, et feoffato," MS. Rawl. C.
** bravit, ut prius deliberet eam si | 159.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. . 491


the aforesaid C., saving always to the said A. the chief
messuage of that manor.


And if there has been there less than the aforesaid 11.
third part (according to a reasonable extent), then cause ir
what is deficient to be assigned to the said A. from assigning
the inheritance of the seid C. in some other suitable 7"*"
place. But if neither more nor less, then let her be
content with the aforesaid manor and its appurtenances,.


Wiiness, &c. |


It is asked amongst other things, whether à fine made — 12.


in the court of the king can take away a specified Es A huh
dower?  Asif a husband or other person has made an iuddedu


alienation of a specified dower in any manner whatsoever, Ed


and a fine and a chirograph has intervened in the court the king


of the lord the king: and it is true that; it is not so, as doc Ps
is proved in Holy Trinity Term in the third year of a specified
the reign of king Henry, in the county of Bucks, con- vtr
cerning Alice who was the wife of Simon of Stentenham

against a certain heir, who eneumbered the dower, (who

ought to have delivered it, if he could, and made by


that fine to the feoffee an equivalent in exchange, and


. the woman should keep during the whole of her life


that land, and after her death it should return to the
feoffee and not to, the heir, except only the "equivalent
in exchange.


CHAPTER VII.


If the tenant has been unwilling io call à warrantor — !


against a woman claiming dower, when a stranger te- o


nant or the heir himself is in possession, he may except woman


claiming


in many ways against the woman why she should not aower,


have her dower peremptorily, or why the action for
dower should be deferred for a time, and the exaction of
dower should be delayed. For the woman states in her
declaration and in the foundation of her declaration, by


Britton,


. 499 . DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


ipsum actio dotis. Dicitur enim sie: Talis mulier N.


unde inprimis erit videndum, quód non sit error in
nomine &c. ut supra. Quia pro cognomine satis suffi-


EM p cit quod dicitur, Talis quze fuit uxor talis &e. De hoc
ch. vi. S 1.


aute quod dicitur (fuit) excipi poterit q fuit uxor et
est uxor talis, e& quód dotem petere non poterit, quia
vir suus adhuc vivit, quo casu, si hoc dedici non pos-
Sit, cadit mulier & casu: quia constitutio dotis et do-
natio ppter nuptias morte viri confirmatur. Est enim
mors civilis et mors naturalis. Si a&utem dicatur q
civiliter mortuus sit, eo quód contulit se religioni, ex
&dverso responderi poterit, quód vir redire poterit ad
seculum, quià non assumpsit nisi habitum probationis.
Si autem ex parte mulieris dicatur quàd vir assumpsit
habitum professionis, suspenditur actio dotis quousq, p
ordinariu loci, vz. episcopü, abbate, vel alium de veri-
iate constiterit. Si autem dicatur à muliere q morte
naturali et ex adverso dicatur quód vivus sit, videndü
cui incumbat pbatio. Et sciendü est quàd quandóg
mulieri, quz dieit quód mortuus sit, quia qui dicit
pbare debet, & quandó3, tenenti qui excipit quód vivus
est, quia excipiendo est quasi actor, et probare debet
exceptionem suam sicut mulier actionem suam. Et
quód quandóque mulieri quz dicit inducta est proba-
tio de morte viri, habetis de termino Saneti Michaelis -
an regni regis H. nono incipiente decimo in comitatu
Essex, de Asselina que fuit uxor Alani filii Jut. Et
ubi datus fuit dies mulieri ad pbandu, & tenens qui


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 493


whai right the action for dower appertains to her. For
it is stated thus: Sueh à woman N., wherefore it is to be
seen in the first place, that there is no error in the
name, &c. as above, because as regards her surname it is
sufficient that it is stated, such an one who was the wife
of so-and-so, &e. But as regards the word * was" it
may be excepted that she was the wife and is the wife,
and that she cannot claim dower because her husband is
still alive, in which case if it cannot be denied, the
woman falls from her suit, because an appointment of
dower and a donation on aecount of marriage is con-
firmed by the death of the husband. For there is &
eivil death and:a natural death. If indeed it be said,
that he is civilly dead, inasmuceh as he has entered à
religious order, it may be answered on the opposite side
that a& man may return to secular life, because he has
only assumed the dress of à probationer. But if on the
part of & woman it be said that her husband has as-
sumed the dress of a probationer, the action for dower
is suspended until through the ordinary of the place, to
wit, the bishop, abbot, or other person, the truth be
established. But if it be stated by the woman that her
husband has died by a natural death, and it be said on
the opposite side that he is alive, we must see upon
whom the proof falls. Anditisto be known that it
falls sometimes on the woman, who says that he is dead,
because he who says a thing ought to prove it, and some-
times in the tenant who excepts that he is alive, because .
by excepting he is as i& were the party. proceeding,
and he ought to prove his exception, just as the woman
her action. And that sometimes the proof of the death
of her husband is imposed on the woman who asserts it,
you have in the term of St. Michael in the ninth and
tenth years of the reign of king Henry, in the county of
Essex, concerning Ásselina who was the wife of Alan
the son of Julius. And where a day was allowed to the
woman to prove, and the tenant who excepted on the


^ Len ad m


4094 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


excipit de vita non fuit oneratus pbatione. Quandóg
vero inducitur pbatio utrig, tam mulieri petenti quám
tenenti, & dabitur utrig, dies quód mulier pbet mor-
tem & tenens vitam. Et si mulier petens ad diem


Sibi datü sectam sufficientem pduxit, quód vir suus


f. 302.


Britton, ib.
$ 4.


mortuus sit, s. qui interfuerit ubi mortuus fuerit apud
talem locü & sepultus est apud talem ecclesiam. Et
secta examinata, si in omnibus bene conveniat, tüc
primó respondeat tenens mulieri petenti de dote sua,
nisi ita sit quód tenens p se sectam pducat validiorem
quód vivus, & quo casu preefereda est illa pbatio, que
fuerit magis valida. Et si pbatio mulieris magis va-
lida, tunc primó respondeat tenens actioni mulieris.
Sed quare non statim recuperàt? videtur quód ideo,
quia bene potest esse quód vir suus mortuus sit, et
quod ipsa nihil juris habeat in petitione sua, & ideo
iunc necesse habet docere de jure suo. Et quód ita
sib, habetis in secundo rotulo post guerr&à de termino
Sanctze Trinitatis in comitatu Sussex, de Maria de
Cromesham. Sed quid si ad diem eis datum unus
habuerit pbationem sufficientem & alius nullam, pro
eo judiceabitur, qui pbationem habuerit. Si autem ex
neutra parte nisi tàtum presumptio ex semiplena pba-
tione, tune recuperabit mulier dotem petitam nisi alia
obstiterit exceptio. Sed tamen sub tali conditione,
quód si vir redierit, restituat dotem tenenti sine pla-
cito cum Íruetibus medio tempore perceptis, preestita
sufücienti securitate fide jussoria, alioquin remaneat
lenens in seysinà sua, . Et quód ita sit, videri
poterit de termino Saneti Hillarii ai regni regis de-
cimoquinto in cofi Derbi, de Agnete qus fuit uxor


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 495


ground of the life of the husband was not burdened with
the proof, Sometimes the proof is imposed on both, the
woman claimant and the tenant, and & day will be


allowed to each, that the woman may prove the death


of her husband and the tenant his life. And if the
woman claimant on the day assigned to her has pro-
duced a sufficient sect to affirm that her husband is dead,


to wit, who were present when he died at such a place


and was buried at such & church. And if the sect upon
examination agree in all particulars, then in the first
place let the tenant. answer to the woman claiming her
dower, unless it be that the tenant produces his sect
which is stronger to show that the husband is alive, and
in which ease the proof which is the stronger is to be
preferred. And if the proof on the part of the woman is
the stronger, then in the first place let the tenant answer
to the action of the woman. But why does she not at
once recover? It seems for this reason, that it may well
be that her husband is dead, and that she has no right
in her claim, and accordingly it is necessary for her to
prove her right. And that thisis so you have in the
second roll after the war, in the term of Holy Trinity, in
the county of Sussex, concerning Maria de Cromesham.
But what if on the appointed day the one has a sufficient
proof and the other none at all? It shall be adjudged
for him who has furnished the proof. But if on neither
side there is anything else except & presumption arising
from a half complete proof, then the woman shall recover
the dower claimed by her, unless some other exception
should be an obstacle. But nevertheless under this condi-
tion, that if the husband should return, she shall restore


' to the tenant without a suit her dower with the fruits


derived from it in the meantime, having furnished suf-
ficient responsible sureties, otherwise the tenant shall
remain in the seysine. And that this is so may be seen
in St. Hilary Term in the fifteenth year of the reign of
the king in the county of Derby, in the case of Agnes


f. 302.


Exceptio,
quod nun-
quam fuit
desponsata


. tali viro.


Britton, v.


ch. vii. $ 1.


2.
De excep-
tione con-
tra matri-
monium.


496 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


Nicholai. Et q in hac exceptione dari debeat dies
rationabilis ad sectam producédam, si partes primo die
sectam non habuerint, pbatur de termino P. ann regis
H. xv. in coti Surrey de Ioetta de la Strode.


Car. VIII.


Item dicitur: Talis qus fuit uxor talis, ad quod
poterit tenens excipere q nunquam fuit uxor ejus, quia
nunquà fuit ei desposata, nec rem habuit cum illa.
Item si rem habuit cum illa, non tenuit illam, nisi ut
concubinam suam. ltem si desponsata, non legitimo
matrimonio, quia priüs aliam duxerat de jure & istam
de facto, vel si nullam priüs habuerit de jure, tamen
Ista petere dotem non potest, quia celebratum fuit
divortiu inter eos propter consanguinitatem, compater-
nitatem, vel aliam affinitatem.


Item si matrimonium legitimü, mulier tamen tunc
teporis ita tenella fuit, quód virü sustinere no posset,
ita quód posset dote deservire. Ite si aliquado fuit
ibi matrimoniu, tamen desiit esse ppter divortiu, et
ubi ab initio nullüà erat matrimoniu, nulla est dos, et
ubi ab initio est matrimoniu, ibi erit dos, quàadiu ste-
terit matrimoniü, sed facto divortio quacunq, occasione,
desinit dos & dotis petitio. lIt8 si matrimoniü legi-
timü quantum ad herede & hereditatis successionem,
tamen illegitimü erit quoad dotis exactionem, cüm dos
constituta fuerit alibi quàm ad ostiü ecclesise, ppter
verba in intentione mulieris contenta, & unde dotata
fuit od ostiü ecclesie.  Cüm aute talis proponatur ex-


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 407


who was the wife of Nicholas. And that in an excep-
ton of this kind a reasonable day should be allowed to


'" produce a sect, if the parties on the first day have not a


sect, is proved from Easter Term in the fifteenth year of
king Henry, in the county of Surrey, concerning Ioetta
de là Strode. | |


CHAPTER . VIII.


Likewise it is said, Such à woman who was the wife l.
of so-and-so, to which the tenant may except that she de üt
was never his wife, because she was never espoused by ha
him nor had he any connection with her. Likewise if he poused by
had any connection with her, he did not keep her except b E
as his concubine. Likewise ifshe was espoused by him,
she was not espoused in lawful matrimony, because he
had: married another woman in law, and her only in fact,
or if he had no previous rightful wife, nevertheless she
cannot claim dower, because à divorce was pronounced
between them on account of consanguinity, or compater-


nity,or some other affinity.


Likewise if there has been alawfulmarriage,the woman 2.
nevertheless at that time was so tender, that she could not enisi
support intercourse with the man, so that she could ngainst a
deserve à dower. Likewise if there was sometime a ""'"^&e.
márriage, nevertheless it ceased on account of a divorec,
and where from the beginning there was no marriage,
there is no dower, and where from the beginning there
was & marriage, there dower shall be as long as the mar-
riage stands; ifa divorce takes place on any grounds,
the dower and the claim for dower ceases. Likewise if
there be à lawful marriage as regards the heir and the
succession to the inheritance, nevertheless it will be un-
lawful as regards the exaction of dower, when the dower
has been established elsewhere than at the church door.

But when such an exception is propounded that the


Q 1302. II


Pn ib.
$3.


f. 302 b.


8.
Breve de
mittendo
inquisitio-
nem ad
curiam
Christiani-
tatis.


4.
De officio
ordinarii.


Britton, ib.
S4.


498 .DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


ceptio quód doté habere non debeat, eo quód non fuit
tali viro (p quem petit) matrimonialiter desposata vel
legitimo matrimonio copulata, hfiodi inquisitio fieri no
potest nec debet in foro seculari cum sit spirituale.
Et ideo demandet inquisitio facienda ordinario loci,
sicut archiepiscopo, epo, vel aliis privilegiatis, quibus
papa hujusmodi concesserit cognitionem, sed rex nü-
quam scribit nisi archiepiscopo vel episcopo. Forma
brevis talis est.


Rex tali archiepiscopo vel episcopo salutem. Sciatis
quód cum A. que fuit uxor B. fn curia nostra &c.
peteret versus C. tantam terram vel tertiam partem
tante terre cum pertinentis in tali villa. ut dotem
suam, unde praedictus B. quonda vir suus eam dotavit
ad ostium eeclesie: ide C. venit in eadem curia &
objecit ei, quód inde dotem ' habere non debuit, quia
nunquam fuit predicto B. matrimonialiter desponsata,
vel legitimo matrimonio copulata. Et quoniam hujus-
modi causz cognitio ad forü spectat ecclesiasticu, vobis
mandamus (quatenüs vocatis coram vobis convocandis).
rel veritatem diligenter inquiratis & inquisitionem
quain inde feceritis sciri faciatis justitiariis nostris
apud W. per litteras nostras patentes. TT. &c.


Ordinarius veró cüm literas .domini regis acceperit
(seeundu considerationem Martini) pceedere debet ad
inquisitione faciendam hoc modo. Et unde P. de Rupe
tunc Winton. episcopus consuluit eundem Martinum in
hoc easu. Qui ei rescripsit, quód in quacüque dyoces.


: ille qui exceptione opposuerit domicilium habuerit, fiat


ei talis denuntiatio per ordinarium, quód si voluerit
veniat contra matrimonium dicturus, secundü quod ei


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. . 409


woman ought not to have a dower, inasmuch as she was
not espoused matrimonially by the said man (through
whom she claims) or was not coupled in lawful matrimony,
an inquest on this subject neither can nor ought to be
made in the secular court, since it is a Spiritual mater.
And therefore let the inquest be committed to be made
by the ordinary of the place, the archbishop, bishop, or
other privileged persons to whom the pope has allowed
the cognizance of such matters, but the king never
writes except to an archbishop or bishop. The form of £ 302 p.
the writ is of this nature.


The king to such an archbishop or bishop greeting. 8.
Know ye, that when A. who was the wife of B. claimed d
in our court so much land or the third part of so much inquest to
land with its appurtenances in such a vill as her dower, o£ Chis.
whereof the aforesaid B. formerly her husband endowed tianity.
her at the door of the church: the.said C. came into our
court and objected to her that she ought not to have
dower thereof because she was never espoused maíri-
monially by the said B., nor ever coupled in lawful
matrimony to him. And since the cognizance of & cause
9f this kind pertains to the ecclesiastical court, we
command you (having called together such persons as
ought to be convoked before you) that you diligently
inquire into the truth of the matter, and make known to
our justiciariés at Westminster the inquest which ye
Shall make thereon, by these our letters patent, Wit-
ness &c. |


But the ordinary, when he has received the letters of 4.
our lord the king (according to the opinion of Martin de iie die. :
Pateshull), ought to proceed to make the inquest in this LUE
manner  Ánd whereon Peter de la Roche then bishop of vs
Winchester consulted the said Martin in this case; who .
wrote back to him, that in whatever diocese he who
made the exception had his domicile, there should be
notice given to him by the ordinary, that if he wished he
should come to state anything against the marriage, ac-

II 2


Britton, v.
ch. vii. S 5.


500 | DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


viderit melius expedire, ad diem quà ordinarius ei
prefixerit. Et sive tunc venerit sive non, testes, quos
tune mulier (quee voluerit matrimonium pbare), & qui
certa ratione reeusari non possit, pduxerit, pro se ad-
mittantur. Et prestito sacramento, dicta eorum reci-
tentur in publico, & veritate absqué magna juris solen-
nitate (quasi summatim) inquisita, remittatur domino
regi inquisitio vel justitiariis suis, secundum formam
mandati, nec audietur quis appellans in hoc easu non
magis quàm in inquisitione de bastardia, quia si talis
audiretur appellans, protrahi posset negotiü in infinitü.
Et sic mulier desperans in suo negotio, recederet de
lite sug. Et quia solümodo ad psonas & ordinarios in
literis domini regis coprehensos mandatur inquisitio,
non exteditur jurisdictio ad alias psonas & maxime!
exir& regnum, quia si episcopus ad appellationem ali-
eujus partis ad dominum papam interpositam subsiste-
reí nec ulteriüs inquireret, p hoc posset domino regi
prejudicium generari, quia sie posset papa in hujusmodi
casibus indistincte et quasi indirecté de layco feodo judi-
care ratione matrimonii, quia incidens est et non prin-
cipale, sed layceum feodü. Sed quoniam dicit ubi
nullum matrimoniü, ibi nulla.dos, & e converso, ubi
matrimonium ibi dos, et si ab initio matrimoniü 1bi
dos duràte matrimonio, & deficiente matrimonio deficiat
dotis actio. Ideo de matrimonio videndü, de quo se-
quitur dotis exaetio. Et ad hoc sceiendu, quod habet .
quis legitimam concubinam, et ex ea plem in concubi-
natu, et postmodü contrahit cum eodem? clamdestinü
matrimonium, et post contractü clamdestinü suscitat


MEENMEP— Ó (n G MM——— —————————— P "—RAApb8SQQ"c^ttt(——————————————————ÓÀ— Ra


! * maxime," MS. Rawl. C. 160.
2 «€ eadem," MS. 1d.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 501


eording to what should appear to him to be expedient,
on the day which the ordinary should appoint before-
hand. And whether he then came or not, the wit-
nesses, whom the woman who wishes to prove the
marriage, and which witnesses cannot be rejected for any
certain reason, may then have produced, shall be admit-
ted on her behalf. And the oath having been administered
to them, their evidence shall be stated in publie, and the
truth having been inquired into without any great for-
mality of law (as it were summarily), let the inquest be
remitted to the lord the king, or to his justiciaries
according to the form of the mandate, nor shall an ap-
pellant be heard in this case any more than in a case of
bastardy, because if such an appellant could be heard,
the eause might be protracted infinitely. And so the
woman, despairing of the business, would withdraw from
her lawsuit. And because the inquest is committed only
to the persons and ordinaries comprised in the letters of
the lord the king, the jurisdiction is not extended to
other persons, and especially not beyond the kingdom;
because if the bishop upon the appeal of either party
being interposed to the lord the pope should halt and
not inquire further, prejudice might be done thereby to
the -lord the king, because in this manner the pope might
in cases of this kind indistinctly and as it were indirectly
judge concerning a lay fee in regard of the marriage, be-
cause this js an incident and not a principal matter, as the
lay feeis. But since it is said where there is no marriage
there is no dower, and conversely where there is à mar-
riage there dower is, and if from the beginning there has
been & marriage there dower is during the marriage, and
where the marriage is deficient the action for dower fails.
Therefore we must see concerning a marriage, from which
the exaction of dower proceeds.. And on this it is to be
known, that & person has a lawful concubine, and has
offspring from her in coneubinage, and afterwards con-
tracts with her & clandestine marriage, and after the


f. 303.


Dritton, v.
ch. ii. S 2.


502 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


ab eo plem. ltem postmodü contrahit eum eadem
publie et in facie ecclesise, et dotat eam ad ostium
ecclesi:te : in hoe casu erit ille legitimus, qui ex cla-
destino matrimonio natus fuerit, dü tame hoc pbetur,
et hereditatem obtinebit. Et ille qui post solennita-
tem progenitus fuerit (quamvis legitimus) non erit
heres propinquior quoad suecessionem, sed mulier
propter solennitatem & dotis constitutionem in facie
ecclesi:e dote obtinebit, seeundum .quod inferiüs dice-
tur de exceptione, quód non ad ostium ecclesie. Item
selendu quód matrimonium aliud de jure, aliud de
facto, & potest quis plures habere uxores de jure, non
tamen simul & semel, sed successivé: videlicet quam-
libet post alteram, & ultima quze fuerit in possessione
viri mortis tempore dotem obtinebit, maxime si fuerit
ad ostium ecclesi;ee tempore desponsationis dotata, sive
ples suscitata fuerit ab omnibus uxoribus vel quibusda.
Ite plures poterit ds habere uxores simul & semel, sed
necesse est q unam tantü habeat de jure, & omnes
alie erüt uxores de facto, & sive unà habuerit sive
plures de facto, prima tame prseipua eu qua legitime
eontraxerit ad ostiu eeclesie vel alibi (dum tamen
sponsalia probentur sive per verba de presenti sive p
verba de futuro, du tamen carnalis subsecuta fuerit
comixio, erii uxor legitima quantu &d successione &
comodum hsredü & quantü ad dotis exactionem, dü
tamen ad ostiü eeclesie fuerit dos costituta. In clan-
destino vero matrimonio nunquaà dote consequetur, si
non ad ostiu ecclesie si cotra ipsam dotem petentem
fuerit coneeptum, seeudum quod inferius dicetur ple-
nius in exceptione, Si ad ostiu ecclesise.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER, - 503


clandestine marriage has offspring by her. Likewise he
afterwards contracts marriage with her publicly and in
the face of the church, and endows her at the door of
the church ; in this case he will be legitimate who was
born after the clandestine marriage, provided this be
proved, and he shall obtain the inheritance. And he
who was begotten after the solemnization of the marriage
(although legitimate) will not be the nearest heir as
regards the succession, but the woman on account of the
solemnization of the marriage and the establishment of
dower in the face of the church shall obtain dower ac-
cording to what will be said below concerning the ex-
ception, that it was not established at the church door.
And it is to be known that there is one marriage of right,
and another of fact, and that & man may have several
wives of right, but not at oné time and together, but sue-
cessively, to wit, one after the other, and the last who
was in possession of the husband at the time of his death
shall obtain dower, especially if she has been endowed
at the church door at the time of her espousals, whether
offspring have been produced by all the wives or by
some. Likewise a man may have several wives at one
and the same time, but it is necessary that he should
have one only of right, and all the others will -be wives
in fact only, and whether he has one or more in fact, the


first nevertheless and the chief wife, with whom he law-


fully contracted marriage at the church door or elsewhere,
(provided however espousals ean be proved by words of
present import or by words of future import, provided
earnal connexion has followed) will be the lawful wife
&s regards the succession and advantage of heirs, and as
regards the exaction of dower, provided however that
dower was established at the church door. But in a
clandestine marriage she will never aequire dower, if not
at the church door, if it was conceived against her claim-
ing dower, aecording to what will be said below more
fully in the exception '*if at the door of the church "


f. 303.


5.
Facta pro-
batione
in curia
Christiani-
tatis et in-
quisitione,
breve per
quod sum-
moneatur
pars.


504. DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


Probato igitur in curia Christianitatis matrimonio
legitimo, càm p litteras ordinarii constiterit regi vel
justitiarüs suis matrimonium esse probatum, statim ad
instatiam mulieris fiat resummonitio loquelee ad curiam
domini regis, p tale breve: & summoneatur tenens ità.
Rex vic. salute. Summoneas p bonos summonitores
C. quód sit coram justice. nostris apud Westmonasteriu
auditurus recorduü & judicium suu de loquela que fuit
in eadem curia nostra, coram justitiarüis nostris &c.
inter À. petente & eundem C. tenente de tanto terrse
cum ptinentiis in tali villa, quam preedicta À. in curia
nostra corà &c. clamavit in doté versus eunde C. &
inde loquela transmissa fuit ad curiam Christianitatis,
eo quód predictus C. objecit eidem À. quód nunquàm
fuit B. legitimo matrimonio nec matrimonialiter copu-
lata. Et habeas ibi sümonitores & hoc breve. Teste,
&c. Ad qué diem bene poterit C. se essoniare (si
voluerit), & si no venerit nec se essoniaverit, statim


 capietur terra in manu domini regis p parvum cape,


& ipse sümoneatur quod sit ibi auditurus judieiu suü.
Et sive tune venerit sive non, recuperabit statim A.
dot& suam sine aliqua ulteriori dilatione, quia de ce-
lero nullà poterit tenens opponere exceptione ulteriore
per quam differatur juditium, quia nihil sequitur nisi
judieiü, sive faciat p petente, sive pro tenente, sicut
pbatur de termino Sancti M. anno regis Henrici de-
cimo quinto incipiente decimosexto in com South, de
quada Aldithia. Si aute p muliere faciat inquisitio,
tunc fiat ei seysina p tale breve.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 505


A lawful marriage having been proved in the court Proof and

of Christianity, when by the letters of the ordinary itj. Pur
has been certified to the king or to his justiciaries that bea made
the marriage has been proved, forthwith at the instance !? the
of the woman let there be & re-summons of the cause of Chris-
into the court of the king by a writ of this kind, and , lii) :
let the tenant be thus summoned. "The king to the vherehy a
viscount greeting.  Summon by good summoners C. Sii
that he be present before our justiciaries at West-
 minster,in order to hear the record and the judgment
against him in the cause which was in our said court
before our justiciaries, &c., between A. as claimant and
C. as tenant of so much land with its appurtenances
in such a vill, which the aforesaid À. in our court before
&e. has claimed as dower against the said C., and .
thereon & cause was transmitted to the court of Chris-
tianity, inasmuch as the aforesaid C. objected to the
said A. that she had never been coupled to the said B.
in lawful matrimony nor matrimonialy. And have
there present the summoners and this writ. Witness
&c. On which day the said C. may well essoin himself
(f he wishes), and if he has not come nor essoined
himself, let the land be forthwith taken into the hands
of the lord the king by the petty caàpe, and let him be
summoned, that he be there to hear his own judgment.
And then, whether he shall have come or not, A. shall
forthwith receive her dower without any further delay,
because the tenant cannot besides object any further
exception whereby the judgment should be. deferred,
because there is nothing to follow but the judgment,
whether it makes for the claimant or for the tenant, as
is proved in Miehaelmas term in the fifteenth and six-
teenth years of king Henry in the county of South.
concerning & certain Aldithia. But if the inquisition
makes for the woman, then let seysine be given to her
through this writ.


Breve de
seysina
facienda
mulieri, si
inquisitio
fecerit pro
ea.


f. 303 b.


rn
Si sum-


' monitus


non ve-
nerit, nec
se essoni-
averit.


Britton, ib.
8 6.


506 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


Rex vie. salute. Scias q A. quse fuit uxor B. in
curia nostra corà justiciariis nostris &e. p judiciu
ejusdé curie recuperavit seisinam suam versus C. de
tanta terr& cu ptinétiis in tali villa ut de dote sua.
Et ideo tibi precipimus q eide À. de preedicta terra
cü pertinentiis (nomine dotis) sine dilatione plenariam
seysinà habere facias. Si auté vir cui postea nupserit
& uxor debeant nominari, tunc sie. Scias q A. de N.
& B. uxor ejus &c. (ut supra) de tanta terra cum pti-
netiis in tali villa ut de dote ipsius B. seysin& su&
recuperaverint, & ideó tibi precipimus q eisdem A. &
B. de predicta terra cum ptinentiis nomine dotis ipsius
B. plenariam seysinam habere facias. Teste &oc.


Si aute summonitus ad diem suum non venerit nec
se essoniaverit, tunc capiatur terra in manu dii regis
per defaltam, et ipse summoneatur quód sit inde audi-
turus judicium suum ad alium diem p parvu eape &c.
ut supra. Et-si tenens ad diem non venerit, mulier
recuperabit seysinam suam per defaltam, et fiat ei
seysina su& per tale breve. Rex vic. salutem. Scias
quód A. quz fuit uxor B. in curia nostra &c. recupe-
ravit seysinam suam de tanta terra cum ptinentiis in*
N. ut de dote sua versus C. de N. per defalta ipsius
C. Et ideo tibi precipimus quód eidem A. &oc. ut
supra. Si &utem recognita ei fuerit dos sine placito
per lieentiam, tune sie. Scias quód càm A. in curia
nostra &e. peteret versus C. tantam terrà cum perti-
nentüs in N. ut dote suam, idem C. venit in eadem
curia & recognovit & reconcessit eidem A. totam pre-
dictam terram cum pertinentiis in dotem ipsius Á., &
ideó tibi precipimus &e. ut supra.


A. who was the wife of B. has in our court before our, giv


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 507


The king to the viscount greeting. Know thou that E

e
justiciaries, &c., through the judgment of the said court yne to
recovered her seysine against C. of so much land with P ic t
its appurtenances in such & vill as her dower. And eco
accordingly we enjoin you that you eause plenary SÉ" for be.
sine of the said land. with its appurtenances to be given

to the said À. without delay. But if the husband to

whom she was afterwards married and the wife ought


to be named, then thus. Know thou that À. of N. and


" B. his wife, &c. (as above) have recovered their seysine f. 308 b.


of so much land with its appurtenances in such a vill
as the dower of the said B.: and accordingly we enjoin
you that you cause plenary seysine of the aforesaid land
with its appurtenances to be given to the said A. and B.


'in the name of the dower of the said B. Witness, &c.


But if the party summoned has not come on his day
nor essoined himself, then let his:'land be taken into Ite —
the hand of the lord the king by default and the said moned hes
party be summoned by a little cape to be there to hear x He
his judgment on another day &c., as above. And if the somed,
tenant has not come on the day, the woman shall recover
her seysine by default, and let seysine be given to her
through a writ of this kind. The king to the viscount
greeting. Know thou that À. who was the wife of B.
has in our court, &c. recovered seysine of so much land
with its appurtenancees in N. as her dower against C. of
N. by the default of the said C. And aecordingly we
enjoón you that you give to the said Á. &c., as 'above.
But if her dower has been recognised without a plea
through a licence, then thus. Know thou that when A.
in our court, &c. claimed against C. so much land with
its appurtenanees in N. as her dower, the said C, came
into our court and. recognised it and regranted to the
said A. the whole of the aforesaid land with its appur-
tenances as the dower of the said A. and accordingly
we enjoin you &c., as above.


9008 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


T e Cüm hujusmodi inquisitio ad curià Christianitatis
turin ^ transmissa fuerit facienda, pbato sufficienter matrimo-


euriaChris- njio, & cüm mulier in veniendo sit cum inquisitione
tianitatis, as IE vA " .
etdum ^ Versus curia, supvenit impedimentum sicut guerra, vel
pes Sx hujusmodi, quód judieiu non poterit executioni deman-
versus dari et antequà ad curiam venerit moritur tenens in
d. guerra forte, & post guerra impetrat mulier super he-
tenens, rede vel aliu tenentem novum breve, ubi si tune tes-
tatum fuerit, quód sie sponsalia pbavit tempore illius
qui obiit, & quód sie impedita fuit per guerram, sine
aliqua alia pbatione recuperabit seysinam suam: ut de
itinere episcopi de Dunelm et Martini de Pateshul in
comitatu Eborum anno regis tertio, de Muriella que
fuiü uxor Hugonis de Haverton: per simile videtur,
q si mulier petat aliqué in virum, & sententia lata
fuerit p muliere, & ab es non sit appellatum, si vir
moriatur ante executionem judicii, ipsa sine alia pba-


tione dotem obtinebit.


Car. IX.


ad Coneedere veró poterit tenens excipiendo, q despon-
Si dicat, e [LJ e. * [J um -— .
ubicunque Sàt& fuit ad ostium ecclesi vel alibi, sed nuqua fuit


Ried dos ei constituta. Quo casu, no erit inquisitio facienda
nunquam in foro ecclesiastico, sed in curia regis cü mulier dicat


dxidrsien cotrariu. Ite coneedere potest q desponsata fuit & dos
velquod constituta, sed non ad ostium ecclesie die quo despon-


non ad bs : : iei 1 ]
ostium S85& fuit: quo casu, eode modo fiat inquisitio in curia


ecclesie. — regis, quia non erit màgis demandanda judici ecclesi-


pisos astico, quà inquisitio de bastardia, ubi sic objecta fue-


matrimo- rit, vz. utrü quis natus fuerit ante matrimonium vel
nium et
excipitur  POSt. Et quod mulier dotem petere non poterit, nisi


E oidls dotata fuerit ad ostium ecclesie (si hoc ei fuerit ob-


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 509


When an inquisition of this kind has been transmitted , 8.
to the court of Christianity to hold, the marriage having zbdei in
been sufficiently proved, and when the woman is in the "y Ju
course of coming with the inquisition to the court, an tianity, m
impediment, such as a war, supervenes or such like, so whilst the
that the judgment cannot be committed to execution, and S he- s
before she has come to the court the tenant dies in the course of
war perhaps, and the woman after the war sues out à new no. -
writ against the heir or another tenant, where if it be thetenant
then testified that she has proved her espousals in the
time of him who has died, and that she has been so
hindered by the war, she shall without any other proof
recover her seysine, as in the iter of the bishop of Dur-
ham and Martin de Pateshull in the county of York in
the third year of the king, concerning Muriel who was
the wife of Hugh de Haverton: by alike case it seems
that if a woman claims à certain person as her husband,
and sentence has been given for the woman, and no appeal
from it has been made, if the man dies before the execu-
tion of the judgment, the said woman shall obtain dower


without any other proof.


CHAPTER IX.


But the tenant may concede the marriage by excepting
that she was espoused at the church door or elsewhere, Ihe "
but dower was never appointed to her. In which case say that
an inquisition will not have to be made in the ecclesias- X'erever
tical court but in the court ofthe king, when the woman espoused


says the contrary, Likewise he may concede that she seal


was espoused and dower was appointed to her, but not at pointed to


the chureh door on the day on which she was espoused, in t rs cid


which ease let an inquisition be made in the court of the of ud
urc
king in the same manner, because it is not to be com- Likewise :


mitted to the ecelesiastical judge any more than an when the
marriage
inquisition concerning bastardy, where it has been thus; is conce-


ded and
objeeted, whether a person was born before or after exception


matrimony. And that & woman cannot claim dower is made


unless she was endowed at the door of the church, if this 3£*inst


. f.304.
Britton, ib.
8 8.


510 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


jeetum in ipetratione dotis) pbatur in itinere W. de
Ralegh in comitat Buck, de Alicia qus fuit uxor Bald-
wyn, quia si mulier in petitione dotis omiserit ista
verba (et unde talis vir meus me dotavit ad ostium
ecclesise) amittet dote sine alqua recuperatione. Et ad
hoe facit q habetis de termino S. Michaelis anno regis
Henrici octavo incipiente nono in comitatu Hertford,
de Aliei& quz fuit uxor Rogeri de Camera. ltem ad
hoe facit q habetis in eode comitatu Buck. de Isabella
qui fuit uxor Robert. Ite ad hoc facit de termino
S. Michaelis anno regis Henrici nono incipiete decimo
in comitatu Oxof, de Alicia qus fuit uxor Jacobi de
Cardevile, ubi judieiu redditü fuit quód mulier dotem
petere non potuit, quia no fuit desponsata ad ostiu
ecclesi;. Et in eisdem cócordantiis reperitur q inqui-
sitio de hujusmodi faciéda erit in curia dfi regis, &
non in foro ecclesiastico. Et unde inquiredu est
muliere ubi, & quando, & in qua ecelesia fuit despon-
sata. Et de inquisitione faciéeda fiat tale breve; Rex
vic. Salute. recipimus tibi quód venire facias corà
te & corü eustodibus placitorü corone nostre in pleno
eomitat duodecim tam milites quàm alios' liberos &
legales homines de visineto tali, & p sacramentum eo-
rum diligenter inquiras si À. de N. die, quo desponsa-
vit B. uxorem suam apud talé ecclesiam, dotavit eam
de tanto terre cum ptinentiis in tali villa soleniter &
ad ostium ecclesim, sieut preedieta B. dicit, vel si illam
despósavit in lecto suo mortali absque aliqua solenni-
tate, & ibi eà dotavit sieut predict? talis dicit. Et
inquisitione, quà inde feceris, scire facias justiciariis
nostris literas &c. & p duos &e. Et ita poterit esse


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 511


objection has been raised against her in her suit for
dower, is proved in the iter of William de Ralegh in
ihe county of Buckinghamshire, concerning Alice, who
was the wife of Baldwin, becauseif à woman has omitted
these words, * and of which so-and-so my husband en-
* dowed me at the church door," she will lose her dower
without any recovery. And this is supported by what
you have in Michaelmas term in the eighth and ninth
years of king Henry, in the county of Hereford, concern-
ing Álice who was the wife of Roger de Camera.  Like-
wise this is supported by what you have in the same
county of Buckingham concerning Isabella who was the
wife of Robert. Likewise thisis supported in Michael-
mas term in the ninth and tenth years of king Henry,
in the county of Oxford, concerning Alice who was the
wife of Jacobus de Cardeville, where judgment was
rendered that the woman could not elaim dower, since
she was not espoused at the church door. Andin thesame
accords it is found that an inquisition on this subject
is to be made in the court of the king, and not in the
ecelesiastical court. And hence it is to be inquired of
the woman where, and when, and in what chureh she


was espoused. And concerning the holding of the:


inquisition let à writ of this kind issue. We enjoin you
that you cause to come before you and before the keepers
of the pleas of our crown in a full county court twelve
as well knights as other free and loyal men of such a
visne, and by their oath diligently inquire if A. de N. on
the day on which he espoused B. his wife at such a
church endowed her with so much land together with its
appurtenances in such a vill solemnly and at the door of
the church, as the aforesaid B. says, or if he espoused her
on his death-bed without any solemnity, and there en-
dowed her as so-and-so aforesaid says. And the inquest
which you shall make thereon you shall cause to be made
known to our justiciaries by letters &e. and by two &c.
And thus & marriage may be legitimate as regards the
Suecession to an inheritance, wherever i6 has been con-


f. 304.


512 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


matrimoniu legitimum, quoad p hereditatis successione,
ubieunq, contractu fuerit, dum tamen pbatum: & ille-
gitimü quoad dotis exactione, nisi fuerit in facie ec-
clesiz? contractu, & ibi dos eonstituta cum solennitate,
quc&& tunc adhiberi potest tam tepore interdicti quàm
alio tempore. Cum autem vir dotem ad ostium eccle-
Sie nominaverit (ut predictum est) certam & nomi-
nata, vel incertam & non nominatam, qusritur an vir
postmodü mutare potest modum et constitutione dotis,
doté augendo vel minuendo ? & videtur q non; quià
sicu& nominata est ad ostium ecclesie vel non nomi-
nata, ità peti potest & non aliter, ppter verba: &
unde dotata fuit ad ostium ecclesie. Quia iste dic-
tiones (ut predietum est) semper exprimi debent in
petitione dotis, & quia inde oritur exceptio tenenti,
quód aliter dotata fuit ad ostium ecclesie. ^ Concedere
etia poterit tenens quod mulier fuit desponsata & ad
ostium ecclesie dos constituta. Sed excipere potest,
quód postmodu fuit matrimonium solutum, & divor-
tium celebratum inter ipsam & virum suum ppter
consanguinitatem, compaternitatem, & aliam affinita-
tem, & quamdiu duravit matrimonium duravit dotis
exactio, ea deficiente deficit dotis petitio, quod si pro-
batum fuerit, etiam in curia regis amittit dotem.  Po-
terit tamen replicare contra exceptionem illam, quód
si aliquando fuit matrimonium inter eos accusatum,
nunquam tamen fuit in vita viri sui solutum, nec
divortium celebratum: vel si aliquando fuit contra
ipsum judicatum, tamen à sententia illa fuit appella-
tum, & in eausa appellationis fuit pro ea judicatum,
ita quód fuit in possessione viri sui die quo obiit, vel
dicere poterit, g vir suus obiit antequ& in causa appel-
lationis fuit conclusüu.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER, 513


traeted, provided only it be proved, and illegitimate as
regards the exaction of dower, unless it has been con-
tracted in the face of the church, and there dower has
been appointed with the solemnity, which may be there
employed as well at the time of an interdict as at any
other time. But when a man has named. à certain and
specified dower (as aforesaid) at the door of the church,
or an- uncertain and unspecified dower, it is asked
whether & man can afterwards change the mode and
appointment of the dower, by augmenting or diminishing
the dower, and it seems that he cannot, for according as


it has been specified at the door of the church or not -


specified, so it may be claimed and not otherwise on
account of the words * and whereof she was endowed at
* the door of the church." Because those expressions (as
aforesaid) ought always to be expressed in the claim
of dower, and because there arises therefrom an excep-
tion for the tenant that she was endowed otherwise at the
door of the church. The tenant may also allow, that the
woman was espoused and dower appointed at the door of
. the chureh. But he may except that afterwards the
marriage was dissolved, and a divorce celebrated between
her and her husband on aecount of consanguinity, com-
paternity, and other affinity, and as long as the marriage
lasted, the exaction of dower lasted, when that ceased,
the elaim for dower ceases, whieh if it be proved, she
loses her dower even in the conrt of the king. She
may however reply against that exception, that if the
marriage between them was at one time impeached, it was
never dissolved in the lifetime of her husband, nor was


a divorce celebrated : or if there was a judgment at one


time against the marriage, nevertheless there was an
appeal from the sentence, and judgment was given for
her on the appeal, so that she was in possession of her
husband on the day on which he died, or she may say that
her husband died, before the judgment was concluded in
the court of appeal.

Q 1802. K K


f. 304 b.


514 AE DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


E Poterit etià tenens dicere sive sit hzeres sive sit alius,

potestquod & cOocedere mulieré esse desposatam & dotatà ad ostium

Reti ecclesie, sed aliter quàm in intensione sua pponit: ut

utsi dieit Sl dieat quód dos fuit ei nominatim costituta, & certo

nonnomi- loco, exeipi poterit à tenete quód costituta fuit ei per
natim, , "T dos

responderi totum, & in tertia parte, quo casu mulier necesse

Poteritde habet, pbare intentioné suam, & dictum suum, p audi-

parte, ; : Mors iar. ci ; "

velhujus. entes & videntes, qui desponsationi interfuerint, qui

Bod presentes incotineti parati sint hoc per sacrametum

confirmare: & eorum stabitur pbationi (si examinati

cocordét) nisi heres vel alius tenens pbatione habuerit

validioré ad pbandum contrariü. Si autem mulier nul-

lam habuerit probationem pro se, nec secta sufficien-

tem, nec etiam,instrumentum, tune pro tenente judi.

eabitur, si pbatione habuerit sufficietem & plenam sive.

semiplenam, propter presumptionem: si autem omninó

nullà, pro eo judieabitur propter commodum possessio-

nis: vel si mulier habuerit sectam sufficientem, & te-

nens non nisi simplicem vocem suam, licet paratus sit

se ponere super patriam, non audietur, sed mulier

recuperabit: ut de termino Saneti Hillarii anno regis

Henrici nono in comitatu Devon., de Alicia quee fuit

uxor W. de Thornton & Matheo de Thornton. Item

cüm ex utrag, parte pdueti sunt testes & una pars

dicat quód nesciat utrum ita sit vel non sit, & alia

pars dicat precise quód ita sit, sicut ille dicit ex cujus

parte pducitur, judieabitur p illa pte quse scit verita-

lem: ut de eodé termino Saneti H. anno eode ejusde

regis in comitatu North. de Wilhelmo de Dauétre,

quia semper oportebit muliere pducere sectam, alioquin

vaeua erib in omni casu petitio sua. ltem si testes


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 515


The tenant also will be able to say, whether he be . 2.
the heir or another person, and to concede that the epe
woman was espoused and endowed at the door of the sey, that
church, but otherwise than she propounds in her decla- bb a
ration: as if she should say that à dower was appointed erii
to her specifically and in a certain place, it may be ex- snould say
cepted by the tenant that it was appointed to her not specifi-
throughout the entire estate and of the third part, in ni AUR
which case the woman will be under the necessity to I dpa
prove her declaration, and her statement by persons who third part
heard and saw it, who were present at the espousals, 9r Such
and who being present are forthwith prepared to affirm
this by their oath, and their proof shall hold good, if
on examination they are of accord, unless the heir or
other tenant shall have stronger evidence to prove the
contrary. Butif the woman have no evidence in her
favour, nor a sufficient sect, nor even an instrument, then
judgment shall be given for the tenant, if he have a
sufficient and complete proof or even a half-complete
proof on account of the presumption in his favour; but
if he has altogether no proof, it shall be adjudged in his
favour on account of the advantage of his possession : or
if the woman has a suflicient sect and the tenant has
only his single voice, although he may be willing to put
himself on the country, he shall not be heard, and the
woman shall recover, as in Saint Hilary's term in the
ninth year of king Henry in the county of Devon, con-
cerning Alice who was the wife of William. de Thornton
against Matthew de "Thornton. Likewise when wit-
nesses have been produced on either side, and one party
says that he knows not whether it be so or not so, and
the other party says precisely that ib is so as he says
on whose part he is produced, it shall be adjudged for
that party which knows the truth, as in the same term
of St. Hilary in the same year of the same king in the
county of Northumberland, concerning William of Daven-
try, because it will be incumbent on. the woman always
io produce a sect, otherwise her petition will be void in

KK 2


C00 0o m0 oc Áo


3.
Quod in-
quiratur
per pa-
tritam, ubi


516 .DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


pdueti nihil pbaverint, vel cognoscant q desponsationi
interfuerunt, vel dicat q nihil sciant de dote, vel ejus
eostitutione: tune non valet q agitur, quasi deficieéte
mulieris pbatione, & tenens quietus recedat, sicut videri
poterit in itinere M. de P. anno regis Henrici decimo
in cofi. Eborum, de Emma qu: fuit uxor Raymeri le
Franceys. ltem si testes qui pducti fuerint ex pte
mulieris plené pbaverint dictu suum, & quód desposa-
tioni interfuerint, & q sie dotata fuit sieut ipsa dicit,
recuperabit mulier petens, secundü q inveniri poterit
in itinere M. de P. in comitatu Suff. anno regis Hen-
riel decimo, de comitissa de Oxon & Wilhelmo Blüdo
& Cecilia uxore ejus, ubi ex utraq, pte pducta fuit
secta. Si aute neutra pars sectam habuerit, nec pba-
tione, nee salte prsesumptione, nec instrumentum, &
utraq, pars de veritate ponat se super patria p defectu
seetze vel alterius pbationis quà &d manum non habu-
erit, tune fiat inquisitio de veritate p tale breve.


Rex vie. salute, Precipimus tibi q diligenter in-
quiras, qui interfuerunt apud tale ecclesiam ubi A..
desponsavit B. uxoré suam, & tam ex ipsis quà ex


secta defe- 8lilis de pximo visneto talis ville per quos &c. venire


cerit et alia


probatio.


f. 305.


facias .ecoram justitiariis &c. ad talem diem duodecim
liberos & legales homines, ad recognoscendu (super
sacramentum suum) si predictus ÀÁ. die quo ipsam B.
desposavit dotavit eam nominatim de tali manerio
cum pertinentiis, quod predicta B. in eadé curia nos-
tra elamat ut doté suam versus C. & sieut predicta
B. dieit, vel si eam dotavit de tertia parte omnium
terrarum & tenementorü unde fuit in seysina die quo
eandem B. desponsavit, ut ide C. dicit, quia tam pre-
dietus B. quàm predictus C. posuerunt se &e,. ut supra.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER,. 517


every case. Likewise if the witnesses produced have
proved nothing, or acknowledge that they were present
at the espousals, or say that they know nothing con-
cerning the dower or its appointment, then that which
is done is of no avail, as if the proof of the woman was
deficient, and the tenant goes away quit, as may seen
in the iter of Martin de Pateshull in the tenth year of
king Henry in the county of York, concerning Emma,
who was the wife of Reymer le Franceys. Likewise, if
the witnesses, who have been produced on the part of
the woman, have fully proved her statement, and that
they were present at the espousals, and that she was
endowed as she states, the woman claiming dower shall
recover it according to what may be seen in the iter of
Martin de Pateshull in the county of Suffolk in the tenth
year of king Henry, concerning the countess of Oxford
and William Bland and Cecilia his wife, where a sect was
produced on either side. But if neither party has a sect,
nor & proof, nor at least à presumption nor an instrument,
and each party concerning the truth places himself upon
the country by reason of the defect of & sect or other
proof which he has not at hand, then let an us be
held as to the truth by such a writ.


The king to the viscount greetinp. We enjoin you
that you diligently inquire who were present at such That an
& church when A. espoused B. as his wife, and cause to be made
come as well of those as of others from the nearest visne sum
of such a vill through whom &c. before our justiciaries where a
on such à day twelve free and loyal men to recognise Dc Driof
upon their oath, if the aforesaid À. on the day on which are de-
he espoused the said B. endowed her specifically with dis
such à manor with its appurtenances, which the said B.  f.305.
in our said court claims as her dower against C. and as
the aforesaid B. says, or if he endowed her with the
third part of all his lands and tenements, whereof he
was in seysine on the day on which he espoused the said
B. as the said C. says, because the aforesaid B. as well


as the aforesaàid C. have placed themselves upon the


HEU RM ET cera mc m MMC, as REC NES aged


AL


518 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


Ité variari poterit breve inquisitionis multipliciter,
secundu varietate recordoru ita. Si predictus A. die
quo ipsam B. desposavit dotavit eam de viginti acris
terre cum ptinentiis in N. &c. (ut supra) vel si eam
dotavit de tertia parte tante terre cum pertinentiis
in N. &e. vel aliter: si eam dotavit de tertia parte
totius hereditatis quam tunc tenuit hereditarie et in
dominico: vel de tertia parte totius qusesstus sui quem
postmodum ea vivente posset acquirere: vel, si eum!
dotavit de tanto terre vel táto de h:wreditate su&*
quà habuit die quo predictam B. desponsavit, ut idem
C. dicit, & unde prwdicta B. ad ostium ecclesie quando
desponsata fuit, tenuit se contentam, quia tam pre-
dicta B. qua predictus C. posuerunt se in inquisitionem

ila, & inquisitionem illà venire facias &e. T. &e. &
ad hanc inquisitionem inducere poteritis omnia genera
constitutionis dotis, eotra quse aliquo modo excipi pos-
sit. Fit autem quandoq, de constitutione dotis & modo
costituendi pbatio p instrumenta, qu: quide si non
fuerint recognita, fides eorum multipliciter pbari pote-
rit, vel per collationem signorü, vel per testes, vel per
patriam, & aliis multis modis, ut supra de fide instru-
mentorum plenius.


Car. X.


ga Sed quid si instrumentum dieat q alius à viro do-
nd taverit uxorem ? non valebit talis constitutio, nec dotis
o his petitio, propter verba contenta in intensione, & unde
instrumen- t&lis vir suus eam dotavit &ce., sed hoc verum est si
tum inre tenementum illud fuerit viri sui, secüs si alienum : ut


aliena. ! : - . . :
si quis uxore suam dotaverit ad ostium ecclesie de re


1 * eam," MS. Rawl. C. 160.
?* de tanto terr; vel, de tanto de hwreditate sua," MS. id. **de tanto
terr: tantum vel tantum de hereditate su&," M.S. Reg. 9 E. xv.


pU- ^T


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 519


country &c. Likewise the writ of inquisition may be
varied in & manifold way, according to the variety of
the records thus: if the aforesaid À. on the day on
which he espoused the said B. endowed her with twenty
acres of land with their appurtenances in N. &c. (as
above), or if he endowed her with the third part of so
much land with its appurtenances in N. &c. (as. above), or
otherwise, if he endowed her with the third part of his
whole inheritance, which he then held by inheritance
and in domain, or with the third part of all his acquisitions
which he afterwards during her lifetime could acquire:
or if he endowed her with so much of his land or with so
much of his inheritance which he had on the day on which
he espoused the aforesaid B., as the said C. says, and where-
with the aforesaid B. at the door of the church when she
was espoused held herself content, because as well the
aforesaid B. as the aforesaid C. have put themselves on
that inquest and have caused that inquest to come &oc.
Witness &ec. And on this inquest you may introduce
every kind of appointment of dower, against which
exception may be made in any manner. Sometimes
proof concerning the appointment of dower and the
mode of appointing is made by instruments, which if
they are not acknowledged, their faith may be proved
in manifold ways, either by the comparison of signatures,
or by witnesses or by the country, and in many other
ways,as above has been more fully stated concerning
the faith of instruments.


CHAPTER X.


But whatif the instrument should say, that another 1.
person than the husband endowed the wife? such an mop
appointment will not be valid, nor the claim for dower, the mode
by reason of the words contained in the declaration, ic
*&nd whereof so-and-so her husband endowed her," ment of
But this is true, if the tenement has been her husband's, pain
otherwise if another person's; as if a person has en-isPro-


dowed his wife at the door of the church out of the zs


590 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


patris vel matris vel alterius parentis vel amici, quo-
rum consensus erit requirendus, ut si dicatur: & unde
talis vir suus eam dotavit per assensum patris vel


Britton, v. matris, vel alterius amici. Et unde incogrué conficitur


ch. ix.


instrumentum q pater vel alius dotavit uxorem filii.
Sed si quis diligenter vim constitutionis pspexerit, non
erit ibi incongruitas, quia ad hoc q valeat constitutio
dotis de re aliena, oportet q duo conveniant in eonsti-
tutione, videlicet nominatio et consensus, quia neutrum

illorum sufficit sine alio, quia si filius nominat & pater
non consentit, non valet sine consensu: si &utem
filius non nominat, licet pater consentiat, non valet
consensus sine nominatione fili. Conjunctis igitur no-
mine & consensu fit valida constitutio. Non est igi-
tur instrumentü reprobandum cüm uterque dotat, vide-
licet filius ex nominatione, & pater ex consensu. Et
si donatio patris plené non sufficiat per se, valeat


Britton, ib. tàmen &d consensum eum nominatione. Sed viden-


8 2.


f. 305 b.


2.
De cujus
assensu
fit talis


dum si eonsensus fieri possit ante constitutionem do-
tis, per literas, vel alio modo in absentia cósentientis,
vel si in oostitutione dicatur in absentia sua quód
assenserit cüm non consenserit, & si valere debeat p
ratihabitionem, videtur quód valeat, facta relatione de
consensu ad ostium ecclesie.  Quód valere nó debeat
videtur, cm a&bsés non sit,si aute ad dote, bene valet.
Si quia nominatio per se nó valet, nec per se sine
consensu, nee alieubi quàm ad ostium ecclesiw, & per-
sonaliter, ita non valet consensus nisi personaliter.


Cüm de consésu patris, vel matris, vel parentis, vel
alterius amici, possit filius dotare uxore: videndu qua-


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 591


estate of his father, or of his mother or of another relation to the


or friend, whose consent is to be required, as if it be


estate of
another


said, ^ and whereof so-and-so her husband endowed her person.


* with the assent of his father, or his mother, or another
* friend." And whereof the instrument is incongruously
drawn, because the father or another has endowed the
wife of his son. But if a person has diligently perceived
the force of the appointment, there will not be there any
incongruity, because for the purpose that the appoint-
ment of dower from another person's estate should be
valid, it is incumbent that two things should be combined
in the appointment, to wit, the specification and the
consent, because neither of these is sufficient without
the other, because if the son specifies and the father does
not consent, it is not valid without his consent, but if the


son does not specify, although the father consent, his con- '


sent does not avail without the specification of the son.
But when the specification and the consent are combined,
the appointment becomes valid. The instrument therefore
is not to be disapproved when both endow, to wit, tho
son by his specification, and the father by his consent.
And if the donation of the father is not fully sufficient
by itself, it would avail for consent with the specifica-
tion. But it is to be seen if consent may be given
before the appointment of dower, by letters or in some
other manner in the absence of the consenting party, or
ifit be said in the appointment in his absence that he
has assented when he has not consented, and if it ought
to be valid by ratification: it seems that it would be
valid, reference having been made to the consent at the
door of the chureh. It seems that it ought not to be
valid, when he is not absent, but if [he be present] at the
dower it is quite valid.: But because & specification by
itself is not valid, nor by itself without & consent, nor
elsewhere than at the door of the church and personally,
80 & consent except personally is not valid.


Since with the consent of a father, or of a mother, or of
8 relation, or of another friend, a son may endow his wife,


f. 305 b.


2.
With


whose


constitutio
dotis.


3.

S1 de con-
Sensu pa-
tris vel
matris vel
alterius
amici do-
tata fuit.


599 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


liter fiat hujusmodi dotis cóstitutio, e& cujus cósensus
fuerit inquirendus. Et sciendü, quod cujuslibet de
cujus assensu fuerit constituta, & tam de assensu &
voluntate matris, quà patris: ut de termino S. M. anno
regis Henrici decimo septimo in comitatu Salop, de
quadà Emma qu:e petiit dote, & eodem modo cujus-
libet alterius cujus assensus.requiritur. Et si dos tali-
ter constituta non restituatur, consulitur ei per tale
breve.


Rex viec.salute, Prwcipe ÁÀ.q juste & sine dilatione
reddat B. qu: fuit uxor C. tantum terre cum  perti-
nentiis in tali villa unde idem C. quonda vir suus &
haeres ipsius talis eam dotavit de volütate prsedieti
talis patris sui vel matris suz vel hujusmodi quado
eam despósavit ad ostiu ecclesie, & unde nihil habet,
ut dicit, & unde queritur, q predictus A. ei deforceat,
& nisi fecerit, & przdicta B. fecerit te securum &c. ut
supra. Sümonitus auté antequam cóparuerit unicum
habebit essonium (sicut superius) & de defalta & aliis
fiat, u& supra, donec comparuerit. Cüàm autem com-
paruerit, satis perpendi poterit qualiter mulier pponere
debeat intentionem ex prsemissis. Et pposita inten-
tione, oportet quód habeat sectam ad pbandam, vel
aliam pbationem ut supra pbatur: & ita fiat probatio
hie sieut ibi. Sed si juratores dubié respondeant in
parte, & in parte dicant quód bene sciüt quód talis
mulier fuit desponsata, sed nesciunt si dotata fuit per
assensum necne, non recuperabit, nisi ita sit fort? quód
vir suus seysina habuerit de eadem terra aliquo tem-


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 593


it is to be seen in what manner an appointment of dower consent
of this kind is made, and whose consent is to be ascertained. ur
And it is to be known that [the consent is to be ascer- ment of
tained] of each person with whose assent the dower is ap- over is
pointed, and as well concerning the assent and willingness
of the mother as of the father, as in Saint Michael's term
in the seventeenth year of king Henry in the county of
Salop, concerning a certain Emma who claimed dower,
and in the same way of every other person whose assent
is required. And if dower so appointed is not restored,


redress is afforded to her by & writ of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin A.that 8.
justly and without delay he restore to B. who was the e
wife of C. so much land with its appurtenances in such endowed
& vill whereof the said C. formerly her husband and the hi:


consent


the heir of the said so-and-so endowed her with the of aed


good will of the aforesaid so-and-so his father or of his ya mother


mother or of such like persons when he espoused her at OE
.the door of the church, and whereof she has nothing'as
she says, and whereof she complains, that the aforesaid
A. deforees her, and unless he shall so have done and
the aforesaid B. has given you security, &c., as above.
But the person summoned shall have before he has
appeared a single essoin (as above), and concerning his
default and other things let it be done, as above, until
he has appeared. But when he has appeared, it can be
sufficiently discovered from what has been premised how
the woman ought to propound her declaration . And
upon her declaration having been propounded, it is in-
cumbent that she have a.sect to prove it, or some other
kind of proof, as is proved above, and let the proof be
made here in the same manner as there. But if the
jurors reply doubtfully in part, and in part say that
they know well that such woman was espoused, but
they do not. know if she was endowed through the as-
sent of some one or not, she shall not recover, unless it
should be by chance that her husband had seysine of
the said land at some time during his life, because then


4.
De excep-
tione con-
tra muli-
erem sic
dotatam.


5.
Jnquiren-
dum, si
dotata fuit
per assen-
sum.


. f. 306.


1.
Quod
competit
exceptio
heredi ex
pluralitate
mulierum
dotem
petentium.


5924 mE DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


pore in vita sua, quia tunc sufficit mulieri seisina viri
quoad dotis exactione, licet assensus parentum non
valeat: ut de termino S. Hillarii anno regis Henrici
decimotertio in fine rotuli. |


Cüm veróà contra mulierem excipiatur quód nunquàm
dotata fuit per assensum & voluntatem talis anteces-
soris, & mulier dicat quód sic, fiat inquisitio per breve
in hae forma.


Rex vie. salutem,  Precipimus tibi q diligentér in-
quiras qui interfuerunt ubi A. desponsavit B.,, & tam
ex illis quà ex aliis legalibus & discretis hominibus
de cóm tuo venire facias coram justic. nostris tali die
duodecim, ad recognoscedum si idem A. die quo ean-
dem B. desponsavit, dotavit eam per assensum & vo-
luntatem talis vel non. De hac materia.inveniri pote-:
rit in rotulo de termino S. Trinitatis anno regis Hen-
rici quarto in comitatu Suff, de quadam Alexandria.


CA». XI.


Competit etiam tenenti hzredi vel non heredi ex-
ceptio ex pluralitate mulierum dotem petentium de
morte unius viri, ut si duse sint petetes, excipere po-
test quód non debet duabus respondere, non magis (ut
videtur) qua si duo unum implacitent de eadem terra,
de tota vel de aliqua ejus parte, sive placitum sit
Super possessione, sive super pprietate. Et unde in-.
primis videndum, utrum dus, cüm nullam dotem habu-


" erint dotem petierint, versus tenente, vel cüm una


dotem habuerit & alia nihil & illa qus nihil habet
dotem petierit versus eum qui habet duas partes, &


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 525


the seysine of the husband suffices for the woman as
regards the exaction of dower, although the assent of
relations does not avail, as in St. Hilary term in the
thirteenth year of the reign of king Henry at the end
of the roll.


But when it is excepted against & woman that she 4.
was never endowed with the assent and good will of such Exe din


an ancestor, and the woman says that it was so, then let against a

an inquisition be made in this form. endowed
The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you

that you diligently inquire who were present when A. y » inque

espoused B., and as well of those as of other loyal and rd if

discreet men of your county, you cause twelve to come ed

before our justiciaries on such a day to recognise if the vith wf

said À. on the day on which he espoused the said B. en- sebiae

dowed her with the assent and good will of so-and-so or Persons.

not. Concerning this matter something will be found in

the roll of Holy Trinity term in the fourth year of king

Henry in the county of Suffolk, concerning a certain


Alexandria.


CHAPTER XI. | f. 806,


But the tenant, whether he be the heir or not, is |.
entitled to except on account of the plurality of women That the
claiming dower upon the death of one man, as if there except 2n
' be two women claiming, he may except that he ought de piel
not to answer to two women, no more (as it seems) than ity of
' if two persons should implead him for the same land, claiming
for the whole of it or for a certain part of it, whether dower.
the plea be about the possession or about the property.

And whence we must see in the first place, whether the
two women, when they have had no dower, elaim dower  -
against the tenant, or when one has had dower and the
other nothing, and she, who has had nothing, claims


against him who has the two thirds, and im like manner


526 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


similiter versus mulierem quse tertiam partem tenet
nomine dolis, que postmodüm vocaverit ad warantum
hsredem, vel alium de dote sua, ut sciri possit ad
quem pertineat exceptio contra mulierem petentem,
quia eüm warantus warantizaverit, necesse habet de-
fendere mulierem quz in possessione fuerit, & sic com-
petit ei exceptio, cum defensionem susceperit per wa-
rantiam. Excipere enim poterit sic nomine proprio,
quód mulier petens dotem habere non debeat hac rati-
one, quia ÁÀÁ. eujus nomine dotem petit, habuit quan-
dam uxorem B. nomine, que fuit cum A. viro suo
per decem annos, tam in Anglia quàm in Hybernia,
& sic in seysina fuit de predicto À. viro suo quando
obiit, & ideo assignata fuit ei dos sicut uxori legitime.
Ad quod veró mulier petens respondit quód tenens
injuste hoc dicit, quia przdicta B. quz se fecit, uxorem
predicti À. non fuit uxor ejus, & hoc bene patuit,
quia ipsa quee nune dotem petit aliquando petiit ip-
sum ÀÁ. ut virum in curia Chrisüanitatis apud talem
locum, coram talibus judicibus, & per judicium in eadem
euria disrationavit ipsum ÀÁ. ut virum suum, presente
ipsa B. Et hoc offert se probare, & tenens e contra
dicit (ut priüs) quód predicta B. semper fuit cum
eodem À. sicut uxor sua, & in vita & in morte, sine
aliquo clamore vel qusestione mota à muliere quz
nune petit. Et mulier petens qussita ubi & quando
desponsata fuit ipsi A. & si probationem habeat de
dieto suo probando? & respondit quód sie, & unde
eadem diem habuit ad probandum. Sed quia ad diem
ilum nullam probationem habuit, nihil recuperavit.
Et de hac materia inveniri poterit anno regis Henrici
decimo in banco, de Alicia & Juliana, que fuit uxor
Thomz de Fughelstone, petentem! dotem, & cui à te-


1 « petente," MS. Rawl. C. 160, et 9 Reg. E. xv.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 5927


against the woman who holds & third part in the name
of dower, who has afterwards called the heir,or some-
one else, as her warrantor respecting her dower, that it
may be known to whom appertains the exception against
the woman claiming, because when the warrantor has
warranted, he is under the necessity of defending the
woman who is in possession, and so he is entitled to an
exception, since he has undertaken by his warranty the
defence, For he may except thus in his own name, that
the woman claiming dower ought not to have it for this
reason, because Á. in whose name she claims dower, had
& certain wife B. by name, who was with her husband
À. during ten years as well in England as in Ireland, and
So was in seysine of her said husband when he died, and
therefore dower was assigned to her as his legitimate
wife. To which however the woman claiming answered
that the tenant states this unjustly, because the afore-
said B. who made herself out as the wife of the aforesaid
A. was not his wife, and this was perfectly clear, be-
cause the said woman who now claims dower once on a
time claimed the said A. as her husband in the court of
Christianity at such a place, before certain judges, and by
&, judgment in the same court derayned the said A. as her
husband, B. herself being present. And this she offers
to prove, and the tenant on the contrary says (as before)
that the aforesaid B. was always with the said A. as his
wife both in hfe and in death, without any claim or
question having been raised by the woman who now
claims, And the woman claiming having been ques-
tioned where and when she was espoused to the said A.,
and if she has any proof to prove her assertion ? and she
answered in the affirmative, and thereupon she had a day
assigned to her to prove. But because on that day she had
no proof, she failed to recover. And on this matter some- .
thing will be found in the tenth year of king Henry in
banco, concerning Alicia and Juliana who was the wife of
Thomas de Fughelstone claiming dower, and to whom it


Lex
Kantie.


f. 306 b.


528 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


nente objectum fuit quód dotem habere non debuit,
quia quedam Isabella Decursum fuit uxor predicti
Thom», & idem Thomas de ea obiit seysitus sicut de
uxore su& Et post mortem dicti Thome secundum
legem Kane. pleniüs habuit dotem suam de toto tene-
mento quod fuit ipsius Thome, & petit judicium si
debeat duabus feminis de uno tenemento & morte
unius viri sui dotem facere. Ad quod respondit ipsa


A. quód ipsa fuit uxor predicti Thome &, non ipsa


Isabella: sed revera dicit quod praedicta Isabella fuit


, eum preedicto Thoma sieut adultera & non sicut uxor
legitima. Quibus auditis, consideratum fuit ibi quód


Alicia (si vellet) implacitaret ipsam Isabellam, & si
posset ostendere quód ipsa Isabella non fuit uxor ip-
sius Thome, tune recuperaret totà terram quà ipsa
Isabella tenuit nomine dotis, & tenens sine die: &
sic erit placitum inter duas mulieres petentes in curia
Christianitatis, ut ipsa obtineat, quze docuerit se esse


: uxorem legitimam. Item de eadem materia anno sep-


timo regis Henrici coram Martino in banco, de Gunora
quee fuit uxor Johannis fili Hugonis, que petiit do-
tem versus Matildam de Berneres tertiam partem terti
partis duarum carucatarum terre cum ptinentiis in
Cidermerse ut dotem suam, unde predictus Johannes


.eam dotavit &e. Et Matilda respondet q tenet terram


illam in dotem de dono predieti Johannis qui fuit vir
suus, & non ipsius Gunorsg, & unde dicit q Galfridus
filius & hsres pregdieti Johannis, & qui est in custodia
talis p dominuth regem, est warantus suus de dote
sua, & unde vocat eum ad warantum. Et Gunor&
dicit q non debet inde warantum habere, quia ipsa
Matilda nunqua fuit sponsa predicti Johannis, per q


—


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 599


was objected that she ought not to have dower, because
a certain Isabella Decursum was the wife of the afore-
said Thomas, and the said Thomas died seysed of her as
of his wife. And after the death of the said Thomas ac-
cording to the law of Kent she had more fully her dower
out of the whole tenement which belonged to the said
Thomas, and he seeks judgment if he ought to furnish
dower to two females from one tenement and upon the
death of one husband. "To which the said A. answers
that she was the wife of the aforesaid "Thomas, and not
the said Isabella; and in truth shé asserts that the afore-
said Isabella was living with the aforesaid Thomas as an
adulteress, and notas his legitimate wife: which matters
having been stated in court, it was resolved that Alicia (if
she wished) should implead Isabella, and if she could
show that the said Isabella was not the wife of the said
Thonias, then she should recover the whole land which
the said Isabella holds in the name of dower, and the
tenantis without a day. nd so shall the plea be be-
tween the two women claiming in the court of Christi-
anity, that she who has shown herself to be the legitimate
wife shall prevail Likewise concerning the same mat-
ter in the seventh year of the reign of king Henry be-
fore Martin [de Pateshull] in banco, concerning Gunora
the wife of John Fitzhugh, who claimed as dower against
Matilda de Berners the third part of the third part of
two carucates of land with their appurtenances in Cider-
merse as her dower, whereof theaforesaid John endowed
her &e. And Matilda answered that she holds that land
as dower upon the gift of the aforesaid John, who was
her husband and not the husband of the said Gunora,
and whereof she says that Godfrey the son and heir of
the aforesaid John, and who has the custody of the said


land through the lord the king, is her warrantor for her |


dower, and whereof she calls him as her warrantor. And
Gunora says that she ought not to have a warrantor


thereof, because the said Matilda was never the spouse


Q 1302. LL


306 b.


530 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


idem Galfridus filius & heres suus deberet esse waran-
tus ipsius Matilde de dote sua, sed dicit Gunora q

- ipsa fuit sponsa sua, & de e& habuerit plem, scilicet
quandam Julianam quse presens est &c. Et hoc parata
est pbare sicut curia consideraverit. Et Matilda e con-
ira dicit q ipsa fuit sponsa sua & non Gunora, & quód
ipsa Matilda fuit cum predicto Johanne quando obiit,
et si eadem Gunora unquam fuit cum eo, hoe fuit in.
adulterio, quia non fuit ei desponsata, et hoc parata
est verifieare &ce.,, et ideo sine die, & Gunora habeat
breve ad episcopum Winton in cujus dioces. fuit de-
sponsata, Forma brevis inferius.


2, Eadem Gunora petiit versus custodem tertiam ptem
Mary duarum partium duarum carucatarum terr» cum per-


petenti — tinentiis in eadem villa ut dotem suam, unde predic-
objetum $us Johannes quondam vir suus eam dotavit &c. Et
fuit quod Petrus respondit (qui custos fuit) & dicit quód Matilda
miren predicta habet inde dotem suam plené per preceptum
irre domini regis, et petiit judicium, si debuit duabus foemi-
dotem, — nis dotem facere. Et quia eadem Gunora petit dotem
itg suam versus eandem Matildam, remaneat loquela sine
mulieribus die versus Petrum custodem, donec sciatur quid fiat
pieces inter Gunoram & Matildam. ltem de eadem materia
denda. | coram Martino in banco, anno regis Henrici octavo de
Agnete quce fuit üxor Roberti de Hactone, qus petiit
dotem versus lIsabellam, qus fuit uxor Aluredi de
Berkings, et Isabella respondit q non debuit inde do-
tem habere, sed bene concedit q aliquando desponsata
fuit eide Roberto, sed postea p censuram ecclesiasticam
partita fuit ab eo per parentelam, et facta partitione,
idem Robertus postea solenniter duxit in uxoré pre-
dictam Isabellam sine clamore vel contradictione ipsius


Agnetis, eb postea fuit cum prsedieto Roberto viro suo


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 581


of the aforesaid John, wherefore the said Godfrey his
son and heir ought to be the warrantor.of the said
Matilda for her dower; but Gunora says that she was
his spouse and he had offspring by her, to wit, & certain
Juliana who is present &c. And this she is prepared to
prove as the court has resolved. And Matilda on the
contrary says that she was his spouse and Gunora not,
and that she Matilda was with the said John when
he died, and if the said Gunora ever cohabited with him,
it was in adultery, because she was not espoused to him,
and this she is prepared to verify, &c. and therefore
without a day, and let Gunora have à writ to the bishop
of Winchester in whose diocese she was espoused. "The
form of the writ is below. :

The said Gunora claimed against the guardian the third qnt to à
part of two thirds of two carucates of land with their ap- woman
purtenances in the same vill &s her dower, whereof the dower it
aforesaid John her husband endowed her, &c. And Me en
Peter (who was the guardian) answered, and s&ys that another
the aforesaid Matilda has thereof her dower fully, by the "omes »
injunction of the lord the king, and he asks for judg- the same
ment, whether he ought to assign dower to two females. oe
And because the said Gunora claims her dower against dower, and
the said Matilda, let the trial against the said guardian "et!tis
be suspended without a day, until i& be known what is allowed
Settled between Gunora and Matilda. Likewise con- diu)
cerning the same matter before Martin [de Pateshull] in
banco in the eighth year of king Henry, concerning
Agnes who was the wife of Robert de Hocton, who
claimed dower against Isabella, who was the wife oí
Alured de Berkings, and Isabella answered that she
ought not to have dower thereof, but she fully concedes.
that she was once on a time espoused to the said Robert,
but afterwards on account of the censure of the church
she was separated from him on account of relationship,
and upon the separation having taken place, the said
Robert afterwards solemnly took for wife the aforesaid
Isabella without any claim or contradiction on the

LL2


532 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


. usqué ad morte Roberti viri sui, & quód de ea obiit


f. 307.


93.
Breve ad
hoc, scili-
cet, de
duabus
mulieribus.


seysitus, ut de uxore sua, ad quod respondit prsedicta
Agnes, quüd nunquam partita fuit de przedicto Roberto,
et si ipsa Isabella ei desponsata fuit, hoc fuit injuste,
et Agnes quzesita ubi moram fecit toto tepore Roberti,
quo Isabella fuit cu eo, dieit q alibi vir suus eam
posuerat, e& dum vir suus alibi moram fecit: postea
mandatu fuit episcopo totu factu, q inde veritate inqui-
ret, et iquisitione madaret justice. Forma veró brevis
de facienda inquisitione talis erit. ;


Rex tali episcopo salute. Sciatis quód eàüm A. qus»
fuib uxor B. in curia nostra &c. peteret dote sua ver-
sus C. de libero teneméto predicti B. quondà viri sui
in tali villa, D. de N., d similiter dote su& petiit versus
eüdé C. sub noie ejusde B. objecit eidé À. q no debuit
inde doté habere quia no fuit eide B. (cujus nomine
doté petiit) legitimo matrimonio copulata. Sed dicebat
pdieta D. q ipsa fuit uxor legitima preedieti B. & eide
B. legitiméà desponsata, et quonia hujusmodi cognitio
ad forü spectat ecclesiasticum, vobis màdamus q con-
vocatis coram vobis convocadis, rei veritate diligenter
inquiratis, e£ de matrimonio ita diligeter discutiatis, ut
sciri possit d illarü sit uxor ipsius B. legitima, et d
illarum preferri debeat in dotis exactione. Et inqui-
sitione quà inde feceritis scire faciatis eisdé justitiariis
nostris p literas vestras patentes. Et facta inquisitione,
mulieri cotra quà lata fuit setetia sup petitione illius
dotis ppetuü imponatur silentiu, cüm non sit post tes-


a Mc ecco Eo cape Er - "x ———497 diens andEE Pt Ll ÉD. E" Ren s
LESS Ld LC cL. capi ccc br qnc CAM dcc


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER,. | 583


part of the said Agnes, and afterwards she cohabited
with the aforesaid Robert as her husband down to the
death of the said Robert her husband, and that he
died seysed of her, as of his wife, to which the afore-
Said Ágnes answered that she was never separated from
the aforesaid Robert, and if the said Isabella was es-
poused to bim, this was done unlawfully: and Agnes
having been questioned where she was commorant during
the whole time of Robert, whilst Isabella was with him,
: She says that her husband had placed her elsewhere, and
whilst her husband was commorant elsewhere: after.
wards the whole of the facts were committed to the
bishop, that he should inquire into the truth thereof,
and send his inquest to the justiciaries. The form of f.307.
the writ for making the inquest will be of this nature.


The king to bishop so-and-so greeting. Know ye that |
when À. who was the wife of B. in our court &c. claimed M
her dower against C. from a free tenement of the afore- concerning
said B. formerly her husband in such a vill, D. of N. who !9 vives.
in like manner claimed her dower against the said C.
under the name of the said B. objected tothesaid ÀÁ.that -

. She ought not have dower therefrom because she was not
coupled in legitimate matrimony-to the said B. in whose
name she claims dower. But the aforesaid D. alleged
that she was the legitimate wife of the aforesaid B., and
was legitimately espoused to the said B., and since cogni-
sance of this cause belongs to the ecclesiastical court, we
command you that, having called before you those who
ought to be so called, you diligently inquire into the
truth of the matter, and you discuss so diligently the fact
of the marriage, that it may be known which of them is
the legitimate wife of the said B., and which of them ought
to be preferred in the exaction of dower, and make ye
known io our said justiciaries the inquest, which you
have held thereon by your letters patent. And after
the inquest has been made let perpetual silence be im-
posed upon the woman, against whom sentence has been :
given upon the claim for that dower, since there is not


534 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


talé inquisitioné in foro ecclesiastico locus appellationi.


. Qüm autem justitiariis ad inquisitionem episcopi de


4.
Consulti
fuerunt
justiciarii,
qualiter
proceden-
dum esset
in tali |
inquisi-
tione
facienda.
Consue-
tudo
Anglis. .
Jritton, v.
ch. viii. $ 4.


verilate costiteri, resümoneatur tenens g sit ad certü
di& eidem A. in petitione dotis responsurus, Quia cüm
contentio sit inter mulieres à sib uxor legitima, dis-
cusso inter eas quie sib legitima, extunc pcedat aetio
inter mulieré petente & tenentem q mulier nihil habu-
erit, quia tunc primó psonam habet standi in judicio.
E& hoc secundü quosdam, sed secüdü alios, quicunqg,
exceptionem apposuerit, ipsa d se legitimam pbaverit
sine ulteriori dilatione obtinebit. Qualiter efá pceden-
dum sit ad hujusmodi inquisitionem faciendam ad con-
siderationem episcopi Wigorü de consilio Martini ex
parte regis tale datum fuit responsum.


Rex tali episcopo salutem, Cüm inter À. petentem !
& B. tenenté corà justie. nostris de baneo contentio
dotis verteretur, & post multas altercationes ipsius? ex
pte ipsius B. eidem A. objieeretur, quód tali viro
(cujus nomine dote petiit) non fuisset legitimo mairi-
monio copulata. Et tandem ad episcopum Wigorü (in
cujus dioces. dicebatur mairimoniü inter tales fuisse
contractum) esset demüdate inquisitio facienda. Idem
episcopus nos postmodum consuluit qualiter in dicta
inquisitione facienda esset pcedendum : eujus cosulta-
toni seeundü consuetudine regni Angliw sie duximus
respondendü, g eum sic fuerit ei inquisitio demadata,


'g convocatis convocadis, &ec. ut supra, sic peedat, quód


inprimis denüciare faciat tenenti q sit ad certü diem
certo loco contra mairimoniü dictura, si voluerit. Et


! «* mulierem petentem," MS. ? « ipsius A." MS. idem.
Reg.9 E. xv.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 535


place for an appeal after an inquest through wiiünesses
in the ecclesiastical court. But when the justiciaries have
been certified after the inquest of the bishop concern-
ing the truth, let the tenant be re-summoned that he be
present on a certain day in order to answer to the said |
À. on the claim for dower. Because since there is & con-
tention between the women which is the legitimate wife,
after it has been diseussed between them, which is the
legitimate wife, thereupon let the action proceed between
ihe woman claimant and the tenant' on the ground that
she has had nothing, because then for the first time she
has a persona, atandé in court. And this is according to
some persons, but according to others, whoever has pre-
sented an exception, the woman who has proved herself
to be legitimate, shall obtain [her dower] without further
proof For how proceedings are to be had to make such
an inquest upon the consultation of the bishop of Wor-
cester such an answer was given on the part of the king
by the advice of Martin [de Patishull].

The king to bishop so-and-so greeting. Sinceacon- 4
tention for dower has been raised between À. the claimant ia
and B. the tenant before our justiciaries in bomeo, and were con-
after much altercation on the part of DB. it was objected Saad
to À., that she has not; been coupled in legitimate matri- procest- |.
mony to such à man, in whose name she claims dower: reser
and at length it has been committed to the bishop of in making
Worcester, in whose diocese the marriage is said to have inquest.
been contracted between them, to make an inquest.

The said bishop afterwards consulted us in what way
. proceedings should be taken in making the said inquest,
to whose consultation according to the custom of the
realm of England we have thought it right that answer
should be made. in this manner, that since the inquest
has been committed to him, having called/together those
who ought to be called together &e. as above he should
proceed thus, that in the first place he should give notice
to the tenant that she be present on & certain day in
order to allege against the said marriage, if she wishes,


536 DE ACTIONE DOTIS


sive tunc venerit sive non, testes quos mulier (quz


. Voluerit matrimoniü pbare) pduxerit, admittat ob con-


tumacià inulieris alterius d non venerit. Et veritate
absq, juris magna solennitate quasi sümatim inquisita,
mandatur inquisitio diio regi, & non obstante aliqua
appellatione à pte adversa interposita (si forte psens
fuerit) quia si aliqua pte in hoc casu audiretur appel-
làs, et dilatu esset appellationi, sie nüquà causa fine


- eaperet, et posset negotiü ptrahi in infinitü, nec debet


f. 307 b.


l.
Exceptio
contra
mulierem,
si aliquan-
do contra
muliérem
petentem
dotem
fuerit sen-
tentiatum
causa
matrimonii.


Britton, v.
ch. vüi. $ 2.


aliqua partiü p appellationem ad alios judices recur-
rere, et maxime? extra regnum ad papam, vel ad alios,
ne sic cognoscerent de layco feodo. -


Car. XII.


Obstabit etiam exceptio mulieri dotem petenti, si
aliquando illü, cujus nomine dote petiit, petiit in virü
dum. vixit & matrimonium legitimum accusavit, &
contra ipsam tune fuerit sententiatü, ut si mulier
dicat q dotem petere non possit, eo q cüm talem in
virum peteret in curia Christianitatis coram talibus
judicibus & contra ipsum judicatum esset, responderi
posset ex adverso quód talis vir à tali sententia ap-
pellavit ad alios judices, & ita quód prima sententia
revocata esset quasi nulla, & per hoc stetit ipsa cum
viro suo usque ad mortem, & seysitus fuit de ea sicut
de uxore sua. Et hoc probato mulier petens nihil
recuperabit, nisi ostendere posset quód in causa appel-
lationis nihil actum fuerit, vel appellatio non prose-
cuta, & sententiatum pro appellante, sententia tamen
in causa appellationis fuit ab aliis judicibus revocata,


. OF ÀN ACTION FOR DOWER. 537


and whether he then come or not, he shall admit the
witnesses whom the woman (if she wishes to prove
her marriage) has produced in pain of the contumacy of
the other woman who has not come. And the truth
having been inquired into as it were summarily without :
any great solemnity of law, the inquest is sent to the |
lord the king, and notwithstanding any appeal having
been interposed by the adverse party (if she has by
chance been present), because if an appellant were heard
on either part in this ease and it was deferred to the
appeal,so the cause would never find an end, and the
business might be protrácted to infinity, nor ought either
of the parties to have recourse by appeal to other judges,
and chiefly out of the kingdom to the pope, or to others,
lest they should thereby take cognisance con nS à


. lay feud.


CHAPTER XII | f. 307 b.


An exception will also be an. obstacle to the woman duce
claiming dower, if at any time she has claimed whilst he Gon spuiu d
was alive as her husband him, in whose name she claims the woman,
dower, and she alleged a legitimate marriage, and sentence unos
was then given against her, as if the woman should SAY Of ina iy

f matri-
that she cannot claim dower, inasmuch as when shen mony has
claimed such an one for her husband.in the court of been im
Christianity before such judges, and it was adjudged d eiui
against him, it might be answered on the other side, that PE
the said man appealed such a sentence to other judges,
and so that the first sentence was revoked as null, and
through that means she stayed with her husband down
io his death, and he was seysed of her as of his wife.


And upon this having been proved the woman claiming


. Shall recover nothing, unless she can show that nothing


was done in the cause of appeal, or the appeal was not
proseeuted, and sentence was given for the appellant, the
sentence however in the cause of appeal was revoked by


9.
Competit
exceptio
contra
mulierem
ex tacitur.
nitate.


Britton, ib.
8 8.


9.
Si due
mulieres
dotem
. petant,
non mul-
tum refert
de priori-
tate.


538 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


& si mulier de hoc in curia regia probatione habuerit,
pro ea judicabitur, vel propter difficultatem  discussio-
nis transmittatur inquisitio ad curiam Christianitatis.


Poterit etiam exceptio dari mulieri tenenti vel hz-
redi ex taciturnitate mulieris petentis, ut si mulier
cüm presens fuerit in ecclesia, vel alibi, ubi ignorare
non possit, càm bannum & tertia denuntiatio fiat ante
desponsationem, tunc tacuerit, licet re vera desponsata
sib, prejudicabitur ei; si talem in virum petierit, quia
si in virum petendo tenere non possit, multo fortius
nee in dote, quasi nullo matrimonio.


Si autem dus» dotem petierint, non multum refert de
prioritate impetrationis, sed tamen restat videre quse
ilarum actrix diei debeat versus aliam. Et secundum
quod actrix dici poterit illa que prius ad judicium
pvocavit, i illa qus prius usa fuerit, licet non prius
impetraverit, nisi alia forte excipiendo actrix efficiatur,
quia sicut ille qui dicit, tenetur probare actionem, ita
ille qui exeipit, exceptionem, sive affrmando sive ne-
gando, dum tamen negativa habeat in se affirmativam
implieitam, & qui excipit quodammodo actor dicitur.
Et de hac materia inveniri poterit de itinere abbatis
de Rading & M. de P. in coii Gloc. anno regis Hen-
rici quinto, de Clementia de Dodewell Et cüm trans-
misse fuerint ad curiam Christianitatis, tenens semper
teneat in pace, donec constiterit de illegitimitate' illa-
rum, que illarum legitima fuerit, & qus; non. Et
utraque teneatur ad probationem. Et cum pervenia-


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 539


other judges, and if the woman has brought forward
proof of this in the court of the king, judgment shall be -
given for her, or on account of this difficulty of the dis-
eussion let the inquest be transmitted to the court óf
Christianity.


An exception also may be allowed to à woman tenant ^ 2.

or to an heir on the ground of the taciturnity of the woman vba
claimant, as if, when the woman was present in the church be made
or elsewhere, where she could not be ignorant, when the n for
banns and the third notice were given before the espousals, direiy
she was then silent, although she has been in truth es-

- poused by him, it will be prejudged against her, if she

claim such person as her husband, because if she cannot

succeed in claiming her husband, much more will she not


do so in claiming dower, as if there was no marriage.


But if two women claim dower, it does not much 4.
matter as to the priority of suing out a writ, but it is to 2
be seen which of them ought to be the party proceeding claim
' ageinst the other. And according as she may-be called d9":
the plaintiff, who has first applied for judgment, that is, much mat-
she who has first used a writ, although she has notior.
been the first to sue it out, unless the other by excepting
has become the plaintiff, because as he who alleges is
bound to prove his action, so he who excepts 1s bound to
prove his exception, whether by affirming or by denying,
provided however the negative has in itself an implied
affirmative, and he who excepts is in & certain manner
ealled the plaintiff. And on this matter something may
be found in the iter of the abbot of Reading and Martin
de Pateshul in the county of Gloucester in the fifth
year of king Henry, concerning Clementia de Dodewell.

And when they have been transmitted to the court of
Christianity, let the tenant always hold in peace, until it
has been established concerning their illegitimacy, which
of them is the legitimate wife, and which not. And let
each be held to the proof. And when the proceeding


540 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


tur ad probationem, una earum, licet re vera legitima
sib, tamen.deficere potest in probatione, ecüm probatio
deficere possit, licet jus non deficiat, ut si quis primó
Britton, ij. unam desponsaverit in Francia vel in Terra Sancta,
$ 4. vel alibi extra regnum, & postea aliam de facto in
Anglia, ipsa qus» est in Anglia obtinebit propter de-
fectum alterius, que probare non poterit. Item si quis
in regno uxorem quandam duxerit de jure, & aliam
de facto cum qua steterit; & legitima cum in regno
f.308. fuerit matrimonium non accusaverit petendo talem in
virum, prejudicabitur ei imperpetuum, si post mortem
viri sui dotem petierit, & ipsa quse in possessione viri
sui mortis tempore fuerit obtinebit.


4. Sed esto quód talem in virum petierit, cüm illegi-
id sarda lima fuerit in possessione. Si mulier petens in vita
dotem pe- viri moriatur, illa que in possessione fuerit obtinebit.
ten0P95 Si autem vir antequàm disrationetur moriatur, per
unius viri, accusationem matrimonii ppetuatur sua actio, quantü
que U- ad dotem obtinendam, maxim? cüm pueri sui fuerint
possessione ]egitimi, & obtinuerit! in successione hsereditatis. Et


n eodem modo etjà si matrimoniu no fuerit in vita viri
obtinebit. accusatum, quia si pueri sui hsereditate acquisierint,
ipsa per hoe dotem obtinebit. Ite si càm matrimoniü
accusaverit, & postmodü per sentetia obtinuerit, & à
sentetia per virum fuerit appellatum, & pendente causa
appellationis moriatur vir, extinguitur sua actio quan-

tum ad virum petendum, sed si hzredes hereditate
obtinuerint, & ipsa per hoc dotem obtinebit, ut supra.

Si autem in eausa appellationis sententia tum sit pro
appellante, & ipsa petens à tali sententia appellave-


! * obtinuerint," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 541


has arrived at the proof, one of them, although she may :
be in reality the legitimate wife, may fail in her proof
since the proof may be wanting, although the right may
not be wanting,as if à person: has espoused one of them
in France or in the Holy Land, or elsewhere out of the
kingdom, and afterwards the other in fact in England,
she who is in England will prevail on aecount of the
failure of the other who cannot prove. Likewise if any
person has taken à wife within the kingdom rightfully,
and another in fact, with whom he has stayed,and the
legitimate wife when she was in the kingdom did not
impeach the second marriage by claiming such person for  f.s08.
her husband, it will be prejudged against her for ever if
after the death of her husband she has claimed dower,
and she who was in possession of her husband at the
time of his death shall prevail.


But let it be that she has claimed such & person for 4.
her husband, when the illegitimate wife was in posses- Edad
sion of him. If the woman claiming should die in the claiming.
lifetime of her husband, she who was in possession of of
him shall prevail. But if the man dies before he be re- one man,
recovered by deraignment, her action is perpetuated by he Ra
her impeachment of the marriage as respects the obtain- possession
ing of dower, more especially when her sons are legiti- t. un s
mate and she has prevailed in the succession to the his death,
inheritance. And in the same manner if the marriage Le
has not been impeached in the lifetime of her husband, .
because if her sons have obtained the inheritance, she
will thereby obtain dower. Likewise if when the mar-
riage has been impeached, and she has afterwards pre-
vailed by a sentence, and her husband has appealed from
the sentence, and pending the cause of the appeal the
husband dies, her action is extinguished as regards the
elaim for & husband, but if her heirs have obtained the
inheritance, she also shall thereby obtain dower as above.

But if in the cause of the appeal sentence has been


given for the appellant, and the claimant has appealed


549 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


rit, vel ad primos, & ipse antequam disecussum fuerit
in appellatione mulieris moriatur, cadit actio versus
virum, sed per hzredes dote obtinebit vel non, ut
supra. Si aute à sententia appellationis appellaverit,
nunquà dotem obtinebit, nisi in causa successionis hz-
redes obtinuerint. Si autem p muliere judicatum fue-
rii, nec à viro appellatum, sed cüm illam recipere
recusaverib post sententiam, nolens parere sententise
moriatur, hoc mulieri sufficiat ad dotem obtinendam,
si heredes sui postmodum legitimi censeantur, sed ta-
men petitio dotis semper remanebit in suspenso, donec
constiterit de heredum legitimitate.


Car. XIII.


1. Dicitur etiam in brevi, talis petit versus talem tan-
Tem com- tam terram ut dotem. De hoc quod dicit (petit) ha-
tio ex Bd bet tenens exceptionem, quód petere non potest tali
quod die^ ratione, quis vir suus nihil juris habuit in terra illa,
petit, re- quia terra illa fuit jus alterius, s. primse uxoris suz,


sponderi — sicut hereditas vel maritagiü suum, g quidem si mu-


f. 808 b. " e . . 7 . -

poteit, dier petens dedieere non possit, amittet dotem: si aute
quod replieaverit in conirarium, hoe p inquisitionem decla-
vir Suus


diequo — r9bitur. Item quia dotem suam remisit & quietam
B clamavit, quo pbato cadit actio sua, nisi replicare pos-
icc posted sib quód hoc fuit per virum suum, cui in vita sua&
aliquid ^ contradicere non potuit; vel coacta à quocunque per
Eu vim aut metum, & hoc per inquisitionem terminari pos-
illa per git, Ttem quód villana est et eode modo fiat ut supra,
tare posset, Vel q. docere possit contrarium, & quód maritata fuerit


libero, & libero thoro, & in libero feodo dotata, & hoc


! * vel non, ut supra? down to *nunquam dotem obtinebit," omitted
in MS. Rawl. C. 160.


fL.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. - -— 548


from such sentence to the highest quarter and the man
before a discussion has taken place on the appeal of the
woman dies the action against the man falls to the
ground, but she shall obtain dower through her heirs or
not, as above. But if she has appealed from the sentence '


. of appeal, she shall never obtain dower, unless her heirs


have prevailed in & cause of succession. But if judg-
ment has been given for the woman, and no appeal has
been made by the man, but when he has refused to re-
ceive her after the sentence, he should die being unwill-
ing to obey the sentence,let this suffice for the woman

io obtain dower, if her heirs have afterwards been
accounted legitimate, but nevertheless the petition for
dower shall always remain in suspense, until the legiti-
macy of her heirs has been ascertained.


CHAPTER XIII. 1.


Likewise
It is also said in the writ, such a woman claims against t? iun
guch & person so much land as dower. Upon this which be raised


it says * claims" the tenant has an exception, that she xcu Um |


cannot claim for such a reason, because her husband !had *a woman
no rigbt in that land, because that land was the land of pusd :
pne 08 b.
another person, to wit, his first wife, as her heritage OP uy be
marriage portion, which if the woman cannot gainsay, answered
she will lose her dower: but if she has replied to the Kies
contrary, this shall be declared by an inquest.  Like- null, be-
wise beeause she has surrendered and quit-claimed her $45: her
dower, upon proof of which her action falls to the ground, neither on
unless she should reply that this was done through her rui A
husband, whom she could not eontradiet in his lifetime, espoused
or eonstrained by some one through force or fear, and afterwards
this may be determined by an inquest. Likewise because e
she is & villein, and let it be done in the same way as dis land,
&bove, unless she can prove the contrary, and that she Mei dun
was married to a free husband and in a free bed and was endow her.


Britton, v.
ch. x. $ 8.


544 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


Similiter per inquisitionem terminabitur. Item quód ei


satisfactum fuit, per quod tenuit se contétam, quo pbato
cadat à eausa sua. ltem quia machinata fuit in mor-
iem viri sui, vel quia tale quid fecit ad exhsredatio-
nem heredis versus que petit. ltem quód petere non
potest ppter consuetudine civitatum. Item quód vir
suus amisit per juditium, & tenens recuperavit ut jus
suum, vel ut villenagium suum. ltem quia vir suus
feloniam fecit pro qua suspensus fuit, vel utlagatus.
Item quia terra illa nunquam accidit viro suo in vita
sua ita quód eam dotare non posset. Item quia tenens
aliàás recessit quietus versus eam in eodem placito per
judicium vel alio modo coram tali justitiario: qu:
quidem si dedicere nó possit, cadit à causa nisi repli-
care possit & ad exceptionem respondere Ad hoc
autem q dicit, quód fuit terra primo uxoris sus, re-


plieare poterit uxor quód non uxoris sus, sed pprium


lenementum ex causa successionis vel alia quacunque,
q quidem terminari poterit per inquisitionem. Item


.ad hoc quod dicit quàd satisfactum est ei, tune refert
qualiter, vel per escambium alterius terrs,, vel per ali-


quam summa. pecunie, vel alio modo. . Et si replica-
verit, quód nunquà fuit ei de conventione satisfactum,
adhue dotem amittet, et agat de conventione. ltem
ad hoe quod dicit, quód machinata fuit in mortem viri
sui, ad hoc replicare poterit, quód cüàm aliàs de hoc
accusata fuerit, petens quieta per judicium recessit de
hujusmodi. ltem ad hoc quod dicit q ad exhseredita-
tionem heredis fecit, replicare poterit, quód hoc fecit
&d comodum suü, quod pbari poterit p inquisitionem.


1 * dotare posset." "MS. Reg. 9 Ed. xv.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 545


endowed in & free feud, and this shall be determined
in & similar manner by an inquest. Likewise that
satisfaction has been made to her wherewith she held
herself out to be content, upon proof whereof she must
fail in her cause. Likewise that she had been instru-
mental to the death of her husband, or that she had
done something towards disinheriting the heir against
whom she claims. Likewise that she cannot claim on
account of the custom of cities. Likewise that her hus-
band lost it through a judgment, and the tenant re-
covered it as his right, or as his villenage. Likewise
beeause her husband committed & felony, wherefore he
was hung or outlawed. Likewise because that land
never accrued to her husband during his lifetime, so that
he eould not endow her. Likewise because the tenant
ab another time left the court, acquitted towards her on
the same plea through a judgment or in some other man-
ner before & certain justiciary ; which if she cannot


gainsay, she is cast from her suit, unless she can reply


and make answer to the exception. But upon this that
he says that it was the land of his first wife, the wife
may reply that it was not the land of his first wife, but
his own tenement acquired by succession, or in some
other way, which may be determined by an inquest.
Likewise upon this that he says that satisfaction has
been made to her, then it is of importance in what
manner, either by an exchange of other land, or by
a& sum of money, or in some other way. And if
she should reply that the agreement made with her has
never been satisfied, she shall still lose her dower, and
let the proceedings be upon the agreement. Likewise
upon this that he says that she plotted the death of her
husband, she may reply to this, that when she was at
another time aceused of this, the claimant left the court
acquitted on this-head by à judgment. Likewise upon
this that he says that she did something towards disin-
heriting the heir, she may reply that she did this for his
&dvantage, which may be proved by an inquest. Like-
Q 1802. MM-


| 546


9.
Cum con-
tra muli-
erem pro-
ponatur
exceptio
de con-
suetudine
civitatis
vel burgi,
tunc fiat
breve bal-
livis civi-
tatis.


f. 309.


Consue-
tudo Lon-
don.


DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


Item de hoe quod dicit de consuetudine civitatu, repli-
care poterit q alia est consuetudo quàm ipsa proponit,
scilicet talis vel talis, et ideo de brevi dotis q dirigi
debet ad ballivos civitatis aliquid tangendu est, & q
sit diversa consuetudo civitatum, et breve tale est de
justitiando deforciantem.


Rex vie. Londó, vel majori alicujus civitatis salute,
Preeipimus vobis, quód justicies Á. q juste & sine dila-
tione & secundu consuetudine civitatis. nostree London
(vel Eboru) reddat B. d fuit uxor C. rationabile dote
sud, que eam cotingit de libero teneméto q fuit ip-
sius C. ' quondà viri sui in Lodoü (vel in alia tali
civitate, vel in suburbio Lodot) et unde nihil habet
ut dicit, e&, unde queritur q pdictus A. ei deforciat,
ne amplus inde clamoré audiamus p defectu justitisz.
Et tunc. pceedat loquela in curia civium secundü eorü
cosuetudiné, Et q in dotis petitione teneda sit cosue-
tudo, pbatur anno regis H. ii. corà Martino in baco,
de Isabella de Gravenel dj petiit dote versus Thoma
de Wederhal, que dote petiit de morte Walteri viri
sui: qui respondit: q dote habere non potuit nec de-
buit, quia ips& post morte predieti Walteri (cujus
nomine doté clamat) cepit alium virum, & consuetudo
est in partibus ills q uxores maritorü defunctorü
habeant franecu bancu suum de terris sockmannorü, &
ieneant nomine dolis ad vità suam: sed si post morte
virorum suorü nupserint alicui, consuetudo est in com
illo q dotes amittant quas habuerut nomine primi viri.
Ad q respondit Isabella q nunquà fuit in seysina illo!
non magis tepore primi viri quà secudi, secundi viri


 « illa," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 547


wise upon this that she speaks of the custom of cities, it
may be replied that the custom is different from what
She propounds, to wit such or such, and therefore we
must touch somewhat upon the writ of dower which
ought to be directed to the bailiffs of a city, and because
the custom of cities is diverse, and the writ for bringing
to justice a deforcer is of this wise.


The king to the viscount of London, or to the mayor of  ».
any other city greeting. We enjoin you that you bring Mb
io justice À. that he may justly and without delay, and is pro-
according to the custom of our city of London (or York), Pa
restore to B. who was the wife of C. her reasonable woman.
dower, whieh appertains to her from the free tenement t^^ unE
which belonged to the said C., formerly her husband, in of a city or
London (or in such other eity, or in the suburb of Lon- IPro*gl»
don), and whereof she has nothing as she says, and whereof writ go to
ghe complains that the said A. deforces her, that we may S do Sie
hear no further complaint thereon from failure of justice.

And then let the suit proceed in.the court of the citizens '
aecording to their custom. And that in a petition for
dower the custom is to be maintained, is proved in the
second year of King Henry before Martin in the Bench,
concerning Isabella de Gravenel, who claimed dower
against Thomas de Wederhal, who claimed dower upon
the death of Walter her husband: who answered that  f.509.
She could not have nor ought she to have dower, be-
cause after the death of the aforesaid Walter (in whose
name she claims dower) she took another husband, and
the custom is in those parts that the wives of deceased
husbands have their free-bench of the lands of sock-men,
and hold it in the name of dower for their life, but if
after the death of their husbands they marry any one,
tle custom is in that county that they lose the dowers
which they had in the name of the first husband. To
which Isabella answered that she was never in seysine
of it no more in the time of her first husband than in
that of her second one, nor in the time of her second


, MM


548 E DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


quà primi, & unde petit judiciü si possit amittere
illud q nunqua habuit. Et ad q responsum fuit &


lestatum, q sive in seysing fuerit sive non, si post


Consue-
tudo Lyn-
eoln.


Consue-
tudo Ebor.


3.
Si sum-
monitus
ad respon-
dendum
in placito
dotis ex-


eipiat quod
nihil


teneat, vel
ad ter-
minum vel
in vil-
lenagio,
vocetur
warrantus.


morte viri sui alium capiat, q amittere debet dotem,
si in seysina fuerit: si aute extra seysinam, debet
amittere clameum. Et fiat inquisitio in com,si talis
sit cosuetudo vel non. Est enim talis cosuetudo in
civitate Lynceolü: q si vir vendiderit hsreditateé suà p
necessitate sua, uxor dotem inde habere non debet, ut
de ultimo itinere M. de P. in cof Lyne. Si aute
invadiaverit vel ad terminum posuerit, dote habebit,
& de omnibus terris & alis unde vir suus seysitus


obiit ut de feodo. Et ita evenit inter Basilia qus


fuit uxor Henrici filii Wareni petentis, & Basilià uxore
Michaelis de Muütpellers. Et ad hoc facit q habetis
eode itinere, de Roberto de Arundel & Katharina
uxore ejus, & magistrum  Robertü de Craveleghe.
Item est consuetudo Lyncolnise, quód nulla mulier post
morte viri sui infra civitatem Lincolü dote petere po-
terit, nisi tantummodo de tenemetis de quibus vir
seysitus fuerit ut de feodo die quo obiit. It& cons.
est in com Eboru, quód mulier infra annum à die mor-
lis viri sui petere debet doté suam, alioquin post
modu non audiretur, u&. de quada Helena qu:e fuit
uxor Wilhelmi de Hástone & Hugonis de Seleby.


Contüinetur etiam in brevi: talis mulier petit versus
talé. Ad q respondere poterit ille qui vocatus est in
judiciü, quód inde nihil tenet nec unquam aliquid
inde tenuit, & poterit veritas per patriam declarari.
Item cognoscere poterit quod tenet, sed non nomine
pprio sed alieno, ita quód nihil de terra illa lucrari
potest nec perdere: quia non tenet aliam nisi ad ter-


id


— —


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER, 549


husband any more than in the time of her first husband,
and thereon she asks for a judgment if she can lose that
which she never had. 'To which it was answered and
attested that whether she may have been in seysine or
not, ifafter the death of her first husband, she takes
another, that she ought to lose her dower, if she has
been in seysine of it; and if she has been out of seysine,
she ought to lose her claim. And let there be an in-
quest in the county, if such & custom exists or not. For
there is à custom of this kind in the city of Lincoln,
that if à husband sells his inheritance from his necessity,
his wife ought not to have dower thereof, as in the last
iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county of Lincoln.
But if he shall have pledged it or leased it for & tertn,
she shall have dower both of all his lands and other
things whereof her husband died seysed as in fee. And
so it happened between Basilia who was the wife of
Henry FitzWarren the plaintiff, and Basilia the wife of
Michael de Montpelier. And on this bears what you
find in the same iter concerning Robert de Arundel and
Catharine his wife, and Master Robert de Craveleghe.
Likewise there is à custom at Lincoln, that no wife after
the death of her husband can claim dower within the
city of Lincoln, except only of the tenements of which
her husband was seysed as in fee on the day of his
death. Likewise it is the custom in the county of York,
that à woman ought to claim her dower within one year
after her husband's death, otherwise after that time she
shall not be heard, as concerning a certain Helena who
was the wife of William de Hastone, and Hugh de Seleby.


For itis contained in the writ, such à woman claims If the per-


against sueh a person. To which he who is summoned EST
to judgment may answer, that he holds nothing thereof, answerin
nor ever held anything thereof, and the truth may be p T


declared by the country. Likewise he may acknowledge ade that
that he holds, but not in his own name, but in another's Bothiag or


name, so that he cannot either gain or lose anything of d pin x
that land, because he does not hold it other than for a villenage,


550 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


Britton, v. minu annoru, vel nisi E voluntatem talis, vel in ville-

c x.$13. 5010, quo casu cadit breve, & impetretur Super eos,
quorum nomine fuerit in possessione. $i aute tenuerit
ad vitam vel p lege Anglie, vel donec pvisum fuerit,
vel hujusmodi, quód liberum habeat tenemetum, non
cadit breve, sed vocare debet warantü sicut in aliis
casibus ui supra.


4 Item si petat versus talem tantam terram cum per-
prn tinentiis, sicut medietatem tante terre, vel tertiam
mulierem, partem, ut si medietatem, excipere poterit tenens quód
rio MF aliter dotata fuerit ad ostium eeclesiz, scilicet de ter-
2e en lia parte, quia tenementum de quo dotem petit est
etquod  ieodum militare. Ad quod poterit mulier asserere con-
rien trarium si voluerit, ut fiat inquisitio de modo consti-

" .utionis. ltem si petat tertiam partem, excipi poterit
q de minori pte dotata fuit, & tenuit se inde contenta,


& hoc simili declarandu est per inquisitione & p pa-


tria. Ite in tali villa, tuc fiat ut supra, si erratu fuerit -


in noibus villarum.


5. Item, & unde vir suus eam dotavit de quo eam

£309 b. desponsavit, & qui illà inde dotare potuit. Ad quod

Dur excipere poterit tenens contra mulierem, q talis quon-

min nn. dam vir suus nunquàm fuit inde seysitus aliquo modo.

ide eoi Item q nunquam fuit it& seysitus q eam dotare posset,

tus, quod quia non nisi ad voluntate talis, vel ut de vadio, vel
inde eam

posset in custodia, vel ad terminum annorum, & sic nomine

dotare. ds Item si nomine pprio, non nisi ad terminum

vitee quaeunq, ratione, ut de libero tenemento, & non

in feodo. ltem si in feodo, non tams$ ita in feodo q

eam dotare posset, quia de jure alieno, & ita qg vir

suus terram illa versus eum amisit per judicium. Item


non nisi p disseysinam vel intrusionem, & unde vir


lE EET M


P E
———— — ——— —


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 551


term of years, or at the will of à given person, or inleta war-
villenage, in which case the writ abates, and let it be eril A
sued out against those in whose name he has been in
possession. But if he has held it for life, or by the law -


of England, or until it has been provided, or such like,


" that he should have & free tenement, the writ does not


abate, but he ought to call à warrantor as in other
cases as Stated above.


Likewise if she claims so much land with its ap- 4.
purtances, as & moiety of so much land, or a third part, obo
as if à moiety, the tenant may except that she was a woman,
otherwise endowed at the door of the church, to wit,/fShe —
with a third part, because the tenement from, which she moiety of
claims dower is & military fief. To which the woman, if "pee
she pleases, may assert the contrary, so that an inquest thst 2e
should be held concerning the mode of appointment. Sim s
Likewise if she claims & third part, it may be excepted third.
that she was endowed with & smaller portion, and she
kept herself content therewith, and this is to be declared
in like manner by an inquest and by the country.
Likewise in such a vill, then let i& be done as above


said, if there has been an error in the names of the vills.


Likewise, and wherewith her husband endowed her at 5s.
the time when he espoused her,and who was able to endow f. 309 b.
her therewith. To which the tenant may except against An excep-
the woman, that so-and-so her husband was never seysed p uem
of ib in any manner. Likewise that he was never so band was
seysed of it, that he could endow her, because he held it £P 1 -
only at the will of so-and-so, or as a pledge, or in thereof,
guardianship, or for a term of years, and so in another's y, d |
name, Likewise if in his own name, only for & term of endow her

. . therewith.
years in some manner or other, as in freehold, but not
as in fee. Likewise if in fee, not however so in fee that
he could endow her, because in another's right, and so
that her husband lost that land to another by & judg-
ment. Likewise [that he held it] only by disseysine or
by intrusion, and there are infinite cases of this kind,


6.
Breve ad
hoc, quod
inde nun-
quam fuit
seysitus
quod, &c.


m


l5
Exceptio,


552 |. DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


suus terrà illam &misit per intrusione vel per assisam,
& infiniti sunt casus de hujusmodi, de quibus similiter
petens dieat cotrarium, si uterq, se inde posuerit super
patriam, fiat inquisitio per'hóc breve.


Rex vicecomiti salute. Preecipimus tibi, quód venire
facias coram te, & coram custodibus plaeitorum coronse
nostre in pleno cofi tuo xii. tam liberos quàm legales
homines de visneto tali, per quos rei veritas melius
sciri poterit, & p eorum sacramentum diligenter in-
quiras, si B. quonda vir Á. die quo eandem A. despon-
savit, vel unqua postea, fuit seisitus in dominico suo
ut de feodo de tàto terre cum ptinentiis in tali villa,
ita q predictam A. inde dotare posset vel non, quia
tam pdicta A. quàm C. de N. versus quà predicta A.
petit tertià ptem in dote, posuerunt se inde in jura-
tam illam, & inquisitione quam inde feceris &e. ut
supra. Et observetur ordo inquisitionum ut supra,
secundü quod fieri debeat, vel coram justic. vel in coii,
& multe possunt esse cause quare illam inde dotare
non potuit, ut si forte nunquam fuit in seysina inde,
vel forte fuit in seysina, sed illam dedit alicui antequa
uxorem suam desponsasset, vel forte non tenuit illam
nisi ad vitam suam tantum, vel ad terminum sicut
rem alienam, vel in custodia cum aliquo qui fuerit
infra setate, vel sicut maritagium vel hereditatem prime
uxoris su;, vel in villenagio sicut villanus, in quibus
casibus nullus uxoré suam dotare poterit in tali sey-


sin& constitutus, unde generalis potest fieri costitutio -


secundum formàá praedictam, qus se habet ad omnes
istas species, si quis in narratione sua ad aliquam
istarum specierum descedat.


Sed si quis in narratione sua ad aliqua istarü spe-


sitenuitin cieru descédat, ut si dieat & exprimat causam suam


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 553


. eoneerning which in like. manner the claimant may
assert the contrary ; if each of them has thereupon put
himself upon the country, let an inquest be held through
this writ.


The king to the viscount greeting. "We enjoin thee, , |. $:
that thou cause to come before thee and before the that he
keepers of the pleas of our erown in thy full county missi
court twelve free and loyal men of such a neighbour- thereof, &c.
hood, through whom the truth of the matter can be
better known, and through their oaths inquire diligently,
if B. formerly the husband of A. on the day on which
he espoused the said ÁÀ. or at any time afterwards was
seysed in his demesne as of fee of so much land with its
appurtenances in such a vill, so that he could endow the
aforesald AÀ. therefrom, or not, because the aforesaid A.
as well as C. de N. against whom the aforesaid A. claims
the third part in dower, have put themselves on that
jury and inquest, which thou will have made thereuopn
&c. as above. And let the order of the inquests be ob-
served as above, aecording to what ought to be done,
either before the justiciaries, or in the county court, and
| there may be many causes wherefore he could not endow

her therefrom, as for instance if he was never in seysine
thereof, or by chance he was in seysine but he gave
it to some one before he espoused his wife, or perhaps
he did not hold it except for his life only, or for a term,
as another person's property, or in guardianship con-
jointly with one who was under age, oras the maritage or
inheritance of his first wife, or in villenage as a villein,
in which eases no one can endow his wife whilst estab-
lished in such seysine, whence a general statute may be
made according to the aforesaid form, which applies to
all those species, if any one in his declaration rests
himself upon any one of those species.


If any one in his declaration rests himself uponany X 7.


one of these species, as if he says and expresses his cause udi
?


554 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


villenagio, quare tale uxorem suam dotare non potuit, ut. si te-

Meus nuit in villenagio, vel ut maritagiü, vel de hereditate

alterius — primee uxoris suz, vel in custodia, vel alio modo (se-

uxoris, vel zi " : TNT

nisad Cundu q predictum est) tune in forma inquisitionis

terminum fiat mentio de specialitate hoc modo, scilicet : ad
annorum, - - : ar S t

velad vi- recognoscendu sup sacramentu suum si B. quondà vir

ES j;, À- eodé die quo eamd& A, desponsavit, vel unquá pos-

tea, fuit seysitus in dominico suo ut de feodo de

tanto terre cü ptinentiis in tali villa, ità quód eam

inde dotare potuit, vel si pdictus B. antequa eadem A.

.desponsasset dedit terra illa C. de N. & chartà suam

ei inde fecit vel sic: si B. quonda vir AÀ. die quo

. eande À. desponsavit tenuit it& liberé & in feodo ian-

tam terram &e. ita quód eandem A. inde dotare posset

sicut ipsa dicit, vel si terram illam tenuit in villena-

gio et ut villanus, sicut C. versus quem predicta A.

f.310. clamat tertià ptem in dote, dicit: vel aliter: utrü illa

| va j;, tenuit ut jus suum & in feodo &e. vel si illa tenuit in
eustodia, vel ut jus prims uxoris suz, vel ad termi- :
num annorum, vel ad terminü vit; suse tantum: quia -

tam predictus B. quàm prsedieta À. posuerunt se inde

in jurata illa, & interim terram illam videát, & unde

ita interim se certificent, q preefatos justiciarios nostros

&c. ad pfatum diem plenius inde certificare possint

(si milites juratores venire debet corà rege). Si aute

fieri debeant coram vic. & coronatoribus, fune sie. Et

inquisitione quà inde feceris scire facias justiciariis

nostris tali die p literas vestras sigillatas sigillo tuo

et sigillis pdictorü juratorü, et p duos ex illis p quorü

sacrametum inquisitione illà feceris. Et infiniti sunt

casus, qui redigi possunt in inquisitione ista.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 555


wbherefore he cannot endow his wife, as if he held his neld it in
land in villenage, or as à maritage, or as the inheritance MES
of his first wife, or in guardianship or in any other theright .
manner (according to what has been said above), then boe
in the form of the inquest le& mention be made of the held only
specialty in this manner, to wit, to recognise upon their E
oath if B. formerly the husband of À., on the same day for life, or
on which he espoused her, or at any time afterwards, ad
was seysed in his demesne as of fee of so much land

with its appurtenances in such a vill, so that he could

endow her therefrom, or if the aforesaid B. before he
espoused the said A. gave that land to C.de N. and

gave him a charter thereof; or thus: if B. formerly the
husband of À. on the day on which he espoused the said

A. held 80 freely and in fee so much land &c. so that he

could endow the said A. therefrom, as she herself says,

or if he held that land in villenage and as & villein, as

C. against whom the aforesaid Á. claims the third part

in dower, says: or otherwise whether he held that land f 310.
as his right and in fee &c., or if he held it in guardian-
Ship, or as the right of his first wife, or for & term of

years, or for the term of his life only : because the afore-

said B. as well as the aforesaid À. have put themselves

on & jury thereon, and meanwhile let them view that

land, and whereupon let them meanwhile so certify
themselves, that they may be able more fully to certify

our aforesaid justiciaries &c. on the day aforesaid (if the
knights who are the jurors, ought to come before the

king) But if they ought to come before the viscount

or the coroners, then thus: and the inquest which thou

hast made thereon do thou make known to our justi-

ciaries on such & day by your letters sealed with thy

seal and with the seal of the aforesaid jurors and by two

of those, by whose oath thou hast made the inquest.

And the cases are infinite, which may be brought under

that inquest.


35060 — DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


8. Item contra uxorem petente excipere poterit, q si
ad side in seysina fuit ut de feodo, tame terrà illam dederit
noscere,  &ntequa eam desponsaret, itià q die quo vir suus eam
iin fad; desponsavit, non fuit in seysina, nec unqu& postea, ita
iyi x q eam inde dotare posset, quia alius illam tenuit in
quam illam feodo, vel ad vita quacung, ratione, & nunqua delibe-
despon- — rata fuit in vita viri. Ad q respondere poterit mulier
saret, illam
dederat ita, Teplieando, quia licet nunqua seisinam habuerit vir
ses suus postquam eam desposavit, tamen dotata fuit sub

tali conditione q terra illa assignaretur ei in dote cüm
esset deliberata, & super hoc pcedendu est ad inquisi-


tionem.


Item excipere poterit contra muliere, quód si vir
Ad hoo suus inde seysinam habuerit ut de feodo, tamé non
responsio
etrepliea- it& inde ut de feodo, q eam dotare posset, quia terra
Hor illa fuit jus alienum, & illam amisit per judiciu. Ad
d XT »' hoc. auté poterit respondere mulier,g seysitus fuit ut
de feodo, ita quod eam dotare potuit, & si illam ami-
sit p judicium, hoc fuit per fraude, q esse poterit: ut
si uxor ad ostium ecclesise dotate fuerit nominatim,
& vir postmodü doté nominata alienaverit aliquo titulo
alienationis, e&' postmodum  seysinam sibi resumpserit
quocunq, modo, & implacitatus fuerit ratione prime
alienationis, & sie per judicium amiserit: licet post-
modiü mulieri dote petenti opponatur quód vir suus p
judicium. amisit, hoc non nocebit, quia ante alienatione
dotata fuit & incepit jus habere, q quidé per factü
viri sui mutari nó debuit. Et q mulier amittit dotem
ubi vir p judicium amiserit, & de eo costiterit, inve-
niri poterit in itinere M. de P. in com Lync. anno
regis H. x., de Alicia qus fuit uxor Ric. fihi Divo.


! * et quod mulier ? down to ** Dive ? omitted in MS. Reg. 9 E. xv.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. - |. 557


Likewise he may except against à wife claiming, that ^ s.
if he has: been in seysine as of fee, nevertheless he gave rn
away the land before he espoused her, so that on the | day kuowledgo
on which her husband espoused her, he was not in seysine, m
nor at any time afterwards, so that he could endow her, as of fee,
because another person held that land in fee, or for his ba i
life in whatever manner, and it was never delivered poused
in the life of the husband. To which the woman may ud it
answer by replying, that although her husband never &e.
had seysine after he espoused her, nevertheless she was
endowed under this condition, that the land should be
assigned to her for dower whenever it should be delivered,


and upon this proceedings must be had for an inquest.


Likewise he may except against the woman, that if ^ 9.
her husband had seysine thereof as of fee, nevertheless rouen
not so of fee as to be able to endow her, because tha to this.
land was another's right, and he lost it by a judgment.

But to this the woman may reply, that he was so seysed
as of fee that he could endow her, and that if he lost the
land by a judgment it was lost through a fraud, which
may be the case: asif & wife has been endowed at the
door of the church specifically, ànd the husband after-
wards has alienated the specific dower by some title of
alienation, and. afterwards has resumed seysine for him-
self in some manner or other, and he has been impleaded
on the ground of the first alienation, and so has lost it
by a judgment, although afterwards it be objected to the
woman claiming dower that her husband has lost it by &
judgment: this shall not prejudice her, because she was
endowed before the alienation, and began to have her right,
which ought not to be changed by the act of her husband.
And that the woman loses her dower when the man has
lost by à judgment, and this has been established, may be
found in the iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county of -
Lincoln in the tenth year of king Henry, concerning
Alicia who was the wife of Richard the son of Diva.


558 — DE ACTIONE DOTIS,


Replicatio Item replicare poterit mulier q, si p judicium recu-
uxoris si peravit, hoe fuit per dolü, vel per negligentia viri: ut
eius Si.vir scienter! & in odiü uxoris suc defalt& faceret
virisey- et ita amitteret, vel alio quocunq, modo, hoe mulieri
tert,ut ^ DOD nocebit, si ita esse pbatü fuerit. Et de hac ma-
uxorem — teria habetis de termino S. M. anno regis H. iii. inci-


defraudaret pionto iy in cof Surrey, de Margeria de Bellanallie :


de dote
habenda quia dolus vel negligentia viri non pjudieat mulieri.
bum, 9'- Et si talis petens versus virü reeuperasset, tame non


fuit discussum de jure, utrü vir suus jus haberet vel
non, non magis quà si petenti restitueret p concordia.
Item replicare poterit mulier contra tenenté q non p
judicium sed p concordia, quo casu distingueédü erit,
quia concordia in foro seculari idem est q transactio.
Et est transactio de re dubia & lite incerta, aliquo
f 310b. dato vel pmisso vel retéto, à lite transactio. Et unde
cüm vir mulieris petentis p amicabilé compositione -
recognoverit rem petità esse petentis, refert uirum res
petita sib propria vel aliena, vz. jus alienum vel jus
pprium, vel dubium utrum pprium vel alienum: sed
Si constare possit, quód res propria & jus pprium, &
forte in fraudé vel odium mulieris, ut prsedietü esi,
vel ppter lucrü habedü, recognoverit esse jus alienum,
hoe non obstante mülier dote recuperabit, ad quem-
cung, res pelita vel recognita pervenerit. Sed refert
utrü hoc fiat ante desponsationé vel post, Si auté res
fuerit aliena & jus alienü, licet antecessor suus seysi-
tus ut de feodo obierit, quia p disseysingm vel intru-


l*wt sj vir scienter amittat ut | ** benda post mortem, MS. Rawl.
* uxorem defraudaret de dote ha- | C.160.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 559


Likewise the woman may reply that,[if another person] 10.
has recovered by a judgment, this has happened through TOP
the fraud or negligence of her husband, as if the husband vif, if the
knowingly and in hatred of his wife has made default pios?
and so has lost it, or in some other manner, this shall been
not hurt the woman, if i& has been proved to beso. And eyed.
on this subject you have a case in Michaelmas term in his soysine
the third and fourth years of king Henry in the county 2roveh
of Surrey concerning Margery de Billenallie, because the negligence,
fraud or negligence of the husband does not prejudice Miche
his wife. And if such & claimant has recovered against iine ie
her husband, nevertheless. there was no dispute about cujos
the right, whether the husband had the right or not, no edis
more than if he restored it to her by an accord.  Like- den.
wise the woman may reply against the tenant that it
was not by a judgment, but by an accord, in which case
a distinction has to be made, because an accord ina
secular court is the same as a compromise. And a com-
promise is about a doubtful matter and an uncertain |
suit, something having been given or promised or re- $ 310y.
tained, a comproiise of the suit, And hence when the


husband of the female plaintiff has by an. amieable com-


position recognised that the thing claimed is the claim-


ant's, it is of importance whether the thing claimed
was his own or another person's, to wit, another person's
right, or his own right, or doubtful whether his own or
another's: butifit can be established, that the thing was
his own and the right was his own and that by chance
in fraud or in spite of the woman, as has been said above,
or for gain's sake, he has recognised the right to be
another's, notwithstanding this the woman shall recover
her dower, into whosesoever hands the thing claimed
or recognised has passed. But it is of importance
whether this has happened before the espousals or after
them. But if the thing was another person's, and the
right another person's, although his ancestor died seysed of
it as of fee, because he had entered upon it by disseysine


560 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


sionem ingressum habuit, tamen non fuit ita seysitus
in feodo, quód uxore dotare posset, & uxor contra
pprietarium ageret, dotem non recuperaret! quia alius
majus jus habuit quàm vir suus. Et quia si ad judi-
cii pcederetur, certü esse posset q petens per judiciu
recuperaret, si judiciu pcederet. Et hoc verü est de
pprietario: secus auté si alteri recognitu esset qui jus -
in recognita non haberet. Sed si vir p concordià ali-
quid retinuerit de concordia, & jure alieno, sive vir
ilud retinuerit vel alienaverit sive non, mulier inde
dote habebit, ad quéeunqg res retenta postmodü per-
venerit, ut videri poterit inter duos fratres, quorum
pater moritur seisitus de tota hereditate, & postnatus
se ponat in totà hsreditate, & postea concordati fue-
rint quód frater postnatus tenens recognoscat totà
hereditate esse jus fratris antenati petetis, & ipse post-
modum scilicet frater antenatus recognoscat & conce-
dat postnato medietatem unam illius terre, tenenda
de eo vel alio: si postnatus postmodum moriatur,
uxor dote habebit de illa medietate quz viro suo re-
cognita fuerit & concessa, et de alia medietate nihil,
quia vir suus nunquam terrà illam habuerit ita in
feodo quód uxore dotare posset, quia seisina sua fuit
de jure alieno. Sed quid si frater suus antenatus
premoriatur superstite postnato? uxor sua non recu-
perabit dotem, nisi de medietate illa quà vir suus re-
linuit, quia quamvis de jure totius hereditatis facta
essel recognitio, tamen de medietate rei petito» vir
suus nunquàm fuit in seysina, nisi tantü de servitio.
Et si à mulieribus petentibus (sicut predietu est) pe-
tatur q ostendat warrantu de dote sus, alium osten-


! « uxor contra proprietarium dotem recuperaret.? MS. Reg. 9 E. xv.


2L ———— — t


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 561


or intrusion, he was nevertheless not so seysed of it
as of fee, that he could endow a wife, and that the
wife eould sue the proprietor, and recover her dower,
beeause another person had more right in it than her .
husband. And because, if proceedings were taken for a
Judgment, it might be certain that the claimant would
recover by & judgment, if the judgment should proceed.
And this is true concerning the proprietor, but it would be
otherwise, if it had been recognised as his, who had no
right in the thing recognised. Butif à husband through
an accord has retained something of an accord and of
another's right, if the husband has retained this or alie-
nated it or not, the wife shall have dower thereof, to
whomsoever the thing retained has afterwards passed ;
as may be seen between two brothers, the father of whom
has died seysed of the whole inheritance, and the younger
brother has put himself into possession of the whole in-
heritance, and afterwards they have made an accord that
the after-born brother the tenant shall recognise the entire
inheritance to be that of his elder-born brother the
claimant, and he himself afterwards, to wit, the elder-
born brother, recognises and grants to the younger-born
one moiety of that land, to be held from him or from
another; if the younger-born dies afterwards, his wife
shall have dower. of that moiety which was recognised
and granted to her hushand, and of the other moiety
nothing, because her husband never had that land so in
fee that he could endow his wife, for his seysine was
founded on another's right. But what if the elder-born
brother predeceases leaving the younger-born brother
surviving him, his wife shall not recover her dower
except out of that moiety which her husband retained,
because although of right there has been a recognition of
the entire inheritance, nevertheless of a moiety of the
realty elaimed her husband never was in seysine ex-
cepting only of the service. And if it be claimed by
female plaintiffs (as aforesaid) that she should produce &
warrantor of her dower, they cannot produce any other
Q 1302. NN


f. 311.


11.
Si vir
alienaverit
terram
suam
antequam
despon-
saret.


569 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


dere non possunt nisi herede defuncti, qui eis waran-
tizare tenetur dotes suas. Si aute postnatus, cüm
implacitatus esset de toto, recognosceret medietatem
esse jus petentis & remitteret: uxor sua dote non
recuperabit, quia recognitio illa ex dolo, vel odio, vel
cupiditate non pcessit, sed quasi de jure alieno. Et
iste casus similis esse poterit casui inter Wilhel. de
Breuse filio Joh. de Breuse fratris antenati, & Regi-
naldü de Breuse fratrem postnatu, versus quem Wal-
debusa quse fuit uxor Wilhelmi dote petiit de medie-
tate, quze remansit predicto Reginaldo fratri postnato
p concordia facta inter ipsum & Wilhelmü nepoté
suum. ltem quod dicitur de re dubia, verum est quód
dotem suam recuperabit in hoe dubio ppter incertitu-
dine, quia cüm dubium sit, poterit vir recognoscere &
remittere adeo bene jus suum pprium sicut alienum,
quod non est in casu supradieto, quia ibi remitütur
& recognoscitur certu, & hsec est causa quare mulier
doté petere poterit de re recognita p concordiam, quia
vir suus adeo bene remittere poterit jus pprium sicut
alienum, sed q ibi dicitur intelligendum est non de re
certa sed incerta.


Concedere etiam poterit tenens q talis vir suus sey-
situs fuit ut de feodo & jure & in dominico, et ita q
eam dotare posset, sed rem illam de qua dos petitur
alienavit vir suus antequa eam desponsavit, ita q die
desponsationis sua no fuit vir seysitus quód eam inde
dotare posset, eo quód illa priüs dederat alicui in feodo
sibi & hseredibus suis, vel alieui ad vitam quaeunq,
ratione, vel in feodo, sicut in liberum maritagiu sub
conditione tacita vel expressa, q res data revertatur p
defectu hsredum, vel sub alia conditione tacita vel


oa C EIEENP imp. GRE ox
Es


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 563


than the heir of the deceased, who is bound to war-
rant to them their dowers. But if the after-born son,
when he has been impleaded concerning the whole,
has acknowledged that the molety is the right of the
claimant and releases it, his wife shall not recover her
dower, because that acknowledgment has not proceeded
from fraud or spite or covetousness, but is as it wore
concerning another's right. And this case may be as-
similated to a case between William de Breuse the son
of John de Breuse the elder-born brother and Reginald
de Breuse the younger brother, against who Waldebusa,
who was the wife of William, claimed: dower in respect
of the moiety which remained to the aforesaid Reginald
the younger-born brother by an aecord made between
him and William his grandson.. Likewise what is said
concerning a doubtful matter, it is true that she shall re-
cover her dower in this doubtful case on account of the
uncertainty, because since it is doubtful, the husband may


recognise and release his own right as well as another's,


which is not in the case aforesaid, because there something
certain is recognised and released, and this is the cause
wherefore a woman may claim her dower of a thing re-
cognised by an aecord, beeause her husband may as well
release his own right as the right of another, but what is
there said is to be understood not concerning a certain
thing but concefning an uncertain thing.


The tenant may also concede that the So-and-so her


f.


1


husband was Seysed as of fee and of right in demesne Ifth


and in such a manner that he might endow her, but her alienated
husband alienated that realty, from which dower is E


81 I


l.
e hus-
has


land
fore he


claimed, before he espoused her, and so that on the day esponsed
of her espousals her husband was not so seysed of it that 25 "ife


he could endow her therefrom, inasmuch as he had pre-
viously given it to some one in fee for himself and his
heirs, or o some one for life in some way or other, or in
fee, as for a free maritage under a tacit or eXpress con-
dition,that the thing given should revert on failure of heirs,
or under some other tacit or express condition, which if
NN2


Britton,
ch. x. $2.


12.
Exceptio
contra
mulierem,
quod vir
suus felo-
niam fece-
rit.


Britton,


564 DE ACTIONE DOTIS


». expressa, qua existente remaneret, & ea deficiente res


data reverteretur. Item quód res data de qua dotem
petit priüs assignata fuit alteri mulieri que adhue
vivit, & si mortua fuerit, non fuit in vita viri mulie-
ris petentis deliberata, secüdü q inveniri poterit in iti-
nere W. de Ralegh in coíi Leyc. circa fine, et expres-
siüs in itinere abbatis de Radinge & M. de P. in coi
Hertford, anno regni regis Henrici v. incipiente vi. de
Ascelma Pickednese. ltem q tempore viri sui non
evenit conditio, licet postmodu evenerit. Ad g mulier
replicare poterit, q licet conditio non evenerit tempore
viri sui, nec:dos deliberata fuerit suo tempore, tamen
ipsa fuit dotata sub tali conditione, q res talis ei as-
signata esset pro dote su& quandoecunq, existeret codi-
tio, vel quadocü j, dos esset, deliberata, et si dicat tenens
contrarium, de veritate inquirenda pcedatur ad inqui-
sitionem. Sed hoc intelligendum est! g mulier dotem
de terra qua tenet in gavelkynde, & hsres hrzreditatis
sed de feodo militari, ut de termino S. Michaelis annó
regni regis Henrici septimo incipiente viii, de quoda
Thoma de Nassendene.


Poterit otiam tenens concedere q vir mulieris seysi-
tus fuit ut de feodo & jure et in dominico, et ita q
eam dotare potuit, et dotavit eam ad ostium ecclesie, -
sed postea feloniam fecit, de qua convictus fuit & sus-
pensus vel utlagatus, vel q regnum abjuravit, et licet
dos rite costituta fuit ad ostiü ecclesie, tame peti no


pipi d a. poterit superveniente felonia covieta, et licet justa


videatur ab initio, tame eliditur petitio ppter excep-
tioné felonie. Et licet dos ante felonia ppetrata rite
fuerit costituta, tamen ppter feloniam peti non poterit,


! ^ Sed hoc intelligendum " down to ** Thoma de Nassendene," omitted,
MS. Rawl. C. 160, and Reg. 9 E. xv.


Me AE a ula IS I NIAI


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 565


i6 continued it would remain with him, and if it failed
the thing given should revert. ' Likewise that the thing
given from which she claims dower was previously as-
signed to another woman, who is still alive, and if she
were dead, i6 was not delivered in the lifetime of the
husband of the claimant, according to what may be found
in the iter of the abbot of Reading in the county of
Leicester near the end of it, and more expressly in the
iter of the abbot of Reading and Martin de Pateshull in
the county of Hertford in the fifth and sixth years of
the reign of king Henry concerning Ascelma Pickednese.
Likewise that in the time of her husband the condition
did not happen, alihough it afterwards happened. To
which the woman may reply, that although the condition
did not happen in the time of her husband, nor was the
dower delivered in his time, yet she herself was endowed
under this condition, that the said realty would be as-
signed to her for dower whenever that condition should
have happened, or whenever the dower should have been
delivered, and if the tenant says the contrary, let an
inquest be proceeded with to inquire into the truth. But
this is to be understood that the woman claims dower
of land which she holds in gavelkind and the heir
claims the inheritance as a military fief, as in St.
Michael's term in the seventh and eighth years of king
Henry, eoncerning a certain Thomas de Nassendene.


The tenant may also concede that the husband of the — ,,
woman was seysed as of fee and right and in demesne and An excep-
so that he could endow her, and that he endowed her at jede
the door of the church, but afterwards he committed a sce
: felony, for which he was convicted and hung or outla wed, pum com-
or that he abjured the realm, and although the dower was mittel a

* * eiony.
appointed at the door of the church, nevertheless it
cannot be claimed since a felony supervened, and although
it seems just from the commencement, nevertheless the
petition is parried on account of the exception of felony.

And although the dower was appointed before the per-


petration of the felony, nevertheless it cannot be claimed


. 566 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


13. -
Responsio
mulieris.

f. 311 b.


ppter exceptionem felonie: non magis quà seysina ali-
eujus terree date post mortem donatoris, de qua nullà
seysinam haberet in vita donatoris, quüvis alia omnia
eoneurrerent 4 faciunt donatione, scilicet recognitio
donationis facta cum solennitate in comitatibus, hüdre-
dis & curiis cum charta et homagio, et omnibus aliis,
quia seysing in vita donatoris habita totu operatur.
Et eodem modo licet donatio facta sit à felone ante
feloniam sine seysina, non valebit donatio licet post-
modu post feloniam seysinam habuerit: dum tame fe-
lia aliquo modo covincatur, secüs si ante feloniam
omnia rite acta fuerint, non revocantur, nec post felo-
nià, ubi felonia non fuerit convicta: ut supra de
donationibus de hac materia.


Et ita licet dos ante felonià rite fuerit constituta,
tamen post feloniam peti non potest à muliere quód
Sibi ei assignata, non magis quam seysina data (ut
Supra) nisi in easu speciali sicut, in Kancia, ut supra
dictum est pleniüs inter placita corone, ad q poterit
mulier replicare, vel quód vir suus nullam feloniam fe-
cerit, vel si fecit, non fuit rité et secundum legem terree
utlagatus, & postea hoec probato, fuit per regem ad
omnia restitutus, quia quasi utlagaria nulla, & sic fuit
hereditas sua sibi restituta. Item quód per volunta-
tem regis et non debito modo fuit utlagatus. ltem
vel quód nunquam fuit utlagatus vel convictus, per
quod hzreditas sua posset esse eschaeta dominorum.
Item si convietus, tamen post convietionem de licentia
regis se contulit religioni: sed ista replicatio non suf-
ficit, cüm perfectum sit judicium lieet non executum,
quia de gratia regis est quód hujusmodi convicti ha-


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 507


on account of the felony, on account of the exception
of felony, no more than the seysine of a certain land
given after the death of the donor, concerning which he
had no seysine in the lifetime of the donor, although all
other things coneur which constitute a donation, to wit,
the recognition of the donation made with solemnity in
the counties and the hundreds and the courts with a
charter and homage and all other matters, because seysine
had in the lifetime of the donor operates the whole. And.
1n the same way although a donation has been made by
a felon before his felony without seysine, the donation
will not avail, although he has afterwards had seysine
after the felony, provided however that the felony has
been in some way matter of conviction, otherwise if
before the felony all things have been duly performed,
they are not revoked, nor after a felony, where the felony -
has not been matter of convietion, as above concerning
donations on this matter.


13.

And so although the dower has been duly appointed Thesnswer
before the felony, nevertheless it cannot be claimed by dien
the woman after the felony, that it should be assigned to f. 311 b.
her, no more than that seysine should be given to her (as
above), except in à special case as in Kent, as has been
said above more fully amongst the pleas of the crown, to
which the woman may reply, that her husband has not.
committed any felony, or if he has, he was not outlawed
duly and according to the law of the land, and afterwards
upon this having been proved, he was restored to every-
thing by the king, because his outlawry was as it were
null, and so his inheritance was restored to him.  Like-
wise that he was outlawed by the will of the king and
notindue manner. Likewise that he never was outlawed
or convicted, whereby his inheritance could be an escheat
of the lords. Likewise if he was convicted, yet after his
eonvietion with the license of the king he has betaken
himself to religion, but that reply does not suffice, when
the judgment has been complete although not executed,
because it is from the grace of the king that convicts of


v2


14.
Si filius
alicujus
et heres
ante dotis
assigna-
tionem


' feloniam


fecerit.


15.
Contra
mulierem,
unde nihil
habet.


568 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


bere possunt vitam, ita tamen quod se conferant reli-
gioni, vel abjurent regnum, quia in regno remanere
non possunt post convictionem, sieut contigit de Jo-
hanne de Herlezim de London, qui de gratia regis se
reddidit Hospitali. Sed jam videamus, quid juris si
filius alieujus et h:res ante dotis assignationem felo-
niam fecerit, et si mulier propter hoe dotem amittere
debet.


Item esto quód hzres alicujus, et. warantus de dote
mulieris, pos&. mortem antecessoris ante dotis assigna-
tionem feloniam fecerit, quzeritur an propter hoc do-
tem amittere debeat? videtur prima facie quód sic,
quasi ei deficiat warantus de dote sua, & valent (ut
videtur) quae rit facta sunt ante feloniam, sed ea quae
agenda sunt post feloniam non convalescunt. Sed re-
ver& propter hoe dotem non amittit, quia etsi talis
desinat esse warantus, ile incipit esse loco hzeredis &
waranti ad quam hereditas pervenerit ratione eschaetze,
et quia vir uxoris feloniam non fecit, aliud tamen
dicendum est de uxore felonis. Jam videamus quid
sib agendum, si cüm mulier dicat se nihil habere, con-
stiterit quód habeat partem dotis.


Ad hoe autem quod dicit mulier in intentione sua,
Et unde nihil habet: si quidem partem dotis habuerit
quamvis minimam, si hoc dedicere non possit, vel cüm
hoc probatum fuerit, cadit breve, nec de residuo quod
ei defuerit poterit sibi prospicere, nisi per breve de


recto de dote, de quo inferiüs dicetur suo loeo. Nihil


igitur recipiat de dote sua& ante brevis impetrationem,


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 569


this kind can have their life, on the condition that they
betake themselves to religion or abjure the realm, because
they cannot remain in the realm after conviction, as
happened in the case of John de Herlezim of London,
who by the grace of the king betook himself to the Hos-
pital. But let us now see, what right there is, if the son
and heir of any one before the assignment of dower has
committed felony, and if the woman on that aecount
ought to lose her dower. |


Likewise let it be, that the heir of any oneand the  j,
warrantor of the dower of the woman, after the death !f the son
of the ancestor and before the assignment of dower has of es p
committed felony, it is asked of in that account she ought before the
io lose her dower ? it seems at tirs& sight to be so, inas- P eim
much as à warrantor for her dower fails her, and what sides
is duly done before a felony is valid (as it appears), but felony.
those things which are to be done after it are not valid.

But in truth she does not on that account lose her
dower, because although the said person ceases to be her
warrantor, he indeed to whom the inheritance has come
by reason of the escheat commences to bein the place
of an heir and a warrantor, and because the husband of
the wife has not committed a felony, another thing
however would have to be said concerning the wife of .
a felon. Let us now see what is to be done, if, when
the woman says that she has nothing, it has been ascer-


tained that she has a part of her dower.


'To this, however, that & woman states in her declara- 15.
tion, *and whereof she has nothing," if indeed she has SUM »
had a part of her dower although a very small part, if « vhercot
she cannot deny this or when this has been proved, 5 pre j
the writ abates, nor can she provide for the residue
which is wanting to her, except by & writ of right con-
cerning her dower, concerning which we shall speak in
its proper plaee. She can therefore receive nothing of
her dower before the suing out of a writ, so that the


f. 812.


16.
De repli-
catione
mulieris.


570 —. DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


ita quód breve contineat omnes deforciantes, ubicunque
fuerint, in uno comitatu, vel in diversis. Et cüm om-
nes contineantur, tunc primó recipiat, et si recipiat
ante judieium etiam sine judicio, non obstabit ei ex-
eeptio quód aliquid habuerit, quia respondere poterit,
quód satisfactum est ei ante judicium.. Et si forte
partem dotis receperit ante impetrationem à quocun-
que, facia& eum nominari in brevi sicut alios, & con-
venire sicut alios, & tunc primó dicere. poterit (si ob-


 jecte fuerit exceptio) quód talis satisfecit, nec erit


multum disputandum utrum ante impetrationem vel
post. Si autem talem in brevi non nominaverit, et
objecta exceptione, dicat quód exceptio ei nocere non
debeat, quià nihil habet in tali villa, licet in alia tali
villa, non valebit sua talis replieatio, quia id quod
dieitur (unde nihil habet) non debet referri ad villas,
sed ad dotem. Et unde non valet si dicat quód nihil
habet in tali villa, nisi ostendere poterit quód nihil
habeat nomine dotis ubicunque. Et cüm mulier repli-
eando negaverit quód nihil habuerit, non habebit de-
fensionem per legem, sed veritas inquiratur per patrià
de replicatione mulieris ut de itinere.


It& replicare poterit, quód si aliquid habuerit, nihil
tamen habet nomine dotis sed alio modo, sicut ratione
custodie & hujusmodi, & si opus fuerit fiat inde in-
quisitio in comitatu, ubi dicitur aliquid nomine dotis
recepisse, sub iis verbis, vz. Si aliquid tenuerit no-
mine dotis de tenemento quod fuit talis viri sui: &


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 511


writ shall include all the deforcers, wherever they may be,
in one county or in divers. And when they are all in-
cluded then she may for the first time receive, and if she
receives anything before judgment also without à judg-
ment, the exception that she has received something
will not stop her proceeding, because she may answer
that she has been satisfied before the judgment. And if
she has received à part of her dower from some one before
the suing of the writ,let her cause him to be named in
the writ like the others and to be convened like the
others, and then she ought to say for the first time (if
the exception has been objected to her), that so-and-so
has satisfied his part, nor will there have to be much
dispute whether before the suing out of the writ or
afterwards. Butif she has not named the said person
in the writ, and upon the exception having been raised,
,She says that the exception ought not to harm her,
because she has nothing in such a vill, although shé has
something in another such vill, such a reply will riot
avail her, because that which she says, * whereof she has
* nothing " ought not to be referred to vills, but to the
dower. And hence it does not avail her, if she says that
she has nothing in such a vill, unless she can show that
she has nothing in the name of dower in any place.
And when the woman in replying has denied that she
has received anything, she will not have any defence at
law, but let the truth be inquired into by the country
concerning the replication of the woman as in the
iter. |
Likewise she may reply, thaif she has had anything,
yet she has nothing in the name of dower but in some


f. 812,


Duncerie :
ing the


other manner, as by reason of guardianship and such reply of


like, and if it be necessary let an inquest be held thereon "'
in the county, where she is said to have received some-
thing in the name of dower, under these words, to
wit, if she has held any thing in the name of dower of


à tenement which belonged to so-and-so her husband,


woman.


17.
Si terra,
de qua do-
tem petit,
commissa
fuit ad
firmam et
ad termi-
num.


572 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


si aliquid habuerit, & modo non habeat, quid inde
fecit, & vic. mittat inquisitionem ; ut de termino Sanc-
te "Trinitatis anno regis Henrici quarto in comitatu
Norff, de Isolda qus fuit uxor W.


Si autem terra de qua mulier dotem petit data
fuerit ad firmam et ad terminum annorum, cüm mu-
lier tertiam partem nomine dotis recuperaverit, per
offiddum judicis retinebit firmarius duas partes ultra
terminum suum, quousq, inde perceperit ad valentiam
ilius terti: partis quam amisit, u& de termino Sancti
Michaelis anno regis Henrici xiv. incipiente xv., in coti
Suffolk et Essex, de Emma qus fuit uxor Rogeri filii


J Swani. Et ad hoc faeit de termino Sancti Michaelis


anno ix. incipiente x. in coii Northampto de Margeria
qua fuit uxor Henry de Northo. Et in hoe casu
semper oportet scire, quantum valeat tertia pars per
rationabilem extensionem. Et ita fiat, nisi de tota


terra illa nominatim dotata fuerint, quia tunc ipsa


recuperabit totam terram illam ut dotem suam nomi-
natam, et ipse firmarius (si charta de termino dedici
non poterit) reeuperabit ad valentiam terrz petite de
terra waranti usq, &d terminum suum completum, et
hoc per offieium judicis, et usq, ad statem waranti si


. warantus fuerit infra statem, vel si plenz setatis, do-


nec deliberare possit terram quam mulier recuperavit,
ut de itinere W. de Raleghe in comitatu Bedf de
quadam Emma Bovastra. Et quid si warantus nihil
habuerit, tune expectet firmarius quousq, dos delibe-
rata fuerit. Et quo casu reversura erit dos ad firma-
rium cüm deliberata fuerit, tenenda usque ad termi-
num suum, & tune demüm ad hsredem, & hoc per


1« Willielm," MS. Reg. 9 E xv. | ?* Northoi," M.8. idem.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 578


and if she has had any thing and now has it not, what
she has done therewith, and let the viscount send an
inquest, as.in Holy Trinity term in the fourth year of
king Henry in the county of Norfolk, concerning 1solda
who was the wife of W.


But if the land from which the woman claims dower 17.

; If the land
has been given to farm and for & term of years, when go, which
the woman has recovered the third part in the name of she claims
dower, the farmer through the office of the judge shall "di dee
retain the two-thirds beyond his term, until he shall to Arie :
have derived therefrom the value of the third part t term.
which he has lost, as in St. Michael's term in the fifteenth
and sixteenth years of king Henry in the counties of
Suffolk and of Essex, in the case of Emma who was the

wife of Roger Swainson. And this is supported in St.
. Michaels term in the ninth and tenth years, in the
county of Northampton, by the case of Margery who was
the wife of Henry de Northampton.  Ánd in this case it
is ineumbent always to ascertain how much a third part
is worth by a reasonable extent. And so let it be done,
unless she has been endowed with the whole of the land
specifically, because then she shall recover the whole of
that land as her specified dower, and the said farmer
(f the charter respecting the term cannot be gainsayed)
shall recover, the value of the land claimed from the
land of the warrantor up to his complete term, and this
through the office of the judge, and up to the full age
of the warrantor, if the warrantor should be under
age, or if he be of full age, until he can deliver the land
which the woman has recovered, as in the iter of Wil-
liam de Ralegh in the county of Bedford, concerning :
Emma Bovastra. And what if the warrantor should
have nothing, then let the farmer wait until the dower
has been delivered. And in which case the dower will
 revert to the farmer after it has been delivered, to be held
up to the end of his term, and then at length to the heir
and this by a judgment, although it may be true regu-


514 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


judicium : licet regulariter verum sit, q semper reverti
deheat ad heredem, quia warantus de dote, vel ad eum
qui est loco waranti, qui habet duas partes sicut es-
chaetam, tamen ad alium quandocunq, reverti debeat,
lieet warantus non fuerit, p judicium, ut hie ppter
defectum waranti, qui escambium facere non potest de
termino vel feoffamento et hujusmodi, quia mulier in-
dotata remanere non debet, et de tali reversione non
semper fiat mentio in judicio & in rotulatione. Et
quód indotata non remanebit, licet warantus nihil ha-
beat unde exeambium faciat tenenti suo, sive nomina-
tim dotata fuerit sive non, inveniri poterit in. com
Lyne. de Alicia vidua, quse petiit dotem versus T. de


S. Licyo.
. 18. Cüm autem de constitutione dotis dubitetur, & terra
Sor. de qua dos petitur fuerit in cófinio duorü cofí, cüm


confinio — inquisitio inde fieri debeat, assumantur.octo milites de
d uno comitatu, & octo de alio ut p tales peedat inqui-


tuum,de sitio. Et cüm juratores requisità nihil omninó probent


L53U. pro muliere, nihil capiet, e& idem eri si dubie, quasi
ende fuerit ea. nihil probante.
inquisitio.
Car. XIV.
De s Cum autem nulla sit exceptio, que opponi possit


facienda  Inulieri dotem petenti, nec dedici potest aliquo modo
mulieri; quin ita dotata sit sicut ipsa dicit, fiat ei seysing per
sitquod tale breve. Rex vicecomiti salutem. Scias quód cum
PONE À. quee fuit uxor B. in curia nostra coram &c. per
quare do ejusdem curis nostre judicium (vel per defaltam talis)
tem 10D  pocuperavit seysinam suam versus C. de tanta terra


habeat. Ain RN ipa
dia cum pertinentis in tali villa ut de dote sua. Et ideo


1 **'Thomam de sancto Licio," MS. Reg. 9 E. xv.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER.  . .. 575


larly that it ought always to revert to the heir, because
he is the warrantor of the dower, or to him who is in the
place of à warrantor, who has the two-thirds as an escheat, -
nevertheless it ought sometimes to revert to another,
although he be not the warrantor, through à judgment
as here through failure of a warrantor, who cannot make
. eompensation for the term or the feoffment or such like,
because the woman ought not to remain without dower,
and of such & reversion mention is not always made
in the judgment, and in the enrolment. And that she
shall not remain without her dower although the war-
rantor has nothing wherewith to make compensation to
his tenant, whether she has been endowed specifically or
not, may be found in the county of Lincoln concerning
Alicia & widow, who claimed dower against Thomas de
5. Licyo.


But when there i ls & doubt about the appointment of 18.
dower, and the land from which the dower is claimed is e
on the confines of two counties, when an inquest thereon which is
ought to be held, let eight. knights be assumed from one 2^imed


is on the


county and eight from "the other that the inquest may confines


proceed before them. And when the jurors have uM


upon the requisition proved nothing at allin favour of f.312 b.

the woman, she shall take nothing, and the result shall which tho

be the same, if it be doubtful, as if she proved nothing. inquest is
: to be held.


CHAPTER XIV..


But when there is no exception that can be objected —— 1.


"P" : : .,, On giving
to à woman claiming dower, nor can it be gainsayed in seysine to


any manner that she has been endowed as she Says, let the woman,
seysine be given to her under a writ of this kind. The MA
king to the viscount greeting. Know thou that since À. hus bs

. who was the wife of B.in our court before &c. by theo Re
judgment of the said court (or by the default of so-and-so) dover. her
has recovered her seysine against C. of so much land


with its appurtenances in such a vill as her dower. And


576 - DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


tibi precipimus quód eidem À. sine dilatione de pre-
dicta terra cum pertinentiis plenariam seysinam habere
facias, & similiter ei sine dilatione habere facias tot
marcas, quz ei in eadem curia nostra adjudicatze sunt
pro damnis suis, quz habuit pro injusta detentione,
quam predictus C. ei fecit de predicta terra & dote
sua. Vel aliter: & de terris vel catallis predicti B.
fieri facias tot denarios, & illos sine dilatione haberi
facias &e. ut supra. Teste &c. Et unde de nova Con-
stitutione! provisum est quód mulier damna recuperet
eum dote sua versus quemeunque possidentem ; et
maxime de terris & tenemenlis de quibus vir suus
moritur seysitus ut de feodo, nisi ita sit quód defor-
cians justam causam habeat differendi dotis exactionem,
quod esse poterit, si vir forte aliquem in vita sua feof-
faverit, & post mortem suam mulier petat dotem suam -
versus eum qui tenet, non erit mulieri injuriosa dila-
tio si warantum vocaverit unum vel plures, quousque
perveniatur ad hzredem warantum mulieris de dote,
su&, quam quidem si warantizaverit, & incontinenti
restituerit, & exeambium faciet tenenti, càm sit sine
culpa, nulla debet refundere damna, nec tenens multo
fortiàs. Si autem fÍfrivolas dilationes qusesierit, quia
fraudulentus est in mora, resareire debet damna: &
eodem modo si cüm antecessor suus seysitus obierit,
heres statim alios feoffaverit p fraudem, uterque tam
hzres quàm feoffatus propter fraudem damna refundet,
unus propter fraudulentam alienationem, & alius prop-
ter fraudulentam detentionem. Et ideo considerandum
est qualiter, & quando facta fuit alienatio sive dona-
tio in vita viri vel post mortem, & utrum ille qui


! * de nova constitutione," that | Mnjora, Rolls Edition, vol iii.
is, the Statute of Merton, 30 Jan. | p.341. Statutes of the Realm, I.
1235-36. cf. Matth. Paris. Chronica | 1., from MS. Cotton. Claudius D. 2.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 571


therefore we enjoin you that you cause the said A.
"without delay to have plenary seysine of the aforesaid
land with its appurtenances, and in like manner without
delay you cause her to have so many marks, which have
been adjudged to her in the same our court for her
damages, which she has suffered through the unjust
detention, which the said A. has caused to her in respect
of the said land and her dower. Or otherwise, and
cause ten pennies to be raised from the lands and chat-
tels of the said B., and cause them to be delivered to the
said À. without delay &c. as above. Witness &ec. And
hence by the new Statute it has been provided that
à woman shall recover her dower with damages against
whomsoever in possession of it, and chiefly from tho
lands and tenements of which her husband died seysed as
of fee, unless it be that the deforceor has a just cause
of deferring the exaction of the dower, which may he
the ease, if the husband in his lifetime has by chance


enfeoffed any one, and after his death the woman claims


her dower against him who is the tenant, it will not be
an unjust delay to the woman if he has called one or
more warrantors, until he arrives &t the heir who is the
warrantor to the wife of her dower, which if he has
warranted and forthwith restored, and he shall make
compensation to the tenant, since he is without fault, he
ought not to refund any damages, and much more the
tenant ought not But if he has sought out frivolous
delays, because he is fraudulent in his delay, he ought to
make good the damages, and in the same manner, if
when his ancestor has died seysed, the heir has forth with
enfeoffed others fraudulently, both the heir as well as
the feoffee shall refund damages on account of the fraud,
one on aecount of the fraudulent alienation, the other
on account of the fraudulent detention. And therefore
it is to be considered in what manner and at what time
the alienation or donation was made, in the lifetime of
the husband or after his death, and whether he who
Q 1802. 'O Oo


—


Si dos ei
recognita
fuerit et
reddita in
curia.


ub 318.


l.
Qualiter
mulier
poterit
suam do-
tem amit-
tere, cum
fuerit in
posses-
sione, et
ex quibus
causis.
Britton v.
ch. x. 8 6.


578 —. DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


tenetur restituere, in mora fuerit justa causa vel in-
justa: quia qui sine culpa est, poenam sentire non
debet. Est etiam alia forma brevis de seysina ei


facienda, ubi in judicio PONES est ei dos sua, quee
talis est.


Rex vicecomiti salutem. Scias quód cüm A. quse
fuit uxor B. in curia nostra, &c. peteret versus C.
tantam terram cum pertinentiis in tali villa ut. dotem
suam, idem C. venit in eadem curia nostra coram eis-
dem justiciarlis nostris &c. et recognovit & reddidit
eidem A. predictam terram cum pertinentiis ut dotem
suam, & ideo tibi precipimus &c. ut supra. Et sci-
endum quód in omni casu tenetur deforcians mulieri
ad damna sua de terris & tenementis, de quibus vir
suus moritur seysitus, si pro dote sua oportet eum
placitare, nisi ipse h:xres justam causam habeat resis-
tendi, cüm statim & sine placito post mortem viri sui,
& ad minus infra xl. dies fuerit ei dos assignanda, '
quie die desponsationis fuit ei constituta.


CAP. XV.


Cum veró mulier sic dotem suam obtinuerit, poterit
ilam amittere multis modis, vel per consuetudinem
qui in diversis locis pro lege observatur, ut si cüm
fuerit ei dos assignata, vel in cofi Kanc. ante assig-
nationem nupserit alicui, statim amittit terram quam
tenet nomine dotis de gavelkind. Idem observatur in
civitate London de terris & tenementis in civitate, &
alibi in pluribus locis Et de hac materia inveniri
poterit de termino S. M. anno regis H. ii. post guer-
ram in cofi Kane. Et sive seysinam habuerit sive


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 579


is bound to restore, is in delay fora just or an unjust
reason, because he who is without fault, ought not to
Suffer à penalty. "There is also another form of & writ
for causing seysine to be given to her, when her dower
has been recognised in & judgment, which is of this
kind.

The king to the viscount greeting. Know thou that ».
when À. who was the wife of B. claimed &c. in our aid has
courb against C. so much land with its appurtenances been recog-
in such a vill as her dower, the said C. came in our court Pscd and.
before our said justiciaries, and recognised and restored her in
to the said A. the aforesaid land with its appurtenances ^?'7*
às her dower, and accordingly we enjoin you &c. as
above. And it is to be known that the deforeeor is
bound in every case to the woman for her damages from
the lands and tenements, of which her husband died  f.318.
seysed, if ib is necessary for her to implead him for
her dower, unless the heir himself has à just cause for
resisting her, when her dower, which was appointed to
her on the day of her espousals, is to be assigned to her
forthwith and without & plea after the death of her
husband, and at least within forty days.


CHAPTER XV.


But when a woman has obtained her dower,she may 1.
lose itin many ways, either by & custom, which is in Bo" *
divers places observed for law, as if when dower has may lose
been assigned to her, or in the county of Kent before iru
the assignment of it, she has married anyone, she forth- is in pos-
with loses the land which she holds in the name of it ud Ua
dower of gavelkind. "The same is observed in the city eid
of London concerning lands and tenements in the city :
&nd elsewhere in many places. And in this matter
something may be found in St. Michael's term in the
Second year of the king after the war, in the county of
Kent. And whether she has had seysine or not, if. after

o o 2 |


2.
Qualiter
dotem
amittit
mulier.


1.
De recto
de dote
ad terram
petendam,
qut per-


580 | DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


non, si post. mortem viri inventa fuerit habens in utero
eonceptum ab alio quàm à viro suo, si nupserit, &
licet nupta non sit, si vir inveniatur, vel puer, vel
uterque, dotem a&mittet. Eodem modo dotem amittit
propter feloniam vel hujusmodi. |


Item antequam fuerit assignata amittet dotem: per
factum & feloniam viri sui ut suprà, quia si petat,
obstabit ei exceptio, quia deficit ei warantus. ltem
amittit dotem suam cüm fuerit ei assignata, ut si
hzres implacitatus fuerit ab eo qui jus habet de dua-
bus partibus, & mulier de tertia & mulier hzredem
vocaverit ad warantum & cüm warantizaverit amiserit
totum, per hoc amittit dotem nec habebit escambium,
quia ex quo convictum est quód hzres warantus suus
de dote sua jus non habet in duabus partibus, nec illa
per eonsequens in tertia parte. Item amittere poterit
dotem per negligentiam, & taciturnitatem, ut si cüm
fuerit disseysita injusté, tacuerit per tantum tempus
quod excedit terminum disseysinsz, vel cüm fuerit dis-
Sseysita injuste, tacuerit per longum tempus, & postea
sine judieio seysinam suam usurpaverit, & disseysitor
per hoe seysinam suam rehabuerit, et ipsa nunquam
ad seysinam restituitur, sed postea oportet agere de
proprietate per breve de recto, quod predictum est de
dote super seysina su& propria.


CAP. XVI,


Si,autem aliquid sit quod ad dotem pertineat, quod
per breve de dote non acquisiverit, succurritur ei per
breve quod vocatur breve de recto de dote, quod clau-
sum esse debet, e& dirigi ad warantum mulieris de


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 581


the death of her husband she has been found to have in

her womb what she has conceived from another man:
than her husband, if she has married, and although she

niay not have married, if the man be found or a boy or

both, she shall lose her dower. In the same manner she

shall lose her dower on account of felony or such like.


Likewise before it has been assigned she loses her 2.
dower by the act and felony of her husband as above, - "
for if she claims it, an exception will be in her way, woman
because & warrantor fails her. Likewise she loses her Pig il
dower, when it has been assigned to her, as if the heir
has been impleaded by him who has a right to the two
thirds, and the woman has a right to & third, and the
woman has called the heir as & warrantor, and when he
has warranted, he has lost.the whole, she thereby loses
her dower and has no compensation, because since it is
proved that the heir the warrantor of her dower has no
right in the two third parts, neither has she in conse-
quence any right in the one third part. Likewise she
may lose her dower by negligence or by taciturnity, as
if when she has been unjustly disseysed, she has kept
silence for so long a time as exceeds the term of dissey-
sine, or when she has been unjustly disseysed, she has
kept silence for à long time, and afterwards without a
judgment has usurped her seysine, and the disseysor has
thereby recovered his seysine, and she is never restored .
to her seysine, but. she must afterwards proceed for the
property by a writ of right, which has been said above
. eoncerning dower upon her own proper seysine.


CHAPTER XVI. :
But if there be anything which appertains to dower, t.


which she has not acquired by a writ of dower, she is t hd
aided by à writ which is called a *'writ of right to hri to
* dower, which ought to bea closed writ, and to be Which 2


directed to the woman's warrantor for her dower, in the Pertains


C ocM——— — — c e a Án 009 o m cm m UEUO uv — Mn ipu ert ma P ande mom


GI pm ceci accu eqetetrer 7s 7 aoo Toca mln OPE i at E Lo ar RO oe mae de


tinet ad
dotem,
cum ces-
saverit
breve de
dote.

f. 318 b.
Britton, v.
ch. xii. $1.


9.
De for-
manda et
propo-
nenda in-
tentione
mulieris.


589 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


dote sua, in forma supradicta inter brevia de recto.
Et refert utruü ipsa aliquando in seysina fuerit, &
postea disseysita fuerit, ut supra pauló antedictum
est, vel si nunquam fuit in seysina. Et placitum istud
deberet deduci in curia waranti, donec curia illa pro-
betur defecisse de recto, quo pbato ponetur loquela
usque ad comitatü sicut de aliis placitis de recto, &
sie inde ad magnam curiam pluribus de causis pre-
notatis. De absentia vero utriusque, si non venerint,
vél si se essoniaverint, qualiter procedendum erit per-
pendi poterit ex premissis. Cüm vero ambo compa-
ruerint, & mulier nunquam seysinam prius habuerit
de terra petita, proponat intentionem suam per hsec
verba.


Peto versus talem tantam terram cum pertinentiis
in tali villa, ut pertinentem ad dotem, quae me con-
tingit de hereditate B. quondam viri mei . Et unde
me dotavit ad ostium ecclesie die quo me desponsa-
vit. Et unde idem eode die fuit seysitus & vestitus,


ita quód me inde dotare potuit. Et si hoc vellet


cognoscere &c. ut supra. Et si noluerit, habet suffi
cliente pbationem, sectam & hujusmodi. Si autem alh-
quando extiterit in seysina, tunc proponat intentionem
suam per hzc verba. Peto versus talem tantum terre
cum ptinentis in tali villa ut dotem meam, & ut pti-
nentem ad terram quam teneo in eadem villa nomine
dotis, vel in alia, & unde B. quondà vir meus die, quo
me desponsavit, tenuit tota terra illam in feodo & in
dominico suo, & me inde dotavit, & ita q post. mortem
predieti B. quondam viri mei fui inde in seysina
nomine dotis quousque predictus talis me injuste &


" OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. ' 583


form described above amongst writs of right, And ib istodower -
of importance whether she has been some time in sey- rit of
Sine, and has afterwards been disseysed, as has been dower has
stated a little above, or if she has never been in seysine. is b.
And that plea ought to be brought in the court of the
warrantor, until that court be proved to have failed in

right, upon proof of which the cause shall be carried into

the county court as in other pleas concerning right, and

So thence to the great court for several causes already

noted. But concerning the absence of each, if they have -

not come, or if they have essoined themselves, in what

way proceedings should be taken can be ascertained

from the premises. But when both have appeared, and

the woman has never had seysine previously of the land

claimed by her, let her propound her declaration in these


words.


I elaim against so-and-so so much land with its
appurtenances in such a vill as appertaining to the Ot fring
dower which belongs to me from the inheritance of bounding
B. who was formerly my husband. And whereof he? d bud
endowed me at the door of the church on the day on oft the
which he espoused me. And whereof the same person "9n.
on the same day was seysed and invested, that he could
endow me thereof. And if he is willing to acknowledge
this &e. as above. And if he be unwilling, she has a
sufücient proof, a sect and such like. But if she has
been some time in seysine, then let her propound her
declaration in these words. I claim against so-and-so
so much land with its &ppurtenances in such a vill as
my dower, and as appertaining to the land which I hold
in the said vill in the name of dower, or in another vill,
and whereof B, formerly my husband on the day on
which he espoused me, held the whole land in fee and
in his own demesne, and endowed me therefrom, and so
that after the death of the aforesaid B. formerly my
husband, I was in seysine thereof in the name of dower,
until so-and-so aforesaid disseysed me unjustly and with-


584 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


sine judicio disseysivit. Et quód ita fui inde dotata
& seysita habeo sufficiente disrationationem & proba-
tionem, videlicet talem sectam & talem.


Proposita sic intentione mulieris poterit tenens waran-
tum vocare,si warantum habuerit, secundum quod su-
pradictum est de waranti vocatione, vel si warantum non
habuerit excipere poterit contra mulierem, scilicet quód
terram illam ei sponte reddidit, vel si disseysita fuit,
postea jus suum remisit & quietum clamavit, vel si.
disseysita fuit, postea de brevi suo se retraxit. Et
unde producat sectam si habuerit, & si opus fuerit


. ponat se super patriam, & poterit veritas per patriam


Britton, ib.
8S 2, 3.


declarari. Non autem inter eos erit magna assisa vel
duellum, nec p consequens essonium de malo lecti.
Et cüm recurrendum ita sit ad patriam, & loquela fue-.
rii in comitatu, videndum si cüm tenens posuerit se
in inquisitionem & petens simpliciter, an comitatus
habeat potestatem procedendi ad inquisitionem vel
juratam nisi hoc fuerit ei specialiter demandatum ?
Videtur quód bene potest, quia cüm dicatur in brevi,
quód nisi warantus hoc fecerit quód vicecomes hoc
faciat, videntur omnia esse ei concessa sine quibus
loquela illa terminari non possit, &.secundum quod in
cof procedi possit ad duellum in alio brevi de recto,
it& poterit in hoe brevi ad inquisitionem, sicut procedi
poterit ad juratàs, ubi vicecomiti demandatur quód
justieiet, Sed contra cüm in magno brevi de recto
contineatur quód nisi dominus rex hoc fecerit vic. hoc
faciat, tamen &d magnam assisam capiendam non pro-
cedit, sed pacem habebit tenens usque ad adventum
justitiariorum, si breve de pace sibi perquisiverit, &
si non, in defalta esse poterit, ut supra de hac ma-
teria per brove do recto.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 585


bh


out a judgment. And that I was so endowed and seysed
therewith I have a sufficient deraignment and proof, to
wit, such and such a sect. 3.

Upon the declaration of the woman having been ihi Upon the
propounded, the tenant may call à warrantor, if he has i AN
a warrantor, according to what has been said above con- pounded.
cerning the calling of à warrantor, or if he have not a
warrantor he may except against the woman, to wit,
that she restored to him of her own accord that land, or if
she was disseysed, that she afterwards released her right,
and quit-claimed him, or if she was disseysed, she after-
wards withdrew from her writ. And thereupon let him
produee a sect, if he has one, and if it be necessary let
him put himself on the country. But there shall not be
. between them a great assise or wager of battle, nor con-
sequently an essoin of illness eonfining to bed. And
when recourse is to be had to the country, and the suit
is in the county court, it is to be seen, if the tenant has
put himself upon.an inquest and the claimant simply [on :
the country], whether the county court has the power
of proceeding to an inquest or a jury, unless this has been ;
specially committed toit? It seems that it can well do so, |
beeause when it issaid in the writ, that unless the war- [
rantor should do so, the viscount shall do so,itseems  - :
that every thing is allowed to him, without which the |
suit cannot be determined, and according as proceedings
may be had in the county court to wager of batte in
another writ of right, so in this writ proceedings may be
had to an inquest, just as proceedings may ^e had to &
| jury, when it is committed to the viscount that he shall
do justice. But on the contrary when it is contained in
a great writ of right, that unless the lord do so, the
viseount shall do so, nevertheless he does not proceed to
hold a great assise, but the tenant shall be at peace until
the coming of the justiciaries, if he has obtained for him-
self a writ of peace, and if not, he may be in default, a«
above concerning this matter in a writ of right.


586 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


f. 814. . Car. XVII.


Si autem warantus vocetur unus vel plures, cüm

De excep- perventum fuerit ad hsredem warantum de dote, si

EUBUR hzres statim recognoscat rem illam ad dotem mulieris

mulierem pertinere, mulier seysinam habeat cum damnis vel sine,

peentet» Secundum quod superius dietum est. Si autem excep-

euratione tiones habeat, per exceptiones si possit se defendat.
dotis e . ; . 3: .

| Poterit enim excipere multis modis; s. q terra illa ad

Briton,v. dote sua no pertineat, vel si mulier inde in seysina

"n fuit, hoc no fuit nomine dotis sed alia ratione, vel q

nunquà inde dotata fuit, sed nominati de alia vel mi-

nore quàtitate quà pte tertia, et inde tenuit se con-

tentà, et de hoc sectà pducat, et pbatione. Ite sive in

seysina fuerit sive no, & sive terra ptinens esset ad

doté sive n0, om jus suu de terra illa remisit et


quietum clamavit.


2. Item q terra no ptineat ad dote sui quia habet
Responderi plen& doté sua, secundü q ei fuit costitute, & plus
duod piene habet in doté qm ad ipsü! ptinet habendü secundu
habetde- leg& et eosuetudins regni. Et unde ipse heres tulit
em suam, ANDR - ]
etideo ^ breve ad comitatu de admésuratione q tale est. Et q
Pod fat de facili in comitatu terminari no poterit, si mulier
extensio — dote habuerit in diversis comitatibus, quia licet sciat
eíaden- guantü tenuerit in uno comitatu, et quatü valeat ter-

tia pars, & quantu dus ptes, t p hoe costare no po-
terit de valore omniu terrarü d sunt in aliis comitatib^,
et nisi costiterit de valore omniü terrarü, sciri no


poterit utrü plus habuerit vel minus: ideo no poterit


1 * ipsam," MS. Rawl. C. 160, et Reg. 9 E. xv.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 5817


CHaPrER XVIL —— — £8H.


But ifa warrantor be called, one or more, when the 1.
heir the warrantor of the dower is arrived at, if the heir ,; vd SU
forthwith recognises that the realty in question appertains sgainet à
to the dower of the wife, let the woman have seysine with qyimant
or without damages, aecording to what has been said and ofthe
above. But if he has exceptions to make, let him defend cua E
himself by the exceptions if he can.  Fór he may be able dower.
to make exception in many modes: to wit, that theland in
question does not appertain to her dower, orif the woman
has been in séysine thereof, this was not in the name of
dower, but for some other reason ; or that she never was
endowed thereof, but specifically of another or smaller
quantity than & third part, and she was content there-
with, and upon this he produces a sect and proof. Like-
wise whether she has been in seysine or not, and whether
the land in question has been appurtenant to her dower
or not, she has herself released her right to thai land and
has quit-claimed him.


Likewise that the land does not ond toherdower, 2.
because she has fully her dower, according to what has lt may be
. answered,
been appointed to her, and she has more for dower that she


than it appertains to her to have aecording to the lg bs fully


her dower, ^


and eustom of the realm. And whereupon the heir and ac-
produeed a writ to the county court for an admeasure- ET.
ment, which is of this kind. And that it cannot be easily bent that
determined in the county court, if the woman has dower 5e be.
in divers counties, because although she may know how and an
much she has had in one county, and how much a third 1" 55*
partis worth, and how much two thirds, nevertheless it

cannot be ascertained thereby concerning the value of all

the lands which are in the other counties, and unless it

has been ascertained concerning the value of all the lands,

ib cannot be known whether she has had more or less ;


accordingly an admeasurement cannot be made, unless


8.
Breve de
admen-
suratione
dotis in
diversis
comita-
tibus.


f. 314 b.


588 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


fieri amesuratio nisi sciatur q plus habeat, qm ad ip-
sum ptinet habedum. Igitur ubi plures habuerit terras
in diversis con, oportet q peedat amensuratio in curia
dii regis, et q omnes terre extendatur et apprecientur
iam du: ptes quà tertia, et mittatur extensio et ap-
preciatio justiciariüis: secudüu formà supra de extensio-
nibus & appceiationibus faciendis, et sic fiat amesuratio
in curia düi regis. Si aute dote non habuerit nisi in
uno comitatu, vicecomes facere poterit amesuratione,
du tame justum ! et p hoc breve.


Rex vic.salute. Questus est nobis À.filius vel filia,
frater vel soror, nepos vel neptis, cosanguineus vel có-
sanguinea et hzres B. q C. q fuit uxor B. plus habet
in dote de libero teneméto q fuit ipsius B. quodà viri
sui in tali villa (vel in talibus villis) qm habere debet
vel ad ipsa ptinet habeda? Et ideo tibi peipimus q
justé & sine dilatione ameésurari facias tota dote illà,
ita q pdieta C. no habeat plus in dote de h:reditate
Ddicti À. qm habere'debet, & ad ipsu? ptinet habendum
secundum rationabilem dotem, & quód praedictus A.


habeat de dote illa.id quod habere debet, & ad ipsum


pertinet habendum, ne amplius inde clamorem audia-
mus pro defectu justitie. Teste &c. Et notandum
quód amensuratio debet esse tam de indebito, quàm


superfluo: ut si per dominum capitalem mulieri assig-


natum fuerit capitale mesuagtum, vel aliquid quod sit
caput baronis, si aliud sit de quo dotem possit habere


rationabilem, auferatur ei indebitum, & assignetur ei


! « justam," MS. Rawl. C. 160. 3 ** eam," id.
3 * habendum," Reg. 9, E. xv.


(OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 589


it be knówn that she has more than it appertains to her
to have. Therefore whére the husband has had several
lands in different counties, it is proper that the adnitea-
surement should proceed in the court of the lord the king,
and that all the lands be extended and appraised as well
the two thirds as the one third, and that the extent. and
the appraisement should be sent to tho justiciaries aecord-
ing to the form above stated concerning the making of
extents and appraisements, and so let the admeasurement
be made in the court of the king. But if she has had
dower only in one county, the viscount may make the
admeasurement, provided it be just and through this
writ.


The king to the viscount greeting. A. has complained .
to us, the son or the daughter, the brother or the sister, RH
the grandson or the grand-daughter, the cousin-male, or measure-
the cousin-female and the heir of B., that C. who was the duin
wife of B. has more for her dower in a freehold which i divers
belonged to the said B. formerly her husband in such à ^
vill (or in such vills) than she ought to have, or than it
appertains to her to have.  Ánd therefore we enjoin you
chat justly &nd without delay you cause to be admea-
sured the whole of that dower, so that the said C. may
not have more for her dower of the inheritance of the
said A. than she ought to have, and than it appertains to
her to have according to reasonable dower, and that the
&foresaid À. should have of that dower that which she
ought to have and which it appertains to her to have,
that we may hear no more complaint about a failure of
justice. Witness, &c. And it is to be noted that the
admeasurement ought to be made as well of that which
is undue as well as superfluous, as if the chief messuage
or something which is the head of a barony has been
" assigned to the woman by the chief lord, if there be
another of which she can have reasonable dower, let
that be taken from her which is undue, and let there be £314 D.
assigned to her what is due, because although what is


4.
De officio
vicecomi-
tis, et de
modo pro-
cedendi.


590 ; . DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


debitum, quia lice& indebitu assignatum sit & super-
fluu, tamen sine judicio ejici non poterit ab hzerede,
nec &b alio.


Cüm igitur vie. breve susceperit, sumonore faciat
mulierem q sit sup terram illam de qua fieri debet
amensuralio coram vic. & coronatoribus, si interesse


possunt, & cora alis liberis & legalibus hominibus


quos vie, seeum assumere voluerit. Et mulier summo-


. nita aut venit aut non venit. Si autem non venerit,


non statim pcedatur ad amensuratione, sed. capietur
terra in manum düi regis de qua fieri debet amensu-
ratio, & ipsa interim summoneatur cum viro suo (si


viro habuerit) Et q terra capi debeat in manum


domini regis, pbatur in itinere M. de P. in cofi Lync.
anno decimo regis H. cirea mediü rotuli. Omnes enim
de quorum jure agitur, presentes esse debent in amen-
suratione facienda. Et si psentes non fuerint, quicquid
actum fuerit in eorum absentia revocabitur: nisi forte
per malitiam se absentaverint, ut de termino S. T.
anno regis H. secundo post guerram, in com Dors., de
Hamone de Halmodoston. Si autem p malitiam se
absentaverint, nec venerint, nec se essoniaverint legi-
iimo modo, post secunda summonitionem et terre
captionem in manum dii regis, non erit ulterius sus-
tinendum, sed statim pcedat vicecomes ad admensura-
tionem faciendam in odium secunde defaltze, et facta
extentione et appreciatione adjudicet unicuiq, q habere


debebit.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 591
undue and superfluous may have been assigned to her,


nevertheless she cannot be ejected by the heir or by any
one else without à judgment.


When the viscount therefore has received the writ, let


4.


him cause to be summoned the woman, that she be pre- ofíce f


sent on that land of which an admeasurement ought to


the vis-
count and


be made in the presence of the viscount and the coroners, or the


if they can be present, and in the presence of other free -


and loyal men whom the viscount may have chosen to
take with him. And the woman having been summoned
either comes or does not come. . But if she has not come,
let them not proceed forthwith to the admeasurement,
but the land shall be taken into the hand of the king, of
which land the admeasurement ought to be made, and
let her be summoned herself meanwhile with her husband,
if she has a husband. And that the land ought to be
taken into the hand of the king is proved in the iter of
Marlin de Pateshull in the county of Lincoln in the tenth
year of king Henry about the middle of the roll. For


all the persons whose right is at stake ought to be


present at the making of the admeasurement. And if
they have not been present, whatever shall have been
done in their absence shall be revoked, unless they shall
have absented themselves from malice, as in Holy Trinity
term in the second year of king Henry after the war in the
county of Dorset, concerning Hamo de Halmodoston.
But if through malice they have absented themselves and
have not come, nor have essoined themselves in a legiti-
mate manner, after à second summons and a taking of


the land into the hand of the lord the king, they are not -


to be endured any longer, but the viscount may forth with
proceed to make the admeasurement in spite of the second
default, and upon the extent and appraisement having
been made let him adjudge to each party what he ought
to have.


e of
roceeding.


5.


Cum partes


preesentes


599 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


Cüm autem partes psentes fuerint, proponat querens
intentionem suam versus mulierem hoc modo, secun-


sint, modus dum formam brevis À. queritur quód B. qu: fuit


per quem
proponat
querens
intentio-
nem suam.


-—


uxor C. plus habet in dotem de tenemento, quod fuit
ipsius C. patris vel alterius antecessoris (ut supra)
ipsius ÁÀÁ. cujus hseres ipse ést, quàm ad ipsam perti-
net habendum. Et unde dicit quód habet in tali villa
medietatem unius carucate terre, desicut non fuit do-
iata nisi de tertia parte, vel quód habet fere totum


. manerium, ubi non fuit dotata nisi de quadam minima


parte, et de qua tenuit se contentam, vel multo plus
habet in dotem quàm habere debet, ultra tertiam par-
tem, vel medietatem, vel ultra partem, unde fuit no-
minatim dotata, & quód ita fuit dotata sicut querens
dieit et non aliter, si mulier negaverit, producere po-
terit sectam vel instrumentum, vel aliud per quod pro-
bare possit intentionem suam, cüm mulier negaverit.
Et quo casu oportebit aliquando de necessitate recur-
rere ad constitutionem dotis qualiter fuerit constituta,
ut probato qualiter fuit constituta, procedatur in amen-
suratione facienda, nisi mulier exceptiones habeat &
responsiones cótra amésurationem quare non sit in:
amensuratione procedendum. Tollit enim amensura

tionem aliquando diuturnitas temporis, imperpetuum,
cüm omnis querela & omnis actio injuriarum limitata
sit infra certa tempora. Tollit etiam a&mensurationem
voluntas & consensus heredis, qui cüm plens setatis
esset dotem mulieri assignavit, quia scienti & volenti
non fit injuria, & sufficit semel voluisse, &.scivit aut
scire debuit. Item cüm dominus capitalis vel alius
dotem assignaverit, hzres major factus assignationem


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER: 598


But when the parties shall be present, let the complain- s,

len me
ant propound against the woman his declaration in this parties are
manner ; according to the form of the writ À. complains iu NM
that B. wlio was the wife of C, has; more as dower from whereby
the tenement which belonged to the said C, the father or ds Mun
other ancestor (as above) of the said À. whose heir he is, propound
than appertains to her to have. And whereupon he says oem
that she has in the said vill the moiety of one carucate
of land, whilst she was not endowed with more than one
third part, or that she has nearly the whole of à manor,
when she was only endowed with & very small part,
aBd with which she kept herself content; or that she
has much more for her dower than she ought to have,
beyond a third part, or & moiety, or beyond the part
wherewith she was specifically endowed, and that she
was so endowed as the plaintiff says, and not other-
. wise; if the woman should have denied it, he may
produce his sect or an instrument, or something else,
whieh may prove his declaration, when the woman
has denied it. And in which case it will be incum-
bent sometimes of necessity. to have recourse to the
appointment of the dower, in what manner it was
appointed, that upon its having been proved how it was
appointed they may proceed to make an admeasurement,
unless the woman has exceptions and answers against
the admeasurement, wherefore they ought not to proceed
to an admeasurement. For sometimes length of time
takes away an admeasurement for ever, since every plaint
and every action for injury is limited within certain
times. For the goodwill and consent of the heir takes
away an admeasurement, when the heir being of full age
has assigned to the woman her dower, becaüse an injury
is not done to à person who knowingly and willingly
Suffers an act to be done to him, and it is sufficient to
have been once willing, and he knew or ought to have
known it. Likewise when the chief or another lord has
assigned the dower, the heir having come to majority has

Q 1802. PP


504 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


ilam ratam habuerit per consensum, tacitum vel ex-
f.315. pressum : dum tamen hoe pbari possit. "Tacitum, p
dissimulationem p longum 'tempus: expressum, si. ex-
presse consenserit instrumento vel alio modo. ltem si.
de amensuratione agatur, non erit estimanda meliora.
tio mulieris quam fecit in dote sua post assignationem,

Britton,v. tépus enim assignationis dotis erit spectandü. Item

ch. xiii. Wr ; P :

8 9. poterit dieere q heres injuste hoc dicit q habet plus
quàm habere debeat in dotem, quia nihil plus habet
quàm rationabilem dotem suam secundum legem terrze, &
non plus quàm ei fuit constituta, licet in meliori!
quantitate quam in dote rationabili, et hoc pbet p.
sectà, vel alio modo si possit: ut de termino S. Michae-
lis anno regni regis H. decimotertio incipiente decimo-
quarto circa medium rotuli. Nota? q habenda est ratio
meliorationis in amensuratione facienda. tem dicere
possit habita ratione ad meliorationem, q anno & die
quo vir suus obiit, non sufficiebat terra ill& quam
nunc tenet in dotem plene ad tertlià partem totius
hereditatis, quze fuit ipsius viri sui, & si postea dotem
suam melioravit, non debet venire in sestimationé sua
melioratio. Et si hoc pbari possit, remanebit mulieri


.
Ld


dos sua secundü q fuerit ei constituta. .


Car. XVIII.


EP Facta autem dotis constitutione et assignatione, nihil -
uad per- pprietatis ptinet ad muliere, nisi tantu seysina et libe-
mulirem rum tenementum ad vitam suam, et nihil facere po-
faeta cOn- (ost g  aliqu& habeat pprietaté, nisi quadiu ipsam
dotis et — warantizare potest, quia jus pprietatis remanet cum


3 « Nota? down to * facienda,"
omitted MS. Rawl. C. 160, et Reg.
9. E. xv.


l*jn minori quantitate," MS.
Rawl. C. 160.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 595


ratified the assignment by consent, tacit or expressed,
provided only that this can be proved. Tacit, by dis- f.315.
simulation during a long time; express, if he has ex-
pressly consented by an instrument or in some other mode.
Likewise if the admeasurement is under discussion, the .
amelioration which the woman has made in her dower
after its assignment is not to be taken into account, for
the time of the assignment is to be looked to. Likewise
she may say that the heir unjustly states that she has
more than she ought to have for her dower, for she has
nothing more than her reasonable dower according to the
law of the land, and not more than was appointed
to her, although in àless quantity than in reasonable
dower, and this she may prove by a sect or in some other
manner, if she can; as in St. Michaels term in the
thirteenth and fourteenth years of the reign of king
Henry, about the middle of the roll. Note, that regard
is to be had to the amelioration in making the admeasure-
ment. Likewise she may say, regard being had to the
amelioration, that in the year and on the day on which

. her husband died, the land which she now holds in
dower did not suffice fully for the third part of the whole -
inheritance, which was her said husband's, and if she has
afterwards improved her dower, her improvement ought
not to come into the admeasurement, and if this can
be proved, the woman shall retain her dower according
as 16 has been appointed to her.


CHAPTER XVIII.


But upon the appointment and assignment of dower S :
having been made, nothing of the proprietorship apper- pertains to
tains to the woman, excepting only the seysine and the 2 Tad
freehold for her life, and she can do nothing that she SUDO.


Should have any proprietorship, except as long as he can adrad !
warrant her, because the right of proprietorship rests ment of
with the heir himself, because he is the warrantor of her dower, and


PP?


CoARSILUILSQU EG (oteMaiut eere c DUE E d La


assig-
natione, et
de vasto
in dote.


Britton, ib.
5.


f. 315 b.


Cum


mulier in
dote vas-
tum fecerit
et destruc-
tionem,

de prohi-
bendo ne
vastum
faciat.


596 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


ipso hserede, quia wa&rantus de sua dote, vel eum alio
ad qué jus pvenerit, sicut nomine eschaete, et ratione
alienationis et veditionis. Et unde nihil clamare po-
terii mulier in doté suam, nisi q uti & frui possit de


rebus dotalibus, sine vasto, destructione, vel exilio.


Rationabile veró estoveriü capere possit in boscis ad
eedifieandü, ardendu, elaudendum, dum tamen in, dote
sua & non extra, ut si vastum, destruetione vel exiliu
fecerit ultra rationabile estoveriüu, hseres pprietatis, vel
alius pprietarius, sine alicujus injuria poterit eum!
impedire. Nee competit mulieri assisa nov: dissey-
sinc$, sj queratur q p hoc disseysita sit de libero tefito
suo, quia tantum conceditur ei rationabile estoverium, .
quod non extendit ad vastü. Et si forte talis impe-
diri non possit, reeurrendum erit ad superiore, s. ad
rege, qui peipiet vie. q non .pmittet talem mulierem
vastum facere. Et si propter hoe non omiserit, tunc
attachietur mulier quód sit coram rege ad ostendendü
quare vastu fecerit. Breve vic. diripendum quód non
permittat, tale erit.


Rex vie. salutem.  Prsecipimus tibi quód non per-
mittas q talis mulier faciat vastum vel venditionem
vel exiliü de terris. hominibus, redditibus, domibus,
boscis, vel gardinis qd tenet in dote de hszereditate talis


in tali villa, ad exhseredationé ipsius talis, ne amplius


&c. T. &e. Et hoc fáciat tempestivé, ne p negligen-
tiam damnum incurrat, . quia melius est in tempore
occurrere &c, Et si per hoe non omiserit, attachianda
erit per tale breve. | | |


Rex vie. salute. Si talis fecerit te securum de cla-
more &e. tune pone p vadiü & salvos plegios talem.


——— 9


) « eam," MS. Rawl. C. 160,


? E S AE uM E


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 597


dower, or with some other person to whom the right has of waste
devolved, as in the name of an escheat, and by reason !" dower.


of alienation and sale And whence the woman ean
elaim nothing for her dower, except that she may use
and enjoy the things which compose her dower, without
waste, destruction, or exile [of serfs]. But she may have


reasonable estovers in woods for building, burning,


fencing, provided they are within her dower and not
outside it, and if she have caused waste or destruction


or exile [of serfs] beyond reasonable estovers, the heir of


the proprietorship, or some other proprietor, without
injury to any one may stop her. Nor is à woman en-
titled to an assise of novel disseysine, if she complains
that she has been disseysed of her freehold, because
reasonable estovers are alone allowed to her, which does
not extend to waste. And if by chance such a person
eannot be stopped, recourse must be had to a superior,
that is, to the king, who shall enjoin the viscount that


he should not permit such woman to cause waste. And


if she has not thereupon ceased, then the woman shall be
attached, that she appear before the king to show cause
wherefore she has caused waste. "The writ to be directed
to the viscount that he should not permit her, will be of
this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you


f. 315 b.


that you do not, permit that such a woman cause waste end
or sale or exile of the lands, men, rents, houses, woods, woman


and gardens, which she holds in dower from the inheri-


has caused
waste and


tance of so-and-so in such a.vill, to the disherison of the destruction


said so-and-so, that no more &e. — Witness &e. And let


in her
dower, of


him do this soon, less through negligence he may ineur prohibiting


loss, because it is better in time to meet &c. And if she


er 1irom


causing


has not thereupon ceased, she is to be attached by a writ veste.


of this kind.


The king to the viseount greeting. 1f so-and-so has, nis |
given you security for his complaint &c., then require does not


598 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


vastum Imulieré &c. g sit coram nobis vel justiciariis nostris


qun vV55- tali die apud talem locum, ostensura quare fecit vast,
tum faciat, :


forma bre- venditionem, & exilium, de terris, hominibus, redditü-


ns duoc bus, boscis, vel gardinis quz tenet in dotem de hsre-


attachiando ditate talis, in tali villa, contra phibitione nostram, &

muliere". habeas jbi nomina pleg. & hoe breve. T. &c. Et ita
si ad alium diem non venerit, observet ordo attachia-
mentorü donee venerit, dum tamé unicum habeat
essoniü de malo veniédi post primü attachiametu, si
voluerit.


4. Cüm aute post dilationes coparuerit, querens pponat
Mi ior intentionem sui hoc modo. Quód talis queritur ut
inhujus- parens vel amicus talis minoris, q cüm talis mulier
vag : iss teneat in tali villa tantam terram nomine dotis, tale
pon poi facit vastu et talé destructione, q terrà talé védiderit,
paruerit, — Vel servos: domos pstraverit tot, & boscu vendidit,

gardinu extirpavit in pdicta terra ad exhseredationem
talis heeredis ad valentiam tanti, et inde pducit sectam


&ec.


. 5. | Ad g poterit mulier multipliciter respodere sic: Et
indu talis mulier venit & defendit vastum, venditione &
contra — exilium cotra tale, et sectam suam. Et g nihil inde
ageres vendidit, nec aliquid tale fecit ad exhseredatione talis
heredis, & cognoscere poterit q domus ob vetustate
corruerit, et ipsa ibi construxit meliores, vel si de bosco
cepit aliquid, non cepit ibi nisi rationabile estoverium
suum ad ardendb, szdifieandum, & claudendü in. terra
illa, quam tenet nomine dotis, et no extra. Et q nihil
amplius cepit, nee alio modo, poterit se ponere super
inquisitionem patrie, lieet sunt quidam qui dicunt
quod contra sectam dqrentis poterit se defendere per


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 599


such woman to find bail and safe sureties that she will cease from .
appear before us or our justiciarjies on such a day at fis
such à place, in order to show cause wherefore she has Mob. da
caused waste, sale, and exile,of the lands, men, rents, attaching
woods, or gardens which she holds for her dower of her * V?mst
inheritance of so-and-so in such a vill against our pro-
hibition, and have there the names of the sureties and

this writ. Witness &c. And so if she has not come on
another day, let the order of attachments be observed

until she has come, provided however that she have &

single essoin of sickness on her journey after the first


attachment, if she has wished it.


But when after some delays she has appeared, let the — 4.
plaintiff propound his declaration in this manner. That pb "
so-and-so complains as the parent or friend of so-and-so, proceeding
& minor, that when such à woman holds in such a vill He shen
so much land in the name of dower, she causes such a after some
waste &nd such a destruction, that she has sold so much AIT.
land or serfs, bas pulled down so many houses, and has appeared.
sold wood, and extirpated & garden in the aforesaid land
to the disherison of so-and so the heir to the value of


so much, and thereon he produces a suite &c.


To which the woman may make answer thus: AÁnd 5.
the said woman comes and defends the waste, the sale, Theanswer
and the exile against so-and-so and his sect. And that woman
she has sold nothing thereof, nor has done anything of Fe "
that kind to the disherison of the said heir, and she can
show that the house fell down from old age, and she has
constructed for herself better houses, or if she took any-
thing from the wood, that she did not take thence any-
thing except reasonable estovers to burn, or to build, or
to fence upon that land which she holds as dower, and
nothing beyond. And that she has taken nothing more,
nor in any other mode, she can put herself upon an in-
quest of the country, although there are some who say
that against the sect of the plaintiff she may defend


6.
Fiat visus
de vasto,
et fiat inde


. inquisitio


f. 316,


15
Item re-
spondere
potest ad
vastum
mulieris.


8.
Uterque
ponere se
possit in
patriam.


600 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


legem, et sic evadere posnà: q esse non debet, quiáà
cüm damnum ita factu sit in re eorporali q manifes-
tum erit aspectibus oculorum, non poterit p lege de-
fendere q non sit ita, quia sic esset visus contrarius
Sacramento juratorum. Melius igitur est quód cüm
mulier vastum defendat, q fiat visus de re vastata
conira phibitione, & qualitate facti, & quantitate.


Et càüm p visum & sacramentum pborü hominu &
legalià de vasto constiterit, emendetur vastum. Sed -
in omnibus obligationibus, & cotraetibus, & stipulatio-
nibus, qus consensu & animo contrahuntur, sicut in
conventionibus, pmissionibus, donationibus, venditioni-
bus, & hmodi, si tame secta pducatur, & secta exa-
minata fuerit, et tantü psumptioné- inducat, poterit ille
de quo queritur contra sectam talis se defedere per .
lege, duplicatis ad minus psonis juratorü, quia cüm
plures simt in defensione, dicta eoru majore faciunt
psumptione. Et sic major presumptio vincit minorem.
Si auté querens pbationem habuerit, sicut instrumenta
& chartas sigillatas, contra hujusmodi pbationes non
erit defensio p legem. Sed si in instrumento contra-
dieatur, fides instrumenti pbabitur per patriam & per
testes. | |


Poterit etiam mulier respondere, q si vastum. ibi
factum sit, non fuit factum tepore suo, sed t&pore
alterius, s. viri sui, custodis, vel heredis ante assig-
nationem dotis, q si querens negaverit, veritas inqui-
ratur per patriam. E |

Cüm igitur necesse sit visum facere de vasto, cüm


querens sectam habuerit, et mulier vastum defenderit,
et uterq se posuerit super patria, peipietur vie. q


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 601


herself by her law and so escape à penalty, which ought
not to be, for since damage has thus been done in a cor-
poreal thing which is manifest to the sight of the eyes,
she cannot by her law deny that it is not so, for so the
view would be contrary to the oath of the jurors. tis
better, therefore, that when the woman denies waste,
that & view be taken of the thing wasted against the
prohibition both in the quality of the act and in the
quantity. |

And when by the view and the oath of honest and 6.
loyal men the waste has been ascertained, let the waste "i Pod
be amended. But in all obligations, and contracts and the wiste,
stipulations, which are contracted hy consent and inten- Karim
tion, as in conventions, promises, donations, sales, and thereupon
such like, if a sect be produced and a sect be examined id
and it only raises & presumption, he concerning whom
the complaint is made may be able against the sect
of the said party to defend himself by his law, upon
doubling at least the persons of the jurors, because when
lhere are à greater number on the side of the defence,
their verdict raises & greater presumption. And so the
greater presumption overcomes the less. But if the
complainant has a proof, as for instance instruments and
sealed charters, against proofs of this kind a defence
cannot be rested on the law. But if the instrument be
gainsayed, the faith of the instrument shall be proved
by the country and by witnesses. f. 816.


The woman also may answer, that if waste has been 7


committed, it was not committed in her time but in the Likewise
' : the woman
time of another person,t o wit, her husband, or her guar- may reply


dian, or the heir before the assignment of her dower, Ee "
which if the complainant denies, it shall be inquired into wasc.


by the eountry.


Since therefore ib is necessary to hold & view of the s.


" waste, when the plaintiff has a sect, and the woman Esch may |
: put them-
denies the waste, and each has put themselves on the selves


602 | DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


assumptis secum militibus fieri faciat visum de vasto
illo per tale breve, et g xii milites veniant ad certu
dié ad certificandü de vasto illo.


9. Rex vicecom salute. Precipimus tibi q assumptis
sid. tecum tam militibus quàm aliis liberis libere tenenti-
vastum — bus, legalibus, & discretis hominibus de visneto tali,
P'mitem in ppria persona tua accedas ad maneriü tale, quod
et patriam, À. quee fuit uxor B. tenet in dotem de hzreditate
iu ipsius B. et eisdem hominibus habere facias visum de
tionem jus domibus, boscis, & gardinis ejusdem  manerii, tàm in-
HOIMTHS — toriüs, quà exteriàs. Et unde przdietus talis queritur,

q presdieta À. contra consuetudinem regni nostri vas-
tum ibi fecit, destructionem et exilium, s. q in uno
bosco tot quercus pstravit et vendidit, & etiam domos
pstravit, et extra terram quam tenet in dotem domum
zedificavit, & pterea quód villanos 1manumisit, & terras
& redditus vendidit & alienavit, & unde predicta A.
dieit quód de pdicto bosco nihil cepit nisi rationabile
estoveriü suum, ad ardenduü et claudendum, & tot
quercus de quibus talia :dificia et talia reparavit. Et
per sacramentum xii. ex pdictis hominibus; qui melius
sciant & velint veritatem dicere diligéter inquiras, q
vastü & quod exilium ibi faetum fuerit, et in quibus
rebus, & quid, et quantum captum fuit in bosco illo,
et ad quid, et p que, et utrum pdicta A. vastum ibi
fecit postquàm  boseus ille devenit in manus suas, vel
si alius inde vastum fecit ante tempus suum. Et in-
quisitione quà inde feceris scire facies justiciariis nos-
iris, etiam tali die evideter, distincte, et, aperté, secun-
dum q per sacramentum pdictorum xii. hominum facta
fuerit, per literas tuas sigillatas, et p quatuor legales


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 608


country, let the viseount be enjoined that having taken upon an
with him some knights he cause a view to be had of that "1"***
waste by such a writ, and that twelve knights come on

& certain day to certify concerning that waste.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you 9.

' that having taken with you certain as well knights as À "ritto
other free freeholders, loyal and disereet men, of that waste by
neighbourhood, you go in your proper person to such a he" | -
manor, which A. who was the wife of B. holds in dower thecountry,
of the inheritance of the said B., and you cause those want
men to hold a view of the houses, woods, and gardens of s mu
the said manor, as well internally as externally. And iicisrios,
whereof so-and-so aforesaid complains that the aforesaid

À., contrary to the custom of our realm, has caused

waste there or destruetion and exile, to wit, that in one

wood she has felled so many oaks and sold them, and

has likewise pulled down houses, and has built à house

outside the land which she holds in dower, and besides

that she has manumitted villeins, and has sold and
alienated lands and rents, and whereupon the aforesaid

À. says that she has taken nothing from the said wood -

but her reasonable estovers, for firing and for fencing,

and so many oaks wherewith she has repaired such and

Such buildings. And by the oath of twelve of the afore-

said men, who know best and are willing to say the

truth, do thou make diligent inquiry what waste and

what exile has been there caused, and in what things,

and what and how much has been taken in that wood,

and for what and by whom, and whether the aforesaid

A. has eaused waste there after the wood has come into

her hands, or if another has caused waste there before

her time. And certify to our justiciaries the inquest

which you have made thereon on such a day evidently,
distinctly, and openly, according as it has been made by

the oath of the aforesaid twelve men, by your sealed

letters and by four loyal and discreet men out of those


10.
Si mulier
de vasto
convitca-
tur, qua
pena
sequatur.


11.
Breve de
apponendo
forestario.


f. 316 b.


604 .DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


&. diseretos homines, ex illis per quorum saeramétum
inquisitione illà feceris, et habeas ibi &c. Teste &c.


Si aute in bosco aliquo factum fuerit vastum &
destructio, et mulier inde p inquisitione convincatur,
talis erit ei poena infligenda, & in tantü erit coarc-
tanda, q de esetero nihil eapiat in bosco illo nisi (p


. visum forestariorum hseredis) rationabile estoverium


suum, et talis servitus ille imponetur ad poena secu-
dum q pbatur in rotulo de termino S. Michaelis anii
regni regis H. tertio incipiente quarto in comitatu
Norff. de Thoma de le Enveyse et Matilda uxore ejus,
& similiter de termino P. anii regni regis H. nono in
cofi Norff. de Margeria de Raylie, ubi de cósilio curie |
ppter vastü appositus fuit forestarius. Et q forestarius
apponi debet ppter vastü et transgressione mulieris,
pbatur in rotulo pdicto, et de forestario apponendo fiat
tale breve.


Rex vieecoih salutem. Scias q ppter destruciione q
facta est in bosco et in terra quam À. de N. tenet in
dote in tali villa de hereditate B. de N. pvisum est
in euria nostra cor& justic. nostris, q idem B. apponat
forestarium suum ad przdietum boscum custodiendum,
it& quód predicta A. nó habeat in eodé bosco misi
rationabile estoveriü suü. ad ardendü, sdifieandü, et
claudendü, tantü sup eandem terrà quam ipsa tenet in
dotem de hereditate ipsius B. in eadem villa, & hoc
nullo modo nisi p visum & liberatione forestariorü ip-.
sius B. Si autem in terris, domibus, gardinis vel pas-
turis incorrigibilis existat, tune addatur clausula ista:
pvisum est etiam in eadem curia nostra q pdictus B.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 605


by whose oath you have held the inquest, and have there
&c. Witness &c.


But if waste and destruction has been made in any 10.
wood, and the woman has been convicted thereof by an p "
inquest, such & penalty shall be inflicted upon her, and convieted
to such an extent is she to be constrained, that she shall 95 vaste
take nothing more from that wood, except upon the penalty
view of the foresters of the heir her reasonable estovers, "^0 V5
and let sueh a servitude be imposed upon her as a
penalty, aecording to what is proved in the roll of St.
Michael's term in the third and fourth years of the reign
of king Henry, in the county of Norfolk, concerning
Thomas de le Enveyse and Matilda his wife, and in like
manner in Easter term, in the ninth year of the reign of
king Henry in the county of Norfolk, concerning Mar-
gery de Raylie, where upon the advice of the court on
account of waste & forester was appointed. And that a&
forester ought to be appointed on aecount of the waste
and trespass of the woman is proved in the aforesaid
roll, and for the appointment of a forester let such a

writ issue.


The king to the viscount greeting. Know thou that 11. ;
on aecount of the destruction which has been caused in ippODdDE
the wood and on the land which A. de N. holds in dower ? forester.
in such a vill of the inheritance of B. de N., it has been
provided in our court before our justiciaries that the
said B. shall appoint his own forester to proteet the
aforesaid wood, so that the aforesaid A. shall not have f. 316 b.
in the same wood anything except her reasonable estovers
for burning, building, and fencing only upon so much
land which she holds in dower from the inheritance of
the said B. in the same vill, and this in no other manner
than by the view and delivery of the foresters of the
said B. Butif she be incorrigible in the lands, houses,
gardens and pastures, then let this clause be added: it
has also been provided in our seid court that the afore.


12.
Refert
utrum quis
vastum
fecerit in
proprio
vel alieno.


606 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


apponat sibi serviente suü ad curam capiedam, ne
eadé A. destruetione faciat in domibus, gardinis, et
pasturis, eb q non capiat de hominibus ejusdé terrm
nisi rationabiles exitus, & servitia, (i facere debent et
solent. Et ideo tibi peipim? q non impedias pdictu
B. quin possit ibi apponere forestariu suu, et serviente
suu, secundü q predietu est, ne p defectu tui inde
clamore audiamus. . Teste &c.


Et refert utrü quis vastü faciat in pprio aut alieno;
et est ppriü, et magis pprium, et est alienü et magis
alienu. Magis ppriü, ut si quis habeat in fundo suo
jus possessionis et pprietatis, in quo si vastü faciat nó
erit tale vastü alieui injuriosum, licet sibi damnosum,
nisi servitus constituatur p modum donationis ne pos-
sit. Item est pprium, ut si quis teneat ad vitam suam
tantum, ubi tenens habuerit liberü tenemeétü tantü, et
alius pprietate, et sic utitur tenens quodamodo in pprio
quoad rationabile estoveriü ppter liberü tefitum, & sie
non facit vastü nec injuriam, utendo p mensuram. Sed
si mensurà excedat utendo, et eapiendo ultra rationa-
bile estoveriü suum, utitur quasi in alieno, et sic erit
vastum injuriosü, nisi vastü ita modicü fuerit, ppter q
non sit inquisitio facienda, ut de termino S. T. aíá


regis H. decimoquinto in comitatu Bed. de Petro Pey-


jure. Et quid debeat adjudicari ad vastüu, et quid non,
ppter magnitudine et parvité, habet jlibet patria suum -
modü, constitutione, et cosuetudine, Est etiàm quasi


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 607


.said B. shall appoint his own servant to take care, lest
the said À. cause destruction in the houses, gardens, and
pastures, and that she shall not exact from the men of.
the said land any but reasonable outgoings and services,
which they ought and are accustomed to furnish. And
therefore we enjoin you that you do not impede the said
B. from appointing his own forester and his own servant,
aecording to what has been.said above, lest from your
default we should hear any complaint from that SEEN
Witness &c.


And it is of importance whether & person has com- 12.
mitted waste in his own or in another's land ; and there EE
is ones own simply and one's own in a greater degree, , whether a

person has
and there is another's simply and another's in à greater committed
degree. One's own in a greater degree, as if one has in waste in


. one's own estate the right of possession and the right of LOT
property, in which if he has caused waste such waste voii 8
will not be injurious to any one, although damaging to a
himself, unless à servitude be created by the manner of

the donation that he may not be able. Likewise there

is one's own, as if & person has for his own life only
where the tenant has had the freehold only, and another

the property, and so the tenant uses it as if it were in
some manner his own as regards reasonable estovers, on
account of his freehold, and so he does not cause waste.

nor injury in using according to measure. But if he
exceeds measure in using it and in taking beyond his
reasonable estovers, he uses as 16 were another's, and so
there will be injurious waste, unless the waste has been

so moderate, that àn inquest ought not to be held about

it, as in Holy Trinity term in the fifteenth year of king
Henry, in the county of Bedford, concerning Peter Pey-
jure. And what ought to be adjudged waste and what

not, on aecount of its greatness or its littleness, each
country has its own measure, constitution, and custom.
There is & kind of another's property, as if & person has


18.
Quid est
vastum,
et quid
exilium.


f. 317.


608 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


alienü, ut si quis fundu habuerit in manu sua ratione
custodie, in qua quide non habet nec jus pprietatis,


nec jus possessionis, nisi tantum nudum dominium cü


possessione, si vastü fecerit, facit vastü quasi in alieno.
Et ideo si de vasto convineatur, amittit custodia et
restituet dàna, et det domino regi misericordiam, q non
est in muliere si de dote sua fecerit vastum, quia do-
tem: non amittit, sed custos vel curator ei adjungatur,
qui impediat ne faciat, et damna debet refundere. Et
est magis alienum, ubi quis, cüm nihil horu habuerit,


vastum fecerit in alieno, sine licentia et voluntate |


eorü quorum res fuerit. Et tale vastum cum sit ita
injuriosum, càüm sit quasi roberia, vertitur in nóvam
disseysina, vel in transgressionem, secundü q psumptor
dixerit tenementum illud esse suum vel non.


Item de hoc q dicit vastum et exilium, sciendum q
non sunt referenda ad eunde intellectu, sed vastum
et destruetio fere idem sunt, quia covertibiliter se
habent vastuü et destructio et vastum idem .est q


destructio, et econverso, & se habent ad omnem de-


structionem generaliter.  Exilium veró dici poterit
generaliter, ubi quid sit ad magnam deformitate curie


& capitalis mesuagii, ut si quis domos prostraverit et


vendiderit, hoe erit.ad magnam deformitatem, ut si
inhabitatores mansionem habuerint derelictam. ltem
si arbores et pomaria crescentia in curia, vel circa
domos prostraverit, et extirpaverit, quod erit ad grave
damnum et maxime deformitatem.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 609


in his own hand an estate by reason of guardianship, in
which indeed he has not the right of property nor the
right of possession, but only the naked dominion with
possession, if he has caused waste, he has caused it as it
. were in another's estate. And accordingly if he be con-
victed of waste, he loses the custody and shall restore
the damages and let him pay to the king an amercia-
ment, which does not take place in the case of à woman,
if she commits waste in her dower, because she does not
lose her dower, but & guardian or a curator is imposed
upon her, who is to prevent her doing it, and she ought -
to refund the damages. And there is the case of a thing
being another's in a greater degree, where a person,
when he has none of these things, has caused waste in
another's property, without the licence and will of those
to whom the thing belongs. And such a waste when it is
so injurious, when it is as i& were robbery, is turned into
novel disseysine, or into trespass, according as the in-
truder says that the tenement is his own or not.


Likewise concerning this which is called waste and uis. -
exile, itis to be known that they are not to be referred to Whats
the same meaning, but waste and destruction are nearly whatis .
the same, because waste and destruetion are convertible, €*ile-
and waste is the same as destruction, and conversely,
and they refer to every kind of destruction generally.
But exile may be said generally, where anything has
been done to the great disfigurement of the court and
chief messuage, as if any one has pulled down houses
and sold them, this will be to their great disfigurement,
as if the inhabitants had their mansion derelict.  Like-
wise if he has cut down trees and orchards growing in |
the court and has rooted them up, which will be to the £317.
grievous damage and great disfigurement of the estate.


Q 1802. Q Q


ul.
Si custos
vastum
fecerit 1n
alieno,
sieut in
terra quam
tenuit
nomine
custodi,
breve ne
faciat.


9


Si custos
de vasto


610 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


CAP. XIX.


Cum autem custos vastum fecerit in custodia sua
quasi in alieno, preciplatur vicecomiti q non pmittat
talem vastum facere vel exiliu &e. p tale breve. Rex
vie. salute. Preeipimus tibi quód non permittas quód
talis vastum faciat, venditionem, vel exiliu, de terris -
&c. (ut supra) que habet in eustodia de hereditate
talis in. tali villa ad exhsredationem &c. et sic fiat
attachiamentum ut superius. Vel sic: Si talis fecerit
te securum &e. pone per vadium &e. D. quóàd sit tali
die ad respondendu B. qux fuit uxor C. matri B. filie
& heredi ipsius C. quare fecit vastum &e. ut supra.
Et ita observetur ordo attachiamentorum, ut supra, in
actione personali. Et notandü q ad vastum judicari
debet, si mulier in dote sua, vel custos in custodia
sua, terras, redditus, servos, vel alias res hereditarias
vendiderit, vel alienaverit, vel si servos manumiserit,
vel plus sequo talliaverit, p q destruantur. ltem si
domos prostraverit & alibi ide zsdifieaverit, vel si eas
combusserit, & non easu fortuito. Item si boscum vel
gardinum in toto vel im pte extirpaverit. Item quie-
quid inde captum fuerit, datum, venditum, vel abduc-
tum, & alibi zdificatum, & quiequid extra terram aspor-
tatum fuerit, sed refert utrum magnum fuerit vel
modicum, secundum quod supradietum est. Non au-
tem debet ad vastum judicari q captum fuerit ad repa-
ratione domorum utilem & necessariam, cüm per hoe
melioretur heredis conditio. Et si quid fiat consimile.


Cüm autem custos vastum faciat in custodia sua &
inde convineatur, (non refert utrum ante prohibitione


such a day to answer to B. who was the wife of C.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. G11


CHAPTER XIX. ,


But when a guardian has caused waste in his guardian- |.
ship as if in another's estate, let it be enjoined to the al ei
viscount that he should not permit him to make such caused
waste or exile, &c., by à writ of this kind. The king to Med]
the viscount greeting. We enjoin you that you should estate, as
not permit that so-and-so should cause waste, sale, or ein :


exile of the lands, &e. (as above), which he holds in has helà
guardianship of the inheritance of so-and-so in such a& ne of
vill, to the disherison, &c,, and so let an attachment be guardian-
made as above: or thus, if so-and-so has given you za e
security, &c., place D. under bail, &c, to be present on rir
the mother of B. the daughter and heir of the said C.,
wherefore he has caused waste, &c, as above. And so

let the order of attachments be observed, as above, in a
personal action. And it is to be noted that it ought to be
adjudged waste, if à woman in her dower, or à guardian

in his guardianship, has sold or alienated lands, rents,

serfs, or other hereditary things, or if he has manumitted

serfs, or has taxed them more than was equitable,
whereby they are destroyed. Likewise if he has pulled

down houses, and has built elsewhere with the materials,

orif he has burnt them down, and not by a fortuitous
aecident. Likewise if has rooted up à wood or a garden

in entirety or in part. Likewise whatever has been

taken therefrom, given away, sold, or led away, or built
elsewhere, and whatever has been carried away beyond

the estate, but it matters whether it was much or little,
aecording to what has been said above. But it ought

not to be adjudged as waste what has been taken for the

useful and necessary repairs of houses, since the condi.

tion of the heir is ameliorated thereby. And if any

thing of a similiar kind has been .done.


But when a guardian has caused waste in his guar- 2. :
a guar-


dianship and has been convieted thereof (it. 1matters not dian has
QQ2


convinca-?
tur, quz
pena
sequatur.


ju
Mortua
muliere,
ad quem
revertitur
dos.


qo sMgt


612 DE ACTIONE DOTIS.


-


vel post) talem pcenam inceurret, s. inprimis amittet
custodiam & in misericordia domini regis remanebit,
et damna restaurabit. Et quód ita sit, inveniri pote-
rit inter plaeita qu:ze sequuntur regem anno regni sui
vicesimo de Johanne de Daco & filia & herede Jo-
hannis de Bray coram lI. de Lacy in comitatu Lync.
& W. de Ralegh.


CAP. XX.


Mortua muliere seysita de dote sua, statim reverta-
bur dos sua ad hszredem proprietarium, vel ad alium -
qui fuerit loco h:zeredis, nisi forte hzres dotem in vita .
mulieris alienaverit, vel donationem fecerit vel vendi-
tionem de duabus partibus, & postea attornaverit emp-
tori, vel donatorio! servitium mulieris, & attornaverit
eam quod sit intendens donatorio vel emptori sieut
waranto de dote sua, quo casu si attornaverit se et
servitium suu, sequunt dos et seisima sua post morte
ejus jus et pprietate d sut in donatorio vel emptore.
Item no revertit ad hzerede (ut supra dictu est) im
parte, dos post mortem mulieris ubi mulier dotem
nominatam vel non nominatanj recuperaveritó versus
heredem, qui terram warantizavit versus mulierem, &
mulier recuperaverit, & heres mihil habeat de quo
escambiu facere possit ante mortem mulieris. Et ideo
per judieium revertetur dos ad donatorium vel ad
emptorem, & non ad hsredem, propter jus merum q
ipsi habent. Si autem cüm hsres donationem fecerit
de duobus partibus, & servitium mulieris attornaverit,
& heres qui dedit & vendidit se intruserit in terram
illam contra chartam & donum & factum: pprium,
consulitur emptori sive donatorio per tale breve de
ingressu.


! « donatario," MS. Rawl. C. 160, hic et alibi pro ** donatorio."'


Digitized by Google | » Ec


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 618


whether before or after & prohibition), he shall incur a been con-
penalty, to wit, he shall lose the guardianship, and shall dieid i
remain at the mercy of the lord the king, and shall re- what
Store the damages. And that it is so may be found in ded
the pleas which follow the king in the twentieth year of

his reign, concerning John de Daco and the daughter and

heiress of John de Bray, before J. de Lacy, in the county


of Lyncoln, and William de Ralegh.


| CHAPTER XX.
Upon the death of the woman who is seysed of her !.


dower, let her dower revert forthwith to the proprietary jy, paie
.heir, or to another person who is in the place of an heir, reverts
unless by chance the heir has alienated the dower in the AER Es
lifetime of the woman, or has made & donation or a sale thewoman.
of the two thirds, and has afterwards attourned to the
purchaser or to the donee the service of the woman, or

has attourned her that she be intendant upon the donee

or purchaser as & warrantor for her dower, in which case

if she has attourned herself and her service, her dower

and her seysine follow after her death the right and pro-
prietorship which are in the donee or the purchaser.
Likewise the dower does not revert to the heir as above

said in part after the death of the woman where the f 317 b.
woman has recovered a specified or an unspecified dower
against the heir, who has warranted the land against the
woman, and the woman has recovered her dower, and

the heir has nothing wherewith he can make compensa-

tion before the death of the woman. And therefore the

dower wil revert by à judgment to the donee or the
purchaser, and not to the heir, on account of the abso-

lute right which they have. But if when the heir has

made & donation of two thirds, and has attourned the
service of the woman, and the heir, who has given and

sold it, has intruded himself into that land contrary to a
charter and a8 donation and his own act, aid is given to

the purchaser or to the donee by & writ of this kind.


614 DE ACTIONE' DOTIS.


Si heeres Rex vicecofü salutem.  Precipe A. quód juste & sine
Den dilatione reddat B. tantam terram cum ptinentiis in
vita muli- tah villa, quam clamat esse jus suum ratione doni
2 om quod idem A. ei feeit p chartam suam, ub ide B. dieit,
mulierem in quam ide A. non habet ingressum nisi p hoc quód
donatorio co intrusit in terrà illam contra chartam & donum
suum, post mortem talis mulieris, qui! terram illain
tenuit in dotem de preedicto B. & servitium ei indé
fecit tota vita sua, & quod ad predictum B. reverti
debuit post mortem predicte mulieris ratione doni
ipsius A. ut idé B. dicit, vel aliter si donator obierit
& donatorius, & extraneus se intruserit, & hseres do-


natori petierit fiat ei tale breve


Rex vieecomi salute.  Proecipe A. q juste & sine

P. dore dilatione reddat B. tantam terram cum ptinentiis in
venté tali villa, qua clamat esse jus suum ratione doni quod -
e due C. pater D. fecit E. patri pradieti B. eujus heres ipse
tenvit, et est, & in quam idem A. non habet ingressum nis p
eee ug talem muliere, quz se intruserit in terram illam post
natum fuit mortem talis alterius mulieris, ij terrà illam tenuit in
Wins. doté de E. patre ipsius B. eujus hsres ipse est, & ser-
ad here- Vitium suu ei inde fecit tota vita sua, & quse ad
cas pdietu B. reverti debet post mortem pdictw» mulieris
ratione doni q predictus C. ei inde fecit ut idem A.


dicit. Et nisi fecerit &c. et sic revertitur dos.


FINIS TRACTATÓS SEXTI LIBRI QUARTI.


- -— — — -——


! ** que," MS. Raw]. C. 160. et Reg. 6. E. xv.


OF AN ACTION FOR DOWER. 615


*


The king to the viseount greeting.  Enjoin A.that 2.
justly and without delay he should restore to B. so much ende
land with its appurtenanees in such a vill, which he a donation
claims to be his own by reason of a donation which the ks i a
said À. made to him by his charter, as the said B. says, the woman


into which À. has not ingress excepting so far as he has but
intruded himself into that land contrary to his charter ie
and donation after the death of the aforesaid woman Fus
who held that land as her dower from the aforesaid B.

and did service to him thereof during the whole of her

. lifetime, and which ought to revert to B. aforesaid after

the death of the said woman by reason of the donation

on the part of said A., as the said B. says, or otherwise

if the donor has died and the donee, and a stranger has
intruded himself, and the heir of the donee has made a

claim, let à writ of this kind be issued to hiin.-


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin A. that 8


justly and without delay he should restore to B. so much apa
land with its appurtenanees in such a vill which he given away
claims to be his own by reason of a donation which C. vxidion


the father of D. made to E. the father of the aforesaid the woman
B., whose heir the said B. is, and into which the said A. qe dover,
has no ingress except through such woman, who has puse
intruded herself into that land after the death of the has been
said other woman, who held that land as dower from 2feurned
E. the father of the said B., whose heir the said B. is, donee, and
.and did service to him on that account during the whole 79 ^90
of her life, and which ought to revert to the said B.

after the death of the aforesaid woman by reason of the
donation which the said C. made to him thereof as the

said À. says. And unless he shall have done so &c., and


so the dower reverts.


HERE ENDS THE SIXTH TREATISE OF THE FOURTH BOOK,


Bayerische ;
Staetsbibliothek


München


9
P.

"
2,


$44
4i
«


*
06
]
*
D
-
t
.
.
' .
.
'
D
*
*
E
.
n
z .
" "
—-
n
E
LI
* [N
E:
8 .
ku cso P
D


.


u
"
. .
; ,
.
.
D
,
.
d
"
'
T
- .
um
*
L .
;
.
i .
"
i N
/
i .
.
€ N LI
" .
dic Ne CRM TTPRHECPRETPLAMCEERERETENL


"4 *v
"^ .


Seda o


I N D E X.


NL os


] À.


Abbots and priors :
who have churches of their own, may
be called rectors in a certain sense,
369.
nre entitled to the same remedies as
laymen, if disseysed of their lands,
375.

Abbot of Messendene, his action against
Hubert de Burgh concerning the
church of Owelton, 71.

A cres, feoffment of 10 enfeoffed to another
retaken by the lord into his own
hand upon the death of sub-feoffee,
181.

Adam de N., Sussex Iter, 10 H. 3; assise
of the death of an ancestor, 13.

Admeasureiuent: |

of dower to be made, where the
quantity to be assigned is disputed
by the heir, 593.

of dower sometimes taken away by
efflux of time,

pending its discussion, the woman's

. improvement of her land is not to
be taken into account, 595.

Advocate of an advowson, who is so
called, 25.

Advowson:

parceners of an, must unite in pre-
senting, 5.

vacancy of an, cognisable by the
ordinary, 35, 39.

when determinable by an assise, 37.


- 7€.


Advowson—econt,
right of, appurtenant to a tenement,
,cannot be exercised before the
tenement has been recovered, 49.
widow cannot present, because the
ehurch is situated in her dower-
land, unless she was endowed with
the entire advowson, 51.
always remains with the part of a
manor retained, 51.
donation of an, invalid, where the
donor is not in possession of any
land, to which the advowson is
appurtenant, 71.
Agnes:
the wife of Rufus, immediate recovery
of her dower, where the tenant
of the land had no warrantor, 457.
the wife of Nicholas, her conditional
assignment of dower, 495.
the first wife of Robert de Hocton,
divorced on account of affinity, 531.
Alan, the son of Julius, claim of his widow
Asselina for dower, 493.
Alexandria, a certain, her action for dower,
4 H.3; 525.
Alexander, the son of Ralph, defendant in
an action of dower, 465.
Alice: ,
the wife of Hugh of Alencester, her
writ of dower abated by reason of
her mendacity as to part of her
dower, 459.
the wife of Ados and the daughter of
Peter, her writ of dower abnated


from error as to part of her dower,
159.


am  akSe


|
]


.- Li b -c» Le]
E* ui Z4 E! PW 1
] 29 e e
-—- -— Dres E $e
v Er» » "y
» z^ TA - »
wa see c P 2 ^w
F. FE. » w 2x
6020 INDEX.


Alice—cont.

wife of Roger de Camera, not en-
dowed at the church door, 511.

the wife of Baldwin, lost her suit as
not endowed at the church door,
511.

wife of Jacobus de Cardeville, not
endowed at the church door, 511.


the wife of William de Thornton,
recovered her dower on producing
a sect to prove her endowment, 515.

the wife of Richard, the son of Diva,
lost her dower, as the husband's
land was another's right, and he
had lost it by a judgment, 557.


& widow, established her claim of


dower against a termor, 'Thomas de
S. Licio, in the county of Lincoln,
515.
Aldithia, claim of dower after sentence of
a Court of Christianity 1n favour of
her marriage, 505.
Agreement proveable sometimes by an
instrument. and witnesses, some-
times by an assise, 399.
Alez, Herbert de, claim to an advowson,
as retaining a part of the manor to
which it is appendant, 51.
Amelioration by the woman not to be
taken into account in the admeasure-
ment of the land appointed for her
dower, 595.
Amundevil, Rogerus de, assise of mort-
dancester, 300.
Anglie Lex:
| husband's interest in wife's property,
52, 64.
husband's right to present in virtue of
wife's dower, 75.
alteration of law in 1259, 74.
monsters cannot be heirs, 259.
bastards may not hold by, 311.
tenement held according to, 551.
Aquila, Gilbert de:
defendant against the prior of Lewes
in an assise of utrum in a Sussex
Iter of 15 H. 3; 375.


Aquila, Gilbert de—cont.

defendant against Ralph de Rupe in

an assise of mortdancester in à

Sussex Iter of 3 H. 3; 323.

Arbervil, William de, a ward of the arch-

. bishop of Canterbury, 57.

Arundel, Robert de, and Catherine his -

wife, custom of dower in the county

of Lincoln, 549.
Assise:

a great, the alternative of trial by

. battle, 67.

great, when a tenant may defend

.himselfagainst an elder born brother

as claimant, 345.


Assise of last presentation :
who are entitled to it, 3.
does not lie in the case of a vicarage,

nor of a prebend, nor of a chapel,
33.
church of Cheyley in. Somersetshire,
15.
church of Suterlege in Norfolk, 33.
church of Elderson in Worcestershire,
35.
church of Haspeele in Bedfordshire,
95.
chureh of Weleton in Lincolnshire,
55.
church of Tunston in Norfolk, 55.
church of St. Mary, Wisbro in Wor-
cestershire, 57.
church of Stokshyre in Kent, 57.
church of Pencombe in Herts, 59.
church of Sneath in Kent, 67.
church of Judliham in Norfolk, 67.
chureh of Sudmel in Beds, 69.
church of Owelton in Norfolk, 71.
church of Stoke in Staffordshire, 71.
church of Wyke in Cornwall, 71.
church of Seyle in Leicestershire, 72.
church of Hecfenur in Yorkshire, 73:
chureh of Harpdown in Oxfordshire,
. 89.
church of Eltdene in Derbyshire, 97.
when it may be held upon a previous
assise, 443.


Digitized by Google EE d


INDEX.


Assise of mortdancester :


si Bartholomew de Waterdene, 12.

si. Adam de N., 12.

8i Radulphus de Wadleyham, 14.

si Thomas de Colvile, 12.

si Brianus filius Henrici, 160.

si Alavie Huse, 171.

g Robertus filius Cinul, 173.

si Robertus de Estwicham, 174.

si Walterus Chamlenger, 178.

si Simon de Hokedes,

si Robertus de Wylington, 181.

si Brianus, 181.

. $i Eudo pater Walteri, 246.

.si Fredericus, 253.

$i Alicia, 259.

si Agnes filia Eve de Benyngworth,
261.

8i Henricus Russell, 261.

.8&1 Wilhelmus Nowell, 262.

si Rogerus de Maunderville, 262.

si Gilbertus, 264.

si Wilhelmus Turpin, 264.

si Stephanus de Pulthorp, 267.

si Ricardus Faber, 269.

si Laurentius Galant, 270.

,8i Wilhelmus de Carleton, 276.

si Wilhelmus de Camera, 278.

si Rogerus Battayl, 279.

| 8i Richardus Avenel, 280.

si Manasserus de Hastings, 280.

8i Eudo pater Walteri, 287.

si Emma mater Rogeri, 288.

$1 Walterus filius Wilhelmi, 288.

si Adhelophus, 298.

$i Henricus filius Yaonis, 299.

si Odo filius 'l'horsini, 300.

si Rogerus de Amundevil, 300.

si Wilhelmus de Carleolo, 302.

si Henricus Russel, 304.

si Leonata de tenemento in Weston,
9804.

si Ricardus Faber, 804.

si Philippa de Cokfend, 308.

si Walterus Curteys, 310.

si Radulphus de Rupe super Gilbertum
de Aquila, 328.

si Adam le Gardener, 327.


621


Assise of mortdancester— cont.


si Wilhelmus de Herst, 329.

si Henricus Paynefore, 329.

si Petrus filius Wymund, 447.

concerning Humfrey de Leycester and
Juliana his wife, 221.

concerning William de Camera, 221.

eoncerning a8 certaiu Mabilia and
Johanna, 256.

between Ralph Basset and Thomas de
Pietesse, 279.

in the county of Boiss 21 H. 3;
467.

parties may terminate an assise by an
aecord, 145.

when not to be stayed by reason ofthe
writ being lost, 155.


not stayed by the death of one of
several claimants, 177.

not allowable,between privies in blood,
185.

does not extend to a grandfather nor
to à grandson, 185.

allowed to the heirs of a person, who
would have been himself entitled to
an assise of novel disseysino, 197.

exception of a tenant must be proved
in the manner of an assise or a jury
221.

abates from uncertainty, if jurors do
not know, whether the tenant holds
the entire tenement, or not, 221.


. whoare entitled to it, 225.


exceptions of a tenant against the
articles of the writ, 235.

exception of bastardy against an an-
cestor not triable by a Court of
Christianity, as the ancestor is dead,
240.

may raise a question of status, 25].

exception, that the tenant cannot an-
swer without the King, 255.

does not lie in boroughs, 263.

does not lie in the demesnes of the
King, 265. |

fails where the jarors know nothing
about the plaintiff, 269,


622 INDEX.


Assise of mortdancester— cont.

fails, where there has been a convie-
tion of felony or an outlawry for
contumacy, 27].

fails from a natural defect-on the part
of the tenant, 279.

fails where the tenant is a madman,
279.

fails, where the tenant has a charter
of the lord the King, 281.

minor shall not answer until he comes
of age, 283.

where several parceners are claimants,
293.

does not bold between blood relations,
such as coheirs, 313.

when it may lie, 319.

by a nephew against a chief lord, 323.

terminated by an exception of bas.
tardy, 325.

when it will lie between the elder-born
and the younger-born brother, 341.

not to be taken upon an assise of mort-
dancester concerning the same thing
between the same parties, 437.

Assisa utrum :

whether the tenement is a lay fee of
the tenant oris free alms appertain-
ing to the church of some rector,
368.

'The only remedy formerly fora rector
to claim free alms, 369.

held by Martin de Pateshull in Suffolk,
12 H. 3; 371.

of Utrum may not be brought by a
viear fora small pension paid to a
religious house, 371.

answer of a layman to a clerk, 372.

answer of a clerk to a layman, 371.

does not lie in the case of land given
to cathedral or conventual churches,
379.

only as to land given to parochial
churches in free alms, 373.

held in the manner of a jury, 379.

utrum una hyda terre 5 H. 3; 388.

utrum duce viugatie terre, 12 H. 3 ;
387.


Digitized by Google NS P.


Assise of utrum—cont.
can never be taken upon a previous
assise of utrum, for it passes into
an adjudged case, 443.
Assise :
of novei disseysine when available for
the parson of a church, 379.
does not lie in the demesnes of the
king, 265. 1
of redisseysine stayed upon assertion
ofa recovery by a previous assise of
novel disseysine, 435.
turned into a jury, case of a suppositi-
tious child, 311. :
also case of an adulterous offspring, i5.
turned into a jury in several cases, 309.
ought not to be held upon au assise,
267.
may be taken after an assise, wliere
the parties are not the same, 459.
not to be taken upon an assise of novel
disseysine between the same parties
concerning the same thing, 435.
when it may be so taken ina case of
disseysine, 441,
Astrarii, in atrio sive in astro, 229.
Attachment of a bishop who has made de-
fault in the King's court, 109.


Avenel, Richardus, assise of mortdancester
280.


B.


Bardolf, Thomas, Norfolk Iter, 3 & 4 H. 3;
49.

Basilia, wife of Henry EKitzwarren, her
claim of dower according to the custom
of the city of Lincoln, 540.

Basset, Ralph, assise of mortdancester, 279.


Bastardy :
not triable by Court of Christianity
after death of the party, but by an
assise held in the mauner of a jury,
240.


INDEX.


Bastardy—cont.
inquest of, when transmitted to the
Court: of Christianity, 329.
no appeal from the court of the
ordinary allowed in & cause of
bastardy, 501.
Bedenton, Robert de, assise of utrum,
369.


Bench :

| justiciaries of the, 159, 534.

petition of dower before Martin de
Pateshull, in Banco, 2 H. 3; 546.

petition of dower before the same
judge at Banc^, 7 H. 3; 528.

petition for dower in Banco, 10 H. 3;
9027.


Bendenger, Godfrey, the son of John and
Gunora de, assise of mortdancester,
467.


Deningworth, Agnes de :
the daughter of Elias de Bening worth,
assise of mortdancester, 303.
the daughter of Eva de Bening worth,
assise of mortdancester, 261.
Berners :
Matylda de, action for dower, 467.
Rogerus de, defendant ss a warrantor
of dower, 457.


Bigot :
Henry le, or Bygod, earl of Norfolk,
247, 287.
Roger le, his son, a minor, ib.


Billenallie, Margery de, not prejudiced in
her claim for dower by the fraud of
her husband, 559.
Bishop :
does not admit a presentee to parcels
of a churoh, 51.
liable to attachment for default to
appear in the King's court after
summons, 109.
his answer to a writ of "quare non
admisit," 111.
Bishops are entitled to the sume remedies
ds laymén, if disseysed of their
lands, 375.


623


| Bland, William, and Cecilia, his wife, suit


against the Countess of Oxford in a
claim of dower, 517.

Bono Fossato, Adam de, party in an action
to convict à jury of perjury, 426.

Bordlandes are demesne lands, 197.

Bovastra, Emma, recovered her dower
against a termor of the dower land,
573.

Bragel, R. de, assise of last presentation to
the church of Eldersen, 35.

Braham :

ARanulph de, 12 H. 3; his land in
Esterbergh, 247.

Roger de, assise taken, although
warrantor vas a8 minor, 287.

Bray, Balph de, his son, his claim for
waste against John de Daco his
guardian, 365.

Brian :

the futher of Henry, assise of mort-
dancester, 161.

an assise of mortdancester, 181.

Burgh, Hubert de : |

suit against the abbot of Messendene
for the advowson of the church of
Ovwelton, 71.

conviction of a jury for a verdict
which was against the lord the
King, 405. |


C.


Calethorp, Eudo de, suspension of dower,
beoause the warrsntor was in the
feulty of the King of France, 462,

Camera, William de, assise of mort-
dancester, Northumberland Iter,
221. |

Camerina, Ernaldus de, loss of dower, by
reason of the felony of the husband,
463.

Cantelupe, William de, defendant in an
action for dower, 465.

Canterbury, archbishop of, guardian of
William de Atbervil, 57.


624


Carleton, Wilhelmus de, assise of mort-
" dancester, 277.

Carucate :
of land, 217, 219.
claim by, 243.

Cassino Monte, Warin of, olini of pre-
sentation to the church of Sneath
in Kent. 67.

Cathedral and conventual churches, land
given to them is to be held in free
barony, 375.

Certificate of a view of dower lands in an
aetion for waste to be made by the
oaths of twelve loyal men in sealed
lettera of the viscount, delivered to
the King's justiciaries by four of
the jurors, 608.

Chamber, rent from a, not held in fee,
201.

Chamlenger, Walter, assise of mortdan-

j cester, 179.

Charters of the King, by which the King
ought to warrant a tenant in an
assise of mortdancester, 139.

Charter :

donation by a, without a sufficient
Beysine inoperative, 189.

of donation, if without seysine, in-
operative, 249.

Charters :

. produced after a judgment not avail-
able in a claim of right of presenta-
&Son, 47.


of donation of an advowson must be


proved by witnesses, 42.
sealed, a mode of proof, 601.


Chester, Ranulf, earl of, donation of an


advowson without any tenement in
the vill and without seysine of pe:
senting inoperative, 71.
Cheyley, church of, in the county of
Somerset, 15.
Chirograph :
.. Jand held by a, and a fine, 139.
in the couft of the lord the King,
189.
without an actual gitt, inoperative,
249.


INDEX. T $5


Christianity, Court of :
has cognisance of the validity of a
marriage, 499.
must make return to tho King's justi-
ciaries at Westminster, ib.

Church :

divided into medieties by reason of two
fees, or by reason of two patrons,
869. | | à

& rector of. a mediety, ib.

Churches :

cathedral,of a bishop, regular churches.
of abbote and jpriors, parochial
churches of rectors, 869.

eathedral, .and conventua] are de-
barred from an assise of utrum, as
they have all the remedies which a
layman has for the recovery of
land, 375. "

Church, a certsin rent payable to a, not to
be regarded as a service, but an
offering in the name of alms, 377.

Cidermere, two carucates of land in, a
third part of a third part claimed as
dower, 528.

Claypoll, mediety of the church, 871.

Colvile, Thomas de, assise of. the death of
an ancestor, 13.

Common of pasture and of fuum dáscy:
sine from, 411.

Common of pasture :

writ by the grace of the | prince to re-
cover by a jury, 359.
rector of à church may recover, ib
writ of quo warranto to recover,
363. | |
action to recover, à personal rather
than a real action, 361.

Concilium Lateranense, A.D. 1179, as to
the vacancy of churches, 76. |

Concubine, a lawful, subsequent marriage -
with her clandestinely, and after-

. wards publicly and in the face of
the Church, 508.

Conjunetge persone, Blocdcreie ons 158,

948.


INDE.


Consanguinity, writ of, where it applies
instead of a writ of mortdancester,
181.

Consilium Curis:

to restrain malice, 78.
to supplement the scope of the king's
« writ, 266. .
to appoint a forester, where there has
been waste in dower-woods, 604.

Consilium Londonense, from which Earl
Richard was absent a». 1254, 390.

Constitutio Lateranensis, respecting a lapse
of presentation to a vacant church,

| 98. !

Constitutio generalis, 538.

Constitutio Nova, for the widow to recover
damages, if she succeeds in an
action for dower, part of the Statute
of Merton, 576.

Consuetudo Regni AngL:

as to consultations between the
bishops and the king's fusticiaries,
585.

as to waste on dower lands, 602.

Contentious, how an estate i8 so rendered,
841. |

Conviction, never taken upon a conviction ;
where the persons and things are
the s&me, 443.

Cornwall, custom of, as to daughters born
of a nief by a free man, 257.

Council of London, A.D. 1254, 391.

County, in which a king's writ does not

run, 267.

County court may proceed to an inquest,

- where the tenant has put himself on

an inquest, after the claimant in an

action of dower has put herself
upon the country, 585.

Craveleghe, Master Robert de, custom of
Lincoln as to dower, 549.

Cromesham, Maria de, claim of dower, 495.

Crown, pleas of the, the keepers of them

in a county, 558.


Cuntey cuntey, mode of determining a writ


- of right, 816, 339.
Q 1802. :


625


Curie consilium:
to restrain the malice of those who
would impede presentations, p. 78.
to aid thé defect of the king's writ.
to appoint a forester, 604.
Custom of cities:
as to dower, 545.
as to bequests and sales of lands
and tenements, just as chattels, 263.

Custom of Cornwall as to the daughters of
à freeman and a nief, 257.

Custom of the city of London concerning
sales of lands and tenements like a
chattel, 263.

Custom of the city of Lincoln for the wife
to lose her dower, if the husband
sells his inheritance from necessity,
549.

Custom of Kent:

as to wife's title to dower, 529. -

a8 to felony of an ancestor not im-
peding the succession of an heir to
à tenement held in gavelkind, 299.

Custom of the city of Oxford as to bequests
of tenements inherited as well a$
purchased, 265. :

Custom of the county of York as to claim
for dower within a year, 549.

Custom of the realm:

as to waste in dower land, 602.
in the matter of dower to a widow, 587.

Custom of the country (patria) is to be
regarded as to what constitutes
waste in taking estovers, 607.

Custom of the manor, to have a little writ
instead of à great writ of right, 265.

Cygony, Egelardus de, Buckingham jurors
convicted at Windeslore before him
and his associates, 427.


D.


Daeo, John de:
defendant as chief lord in a suit for
waste on behalf of a minor son of
Rulph de Bray, in the county of
Huntingdon, 365.


R R


626 INDEX.


Daco, John de— cont.
guilty of waste in the county of Lin-
coln, as guardian of the daughter
of John de Bray, 20 H. 3, 612.

Damages, due to a widow, if she recovers
her dower against a deforceor, 576.

Daventry, Wiliiam de, the woman's action

for dower failed, as sbe could not

produce a sect in support of it, 515.

Day:

solar and lunar, 203.

artificial, divisible into four parts, 203.

the whole till nightfall, allowed-to a
debtor to pay his debt, 259.

Daybreak to midday the fonrth part of a
day, 203.

Death, civil:

by entry into a religious order, 129.
not incurred by entering into a reli-
gious order as a probationer, 492.
upon entry into a religious order va-

cates a parsonage, 33.

Debray, Ralph de, his son's suit, against
John de Daco, his chief lord .and
guardian, for waste in the county
of Huntingdon, 368.

Debray, John de, his daughter's suit
against John de Daco, her guardian,
for waste in the county of Lincoln,
612.

Debtor is allowed the whole day till night-
fall to pay his debt, 259.

Declaration:

of the plaintiff, in an assise of last
presentation, 21.
upon a writ of eosinage, 337.
in an action for dower, 455.
Demesne:
taken in manifold senses, 197.
opposed to that which is held under
service, 197.
of which one person has the freehold,
and another may have the usufruet,
197.
Denemede, tenement of, in Hampshire, 173.
Dernia, wife of Robert DBryton, a tenant
unwilling to answer in an action for
dower, without a warrantor, 465.


Disseysine, writ of novel, granted to heirs -
ejected against their will bya chief — —


lord, if they are of full age, 117.
Disseysor,a person who impedes seysine
may be so termed, p. 7.


Divorce:
pronounced by the Ecclesiastical Court
by reason of affinity, 473.
on account of consanguinity or affinity,
497.

Dodewell,Clementia de, her claim of dower,
539. |
Domicile of the husband determines the

jurisdiction of the bishop in matri-
monial causes, 499,
Donations, made by a minor, how revok-
able, when he comes of age, 275.
Dower:
the constitution of, is similar to a
donation, 51.
an action for, can only be determined
in the court of the king, 451.
reasonable, writ to recover it, 453.


only claimable against the heir, when
he has a right in two-third parts of
the inheritance, 461.

widow's action for, suspended, whilst
her heir is in parts beyond the sea,
463.


widow may recover against the chief
lord, if her husband's estate has
escheated to him from failure of
of heirs, 463.


a wife, whose husband has committed
felony, cannot claim dower against
the heir, as he has no right in two-
third parts, 463.


if two women claim it, the heir is not
bound to answer to either, unless
it has been decided in the eccle-
siastienl court, which is the legi-
timate wife, 471.

where it is specific, warrantor must
compensate the tenant, since he is
bound to deliverit to the widow,
411,


LEE


INDEX. 627


Dower—cont.


where it is not specific, warrantor
must compensate the widow for the
value of her dower, 477.

action for, not stayed by the minority
of the warrantor, 477.

the guardian must always produce the
minor heir, 485. .

the majority of* a minor is sometimes
waited for on special reasons, 485.

wife not entitled to it, if tootender to
support married intercourse, 497.

claim for, ceases upon a divorce on
any grounds, 497.

exceptions against, from nullity or
irregularity of marriage, 497.

the last survivor of several succes-
sive wives is entitled to dower,
503.

must be established at the church
door, 503. .

judgment in favour of dower is sus-
pended if the tenant dies in a super-
vening war, 509.

exception against its appointment at
the door of the church, determin-
able in the court of the king, and
not in an ecclesiastical court, 509.

appointed at the church door, can be
afterwards varied, 513.

incumbent on the woman in an action
for dower to produce & sect, in
proof of it, 517.


may be appointed out of the estate .


of the husband's father or other re-

. lation, 521.

appointed by a husband out of the
estate of a third party, must have
the consent of the latter, 521.

claimed by two women, one of whom
died in seysine of the husband,
and the other had obtained a judg-
ment as his lawful wife in the court
of christianity, 527.

according to the custom of Kent,
529, 579.

Where two women claim dower in


respect of one husband, the claim -


Dower- cont.
of her shall proceed who has esta-
blished her title in the court of
christianity, as the legitimate wife,
529. |

woman's claim for dower barred by a
previous sentence of the Eccle-
siastical Court against the validity
of her asserted marriage, 589.

woman's claim for dower established
upon her heir obtaining the inhe-

'ritanee in a cause of succession,
543.

regulated by the custom of cities,
549.

forfeited by a wife, who is instru-
mental to the death of her husband,
949.

of à woman, lost by a judgment
against her husband's title to the
land, whereon her dower has been
appointed, 557.

wife's elaim not prejudieed by the

. fraud or negligence of her husband,
559.

exception of the tenant, that her hus-
band was convicted of a felony
after the assignment at the church
door, 565.

assignment of, cannot be claimed after

. & felony, 567.

not forfeited by a woman, because the
heir or warrantor of it has been
convicted of felony, 569.

as appointed at the espousals, to be
assigned at least within forty days
after the dcath of the husband, 579.

is lost to the widow, where the wur-
rantor has lost the whole estate,
581.

writ of right to, of use where a writ
of dower has not sufficed, 581.

in accordance with the customs of the
realm, 587.

where the lands arein divers coun-
ties, the admeasurement must be
made in the court of the king,
589. |

R R 2


628


Dower—cont.
admeasurement of, should be made in
in the presence of all the persons,
whose rights are at stake, 591.
gives to the woman nothing of the
proprietorship, but only the seysine
and the freehold for life, 595.
widow has a right to reasonable esto-
vers in woods, which are within her
dower land, 597.
reverts to the heir or his assignee on
the death of the widow, 613.
dreit, right of possession and of
property, 355.


Dreit


Duel:
the alternative for a great assise,
67.
not admissible where bastardy is ob-
jected, 227
when a tenant may so defend him-
self against an elder-born brother as
claimant, 345.
when a rector of a church may so
defend himself, 381.
Durham, bishop of :
York Iter with Martin de Pateshull,
3 H. 8, 301.
York Iter with Martin de Pateshull,
4 H. 3, 263.


E. E.


: Edward IL, change made in the writ of
mortdancester in his time, 127.
Eggefend, Letitia de, seysine of specified
E dower, 489.
Elder-born brother :
cannot be both heir and lord, 263, 301,
321.
his son preferred by right of prmmo-
geniture to a younger-born bro-
ther, 279.
detained in remote parts or in prison,
817.


INDEX.


Digitized by Google [


Eldersen, church of, in county of Wor- Pa
cester, vacancy of the advowson, ec
- p. 35. -
Eltdene, church of, assise of last presenta-
tion, 97.
Ely, the liberty of, 371.
Emma, à certain, her action for dower,
17 H. 8.; 523.
England, marriage had in, will prevail
over marriage had abroad, from
failure of proof of the latter, 541.
Enveyse, Thomas dele, and Matilda his
wife, defendants in an action of
waste, 3 & 4 H. 3. ; 605.
Escheat to a church :
where land in free alms is held fora.
service, and the tenant commits
felony or dies without an heir, 381.
where a bastard has been enfeoffed
of land to be held of a church, and
dies without an heir and without.
having assigned it, 383.
Espousals by words of future import, if
carnal connexion has followed.
503. í
Essonium de malo veniendi, p. 12.
Essonium de servitio regis, p. 12. -
Essoins :
on account of absence beyond the
sea, 137. |
after vouching a warrantor, 159.
Esterbergb, thirty-six aeres of land in
Norfolk, held by Ranulphus de
Braham, 247. s
Estovers:
for burning, building, and fenéing,
allowed to a woman in seysine of
dower-woods, 605.
rcasonable, may be taken by a life-
tenant on-aceount of his freehold,
607.
Estwicham, Rogerus de, assise of mortdan-
cester, 174. — —
Eudo, the father of Walter, assise of mort-
dancester, 247. 1
Exception, the raising of an exception
converts the defendant into a plain-
tiff in a certain manner, 539.


*


Exeter, prior of, his claim of the presen-
tation to the church of Cheyley, in
| Somersetshire, p. 15.
Exile :
committed on dower land, an act of
waste on the part of the woman in
seysine, 599.
when committed by à woman in sey-
sine of dower lands, or by a life-
tenant in possession, consists of
acts, which disfigure the estate,
608.


to be assigned in exchange, 151.
Extraneous persons :
bastards may be so termed, although
uterine, 185,227.
minor may claim against, 285.
opposed to parceners, 293.
cousins may claim against them by a
writ of cosinage, where an assise
of mortdancester does not extend,
349. ;
a son by the same mother, but by a
different father, 351.


Vois adum ANE COM Mg DL


F.


Fee, definition of a, what a man holds
for himself and his heirs, 201.
Felony, of the next heir:
Special exception in gavelkind tene-
ments in Kent, 299.
interrupts the succession of the other
heirs, 299.


Felomy : .
will stay an assise of mortdancester,
297.


of a son who has killed his father,

vitiates upon his conviction, the
suecession of his heirs, 271.

Faber, Richard, assise of mortduncester,
269, 304.

Ferrers, Earl of, gift of the manor of
Seyle, before he presented to the
ehurcb, 73.


INDEX.


Extent, how .to be made, where land has


629


Fine and chirograph, when inoperative,
249. 2

Fitzhugh, John, his wife Gunora's action
for dower against Matilda de Ber-
Ders, 528. ;

Forester ordered by the court to be ap-
pointed by the heir, where a woman
in seysine of dower woode has com-
mitted waste therein, 605.


. Forgery of a seal, land forfeited thereby


a8 for felony, 299.

Framesdon, the church of, divided between
two parsons, 371.

France :

a warrantor who is in the fealty of
the king of France, may be ex-
cepted against, 463.

espousals in, proof of them may be
wanting, 541.

Franceys, Raymenus le, and his wife
Emma, the failure of her sect to
prove the appointment of dowerat
the church door, 517.


. Fughelstone, Thomas de and Alicia bis


wife, her suit for dower according
to the law of Kent against Isabella,
who had obtained dower on a false
claim, 529. ^
Fulk de Briant :

his suit against the prior of Neven-
ham about the church of Haspeele,
95. ;

his gift of the church of Sudmel to
the house of Nevenhan, 69.


G.
Galant Lanrentius, asaise of mortdancester,
276.
Gavelkind :


dower of, how forfeited in the county
of Kent, 579. |

in Kent, succession of an heir to
a tenement held in gavelkind is
not barred by the felony of an an-
cestor, 299.


630 INDEX.


-


| Heir:^ e :
the next, may put himself into seysine
of his ancestors! fend, if itis vacant,
115.
may claim for waste and destruction
against & chief lord, who bas beer
in seysine, 125. |
who may be called the first or^next,
211.
so ealled from the inheriaige; not the
inheritance from the heir, 211.
the sons are all next heirs, where the
inheritance is shareable, 215.
the next, is he to whom 4£he absolute
right of inheritance accrues, 217.
niece by the same father and mother
nearer than nephew by a different
mother, 393, ]
guardian must always produce the |
minor in an action fcr dower, 486.
Helena, wife of Willam de Hastone, her
"claim of dower. after one year from
her husband's death, 549. 0.
Helewiza, the wife of Wasa, defective re-
plication in an action for dower, 459. -
Henry :
the king who now is, 13.
Henry III : coronation of, recited in a writ
of mortdaneester in the place of
. King John'sreturn from Ireland,126.
Susex "Ter; second roll after the war,
495.
Michaelmas Term, second year, 13.
Somerset iter, second year, 15.
petition in Banco for dower, second
year, 547.
Bucks Iter, third year, 491.
Dorset Iter, third year, 304.
Susex Iter, third year, 323.


Grandson :
claiu of, to thé inheritance against an
uncle restrained by the case of the
king (John), 229, 232, 240.
by prerogative of right has a claim
of inheritanee to his grandfather,
preferable to that of his uncle, who
is in the transverse line, 229.
Gravenel, Isabella de, her claim of cus-
tomary dower, 547.
Guardian :
has only the naked dominion with
possession, and no right of pro-
perty, 609.
his punishment, if he has been guilty
of waste, 619.
Guerra, generalis, 26.
Guerram post, 494, 578, 590.
Gunora, the wife of John, the son of
Hugh, her action of dower, 467.


H.


Hamelin, the son of Ralph adjudged a
villein ir. every case, after he had once
adnfitted himself to be such, 304.

Hardel William, his successor in the rec-
tory of St. Mary the Virgin of Oxford,
367.

Harpdown, church of, assise of last presen-
tation, 89.

Hurpdown Robert de, plaintiff against Re-
ginald of the White Monastery for the
ehureh of Harpdown in Oxfordshire,
89.

Ilaspeele, church of, claimed by Fulk de

. Priant, 55.


A P À— —— À—— M À— —— —À M HI UR m, E n c


Hastings Manasser de, assise of mortdan- York Iter, third year, 459. '
cester, 280. York Iter, third year, 465.

Haverton Hugh de, Muriel his wife, her Norfolk Tter, third and fourth years,
suit for dower against her heir, where: 604.
a& war had supervened since she Norfolk Iter, third : and fourth years,
proved her espousals, 509, 6095.

Hay warde Robert de, his widow's claim of Essex Iter, third and fourth years, 161.
dower suspended by the absence of Norfolk Itor, third and fourth years,
tlie heir in the Holy Laud, 465. 48.


INDEX.


Henry III.—oont.


Oxford Tter, third and fourth years, 89.

Surrey Iter, third and fourth years,
. 559. ]

Worcester [ter, fourth year, 35.


. York Iter, fourth year, 263.


Lincoln Iter, fourth year, 465.

Suffolk Jter, fourth year, 525.

Norfolk fter, fourth year, 573.

Worcester Iter, fifth year, 71.

Warwick ter, fifth year, 245.

Gloucester Iter, fifth year, 385.

Hereford Iter, fifth and sixth years,
271.

Herts Iter, fifth and sixth years, 565.

Hertford Iter, sixth year, 59.

Michaelmas term, sixth year, 67.

Middlesex Iter, sixth year, 171.

Bedford Iter, seventh year, 53.

Judgement in Banco, seventh year,
529.

seventh and eighth years, claim of
dower against Thomas de Nassen-
dene, 565.

Berks Iter, eighth year, 467.

Kent Iter, eighth year, 67.

Warwick Iter, eighth and ninth years,
465.

Hereford Iter, eigth and ninth years,
911.

Norfolk Iter, ninth year, 55.

Norfolk Iter, ninth year, 605.

Lincoln Iter, ninth year, p. 55.

Stafford Iter, ninth year, 71.

Cornwall Iter, ninth year, 71.

Hilary term, ninth year, 71.

Action for dower before Martin de
Pateshull, ninth year, 455.

Northumberland Iter, nintli year, 515.

Devon Iter, ninth year, 515.

Bedford lter, ninth and tenth years,
69. |

York Iter, ninth and tenth years, 73.

Essex Iter, ninth and tenth years,
492. -

Northampton [ter, ninth and tenth
yeurs, 979.


631


Henry 1II.—cont.


Sussex Iter, tenth year, p. 13.

Norfolk Iter, tenth year, p. 67.

Lincoln Iter, tenth year, p. 261.

Leicester Iter, tenth year, 73.

Kent Iter, tenth year, 289.

Lincoln Iter, tenth year, 303.

Iter of Martin de Pateshull, tenth
year, 303.

York Iter, tenth year, 467.

Suffolk Iter, tenth year, 517.

Judgment in Banco, tenth year, 527.

Lincoln Iter, tenth year, 557.

Kent Iter, eleventh year, 829.

Kent Iter, eleventh and twelfth years,
p. 15.

Suffolk Iter, twelfth year, 369.

Norfolk Iter, twefth year, 424.

Buckingham Iter, twelfth year, 281.

Kent Iter, twelfth year, 281.

Suffolk Iter, twelfth year, 289.

York Iter, twelfth year, 301.

Bucks Iter, twelfth year, 388.

Gloucester Iter, twelfth year, 387.

Suffolk Iter, twelfth year, 457.

Soutbampton Iter, twelfth and thir-
teenth years, 173.

Roll of the thirteenth year, 525.

Michaelmas roll, thirteenth and fout-
teenth years, 595.

Suffolk Iter, fourteenth year, 51.

Norfolk Iter, fourteenth year, 489.

Derby Iter, fourteenth and fifteenth
years, 97.


Warwick Iter, fourteenth and fif-
teenth years, 461.


Kent Iter, fourteenth and fifteenth
years, 463.

Derby Iter fifteenth year, 495. .

Surrey Iter, fifteenth year, 497.

Bedford Iter, fifteenth yenr, 600.

Southampton Iter, fifteenth and six-
teenth years, 505.

Suffolk und Essex lter, fifteenth. and
sixteenth years, 573. |

Bucks Iter, seventeenth year, 175.

Lincoln and Northampton Jter, seven-
teeuth ycaur, 4603. |


Y ig x ») m—. 2 :
] À * - 2 hr , bs 2
E. : t9 zr" CN E o o s
* e tT "3 .
Z JOURS
Ange ol o
ESAE e e
K E ESL JE 79
EK. Dx
! NEC - 2d.
632 . — INDEX.
Henry III.—cont.
Salop Iter, seventeenth year 523.
Pleas whieh follow the King, in the


county of Lincoln, twentieth year,
613.


Pleas whieh follow the King, in the
county of York, twenty-first year,
267.

Pleas whieh follow the King, in the
county of Berks, twenty-first year,
4167.

Linco]n Iter, twenty-first year, 421.

Kent Iter thirty-second and thirty-
third years, 31.

Herlezim, John de, of London, by favour
of the Kiag betook himself to the
order of the Hospitallers, 569.

Herbert, the son of Richard, vouched. the
prior of St. John de Rothomago
beyond the sea, as a warrantor who
made default, 173.

Hewell, Gerard de, claimed the mediety
of the ehurch of Claypoll, 371.

Hoggestorp land in, the subject of an er-
roneous finding by a jury, 447.

Hoecfenur church of, presentation disputed
between the prior of Lewes, and
Adam of Newmarket, 73.

Hokedes, Simon de, assise of mortdan-
cester, 179.

Holy Land, in the absence of the elder
brother, seysine may be given to the
younger on condition of restoration
without a suit, if elder born returns,
117.
in the absence of the heir, the.action
of a widow for dower is suspended,
463.

Hospital the, John de Herlezim, by the
grace of the king, betook himself to the
order of the Hospitallers after a con-
vietion of felony, and thereupon had
his life spared, 569.

Hour of the day, made up of forty mo-
ments, 203.

Iiundreds, recognitions made in the hun-
dreds and in the county, 567.

Huse, Alurie, assise of mortdaneester, 171.


icc


Institution of a elerk to a churehisasit ——
were a spiritual marriage, 37. — —
Instruments, the faith of, may be proved
by a comparison of signatures
(signorum), 518.
Instrument, if its faith is impugned, it shall
be proved by the country and hy
witnesses, 601. ]
Isabella : 3 A
wife of Robert, not endowed atthe
door of the church, 511.
the wife of Alured de Berkings, pre- |
viously the second wife of Robert |
de Hoeton, 531. E
Isolda, the wife of William, tn if *&lio |
has had any part of her dower,
572.
Itinerant justiciaries, 159.


-


J.. :
James, Saint, of Compostella, pilgrimage
to his shrine, 129, 137.
Jew, would lie, if he said Christ was born
of a virgin, as being ngainst his
intelligence, 393.
John King, his return from Ireland to
England, limitation of time in the
ancient writ of mortdancester, 127.
John, the son of Elfred, action ESI
a warranty of dower, 461.
Judgment, has after a long Yael the
authority of a matter adjudicated,
387.
Judlibam, Church of, in Norfolk, action
forright of property, where proof
of last presentation failed, 67.
Juliana, plaintiff in an action for dower,
467. - |
Juror does not commit perjury, if his oath |
is only fatuoüs, not false, 891]. —


Digitized by Google E xs


INDEX.


Jurors: '

for a recognition, in an assise of mort-
dancester, 135.

writ to summon twelve knights and
other free men to make an extent,
151.

required to make a return to the
justiciaries in the matter of an
extent by letters under their seals,
and the seals and the seal of the
viscount, 158.


- liable to be attainted if they have :


sworn falsely, 389.

accused of having sworn falsely must
be convicted by a jury cf twenty-
four knights, 389.


'Jedaway by.a just error, may correct


their saying before judgment with
impunity, but not so after judg-
. ment, 353.
on what occasions their judgment
may be fatuous and not false, ib.

who have made a just error in their
finding, are entitled to a certification
before the justiciary who held the
assise, 395.

. when they ere liable to a conviction,
897.

not liable to a conviction of perjury
in a great assise, 403.

on an inquest, not ligble to a convic-
tion of perjury, but may be rein-
forced, 405.

erass ignorance on their part not ex-
cusable, 25.

finding according to the narrative of
facts, guilty only of an error of
judgment, 405.

a conviction of them for perjury must
be taken before the judge who has
held the assise, 407. |

not liable to a conviction for too heavy
dapages, ib.

whoever may bring an assise may in-
BStitute proceedings for a conviction
of perjury against the jurors, 7b.

mode of proceeding for a conviction
of jurors for perjury, 415.


633


Jurors—econt. |

if convicted of perjury by a jury of
twenty-four, are to be kept in
custody, 417.

convicted of perjury are no longer
admissible to take an oath, and lose
the law of the land, 419.

punishment of, if convicted of perjury,
419.

who have made à just error may con-
fess, and put themselves on the
King's mercy, 421.

in an assise of * utrum" redeemed


themselves from a conviction of -


perjury, i5.
Jury :
conviction of a, depends whether the
. assise of utrum be held as an assise,
or after the manner of a jury, 399.
certifieation on the part of a, to ex-
' plain their verdict, 427.
of twenty-four, when summoned to
eonvict of perjury a jury of twelve,
may be objected to individually, i5.
Jus simulatum, in the case of St, Mary's
Church, Oxford, 868.
Justieiary :
& chief, sent from the side of the
King himself, 155. |
responsible for malice in pronouncing
a wrong judgment, 395.
his record must be examined before
proceedings ean be taken against a
jury for perjury, 389.
d usticiaries : |
liable to prosecution if they entertain
an assise upon an assise knowingly,
435.
their power does not extend beyond
what has been put by the plaintiff
into his view, 387.
ought not to pronounce, aecording to
the finding of the jurors, if it be
fatuous, 405.


034. — 5 |. TNDEX.


K.


Kedware, Walter de, claim of last presenta-
tion against the FUE of Sudledhe,
73.
Kenelworth, prior of, his right of present-
ing to the Church of Stoke, 71.
Kent, county of :
felony of an ancestor does not impede
the suecession of an heir in gavel-
kind, 299.
a special case amongst the ies of
the ctown, 366.
King, case of the : s S
King John, 228, 293, 841.
his pleasure to be requested, when he
is vouched to warrant his gift, 255.
the time of the, must be stated in a
writ of right, 357.


L.


Lacy, John de, pleas which follow the
King, 20, H. 3; 612.

Land given in pledge remains with the
creditor, if the money is not paid
on a certain day before nightfall,
259.

Laud, the Holy :

the absence of the heiri in, 117, 463.

pilgrimage to, 129.

general passage to, 137.

absence in, 317.

espousals in, the proof may be wanting
of them, 541.

Lumbert, the son of Lambert, the jurors
in an assise of utrum redeemed
themselves from a eonviction of
perjury, 42].

Lantony, prior of, an assise of last pre-

, sentation not held in the person of
^ claimant under ange, 59. |

Lateran Constitution, as to lapse of an
advowson, 29.

the practice before the Council of
Lateran was held, 77.


-


Law :

a defence per legem cannot be set up
by-the woman against a sect of the
plaintiff in an action four waste on
dower land, 599.

a defence per legem eannot be set up
against a proof by sealed charters,
601.


Lewes, prior of : : '
' his presentation to the church of
Stokshyre upheld, 57. — ".
his claim to present to the church of
Hecfenur not successful, 73.
error of the court as to an assise
of Utrum in the case of a con-
ventual church.
Lex Anglic :
husband seysed ofh his wife' s property .
during his life, 53. *
seysed of a presebtation in right of
survivorship to his wife, 64.
entitled to a presentation by reason of
his wife's dower, 75. .
monsters cannot be heirs 259.


Leycester Humfredus de, assise of mort-
dancester, 2921.


Lex terrg :
he who has observed it, cannot be in
default, p. 165.
outlawry not made in accordance vith,
declared as it were null, £67.
lost by j jurors who are. convicted of
perjury, 419. .
Lexingstone R. dei otherwise Leyliton, his


error of judgment in his Sussex iter,
16.H. 3, 375. Z


Librates of land, 217.
claim by, 243. ]
Limitation of an assise of mortdancester by
statute of Westminster 1.127.
Lincoln, eustom of the city of, as to dower
of widows where the husband has sold
his inheritance, 549.
custom for them to: have dower only
of tenements, of which the husband
died seysed as of fee, 549.


INDEX.


London :

barons of, their decision that an in-
heritance as well as. property pur-
chased may be bequeathed as a
chattel, 265.

city of, its custom for lands to be sold,
as chattels, 265.

city of, ite custom as to the free bench
of widows, 547. . j

eouneil of, A.D. 1254, which earl
Ricliard did not attend, 891.


M.


Mansion chief,made as it were derelict,
when houses are pulled down, or trees
. and orchards growing ín the court
are rooted up, 609.
Manumission :
instrument of, 401.
of villeins on dower lands not allowed
to the woman who is in seysine of
them, 603.
Marks six, assigned as an. annual pension
from a church to a prior, 93.
Margery, the wife of Henry of Northampton,
 8termor reimbursed by a prolonged
holding, when dower has been re-
covered against him, 572.
Marre, John de, and Eve his wife, when a
chief lord is entitled to claim that a
woman shou|d produce à warrantor
of her dower, 465.
Marriage :
of a clerk vacates his parsonage, 33.


clandestine, wil] render subsequent
children legitimate, but gives to the


wife no right of dower, 503.

of fact, not necessarily a marriage of
right, 503.

legitimate for an inheritance, and il-
legitimate for dower, 513.

& woman's action for the validity of
her marriage perpetuated ns regards
her claim for dowez, although her
husband has died before it has
been decided, 541.


635


Mary, Quinzaine of St., 31.
Matrimony :
the union of a man and & womun
maintaining an indivisible habit of
life, 469.
its validity not cognisable
secular court, 499.
the cognisance of its validity belongs
to the court of the ordinary, 499. :
Maunderville, Rogerus de :
assise of mortdancester, 262.
Galfridrus de, challenges a jury of
twenty four summoned to convict a
jury of twelve, 426.
Meanton, heir of, right of presentation to the
church of Suterlege, 38.
Mediety of a church. Sec Claypoll.
Merton, statute of, for a widow to have
damages, when she recovers her dower
against a deforceor of it, 576.
Messendene, abbot of, Norfolk iter, 71.
Messuage :
chief of a manor, reserved to the heir
upon an assignment of dower to the
widow, 489.
chief, or head of a barony,is to be
withdrawn, and another is to be as--
signed to a widow by the chief
lord, as her due, 589.
Minor : . |
when he comes of age, may revoke
donations made by him to his guar-
dian, 275.
excused from  warranting until he
comes of age, 157.
Moments, forty make up an hour of the day,
203.
Monastery, the White :
Reyinald of, 89. Matilda of, 172.
William of, 172.
Movewedene, Henry de, a ward of the king
in the time of Hubert de Burgh,
405.
Mortdaneester, see writ.


Munumew, John de, in the case of his heirs
their full age not vraited for, 307.


in the


I


636


Muriel, the wife of Hugh de Haverton, the
proof of her marriage admitted not-
withstanding war had supervened
after sentence, and her husband
died in the war, 300.


N.


Nassendene, "Thomas de, claim of doówer in
gavelkind, 565.

Nephew may havea writ of entry to the
inheritance of his grandfather, as
against an uncleyounger than his father,
283.

Neveham :
house of 69.
prior of, 55.


Newmarket, dus of, deferidant in an


assise of last presentation against the
prior of Lewes, 73.

Niece by the same father and mother a
nearer heir than a nephew by a differ-
ent mother, 323.


Nightfall to midnight a fourth part ofthe |


day, 203.


* Nod, Simon de, the right of presentation and


the property determined on the same
writ, 67.


Note as to admeasurement of dower rot .


found in all the MSS. 595.


Nowell Wilhelmus, assise of mortdancester |
does not lie, where there is only a
service and nothing in demesne,


" 262.


O.
Oath:


of jurors in an assise of mortdances-


ter, 141.


when allowed to be taken ** saving the


view," 148.
of the jurors in an assise of last pre-
sentation, 17. |


INDEX.


 Oath—cont.


of jurors in an assise of « utrum, "377.
when an assise of *utrum" is held
after the manner of a jury, 379. —
of a jury of twenty-four knights sum-
moned to try & complaint of per-
jury against a jury of twelve, 415.
tendered by a party to a party, or by
a judge to a party, 407.
Office of the judge, in aid of a termor, who
has suffered by a recovery of dower,
978. See younger-born brother.
Onus of proof, falls on. the woman, who


asserts her husband's death, to found


à claim of dower, 493.


Ordinary of the place, has the cognisance :
of inatrimonial causes by ordinance |


of the Pope, 499.

Ordinary's court, evidence in a matri-
monialsuit. should be stated pub-
liely, 501.

Osneby, prior of, his claim to present to
the church of Weleton, 55. -


Othes-worth, persons admissible to take an.


oath, 419.
Outlawry, null, where it has not been made
according. to the law 2» the s
566. -
Oxford:
custom in the city for land to be be-
queathed like a chattel, 265.
countess of, her suit against Richard
Bland and Cecilia his wife, a sect
produced on either side and a claim
Yor dower thereby established, 517.
church of the blessed Virgin Mary at,
867.


burgesses of, may bequeath land in-


herited, a$ a chattel, 265.


P.
Parochial churches, rectors of. such alone


entitled to an assise of * utrum,"
969.


|
|
|
|
:


INDEX. — | 6377


: Parsons:


&re properly rectors of parochial
churches, 369.

alone entitled to an assise of * utrum,"
369.

when entitled to an assise of novel
disseysine or other assises just as a
layman, 879.

Parson may defend his claim to land where
necessary by the duelor the great
assise, with the authority of tlie
ordinary and with the consent of
of the patron, 381.

Pateshull, Martin de:

his judgment in Banco as to a custom
of the city of London, 2 H. 3; 347.

York Iter with Bishop of Durham,
3 H. 3; 301.

York Iter, 3 H. 3; 459, 465, 509.

Dorset Iter, 3 H. 3; 304.


- York Iter, with Bishop of Durham,


4 H.3 ; 263.

Lincoln Iter, 4 H. 8; 465.

Gloucester Iter with the abbot of
Reading, 5 H. 3; 385, 589.

Worcester Iter, 5 H. 3; 71, 220, 245,
289.

Warwick Iter, 5 H. 8; p. 245.

Herts Iter with the abbot of Read-
ing, 5 & 6 H. 3; 565.

, judgment in Banco, 7 H.3; 529.
judgment in Banco, 8 H 8 ; 581.
action for dower, 9 H. 3; 455.

Kent Iter, 10 H: 3; 289.
Lincoln Iter, 10 H. 3; p. 303.
Suffolk Iter, 10 H. 8 ; 517.
York Iter, 10 H. 3; 517.
Lincoln Iter, 10 H. 3; 557.
last York Iter, 10 H. 3; 467.
Lincoln Iter, 10 H. 3 ; 261.
Carlisle Iter, 10 H. 3; 303.
York Iter, 10 H. 8 7 175.

Jast Sussex Iter, 10 H. 3; 18
Norfolk Iter, do.

Kent Iter, 11 H. 3.;: 329...
Kent Iter, 11 & 12 H. 3 ; 15.
Suffolk Iter, 12 H. 8; 457, 289.
York Iter, 12 H. 8; 301.


Pateshull—cont.
Norfolk Iter, 12 H. 3; 287.
last Norfolk Iter, 12 H. 3; 247.
Suffolk Iter, 12 H. 3; 289, 371.
last Suffolk Iter, 12 H. 3; 15,277,
309, 311, 369. |


Suffolk Iter, assise of mortdancester,


257.

Kent Iter, 12 H. 3; 57, 181, 280.

last Kent Iter, 299.

last Sussex Iter, 279.

last York Iter, 327.

Salop Iter. 309.

last Salop Iter, 328.

his last Lincoln Iter, 304, 459, 549.

his Worcester Iter with the abbot of

. Reading, 57, 369.

Leicester Iter with the abbot of ltead-
ing, 265, 2:9.

his Warwiek Iter with the abbot of
Reading, 265, 253.

Hereford Iter with the abbot of Read-
ing, 263.

judgment of perjury concerning Henry
de Movewedene, 405.

Lincoln Iter, assise of mortdanees-
ter, where the jurors corrected their
error, 447.

his eonsultation. with Peter de la
Roche, bishop of Winchester, as to
the office of the ordinary in matri-
monial causes, 499.


his eonsultation with the bishop of
Worcester aecording to the custom
of the rcalm of England, 535.

Peace, time of:

a necessary condition of the last pre.
sentation to & church to found a
titleto the advowson, p. 2, 7, 17.

in distinetion from a time of war, 27.

writ of, until the coming of the Just
ciaries, 261.

a writ of, 277.

Pencomb, church of, assise of last pre-

sentation, 59.

Penne, Walter de la, charter of, 71.


Peter de la Roche, Bishop of Winchester, |


499.


638


Peyjure, Peter, defendant in an action of :


waste, Where it was so moderate that:
no inquest ought to have been held,
606. ,

Piekednese, Áseelma, conditional assign-
ment of dower, 565.


Pietesse, Thomas de, assise of mortdan-


cester, 219.
Perjury of jurors of an assise, proocedings
for their conviction, 415.


Pleas, whioh follow the King in his, six-


teenth year, 33.
Popethe: —
has allowed the cognisance of matri-


mony to the ordinary of. the place, :


499.
no appeal to the pope allowed in a

matrimonial cause whioh has been
sent by the King to the bishops'
court, 501. |

reasons for denying an appeal to, in
matrimonial causes, 501.

no appeal allowed to, in an inquest
which of two wives is the legiti-
mate wife, 525. .


Possession, right of, mmy stand without


the use and profits, 357.
Presentation :

to à church, after a deed of convey-
ance has been executed, avoids the
deed, p. 41.

to & church, belongs to the donor, if
the first donatory has transferred it
to a second without having pre-
sented to it, p. 48.

by the heir, when it supersedes pre-
sentation by a predecessor, who has
died, 55.

right of, in the case of co-heirs, 61.

by a woman, in right of dower of a
third part not valid, 51.

Presumption :

of half complete proof, sufficient, if
not rebutted, for a conditional as-

. Signment of dower, 495.

a, disproved by a sect, 405.


INDEX.


Primogéniture, right of, the son of an
elder brother preferred to a: younger
brether, 27 9.


| Prior:


of Exeter, assise of last presentation
'to the church of Cheyley, 15
: of Lewes, assise of last presentation
to the chureh of Stokshyre, 57.
' ditto, assise of * Utrum," 375.
of Neveham, assise of last presenta
tion to church of Haspeele, 55.
. ditto, . assise of last presentation to
eburch of Sudmel, 69.
of Lantony, assise of last presenta.


tion to the church of Pencombe,.


59.

of Osneby, assise of last Virsenta tiU
to the church of Weleton, 55.

of Southivick, as to the chureh of
Sneath, 67.

of Kenelworth, assise of last presen-
tation as to the church of Stoke, 71.


of Trywardray, assise of last presen-


tation as to the church of Wyke,
71.
of Sudledhe, assise of Jast presentation
. to the church of Seyle, 73.
of St. Lando de Rothornago; vouched
as à, warrantor in An assise of mort-
dancester, 173.
in & certain sense may be termed
rector, 369.
Prohibition, see writ. m
Proof: ZEE
burden of, falls on the woman, who
asserts her husband's death in a
claim of dower, 498.


may be disehargsd - by produeuy a


sect, 495.
iustruments and sealed dharen 601.


Property, right of, cannot stand without be
use and profits, 387.

Pulthorp, Stephanus de, assise of mort-
dancester, in the county of York,
267.


, Purgation of a crime or of & misdemenanor,


4083.


INDEX. 639


Record ofthe justiciaries must always be
Q | read before a jury of 24 can proceed
: to convict a jury of 12, 429.
Rector:
the name property limited to the par-
sons of parochial churches, 369.
of a mediety of a church may plead
and implead separately, 369.
of the mediety of a church, if hc has
separate rights, may plead and beim
. pleaded without the otherrector,369.
Ralegh, William de: ! ofa mediety of a church, if he has
Bedford Iter, 79,578. the same patron as the other rector,
Warwick Iter, 176. cannot plead or be impleaded with-
Bucks Iter, 179. out the other, 271.
. Bucks Iter, 259,269, 281,511. of a church, when he may defend


his last Buoks Iter, 261, 304. his seysine by a duel or by a. great
Leicester Iter, 221, 5, H. 3, 371. assise, 381.


last Northampton Iter, 221.


. Quindena, Sancte Mariz, p. 30.


R.


Re-summons writ of, whena day is given


Northumberland Iter, 279. beyond the county, 137. .
Kent Iter, 299, 327. Return of inquest to be sealed with the
Pleas whieh follow the king iu the seal of the viscount and with the senls
county of Huntingdon, 365. of the jurors, 555.
Pleas whiéh follow the king in 20, H. | Richard, Earl :
3, 612. ' not present at the council of London,
Ralph de Rupe, plaintiff in an assise of 391.
mortdaneester,323. .


Richard, the rector of the mediety of the


Raylie, Margeryde, defendant in an action church of Claypoll, 371.


of waste, 9, H. 3, 604. |
Reading, Abbot of:
his Worcester Iter with Martin de
Pateshull, 55.
Warwick Iter, with Martin de Pates-
hull 253, 265.
Hereford Iter, with Martin de Pates-


Right :
a great writ of, 585.
to dower, à writ of, ancillary to a
writ of dower, 581.
feigned, in the case of St. Mary's
Church, Oxford, 367.


Robert :
hull, 263. ; :
/ his Leicester Iter with Martin de son of Cinul, assise of mortdancester,
Pateshull, 265, 289. M8. 0 0 00 05;
Hereford Iter, 5 & 6 H.3.; 271. son of Alrie, assise of utrum as to
his Worcester Iter with Martin de "he 'Cuuten ok sranisdon Srt
Pateshull, 369. Robertson, John, defendant in a suit as à
his Gloucester Iter with Martin de warrantor of dower, 455.
Pateshull, 5 H. 8, 385. Roche, Peter de la, bishop of Winchester,
his Gloucester Iter, with Martin de his consultation with Martin de
Pateshull, 5 H.3, 539. Pateshull, 499. -
his Leicester Iter, 565. Rochesford, Matilda de, assise of presenta-
, his Herts Iter with Martin de Pates- tion as to the Church of Tunston,


hull, ib, $5,


640


Roll, second after the war, Sussex Iter,
495.

Ropelay, Simon de, Lincoln Iter, 291 H. 3;
written in some MSS. * Simon de
Poppelay," 421.

Rothomago, St. Lando de, prior of, 178.

Russel, Henricus :

assise of mortdancester, Bucks Iter,


* . 4261.


same assise, 304.


S.


Seal of Lord M. forged by Henry, son of
Yao, 299.

Seals of the jurors to be affixed to the re-
turn of their inquest, when pre-
sented to the King's justiciaries,
555. .

Seal, letters of jurors returnable to the
justiciaries under the seals of the
jurors and of the viscount, 15i.

Sect, a :

a sufficient defence against a presump-
tion, 405.

the woman's, shall prevail in an action
for dower, where the tenant of the
land has only his single voice, 515.

raises a presumption, which may be
rebutted by the production of a
more numerous sect to contradict,
in a matter of waste on dower lands,
601.

may be produced by the woman to
prove the quantity of land that has
been appointed for her dower, 895.

Sects, where opposing are produced, the
stronger is to be preferred, 495.

Seleby, Hugh de, custom of the county of
York as to dower, 549.


. Segrave, Simon de, Plea before the King


at Woodstocke, 427.

Seyle, Church of, manor given by Earl
Ferrers before he presented, and so
the advowson came into con-
troversy, 78.


i


|


INDEX.


- BSeysine :

by the bare. "e of the feet on a
. tenement, 341. '

may be retained mentally without the
body up to death, 187. .

may be retained corporeally only with -
out the mind, until the body is
carried forth out of seysine, ib.

by an agent, notwithstanding the
death of the principal, 189.

of a thing may be sufficient to give a
title, although the donee has not
used it, 205.

what may be called firm, and what
tender, 211.

where the chief lord has found it
vacant, he may keep possession
until the rightful heir has established
his claim, 119.

Sbillings :

one hundred, the portion from a
church assigned to an abbot or
prior, 98.

twenty, worth of land to be appraised
by a jury upon & view, 151.


Signatures, & comparison of, to prove the .


faith of i instruments, 519.

Sneath, Church of, the presentation claimed
by the Prior. of Southwick, 67.

Somerset, Albert, Earl of, case of, when
jurors were not of accord as part
only were convicted of perjury by
& jury of twenty-four, 419.

Southwick, prior of, his claim to present '
to the Churcli of Sneath, in Kent,

67.

Status, exception of, when itn may be proved
by kinsmen, 401.

Statute :

of Merton, limitation .of time for a
writ of * quo obiit," 197.
of Westminster L, alteration in the

limitation of time for aü assise of
mortdnncester, ib.

Stentenham, Simon de, Alice, his wife,
her claim of dower against the heir,
491.


-


DU A-^vUES 7


Stoke, Church of, suit of the Earl of
Chester against the Prior of Kenol-

, . worth for the advowson, 71. |

Stokshyre, Church of, claim of the Prior
of Lewes to the presentation against
William of Arbervil, late a ward of

: the Archbishop of Canterbury, 57.

Strode, Joetta de la, conditional assign-
ment of dower, 497.

Stronby, tenement at, held in gavel-kind,
80 that the succession of the heir
was not barred by the felony of an
ancestor, 299.

Sudledhe, prior of, claim of the advowson
of Seyle, 73.

Sudmel, Church of, presentation to the

. — third part, 69,

Summons to a: warrantor of dower, 457.

Superior :

. ejectment by a, 121.
aid of a, 197.
recourse must be had to a, that is, to

the King, to stop & woman from
eausing waste in her dower-land,
697,

Suterlege, Church of, in the county of
Norfolk, 82.

Swainson, Emma, the wife of Roger, com-
pensation to termor, where he has
suffered by a claim of dower, 578.


T.


Tenant of an estate for life may not root
| up trees and orchards growing in
the court of the chief messuage,

| 609.

Tenement of an ancestor, claimed by
earucates, or by líbrates, or by
virgates, or by acres, 248.

Time does not run against the absent,
841. .

Thomas, the parson of the Church of
Framesdon, in Suffolk, 371.

Q 1302.


INDEX.


641


| /Transfer of land, fraudulent, if made after


a writ of mortdancester has been
sued out, 219.

Traylie, John de, assise of last presentation
to Church of Sudmel, 69.

Trees and orchards growing in the court
of the chief messuage may not be
rooted up by a life tenant, 609.

Trywardray, prior of, disputes a presenta-
tion to the Church of Wyke in
Cornwall, 71.

Tunston :

Robert de, assise of last presentation,
55.
Church of, claimed by Matilda de
Rochesford, ib.
Turpin, Willelmus, assise of mortdancester
'  inthe county of Warwick, 265.


U.


Uterine brothers, if bastards, extraneous
to each other, 227.


V.


Valle de, William, an assise of '* utrum"
in the person of the rector, 369.

Vallibus, Hubert de, distrained by the

.. viscount for non-appearance in a
suit of ** quare impedit," 179.
Vestiméntum sometimes proves the s&ey-
sine, where the substance is not
clear, 205.

Vicar may join with a private person in
an assise of utrum for a pension,
which is payable to a private per-
80D, 371.

Vicarage on vacancy accrues to the parson,
unless it is taxed by the ordinary
for the support of a vicar, 35.

Vigilantibus jura sulveniunt, 340.


SS


642


Virgate :
of land, 219.
claim of a tenement by virgates, 243.
of land, whether held in free aulms,
371.
Villein :
cannot recover against his lord by a
writ of mortdancester, if his father
died under the power of the lord,
2/17.
a person who has once so admitted
himself, will be so adjudged in
every subsequent trial, 305.
Villeins not allowed to be manumitted by
a woman whois in seysine of dower-
lands, 603.


W. :


Wadleyham, Ralph de, assise of mort-
dancester, 15.

Waldebusa, the wife of William de Breuse,
the son of John, her claim of dower
against the moiety of John's estate
held by his younger brother
Reginald, under an accord with
William, 565.

Walenus, Maria de, claim of presentation
by reason of her third part, as
dower, 51.

Walepole, Alexander de, and his wife
Grace, recovery of dower against a
tenant through failure of a war-
rantor, 455.

War:

a time of, presentation wrongfully
made in such time insufficient to
found a rightful title to an" advow-
son, 27.

a general, 27.

in the second year after the, Kent Iter,
579.

Dorset Iter, 591.

second roll after the, Sussex Iter, 495.

supervening and death of the tenant
only suspends the execution of a
judgment in favour of dower, 519.


Digitized by Google


INDEX,


Warrantor :

in an assise of mortdancester must
defend the tenant against a claimant,
157.

liable to make compensation by an
exchange of land, 163.

may be called in an assise of utrum
just as in an assise of mortdan-
cester, 372.

minority of, does not stay an action
for dower, 477. |

if within the franchise of a bishop
or an earl, must be distrained by
him to appear before the King's
justiciaries, 487. |

Waste :

may be claimed againsta chief lord,
or against a guardian, 125.

writ for granting seysine after judg-
ment,145.
a fit cause for damages in an assise
of mortdancester, 363.
damages against a chief lord as
guardian, 365. |

mode of proceeding in a suit for
waste committed on dower lands,
599. |

answer of tbe woman in a suit of,
599. |

if a woman has not appeared in a
suit for waste of her dowor lands
after due summons, let her be
attached, subject to a single essoin -
de malo veniendi, 599.


the mode of proceeding against a
woman for waste of her dower
lands, 601.


where the woman denies it in respect
of dower lands, a view should be
taken by the jurors, 601.

a writ to. view the waste alleged to
have been committed by a woman
on her dower lands, 603.

in dower lands by manumitting vil-
leins, 603.

in dower woods by cutting down oak
trees, 603.


INDEX. 643


Waste—cont.

houses not allowed to be pulled down
on dower lands by the woman when
in seysine of them, 608.

where caused by a woman in dower
woods justifies the court in ap-
pointing a forester, 605.

custom of eacb locality as to what
constitutes waste in dower lands,
606.

where a person has only a life interest


in an estate, it does not take place -


where the possessor only takes
reasonable estovers ou account of
his freehold, otherwise if he exceeds
measure in taking tbem, 607.
where & person has both the posses-
sion and the property, it can only
take place, where a servitude has
been established by the mode of
donation, 607.
of lands or woods, what constitutes
it, 608.
made by a stranger is the subject of
an action for novel disseysine or
for trespass, 608.
made by a guardian entails his loss
of office and both damages and &
fine to the King, 609.
no similar loss is incurred by a woman
on account of waste, but ehe must
refund damages and have a curator
imposed upon her, 609.
what constitates waste in the case of
a guardian, 611.
Waterdene, Barsholomew de, assise of
mortdancester, 13.
Weleton, church of, claimed by the Prior
of Osneby, 55.
Weleton Conan de, claimed the church of
Weleton, 55.
Westminster :
writ of dower returnable before the
King's justiciaries at, 458.
our first coronation at, 409.
an &ccord made at, 304.
Wichio, church of St. Mary, assise of last
presentation, 57.


|
|


Widow may proceed by a writ of right,
when, by delay, she has lost her
title to à writ of dower, 581.

Wife:

lawful, inquest to determine her claim
committed to the ordinary by a
mandate from the king, 451.

a female serf, upon the death of her
husband, who was a free man, is
not entitled to dower, 469.

Wife's sentence for validity of her mar-
riage gives her dower, although her
husband has died before the execu-
tion of the judgment, 509.

Wife, a man can only, of right, have one,
although he may have several in
fact, 469.

Wives, where a man has several in fact

the first wife is the lawful wife, -
and may exact her dower if it was
established at the church door, 503.

Woman's claim for dower shall prevail, if
her heirs have obtained the inheri-
tance of her husband in a cause of
succession, 541.

Woodstoke, pleas before the king at,
claim to the rectory of the church
of St. Mary the Viryin in Oxford.

Worcester, bishop of, his consultation with
the King's justiciaries aecording to
the custom of the realm of England,
535,

Wnrt :

for an assise of last presentation, 5.

for à jury to come, 9.

of entry to revoke the donation of
an advowson, 53.

' to the bishop of Winchester to deter-
mine who was the lawful wife of
John Fitzhugh, 53.

of quare impedit in the case of a
woman claiming a presentation in
right of her dower, 49.

in the case of a husband holding by
the Lex Anglie, 53.

of quare non permisit differs from
quare impedit, 61.


644 INDEX.


Writ—-cont.

to bishop to present after an assise of
last presentation, 63.

of quare impedit, tenor of it, 74.

of quare impedit, how it differs from
writ of quare non permittit, 75.

against a minor in an assise of last
presentation, 79.

to a bishop to admit a presentee, after
a judgment on quare impedit or on
quare non permittit, 85.

to a bishop to admit a presentee after
an assise, 83.

to a bishop to admit a presentee of
several parceners, 91.

toa bishop to admit a presentee of
four sisters, two of them having
husbands, 92.

to a bishop, where an aecord has been
for a prior or an abbot to receivean
annual pension charged on a church,
93.

to a bishop to admit after judgment
the presentee of the lessee of a
manor with al] its appurtenances,
95.

to a bishop to admit the presentee of
two parties who dispute the advow-
son, one of them being a minor,
97.


to the bishop, where two out of three
who dispute the advowson agree
upon a presentee, 99,

to a bishop to admit the presentee of à
party who has seysine of à manor
with the advowson, 101.


toa bishop who in such a case has
not obeyed the King's mandate, ib.


of prohibition to the judges to entertain
a further suit, where judgment has
been given in the King's court on
the right of presentation, 193.


of prohibition to the Court of Christi-
anity to hold a plea concer ning pre-
sentation already heard in the
King's court, in the case of a
minor, 105.


CI m mo wc Áo


|


oed Coogle "d


Writ—cont.-


to a bishop to admit the ERonfo of
a party, to whom the right of pre-
sentation has been adjudged, not-
withstanding a plea of ME is
pending, 107.
of * quare non admisit" to a bishop,
who has disobeyed the King's.
mandate to admit a elerk, 107. —
of novel disseysine, granted to heirs of
full age, if ejeeted by à chief lord,
117.
of mortdancester granted to minor
heirs ejected by a chief lord, i5.
of novel disseysine granted to a chief
lord ejected from a freehold, where -
no heir has appeared, 121.
of mortdancester, when allowed to the
true heir against a younger brother
Or a bastard, 123.
of mortdancester, when granted to an
heir against a chief lord, who is in
seysine of a vacant inheritance, 125.
of an assise of mortdancester, limita-
tion by statute of Westminster I.,
127.
of mortdancester, various forms of,
129.
of ecosinage, when it applies instead of
a writ of mortdaneester concerning
the death of a grandfather, 131.
it applies further in descent than to a
grandehild, 133.
of mortdancester, when it may be
conjoined with ceosinage, i5. X
of right, when it has place instead of a
writ of mortdancester, 135.
to the viseount to produce the bodies
of the jurors before the justiciaries
in an assise of mortdancester, 143.
to give plenary seysine after an assise
of mortdancester, 145.
to grant seysine to the parent of a
minor, after judgment, against &
chief lord for waste, 147.
if a plaintiff has not, obtained in
after judgment in an assise of mort-
dancester, 147. S


INDEX.


of the justiciaries to the viscount for
seysine after an accord. in an assise
of mortdancester, 150.


loss o£, will not necessarily stay the


suit, 155.
of mortdanoester, loss not hurtful, if
the justiciary exhibits his warrant,
tb.
to summon a warrantor in an assise
of mortdancester, 157.
an interlaced (interlaqueatam), (o
summon several warrantors together,
199.
to take into the King's hands the lands
of a warrantor to make compensa-
tion after an assise of mortdancester,
165.
to take into the hands of the King
the lands of a warrantor who has
made default, 167.
to summon à warrantor upon bis de-
fant, 169.
of right between parties who have a
parity of right by descent from a
common stock, 223.
for a& ressonable portion between
sisters or two parceners, 223.
of cosinage has place where an assise
of mortdancester is restrained, 225.
of right bas place where writ of cosin-
age is restrained, ib.
of peace til] the arriva] of the justi-
. eiaries, 261.
to the viscount of a county, in which
the King's writ does not run, 267.
of peace, until the Iter of the justi-
ciaries, 277.
of right, minor shall not answer until
he is of the age of twenty-one,
283.
of cosinage, in aid of an assise of mort-
dancester, where the latter fails,
384.
of cosinage fails, where the elder born
and younger born are both in pos-
session, 839.
of cosipage, tenor of the writ, 887.


646


Writ—cont.


of cosinage only claims the seysine
not the right, 347.

of cosinage has no place between one
near heir and another near heir;
as between two  younger-born
brothers, 847.

of cosinage does not lie between co-
heirs, 351.

of cosinage only determines the pos.
sessory right, 355.

of right, where the claimant can only
prove his seysine upon hearsay,
335.

of right, determines the right as well
as the seysine, 347.

of right, for a rector of & church to
recover common of pasture ; which is
a cause of possession rather than a
cause of property, 361.

of entry available to the parson of a
church, 379.

of entry sometimes turned into a writ
of right, 357.

of quo warranto, against a person who
does not permit another person to
hàve common of pasture, 363.

for & jury to come in an assise of
utrum, 371.

for a rector to have an assise of utrum,
371.

for a layman to have an aasise of
utrum, 37i.

for land to be restored to a church as
an escbeat, where the feoffee is a
bastard, and dead without heirs,
384.

to summon twenty-four knights, to
eonviet & jury for perjury in an
assise of novel disseysine, 409.

to summon twenty-four knights to
conviet a jury for perjury in an
assise of mortdancester, 411.

to sumuon twenty-four knights to
eonvict a jury for perjury in an
assise of last presentation or in an
assise of utrum, 411,


646


: *; 7 E TIE E -
TT I e M—— à Lc ELS $ -
» , QE CHUA ;e - ei-E^ ]
rode cto» E — E
v^ um c M ju. —— Y. T
Ms T " J .
T , ts P -- as
INDEX.
Writ—cont. Writ—cont.
to put a party into seysine upon a Christianity in favor of her mar-
verdict of twelve being confirmed riage, 507.


by a jury of twenty-four, 421.

to give seysine, where a jury of twelve
have amended their verdict, 423.

to & jury to certify their verdict in an
assise of novel disseysine, 427.

to inquire as to the recognition of a
jury of twenty-four summoned to
convict a jury of twelve, 431.

where one of a jury of twenty-four
summoned to convict for perjury a
jury of twelve dies before the assise,
432.

where one of a jury of twenty-four
has died after a summons to convict
a jury of twelve for perjury in an
assise of mortdancester, 433.

in an action for raising a foss, 411.

to assign reasonable dower, 453.

for a warrantor concerning dower to
be produced by the sheriff, 465.

to cause a warrantor of dower to
appear in court, 475.

to give seysine of dower to the widow,
477.

for the heir to provide for the widow
a dower, where it has not been
specified, 481.

for a widow to receive specified dower,
aud for the heir to compensate the
feoffee of the land, 483.


to a bishop or an earl to produce the


warrantor of dower, if he is within .


their franchise, 487.

for an extent of a manor for the
amount of specified dower, 489.

to an archbishop or bishop to try the
validity of a marriage, 499.

to summon the tenant of land to appear
before the justiciaries after the
court of Christianity has pronounced
in favor of a marriage, where dower
is claimed, 505.

to give to a woman seysine of her
dower after sentence of a court of


to hold an inquest as to the endow--
ment of a wife at the door of the
church, 511.

for an inquest in a claim for dower,
where a sect and other proof are
wanting, 517.

for dower, appointed by the husband
with the eonsent of his father or
other relation, 523.

to the bishop of Winchester to deter-
mine which of two claimants of
dower was the lawful relict of
Robert de Hocton, 531.

to the bailiffs of a city to "procure for
a widow her reasonable dower ac-

| cording tothe custom of the city,547.

to inquire if a deceased husband was
seysed of certain land on the day
on which he espoused his wife, of
which she claims dower, 553.

to give to a widow seysine of her
dower, 575.

of right to dower, may be sued out by
the widow as a closed writ, where
a writ of dower has not sufficed, 581.

toa county court for an admeasure-
ment of dower, where the lands
are all within the same county, 587.

for the admeasurement of dower in
divers counties, 589.

to prohibit a woman to cause waste in
her dower lands, 596.

to the viscount to hold a view of waste
alleged against a woman ied of
dower lands, 603.

for the viscount and jurors to view
the dower lands, upon which waste
contrary to the custom of our realm
is alleged against the woman, 603.

for appointing a forester, where a
woman has caused waste in dower
woods, 605.

for the heir to restore dower land on
the death of the *voman, who has -
been seysed of it, to a party, to


oitzea Coogle EU


INDEX.


Writ— cont.


whom the heir has previously con-
veyed it by deed, 614.
' where a gunrdian has caused waste in
the estate of his ward, 611.
to the viscount to enjoin A. an intruder
into dower land upon the death of
the woman who was endowed with
it, to restore it to B. the son of a
rightfül owner of the land by pur-
chase, who endowed the woman,615.
Wyke::
ehurch of, in county of Cornwall,
claimed by the prior of Trywardray,
71.
Richard, his suit with the prior of
"Trywardray, 71.
W ylington, Robert de, assise of mortdan-
cester, 18].


|
|


647


M.


Younger-born brother may be admitted to
the inheritance, if elder brother is
absent in the Holy Land, condition-
ally to surrender it, if he should
return alive, 117.

through the office of the judge may
have conditional seysine of the in-
heritance, if the jurors find that the
elder-born brother is in transmarine
parts, and they know not whether
he is dead or not, 269.

Younger-born, after a long seysine, cannot
be ejected by an elder-born brother
without a writ, 341.

York, eustom of the county for à woman
to claim dower within a year nfter
her husband's death, 549.


d D. nd d


o


"

w 4,
ÉKH- *
[un
"De


3;
y


e
EU
T3
E
ed


CATALOGUE


OF


RECORD PUBLICATIONS


ON SALE
BY .
Messrs. Longmans & Co., and Messrs. Trübner & Co., London
Messrs. James Parker & Co., Oxford and London;
Messrs. Maemillan & Co., Cambridge and London ;
Messrs. A. & C. Black, and Moessrs. Douglas and Foulis,


Edinburgh;
and Messrs. A. Thom & Co., Dublin.


Q. 1802, | TT


CONTENTS.


CALENDARS OF STATE PAPERS, $c.  - . " : - 3


CHRONICLES AND MEMORIALS OF GREAT BRITAIN AND ÍRELAND DURING


THE MiDDLE AGES - - - . E * - 9
PusLICATIONS OF THE RECORD CoMMiSSIONERS, &c.  - - - 26
Wonxs PuBLISHED IN PHOTOZINCOGRAPHY - . - . 29
Scorcu REeGoRD PUBLICATIONS - - - - - 81
Inrsg REeCcoRD PuBLICATIONS - - - . - . 82


MEME ifc


ENGLAND.


CALENDARS OF STATE PAPERS, &c.


[IwPERIAL 8vo.,cloth. Price los. each Volume or Part.]


As far back as the year 1800, a Committee of the House of Commons
recommended that Indexes and Calendars should be made to the Public
Records, and thirty-six years afterwards another Committee of the House of
Commons reiterated that recommendation in more forcible words ; but it
was not until the incorporation of the State Paper Office with the Public
Record Office that the Master of the Rolls found himself in a position to take
the necessary steps for carrying out the wishes of the House of Commons.

On 7 December 1856, he stated to the Lords of the Treasury that although
* the Records, State Papers, and Documents in his charge constitute the
* most complefe and perfect series of their kind in the civilized world," and
although * they are of the greatest value in & historical, and constitutional
* point of view, yet they are comparatively useless to the publie, from the
* want of proper Calendars and Indexes."

Acting upon the recommendations of the Committees of the House of
Commons above referred to, he suggested to the Lords of the Treasury that
to effect the object he had in view it would be necessary for him to employ a
few Persons fully qualified to perform the work which he contemplated.

'Their Lordships assented to the necessity of having Calendars prepared
and printed, and empowered the Master of the Rolls to take such steps as
might be necessary for this purpose, — —

'The following Works have been already published under the direction of
the Master of the Rolls :—


CALENDARIUM GENEALOGICUM ; for the Reigns of Henry III. and Edward I.
Edited by CHARLES RoBERTS, Esq., Secretary of the Publio Record
Office. 2 Vols. 1866. |

'This is a work of great value for elucidating the early history of our nobility
and landed gentry.

CALENDAR OF STATE PaPrens, DowEsTIC SERIES,OF THE REIGNS Or Ep-
WARD VL, Manr, ELIZABETH, and JAMES I., preserved in Her Majesty's
Public Record Office. Edited by RosERT LxWwoN, Esq., F.S.A., (Vols.
I. and IL), and Many ANNE EvznETT GREEN, (Vols. IIL-XIT.).
1856-1872.


Vol. I.—1647—1580. Vol. VII.—Addenda, 1566-1579.
Vol. 11.—1581—1590. Vol. VIII.—1603-1610.

Vol. III.—1591-16594. Vol. IX.—1611-1618.

Vol. IV.—16595-1597. Vol. X.—1619—16238. |
Vol. V.—1598-1601. Vol. X1.—1628—1625, with Ad-
Vol. VI.—1601-1608, with denda, 1603-1625.


Addenda, 1547-1565. | Vol. XIL—4Addenda, 15680-1625.
'These Calendars render accessible to investigation a large and important mass
of historical materials. The Northern Rebellion of 1566-67 ; the plots of the
Catholic fugitives in the Low Countries ; the numerous designs against Queen
Elizabeth and in favour of a Catholic succession ; the Gunpowder-plot; the


TT 2


4


rise and fall of Somerset; the Overbury murder; the disgrace of Sir Edward
Coke; the rise of the Duke of Buckingham, &c. Numerous other subjects are
illustrated by these Papers, few of which have been previously known.
CaLENDAR Or STATE ParERs, DoMEesTiC SERIES, OF THx REIGN OF
CHARLES L, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. Edited
by Jonw BRUcE, Esq., F.S.A., (Vols. L-XIL); óy Jouw BRUCE, Esq.
F.S.A., and WinLiaw DovucLas HawiLTON, Esq., F.S.A., (Vol. XIII);
and by WirLiAw DoucLAs HauwrLTON, Esq. F.S.A., (Vols. XIV.-
X VI.) 1858-1880. j


Vol. 1.— 1625-1626. | Vol IX.—1635-1636.
Vol. II.—1627-1628. Vol. X.—1636-1637.
Vol. I1T.—1628—1629. Vol XI.—1637. :

Vol. IV.—1629-1631. Vol. XII.—1637-1638.
Vol. V.—1631-1633. | Vol. XIII.—1638-1639.
Vol. VI.—1633-1634. Vol. XIV.—1639. .
Vol. VII.—1634—1635. Vol. X V.—1639-1640.
Vol. VIIL—1635. — Vol. XVI.—1640.


This Calendar presents notices of a large number of original documents of great
value to all inquirers relative to tbe history of the period to which it refers
Many of them have been hitherto unknown.
CALENDAE OF GTATE PAPERS, DoMEsTIC SERIES, DURING THE COMMONWEALTH,
preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. Edited by Mam
' ANNE EvERETT (XREEN. 18775-1880.
Vol. 1.—1649—1650.
Vol. II.—1650.
Vol. II1.—1651.
Vol. IV.—1651-1652.
This Calendar is in continuation of those during the reigns from Edward VI. to
Charles I., and contains a mass of new information.
CALENDAR OF STATE PaPrns, DoMwesTIC SERIES, OF THE RriGN or
CHARLES IL, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. Edited
by Man ANNE EvkeRETT GREEN. : 1860-1866.


Vol. V.—1652—1653.
Vol. VI.—1653-1654.
Vol. VII.—1654.


Vol. I.—1660—-1661. Vol. V.— 1665-1666.
Vol. II.— 1661-1662. Vol. VI.—1666-1667.
Vol. III.—1663—1664. Vol. VII.—1667.


Vol. IV.—1664-1666.


Seven volumes ofthis Calendar, of the period between 1660 aud 1667, have been
published.


CALENDAR OF Howe OrrrcE PapeEns or THE REiGN or GxoncE III., pre-
served in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. | Edited by Josken
REDriNGTON, Esq., 1878-1879. |

Vol. IL.—1760 (25 Oct.)-1765. | | Vol. I1.—1766-1769.
These are the first two volumes of the modern series of Domestic Papers, com-
mencing with the accession of George III.

CALENDAR OF STATE PaPEns relating to ScoTLAND, preserved in Her
Majesty's Publie Record Office. Edited by MARkHAM JonN THORPE,
Esq., of St. Edmund Hall, Oxford. 1858.

Vol. IL, the Seottish Series, of the Reigns of Henry VIII.
Edward VI., Mary, and Elizabeth, 1509-1589.

Vol.IIL., the Scottish Series, of the Reign of Elizabeth, 1589-1603;
an Áppendix to the Scottish Series, 1548—1592 ; and the State


Papers relating to Mary Queen of Scots during her Detention in
England, 1568-1587. |
These two volumes of State Papers relate to Scotland, and embrace the


period between 1509 and 1603. In the second volume are notices of the Stat
Papers relating to Mary Queen of Scots. 2i x:


5


CALENDAR or DocuMENTS relating to IRELAND, preserved in Her Majesty's
Public Record Office, London. Edited by HENRY SAvAGE SWEETMAN,
mi: B.A., Trinity College, Dublin, Barrister-at-Law (Ireland). 1876-

Vol. I.—1171—-12651. Vol. I1I.—1285—-1292.
Vol. 11.—12652-1284. |

These volumes contain & Calendar of all documents relating to Ireland,
preserved in the Public Record Office, London ; the work is to be continued
to the end of the reign of Henry VII.

CALENDAR OF STATE PaPERs relating to IRELAND, OF THE REIGNS OF
HrNnr VIIL, EnwaRp VI, MaRY, AND ELIZABETH, preserved in Her
Majesty's Public Record Office. Edited by HaNs CLAUDE HAMILTON,
Esq., F.S.A. 1860-1877.

Vol. 1.—1509-1573. Vol. III.—1586-1588.
Vol. II.—16574-1589.

' The above have been published under the editorship of Mr. Hans Claude

Hamilton.
CaneNDAR or SrATE PaPEns relating to IRELAND, OF THE REIGN OF
| JAxES I, preserved in Her Majestys Public Record Office, and
elsewhere. Edited by the Rev. C. W. RussELL, D.D., and Jouw P.
PRENDERGAST, Esq., Barrister-at-Law. 1872-1880.
Vol. 1.—1603—-1606. Vol. IV.—1611-1614. -
Vol. I11.—1606—1608. Vol. V.—1616-1625.
Vol. II1.—1608-1610.

'This series is in continuation of the Irish State Papers commencing with
the reign of Henry VIII.; but, for the reign of James I.,the Papers are not
confined to those in the Public Record Office, London.

CarENDAR or STATE PaPERS, CoLoNIAL SERIES, preserved in Her Majesty's
Public Record Office, and elsewhere. .Edited by W. NoEgL SAINSBURY,
Esq. 1860-1880. |

Vol. I. —Americo and West Indies, 1574-1660. :
Vol. II.—East Indies, China, and Japan, 1518-1616.

Vol. III.—East Indies, China, and Japan, 1617—1621.

Vol. IV.—East Indies, China, and Japan, 1622-1624.

Vol. V.—America and West Indies, 1661-1668.

These volumes inelude an analysis of early Colonial Papers in the Public
Record Office, the India Office, and the British Museum.


CALENDAR or LETTERS AND PAPERS, FOREIGN AND DouxsTIC, OF THE
RzreN or HrwnY VIIL, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record
Office, the British Museum, &c. Edited by J. S. BnEwxn, M.A,,
Professor of English Literature, King's College, London, (Vols. I.-IV.);
and by JAMES GAIRDNER, Esq., (Vol. V.) 1862-1880.

Vol. I.—1509-1514. Vol. IV.—Introduction.
Vol. II. (in Two Parts) —1515- | Vol. IV., Part 1.—1524—1526.

1518. | Vol. IV., Pert 2.—1526—1528.

Vol, III. (in Two Parts)—1519—- | Vol. IV., Part 3.—1529-1580.

1523. Vol. V.—1531-16532.

'lTrhese volumes contain summaries of all State Papers and Correspondence
relating to the reign of Henry VIIL, in the Public Record Office, of those
formerly in the State Paper Office, in the British Museum, the Libraries of Oxford
and Cambridge, and other Public Libraries; and of all letters that have appeared
in print in the works of Burnet, Strype, and others. "Whatever authentic
original material exists in England relative to the religious, political, parliamen-
tary, or social history of the country during the reign of Henry VIII., whether
despatches of ambassadors, or proceedings of the army, navy, treasury, or
ordnance, or records of Parliament, appointments of officers, grants from the
Crown, &c., will be found calendared in these volumes,


6


CanENDAR OF STATE PAPERS, FonE:GN SERIES, OF THE HKEIGN OF

' EnwARD VL, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. 1647-

1558. Edited by W. B. TuURNBULL, Esq.,of Lincoln's Inn, Barrister-
at-Law, &c. 18061.


CALENDAR OF STATE PAPERS, FonEiGN SERIES, OF THE ÉREIGN OF Manr,
preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. 1553-1558. Edited by
W. B. TuRNBULL, Esq., of Lincoln's Inn, Barrister-at-Law, &c. 1861.


The two preceding volumes exhibit the negotiations of the English ambassadors
with the courts of the Emperor Charles V. of Germany, of Henry II. of France,
and of Philip II. of Spain. "The affairs of several of the minor continental states
also find various incidental illustrations of much interest.

A valuable series of Papers descriptive of the circumstances which attended
the loss of Calais merits a special notice; while the progress of the wars in the
north of France, into which England was dragged by her union with Spain, 1s
narrated at some length. 'The domestic affairs of England are of course passed
over in these volumes, which treat only of its relations with foreign powers.


CaAnENDAR or STATE PaPrns, FonEIGN SERIES, OF THE HREIGN OF
ErizABETH, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office, &c.
Edited by the Rev. JosceH SrEvEsNsoNu, M.A., of University College,
Durham, (Vols. L-VII), and ArnaAN Jawxrs  CnmosBx, Esq., M.A,,
Barrister-at-Law, (Vols. VIII.-XI.) 1863-1880.


Vol. 1.-——1558-1559. Vol. VII.—1564-1565.
Vol. II.—1559-1560. Vol, VIII.—1566-1 568.
Vol. III.—1560—-1561. Vol. IX.—1569-—1571.
Vol. IV.—16561-1562. Vol. X.—1572-15'74.
Vol. V.—16562. Vol. XI.—1575-1577.


Vol. VI.—16563.
These volumes contain a Calendar of the Foreign Correspondence during the
early portion of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, deposited in the Publice Record
Office, &c. They illustrate not only the external but also the domestic affairs of
e Foreign Countries during that period.
CALENDAR OF TnzaAsURY PAPERS, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record
Office. Edited by Joseen RepnimvGTON, Esq. 1868-1879.


Vol. 1.—1557—1696. Vol. III.—1702-1707.
Vol. 11.—1697—1702. Vol. IV.—1708—1714.

The above Papers connected with the affairs of the 'Treasury comprise
petitions, reports, and other documents relating to services rendered to the State,
grants of money and pensions, appointments to offices, remissions of fines and
duties, &c. "They illustrate civil and military events, finance, the administration
in Ireland and the Colonies, &c., and afford information nowhere else recorded.

CALENDAR OF THE CAREW PAPERS, preserved in. the Lambeth Library.
Edited by J. S. BREwER, M.A., Professor of English Literature, King's
College, London ; and WiLLiAM BuüLLEN, Esq. 1867-1873,


Vol. 1.—1515—1574. Vol. V.—Book of Howth ; Miscel-
Vol. I1I.——16576-1688. laneous.
Vol. I11.—1589—1600. Vol. VI.—1608-—-1624.


Vol. IV.—1601-1608.
The Carew Papers relating to Ireland, deposited in the Lambeth Library, are
unique, and of great importance. "The Calendar cannot fail to be welcome to
'allstudents of Irish history.
CALENDAR OY LETTERS, DESPATOHES, AND STATE PaAPzms, relating to the
.. Negotiations between England and Spain, preserved in the Archives at
Simancas, and elsewhere. Edited by G. A. BgRGENROTH. 1862-1868.
Vol. I.—Hen. VII.—1486-1509.
Vol. II.—Héen. VIII.—1509-1525.
Supplement to Vol, I. and Vol. II.


47


Mr. Bergenroth was engaged in compiling a Calendar of the Papers relating
to England preserved in the archives of Simancas in Spain, and the correspond-
ing portion removed from Simancas to Paris. Mr.'Bergenroth also visited
Madrid, and examined the Papersthere, bearing on the reign of Henry VIII.
The first volume contains the Spanish Papers of the reign of Henry VII. ; the
second volume, those of the first portion of the reign of Henry VIII. The
Supplement contains new informaton relating to the private life of Queen
Katharine of England ; and to the projected marriage of Henry VII. with Queen
Juana, widow of King Philip of Castile, and mother of the Emperor Charles V.


CALENDAR Or LETTERS, DESPATCHES, AND STATE PaPzms, relating to the
Negotiations between England and Spain, preserved in the Archives at
Simancas, and elsewhere. Edited by DoN PascuaL pE GaxANGOS.
1873-1879.


Vol. III., Part 1.—Hoen. VIII.—1525-1526.
Vol. IIL, Part 2.—Hen. VIII..—1527—1529.
Vol, IV., Part 1.—Hen. VIIT.—1529—-1530.


Upon the death of Mr. Bergenroth, Don Pascual de Gayangos was appointed

to continue the Calendar of the Spanish State Papers. He has pursued a

similar plan to that of his predecessor, but has been able to add much valuable

matter from Brussels and Vienna, with which Mr. Bergenroth was unacquainted.
CALENDAR OF STATE PAPERS AND MANUSCRIPTS, relating to ENGLISH
ArrAIRS, preserved in the Archives of Venice, &c. JAdited by RAwDOoN


Bnoww, Esq. 1864-1877.


Vol. 1.—1202-1509. Vol. IV.—152'7-1583.
Vol. IT.—1509—16519. Vol. V.—1534-1554.
Vol. III.—1520-1526. Vol. VI., Part 1.-—1556-1556.


Mr. Rawdon Brown's researches have brought to light a number of valuable
documents relating to various periods of English history ; his contributions to
historical literature are of the most interesting and important character.

SYLLABUS, IN ENGLISH, OF Rywrzms FaprkRAa. Jy Sir Tuowas Durrus
Han»r, D.C.L., Deputy Keeper of the Public Records. Vol. I. —Will. I.-
Edw. III; 1066-1377. Vol. Il. — Ric. II. - Chas. II.; 1377-1654.
1869-1873.

The * Fodera," or * Rymer's Federa," is a collection of miscellaneous docu-
ments illustrative of the History of Great Britain and Ireland, from the Norman
Conquest to the reign of Charles II. Several editions of the ** Fe dera? have
been published, and the present Syllabus was undertaken to make the contents
of this great National Work more generally known.

RgPogT or THE DrePuTY KEEPER or THE Pusri1C RECORDS AND THE REY.
J. S. BRezwzR TO THE MasTER OF THE ROoLLs, upon the Carte and
CarewPapers in the Bodleian and Lambeth Libraries. 1864. Príce 2s. 6d.

RrxPonT or THE DrePuTY KEEPER Or THE PuBLIC RECORDS TO THE MASTER
or THE RorLs, upon the Documents in the Archives and Public Libraries
of Venice. 1866. Price 25s. 6d.


In the Press.


SYLLABUS, IN ENoLISH, or RywER's FapkRA. By Sir THowAs Durrus
Hazpy, D.C.L. Deputy Keeper of the Public Records, Vol. III.—
Appendix and Index. |

. CAzENDAR or SrATE ParERS AND MANUSCRIPTS, relating to ENGLISH

A rFAIRS, preserved in the Archives of Venice, &c. | Edited by RAw»oN

Bnowms, Esq. "Vol. VI, Part 11.—1606-16568.


8


CALENDAR Or HoxE OrrircE ParEeRs or THE RExrGN or GxoncE IIL,
preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Offioe. Edited by RicHARD
ARTHUR RoszRTS, Esq., Barrister-at-Law. Vol. IIT.—1770—1772.


CALENDAR Or LETTERS, DESPATCHES, AND STATE PaPzms, relating to the
Negotiations between England and Spain, preserved in the Archives at
Simaneas, and elsewhere. Edited by Dow PascuAL p& GAYANGOS.
Vol. IV., Part 2.—Hen. VIII.


CALENDAR OF STATE Parrns relating to IRELAND, OF THE REIGN OF
ELIZABETH, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. Edited
by Haus CrLAupE HawiLTON, Esq., F.S.A. Vol. IV.—1588—-1590.

CALENDAR OF DocuwENTS relating to IRELAND, preserved in Her Majesty's
Publie Record Office, London. Edited by HkNRY SAvAGE SWEETMAN,


Esq., B.A., Trinity College, Dublin, Barrister-at-Law (Ireland). Vol. IV.
—1293-1801.


CALENDAR oF LETTERS AND PAPERS, FOREIGN AND DoxzsTIO, or THE Rx!GN
or HeNRY VIIL, preserved in Her Majesty's Publice Record Office,
the British Museum, &c. Edited by JaMxs GargpNER, Esq. Vol. VI.
—1538, &c.


CALENDAR OF STATE PAPEns, DouxsrIC SERIES, DURING THE COMMONWEALTH,
preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record .Offüce. Edited by Manx
ANNE EvrRETT GREEN. Vol, VIIL——1684—5.


In Progress.


CALENDAR OF STATE PaPzns, CoLoNiAL SERIES, preserved in Her Majesty'a
Public Record Office, and elsewhere. Edited by W. Nor SAINSBURY,


Esq. Vol. VI.— East Indies, 1625, &c. Vol. VII.—America and West
Indies, 1669, &c. |


CALENDAR OF TREASURY PAPEszS, preserved in Her Majesty's Publie Record
Office. Edited by JosseR RepmNGTON, Esq. Vol. V.—1714, &c.
CALENDAR OF Howr OrricE ParERs or THE RxrGN or Gxonmamz III. ,
preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. Edited by RiCHARD
Anrmun RonzxnrS, Esq., Barrister-at-Law. Vol. IV.—1778, &c.
CALENDAR OF STATE PAPrns, FonEIGN SERIES, OF THE REIGN OF ELIZABETH,
preserved in Her Majesty's Publie Record Office, Edited by ALLAN
JAMES CnosBy, Esq. M.A., Barrister-at-Law. Vol, XII.—1577.
CALENDAR OF STATE Parens, DowuksrIC SERIES, O* THE REIGN OF


CnARLESs L, preserved in Her Majesty's Publie Record Office, Edited by
WiLLiAM DoueLas HawiLTON, Esq. F.S.A. Vol. XVII —1640.


THE CHRONICLES AND MEMORIALS OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND IRELAND DURING THE MIDDLE AGES.


| Rovar 8vo. half-bound. Price 10s. each Volume or Part.]


On 25 July 1822, the House of Commons presented an address to the
Crown, stating that the editions of the works of our ancient historians were
inconvenient and defective; that many of their writings still remained in
manuscript, and, in some cases, in a single copy only. "They added, ** that an
** uniform and convenient edition of the whole, published under His Majesty's
** royal sanction, would be an undertaking honourable to His Majesty's reign,
** and conducive to the advancement of 'historien] end constitutional] know-
** ledge ; that the House therefore humbly besought His Majesty, that He
* would be graciously pleased to give such direetions as His Majesty, in His
* wisdom, might think fit, for the publication of a complete edition of the
* ancient historians of this realm, and assured His Majesty that whatever
* expense might be necessary for this purpose would be made good."

'lhe Master of the Rolls, being very desirous that effect should be given
to the resolution of the House of Commons, submitted to Her Majesty's
Treasury in 1857 & plan for the publieation of the ancient chronicles and
memorials of the United Kingdom, and it was adopted accordingly. In -
selecting these works, it was considered right, in the first instance, to
give preference to those of which the manuscripts were unique, or the
materials of which would help to fill up blanks in English hibtory for
which no satisfaetory and authentic information hitherto existed in any
accessible form. One great object the Master of the Rolls had in view was
to form à corpus historicum within reasonable limits, and which should be
as complete as possible. In a subject of so vast a range, it was important
that the historical student should be able to select such volumes as conformed
. with his own peculiar tastes and studies, and not be put to the expense of
purehasing the whole collection ; an inconvenience inseparable from any
other plan than that which has been in this instance adopted.


Of the Chronicles and Memorials, the following volumes have been pub-
lished. 'They embrace the period from the earliest time of British history
down to the end of the reign of Henry VII. |


l. THE CunRoNICLE Or ENGLAND, by Jouw CaPaGRAVE. Edited by ihe
Rev. F. C. HiuaozsToN, M.A., of Exeter College, Oxford. 1868.
Capgrave was prior of Lynn, in Norfolk, and provincial of the order of the
Friars Hermits of England shortly before the year 1464. His Chronicle extends
from the creation of the world to tbe year 1417. As a record of the language
spoken in Norfolk (being written in English), it is of considerable value.


2. CmnoxicoN MoNasTERH DE ÁBINGDON. "Vols. I. and II. Edited by
the Rev. JosePH STEvEeNsOoN, M.A., of University College, Durham,
and Vicar of Leighton Buzzard. 1868. |


(this Chronicle traces the history of the great Benedictine monastery of
Abingdon in Berkshire, from its foundation by King Ina of Wessex, to the
reign of Richard I., shortly after which period the present narrative was drawn
up by an inmate of the establishment. "The author had access to the title-deeds
of the house ; and incorporates into his history various charters of the Saxon
kings, of great importance as illustrating not only the history of the locality
butthatof the kingdom, The work is printed for the first time. |


10


3. Lives or EpwARD THE CoNrEssoR. I.—La Estoire de Seint Aedward
le Rei. IL-—Vita Beati Edvardi Regis et Confessoris. IIIL.—Vita
JEduuardi Regis qui apud Westmonasterium requiescit. .Edited by
HzwnY RicHARDsS LuanRD, M.A., Fellow and Assistant Tutor of Trinity
College, Cambridge. 1858.

The first is a poem in Norman French, containing 4,686 lines, addressed to
Alianor, Queen of Henry IIL, and probably written in the year 1245, on the
occasion of tle restoration of the church of Westminster. Nothing is known

 oftheauthor. 'The second is an anonymous poem, containing 536 lines, written
betweem the years 1440 and 1450, by command of Henry VI, to whom it
is dedicated. It does not throw any new light on the reign of Edward the
Confessor, but is valuable as a specimen of the Latin poetry of the time, 'The
third, also by an anonymous author, was apparently written for Queen Edith,
between the years 1066 and 1074, during the pressure of the suffering brought
on the Saxons by the Norman conquest. It notices many facts not found in
other writers, and some which differ considerably from the usual accounts.


4. MONUMENTA FRANCISCANA ; scilicet, I.—Thomas de Eccleston de Ad-
ventu Fratrum Minorum in Angliam. II.—Ade» de Marisco Epistols.
IIL— Registrum Fratrum Minorum Londonise. .Edited by J. S.
BaEeWwER, M.A., Professor of English Literature, King's College,
London. 1858.

This volume contains original materials for the history of the settlement of
the order of Saint Francis in England, the letters of Adam de Marisco, and
other papers connected with the foundation and diffusion of this great body. It
has been the aim of the editor to collect whatever historical information could be
found in this country, towards illustrating à period of the national history for
which only scanty materials exist. None of these have been before printed.


5. FAsCcICULI ZIZANIORUM MaaisrRi JoHANNIS WyroLirw cuM "TRirICO.
Ascribed to TuowxAs NETTER, of WALDEN, Provincial of the Carmelite
Order in England, end Confessor to King Henry the Fifth. Edited by
the Rev. W. W. SurgLEY, M.A,, Tutor and late Felow of Wadham
College, Oxford. 1868.

'This work derives its principal value from being the only contemporaneous
account of the rise of the Lollards. When written the disputes of the school-
men had been extended to the field of theology, and they appear both in the
wriüngs of Wycliff and in those of his adversaries. Wycliff's little bundles
of tares are not less metaphysical than theological, and the conflict between
Nominalists and Realists rages side by side with the conflict between the different
interpreters of Scripture. The work gives a good idea of the controversies àt
the end of the 14th and the beginning of the 15th centuries.


6. TRE Burk or THE CnRoNiCLIS OF SCOTLAND ; or, À Metrical Version of
the History of Hector Boece; by WirLLiAM STEWART. Vols. I., II.,
and III. Edited by W. B. TuRNBULL, Esq., of Lincoln's Inn, Barrister-
at-Law. 1858.

This is a metrical translation of a Latin Prose Chronicle, and was written in the
first half of the 16th century. "The narrative begins with the earliest legends,
and ends with the death of James I. of Scotland, and the ** evil ending ofthe
traitors that slew him." Strict accuracy of statement is not to be looked for in
such a work as this ; but the stories of the colonization of Spain, Ireland, and
Scotland are interesting if not true; and the chronicle is valuable as a reflection
of the manners, sentiments, and character of the age in which it was composed.
The peculiarities of the Scottish dialect are well illustrated in this metrical version,
and the student of languege will find ample materials for comparison with the
English dialects of the same period, and with modern lowland Scotch.


7. JOHANNIS CaPGRAVE LiBER pE lrLUsTRIBUS HENRICIS. Edited by the
Rev. F. C. HixeEsToN, M.A., of Exeter College, Oxford. 1868.


This work is dedicated to Henry VI. of England, who appears to have been, in
the author's estimation, the greatest of all the Henries. it is divided into three


11


distinct parts, each having its own separate dedication. "The first part relates only
to the history of the Empire, and extends from the election of Henry I., the
Fowler, to the end of the reign of the Emperor Henry VI. 'The second part is
devoted to English history, and extends from the accession of Henry I. in the year
1100, to the year 1446, which was the twenty-fourth year of the reign of King
Henry Vl. 'The third part contains the lives of illustrious men who have borne
the name of Henry in various parts of the world.

Capgrave was born in 1393, in the reign of Richard II., and lived during the
Wars of the Roses, for the history of which period his work is of some value.


8. Hisroniíà MowasTxRnu S. AuaGusrINi CaNTUARIENSIS, by THOMAS OF
ErMwHAM, formerly Monk and Treasurer of that Foundation. Edited
óy CHARLES Hanpwick, M.A., Fellow of St. Catharine's Hall, and
Christian Advocate in the University of Cambridge. 1858.


This history extends from the arrivalof St. Augustine iu Kent until 1191.
Prefixed is a chronology as far as 1418, which shows in outline what was to have .
been the character of the work when completed. 'The only copy known 1s in the
possession of Trinity Hall, Cambridge. The author was connected with Norfolk,
and most probably with Elmham, whence he derived his name.


9. EuLociUM (HisroRIARUM sivE TEMPORIS): Chronicon ab Orbe condito
usque ad Annum Domini 1366 ; à Monacho quodam Malmesbiriensi
exaratum. Vols. L, IL, and III. Edited by F. S. HAvpoN, Esq., B.A.
1858-1863. |


This is a Latin Chronicle extending from the Creation to the latter part of the
reign of Edward IIL, and written by a monk of the Abbey of Malmesbury, in
Wiltshire, about the year 1367. A. continuation, carrying the history of England

. down to the year 1413, was added in the former half of the fifteenth century by
an author whose name is not known. 'The original Chronicle is divided into
five books, and contains a history of the world generally, but more especially
of England to the year 1366. The contnuation extends the hrstory down to
the coronation of Henry V. Tbe Eulogium itself is chiefly valuable as contain-
ing a history, by & contemporary, of the period between 1356 and 1366. "The
notices of events appear to have been written very soon after their occurrence.
Among other interesting matter, the Chronicle contains a diary of the Poitiers
campaign, evidently furnished by some person who accompanied the army of the
Black Prince. The continuation of the Chronicle is a]so the work of a contem-
porary, and gives a very interesting account of the reigns of Richard II. and ,
Henry IV. 1t is believed to be the earliest authority for the statement that the
latter monarch died in the Jerusalem Chamber at Westminster.


10, MEMORIALS or HxNRY THE SEevENTH: Bernardi Andres 'Tholosatis
Vita Regis Henrici Septimi ; necnon alia quedam ad eundem Regem
spectantia. Edited by JAMES G'AIRDNER, Esq. 1858.


The contents of this volume are—(1) a life of Henry VIL, by his poet
laureate and historiographer, Bernard André, of "Toulouse, with some composi-
tions In verse, of which he is eupposed to have been the author; (2) the journals
of Roger Machado during certain embassies on which he was sent by Henry VII.
to Spain and Brittany, the first of which had reference to the marriage of the
King's son, Arthur, with Catharine of Arragon; (3) two curious reports by
envoys sent to Spain in the year 1505 touching the succession to the Crown
of Castile, and a project of marriage between Henry VII. and the Queen of
Naples; and (4) an aecount of Philip of Castile's reception in England in 1506.
Other documents of interest in connexion with the period are given in an appendix.


11. MxwomrALs or HENRY THE Firrg. I.—Vita Henrici Quinti, Roberto
Redmanno auctore. lIL-—Versus Rhythmici in laudem Regis Henrici
Quinti. IIL.—Elmhami Liber Metricus de Henrico V. Edited by
CHARLES Á. CoL, Esq. 1858.


12


'T'his volume contains three treatises which more or less illustrate the history of
the reign of Henry V., viz.: A Life by Robert Redman ; a Metrical Chronicle by
Thomas Elmham, prior of Lenton, a contemporary author; Versus Rhythmici,
written apparently by a monk of Westminster Abbey, who was also a contempo-
rary of Henry V. "These works are printed for the first time.


12. MUNIMENTA GHUILDHALLZE LONDONIENSIS; Liber Albus, Liber Cus-
tumarum, et Liber Horn, in archivis Gildballe asservati. Vol. I.,
Liber Albus. Vol. II. (in Two Parts), Liber Custumarum. Vol. III.
"Translation of the Anglo-Norman Passages in Liber Albus, Glossaries,
Appendices, and Index. Edited by HgNRYy Tuowas Rirgr, Esq., M.A.,
Barrister-at-Law. 1859-1862. |


, The manuscript of the Liber Albus, compiled by John Carpenter, Common
Clerk of the City of London in the year 1419, a large folio volume, is pre-
served in the Record Room of the City of London. It gives an account of
the laws, regulations, and institutions of that City in the twelfth, thirteenth,
fourteenth, and early part of the fifteenth centuries.

The Liber Custumarum was compiled probably by various hands in the early :
part of the fourteenth century during the reign of Edward Il. 'The manuscript,
a folio volume, is also preserved in the Record Room of the City of London,
though some portion in its original state, borrowed. from the City in the reign
of Queen Elizabeth and never returned, forms part of the Cottonian MS.
Claudius D. II. in the British Museum. It also gives an account of the laws,
regulations, and institutions of the City of London in the twelfth, thirteenth, and
early part of the fourteenth centuries.


189. CunowmicA JoHaNNIS DE OxrNEDES. Edited by Sir HzNRY ErrLis,
K.H. 1859.


Although this Chronicle tells of the arrival of Hengist and Horsa in England
in the year 449, yet it substantially begins with the reign of King Alfred. and
comes down to the year 1292, where it ends abruptly. 'The history 1s particu-
larly valuable for notices of events in the eastern portions of the kingdom

"which are not to be elsewhere obtained, and some curious facts are mentioned
relative to the floods in that part of England, which are confirmed in the Fries-
land Chronicle of Anthony Heinrich, pastor of the Island of Mohr.


14, A CorLrEcTION or PornrriCcAL Porws AND SONGS RELATING TO ENGLISH -
HisroRY, FROM THE ACCESSION OF lipwARD III. ro THE REIGN OF
HrwRx VIII. "Vols. I. and II. Edited by 'TmBowAs WmicGnHT, Esq.,
M.A.: 1859-1861. |


'These Poems are perhaps the most interesting of all the historical writings of
the period, though they cannot be relied on for accuracy of statement. "They
are various in character; some are upon religious subjects, some may be called
satires, and some give no more than a court scandal; but asa wholethey pre-
senta very fair picture of society, and of the relations of the different classes
to one another. 'The period comprised is in itself interesting, and brings us,
through the decline of the feudal system, to the beginning of our modern
history. "The songs in old English are of considerable value to the philologist.


15. The * Orvs TERr1IUV," ** OPus MiNvs," &c., of RoagR BAcowN. Edited
by J. S. BREWxn, M.A., Professor of English Literature, King's
College, London. 1899. |

This is the celebrated treatise—never before printed—8so frequently referred
to by the great philosopher in his works. Jt contains the fullest details we
possess of the life and labours of Roger Bacon : also a fragment by the same
author, supposed to be unique, the * Compendium Studii Theologia."


16. BAgTHOLOMJEI DE CorroN, MoNaAcHI NoRmRwickNsIis, HisvORIA AN-
GLICANA ; 449-1298: neenon ejusdem Liber de Archiepiscopis : et
Episcopis Anglie. Edited by HENRY RicHARDS LUAED, M.A., Fellow
and Assistant Tutor of Trinity College, Cambridge. 18659.


18


The author, a monk of Norwich, has here given us à Chronicle of England
from the arrival of the Saxons in 449 to the year 1298, in or about which year
it appears that he died. "The latter portion of this history (the whole of the
reign of Edward I. more especially) is of great value, as the writer was con-
temporary with the events which he records. An Appendix contains several
illustrative documents connected with the previous narrative.


l7. BRuT x TywisocioN; or, The Chronicle of the Princes of Wales.
Edited by the Rev. Jon WirpriAMs AB IrTHEL, M.A. 1860.


This work, also known as '* The Chronicle of the Princes of Wales," has
been attributed to Caradoc of Llancarvan, who flourished about the middle of
the twelfth century. Itis written in the ancient Welsh language, begins with
the abdication and death of Caedwala at Rome, in the year 681, and continues
the history down to the subjugation of Wales by Edward I., about the year 1282.


18. A. CorLEcTIoON or RoxAL AND HisromicAL LETTERS DURING THE
REeieN or HewNRy IV. 1399-1404. Edited by the Rev. F. C. Hin-
GESTON, M.A., of Exeter College, Oxford. 1860.


This volume, like all the others in the series containing a misoellaneous selec-
tion of letters, is valuable on account ofthe light it throws upon biographical
history, and the familiar view it presents of characters, manners, and events.
The period requires much elucidation; to which it will materially contribute,


19. THE REePRESSOR OF OVER MUCH PDBrAMING OF THE ÜCrLrmcr. By
REGINALD PEecock, sometime Bishop of Chichester. "Vols. I. and II.
Edited by CnvuRoummuL BaniNoTON, B.D., Fellow of St. John's College,
Cambridge. 1860. |


The * Repressor" may be considered the earliest piece of good theological dis-
quisition of which our English prose literature can boast. 'The author was born
about the end of the fourteenth century, consecrated Bishop of St. Asaph in
the year 1444, and translated to the see of Chichester in 1450. While Bishop of
St. Asaph, he zealously defended his brother prelates from the attacks of thoso
who censured the bishops for their neglect of duty. He maintained that it was no
part of a bishop's functions to appearin the pulpit, and that his time might be
more profitably spent, and his dignity better maintained, in the performance of
works of & higher character. Among those who thought differently were the
Lollards, and against their general doctrines the ** Repressor?! is directed. Pecock
took up a position midway between that of the Roman Church and that of the
modern Anglican Church; but his work is interesting chiefly because it gives &
full account of the views ofthe Lollards and of the arguments by which they were
supported, and because it assists us to ascertain the state of feeling which ulti-
mately led to the Reformation. Apart from religious matters, the lightthrown upon -
contemporaneous history is very small, but the ''Repressor? has great value
for the philologist, as it tells us what were the characteristics of the language in
use among the cultivated Englishmen of the fifteenth century. "Pecock, though
an opponent of the Lollards, showed a certain spirit of toleration, for which he
received, towards the end of his life, the usual medite»val reward—persecution.


20. ANNALES CAMBRLE. Edited by ihe Rev. Jon WirriAMs AB ITHEL,
M.A. 1860.


These annals, which are in Latin, commence in the year 447, and come down
to the year 1288. "Theearlier portion appears to be taken from an Irish Chronicle,
which was also used by Tigernach, and by the compiler of the Annals of Ulster.
During its first century it contains scarcely anything relating to Britain, the
earliest direct coneurrence with English history is relative to the mission of
Augustne. ts notices throughout, though brief, are valuable. "The annales
were probably written at St. Davids, by Blegewryd, Archdeacon of Llandaff,
the most learned man in his day in all Cymru.


21. Tur Wonxs or GrgaLpDUs CawnneNsISs. Vols. L, IT., III, and IV.
Edited by J. S. BREwER, M.A., Professor of English Literature, King's
College, London. Vols. V., VI.,and VII. Edited by the Rev.JAMxs
F. DrMock, M.A., Rector of Barnburgh, Yorkshire. 1861-1877.


14 '


These volumes contain the historical works of Gerald du Barry, who lived
in the reigns of Henry IL, Richard I., and John, and attempted to re-establish
the independence of Wales by restoring the see of St. Davids to its ancient
primacy. His works are of a very miscellaneous nature, both in prose and
verse, and are remarkable chiefly for the racy and original anecdotes which
they contain relating to contemporaries. He is the only Welsh writer of any
importance who has contributed so much to the medisval literature of this

' country, or assumed, in consequence of his nationality, so free and independent
atone. His frequent travels in Italy, in France, in Ireland, and in Wales, gave
him opportunities for observation which did not generally fall to thelot of mediseval
writers in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and of these observations Giraldus
has made due use. Only extracts from these treatises have been printed before,
and almost all of them are taken from unique manuscripts.

The Topographia Hibernica (in Vol. V.) is the result of Giraldus? two visits to
Ireland. 'The first in the year 1188, the second in 1185—6, when he accompanied
Prince John intothat country. Curious as this treatise is, Mr. Dimock is of
opinion that it ought not to be accepted as sober truthful history, for Giraldus
himself states that truth was not his main object, and that he compiled the work
for the purpose of sounding the praises oflHenry the Second. Elsewhere, how-
ever, he declares that he had stated notbing in the Topographia of the truth of
which he was not well assured, either by his own eyesight or by the testimony,
with all diligence elicited, of the most trustworthy and authentic men in the
country ; that though he did not put just the same fullfaith in their reports as
in what he had. himself seen, yet, as they only related what they had themselves
seen, he could not but believe such credible witnesses. À very interesting portion
of this treatise 1s devoted to the animals of Ireland. It shows that he was a very
accurate and acute observer, and his descriptions are given in a way that a
scientific naturalist of the present day could hardly improve upon. The Expug-
natio Hibernica was written about the year 1188 and may be regarded rather
as & great epic than & sober relation of acts occurring in his own days. No
one can peruse it without coming to the conclusion that it is rather a poetical
fiction than a prosaic truthful history.

Vol. VI. contains the Itinerarium Kambriwe et Descriptio Kambrie: and
Vol. VII., the lives of S. Remigius and S. Hugh.


29. LETTERS AND PAPERS ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE WARS OF THE ÉNGLISH
IN FRANCE DURING THE REIGN OF HENRY THE SrxrH, KiNe or ENwa-
LAND. Vol. I., and Vol. II. (in Two Parts). Edited by the Rev. JosEPR
SrEvENSON, M.A., of University College, Durham, and Vicar of Leighton
Buzzard. 1861-1864. :


'The letters and papers contained in these volumes are derived chiefly from
originals or contemporary copies extant in the Bibliothóque Impériale, and the
Depót des Archives, in Paris. "They illustrate the line of policy adopted by
John Duke of Bedford and his successors during their government of Normandy,
and such other provinces of France as had been acquired by Henry V. "We
may here trace, step by step, the gradual declension ofthe English power, until
we are prepared to read of its final overthrow.

283. THE ANGLO-SAxoN CHRONICLE, ACCORDING TO THE SEVERAL ORIGINAL
AvuTHORITIES. Vol. I., Original Texts. 'Vol.IIL., Translation. .Edited
and translated by BegNJawIN TmEHoRPE, Esq., Member of the Royal
Academy of Sciences at Munich, and of the Society of Netherlandish
Literature at Leyden. 1861. !

This Chronicle, extending from the earliest history of Britain to the year
1154, is justly the boast of England ; for no other nation can produce any history,
written in its own vernacular, at all approaching it, either in antiquity, truthful-
ness, or extent, the historical books of the Bible alone excepted. "There are at

' present six independent manuscripts of the Saxon Chronicle, ending in different
years, and written in different parts of the country. In this edition, the text
of each manuscript is printed in columns on the same page, so that £he student

may see at a glance the various changes which occur in orthography, whether
arising from locality or age.

24. pedi AND Te ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE REkI:GNS or RicHaAn» III.
AND HENRY VII. Vols. I. end II. — Edited by JAMES GAIRDNER
1861-1863. idis: pes.


15


The Papers are derived from MSS. in the Public Record Office, the British
Museum, and other repositories. 'The period to which they refer is unusually
destitute of chronicles and other sources of historical information, so that the
light obtained from these documents is of special importance. "The principal
contents of the volumes are some diplomatic Papers of Richard III. ; correspon-
dence between Henry VII. and Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain; documents
relating to Edmund de la Pole, Earl of Suffolk ; and a portion of the corre-
spondence of James IV. of Scotland.

25. LETTERS OF BisHoP GmROSSETESTE, illustrative of the Social Condition
of his Time. Edited by HeNRx RicHagps LuAnRDp, M.A., Fellow and
Assistant Tutor of Trinity College, Cambridge, 1861.

The Letters of Robert Grosseteste (131 in number) are here collected from various
Sources, and a large portion of them is printed for the first time. They range in
date from about 1210 to 1253, and relate to various matters connected not only
with the political history of England during the reign of Henry IIL, but with
its ecclesiastical condition. "They refer especially to the diocese of Lincoln, of
which Grosseteste was bishop.


26. DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE OF MANUSCRIPTS RELATING TO THE HisTORY
or GRzAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND. Vol. I.(in Two Parts) ; Anterior
to the Norman Invasion. Vol. II.; 1066-1200. "Vol. IIIL.; 1200-1327.
By Sir THowas Durrus Hangpr, D.C.L., Deputy Keeper of the Public
Records. 1862-1871. - |

The object of this work 18 to publish notices of all known sources of British
history, both printed and unprinted, in one continued sequence. "The materials,
when historical (as distinguished from biographical), are arranged under the
year in which the latest eventis recorded in the chronicle or history, and not
under the period in which its author, real or supposed, flourished. Biographies
are enumerated under the year in which the person commemorated died, and no
under the year in which the life was written. This arrangement has two
advantages; the materials for any given period may be seen at a glance; and
if the reader knows the time when an author wrote, and the number of years
that had elapsed between the date of the events and the time the writer flourished,
he will generally be enabled to form a fair estimate of the comparative value of
the narrative itself. A brief analysis of each work has been added when deserving
it, in which the original portions are distinguished from those which are mere
compilations. "When possible, the sources are indicated from which such com-
pilations have been derived. A biographical sketch of the author of each piece
has been added, and a brief notice has also been given of such British authors as
have written on historical subjects.

27. RoxAL AND OTHER HisromicAL LETTERS ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE REIGN
or HzwnY IIl. Vol. I, 1216-1285. Vol. IL, 1236-1272. Selected
and edited by the Rev. W. W. SHIRLEY, D.D., Regius Professor in
Ecclesiastical History, and Canon of Christ Church, Oxford. 1862-
1866.

The letters contained in these volumes are derived chiefly from the ancient
correspondence formerly in the Tower of London, and now in the Public Record
Office. They illustrate the political history of England during the growth of
its liberties, and throw considerable light upon the personal history of Simon de
Montfort. 'The affairs of France form the subject of many of them, especially
in regard to the province of Gascouy. "The entire collection consists of nearly
700 documents, the greater portion of which is printed for the first time.

28. CmnoNxicA MoNAsTERII S. ÁLBANL—l1. THOME WALSINGHAM HisTORIA
ANGLICANA ; Vol. 1, 1272-1881: Vol. IL, 1881-1422. 2, WirLELWI
RisHANGER CHRONICA ET ANNALES, 1259-1307. 38. JoHANNIS DE
TRokELOWE ET HENRIOI DE BLANEFORDE CHRONICA ET ANNALES,
1259-1296 ; 1807-1824 ; 1892-1406. 4. GxsTrA ABBATUM MoNASTERIH
S. ALBANI, A THoMA WALSINGHAM, REGNANTE Ricagpo SrcUuNDO,
EJUSDEM EccLESLE PRA4CENTORE, COMPILATA ; Vol. L, 793-1290:
Vol. II., 1290-1849 : Vol. IIL., 1849-1411. 5. JOHANNIS AMUNDESHAM,
MoNACcHI MOoNASTERII S. ALBANI, UT VIDETUR, ÁNNALES; Vols. I.


4


p c (60€ vo Ems SU vae iMd PIS te RIDENS. Jodi, cal o. ic 6rd Qo coa db oa dila n caf ade P UAM, 'e rw. 2b $5
: n z


16


and Il. 6. REGISTRA QUORUNDAM ÁBBATUM MoNasTERH S. ALBANI,
QUI SJCULO XvV?? FLORUERE; Vol.l., REGiSTRUM .BBATLE JOHANNIS:
WuETHAMSTEDE, ABBATIS MMONASTERU SANCTI ALBANI, ITERUM
SUSCEPT.E; RoBERTO BLAKENEY, CAPELLANO, QUONDAM ADSCHAIPTUM :
Vol IL, RraisTRA JoHANNIS WHETHAMSTEDE, WILLELMI ÁLBON, ET
WILLELMI WALINGFORDE, ÁBBATUM MoNASTERII SANCTI ÁLBANI, CUM
APPENDICE, CONTINENTE QUASDAM EPISTOLAS, A JOHANNE WHETHAM-
STEDE CoNsoRIPTAS. 7. YPODIGMA NEUSTRLE, A T'HoMA WALSINGHAM,
QuoNDAM MoNaAcHo MoNasTERH S. ALBANI, CONSCRIPTUM. Edited
— by HraNRY TmHowas Rinrr, Esq., M.A., Cambridge and Oxford; and
of the Inner Temple, Barrister-at-Law. 1863-1876. |

In the first two volumes is a History of England, from the death of
Henry III. to the death of Henry V., by Thomas Walsingham, Precentor
of St. Albans, from MS. VII. in the Arundel Collection in the College
of Arms, London, a manuscript of the fifteenth century, collated with MS.

13 E. IX. in the King's Library in the British Museum, and MS. VII. in the
Parker Collection of Manuscripts at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge.

In the third volume is a Chronicle of English History, attributed to William
Rishanger, who lived in the reign of Edward L, from the Cotton. MS.
Faustina B. IX. in the British Museum, collated with MS. 14 C. VII.
(fols. 219-231) in the King's Library, British Museum, and the Cotton MS.
Claudius E. IIL, fols. 806—331: an account of transactions attending the
award of the kingdom of Scotland to John Balliol, 1291-1292, from MS.
Cotton. Claudius D. Vl. also attributed to William Rishanger, but on
no sufücient ground: a short Chronicle of English History, 1292 to 1300,
by an unknown hand, from M8. Cotton. Claudius D. VI.: a short Chronicle
Willelmi Rishanger Gesta Edwardi Primi, Regis Angliw, from MS. 14 C. I.
in the Royal Library, and MS. Cotton. Claudius D. V1., with Annales Regum
Anglie, probably by the same hand: and fragments of three Chronicles of
English History, 1285 to 1307.

In the fourth volume is a Chronicle of English History, 1259 to 1296,
from MS. Cotton. Claudius D. VI.: Annals of Edward II., 1307 to 1323, by
John de Trokelowe, a monk of St. Albans, and a continuation of 'Trokelowe's
Annals, 1323, 1324, by Henry de Blaneforde, both from MS. Cotton. Claudius
D. VI.: a full Chronicle of English History, 1392 to 1406, from MS. VII. in
the Library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge; and a&n account of the
Benefactors of St. Albans, written in the early part of the fifteenth century,
from MS. VI. in the same Library.

The fifth, sixth, and seventh volumes contain n history of the Abbots of
St, Albans, 793 to 1411, mainly compiled by Thomas Walsingham, from
MS. Cotton. Claudius E. IV., in the British Museum : with a Con-
tinuation, from the closing pages of Parker MS. VIIL., in the Library of
Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. Tum |

The eighth and ninth volumes, in continuation of the Annals, contain a
Chronicle, probably by John Amundesham, a monk of St. Albans.

The tenth and eleventh volumes relate especially to the acts and proceedings
- of Abbots Whethamstede, Albon, and Wallingford, and may be considered as a
memorial of the chief historical and domestic events during"those periods.

The twelfth volume contains a compendious History of England to the reign
of Henry V.,and of Normandy in early times, also by Thomas Walsingham.
and dedicated to Henry V. "The compiler has often substituted other authorities
in place of those consulted in the preparation of his larger work.


29. CuRoNICOoN ABBATLE EvESHAMENSIS, ÁUCTORIBUS DoMiNICO PRIORE
EvEesHAMLE ET THOMA DE MARLEBERGE ABBATE, A FUNDATIONE AD
ANNuM 1218, UNA CUM CONTINUATIONE AD ÁNNUM 1418. Edited by
the Rev. W. D. MacRar, M.A., Bodleian Library, Oxford. 1863.
"The Chronicle of Evesham illustrates the history of that important monastery
from its foundation by Egwin, about 690, to the year 1418. ts chief feature is
an autobiography, which makes us acquainted with the inner daily life of a
great abbey, such as but rarely has been recorded. Interspersed are many
notices of general, personal, and local history which wil be read with much
| interest. This work exists in a single MS., and is for the first time printed.


17.


30. HicARDI DE CiRENCESTEIA SPECULUM HisSTORIALE DE (ksTIS REGUM
ANGLLE, Vol.L, 447-871. Vol. IL, 872-1066. Edited by Jouw E. B.
Maxon, M.A., Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge. 1863-1869.

The compiler, Richard of Cirencester, was a monk of Westminster, 1355-
1400. In 1891 he obtamed a licence to make a pilgrimage to Rome. — His
history, in four books, extends from 447 to 1066. He announces his intention
of continuing it, but there is no evidence that he completed any more This
chronicle gives many charters in favour of Westminster Abbey, and a very full
account of the lives and miracles of the saints, especially of Edward the Con-
fessor, whose reign occupies the fourth book. A treatise on the Coronation, by
William of Sudbury, a monk of Westminster, fills book iii. c. 8. It was on this
author that C. J. Bertram fathered his forgery, De Situ Brittania, in 1747.

931. YzAR Books or THE REz:eN or EpwARD THE FinsT. Yenrs 20-21,
21-22, 80-31, 32-33, and 38-35. Edited and translated by ArrRED
JouN Hogwoop, Esq., of the Middle Temple, Barrister-at-Law.  1863-
1879.

The volumes known as the ** Year Books" contain reports in Norman-French
of cases argued and decided in the Courts of Common Law. "They may be con-
sidered to a great extent as the **lex non scripta" of England, and have been held
in £he highest veneration by the ancient sages of the law, and were received by
them as the repositorres of the first recorded judgments and dicta of the great
legal luminaries of past ages. 'They are also worthy of the attention of the
general reader on account of the historical information and the notices of public
and private persons which they contain, as well as the light whien they throw
on ancient manners and customs.

32, NARRATIVES OF THE EXPULSION OF THE ENGLISH FROM NORMANDY,
1449-1450.—Robertus Blondelli de Reductione Normannie: Le Re-
couvrement de Normendie, par Berry, Hérauit du Roy : Conferences
between the Ambassadors of France and England. Edited, from MSS.
in the Imperial Library at Paris, by the Rev. Josgen STEVENSON,
M.A., of University College, Durham. 1863.


This volume contains the narrative of an eye-witness who details with con-
siderable power and minuteness the circumstances which attended the final ex-
pulsion of the English from Normandy inthe year 1450. The history commences
with the infringement of the truce by the capture of Fougéres, and ends with
the battle of Formigny and the embarkation of the Duke of Somerset. The
whole period embraced is less than two years.

33. HisroRiA ET CAgRTULARIUM MoNAsTERI S. PETRI GLoucEsTRI&. Vols.
L,IL,snd IIL Edited by W. H. Hanr, Esq., F.S.A., Membre corre-
spondant de 1a Société des Antiquaires de Normandie, 1863-1867.

'This work consists of two parts, the History and the Cartulary of the Monastery
of St. Peter, Gloucester. 'The history furnishes an account of the monastery
from its foundation, in the year 681, to the early part of the reign of Richard II.,
together with a calendar of donations and benefactions. It treats principally of
the affairs of the monastery, but occasionally matters of general history are
introduced. ts authorship has generally been assigned to Walter Froucester,
the twentieth abbot, but without any foundation.


34. ALEXANDRI NECKAM DE NaTrvuEISs RERUM LIBRI DUO ; with NxokaAvw's
PozM, Dr LavupiBus DrviN SApPmzNTLE. — Edited by 'THowMAs WzaiaGnT,
Esq. M.A. 1863.


Neckam was a man who devoted himself to science, such as it was in the
twelfth century. Inthe * De Naturis Rerum" are to be found what may be
called the rudiments of many sciences mixed up with much error and ignorance.
Neckam was not thought infallible, even by his contemporaries, for Roger Bacon
remarks of him, * this Alexanderin many things wtote what was true and useful ;
'* but he neither can nor ougbt by just title to be reckoned among authorities."'
Neckam, however, had sufficient independence of thought to differ from some
of the schoolmen who in his time considered themselves the only judges of litera-
ture. He had his own views in morals, and in giving us a glimpse of them, as
well as of his other opinions, he throws much light upon the manners, customs,
and general tone of thought prevalent in the twelfth century. The poem entitled
*]Te Laudibus Divine Sapientis" appears to be & metrical paraphrase or
abridgment of the ** De Naturis Rerum." It is written in the elegiac metre ;


de Q, 1802. UU


18


and though there are many lines which violate classical rules, it is, as a whole,
above the ordinary standard of medieval Latin. | |

85. LEEcHDOMS, WORTCUNNING, AND STARCRAFT OF EARLY ENGLAND; being
& Collection of Documents illustrating the History of Science in this
Country before the Norman Conquest. Vols. I. IL, and III. — Collected
and edited by the Rev. T. Oswarnp CockAxwE, M.A., of St. John's
College, Cambridge. 1864—1866. A

This work illustrates not only the history of science, but the history of super-
stition. In addition to the information bearing directly upon the medical skill
and medical faith of the times, there are many passages which incidentally throw
light upon the general mode of life and ordinary diet. The volumes are interesting
not only in their scientific, but also in their social aspect. "The manuscripts from
which they have been printed are valuable to the Anglo-Saxon scholar for the
illustrations they afford of Anglo-Saxon orthography. |

96. ANNALES MowasriCi. — Vol I.:—Annales de Margan, 1066-1232;

' Annales de Theokesberia, 1066-1263 ; Annales de Burton, 1004-1263.
Vol, II. :—Annales Monasterii de Wintonia, 519-1277; Annales Mo-
nasterii de Waverleia, 1-1291. Vol. JIY.:—Annales Priorstus de
Dunstaplia, 1-1297. Annales Monasterii de Bermundeseia, 1042-
1432. "Vol. IV. :—Annales Monasterii de Oseneia, 1016-1847 ; Chroni-
eon vulgo dictum Chronicon Thome Wykes, 1066-1289; Annales ,
Prioratus de Wigornia, 11377. Vol. V. :—Index and Glossary. Edited
by HxNnx RicHARDS LuaARD», M.A., Fellow and Assistant 'Tutor of
Trinity College, and Registrary of the University, Cambridge. | 1864-
1869.

The present collection of Monastic Annals embraces all the more important
chronicles compiled in religious houses in England during the thirteenth
century. These distinct works are ten in number. "The extreme period
which they embrace ranges from the year 1 to 1432, although they refer more
especially to the reigns of John, Henry III., and Edward I. Some of these narra
tives have already appeared in print, but others are printed forthe first time.

37. MAGNA VrrA S. HvcoNis EPrriscopr LiNconwiENSIS. From Manuscripts
in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, and the Imperial Library, Paris. Edited
by the Rev. JAwEs F. Drwock, M.A., Rector of Barnburgh, Yorkshire.
1864. |

This work contains & number of very curious and interesting incidents, and
being the work of a contemporary, is very valuable, not only as a truthful
biography of a celebrated ecclesiastic, but as the work of a man, who, from per-
sonal knowledge, gives notices of passing events, as well as of individuals who
were then taking active partin public affairs. "The author, in all probability,
was Adam Abbot of Evesham. He was domestic chaplain and private confessor
of Bishop Hugh, and in these capacities was admitted to the closest intimacy.
Bishop Hugh was Prior of Witham for 11 years before he became Bishop of
Lincoln. His consecration took place on the 21st September 1186 ; he died on
the 16th of November 1900 ; and was canonized in 1220.

38. CHRoNICcLES AND MrxMOoRIALS OF THE RxiGN or RioHARD THE F'umsT.
Vol. I.:—IrINERARIUM PEREGRINORUM ET GxsTA RzaGis RICABDI.
Vol. II.:—EPisTOLZ£ CANTUARIENSES ; the Letters of the Prior and
Convent of Christ Church, Canterbury; 1187 to 1199. Edited by
WiLLIAM STuBBss, M.A., Vicar of Navestock, Essex, and Lambeth
Librarian. 1864—1865. . |

The authorship of the Chronicle in Vol. L, hitherto ascribed to Geoffrey
Vinesauf, is now more correctly ascribed to Richard, Canon of the Holy Trinity
of London. 'The narrative extends from 1187 to 1199; but its chief interest
consists in the minute and authentic narrative which it furnishes of the exploits
of Richard I., from his departure from England in December 1189 to his death
In 1199. "The author states in his prologue that he was an eye- witness of much
that he records ; and various incidental circumstances which occur in the course
of the narrative confirm this assertion.

The letters in Vol. IL, written between 1187 and 1199, are of value as
furnishing authentic materials for the history of the ecclesiastical condition of
England during the reign of Richard I. "They had their origin in a dispute which
arose from the attempts of Baldwin and Hubert, erchbishops of Canterbury, to


19


found a college of secular canons, a project which gave great umbrage to the
monks of Canterbury, who saw 1n it a design to supplant them in their function
of metropolitanchapter. These letters are printed, for the first time, from a MS.
belonging to the archiepiscopal library at Lambeth.

39. RECUEIL DES CRONIQUES ET ANOHIENNES ÍSTORIES DE LA GRANT BnE-
TAIGNE A PRESENT NOMME ENGLETERRE, par JEHAN DE WAuniN. Vol. I.
Albina to 688. Vol. IL, 1399-1422. Vol. IIL, 1422-1481. Edited by
WiLLIAM HaRprY, Esq. F.S.A. 1864—1879.

40. A. CoLLECTION oF THE CHRONICLES AND ANCIENT HISTORIES OF GREAT
BRiTAIN, NOW CALLED ENGLAND, by JoHN pk WavniN.  Álbina to 688.
(Translation of the preceding Vol. L) ^ Edited and translated by


WiLLIAM Hanpr, Esq., F.S.A. 1864.

This curious chronicle extends from the fabulous period of history down to the
return of Edward IV. to England in the year 1471 after the second deposition of
Henry VI. The manuscript from which the text of the work is taken is pre-
served in the Imperial Library at Paris, and is believed to be the only complete
and nearly contemporary eopy in existence. 'The work, as originaly bound,
was comprised in six volumes, since rebound in morocco in 12 volumes, folio
maximo, vellum, and is illustrated with exquisite miniatures, vignettes, and initial
letters. It was written towards the end of the fifteenth century, having been
expressly execuled for Louis de Bruges, Seigneur de la Gruthuyse and Earl of
Winchester, from whose cabinet it passed into the library of Louis XII. at Blois.

41. PoLxongoNicoN RANULPHI HiGDEN, with Treviss's Translation. Vols. I.
and II. Edited by CnunRonit.L BaniNaGTON, B.D., Senior Fellow of:
St. John's College, Cambridge. Vols, IIT., IV., V., VI., and VII.
Edited by ihe Rev. Josz?u RAwsoN LuxBr, D.D., Norrisian Professor
of Divinity, Vicar of St. Edward's, Fellow of St. Catharine's College,
and late Fellow of Magdalene College, Cambridge. 1865-1879..

"This is one of the many medieval chronicles which assume the character of a
history of the world. Jt begins witb the creation, and 1s brought down to the
author's own time, the reign of Edward IIL — Prefixed to the historical portion, is
2 chapter devoted to geography, in which is given a description of every known
land. 'l'o say that the Polychronicon was written in the fourteenth century is to
say that it is not free from inaccuracies. It has, however, a value apart from ite
intrinsic merits. It enables us to form a very fair estimate of the knowledge of
history and geography which well-informed readers of the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries possessed, for it was then the standard work on general history.

The two Englisb translations, which are printed with the original Latin, afford '
interesting illustrations of the gradual change of our language, for one was made
in the fourteenth century, the other in the fifteenth. "The differences between -
'Trevisa's version and that of the unknown writer are often considerable.

42. Le LivERE nk Rris pE BnirTANIE Ek Leg LiveRE pr Rris Dx
ENGLETERE. Edited by JouN Grovzn, M.A., Vicar of Brading, Isle of
Wight, formerly Librarian of Trinity College, Cambridge. 1865.

These two treatises, though they cannot rank as independent narratives, are
nevertheless valuable as careful abstracts of previous historians, especially ** Le
Livere de Reis de Engletere." Some various readings are given which are
interesting to the philologist as instances of semi-Saxonized French. TP

It is supposed that Peter of Ickham must have been the author, but no certain -
conclusion on that point has been arrived at. | : |

489. CuRoNICA MoNwasTERU DE MELSA, AB ANNO 1160 USQUE AD ÁNNUM
1406. Vols. L, II., and III. Edited by EpwARD AvcusTus Bonn, Esq.,
Assistant Keeper of the Manuscripts, and Egerton Librarian, British
Museum. 1866-1868. e |

The Abbey of Meaux was a Cistercian house, and the work of its abbot is both
curious and valuable. Jt is & faithful and often minute record of the establishment
of a religious community, of its progress in forming an ample revenue, of its
Struggles to maintain its acquisitions, and of its relations to the governing
institutions of the country. In addition to the private affairs of the monastery,
some light is thrown upon the public events of the time, which are however kept
distinct, and appear at the end of the history of each abbot's administration. The
text has been printed from what is said to be the autograph of the original
compiler, Thomas de Burton, the nineteenth abbot.


vv 2


20


44. MATTHJEI PARISIENBIS HiSTÓRIA ÁNGLORUM, SIVE, UT VULGO DICITUB,


49.


HisroRrA Mrwom, Vols. I, IL, and III. 1067-1253. Edited by Sir
FREDERICO MappEN, K.H., Keeper of the Department of Manuscripts,
British Museum, 1866-1869. ]
| The exact date at which this work was written is, according to the chronicler,
1250. "The history is of considerable value as an illustration of the period during
which the author lived, and containsa good summary of the events which followed
the Conquest. This minor chronicle is, however, based on another work (also
written by Matthew Paris) giving fuller details, which has been called the
* Historia Major." The chronicle here published, nevertheless, gives 80me
information not to be found in the greater history.
LisER MoNasTERIH DE HypA: A CHRONICLE AND CHARTULARY OF
HypE ABBEY,WINCHESTER,465-1028. Edited, from a Manuscriptin the
Library of the Earl of Macclesfield, by EpwARD EpwARps, Esq. 1866.


The *Book of Hyde" is à compilation from much earlier sources which are
usually indicated with considerable care and precision. In many cases, however,
the Hyde chronicler appears to correct, to qualify, or to amplify—either from
tradition or from sources of information not now discoverable—the statements,
whieh, in substance, he adopts. He also mentions, and frequently quotes from
writers whose works are either entirely lost or at present known only by fragments.

There is to be found, in the ** Book of Hyde," much information relating to the
reign of King Alfred which is not known to exist elsewhere. 'The volume
contains some curious specimens of Ánglo-Saxon and Medieval English.


46. CHRoNICoN ScoroRuM : A CunoNicLE or ImisH ArrAxmsS, from the


EARLIEST Tiwrs to 1185 ; with.a SuPPLEMENT, containing the Events
from 1141to 1150. Edited, with a Translation, by WiLLIAM MAUNSELL
HrwNEssY, Esq. M.R.Il.A. 1866.

"There is, in this volume, a legendary account of the peopling of Ireland and of
the adventures which befell the various heroes who are said to have been con-
nected with Irish history. "The details are, however, very meagre both for this
period and for the time when history becomes more authentic. 'The plan adopted
in the chronicle gives the appearance of an accuracy to which the earlier portions
of the work cannot have any claim, "The succession of events is marked, year by
year, from A.M. 1599. to A.D. 1150. "The principal events narrated in the later
portion of the work are,the invasions of foreigners, and the wars of the Irish
among themselves. 'The text has been printed from a MS. preserved. in the
library of Trinity College, Dublin, written partly in Latin, partly in Irish.


47T. THE CuHRoNICLE or PreRRE DE LaNGTOFT, IN FRENCH VERSE, FROM


THE EARLIEST PERIOD TO THE DEATH OF EpwaRp I. Vols. I. and II.
Edited by 'THowAs WnianHm, Esq., M.A, 1866—1868.


It is probable that Pierre de Langtoft was a canon of Bridlington, in Yorkshire,
and that he lived in the reign of Edward I., and during a portion of the reign of
Edward II. This chronicle is divided into three parts; in the first is an
abridgment of Geoffrey of Monmouth's ** Historia Britonum," in the second, a
history of the Anglo-Saxon and Norman kings, down to the death of Henry III.,
and in the third a history of the reign of Edward I. The principalobject of the
work was apparently to show the justice of Edward's Scottish wars. 'The
language is singularly corrupt, and a curious specimen of the French of Yorkshire.


48. THE WAR or THE GAEDHIL WITH THE GAILL, or, THE& INvASIONS OF


InELAND BY THE DANES AND OTHER NonsEMEN. Edited, with a
Tránslation, by Jaumkes HEgNTHORN Top», D.D., Senior Fellow of


Trinity College, and Regius Professor of Hebrew in the University,
Dublin. 1867. | | |


The work in its present form, in the editor's opinion, isa comparatively modern
version of an undoubtedly ancient original. That it was compiled from contem-
porary materials has been proved by curious incidentalevidence. It is stated in
the account given of the battle of Clontarf that the full tide in Dublin Bay on the
day of the battle (23 April 1014) coincided with sunrise; and that the returning
tide in the evening aided considerably in the defeat of the Danes. "The fact has
been verifled by astronomical calculations, and the inference is that the author of
the chronicle, if not himselfan eye-witness,must have derived his information
from those who were eye-witnesses. "The contents of the work are sufficiently
described in its title. "The story is told after the manner of the Scandinavian
Sagas, with poems and fragments of poems introduced into the prose narrative.


21


49, GrzsrA Rxais HeNnIOI'SEOUNDI BENEDIOTI ÁnBBATIS. TnHkg CHnoNmigLE
or THE RxziGN8 oF HxwRY II. Amp RicHagp IL, 1169-1192, known
under the name of BENEDICT OF PrTERBOROUGH. Vols. I. and II.
Edited by Wiru1AM STUuBBs, M.A., Regius Professor of Modern His-
tory, Oxford, and Lambeth Librarian. 1867.


This chronicle of the reignsof Henry II. and Richard IL, known commonly
under the name of Benedict of Peterborough, is one of the best existing speci-
mens of a class of historical compositions of the first importance to the student.


$0. MUNIMENTA AÁCADEVICA, OR, DOCUMENTS ILLUSTRATIVE OF ÁCADEMICAL
LirE AND Sruprzs AT OÓxronDp (in Two Parts). Edited by the Rev.
HeNRY ANsTrEY, M.A., Vicar of St. Wendron, Cornwall, and lately
Vice-Principal of St. Mary Hall, Oxford. 1868. |
This work will supply materials for a History of Academical Life and Studies
in the University of Oxford during the 13th, 14th, and 15th centuries.


561. CuoNicA MacisrRI RocERI pE HovEspENxe. Vols. L., IL, III., and IV.
Edited by Wiv1iAM SruBBs, M.A., Regius Professor of Modern History,


and Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. 1868-1871. | |

This work has long been justly celebrated, but not thoroughly understood until
Mr. Stubbs! edition. The earlier portion, extending from 732 to 1148, appears
to be a copy of a compilation made in Northumbria about 1161, to which
Hoveden added little. From 1148 to 1169—2a very valuable portion of this
work—the matter is derived from another source, to which Hoveden appenrs to
have supplied little, and not always judiciously. From 1170 to 1192 is the
portion which eorresponds with the Chronicle known under the name of
Benedict of Peterborough (see No. 49); but it is not a copy, being sometimes
an abridgment, at others a paraphrase; occasionally the two works entirely
agree; showing that both writers had access to the same materials, but dealt
with them differently. From 1192 to 1201 may be said to be wholly Hoveden's
work : it is extremely valuable, and an authority of the first importance.


52. WiLLELMI MALMESBIRIENSIS MoNAcHi px GEsTIS PoNTIFICUM ÁNGLO-
RuM Lismi QuivQuE. — Edited, from William of Malmesbury's Auto-
graph MS., by N. E. S. A. HaurLTON, Esq. of the Department of
Manuscripts, British Museum. 1870.

William of Malmesbury's ** Gesta Pontificum " is the principal foundation of
English Ecclesiastical Biography, down to the year 1122. 'The manuscript
which has been followed in this Edition is supposed by Mr. Hamilton to bo the
author's autograph, containing his latest additions and amendments.


53. HisTORIC AND MuNiCIPAL DocuwvENTS OF IRELAND, FROM THE ÁRCHIVES
or rHE Cirx or DuariN, &c, 1172-1820. Edited by Jouw T. GILBERT,
Esq., F.S.A., Secretary of the Publie Record Office of Ireland, 1870.

A collection of originaldocuments, elucidating mainly the history and condition
of the municipal, middle, and trading classes under or in relation with the
rule of England in Ireland,—2a subject hitherto in almost total obscurity.
Extending over the first hundred and fifty years of the Anglo-Norman
settlement, the series includes charters, municipal laws and regulations, rolls of
names of citizens and members of merchant-guilds, lists of commodities with
their rates, correspondence, illustrations of relations between ecclesiastics and
laity; together with many documents exhibiting the state of Ireland during the
presence there of the Scots under Robert and Edward Bruce.


54. Tug ANNALS OF LocH Cf. A OCnHRONIOLE or InrsH ArrArms, rnoM
1014 to 1590. Vols. L and IL. Edited, with a Translation, by
WiLLiAM MauwsELL HrNwESsY, Esq. M.R.L.A. 1871. |

| | 'I'he original of this chronicle has passed under various names.  'The title of

« Annals of Loch Có" was given to it by Professor O'Curry, on the ground that
it was transcribed for Brian Mae Dermot, an Irish chieftain, who resided on the
igland in Loch Cé, in the county of Roscommon. It adds much to the materials
for the civil and ecclesiastical history of Ireland ; and contains many curious
references to English and foreign affairs, not noticed in any other chronicle,


55.


56.


9T.


68.


99.


60.


*


22


MoNUMENTA JURIDICA. THE BraAck Boox or THE ÁDMIRALTY, WITH
APPENDICES. Vols. L, lI, IIL, and IV. Edited by Sx& 'TRAvERS
T wiss, Q.C., D.C.L. 1871-1876.


This book contains the ancient ordinances and laws relating to the navy,
and was probably compiled for the use of the Lord High Admiral of England.
Selden calls it the jewel of the Admiralty Records."  Prynne ascribes to the
Black Book the same authority in the Admiralty as the Black and Red Books

have in the Court of Exchequer, and most English writers on maritime law
recognize its importance.


MEMORIALS Or THE RErGN or HeNnY VI.:—OrrrctAL CORRESPONDENCE
or Tnuowas BrexuTON, SEecRETARY TO HxNnY Vl, AND BisHop


OF BATH AND WrLLs. Edited, from a MS. in the Archiepiscopal
Library at Lambeth, with an Appendix of Illustrative Documents, by the
Rev. GEoncE WirLiAws, DB.D., Vicar of Ringwood, late Fellow of King's
College, Cambridge. Vols. I. and II. 1872.


'These curious volumes are of a miscellaneous character, and were probably
compiled under the immediate direction of Bekynton before he had attained
to the Episcopate. They contain many of the Bishop's ownletters, and several
written by him in the King's name; also letters to himself while Royal Secre-
tary,and others addressed to the King. "This work elucidates some points in
the history of the nation during the first half of the fifteenth century.


Marruar PanrsreENsIS, MoNACHI SaNoTI ÁLBANI, CHRONICA MAJORa4.

Vol. I. The Creation to A.D. 1066. Vol. IT. A.D. 1067 to A.D. 1216.

Vol, III. A.D. 1216. to A.D. 1289. Vol. IV. A.D. 1240 to A.D. 1247.

Vol. V. A.D. 1248 to A.D. 1259. Edited by HeNRx RicHanps LUARD,

D.D. Fellow of Trinity College, Registrary of the University, and

Vicar of Great St. Mary's, Cambridge. 1872-1880. |

This work contains. the * Chronica Majora? of Matthew Paris, one of the

most valuable and frequently consulted of the ancient English Chronicles. 1t

is published from its commencement, for the first time. "The editions by Arch-
bishop Parker, and William Wats, severally begin at the Norman Conquest.


MEMORIALE FRATRIS WarnTERI DE CovENTRIA.—T HE  HisTORICAL
CorrEecTI0NS OF WALTER OF CovENTRY. Vols. l.and Il. Edited, from
the MS. in the Library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, by
WiLLrAM SruBss, M.A., Regius Professor of Modern History, and Fellow
of Oriel College, Oxford. 1872-1873. - |
. "This work, now printed in full for the first time, has long been a desideratum
by Historical Scholars. 'The first portion, however, is not of much importance,
being only a compilation from earlier writers. 'The part relating to tho first
quarter of the thirteenth century is the most valuable and interesting.


"Eng ANGLO-LATIN SamIRICAL PoxkTs AND EPIGRAMMATISTS OF THE


TwreLErH CxrNTURY. — Vols. Il. and Il. — Collected and edited by
'l'HoMAs Waienr, Esq., M.A., Corresponding Member of the National
Institute of France (Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres). 1872.

'The Poems contained in these volumes have long been known and appreciated


88 the best satires of the age in which their authors flourished, and were deservedly
| popular during the 13th and 14th centuries.


MarxniAns FOR A liisrTony or THE RxiGN or HeNRY VIL, rROM
.OBIGINAL. DOCUMENTS PRESERVED IN THE PuBLic RECORD Orricr.
Vols. I. and II. Edited by the Rev. WintLiAaw CAMPBELL, M.A., one
.of Her Majesty's Inspectors of Schools. 1873-1877.


These volumesare valunbleas illustrating the acts and proceedings of Henry V I1.
on ascending the throne, and shadow out the policy he afterwards adopted.


23


61. HisroRiCAL PAPERS AND LETTERS FROM THE NORTHERN REGISTERS.
Edited by JawEgs RarNE, M.A., Canon of York, and Secretary of the
Surtees Society. 1873.

- 'The documents in this volume illustrate, for the most part, the general history
of the north of England, particularly in its relation to Scotland.


62. REaisTRUM PALATINUM DUNELMENSE. "THE REGISTER OF RICHARD DE
KrzrLAwEe, Logp ParaTINE AND BisHoP or DumgHaM; 1811-1316.
Vols. IL, IL, IIL, and IV. Edited by Sir THowas Durrus HaR»y,
D.C.I.,Deputy Keeper of the Public Records. 1873-1878.


Bishop Kellawe's Register contains the proceedings of his prelacy, both lay
and ecolesiastical, and is the earliest Register of the Palatinate of Durham.


63. MEMORIALS Or SAarivT DUNSTAN ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY. Edited,
from various MSS., by WirtLiAM SruBBs, M.A., Regius Professor of
Modern History, and Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. 1874.

This volume contains several lives of Archbishop Dunstan, one of the most
celebrated Primates of Canterbury. 'They open various points of Historical
and Literary interest, without which our knowledge of the period would be

, more incomplete than it is at present.


64. CHgoNICcoN ANGLLE, AB ANNO Dowiwi 1328 usQuE AD ANNUM 1388,
AUCTORE MoNACcHO QUODAM SANcTI ALBANI. Edited by EpwaARD
MauNpEÉ TnuoMPsoN, Esq. Barrister-at-Law, and Assistant-Keeper of
the Manuscripts in the British Museum. 1874.

This chronicle gives a circumstantial history of the close of the reign of
Edward III. which has hitherto been considered lost.


65. THÓMAS SAGA EnxiBYskUPSs. A LirE or AmcHBISHOP TnoMAs BECKET,
IN IcEkLANDIC. Vol. I. Edited, with English Translation, Notes, and
Glossary, by M. Ersfkg MaanÓssoN, Sub-Librarian of the University


Library, Cambridge. 1875.
This work is derived from the Life of Becket written by Benedict of Peter-
borough, and apparently supplies tho missing portions in Benedict's biography.


66. RApuLPHui DE CoccEsHALL CHnoNICON ÁNGLICANUM. .Edited by the
Rev. JosePH SrEveNsoN, M.A. 1875.
This volume contains the ** Chronicon Anglicanum," by Ralph of Coggeshall,
the * Libellus de Expugnatione Terre Sancte per Saladinum," usually
ascribed to the same author, and other pieces of an interesting character.


67. MATERIALS FOR THE Hisrony or THoMAs BECKET, ÁRCHBISHOP OF
CANTERBURY. Vols. I, IL, IIL., and IV. Edited by the Rev. JAwxs
CnRArcrE RosERTSON, M.À., Canon of Canterbury. 1875-1879.

This Publication will comprise all contemporary materials for the history of
Archbishop Thomas Becket. "The first volume contains the life of that cele-
brated man, and the miracles after his death, by William, à monk of Canter-
bury. "The second, the life by Benedict of Peterborough ; John of Salisbury ;
Alan of Tewkesbury; and Edward Grim. "The third, the life by William
Fitzstephen; and Herbert of Bosham. The fourth, Anonymous lives, Quad-
rilogus, &c. |

68. RApuLEFI DE Dicero Dxcawi LuwpoNiENSIS OPrRA HrierOoRiCA. Tux
HisroRiícAL Wonks or MasrEgR RALPH DE DicETO, DEAN or LoNpox.
Vols, I. and II. Edited, from the Original. Manuscripts, by Wiry1AM
SrusBs, M.A., Regius Professor of Modern History, and Fellow of
Oriel College, Oxford. 1876.

j The Historica] Works of Ralph de Diceto are some of the most valuable
materials for Britisb History. The Abbreviationes Chronicorum extend from


the Creation to 1147, and the Ymagines Historiarum to 120].


24


69. RoLL or vHE PnockEDINGS OF THE KrwG's CoUNOIL IN IRELAND, FOR
A PomrioN or THE l6TH YEAR or THE RxreN or RicHARD II. 1892-
93. Edited by the Rev. JawEs GRAvzs, A.B. 1877.


This Roll throws considerable light on the History of Ireland at a period |
little known. Jt seems the only document of the kind extant.


70. HEgNRIcGI DE DBnacroN pE LEGIBUS ET CONSUETUDINIBUS ANGLIA.
' Lrzegr QuiNQUE IN VARIOS TRACTATUS DISTINCTI. Ap DIVERSORUM ET
VerusrIsstMORUM CoprcuM CorLATIONEM 'Tvrrs VunGATI. Vols. I.,
IL,IIL, and IV. Edited by S1& TRAvEzs Twiss, Q.C.,D.C.L. 1878-
1881. |

| This is a new edition of Bracton's celebrated work, collated with MSS. in
the British Museum ; the Libraries of Linooln's Inn, Middle Temple, and Gray's

Inn ; Bodleian Library, Oxford;the Bibliothàque Nationale, Paris ; &e.


7]. Tmk HisroRiANs OF THE ÜCHURCH 'OF YORK, AND ITS ÁRCHBISHOPS.
Vol.l. Edited by Jamxs Ra1NE, M.A., Canon of York, and Secretary
of the Surtees Society. 1879. €


"This wil form a complete * Corpus Historioum Eboracense," a work very
much needed, and o£ great value to the Historical Inquirer.


79. RreisTRUM MALMESBURIENSE. THE REGISTER OF MALMESBURY ÁBBEY ;
PRESERVED IN TH& PuBLic Recogp Orrice. Vol l.and Il. .Edied
Ay J. S. BRaEwzn, M.A., Preacher at the Rolls, and Rector of Toppes-
field, and CHARLES TgrcE ManriN, Esq., B.A., 1879, 1880.

This work throws light upon many curious points of history, and illustrates


the growth of society, the distribution and. cultivation of land, the relations of
landlord and tenant, and national history and customs.


73. HisrogicAL WoRxs or GERVvASE OF CANTERBURY. Vols.I.and Il. Tur
CugoNICLE OF THE REiaNS OF STEPHEN, HEwRY Il., AND EicHAnD I.,
sy GERVASE, THE MoNK or CawTERBURY. Edited by Win.LiAM STUBBS,
D.D.; Canon Residentiary of St. Paul's, London; Regius Professor of
Modern History, and Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford; &c. 1879, 1880.

The Historie] Works of Gervase of Canterbury are of great importance,
as regards the questions of Church and State, during the period in which he
wrote. 'This work was printed by Twysden,in the ** Historie Anglicanm
Scriptores X.," more than two centuries ago. "The present edition has received
critical examination and illustration.


"4. HeNREici AgoHrpiACoNI HuwTENDUNENSIS HisTORIA ANGLORUM. THE
HisroRY or THE ENGLISH, BY HENRY, ÁRCHDEACON OF HUNTINGDON,
from A.C. 55 to A.D. 1154, in Eight Books. Edited by 'THowAs ARNOLD,
M.A., of University College, Oxford. 1879.


Henry of Huntingdon's work was first printed by Sir Henry Savile, in 1596,
in his *Seriptores post Bedam," and reprinted at Frankfort in 1601. Both
editions are very rare and inaccurate. The first five books of the History were
published in 1848 in the *« Monumenta Historica Britannica," which is out of print.
'he present volume contains the whole of the manuscript of Huntingdon's
History in eight books, collated with a manuscript lately discovered at Paris.


25


In the Press.


CuBoNICLE Or RoBERT OF BnRuwNE. Edited by FREDERICK JAMES FuR-
NIVALL, Esq., M.A., of Trinfty Hall, Cambridge, Barrister-at-Law.

Tue METRICAL CHRONICLE OF ROBERT OF GLOUOESTER. Edited by WiniiAM
Arpis WaiGHT, Esq., M.A. :

A. CorrkcrION or SAGAS AND OTHER HisrORICAL DocuwENrs relating to the
Settlements and Descents of the Northmen on the British Isles. Edited
by Sir GeogcE WrssE Daszswr, D.C.L,, Oxon., and M. GupBRAND
VigGFussoN, M.À.

'THÓóMAS SAGA EnKiBYskuPS. AÀ LirE or ARCHBISHOP THoMAs BECKET, IN
IceLANDIC. Vol. Il. Edited, with English Translation, Notes, and
Glossary, by M. Ersífkg Maawóssou, M.A., Sub-Librarian of the
University Library, Cambridge. |

RecuxiL pES CRONIQUES ET ANCHIENNES ÍsTORIES DE LA GRANT Bnx-
TAIGNE A PRESENT NOMME ENGLETERRE, par JEHAN DE WAURIN.
Vol.IV.,1431—-1448. Edited by WirriAM Hampr, Esq., F.S.A.

LxesrogrkE pneS ENGLES SOLUM GErFREI GarMAR. Edited by Sx& 'Tnuowas

.. Durrus Hanvx, D.C.L., Deputy Keeper of the Public Records.

Tug HisrogiíANS Or THE CHuRCH OF YORK, AND ITS ARCHBISHOPS.
Vol.IL Edited by Jawxs RarmvE, M.A., Canon of York, and Secretary
of the Surtees Society.

PorrcHROoNICON RANULPHI HiGDEN, with 'Trevisa's Translation. Vol. VIII.
Edited by the Rev. JosceeH RAwsoN Luwsr, D.D., Norrisian Pro-
fessor of Divinity, Vicar of St. Edward's,Fellow of St. Catharine's
College, and late Fellow of Magdalene College, Cambridge.

YrAR Books, 11—16 Edward III. —.Edited and translated by ArvrnRED
Jom HoRwoop, Esq., of the Middle Temple, Barrister-at-Law.

MATERIALS FOR THE HisronY or TuHoMAs BEOKET, ARCHBISHOP OF
CaNTERBURY. Vol. V. Edited byihe Rev. JAwxs CRAIG IE ROBERTSON,
M.A., Canonof Canterbury.  . |

MarTTHAEI PanmrisrENSIS, MowaAcHI SANCTI ÁLBANL CHRoNICA "MaAJonRa.
Vol. VI. Additamenta. Edited by HNRv REicHARDs Luanp, D.D.,
Fellow of Trinity College, Registrary of the University, and Viear of
Great St. Mary's, Cambridge.

CunonicoLEs or THE Rzraus or EDWARDI. AND II. Vol.I. Edited by WivriAM
SrusBs, D.D.; Canon Residentiary of St. Paul's, London; Regius
Professor of Modern History, and Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford ; &c.

HeNRICGI DE BRAOTON DE LzGiBUS ET CONSUETUDINIBUS ANGLLE.
LisRr QuiNQuE 1N VaRi0s TRACTATUS DisrINOTI. AD DrvERSORUM xT
VxerusTISSIMORUM ConicUM CorLATIONEM Typrir  VurLGATL — Vol V.
Edited by Sig TRAvxns Twiss, Q.C., D.C.L.


In Progress.


DrescRrPTIVE CATALOGUE OF MANUSCRIPTS RELATING TO THE lisTORY Or
GarAT BnrrAIN AND ÍRELAND. Vol.IV.; 1827, &c. By Sir THowAs
Dvurrus HaRpy, D.C.L., Deputy Keeper of the Public Records.

RrGarsTRUM EPISTOLARUM  FRATRIS JOHANNIS JPECKHAM, ARCHIEPISCOPI
CawrUARIENSIS. Edited, from MS. in All Souls! College, Oxford, by
CHARLES TRioE ManmriN, Eso, B.A. | :

Tue HisrogiCAL Wonks or SwEoN or DunHaM. Edited by 'THowAs
Ax2NOLD, M.A., of University College, Oxford.

MowuwENTA FRANOISCANA, Vol. Il. Edited by Rionamp HowrxTT Esq.
of the Middle Temple, Barrister-at-Law. Él :


26


PUBLICATIONS OF
THE RECORD COMMISSIONERS, &c.


[In boards or cloth.]


RorULOoRUM ORiGINALIUM IN CumiÁ SoAccARH AnBREVIATIO. Henry III.
—Edward III. Edited by HeNRY PLAxroRp, Esq. 2 Vols. folio
(1805—1810). 26s., or 12s. 6d. each.

CALENDARIUM ÍNQUISITIONUM POST MoRTEM SIVE EsCAETARUM. Henry III.
—HRichard III. Edited by Jon CarEY and Jouw Barry, Esqrs.
Vols. 8 and 4, folio (1821—1828): Vol. 3, 21s.; Vol. 4, 24s.

LrBsRoRUM  MANUSCRIPTORUM  BiBLIOTHECZE  HamRLEIANZX — CATALOGUS.
Vol. 4. .Edited by the Rev. T. HaAgTWELL HonNE. Folio (1812), 18s.

ABBREVIATIO PLACITORUM. Richard L——Edward II. Edited by the Right
Hon. GzonaE Rosz and W. IupixewonTH, Esq. 1 Vol. folio (1811), 185.

LiBRi CEeNsUALIS vocati DowEsDAx-Bookx, IwmpicEs. Edited by Sir HENRY
Errzrs. Folio (1816), (Domesday-Book, Vol. 3). 21s.

LiBRr CENsUALIS vocati DowEspAY-BoOK, ADDITAMENTA EX CoDic. ANw-
TIQUISS. Edited by Sir HgNRY Erris. Folio (1816), (Domesday-Book,

: Vol. 4). 21s. | |

STATUTES OF THE REALM. .Edifed by Sir T. E. TowriNs, JouN RarrHBrY,
Jonuw CALEY, and Ww. ELrioTT, Esqrs. Vols. 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11,
including 2 Vols. of Indices, large folio (1819— 1828). 315. 6d. each ;
except the Indices, 30s. each.

VALOR ECCLESIASTICUS, temp. Hen. VIII., Auctoritate Regia institutus.
Edited by Jon Carry, Esq. and the Rev. JoskemH HuNwTER. Vols.
8 to 6, folio (1817-1834). 26s. each.

*u* The Introduction, separately, 8vo. 2s. 6d.

RoruLi Scorug iN Tugzgi LoNpimwENSI xr iN Dowo CaPrTULARI WzsT-
MONASTERIENSI ÁAsSERVATI. 19 Edward I.—Henry VIII. Edited by
Davi» MacPHERSON, Jong CarEv, and W. InviNG WORTH, Esqrs., and
the Rev. T. HAgrTwEeLL HonNr. Vol.2,folio (1819). 21s.

F«preRA, CowvENTIONES, LirrER&, &c. ; or, RywxRs FapksRA, New
Edition,folio. Vol. 3, Part 2, 1361—1377 (1880) : Vol. 4, 1877—1383
(1869). | Edited by Jouw Carex and FmgEp. HorBROOKE, Esqrs.

... Vol. 8, Part 2, 21s. ; Vol. 4, 65. o.

DucATUS LANCASTRLE CALENDARIUM INQUiSITjONUM POoST MORTEM, &c.
Part 3, Calendar to the Pleadings, &c., Henry VIL-—13 Elizabeth.
Part 4, Calendar to the Pleadings, to end of Elizabeth. (1827— 1884.)
Edited 0y R. J. HAnPER, JonN CALEY, and Wx. MiNCHIN,Ésqrs. Folio.
Part 8 (or Vol. 2), 31s. 6d.; Part 4 (or Vol. 8), 215.

CALENDARS OF THE PRocEEDINGS IN CHANCERY, ELIZABETH ; with Ex-
amples of earlier Proceedings from Richard II. Edited by Jouw
BaxLzr, Esq. Vols.2 and 3 (1830— 1832), folio, 21s. each.

PARLIAMENTARY WRITS AND WmniTrs or Minrrany SuMMOoNS, with Records
and Muniments relating to Suit and Service due and performed to the
King's High Court of Parliament and the Councils of the Realm. Edited
by Sir FaANCIS PALGRAVE. (1830— 1834.) Folio. Vol. 2, Division 1,
Edward YI., 21s. ; Vol. 2, Division 2, 21s. ; Vol. 2, Division 9, 42s.


21


RorUL: LITTERARUM CLAUSARUM IN TUREJ LONDINENSI ASSERVATI. 2 Vols.
folio (1838, 1844). Vol. 1, 1204—1224. Vol. 2, 1224—122'.
Edited by 'THoMAs Durrvus Hanpy, Esq. —815.; orseparately, Vol. 1,
63s. ; Vol. 2, 185.


PROCEEDINGS AND OnnpriNANCES OF THE Pnivx CouNciL or ENGLAND.
10 Richard IT.—33 Henry VIIL — Edited by Sir NicHoLAs Hannis Nr-
COLAS. 7 Vols.royal8vo.(1834— 1837). 985. ; or separately, 14s. each.


RorTuL: LirTERARUM PATENTIUM IN TunRI LONDINENSI ASSERVATI. 1201
—1216. Edited by 'T. Durrus Hanpr, Esq. 1 Vol.folio (1835) 31s. 6d.
*,* The Introduction, separately, 8vo. 9s.
RoruLi Cunre Rracis. Rolls and Records of the Court held before the
King's Justiciars or Justices. 6 Richard I.—1 John. Edited by Sir
FRANCIS PALGRAVE. 2 Vols.royal8vo. (1836). 285.


RoruLINORMANNLE IN TuRRI LONDINENSI ASSERVATI. 1200—-1206 ; also,
1417 to 1418. Edited by 'THoMAs Durrus Hanpr, Esq. 1 Vol.royal
8vo. (1835). 12s. 6d.


RoTULI DE OBLATIs kT FiN1iBUS IN TuRRI LONDINENSI ASSERVATI, tempore
Regis Johannis. Edited by 'THoMAs Durrus Hanpy, Esq. 1 Vol.
royal 8vo.(1885). 18s.


ExcERPTA E RoruLIis FrNIUM IN Tunmi LoNDINENSI ASSERVATIS. Henry
IIL, 1216—1272. Edited by CnuaRrLEs RoBERTS, Esq. 2 Vols. royal
8vo. (1835, 1836), 32s. ; or separately, Vol. 1, 14s. ; Vol. 2, 18s.

FiNES, SsivE. PEDES FrmiUM ; sSivE FiNALES CoNcoRDLE IN Cumià Douinwi
Rrcis. 7 Richard L—16 John, 1195—1214. Edited by the Rev.
JoskePH HuNTER. In Counties. 2 Vols. royal 8vo. (1885—1844), 115. ;
or separately, Vol. 1, 8s. 6d.; Vol. 2, 2s. 6d. |

ANCIENT KALENDARS AND IwvENTORIES OF THE 'InEAsuRY or His Ma-
JESTYS EXCHEQUER ; together with Documents illustrating the History
of that Repository. .Edited by Sir FRANCIS PaLGnAvE. 3 Vols. royal
8vo. (1886). 425.

DocuMENTS AND RECORDs illustrating the History of Seotland, and the
Transactions between the Crowns of Scotland and England; pre-
served in the Treasury of Her Majestys Exchequer, Edited by Sir
FRANOIS PALGRAVE. 1l Vol.royal8vo.(1837). 18s.

Rorut.: CHARTARUM IN '"lungRI LONDINENSI ASSERVATI. 1199—1216.
Edited by 'THoMAs Durrvus Hanpy, Esq. 1 Vol.folio (1837). 30s.


REPORT OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE RECORD QCoMMissIONERS, 1831—
1837. 1 Vol.folio (1837). 85s. !


RreeisTRUM vulgariter nuncupatum **'The Record of' Caernarvon," o codice
MS. Harleiano, 696, descriptum. Edited 0y Sir HzNny Err:is. 1 Vol.
folio (1838). 3815. 6d.

AwcieNT LAws AND INSTITUTES OF ENGLAND; comprising Laws enacted
under the Anglo-Saxon Kings, from ZEthelbirht to Cnut, with a
Translation of the Saxon; the Laws called Edward the Confessor's;
the Laws of William the Conqueror, and those ascribed to Henry the
First; Monumenta Ecclesiastica. Anglicana, from 7th to 10th century ;
and Ancient Latin Version of ihe AÁnglo-Saxon Laws. Glossary, &c.
Edited by BzN3AMIN TmHonPE, Esq. 1 Vol. folio (1840), 40s. Or,
2 Vols. royal 8vo., 30s.

AwciENT LAWS AND INSTITUTES OF WALES ; comprising Laws supposed to be
enacted by Howel the Good, modified by subsequent Regulations prior
tothe Conquest by Edward the First ; and anomalous Laws, consisting
principally of Institutions which continued in force, — With 'Tranelation.


!


28


Also, Latin "Transcripts, containing Digests of the Welsh Laws, princi-
paly of the Dimetian Code, Glossary, &c. Edited by AwEURIN
OwkzN, Esq. 1 Vol. folio (1841), 44s. Or, 2 Vols. royal 8vo., 36s.

RoruLi pE LiBsERATE AO DE Misis gT PmasTITIS, Regnante Johanne.
Edited by'TuowAs Durrus Hanpy, Esq. 1.Vol.royal 8vo. (1844). 6s.

Tur GaEAT RoLLs or THx PriPz, 2, 8, 4 HrN. 11., 11655—1168. Edited by
the Rev. JosePH HuwTER. 1 Vol.royal8vo.(1844). 4s. 6d.

: THE GREAT Rorr or rHE Pier, 1] Ric. 1, 1189—1190. Edited by the Rev.
JosEePE HuwTER. 1 Vol. royal8vo. (1844). 6s.

DocuuENTS lLLUsTRATIVE OF EÉNaLisH HisrORY in the l8th and 14th
centuries, from the Records of the Queen's Remembrancer in the Ex-
chequer. Edited by HgNRY Corz, Esq. 1 Vol. fep. folio (1844). 46s. 6d.

Mopus TEeNENDI PARLIAMENTUM. An Ancient Treatise on the Mode of
holding the Parliament in England. Edited by TnmowaAs DurrUus
HanpY, Esq. 1 Vol. 8vo. (1846). 2s. 6d.

RrcisTRUM MagNi Sieinzi REGUM ScoroRux in Archivis Publicis asser-
vatum. 1806—1424. Edited by THowAs TuowsoN, Esq. Folio (1814).
10s. 6d.

'THE Acrs oF THE PARLIAMENTS OF ScorLAND. Folio (1814—1875).
Edited by 'THOMAs TuoMwsoN and Coswo IwNEs, Esqrs. Vol. 1,
49s. "Vols. 5 and 6 (in three Parts), 21s. each Part ; Vols. 4, 7, 8, 9,
10, and 11, 10s. 6d. each; Vol. 12 (Index), 68s. Or, complete, 12
Volumes in 13, 12/. 12s. : |

THE Acrs or THE LoRDs ÁupiTORS OP CaUsxks AND CowPLAINTS (ACTA
DoMiNORUM AUDITORUM). 1466—1494. Edited by 'THowAs TuHoMsoN,
Esq. Folio (1839). 105. 6d.

Tug Acrsor TRE Longps or CouNoIL IN CrviL Causes (AcrA DOMINORUM
Cowon). 1478— 1496. Edited by 'TTHowAs TuHowsoN, Esq. Folio
(1839). 10s.6d.

IssuE RonnL or THowAs pE BRANTINGHAM, Bishop of Exeter, Lord High
Treasurer of England, containing Paymenis out of His Majesty's
Revenue, 44 Edward IIL, 1370. Edited by FmxpERIiCK DEvoN, Esq.
1 Vol. 4to.(1888), 36s. Or,royal8vo., 25s. |

Issues or THE EXCHEQUER, James 1. ; extracted from the Pell Records.
Edited by FREDERICK DEvoN, Esq. 1 Vol. 4to. (1836), 30s. Or, royal
8vo., 21s.

IssuES or TEE ExcHEQUER, Henry III.—Héenry VI.; extracted from the
Pell Records. Edited by FREDERICK Drvow, Esq. .1 Vol. 4to.
(1837), 40s. Or,royal8vo.,30s.

HawpBook TO THE PusLIc RxcoRps. By F. S. THoMas, Esq., Secretary
of the Public Record Office. 1 Vol.royal8vo. (1858). 12s.

HisroRICAL NOTES RELATIVE TO THE HisTORY OF ENGLAND. Henry VIII.
—Anne(1509—1714). Designed as & Book of Eeference.for agcer-

. taining the Dates of Events. By F.S. TnHoMAs, Esq. 3 Vols.8vo.
(1856). 40s. |
STATE PAPERS, DURING THE KEIGN or HeNRY THE EiGHTH: with Indices
of Persons and Places. 11 Vols, 4to. (1830— 1852), 54. 155. 6d. ;
. or separately, 10s. 6d. each.
Vol. I.—Domestic Correspondence. |
Vols. II. & IIL.—Correspondence relating to Ireland.
Vols. IV. & V.—Correspondente relating to Scotland.
Vols. VI. to X.I.—Correspondence between England and Foreign Courts.


———— ——— M e — . —— — —


29


WORKS PUBLISHED IN PHOTOZINCOGRAPHY.


Dowgspax Book, or the GREAT SunvEex or ENGLAND OF WILLIAM THE
CoNuQvuERoR, 1086 ; fac-simile of the Part relating to each county, sepa-
rately (with a few exceptions of double counties). ^ Photozincographed,
by Her Majesty's Command, at the Ordngnce Survey Office, Southampton,
Colonel Sig HeNRY JawEs, R.E., F.R.S., &c., Director. 39 Parts,
imperial quarto and demy quarto (1861-1863) boards. Price 8s. to
1l. 3s. each Part, according to size ; or, bound in 2 Vols., 207. (ThÀe
edition in two volumes is out of print.) |


This important and unique survey of the greater portion of England" is the
oldest and most valuable record in the national archives. It was commenced
about the year 1084 and finished in 1086. Its compilation was determined upon
at Gloucester by William the Conqueror, in council, in order that he might
know what was due to him, in the way of tax, from his subjects, and that each
at the same time might know what he had to pay. It was compiled as much
for their protection as for the benefit of the sovereign. "The nobility and people
had been grievously distressed at the time by the king bringing over lare num-
bers of French and Bretons, and quartering them on his subjects, ** each accord-
** ing to the measure of his land," for the purpose of resisting the invasion of
Cnut, King of Denmark, which was apprehended. 'The commissioners appointed
to make the survey were to inquire the name of each place ; who held it in the
time of King Edward the Confessor; the present possessor; how many hides
were in the manor ; how many ploughs were in demesne ; how many bomagers ;
now many villins ; how many cottars; how many serving men; how many free
tenants ; how many tenants in soceage ; how much wood, meadow, and pasture ;
the number of mills and fish-ponds; what had been added or taken away from
the place; what was the gross value in the time of Edward the Confessor; the
present value ; and how much each free-man or soc-man bad, and whether any
advance could be made in the value. 'Thus could be. ascertained who held the
estate in the time of King Edward; who then held it ; íts value in the time of
the late king; and its value as it stood at the formation of the survey. So
minute was the survey, that the writer of the contemporary portion of the Saxon
Chronicle records, with some asperity—'* So very narrowly he caused it to be
** traced out, that there was not & single hide, nor one virgate of land, nor even,
* jt is shame to tell, though it seemed to him no shameto do, an ox, nor a cow,
* noraswine was left, that was not set down."

Domesday Survey is in two parts or volumes. 'The first, in folio, contains the
counties of Bedford, Berks, Bucks, Cambridge, Chester and Lancaster, Corn-
wall, Derby, Devon, Dorset, Gloucester, Hants, Hereford, Herts, Huntingdon,
Kent, Leicester and Rutland, Lincoln, Middlesex, Northampton, Nottingham,
Oxford, Salop, Somerset, Stafford, Surrey, Sussex, Warwick, Wilts, Worcester,
and York. The second volume, in quarto, contains the counties of Essex,
Norfolk, and Suffolk.

Domesday Book was printed verbatim et literatim during the last century, in
consequence of an address of the House of Lords to King George III. in 1767.
It was not, however, commenced until 1773, and was completed early in 1783.
In 1860, Her Majesty's Government, with the concurrence of the Master of the
Rolls, determined to apply the art of photozincography to the production of a
fac-simile of Domesday Book, under the superintendence of Colonel Sir Henry
James, R.E., Director of the Ordnance Survey, Southampton. The fac-simile was
completed in 1868.


* For some reason left unexplained, many parta were left unsurveyed ; Northumberland, Cu
Westmoreland, and Durham, are not described in the survey; nor does Lancashire a Mire para
proper name; but Furness, and the northern part of Lancashire, as well as tho south of Westmoreland

th a part of Cumberland, are included withín the West Riding of Yorkshire. That part of Lancashire
which lies between the Ribble and Mersey, and which at the time of the survey comprehended 688
manors, ís joined to Cheshire, Part of Rutland is described in the counties of Northampton and Lincoln


30


FAc-siuirLks of NATIONAL, MANUSCRIPTS, from WiLLIAM THE CONQUEROR to
QuEEN ANNE,selected under the direction of the Master of the Rolls,
and Photozincographed, by Command of Her Majesty, by Colonel Six
HeNRY JAMES, R.E., Director of the Ordnance Survey. Price, each
Part, with translations and notes, double foolscap folio, 165.


Part I. (William the Conqueror to Henry VII.). 1866. (Out of print.)
Part II. (Henry VIII. and Edward VI.). 1866. |
Part IIT. (Mary and Elizabeth). 1867.

Part IV.(James I. to Anne). 1868. -


"The first Part extends from William the Conqueror to Henry VII., and contains
autographs of the kings of England, as well as of many other illustrious per-
sonages famous in history, and some interesting charters, letters patent, and
state papers. "The second Part, for the reigns of Henry VIII. and Edward VI.,
consists principally of holograph letters and autographs of kings, princes, states-
men, and other persons of great historical interest, who lived during those
reigns. "The third Part contains similar documents for the reigns of Mary and
Elizabeth, including a signed bill of Lady Jane Grey. 'The fourth Part con-
eludes the series, and comprises a number of documents taken from the originals
belonging to the Constable of the Tower of London ; also several records illus-
trativeof the Gunpowder Plot, and a woodcut containing portraits of Mary Queen
of Scots and James VI., circulated by their adherents in England, 1580-8.


FAc-srurLES Or ÁNGLO-SAxON MaNuscCRiPTS,  Photozincographed by the
DrgECTOR-GENERAL of the ORbNANCE SuRvEY, with translations by
W. Basxvi SaANpERS, Assistant Keeper of. H.M. Records. Part lI.


Price 2l. 10s.

The Anglo-Saxon MSS. represented in this volume form the earlier portion
of the collection of archives belonging to the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury,
and consist of a series of 25 charters, deeds, and wills, commencing with a
record of proceedings at the first Synodal Council of Clovesto in 742, and
terminating with the first part of a tripartite cheirograph, whereby Thurstan
conveyed to the Church of Canterbury land at Wimbish, in Essex, in 1049, the
sixth year of the reign of Edward the Confessor.


Public Record, Office,
May 1881.


SCOTLAND.


CATALOGUE OF SCOTCH RECORD PUBLICATIONS


PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF
THE LORD COLERK REGISTER OF SCOTLAND.


Mzssas. LONGMANS & Co., ANp Mzssas. TRÜBNER & Co., LoNDoN ;
Mxssns. JAMES PARKER & Co., OxroRnD AND LoNDON ;
Mzssns. MACMILLAN & Co., CAMBRIDGE AND LONDON ;
Mzssns. À. & C. BLACE, AND Mzssns. DOUGLAS & FOULIS, EpINBURGH;
AND Mzssns. A. THOM & Co., DuBrrN.


CHRONICLES OF THE PicTS AND SCOTS, AND OTHER EARLY MEMORIALS OF
Scorrrsu  Hisrony. Royal 8vo. half bound (1867). | Edited by
WiLLIiAM F. SkeNE, LL.D. Price 10s.


LkpckER or ANDREW HaALYBURTON, CONSERVATOR OF THE PRIVILEGES OF
THE ScorcH NaTIoN IN THE NETHERLANDS (1492-1503); TOGETHER
wirH THE Books or CusrTOMS AND VALUATION OF MERCHANDISES IN
ScorLAND. Edited by Coswo IwwEs. Royal 8vo., half bound (1867).
Price 10s.

DOocuMENTS ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE HisTORY Or SCOTLAND FROM THE DEATH
or KiNG ALEXANDER THE 'lHIRD TO THE ACCESSION OF ROBERT
BRucr, from original and authentic copies in London, Paris, Brussels,
Lille, snd Ghent. In 2 Vols. royal 8vo., half bound (1870). Edited by
Rev.JosEePR STEVENSON. Price 10s. each.

AccouwxTS or THE Logp HioH TREASURER OF SCOTLAND. Vol. 1, A.D.
1473-1498. Edited by 'THoMAs DicksoN. 1877. Price 10s.


Re&arsTER Or THE PRivx CouwciL or ScorLAND. Edited and arranged by
J. H. BunroN, LL.D. Vol. 1, 1545-1569. Vol. 2, 1569-1678.  Vol.8,
A.D. 1578-1586. Edited by Davi» Massow, LL.D. 1877-1880.
Price 15s. each. — Vol. 4 in the press.

RoruLi ScAccARu REgcvuM ScoroRuM. "Tur ExcuHkQuER Rorris or Scor-
LAND. Vol 1, A.D.1264-1359. Vol.2, A.D.18369-1879. X Edited by
Jouw Sruagr, LL.D., and GroRcE BumgNETT, Lyon King of Arms.
1878-1880, Vol. 3, À.D. 1379-1406. Vol. 4, A.D. 1406-1436 (1880).
Edited by GgogaE BunwETT. Price lOs. each. Vols. 6 and 6 in the
press. : |


FAc-sIMILES OF THE NATIONAL MSS. or ScoTLAND. (Out of print.)
Parts L, IL, and III. rice 215. each.


CALENDAR OF DOCUMENTS RELATING TO SCOTLAND. Vol. l in tlie press.


Stationery Office,
February 1881.


IRELAND.


CATALOGUE OF IRISH RECORD PUBLICATIONS,


s On Sale by— :
Mzsszs. LONGMANS & Co., ANp Mxsses. TRÜBNER & Co., LoNDON :
Mzssns. JAMES PARKER & Co., Oxronp AND LONDON ;
'" Messps. MACMILLAN & Co., CauBRIDGE AND LONDON ;
Mzssns. À. & C. BLACE, AND Mxssgs. DOUGLAS & FOULIS, EpiNsURGH;
AND Mzssns. À. THOM & Co., Dus.


CALENDAR OF THE PATENT AND CrLosE RoLLs or CHANCERY IN ÍRELAND.
HrNRy VIIL, Epwagp VI, Manr, AND EumanETH. Edited by
JaAwEs MonmiN.  Royal8vo.(1861-8). Vols.1,2,and 8. Price lls.

» each. |

ANCIENT LAWS AND INSTITUTES OF IRELAND. |


Senehus Mor. (1865-1880.) Vols. 1, 2, 3, and 4. Prce 10s. each.
Vol. 5 in the press.


FAc-smuILES of NATIONAL MaNvuscnrers of IRELAND. Edited by Jouw
T. GinsEeRT, F.S.A, M.R.LA. Parts L, IL, IILI., IV. (in the press),
Price 42s. each.

This work is intended to form a comprehensive Paleographic Series for
Ireland. It will furnish characteristic specimens of the documents which
have come down from each of the classes which, in past ages, formed principal
elements in the population of Ireland, or exercised an influence in her affairs.
With these reproductions will be combined fac-similes of writings connected
with eminent personages or transactions of importance in the annals of the
country to the end of the reign of Queen Anne.

'The specimens are reproduced as nearly as possible in accordance with the
originals, in dimensions, colouring, and general appearance. Characteristic
examples of styles of writing and caligraphic ornamentation are, so far as
practicable, associated with subjects of historic and linguistic interest.
Descriptions ofthe various manuscripts are given by the Editor in the Intro-
duction. The contents of the specimens are fully elucidated and printed in the
original languages, opposite to the Fac-similes—line for line—without contrac-
tions—thus facilitating reference and aiding effectively those interested in
paleographie studies.

Part I. contains upwards of seventy coloured specimens, commencing with
the earliest Irish MSS. extant.

Part II. extends from the Twelfth Century to A.D. 1299, and contains ninety
specimens in colours.

Part IXII., from A.D. 1300 to end of reign of Henry VIIL, contains upwards
of one hundred specimens.
^ In Part IV.—now in the Press—the Work will be carried down to the
eighteenth century. "

(This worh is sold also by Letts, Son, & Co. (Limited), 38, King William Street;
E. Stanford, Charing Cross; J. Wyld, Charing Cross; B. Quaritch, 15, Pic-
cadilly ; W.& A. K. Johnston, Edinburgh ; and Hodges, Foster & Co., Dublin.)


AccouwxT Or FAc-sIMILES OF NATIONAL MANUSCRIPTS OF IRELAND. Parts
I. and II. together. Price 2s. 6d. Part II. Priícels, Gd. Pert III.


Price ls.


Stationery Office,
February 1881.


Ww


€ o


.:*


" E
.
. *
- . : ]
* ,
.
. '
B .
' Ld
^
K -
y .
.
.
E
* LI
2: -
. . .
.
E
,
—-
* -
.
.
.
N *
L3
*
"
LI
u LI
.
Y x '
.
4
*
*
* LI
-
! .
Ld
,
. " "
L
L bi D
.
-
- * *
*
*
,
' .
i
.
d
7 t
Li
€ , *
LI
* * )
L] i - E 1
- x n E "
3 —-—e - — Em 7 — DERE EE


LU V ag tea rene th s LEE ——-—-


|i i.- ]


NCNINORET:


(NONU
tí w
P2. 00
Ne


? aw


cw. vhs
PNCTSAN
" DN
DA € E


Xf x3
AS v
"


*-*- € €
** NN
*-^w


- ^o € € msc
v qv v
-


Ww Www
www wv


ww ww NN NON
- o8


- XN
vv v ww
NUS *


"-*
SEDE
- -—
"*-- * -——*
MSS, v NT
* vv wN


* £4

* «44 4
"4 4
A^.
4 ^

"


4A 4^
^
A 4
*
"
*
1


^


*- wo wow wow


wc *


^, ^
^^^
^


*


-—-* * - LL

i. ***

vow wSNCNENLSN ON

"cw ce ce NOCUN
w—£ow


LJ
^
:]
j/.
4
L]
«


- 9€ " "*o—- - CY


*«"- * Qe 4 «


» www
| *
QN :


*
Lat 4


^


LI
*
4
s
^
"4
Li
4^
4
4
"
LI


vtr d

Tee

4*9 4 t "-
*.


*o*
T **
""


*-


-
* ANN NNUS "T
. «4 «ST TS.


e
-O- "^


^
4^
Lm
*


*-ctwv Ow


€
LI
*


B
AÁ
INS


Nw
w-* "9*4
-"wY


T


-*


^


-


4

4 d

4 44

2
m4 a d


P"
*


* ^4
12 474


^
^


*
* ^
4.4
AGE

*4

"

"

"


4 ^
^
^
4
a

Lo
LI
e


"


4 n


-- - d
A,


44


LI
