This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.


Google books


https://books.google.com


This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.


Google books


https://books.google.com


,
3 ^ " L " 2174 174 d L3
TJ r P. tUTRFRCLTRST RE LERRA ^ 1t t1*. DECIES


T


x^ -
h^. *

[e

dava EE"

dela Ta "
PELLE

e

27: 4

Da .
144/994

449€. ^ ^
y PLC P PS J
daa Tas "
MS aT

HY 1424 1* 4
SS RA

424 414-4 H
"ad
Sa uu ^
709099 7
Cauda" ^
CRAT RE RP SER
P a E .
PU a aeta
Sr LN "
ANUS
MNT S -
SCR RP ^

» A^

S RAF "

Q^


^
*
? * SN
» . -
^ HW
" 4 S.
"P. PL
Vat va "
MS. ru NN
M | SS
A P PS. MURUS E
; Tat P M. *
MS NMNT Hi M. DEW TE
atat v LM S87. IS POTE
au STATT WR VIR
"Ta a b^. f. H HE S4 4347
VP A PR ^S EUST ATTI
dta tao MS 4144
P4 MN. ^ Hs *
Par T a.u Maa tuu
"edt 4 2434 B ^ B
HAN 319 Ww 4 de water A Pat
PUN. . "Ta Tau Ta a EI f n
Pa" MNT MONT RT RISTATRIT S TR ^ OE
, "un H616 4 44 € 6 S ^.
" SM RI RIS TIAS ISI IS T Da
Tes * Vi. V Pe,
» SAP. ^. h^.
SA L3 ^
E "1 LE Sf
» MATS. ^ ^
. 1 « m
NS * ^ "
» . »
"Tp ^ PS ^
" " "
ws ^ ^ E


"Tu a $T b S EN M

SVP ^ ^ E SEDET PES UN »
MNA TRÀ Rr A ^ LD48 44 4 7518 4 ^

278 5 784 7T TROP SUN NTSNTSNTRTRTRSTRT RTT TR TAI

"T4786 "a atu CURSUS TNT. STAT »
bL rA CAT 0 04 2L M MI

e^ A S M^ 2 SNR TS TS SOS TR »
-: "^ 1 "a" ELTE SELSECEEE ,
* a vu E MSURTSNTSTS TRIS ARAS

* ^ ^ TALES ISOUEURPRS *-
"IST US IS bra M. S NITOREM ^M M S

"TE" "n . eS UNS TNT STATS STAT ^

"7 TT "v" mE TEES

| A i AAT hs 8$ 78 $897 RTÁSI TR

HA" w^ V7 7878 78 P8 S» ^


- D ^
^o SUR TR CS 8 SOT CR T
Mh. UR S TT "e
M€NSSTRSTS T T ART
E: ^85 8 7T US T7 IST
"NS MSS SAT T
^ S TTA
LX NL SEE EC EN
i 5957 778 s AT
MR SS SS ST RTRTA TR T IT
US


iu NS
.


"e
"4


NNNM OS RCS


^ - 8


^
» H
LX EE RN

b?
^ ^


d
»

,

»

,

,

y

»

»

,


» ^
MS S A SN AUS TS S TORT S TT ISI
^8 TRUST US TR S AT n TA,
Déc CDD N SESS SS:
RNC SESESSSSSESTSESS T
o ST UR TOR ^h 9 NS RSS RS S. A TS TR TRUST
ELE SISSE SS S
|DER LDIIDCD SuSE
Et CC NuSSSSSTSMSOA
QuANNSGQuUUCUUUCUOCCeNRD CUN
OSSA S R87 TRIS T IIS PR "M4
|DLDIDXELSSSSESESESSSESSECS


SRM


MICOLMUOXDLM M


ame e n d M a


Fury,


,


^


9


,
v


,
,


y,


v
y
»


LOEO


"NS RUN S
LL


STU Rn


LX ES
MU. S UT US TS
au NOS
^ » ^
LX TEE
MUST ST SU SUR TT

LNLESCRRCRESEO
SS 88 7. RATS S. A.
SNNT


LES


LEES ^ -R


^


^ RS TR m A M
AMT STAT ATTE S
ROBCAORTURTN A hU UR S A S RIS Rh. A. A RR
bM AS RS SUM S ERN
"LM MESES


B NM LNMSTNMMTRARTSNSTR RT ST RR Ah. o m IA


eM Vh ^ b LS SN S RB n.


14 442 XXE
"UR S T

BIRUS NR M Um hi SR AS RR S
POM TRTS RT bIMASRS ORC S SN S TN
L'OMETUM" LOL MXSESEN
DESSEN *

^^ 5 5 5 $8 €
La bh. hA S US NR
^ NS ARATS Rb.
^


CEN ^
|o 1


EDS PS PCS en


ho AS URS S n TR
^^ NS RU S


LEXERCNES


M 'S. SOMUMBRA SRM NT AT C ^R hh bh A m


AS S AUS STR UST m hm A BR RN


JUNE


Sh hU TR Oh RR
DLL
^S AUS S S Tm
"A S RS m

^^ SR S RN


Mh hA T RN


BAS S S NS


- ^» h. S s ha
3M. RR NS


QuuVcteC CC C eQQQC DC DOCU p Cpu E
[L3


|DELLXXLIPELNEMCESDCNES
LLL CELL


MSS RUNS RM MET S STR


^o^ S ^ S m S S A RA


Qe LLDILPDDCCLONCSN SESS SISSE SS
MUT RS ST mU SU S A SS S Rh Rh hh


ECC LCQCDCLDIUUDDERSSTNNSES SETS Set S


MS S


MOS S S. NURSE T S m S m A SA lh. S
MUN P NUS S ASTA S Tm T n hA. Mh. P R. hA A RR


e$: 696€ 6$ C6 ODD SE SEIS SEES Sa y cuneo e$.
HDODLES SUE Nw SC SS »


»
M?


"hh S RÀ n i RSS
^o. ^58 ^. m n. 5 9. o9 n
* ^


JL
LILESOEESESESESESCESE
"^ n n S om ^


^
NNNM MSNRAM SMART. RS TRÀ A. b Rh. Rh hh. S A


Lua SPEC


Je


^o S^ RS hM. hA S M


^^ SS S S hh T S S ^h. S. S.S
s MSN SC SCR SS SUN A UR S S i UR OM ^h. RR S S
MS ^ MOSS S UNS NS S AS RS T A m M hh P» & or
CU NES HELLE SS ST ON

MOV SN NS US S m S STRUR TA S RR. M hh

NL MNA RS R7 S ASTA A hh RÀ h bh. bh h'h*h bh
LEE "MN SRNMMAMMRMNSMSM MS SR S a hh &. A bh h A à b »  h
^ MOM S Rh m S AUR ^ RR hh A S
SS S NS TS TR TOR TR e M^ 9 hU. S S S AT

LN MM nS T Tm AR ^o. RT DCN

LX BORA S RS A TS T Rl oh WR S S RR
bu SN US SR SUR A m S A M m Rh S M
M

3
E


L2 OMS S th b S S S RT A m S UR S OR SR S RN
LONLS "^"^. n S S S. S ON RXEXLESL TIENES
LEES ERCNLCCR ^o SU S RU m UA RS M A m h^ À €. ho
L2 ^ 277589 89$ S s ^ n S
E SN RS A. m AR SS A Rh A S RS S
DNE MN S SNR S S A T RR S Rh

HL TEN DOLLS
"aes LNDDSCDESCRCEUREEC
DTE ^S SS S S T S RA

^... S ^S. ^ n S RS SA S M S
TEN "^. S RS A I. UR ^ S WR S STR
SS NS S m BR RR RR A S. RO S
M S.S o€wSS S S AS A A NT S i» hb S. ^ NS
h.t. LASER
MR. . wo ANS A S SNNT TNT NSNICUNNE
LEORDNOOCOENCCOUOO EUN NISUS 9 0979 874. trt q
DLP *SR SS ST STU Tor. RTT ^ 9 o S TR T

"SS SN S. S S LLL ESSEN "^V NN

MS S. n i M MUN NUN UN SUN NUM SUN SS RORIS Pa
^h. "eS ^X RU NAT S S. A RR NO
"ES "S NS SUN ATA RA S SUR om R hw M RT
^ M. ^h S AS S Tm RS mm P M Rh m R. A €
LE EN ^". S S 9 ^^. SA S m S n. NR
^N m NN S ^w. S S ^R RT UR S OR
LNSCN o^ STR S NR EXIRET
NN S SORT. A NNNNNNST bo b 9 S SR
SES "S.S SMS. S. h^ SRM SMS M S ON
LC XD ENVES SNNA S NS. A S S
COSE - ^ SS DLE ES
^ ow » |] XS
Sh. M RS TN ^ - D BUS. SS A T TT
hU NS TTA MSS NU M*- AUR S n o S S A S
hh m RU "S ^ ^9. 8S b US NS S M
JLILNLLNXDEONEN SS UST TS m m RUM BR A RTR Rm A T
^o. 83 8 OSSA NS RS S. S S S S m om SS MN
^... S NN SUS SS TNT US RAS S S S S RS S S ÀCR  .
ho. Mo. S "589 NS S |J M NLLLXLUUSN
^b MM SN ^ SN T. S ho. UR Mh UR ELREESECCISN

NECS ^S USUS S SNR EN LIOS
Lx X NES ^o NS 5 S78 8. Am NAT RS oS OM S S
NN "SNNT. ^N AN . eR S TA

^


» M» * NS
h ^ S WANN NA NA NT. A A. S RÀ SN
^ We WwQUCLRLIDOCOCUSDENTSEXE MESSICO CES S
LI "oh RURSUS ATA NS ATIS T mbil RA S A. A mo ori DS T

BS RS SS Sh T A A S RR A MOM NUS STRA US ONT A S
bOOODCQDIQSSOUINSESSSENn NS mS 469 erre tee TS

MM MSAN S. S. ^. TS STET. BUB OR A S S S T S m ON

Q6 QNS qe de 84 Re QEON AN. 9 aar uc SEE Sn e e ere
^" * 9. 9 s LORS XL 1285 3L ^S. oA m
XE PNE SN CNN SESS SPEC SPI  POPISI
MATACR TNR TA h ^ A RI. hn A RN S EXE
3$ 25M. NN S )---W LEX ^^ bh 58. o S n
ACE ^S USUS SS n. S AN n A. n m. S A
»


- ^N


^o UR T
"^ SS S S A
MS M A m RR
^. S UN NS Sm
"S S TR A RR S
hU. S TR ORC D


uas
^. 0» ^. "^^ f 9 LOSSLMMLLS EI MIT

Mh S MUN "RR S ^o^ ^R T UR n
LR LORS TESORO TENE SS ESSE nS emm SS oe

LC ECPQCEIEN MUSS A. S RAS [DONC
b» UOLUIT SS Een AN
D M S Rm rt m A Rh A RS

- ^M S S Rh A RUN T. RU m

L. b ^FPS SS S. Nn. n.

O8 MELDEN

^. S. S AS

H

^


LS


*
r ^ ac
- P*
L " €.


LEEREN "n
ho. SS. m
^R US S USA


LINE
5. MN. -
ut -
^»
" - ^


M


^


^.


A


h
v


^


"
.


^


' " . - ! P LM Lee ; x Le
n i i S Pts y E "
r D L DA
E : "n . : e, ur
4 . . : "
"t. ' D ; ! ^ . : . ^£ )
' , gd ] v uw
: E . "
LI LI - - H ^ " *
* : " LI
. à 1
. n * LI
4 : * * ' 2
?S B. LI
D
; *
4 ' : *
* D 5 *
z 4
' '
: à
: i ; "
H ' »
" /
,
| ) .


e


LLJ


D


4$.


PATRIMOINE
de l'UNIVEKSJTÉ
de GAND


RERUM BRITANNICARUM MEDII VI
SCRIPTORES,


. OR


CHRONICLES AND MEMORIALS OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND IRELAND


DURING


THE MIDDLE AGES.


H 671. Wt. B 444. à


€


"


P


[2m Op UNECTOENLE


THE CHRONICLES AND MEMORIALS


OF


GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND
| A DURING THE MIDDLE AGES.


PUBLISHED BY THE AUTIORHITY OF HER MAJESTY'S TKEASURHY, UNDER
THE DIRECTION OF THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS.


4


Ow the 26th of January 1857, the Master of the Rolls
submitted to the Treasury a proposal for the publication
of materials for the History of this Country from the
Invasion of the Romans to the reign of Henry VIII.


The Master of the Rolls suggested that these materials
should be selected for publication under competent
editors without reference to periodical or chronological
arrangement, without mutilation or abridgment, prefer-
ence being given, in the first instance, to such materials
as were most scarce and valuable.


He proposed that each chronicle or historical docu-
ment to be edited should be treated in the same way as
if the editor were engaged on an Editio Princeps; and
for this purpose the most correct text should be formed
from an accurate collation of the best MSS.


To render the work more generally useful, the Master
of the Rolls suggested that the editor should give an
account of the MSS. employed by him, of their age and.
their peculiarities ; that he should add to the work a
brief account of the life and times of the author, and
any remarks necessary to explain the chronology; but
no other note or comment was to be allowed, except.
what might be necessary to establish the correctness of
the text. |


4


The works to be published in octavo, separately, as
they were finished ; the whole responsibility of the task
resting upon the editors, who were to be chosen by the
Master of the Rolls with the sanction of the Treasury.


The Lords of Her Majesty's Treasury, after à careful
consideration of the subject, expressed their opinion in a
Treasury Minute, dated February 9, 18577, that the plan
recommended by the Master of the Rolls * was well
calculated for the accomplishment of this important
national object, in an effectual and satisfactory manner,
within a reasonable time, and provided proper attention be
paid to economy, in making the detailed arrangements,
without unnecessary expense."


They expressed their approbation of the proposal that
each Chronicle and historical document should be edited
in sueh a manner as to represent with all possible correct-


ness the text of each writer, derived from a collation of


the best MSS., and that no notes should be added, except
such as were illustrative of the various readings. "They
suggested, however, that the preface to each work should
contain, in addition to the particulars proposed by the


Master of the Rolls, a biographical account of the author, .


so far as authentic materials existed for that purpose,
and an estimate of his historical credibility and value.


Rolls House,
December 1857.


——— À—o— — e M — € — —— I —À


|


63 | Lu Pa PUN VE.
HENRICI DE BRACTON
m DE
LEGIBUS ET CONSUETUDINIBUS
ANGLIAZ.


LIBRI QUINQUE
IN VARIOS TRACTATUS DISTINOTI


AD DIVERSORUM ET VETUSTISSIMORUM CODICUM
COLLATIONEM TYPIS VULGATI.


EDITED


DnY


PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHORITY OF THE LORDS COMMISSIONERS OF HER MAJESTY'S
TREASURY, UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS.


VOL. II.


LONDON:
LONGMAN & Co., PArERNosTER Row ; TRÜBNER & Co., LupaaTE Hipp: |
ALSO BY
PARKER & Co., OXFORD; aup MACMILLAN & Co., CAMBRIDGE;
À. & C. BLACE, AND DOUGLAS & FOULIS, EDINBURGH ;
AND À. THOM, DUBLIN.


1879.


AU 17277. Uo


Printed by :
EYnE and SPoTTISwooDE, Her Majesty's Printers.
For Her Majosty's Stationery Office.


ba


CONTENTS.


SUSANA, F8, AI, P0CUIUAS IAS


ÍNTRODUCTION - - - s »
TABLE or CoNTENTSs or CumaAPTERS - E


Or AcQuimNG THE DowrwroN or Turwos, Boox IL,
CBAPTER XXXVIYI. - - " E


" Or AcrroNs—Book IIL.—TnxzaTISE I. - -


Or TrE Cnowu—Boox III.—TnzATIszx II. -
ARTICLES OF THE EYRE—2 EpWwARD I.—ArrrENDIx I.


AnmICLES OP THE EYnE—3 EpwaARD I.—ArPPENDIX
lI. - - - | - - -


PrzA-Rorr, 18 Hrwnzx III. —ArrzNbix |ll. -


IupEx - -0 - - "


-


oom c M 99 70. TENE XA. 9.


INTRODUCTION.


.
.
-
.
.
.
;
- .-
.
E
.
E
.
.
* .
e Lj
. -
z --» H
- *» LI
- N .
n: E M 4 ee 2
c H i —
g m ,
- - . - z ES * 2 -
Ld . * x: . -.
- * - - -
- " - -— - T E n -
3 HE: B
- - : J »
- " a d 3 ;
.- "D - p
- .» . - b BE » i
.
z - . " . " *
- " - - 5.9 " d Jenna e C Us M cale di M


———-


|
!
L


INTRODUCTION.


SINCE the publication of the first volume of the present.
work, the Editor has been successful in discovering certain
new sources of information as to the ecclesiastical offices
and dignities held by Henrieus de Bracton, which do not
appear to have been known to those who bave hitherto
treated of his life and writings. "This discovery is not
merely decisive of the question as to Bracton having
been an ecclesiastie, but it also throws considerable light
upon a subject hitherto involved in complete EID.
namely, the time of his desth. Mr, Foss, in his Lives of
the Judges of England, states that Henry de Bracton
held the office of Árchdeacon of Barnstaple, and cites Le
Neve as his authority. Dugdale, in his Origines Ju-
dielales, had affirmed the same fact, and had carried
the subject no further. There is preserved amongst the
Harleian MSS. (No. 863) in the British Museum an
ancient Latin Psalter, in à handwriting of the ninth cen-
tury, on véllum, to which is prefixed a Latin kalendar in
a handwriting of the thirteenth or fourteenth century.
This Psalter appears to have been in use in Exeter
Cathedral, sand notices have been inserted in various
pages of the kalendar, opposite to certain days of the
respective months, of sums of money in immediate con-
nection with the '*obits " of certain persons, mostly dig-
nitaries or men of consideration. "These eniries are in a
eursive hand, more modern than the writing of the
kalendar itself, and on the table of the month of October,
near'the bottom of the page, the words, * Ob. Henr. de
* Bratton xiid," have been written opposite the date of


-- "eco, 7 — -
P4


E c——— ^ S ———


viii INTRODUCTION.


* jii. kalendas" It may be presumed, that these notices
have reference to certain sums of money, which were dis-
tributable on the occasion of celebrating the * bits" of
the respective benefactors, to whose names they are ap-
pended. | Amongst a list of fifty-eight persons, whose
benefacetions are noted in this kalendar, there are only
two others, besides Henricus de Bratton, who have made
so liberal a provision as this twelvepenny dole, and. they
are both Bishops of Exeter, one of whom is entered as
* Episcopus Walter, and is probably Bishop Walter
Bronescombe. This prelate was preferred from the Arch-
deaconry of Surrey to the Episcopal See of Exeter in
1237, and he died in 1280. He was thus a contemporary
of Henrieus de Bratton, and would be in elose official
relations with him, when he was Archdeacon of Barn-
staple. Unfortunately the kalendar is silent as to the
years in which the several benefactors. died, and the
handwriting affords us no assistance, as it is much more
recent than the institution of the '* obits," to which the
entries refer. |

The notice of Bracton's * obit " in this kalendar, coupled
with the fact that Bracton's Mass! was the earliest mass
celebrated every day in Exeter Cathedral, induced the
Editor to follow up the clue furnished by Dugdale's
Statement, that Henrieus de Bracton held the offiee of
Archdeacon of Barnstaple, as that office would bring him,
whilst living, into immediate relations with the Dean
and Chapter of Exeter Cathedral. "The Editor has been
enabled through the courteous co-operation of the present
Dean of Exeter, the Very Reverend Dr. Boyd, to follow
up this clue to results which seem to be conclusive, that
Henricus de Bracton died in the autumn of 1268. "The
most ancient Register-book, which is preserved in the


1 Further information from the | Bracton's Altar in Exeter Cathedral
Archives of the Dean and Chapter | will be found in a later part of this
on the subject of Bracton's Mass and | Introduction, p. Ixviii.


INTRODUCTION. ix


Bronescombe's Hegister, which commences A.D. 1237.
There áre twelve entries in this Register-book, in which
mention is made of Henricus de Bratton or de Bracton.
Amongst the earliest is the record of the preferment of
 . Andreas Prous, viear. of Cheddeham, to an office in the
church of Boseham in,Surrey, at that time a peculiar of
the Bishops of Exeter, which is stated to have been con-
ferred upon him by the Bishop of Exeter, with the consent
of Sir Henry de Bratton. The Bishop's act of collation is
dated on * xv kalendas Marcii," in the fourth year of his
Episcopate, which would correspond to the fifteenth day of
February, 1241-42. In what precise character Sir Henry
de Bratton was entitled to the patronage of the Saeristy
of the Church of Boseham, the office in question, is not
expressly stated in the Bishop's act of collation, but
there can be little doubt, from a subsequent entry in the
same Register, that Sir Henry de Bratton was at that
time à prebendary of Boseham, and a notice in the Liber
Regis informs us, that there was at that time a College
of Priests at. Boseham, which consisted of five preben-
daries, richly endowed. That Sir Henry de Bratton was
one of these prebendaries, and that he had been appointed
to his prebend prior to the advancement of Bishop Brones-
combe himself to the see of Exeter may be presumed
from the fact, that no entry is found in Bronescombe's
Register of Bracton's collation to a prebend in. Boseham
Church, whereas there is mention, in 1268, of the Bishop
having collated the Dean of Wells to the prebend, which
had been vacated by Sir Henry de Bratton. |

There is an entry in Bishop Bronescombe's Register of
— the appointment;of Henricus de Bracton himself to an


o —


| The entry in Bishop Brones- | * in Ecclesia de Boseham eum ojus-
combe's Register is as follows:— | * dem. ecclesi: sacristaria, con-
* Anno die et loco eodem Domi- | ** sensu domini Henrici de Bratton,
* mus Episcopus contulit Andree | ** ad quem ipsius sacristarie collatio
* Prous, vicario de Cheddeham pre- | * spectabat."
'* bendam, que fuit Roberti Apthi(?) |


Xx | INTRODUCTION.


ecclesiastical office under the date of 21 January 1263,
when it is recorded that * On the festival of St. Agnes, in
* the year 1263, the Lord Bishop at Horsley collated Sir
" Henry de Bracton to the Archdeaconry of Barnstaple."!
This entry in the Bishop's Register so far confirms the
statement of Dugdale. In the next following year
there is an entry in the same Register of the appointment
of Sir Henry de Bratton to the office of Chancellor of
Exeter Cathedral. This évent, which took place on the
18th May 1264, has been hitherto unknown to or has
not been noticed by Bracton's biographers, notwithstand-
ing that he resigned the Archdeaconry of Barnstaple on
his new appointment. The entry in the Register is as
follows: *In the same year (1264), and on the Lord's
* Day, the Vigil of St. Dunstan, Archbishop, that is, on
* the fifteenth of the kalends of June, the Lord Bishop
* eonferred the Chancellorship of Exeter on Sir Henry
* de Bratton at Taunton.? |

That Bracton resigned the Archdeaconry of Barnstaple,
on his appointment to the chancellorship of the Cathedral,
appears from another entry shortly following, which re-
cords the appointment of a successor to him in the arch-


. deaconry on 25 May 1264: *'In the same year (1264),


* &nd on the Lord's day following the feast of St. Dun-
* stan, Archbishop, that is on the eighth day of the kalends
* of June, the Lord Bishop conferred the Archdeaconry of
* Barnstaple, vacant through the spontaneous resignation
* of Sir Henry de Bratton, on Sir Richard le Blund, and
* he had letters ; and on the same day the prebend, which
* was that of the same Richard at Boseham, vacant by
* his spontaneous resignation, on Master Roger de Cory,


1 Eodem anno et die Sancti Ag- | vigilia Sancti Dunstani Archiepi-
netis apud Horsley Dominus Epi- | scopi, hoc est, xv kalendas Junii,
scopus contulit Archidiaconatum | Dominus Episcopus contulit Can-
Barnstap. domino Henrico de Brac- | cellariatum Exonis domino Henrico
ton. de Bratton apud TTànton.

3 Eodem anno et die dominica in


INTRODUCTION. xi


* &nd he had letters accordingly." No further mention
is made of Henricus de Bratton in Bronescombe's Register
until 1268, when the registrar has recorded the appoint-
ment of a suecessor to him in his office of chancellor, and
also of successors to him in his prebendal stalls, namely,
that at Boseham in Surrey, already mentioned, and that
of Exeter itself founded in the Cathedral ^ There is no
entry to be found in Bishop Bronescombe's Register of
Bracton's collation to the Exeter prebend, and the pre-
sumption in this case, as in the case of Boseham, is that
Sir Henry de Bratton had been collated to it before 1237,
when the entries in Bishop Bronescombe's Register com-
mence.. |

The first of these new appointments occurs on the third.
day of the nones of September, which corresponds with
the third day of the month of September according to
the Gregorian kalendar. *In the same year, at the same
* place, and on the same day, the Lord Bishop conferred on
* Master Oliver de Tracy the Chancellorship of Exeter,
* with everything appertaining to it, and he had letters
* of induction, assignation, and institution in common
* form."? "The place referred to in this entry, where the
collation took place, appears from a preceding entry to
have been Clist in Devonshire. "Two other entries follow
shortly afterwards, both having reference to preferment
vacaled by Henry de Bratton. The first is to this effect :
* [n the same year, and at Wallingford, on the second of


! Anno eodem. die dominica | resignationem suam vacantem ma-


proxima post festum Sancti Dun-
stani Archiepiscopi hoc est viii.
kalendas Junii Dominus Episcopus
contulit Archidiaconatum Barnstap.,
per spontaneam resignationem Do-
mini Henrici de Bratton vacantem
domino Ricardo dicto Blundo et
habuit litteras, et eodem die pre-
bendam, que fuit ejusdem Ricardi
apud Boseham, per spontaneam


gistro Rogerio de Cory, et habuit
literas in forma communi.

? Anno loco, et die eodem Do-
minus Episcopus contulit magistro
O. de Tracy Cancellariam Exoni-
ensem cum omnibus ad eam per-
tinentibus, et habuit litteras induc-
cionis, assignationis et institutionis
in forma communi.


Xn INTRODUCTION.


* the nones of November, the Lord. Bishop conferred on


* Master Edward Delacron, Dean of Wells, the prebend,
* which was that of Henry de Bratton !in the Church
* of Boseham." "The second entry, which immediately
follows, is of similar import as regards Henry de Brat-
ton: "In the same year, on the same day, and at the
* same place, the Lord Bishop conferred on Master R. de
* Esse the prebend, which was that of the aforesaid
* Henry in the Chureh of Exeter? No mention is
made in any of these entries of Bracton having vacated
his preferment by voluntary resignation, as is mentioned
in the instance of his advancement to the Chancellorship
of the Cathedral, when he resigned the Archdeaeonry of
Barnstaple, and there is no known record of his having
been advanced to any higher preferment about this time,
which would have avoided his minor ecclesiastical digni-
ties. Aecordingly when we couple the striking fact that
all the ecclesiastical preferments, which Bracton is known
to have held, were vaeated by him in the autumn of 1268
with another striking fact that his name ceases to be
mentioned in any judicial record after the year 1267,
whereas there is continual mention of him as acting in
some high judicial capacity during & preceding period,
extending from 1245 to 1267 inclusive, & presumption is
reised ,of a very forcible character that he died in the
year 1268? His decease in that, year would account for


——— —— — ——— —— MÀ -— — —— ——— — À —- ——À—À — —


! Eodem anno et apud Walling-
ford ii. nonas Novembris Dominus
Episcopus contulit magistro Ed.
wardo Delacron, decano Wellensi,
prebendam, que fuit Henrici de
Bratton in Ecclesia Boseham.

? Anno, die, et loco eodem Do-
minus Episcopus contulit magistro,
Ricardo de Esse, prebendam, que
fuit predicti Henrici in Ecclesia
Exoniensi.

3'The Editor has to thank Mr.
Arthur Burch, the Deputy Registrar


of the diocese of Exeter, for tran-
scripts of the various entries in
Bishop Bronesconbe's Register.

]t deserves remark, that IIenricus
de Bractonhas the titleof *Dominus"'
prefixed to his name in most of these
entries. Dominus" was the title
specially given to the Professors of
Law in the University of Bologna
under the privilege accorded to it
by the Emperor Frederic I. at tho
Diet of Roncaglia, A.D. 1158.


INTRODUCTION. : xlli


all the above facts; and the entry of his *obit" in the
.Exeter kalendar in the month of October creates no
difficulty in the way of our supposing, that his decease in
August or previous thereto had created the vacancy in
the chancellorship of Exeter, which was filled up by the
eollation of Oliver de Tracy on the third of September
12068.

The Editor has examined very carefully the list of
*obits" entered in the Exeter kalendar, with à view to
ascertain whether the '** obit " of each benefactor is entered
on the day of the month, on which itis known from other
sources that the benefactor died. "There are as many as
nine bishops of Exeter, whose obits are noted in íhe
kalendar, and in no single instance does the * obit" of a
bishop coincide with the day of the month, on which he is
elsewhere recorded to have died. "The celebration, there-
fore, of Sir Henry de Bratton's obit on the 29th day of .
October would in no respect be inconsistent with the fact
of his death having happened before the 3rd day of Sep-
tember, when Oliver de Tracy succeeded to the chancel-
lorship. It may be further observed that the event of his
death at that time would not invalidate the suggestion
of Mr. Foss, that Henry de Bracton discharged the duties
of Chief Justiciary in the interval which elapsed after the
death of Hugh le Dispenser in 1265, and the appointment
of Robert de Brus in 1268. But to this fact further
reference will be made, when we come to treat'of the
various duties of the King's Justiciaries.

Passing onwards to a review of the contents of the
present volume, which commences with Chapter XXXVII.
of Bracton's treatise De acquirendo Rerum dominio, the
Editor would observe, in the first place, that he has
already stated in the Introduction to the first volume
(p. xlvii) the reasons, which induced him to termi-
nate the first volume with the chapter on homage and
reliefs payable on succession to immoveable property.
Between such subjects and the rights and duties of

VOL. II. ! b


UT WS CR Ne raa m UU wo o m7 .CEBRRAKEaS2  ..
2


xiv INTRODUCTION.


guardians in respect of minors under their wardship
there seemed to the Editor to be a sufficient diversity to
warrant him in adopting Chapter XXXVII. as the com-
mencement of the second volume, which should termi-
nate with the treatise De Corona, the second and con-
cluding treatise of Bracton's third book. The present
volume will accordingly be found to comprise the four
last ehapters of the treatise De acquirendo Rerum do-
minio, which terminate the second book in the printed
edition of 1569. These chapters are immediately fol-
lowed by the treatise De Actionibus, which deals with
ihe various kinds of actions and the various courts au-
thorised to entertain them, and more particularly with
ihe jurisdiction of the Justices Itinerant, which latter
subject is extended into the two first chapters of the
ireatise De Corona. "The remainder of this last treatise
is devoted to the discussion of the rules of legal proce-
dure in criminal matters, and is in fact à summary of the
criminal law as administered by the Justices Itinerant
in the reign of Henry III. "The treatise De Actionibus,
coupled with the treatise De Corona, constitute Bracton's
third book in the printed edition of 1569. "The notation
of the folios of the printed book, which has been pre-
served on the margin of each page in the first volume,
has also been preserved by the Editor throughout the
present volume, so that there will be no difficulty in the
way of the law student identüfying any reference to
Bracton's work, which he may meet with in ancient
law ireatises, or in the reports of cases adjudged at
Westminster.

It would appear from Braceton's treatment of the rights
incidental to the wardship of minors, with which Chapter
XXXVII. opens, that the law, as laid down in Glanville's
* Tractatus de Legibus, had undergone very little '
change since the reign of Henry IL, further than what
m&y be inferred from the silence of Glanville, as to any
right of tbe guardian in eases of military tenure to sell


INTRODUCTION. xv


the maritage of the heir, which Bracton discusses (fol. 87)
as a matter of ordinary practice in his time. In this
respect an element of decay would seem io have insi-
nuated itself into an important outwork of the feudal
System. No part of that system in its original organisa-
tion had been so jealously guarded as the inheritance of
the feud, and the right of testament in respect of im-
moveables was altogether unknown to the feudal law.
The maxim *quod solus deus heredem facere potest,
* non homo," is cited by Glanville as explanatory of the :
anomaly, that a man might give away during his life-
time all his acquisitions, but could not bequeath them
after his death. "The further maxim of * heres quem
* nuptie demonstrant" completed the circle, within
which the feudal law of inheritance could operate, so
that the right of the lord to the maritage of the heir
rendered the lord master of two positions, whereby he
was enabled to secure in the case of male wards that
they should not marry out of the pale of (tenants by
military service, and in the case of female wards that
they should not intermarry with persons unfit or indis-
posed to perform the duties incidental to military tenure.
The framework of the English law of wardship, in regard
to the personal right of the chief lord to the maritage of
the heir, seems to have been still complete in the reign
of Henry IL, and if that King occasionally departed
from the rule and sold his wardships, it was an excep-
tion in favour of one, * who had no equal, much less a
* superior"  Glanville alludes to this as in his time an
occasional event, but subsequent mention is frequently
found of this practice on the part of the Crown in
charters both of King John and of Henry IIL, to which
the barons gave their formal assent. It is not unrea-
sonable to suppose, that the vicious example of the sove-
reign Lord had a corrupting influence upon the mesne
Lords, and that the office of guardian, which was in its
origin an office of personal trust, had come to be regarded


Xvi INTRODUCTION.


in Bracton's time as an office of personal interest, of
which the lord might avail himself for his own pecu-
niary benefit regardless of any duty to his Order.

The subject of the dower of the widow, which follows
the wardship of heirs, and with which Chapter XXXIX.
commences, terminates the treatise De acquirendo Rerum
dominio. It is not historically certain, as far as the
Editor is aware, how the Anglo-Saxon * morgengif "
came to be transformed into a gift on the part of the
bridegroom at the door of the church before espousals.
It may be presumed that the clergy were instrumental
in effecting this change, and Glanville states that in his
time the practice of endowing the bride at the door of
the ehurch was sanctioned by the ecclesiastical as well
as by the secular law. "The term dos was already used
in Glanvilles: time in two senses. It signified vulga-
viter, Vo borrow from Glanville his own phrase, ** id quod
* aliquis liber homo dat sponse sur ad ostium eccle-
* gie tempore desponsionis sus" (lib. vi. c. 1.); and
it is obvious that, when once the morgengif had been
converted into a gift in view of coming marriage, it was
susceptible of being treated aecording to the principles
of the Roman law applicable to donations * propter
* nuptias futuras." The other sense, in which the term
* dos" was used in Glanvilles time, was substantially
in accordance with the Roman use of the word * dos,"
to signify the marriage portion, which the spouse re-
eéived from her parents or other kinsfolk, and brought
into community with her husband. * In alia enim ac-
* eeptione, says Glanville, * aecipitur dos seeundum
* leges Romanas, secundum quas proprie appellatur dos
* id, quod cum muliere datur viro, quod vulgariter di-
* eitur maritagium " (lib. VII. c. 1). This difference
of origin, as regards the English and the Roman insti-
tution of dower, had ceased to be thought worthy of
distinetion in Bracton's time, who classes both kinds of
dower under the common head of donations made in


INTRODUCTION. xvii


view of marriage. "The amelioration of the condition of
the woman by the side of the man seems to have made:
& steady advance under the Plantagenet Kings. Para-
phernal dower, which did not come atall into partition
with the husband, is recognised by Rracton (fol. 92 b.),
and he notices how the widow had acquired during the
reign of Henry III. the further advantage of being en-
abled to bequeath the fruits and crops growing at the
time of her decease upon the lands assigned to her for
dower. This power of bequest was not allowed to the
widow in Glanville's time. It was a privilege conferred
on the widow by the provisions of Merton of 20 H. IIT,
of which Bracton makes express mention.

À. curious difficulty, however, arises upon the text of
Bracton, in which he notices this fact: * It has been aecus-
* tomed to be observed," he says (fol. 96), *that justasa -
* wife receives her dower after the death of her husband,
* eultivated or uncultivated, so.after the death of the
* wife it has been aecustomed to be restored to the heir,
* eulüivated or uncultivated, because the wife had no
* power to make a will of the crops and fruits not sepa-
* rated from the tenement, but by à new supervenient
" grace and provision, 3s is apparent from the provisions
*" of Merton, à wife may make a will and dispose accor-
* ding to her pleasure of the fruits and crops, whether
* they have been separated from the soilor not" This
Statement of the law, if it stood alone, would be in per-
fect accordance with the constitution of Merton, by which
term Bracton elsewhere (fol. 227) describes the provisions
of Merton of 20 H. III. "Those provisions are of this
kind: ,*Item omnes vidus de ceztero possunt legare
* blada .sua de terra sua, tam de dotibus suis, quam
* de alis terris et tenementis suis, salvis serviclis do-
* minorum, quie de dotibus et alis tenementis suis
* debentur" "There occur, however, in the text of
Bracton, as printed in the edition of 1569, and as written
in all the best MSS. which the Editor has examined, some


xvii INTRODUCTION.


additional words, which cause the greatest historical per-
plexity. The full text of Bracton (fol 96) is as follows:
* Sed nova superveniente gratia et provisione, sicut
* patet de provisionibus de Merton 4n£er placa qw
* segwwnter regem, Henricum ammo vegmi sui decimo
* ociavo, potest uxor de fructibus et bladis, sive & solo
* separata fuerint, sive non, testari, et pro voluntate
* sua disponere" (vol. ii. p. 82). It will be observed
that the words, which the Editor has placed in italics, are
not necessary to complete the sense of the context, whilst
they are at variance with an indisputable historical fact,
viz, that the provisions of Merton, by which the testa-
mentary power of widows was enlarged in the manner
stated by Bracton, were made in the twentieth year of
the reign of Henry IIL, and were not in fact the results
of & judgment on a plea brought before the King him-
self, but were the resolutions of & Council summoned to
meet the King at Merton for the purpose of consulting


respecting the approaching coronation of the King and


his newly-married Consort. Eleanor, the daughter of the
Count of Provence.

The passage as it stands in the full text of Bracton,
as &bove italicised, would appear to allude to certain
provisions of Merton made in the eighteenth year of the
reign of Henry LIII. amongst the pleas heard before the
King himself, and the Editor in his Introduction to the
first volume, p. xli, has, upon the authority of this passage,
suggested that the amendment of the law on the subject
of the widow's dower was the result of & judgment in
the first instance of the Aula Regis held at Merton in
18 H. III. and that it obtained subsequently legislative
confirmation at Merton in 20 H. III. The passage as it
stands seems to have perplexed various legal scribes, who
had to copy the text of Bracton's work at a very early
period. MS. Rawlinson C. 160 for instance has the
numerals xviii, clearly written, whilst MS. Rawlinson C.
169 has xviij. On the other hand MSS. Godbold and


INTRODUCTION. ; xix


Corbet have the numerals xv., followed by a contraction
of a singular character, which there is good reason for
pronouneing to be the three numerals iii. rolled up together,
which have become separated from the preceding xv.,
and are wanting to make up xviii MS. Crewe, on the
other hand, and the Chertsey MS. agree in exhibiting
the alternative reading of *xv. alias xviii" "The Editor
before preparing the Introduction to the first volume had
consulted the summary of the Plea Rolls (Placitorum
Abbreviatio), published by the Record Commissioners in
1811, in the hope of finding a record of the pleas heard
before the King in 18 H. IIL, but no pleas of that year
are found in that collection. He has subsequently as-
certained, that amongst the Rolls recently removed from
the Tower of London to the Publie Record Offiee, but
which have not yet been printed, the Roll of the Pleas
heard [before the King in 18 H. III. has been preserved,
and through the courtesy of Mr. William Hardy, the
Deputy Keeper of the Records, he has had the Roll of
that year carefully examined, and has ascertained that
its contents are of considerable interest. "They serve not
merely to throw a direct light upon the text of Bracton,
but also to correct incidentally a serious error, into which
Selden has fallen in his Titles of Honor (Part 2, ch. v.
$xxiii) and into which the authority of Selden has
betrayed Sir William Blackstone in his Introduction to
his treatise on the Great Charter, Oxford edition, anno
1771, p. 133.

It should be premised, that Bracton in his treatise De.
Exceptionibus, which occupies a later portion of his work
(fol. 416 b.), has gone very fully into the proceedings of
ihe so-called Parliament of Merton of 20 H. IIL, when
. the Barons pronounced their dissent from the proposals
of the Bishops in the memorable words * Nolumus leges
* Anglie mutare. Bracton goeson to state that *after-
" wards, on the Thursday following the festival of St.
" Denis in the same year, inthe presence of the King


XX INTRODUCTION.


* himself and the undersigned parties, at à Council ex-
* pressly convoked, it was provided and conceded by
* the King himself in the presence of Edmund Archbishop
* of Canterbury, Ralph Bishop of Chichester, the King's
** Chancellor, Richard Bishop of Durham, &c. (fol. 417)"
that a special form of proceeding should be observed,
when the King's Court consulted the Ordinary in a case
of special bastardy.  Selden appears to have been imper-
fectly informed as tothe contents of the Plea Roll of 18
H. IIL, and has supposed that it purported to be exclu-
sively & record of the pleas heard before the King at
Tewkesbury, and he goes further astray in asserting that
on the face of it the roll is clearly not a Plea Roll, but a
transcript out of a Parliament Roll. He adheres, however,
to the date of 18 H. IIL, and upon that assurance con-
tends that Bracton is in error, in his treatise De Excep-
tionibus, in reciting the provision of the King's Council
made on the Thursday following the festival of St. Denis
as having been made in 20 H. III. Sir William Black-
Stone on the other hand, relying upon the authority of
Selden and on his citation of the original record under
— the title of Placita apud, Theokebwriam 18 H. III. dors.
TOt. 15, states as & fact. that it was ordained in & Parlia-
ment held at Tewkesbury on 12 October A.D. 1234 (18
H. IIL), that for the future, whenever special bastardy
was pleaded, the form of the inquisition directed to the
Bishops should be to inquire not whether bastard or not,
but whether born before marriage or not, to which the
Ordinary should return & plain and categorical answer ;
that according as this fact was certified, the King's Courts
might determine the legitimaey. It is not surprising,
ihat the combined authority of Selden and of Sir Wil-
liam Blackstone should have been accepted by subse-
quent writers, as & sufficient assurance of à Parliament
having been held at Tewkesbury in the eighteenth year
of Henry IIL, and Mr. C. H. Parry has accordingly, on
Selden's authority, inserted such & Council or Parliament


INTRODUCTION. | xxi


in his carefully prepared work on the Parliaments and
Councils of England, London, 1839. It is, however, a
fact beyond dispute, that, no such Parliament was held
at Tewkesbury on the 12th October 1234, inasmuch as
the presence of the King at Westminster on that day is
vouched not merely by the Plea Roll itself of that month,
but by entries in the Patent and Close Rolls of 18 H. TII.

The Plea Rolls, which have been published in the collec-
tion known by the title of Placitorum Abbreviatio, and
which have been already alluded to, purport to be the Plea
Rolls preserved in the Chapter House of Westminster
Abbey. "There are very few Plea Rolls of H. III. in that
eollection, and such as have been preserved of that King's
reign refer mostly to portions of it later than 18 H.IIT.
They are however, of historical value, as they confirm a
fact of considerable legal interest, namely, the revival of '
. the office of ** Justitiarius Angli: " in the person of Hugh
Bigot in 1258.. The Tower Plea Rolls, on the other hand,
extend from 9 H.IIL to 53 H. IIL, not consecutively .
indeed, but with considerable gaps between them. "They
contain, however, the Pleas of very important years, such,
for instance, as those of 9 H.. IIT., when the third Charter of
H. IIL was granted ; of 18 H. IIL, when the procedure in
cases of special bastardy was settled ; of 42 H. IIL, when
the provisions of Oxford were published and the office
of Justieiary of England was revived ; and of 52 H. IIT,
when, according to Mr. Foss, in his Lives of the Judges,
li. p. 155,a new title was given to the head of the King's
Court by the appointment of Robert de Brus as * Capi-
* talis Justitiarius ád placita coram Rege tenenda," or,
88 he is now styled, Chief Justice of the King's.Bench.

Àn account of the contents of the Plea Roll of 18 H. IIT.
has been supplied to the Editor by the courtesy of Mr.
William Hardy, the Deputy Keeper of the Public Records,
and is as follows :—

*The * Coram Rege' Roll of 18 Henry IIL, formerly '


xxi - INTRODUCTION.


* preserved in the Tower of London, consists of thirty-


«€


£€


«c


iwo membranes, attached together by their upper edges.
All of them, with the exception of the eleventh, are
written over on both sides. The twenty-first membrane
eontains on its dorse only the words * Recordum loquele
* de Judzeis Norwici, qui sunt in prisona apud London,
descriptive of the entry on its face. "To the foot of
the firs& membrane a small cedule is attached, con-
taining & list of names arranged in two columns; &
portion of the second column islost. Rows of holes
existing at the foot of membranes 3, 4, 20, 25, and 26


possibly indicate that cedules were formerly attached to


them. The contents of the Roll are fairly legible, but
the edges of the membranes are in many cases much
decayed or eaten away, and many of them are so frail,
as scarcely to admit of being handled. It might be
worth while to transceribe the entire document, if only
to save ib from the chance of further unavoidable injury
&& the hands of those, who may consult it in future."

* 'The nature of the proceedings entered on the Roll
may be inferred from the headings. The first of them
is on membrane I., and runs, so far as i6 can be read:
* Placita apd Theokesb corá W. de Ralegh Godefr de
* Crauwecumb ai Pentecost anb Reg H. xviij There
are Placita before the King at Wallingford, Reading,
Kenington, Windsor, and Westminster, and Placita et
Assise a& Woodstock. There is à Conventio before the
King and his Council at Marlborough. There are also
Placita before Ralegh and Crauwecumb at Tewkesbury
(already mentioned); Querele before the same ; Placita
at Winchecomb, Rochester, Windsor, Odiham, Chertsey,
and Westminster, and an Assise of novel disseisin before
Ralegh and Rockele. On membrane 21 is & very in-
teresting account of the abduction and circumcision of
one Odardus, a boy aged five years, the son of a certain
Wychardus Phisicus, by Jacob of Norwich, a Jew, five


INTRODUCTION. xxill


* years before! The details are exceedingly curious.
* With regard to the provision relating to bastardy made
* by the King and certain of his Council on the Thursday
* after the feast of St. Denis (12th October), 18 H. ILI.
* (in 15 dors), it follows a heading : * Placita apud Westiüi
* *eorà Dfio Rege. in Oct. Sti. Mich. ann. Regh. ejusd.
* ' xviijo, and was therefore presumably made at West-
* minster. "That on the day, on which it was made, the
* King was not at Tewkesbury is clear from entries in the
* Patent and Close Rolls of the 18 Henry IIL, from
* which it appears that he was at Westminster on the
* 7th, 8th, 9th (St. Denis' Day), 11th, and 12th October."

There ean be no doubt that Selden's observations, in
his work on Titles of Honor, have reference to this par-
ticular membrane, * No. 15 dorso," of the Roll of the Pleas
heard * coram Rege" at Westminster in 18 H. III, and
not to any other membrane, which might possibly be now
missing, inasmuch as he specifies the names subscribed to
it, which he considers to be the Roll of the Parliament
held at Tewkesbury in that year, and he contrasts them
with the names, which Bracton (f. 417) enumerates as
subscribed to the Roll of a Plea heard * coram Rege" in
20 H. III. The names of the archbishop and bishops
and.of the earls and barons are identical in both cases,
with the exception of two or three names towards the
end of the lists, as may be tested by & comparison of
ihe Plea Roll, the text of which the Editor has annexed
in Appendix IIL, with the list which Bracton has enu-
merated in folio 417. t is obvious, therefore, that the
expert, upon whom, rather than on himself, Selden most
probably relied for a correct report of the contents
of the Ples Roll of 18 H. IIL, did not examine it with
sufficient accuracy, and that the Parliament of Tewkes-
bury of 18 H. III. has never had any existence, except


! An account is given of the trial | Historia Anglorum, Rolls' edition,
of the parties concerned in this | vol. ii., p, 375.
affair by Matthew Paris in his


"t OH


|OXXxiv. INTRODUCTION.


in & baseless conjecture, which Selden has hazarded in
explanation of a misrepresented fact. It may not be out
of place to mention that the Annales de Theokesberia
(Rolls edition of the Annales Monastici, vol i. p. 95) are
silent as to any such Parliament having met at Tewkes-
bury in 1234, and that no mention of it is found either
in the contemporary, * Chronica Majora" of Matthew
Paris, or in the Annals of Burton.

It remains to consider, how the words 4n£er placita
qua sequwntur regem, Henricum ammo vegnà sui decimo
octavo have found their way into Bracton's text. "That
Bracton was familiar with the provisions of Merton of
20 H. IIL at the time when he composed Chapter XL.
of his treatise * De acquirendo rerum dominio," may be
presumed from the facet that Chapter XXXVIII. which
precedes it on the subject of the maritage of heirs, and
which he recites (fol. 91 b.) as & provision made at a .
Common Council of the realm, is an embodiment of the
sixth chapter of the text of the provisions of Merton of
20 H. IIL, as printed in the collection of the Statutes of
the Realm, published by the Record Commissioners in
1810. Mr. H. S. Milman, however, who has paid great
attention to the text of Bracton, has suggested ! that the
sixth chapter of the authorised text of the provisions of
Merton is no part of the original Statute of Merton of
20 H. IIL, but is probably of an earlier date. Mr. Milman
founds his suggestion on two arguments, first, that Brac-
ton in his embodiment of the sixth chapter (fol 91 b.)


. does not apply to it the epithet of * new," which epithet


is applied by him to the first chapter of the statute,
which he quotes as & "nova constitutio" in his treatise
De actione dotis (fol. 312 b.) ; secondly, that this chapter
is not included in the King's writ concerning the new
constitution, which was sent round to the Sheriffs and to
ihe Justices Itinerant on 30th January immediately


! On the Statute of Merton, Law Magazine and Review, N.S., vol. iv.


.p. 16, 1875.


INTRODUCTION. XXV


following the passing of the statute, with directions that
it should be read in the full county court and firmly kept!
The first argument, however, is by no means conclusive,


as Bracton elsewhere (fol. 227) cites the fourth chapter of -


the provisions of Merton, as a certain constitution called
that of Merton (qusedam constitutio, quze dicitur consti-
tutio de Merton) without the prefix of *nova" applied
toit. The second argument of Mr. Milman is of greater
weight, as the particular chapter of the authorised text
is not found either in the text of the '* Statuta regis
* Henrici III. apud. Meretonam " set forth by Matthew


Paris, à contemporary chronicler, nor in the text of the


* Leges de Merton " as recited in the Annals of Burton.
Howsoever this may be, the fact does not affect the
position, that Bracton was well acquainted with the text
of the provisions of Merton of 20 H. IIL, for whenever
he cites them as such by name he is supported by the
testimony of the two annalists above mentioned, as well
as by the authorised text of the provisions themselves.
It is not therefore altogether reasonable to suppose that


in citing the chapter of the provisions of Merton of 20


H. III. as to the widow's dower, he should have made so
gross a blunder as to represent itto bethe result of a judg-
ment *coram Rege" in 18 H.IITI, On the other hand, if
the words, which cause the perplexity, were appended to
Bracton's text at à very early periodas a side note, there
would be a sufficient reason for so appending them, inas-
much as the question of special bastardy, which was the
subject of the judgment * coram rege " in 18 H. IIL, was
re-considered and re-affirmed in the Council of Merton
of 20 H. IIL. The proposal, however, of the bishops was
on this occasion negatived by the lay peers, and this cir-
. €Cumstance may account for the silence of Matthew Paris,
who has recorded only such provisions as became law.

The treatise * De actionibus," with which the third book

in the printed edition of 1569 commences, is divisible


! Rot. Claus. 20 H. IIl. m. 12 d,


xxvi INTRODUCTION.


into three parts, the first four chapters being concerned
with the subject-matter of civil actions, the next seven
chapters with courts and jurisdictions, and the twelfth
and last chapter with the order of proceeding in civil
actions. If it were allowable to speculate upon the cit-
cumstances, under which the various chapters of this trea-
lise were compiled, ihe Editor would have no hesitation
in saying that the scholastie character, of the first four
chapters betrays an academic origin, and that they might
well pass muster for a dissertation delivered from a Pro-
fessor's Chair of Civil Law, such as that, which Bracton
is said to have filled in the University of Oxford. The
firs& chapter opens with an illustration of the relation,
which actions bear to obligations, which has been evi-
dently borrowed from Azo's Summa on the Institutes.
* [t is to be known," says Bracton, * that an action arises
* from & preceding obligation, as & daughter from &
* mother" He then goes on to assign for the origin of
obligations the four sources, which are recognised in the
Roman Law, contract and quasi contract, delict and. quasi
delict. He then proceeds to distinguish between * nuda
* pacta" and * pacta vestita," adopting the six heads of
* vestintenta pactorum," which are familiar to civilians,
&nd which Bracton has already enumerated in his pre-
vious treatise De acquirendo rerum dominio, fol. 16 b., in
the memorial verses : |
Re, verbis, scripto, consensu, traditione,
Junctura vestes sumere pacta solent.


Further he goes on to trace analogies between the English
law respecting written conventions and the Roman law
of verbal stipulations, so as to apply the principles of the
Roman stipulations to the subject matter of conventions
in writing, upon which alone actions were maintainable
in England. In the course of the diseussion he makes
use of an illustration, which savours strongly of an
academic origin. * Likewise," he says, *places are brought
* into stipulation, as if you should say, beóng at Oxford


INTRODUCTION. |. Xxvii


* to-day, do yow promise to ge 4v London? Such a
* stipulation will be useless, unless & time be added,
* within which the thing brought into stipulation may
* be done" (fol. 100). Such an illustration would be
very apposite, if it were presented to an audience assem-
bled in! the Law School at Oxford, and its appositeness
. would well warrant the author in substituting it for the
original illustration in the Institutes, ^ Et ideo, si quis
.* Roms ita stipulatur, hodie Carthagwn dore spondes,
* inutilis erit stipulatio, cum impossibilis sit repromissio,"
. lin. tt. xvi. $ 5.

The Roman principle of real contracts had found accep-
tance in England before the time of Glanville. It wasin
the nature of things, that men should buy and sell, borrow
and lend, hire and let, and Glanvilles commentary on
these transactions of ordinary life is in. complete accord-
&Ance with the Roman law, but Glanvilles treatment of
these subjects is tentative, as compared with thatof Brac-
ion. The latters exposition of them is almost taken
literally from the Institutes of Justinian, and he supplies
rules for the decision of questions, which in Glanville's
Uüme had evidently not received a definite solution. For
instance, in the case of & thing lent to another person for
his use and to be returned after it has been used, which
is designated in the Roman law by the term commoda-
(wm as distinguished from «vutwwm, Glanville states
ihat the borrower is under all cireumstances bound to
restore the thing itself or its reasonable value, and there
he leaves the subject. JBracton, on the other hand, after
distinguishing the contract of commodatwm from the con-
iract of mutwum,adopts the principle of the Roman law,
and relieves the commodatarvwus of all responsibility in
cases of vis major, or of casus fortu, nisi culpa, sua
vnlervenerit. 'This is in complete accordance with the
Institutes of Justinian, 1. iii. tit. xv. $ 2.

The passage, in which Bracton expounds the law,
as amended in bis time, has given rise to considerable


4


MM mE Cop s nc n VRCSCEORRNCATT An fps qo UE
*.


- 6 o —— ——— 5 -— P


xxvlü INTRODUCTION.


controversy. Chief Justice Holt, in Coggs v. Bernard,
Lord Raymond's Reports, p. 915, in citing the passage,
adopts à reading at variance with the text of the printed
book of 1569. "The passage as it stands in the printed
book (fol. 98) is as follows: * Sed magna est differentia
* inter mutuum et commodatum, quia is qui rem com-
* modatam accepit, ad ipsam restituendam tenetur vel
* ejus pretium, si forte incendio, ruinà, naufragio, aut
* Jatronum vel hostium incursu consumpta fuerit vel
* deperdita, subtracta vel ablata," vol. ii. p.108. Chief
Justice Holt, in citing this passage, adopts the reading,
* quia is qui rem mutuam, accepit, in the place of
* quia is qui rem commodatam, accepit. Sir William
Jones, on the other hand, in his Law of Bailments, 64 (x.),-
rejects Chief Justiee Holt's amendment of the passage,
and observes that it is difficult to reconcile the amend-


^ ment with the words * ad ipsam restituendam," and there


is great force in Sir W. Jones' criticism.  Fleta also, ii.
56, $ 5, reproduces the identical reading, which is adopted
in the printed text of Bracton, and the Editor has failed
io discover in any M5. & reading, which is confirmatory
of Chief Justice Holt's correction. It must be admitted
that the passage as it stands in the printed book is
in itself intelligible ; on the other hand, it is in evident
eontradiction with what Bracton states in the next but
one following sentence: * Àd vim autem majorem vel
* easus fortuitos non tenetur quis, nisi culpa sua inter-
* venerit, ut si rem sibi commodatam domi secum de-
* tulerit, cum peregre profectus fuerit, et illam incursu
* hostium vel preedonum vel naufragio amiserit, non est
* dubium, quin ad rem restituendam teneatur." "This
contradiction is suggestive, that there is something either
wanting or redundant in the printed book, and Sir Wil-
liam Jones, after observing that there is certainly some
mistake in the passage, suspects the omission of a whole
line after the word * pretium," where the oldest MS. which
he had seen, has a full stop, and he very appositely suggests


INTRODUCTION. XXix


that the line omitted may be thus supplied from the
Institutes: *.At 4s qué mutwwm, accepit, obligatus ve-
* manet, si forte incendio, etc. "This would be a very
legitimate correction, as it brings Bracton's text into
general harmony with the text of the Institutes (]l. iii.
it. xv. $ 2-4), which has been followed by Bracton
throughout the rest of the chapter.

It deserves notice that Bracton, in discussing the law
of obligations, expressly rejects the Roman law in several .
instances as not applicable to English obligations, one of
the most remarkable instances being that in which he
states, that if a person shall write that he owes money
to another, whether the money has been paid to him or
not, he shall be bound by the writing (f. 100 b.). Such
was the law of England in Glanville's time (l. x. c. 13),
and the Roman law had failed to supersede it in Bracton's
time. On the other hand, whilst Roman consensual con-
tracts were not recognized by English law, as, for in-
stance, the contract of buying and selling was not a true
consensual contract according to English law, neverthe-
less the Roman law with regard to earnest money had
worked its way in Bracton's time into the English con-
Uract of *emptio et venditio," so to supply an answer
to à question, for which Glanville was at & loss. "The
purehaser's right to withdraw from his bargain upon
the forfeiture of his earnest money had been admitted
in England from a very early time, but the right of the
vendor to withdraw from his bargain was not definitely
settled in Glanville's time, whereas Bracton treats it
as settled law, that the vendor might withdraw upon


! Glanville puts the question in | ** pena id facere possit? quod non
this form, * Ubi vero sole arrhs | * videtur, quia tunc videretur in
* date sunt, si emptor a contractu | ** hoc melioris conditionis venditor
* recedere voluerit, id ei cum arr- | * quam emptor? Quod si impune.
* harum amissione licebit. Sin | * id fieri nequit, quam penam inde
* autem venditor recedere voluerit | * prestabit?  L. x. c. 14."

* intali causá, quero utrum sine
VOL. II. c


SCC PAPE Mem A m Ve Riu os — m


eiu EET


———— V


XXX | INTRODUCTION.


restoring io the purchaser double of what he had re-
ceived as earnest money (fol 62)! But Bracton deals
with this question, not in his chapter on obligations, but
in discussing the causes of acquiring the dominion of
things, and he expressly guards himself against being
supposed to desire to break down the old established
English rule, that actions were only maintainable for the
enforcement of contracts, when the contracts were made
in solemn form and in writing.

Thus he states that, when earnest money had been
paid, an action might be brought by the vendor to recover


— that, which is wanting in the price by a suitable action,


but not to compel the purchaser to ratify the contract
(vol. 1, p. 491).

After discussing the law of obligations, Bracton pro-
ceeds in the third chapter to discuss the theory of actions.
Having at the commencement of the treatise defined an
action to be nothing else, than the right of a person to


pursue in court à thing which is due to him, adopting


herein the identicallanguage of the Institutes, he pro-
ceeds upon the basis of the Institutes or of Azo's Summa,
for they are in this respect identical, to divide actions
into three classes, according as some are real, others per-
sonal, and others mixed. The term real, as used in this
classification, is applied to actions which were directed
io obtain possession of an immoveable thing or of &
right incidental to it. Personal actions on the other
hand might be brought for the possession of & moveable,
or for damages on account of & wrongful taking or &
wrongful detention ofit. Mixed actions formed a third
class, in which the object of the suit was & thing either
moveable or immoveable, and a penalty fór the wrongful
deteniion of it. This division of actions does not appear


l'This is in accordance with the | by the German and the Scandi-
Roman law (Institutes, l. iii. tit. | navian nations.
xxiv. proem), which was received


INTRODUCTION. ' xxxi


to have been adopted in Glanville's time, in fact the
personal action seems to have obtained & formal recog-
nition in the King's courts subsequently to his time, as
Glanville himself avows, that the King's courts did not
willingly mix themselves up with |personal contracts,
which did not touch real property. We may, therefore,
regard the adoption in Bracton's work of this threefold
division of actions in accordance with the Roman law,
as marking a considerable advance of the English courts
inlegal science, and that this advance was maintained
in the reign of Edward lI. in this partieular branch of -
the law may be inferred from the more complete manner,
in which Fleta, as compared with Bracton, expounds the
subject of procedure in personal actions. , He recasts, as
ib were, and treats in special detail several subjects, on
which Bracton has only slightly touched.

Braeton goes on to make a further division of per-
sonal actions into civil and criminal, and he enumerates
various examples of the latter borrowed from the Digest.
Further he goes on to show how, in the English system
Of possessory petitions for an inheritance, the assise of
novel disseysine and the assise * de morte antecessoris "
were adaptations of the Roman actions of * unde vi" and
of *quorum bonorum." |

Braeton in Chapters V. and VI. touches very slightly
upon criminal actions and the two kinds of punishment,
with which malefactors are visited, justifying the in-
vention of punishmenis as & means of restraining men
from sin, where the fear of God does not restrain them
from evil. He does not object to torture as a means of
obtaining evidence, but deprecates the use of it as a
means of punishment, and he upholds the general prin-
eiple, that, punishments are rather to be mitigated than
exasperated. He then: passes on to the consideration of
the tribunals, before which civil actions may be brought,
distinguishing between the Baron's court, the County court,
and the King's courbó; and when he comes to consider

c 2


xxxl  . INTRODUCTION.


the class of pleas, which are properly triable in the
King's court, he enters upon à discussion of the various
kinds of justiciaries, which is not merely juridically
instructive, but is likewise historically interesting, inas-
much as he altogether ignores the office of Chief Jus-
ticiary of England. Ithas been a subject of controversy
whether, after the ejectment of Stephen de Segrave from
the office of Chief Justiciary of England in 18 H. IL, &
suecessor to him in that high office was appointed or
not, and the better opinion would seem to be, that in the
interval from April, 18 H. III. (1234), until the Parlia-
ment met at Oxford in June, 42 H. III. (1258), there
was no Chief Justiciary of England. A single chronicler,
Fabyan, states that John Mansel, Provost of Beverley, was
made * Chefe Justyce of Englande" in 1257, and that
in that capacity he was one of the twelve peers appointed
on the King's part to confer with the twelve peers ap-
pointed on the part of the Barons. Mr. Foss, in his
Judges of England, vol. ii. p. 153, has carefully examined
this statement of Fabyan, and alleges good reasons for
not attaching credit to it. Amongst other facts he calls
attention to this fact in particular, that in a patent of
May 1258 issued shortly before the Parliament assembled
a& Oxford, and in another patent of June in the same year
issued shortly after the Parliament had dispersed, John
Mansel is described simply as Treasurer of York, whereas
the practice had hitherto been, in regard to the Chief
Justices of England, always to append in publie documents
the title of * Justitiarius Anglie " to their names. This
had been the practice in the case of Hubert de Burgh and
Stephen de Segrave, who were successively justiciaries
of England in the early part of the reign of Henry III.,
and was again observed when Hugh Bigot was appointed
by the Barons to that office at Oxford in June 1258.
However this may be, it had been a subject of frequent
complaint on the part of the Barons in ihe interval
between the ejectment of Stephen de Segrave and the


INTRODUOTION. xxxii


Parliament of Oxford, that the King, unlike his illustrious
predecessors, governed without a Justiciary, Chancellor, or
Treasurer. Matthew Paris cites several instances of
such complaints having been made by the Barons, and
of the King not having kept his promise to them. "The
result was, that at the Parliament assembled at Oxford,
in 1258, the Barons took the matter into their own hands,
and elected Hugh Bigot, Chief Justiciary. The title
* Justiciarius Ánglicze " came once more into use, and was
borne successively by Hugh Bigot,as above-mentioned,
Philip Basset, and Hugh le Despenser, and after the latter
fell on the battle-field of Evesham by the side of Simon
de Montfort, on 4th August 1265, there is no authentic
record of its further use. It has been thought that the
appointment, in 52 H. IIT. (1268), of Robert de Brus, at
that time a justiciary of the bench, to the office of * Capi-
* talis Justiciarius ad placita coram rege tenenda," marks
the dividing line, which separates the office of Chief
Justice of the King's Bench from the ancient office of
Chief Justiciary of, England. It is, however, deserving
of remark that the title of *justitiarius capitalis " was
in Bracton's time tlie general title of the judges of the
Supreme Court, the Aula Regis, of which the sittings
were always supposed to. be, if they were not in reality,
held * coram ipso Rege." .

Bracton has made two well-considered statements.as
to the diversity of justiciaries in his time, which seem
to deserve more attention, than they have received in the
controversy touching the constitution of the *justitiarii
* de banco" in the reign of H. III. "The first state-
ment, which he makes, has reference to the question in
what courts civil aetions are to be decided (Chapter VIL):
* But civil pleas, he says, * for a thing or against &
* person to be determined in the King's court, are deter-
mined before different justiciaries. For he has several
courts, in which different actions are determined, and
of those courts he has & special one of his own, as the


[1


«c


«


XXXlv INTRODUCTION.


* Kings Hall (Aula Regis), and Chief Justiciaries (Jus-
* titiarios Capitales), who determine the special causes of
* the King and of all others upon complaint, or through
* & privilege or a franchise, as if there be some one, who
* ought not to beimpleaded except beforethe Lord the
* King himself (coram ipso Domino Rege). He has also
* & court and justiciaries resident in the Bench (justi-
* tiarios in banco residentes) who hold cognizance of all
* pleas, respecting which they have authority to take cog-
* nizanee, and without & warrant they do not exercise
* jurisdiction nor coercion. He has also justiciaries itin-
* erant from county to county, sometimes to hear all
* pleas, sometimes to hear special pleas, or to hold assises
* of novel disseysine, or of the death of an ancestor, and
** todeliver jails, sometimes for one singly or for two and
* not more. Inall these cases the courts will be those
* of the King himself (curic:e ipsius domini regis), vol. ii.
* p. 161^ Having interposed a couple of chapters upon
the duties of judges to keep their hands clean from filthy
gifts, which corrupt the straight line of judgment, and
upon the duty of the King himself as the vicar of God
on earth, to separate justice from injustice, Bracton pro-
ceeds to warn men from seeking to be judges, before they
have learnt the law, lest they fall down from on high
in their endeavour to fly before they have got wings, and
thereupon he enumerates again the diversities of justi-
ciaries. * Likewise," he says, * some are chief (capitales),
* pérpetual, and supreme, resident by the side of the King,
* who are bound to correet the injuries and the errors
* of all the others: There are others perpetual, resident
* ai a certain place as in the bench (certo loco residentes,
* gieut in banco), determining all arguments respecting
* which they have à warrant, all of whom commence
* exercising their jurisdiction by taking an oath.  Like-
* wise there are others itinerant from place to place, as
* from county to county, sometimes for all pleas, some-
* times only for special pleas, as for assises and jails, and


INTRODUCTION. XXXV


* who begin to exercise authority without an oath, when
* they have received the King's writ of warranty. "There
* are also justices appointed for certain assises, two or
* three or more, who are not perpetual, because when
* their duty has been fulfilled, they lose their jurisdiction,
* vol ii p. 181." The total silence of Bracton in both
these passages as to the office of *Justiciarius Anglie"
is remarkable, &nd can only be accounted for on the
supposition, that there was no such high officer at the
lime when he drew up his statements of the diversities
of justieiaries, for the two statements may be regarded
as in substance identical. Considered from this point of
view, these chapters may be taken to have been written
before the provisions of Oxford were enforced upon the
King;inil258, when the office of Chüef Justiciary of
England was revived by the Barons, and the office was
then declared to be tenable henceforth only for & year.
'The silence of Bracton on this subject would be quite in
aecordance with the other facts specified in the Introduc-
tion to the first volume, as fixing the completion of Brae-
ton's work shortly prior to 1258.

To resume the consideration of the status of the justi-
 eiaries of the bench in Bracton's time, it may be observed
that the mention of justitia? de bamco occurs three times
in Glanville, by which term Glanville evidently meant to
describe certain justiciaries of the Curia Regis sitting 2n
banco; but in what place.the justiciaries sat on such
occasion has perplexed the most able of their successors
to determine. The increase of the business of the Curia
Regis by the frequent removal of civil suits into it had
called for an increase in the number of permanent justi-
ciaries towards the middle of the reign of Henry II., when
six justiclarles were appointed by the Council of Windsor
(25 H. IL) to try civil suits in the King's Court under
the title of *Justitize in Curia Regis ad audiendum cla-
* mores populi" (R. de Hoveden, ii. p. 190). Ranulph


xxxvl INTRODUCTION.


de Glanville, afterwards Chief Justiciary, by whose hand
or under whose directions the ^ Tractatus de Legibus"
was composed, was one of these six justiciaries. No
mention, however, is made in these statutes of any place,
where the six justiciaries were to hold their sittings
further than that they were justiciaries in the '* Curia
* Regis." There is, however, abundant proof that dur-
ing the reign of Henry II. fines or final concords, which
were the voluntary terminations of civil suits between
individuals, and which were probably introduced after
25 Henry IL, as there are none extant earlier than
28 Henry IL, were acknowledged at the Exchequer, when
they were settled in the Curia Regis at Westminster
and not on the circuits of the Justices Itinerant.

The Exchequer, however, in the reign of Henry II. seems
io have been & distinct. court from the court in which
the King himself presided, and the Chief Justiciary of
England was ex officio President of the Exchequer Court.
The author of the * Dialogus de Sceaccario," reputed to
be Richard Fitznigel, Bishop of London, son of Nigel,
Bishop of Ely, Treasurer of the Exchequer, and great
nephew of Roger Bishop of Salisbury, who organised the
administration of the Exchequer as established in the
reign of Henry L, describes the Exchequer Court, as it
existed in the time of Henry IL, and explains the mean-
ing of the term scaccarium,! that it signified a square
table at which the officers of the King's Exchequer were
seated, and over which a rich chequered cloth was
Spread, which was renewed at the commencement of


l'The word scaccarium" originally | money was paid and counted, and
meant & chessboard, when it came | where the tallies were cut, which
first into use at Westininster, and | were afterward sent up to the
the * scaccarium " was the table in | Upper Chamber to be counted and
the lower room marked out in | registered.

chequers or squares, on which the


INTRODUCTION. xxxvii


every Easter term. Around this table were placed four
benches, upon which the different officers of the Exche-
quer were seated, and amongst the occüpants of the
uppermost, bench was the Chief Justiciary, and at his
side were seated certain other justiciaries, whom it
pleased the King to nominate as legal assessors of the
court. Their business was to determine any doubtful
point of law, which might arise in settling the King's
aecounts with the sheriffs of the counties. In course of
time the table gave its name to the chamber, in which it
was placed, and the court, for it was a court of record
from' the earliest period, came to be designated the Ex-
chequer (ad scaccarium) in like manner as it had pre-
viously been designated.'*the tallies" (ad taleas). It
scems to have rested with the King, at the time when
the Dialogus de Seaccario was composed (23 H. II.,
to appoint such justiciaries as he pleased to be the
assessors of the Chief Justieiary in the Court of the
Exchequer, and it is not an unreasonable conjecture, that
. the justiciaries so appointed came to be designated *^jus-
* tciarii de banco," from the fact of their sitting on
the bench at the Exchequer table by the side of the
Chief Justiciary. These justiciaries were a distinct
body from the Barones Scaccariü. They were not jus-
ticiaries of the Exchequer, but only accidental members
of the court. When the change was made by the Coun-
cil of Windsor in 26 H. IL, under which six permanent
justieiaries were appointed to hear civil suits in the
King'*s Court at Westminster, those justiciaries seem to
have succeeded to the title of * justiciarii de banco,"
some of them being in fact justiciaries who had been
accustomed to sit as assessors at the Court of the Ex-
chequer, and the title having become in practice the
most honourable after the title of Chief Justiciary.
Ranulph de Glanville, as above mentioned, was one of
these six justiciaries before he became Chief Justiciary,


xxxviil INTRODUCTION.


and his *' Tractatus de Legibus, in which the term
justitiarii de baneo occurs for the first time, gave to
the term both currency and authority. So far there
may be little diffieulby in determining the origin of the
term * justiciarii de banco," and in tracing its earliest
use to Glanville. Mr. Foss, in his Lives of the Judges,
states that he cannot find that *justiciarii de banco"
are ever named in the reign of Richard I., although the
expressions * habet diem in banéo" and *qui venerunt
* in banco" occur now and iíhen in legal proceedings
during that King's reign. On the other hand, the term
justiciarii de banco is frequently used in the reign of
King John, and *bancus," like its elder brother *scac- ,
* carium," came in a short time to signify the chamber,
in which the King's justiciaries held their sittings in
Westminster to hear civil suits without the presence of
the Chief Justiciary. The Chief Justiciary held his
court of criminal justice within the Tower of London;
the Justiciaries .of the Bench held their court of civil
instance in some place or other within the King's Palace
at Westminster, and most probably in the Upper Cham-
ber of the Exchequer. The organisation of the *'jus-
* ticiarii de banco," as & body of justiciaries holding
permanent sittings at Westminster, dates from the
Charter of Liberties of King John, or practically it
might be said from its confirmation by Henry III. im-
mediately on his accession in 1216, under which it was
provided that * communia placita non sequantur curiam
* nostram, sed teneantur in aliquo loco certo. "This
provision is repeated in the second charter of Henry III.
in 1217, and again in the third charter of 1925. It
does not follow from this frequent repetition, that the
provision of the earlier charters had been altogether a
dead letter; the probability, however, is that the busi-
ness of the justiciarii de banco increased very much
after the introduction into the charters of Henry III.


INTRODUCTION. XXXIX


of two clauses, which had no place in the charter of
King John, under which clauses it was provided that
difficult points of law, which could not be solved by
the judges itinerant on their circuits, should. be re-
served for the decision of the * justiciarii de banco," and
further that assises concerning a last presentation should
always be heard "coram justiciariüs de banco et ibi
* terminentur."

The collection of Pleas published by the Record Com-
missioners in 1811, under the title of Placitorum Ab-
breviatio, are taken from the proceedings of the Curia
Regis, of which the Rolls were preserved in the Chapter
House of Westminster Ábbey. Mandates also.are fre-
quently found in this collection addressed by the King
or his Chief Justiciary to the other justiciaries, some-
limes to justitiarii domini regis de Westmonasterio, some-
Aimes to justitiarii de banco, sometimes to justitiarii in
banco.  Bracton also, in Chapter XL, de Actionibus,
" has handed down to us a collection of writsin use in
his time, which speak of justiciarii nostri apud West-
monasterium, justieiarii nostri de banco simply, and
justieiarii nostri de banco apud Westmonasterium ; but
Bracton has set forth no writ which speaks of *^jus-
* &eiarii in banco" Mention, however, is made in
several of the writs recited by him of *placita" and
* Joquele " que sunt $?» baneo. JBracton further com-
mences his Chapter XI. by speaking of the justiciarii
capitales in banco residentes, so far using & similar
phrase to that which Glanville uses, when he speaks of
final concords recited "^ coram justiciis domini regis in
.* baneo residentibus. There is no doubt that the term
* in baneo residentes," as used by both these writers,
is of the same signifieation as "in banco sedentes;" '
but Bracton distinguishes and dignifies the justiciarii
de banco, in the passage above referred to, by the
epithet of *capitales," as if they were personally of


xl INTRODUCTION.


co-ordinate rank with the justiciaries, who sat by the
side ofthe King to hear * placita coram rege," whom he
elsewhere describes as capitales, generales, and perpetui.
It would assist very much to clear up.the difficulty, which
arises upon Bracton's division of the King's justiciaries
into two orders apparently, namely, ^ justiciarii à latere
* regis residentes" and *justiciarii in baneo residentes,"
if the Lords Commissioners of Her Majesty's Treasury
would authorise that portion of the Tower Plea Rolls,
which contains the Placita coram Rege in the reign of
Henry III. to be printed and published. These Rolls
seem to have been unknown to the Record Commis-
sioners in 1811, who published the Plea Rolls preserved
in the Chapter House at Westminster, which are very
defective as regards the reign of Henry IIT. "The single
Roll of 18 Henry IIL, of which the Editor has been
enabled to publish a short report (swprá, p. xxi,) pre-
pared by Mr. F. S. Haydon, senior clerk of the Record
Office, is full of instruction as to the historical value of
these Rolls, which are not identical with the Chapter
- House Rolls, and which relate to some of the most eventful
years of the reign of Henry III.

It appears from the Plea Roll of 18 H. III. that two
justieiaries accompanied the King as he travelled from
place to place in that year. Mention is made in the first
instance of William de Radlegh and Godfrey de Craw-
combe ! as hearing pleas before the King at Tewkesbury
and ai various other places, and secondly, of William de
Radlegh and Robert de Rokele holding an assise of novel


! Godfrey de Craweombe is not | and is & subscribing witness in
mentioned by Mr. Foss in his Lives | 17 H. III. to the Act under which
of the Judges, but there is fre- | the Great Seal was delivered to
quent mention of him in Madox's | Ralph de Nevile, Bishop of Chi-
History of the Exchequer. Ho was | chester.
sheriff of Oxfordshire in 16 H. III,


scd


-


INTRODUCTION. xli


disseysine. Of Godfrey de Crawecombe little is known,
although his name appears subscribed on the Roll of the
Plea on the subject of special bastardy heard before the
King at Westminster on the Thursday after the festival
of St. Denis, A.D. 1234 (Appendix IIL). Robert de Ro-
kele, on the other hand, is known to have been admitted
& justice of the bench on July 6, 1234, and fines are
recorded as levied before William de Radlegh at West-
minster at various times between 13 Henry III. and
19 Henry III (1228-1235), from which it may be
inferred that at such times he acted in the capacity
of * justiciarius de banco" William de Radlegh was
a remarkable personage, and the Editor ventures to
suggest that it was under his auspices and those of
Martin de Pateshull that Bracton made so great a
career and achieved such eminence in the study of the
law.

Martin de Pateshull, during the time when Hubert de
Burgh was Chief Justiciary (1215-1232), held a very
high position amongst the justiciaries of the Bench,
being at the head of every commission of justices itinerant
to which he was attached in 9, 10, and 11 Henry III.
The earliest of the law cases cited by Bracton (fol. 364)
contains a judgment delivered by Martin de Pateshull
in the reign of King John on the Leicester circuit, the
date of which however is not supplied by Bracton. By
some accident this judgment appears to have escaped the
notice of Mr. Foss, who speaks of Martin de Pateshull
having been raised to the the Bench very soon after the
accession of King Henry III. He seems to have been
a justieiary of extraordinary capacity with a formidable
appetite for work, who was able to tire out his associate
judges on the circuit, not excepting even William de
Radlegh. The Fourth Report of the Public Records,
Appendix IL, supplies curious evidence of this fact in a
letter to the authorities a& Westminster from an associated


xlii INTRODUCTION.


justieiary, who had been designated to aecompany Mar-
iin de Pateshull on the York circuit, in which he prays
to be eased of his office and to be allowed to go quietly
away to his church in Yorkshire, for he says, *the said
* Martin is strong, and in his labour so sedulous and
* practised that all his associates, especiallp W. de
* Ralegh and myself, are overpowered by the labour of
* Martin de Pateshull, who works every day from sun-
* pjse to night." "This account of the untiring energy of
Martin de Pateshull is the more remarkable, inasmuch
as Wilham de Radlegh seems to have been a justiciary,
who had no disposition to shirk his work. He was &
native of Devonshire, and appears from Letters Patent
of 14 John to have been presented by the Crown to the
church of Bracton in the Archdeaconry of Barnstaple, of
which church Odo de Bracton was perpetual vicar. The
combination of these names is rather significant, more par-
tieularly if it be borne in mind, that William de Radlegh
was subsequently Treasurer of Exeter Cathedral, of which
Henry de Bracton became Chancellor. When and under
what cireumstances William de Radlegh was advanced

io the office of Justiciary at Westminster is not. known,
but we find him acting as & Justiciary of the Bench in
13 H.IIL, and he is recorded as taking fines in that
capaeity so late as 19 H. IIT. After that time we find
him employed by the King in 21 H. III. as his commis-
sioner to open the Parliament, when by his eloquence he
persuaded the Barons to grant the King a subsidy of &
thirtieth in return for his confirmation of ,the Charters
granted by him during his minority. Four years after-
wards,having meanwhile been appointed a canon of St.
Pauls, London, and & canon of Lichfield Cathedral, he
was elected to two bishopries in 1239, that of Lichfield
and Coventry, and that of Norwich. He decided to
accept Norwich, and was eonseerated to that See. Almost
immediately after this event the monks of Winchester


INTRODUCTION. xluü


elected him their Bishop in succession to Peter des Roches,.-
who had been dismissed some time before from the King's
service as Prime Minister at the time when Stephen de
Segrave was ejected from the office of Justiciary of
England in 16 H. ITI (1234). "Their election of William
de Radlegh made him obnoxious to the King, who sought
to force upon the Chapter of Winchester the election of
William de Valence, the uncle of Queen Eleanor. A
contest ensued thereupon between the King and ,the
Chapter, which lasted for several years, but ultimately
William de Radlegh with the aid of Pope Innocent IV.
and of Boniface, Archbishop of Canterbury, overcame
the King's opposition, but he failed to regain the King's
favour. He died abroad at Tours in 1250. The manner
in which Bracton speaks of William de Radlegh in
Chapter XXIIL, De Corona (fol. 144 b.), might induce
the reader to suppose that William de Radlegh had
been appointed Chief Jüsticiary in succession to Stephen
de Segrave, as Bracton cites & case in which the King
pardoned an act of homicide in a plea heard * coram
* rvege apud Windsore de quodam homine de Cocham
* eoram W. de Ralegh tunc justitiario " (vol. ii. p. 464).
The phrase **tunc justitiario" in its ordinary acceptation
might be here taken to mean * then Chief Justiciary."
The Tower Roll,however, of 18 H. IIL. comes to our
assistance on this occasion, as it contains the pleas
heard before the King at Windsor in that very year in
the presence of William de Radlegh and an asociate
judge, and we also know from other sources that final
concords were settled before William de Radlegh as a
* justiciarius de banco" in the next following year. It
would thus appear that the justiciaries, who accompanied
the King from place to place, &nd heard pleas brought
coram ipso domino Rege, were, as already suggested, inter-
changeable with those who heard pleas brought coram
Justitiariis in banco residentibus, and that they were
distinguished from the justices itinerant as being per-


xliv INTRODUCTION.


petui, whereas the office of justice itinerant, as such,
expired on the completion of each iter.

Bracton does not throw any light upon the exact period
when the system of judges itinerant was established. The
early records of the Exchequer show that there were jus-
tices itinerant in the reign of Henry L, and it seems to be
the better opinion, that the regulations made at the Great
Council of Northampton in 22 H. II. (R. de Hoveden, ii.
p. 87) were not made on the first institution of the office
of justice itinerant, but were drawn up with a view to
secure & more systematic discharge of its duties, which
were fiscal as well as legal The realm of England
was on that occasion divided into six circuits, on each
of which were three justiciaries. "Three years later the
realm was partitioned at the Council of Windsor into
four circuits, and à greater number of justiciaries were
assigned to each circuit. This constitution of the legal
circuits seems to have been maintained during the reign
of Henry II., and during the greater part of his reign the
justices itinerant held their circuits in the counties as-
signed to them once in each year. The duties of the
justiees itinerant were defined at the Council of North-
&ampton above mentioned after a scheme previously de-
vised under what is termed the assise of Clarendon
A.D. 1166. (R.de Hoveden, ii. p. 87, Rollsedition) "The
authority of the justices itinerant as thus settled was
amplified by slow and gradual steps under warrants
or commissions, which they received from the Crown, and
in pursuance of certain '' eapitula " or articles of inquiry
delivered to them on eaeh occasion before entering on
their circuits. How great had been the advance made
in this branch of our judicature in the reign of Richard I.
may be gathered from a comparison between the articles
drawn up &t& Northampton (A.D. 1176) and the form of
proceeding established inthe fifth year of King Richard T.
(A.D. 1193) during his short visit to England after the
eaptivity, which he had endured on his way home from


INTRODUCTION. ! xlv


the Crusade (R. de Hoveden iii, pp. 262-267). A further
advance may be observed in 10 Richard I. (A.D. 1198)
when * capitula" somewhat different were issued (R. de
Hoveden, iv. p. 61)  Abuses, however, seem to have
grown up in the system of justices itinerant in the reign
- of King John, as may be gathered from the Articles of
the Barons, who petitioned for a further regulation of the
judicial eireuits, namely, that two justiciaries should visit
every county four times in each year (Art. 8) for the pur-
pose of holding recognitions concerning novel disseysine
and the death of an ancestor and last presentations.
Burther they petitioned (Art. 42) thatthe justices, sheriffs,
and bailiffs should be persons who knew the law of the
land, and would take care that it should be observed. This
latter provision was of the last importance, inasmuch as
the justices itinerant were for the most part local notabi-
lities, who were associated in the commission with a justi-
ciary of the bench, and were selected not so much for
their knowledge of. the law as for, their knowledge of the
counties and of the cireumstances of each locality. The
petition of the Barons on both these heads was granted in
the Great Charter of Liberties, A:D. 1215 (Artieles 18
and 45). On the second re-issue of the Great Charter by
King Henry IIT, in 1217, provision was made that in
every county an assise should be held by the King's jus-
Uticiaries once in every year (Art. 13), and a further pro-
vision was made that if any matters were left unfinished
by them in a county, they might be determined by them
elsewhere on the same circuit, and if they could not be
determined on the circuit, they should be reserved for the
justiciaries of the bench, and be there determined. Hence-
forth it would seem that the visitation of the justices itin-
erant for general business was septennial until the reign of
Edward I. "This general complaint of the want of know-
ledge of the law on the part of the justices itinerant
throws considerable light on the motives, which induced
VOL. II. | d


xlvi INTRODUCTION.


Bracton to undertake. his great work, which he com-
mences by censuring the frequent audacity of foolish and
unlearned men, who ascend the judgment seat before
they have learnt the laws, and in the Treatise de Ac-
tionibus, Ch. VIIL, warns the justices against aecepting
bribes, which pervert the straight line of judgment.

It would appear that prior to the provision of the
Great Charter granted by Henry III. in 1217, that in
every county there should be one assise held in every year
by the justiciaries of the Crown for the determination of
certain classes of civil suits, & practice had grown up of
issuing from time to time commissions to justices of gaol
delivery. Accordingly we find that Bracton recognises
three classes of justices itinerant, namely, the ancient
normal class of justiciaries travelling from county to
county empowered under a general warrant to hear all
pleas, and two new classes of justiciaries, namely, justices
empowered to hear special pleas &nd to hold assises
of novel disseysine, and of the death of an ancestor,
and justices of gaol delivery, sometimes for one singly
or for two and not more (fol. 161). The writ of general
summons to attend the county eourt before the justices
itinerant (fol. 109 b.) will be found to retain in Bracton's
time the bishops and barons as in the reign of Henry II., but
it also includes, in addition to the knights and freeholders
and the representatives of hundreds and of townships, &
new constituency, namely, the representatives of boroughs;
the justices are also empowered under this general writ!
not only to hear all the pleas of the Crown, which have
emerged since their last Iter, but also all civil suits sent
down to them by the justices of the bench at West-
minster . No allusion, however, is made in the writ to


1 The same kind of writ of general | Series, i. p. 395), and is cited in
summons was in use in 17 H. III. | Professor Stubbs" useful work on
(Shirley, Hoyal Letters, Rolls | Select Cha rs, p. 849.


INTRODUCTION. xlvii


any articles or capitula, to be administered to the hun-
dredors, such as are recited by Bracton in the opening
chapters of his treatise de Corona.

The treatise de Corona, as already stated in the Intro-
duction to vol. i, p. xv, is entitled * De Itinere Justitia-
riorum in MS. Rawlinson C. 160, in which there is also
a MS. head-note to the same effect continued throughout
the treatise. lt may be observed that the MSS. of
Braeton for the most part are without head-notes, or, if
they exhibit any, the head-notes are in a handwriting
much more modern than the text. "This treatise com-
mences with directions how to hold a cireuit court, and
. themode in which Bracton cites the practice of Martinus
de Pateshull to deliver a charge (et proponi solent verba
ista per Martinum de Pateshull), immediately after the
writs have been read and before proceeding to any other
business, is suggestive that this part of the treatise was
eomposed during the lifetime of that eminent judge,
whose death is placed by some persons in 14 Henry III.,
but according to Bracton's authority could not have
happened before 16 H. III. (vol. i, p. 399). The Editor
was disposed to think, when he prepared the Introduction
to the first volume, that the whole of the treatise de
Corona might have been written by Bracton whilst
Marün de Pateshull was still alive, but two objections:
have since presented themselves to this view. One of
them arises on the pardon granted by King Henry III.
to the man who slew a burglar breaking into his house,
which, as narrated by Bracton (p. 464), is without a
date, but has been ascertained by the examination of
the Plea Roll of 18 H. IIL to have been granted at
Windsor in that year; the other is the reference in the

Chapters of the Eyre, to which we shall presently allude,


! Inthe fifth treatise of thefourth | * primo fuit observatum tempore
book, entitled * De Assisa Utrum," | * M. de Pateshull,? which impbes
Bracton uses the expression *sicut | that Martinus was at that time dead.


d 2


xlvii INTRODUCTION.


to the visit of the King to Gascony, which took place in
1243 (27 H. IIL). The latter objection is not of &
paramount character in the Editor's opinion, as Bracton
in arranging his treatises in their present order would
have reasonably inserted the most recent change in the
Chapters of the Eyre, and there is good reason for sup-
posing that his work was not completed in its present
form before 1257. On the other hand the reference to
the pleas heard before the King at Windsor (p. 464) has
all the appearance of being an original part of the text
and not a side-note, which has since been interpolated.
Bracton then goes on to describe an order of proceeding,
in which are discernible the germs of the grand jury and
ihe petty jury. After the charge has been delivered by
the senior justiciary, the justiciaries are to withdraw
into a private room with six or more of the greater men
of the county, who are called * Busones comitatus." "This
anomalous appellation of * Busones " is not to be met with
elsewhere than in this passage of Bracton, and it is &
matter of fair consideration whether it is not a miswrit-
ing for "Barones" Sir Henry Spelman says that he
had seen & MS. in which the word was written '* Barones."
The Editor has met with several MSS. which exhibit
* Barones," but * Buzones" is the reading of MS. Raw-
linson C. 160, which does not generally go astray, and
Braeton cites the word, as if it were à slang term ora
provineialism. On the latter supposition it has some
countenance in the Flemish word * boss," which signifies
& big burly fellow, and the word boss is used amongst
workmen in England to signify their headman or
director. On the other hand the phrase '* Barones comi-
tatus " may have been the counterpart of the correspond-
ing phrases of Barons of the Cinque Ports and Barons of
London, the former of whom are mentioned by Bracton
in the writ which follows immediately the Chapters of
the Eyre, and the latter term was used down to the reign
of Edward VI. to denote the leading citizens of London.


INTRODUCTION. xlix


After certain exhortations have been addressed to the
leading men of the county, the-justiciaries are to address
themselves to the serjeants and bailiffs of the hundreds,
who are to elect four knights from each hundred, and
these knights are in their turn to elect twelve knights
or freeholders, and to present them to the justiciaries,
before whom they are to be sworn io speak the truth.
Thereupon the justiciaries are to exhibit to these hun-
dredors certain * capitula" or heads of inquiry, familiarly
termed '* Chapters of the Eyre," to which the hundredors
are bound to make:a return, as the object of the inquiry
is to ascertain what, if any, encroachments have been
made on the rights of the Crown since the last iter, and
what, if any, abuses have crept into the administration of
the counties by the sheriffs. These inquisitions, however,
on the part of the justices itinerant were capable of being
much abused, and were in some cases so much abused in
the reign of King John, that the people dreaded the
visitations of the justices itinerant, and remonstrated
against their taking place oftener than once in seven
years. In this fact we have another key to the motives,
Which induced Bracton to undertake his great work,
namely, to supply a knowledge of the law to the justices
itinerant, at the same time as to enforce upon them &
sense of duty ; and further, as we shall have occasion to
point out in a future volume, to supply to the Justices of
assise, who under the Second Charter of Henry III. were
io visit each county once in every year, à competent
knowledge of the law in the subjects of novel disseysine,
the death of an ancestor, and other subjects, which Bracton
treats of in his fourth book. "The Chapters of the Eyre,
such as we find them in the printed edition of Bracton,
were administered to the hundredors with little variation
during the reign of Henry III. (Annals of Burton, Rolls
edition p. 337), but the scribe of MS. Rawlinson C. 160
has inserted after the Chapters of the Eyre, which alone
find a place in the printed book of 1569, two other sets of
Capitula, which are of considerable interest; the first of


1 INTRODUCTION.


these sets is headed "Item nova capitula de tempore
* regis Edwardi, filii regis Henrici tertii," and the second
* [tem capitula' tangentia prima statuta Westmonas-
* teriensia in anno regni regis Edwardi filii regis Henrici
* tertio."

These Capitula form no part of the original work
of Bracton, but the insertion of them in this MS., with
the special headings prefixed to them, serves to clear up
some historical difficulties, which ;appear to have beset
the Record Commissioners, when they published the
Capitula Itineris as * incerti temporis" in 1811. On the
arrival of King Edward I. in England, which did not
take place until very near the end of the second year
of his reign, (2 August 1274), one of his first acts was to
issue & commission of justices itinerant to inquire into the
state of the Royal demesnes and of the rights and revenues
of the Crown, and also into the conduct of the sheriffs and
other officers and ministers, who had defrauded the late
King and grievously oppressed the people, and we know
from the Annals of Winchester, Rolls edition, p. 113,
that the Parliament, which had assembled at Westminster
immediately upon the death of Henry IIL, resolved *quod
* nulli sint justiciarii itinerantes usque ad adventum
* principis, sed de Banco," in other words, that *no
* justiciaries should proceed on an iter until the arrival
* of the King, but that the sittings of the justiciaries in
* Banco should be maintained." King Edward I. accord-
ingly on his arrival in England issued commissions of
justiees itinerant on 11th Oct. 1274 for the whole king-
dom, according io the Patent Rolls for that year, and
the commissions in certain cases, as appears from the
print of them prefixed to the Hundred Rolls of that year,
published by the Record Commissioners in 1812, con-
iained only thirty-five articles, whilst the returns from
some counties exhibit answers to a greater number of
articles. This anomaly is explained by the first set of
articles in MS. Rawlinson C. 160, which are entitled
« Nova capitula de tempore regis Edwardi filii regis


" INTRODUCTION. | li


* Henriei tercii and which contain forty-one articles.
The six additional articles are also found inserted in
three MSS. of the Harleian Collection in the British
Museum. "The result of the returns made to these articles |
was the enactment of the Statute of Westminster the
First (3 Edward L). "This statute led up to à new ter
and to further articles of inquiry, of which the origin
seems not to have been aecurately known to the Record
Commissioners, who have published them also without
any date as * capitula incerti temporis." They are entitled -
in MS, Rawlinson C. 160, * Capitula tangentia prima
* statuta Westüi in anno regni regis Edwardi filii
* regis Henrici tercio." One main object of these articles
was to ascertain whether the provisions of Westminster
the First, more particularly those which prohibited certain
distraints of cattle, were observed. These articles have
never before been published in their original form.
They are in fact the articles, which were delivered to the .
justices itinerant in 6 Edward L, and not the previous
articles of 2 Edward I. as suggested in the Report of Mr.
Ilingworth, the Deputy Keeper of the Tower Records,
in 1812. Mr. Illingworth, as is well known, was both a
learned and & painstaking officer, and no reflection can
attach to him for negligence of research in this matter,
as the. MS. Rawlinson C. 160 was not accessible to him.
The * Capitula Coron: et Itinerum," which the author of
Fleta has collected in Chapter 20 of his work, are an *' olla
* podride," and throw no light on the subject.

Braeton in his third chapter commences his discussion
of erimes with crimes of & publie charactor against the
King's Majesty, such as high treason, the crime of forgery,
the.fraudulent concealment of treasure-trove, the taking
of wreck on the sea, all of which may, be said to concern
the person of the King. He next proceeds to consider
other crimes, which touch both the King himself, inas-.
much as his peace is thereby broken, and also the persons
of the King's subjects, such as homicide, rape, cutting and


liu INTRODUCTION.


wounding, murder, or in other words the slaying of &
man when none is present, the term * murdrum " having
been invented in the time of Canute the Dane, mayhem,
breaches of the peace by false imprisonment, or by rob-
bery, arson, suicide, all of which are felonies. All such
acts Braeton classes under the head of greater crimes,
which may entail capital punishment or mutilation or
exile, according to their comparative gravity.

He then proceeds in Chapter X XXVI. to treat of minor
crimes, which are the subject of civil actions, one of the
most serious heads of which crimes was the wrongful
distraint of cattle, which had become & great engine of
oppression in the reign of H. III. It had been a special
object of the Statute of Westminster the First to prohibit
distraeints being made upon animals employed for the
waynage of lands, and upon sheep, and the articles of
inquiry issued in 3 Edward I. (Appendix IL, p. 603) will
be found to be specially directed to ascertain, if the pro-
visions of that Statute on this subject were observed.
The latest case cited in this treatise as having been heard
before the King at Westminster at the Exchequer, in
46 H. IIL, is à complaint of wrongful distraint brought
against Peter of Savoy, the uncle of the Queen, on behalf
of certain of his tenants against his servants who had
levied à tax (tallage) upon his tenants, and had dis-
trained their cattle. Peter of Savoy avowed the act of
his servants, and thereupon an inquisition was directed
to be made, whether the talliage was justly levied or not.
The reference to the case of Peter of Savoy has caused
some perplexity in fixing the time when Bracton com-
posed his work, but the better opinion would seem to be
that the case of Peter of Savoy was originally a side-note,
which has been interpolated into the text to illustrate &
prineiple of law as applied by the highest court.

The omission of all mention of a * Justiciarius Ánglise "
by Bracton, although in the treatise de Actionibus
(p. 209), and again in the treatise de Corona (p. 524), he


INTRODUCTION. nu


 recites writs directed from the King to the Viscount,
which speak in alternative terms of *us or our Chief
Justiciary," is not without significance, as regards the
lime within which Bracton's work was completed. It
has been a subject of controversy whether, after the en-
forced retirement of Stephen de Segrave from the office
of Chief Justiciary in 18 H. IIL, any successor to him was
appointed under the title of * Justiciarius Ánglie." The
better opinion would seem to be that no justiciary
received the appointment of *Justiciarius Anglie" by
Letters Patent after the retirement of Stephen de Segrave,
until the appointment of Hugh Bigot in 42 Henry III.
(1261), so that there would be an interval of twenty-four
years during which the office of Chief Justiciary would
be, as it& were, in commission, and its duties would be
discharged, in respect of all formal business, by the senior
justiciary, who was in attendance on the King. Allusion
has already been made to this cireumstance, in connexion
with the attendance of William de Radlegh on the King,
in 18 H. IIL, when Bracton speaks of him as * tunc jus-
* ticlarius. Mr. Foss endeavours to establish an order
of precedence at this time amongst the justiciaries in
accordance with the order, in which their names are
recited in certain commissions of assise, but he is sensible
that his theory does not meet allthe difficulties of the
case. The probability is that when they sat $n banco
ihey took precedence of one another in order of seniority,
and that they attended on the King to hear pleas coram
ipso Rege according as it pleased the King to summon
them. It is not immaterial to remark that Bracton
designates all the justiciaries of the Aula Regis as
* Justiciarii Capitales," so that the summons of the King
io & justiciary of the bench to attend upon him per-
sonally to hear pleas coram ipso Rege may have conferred
on the justiciary an additional dignity, analogous to that
which a Puisne Judge of the Courts at Westminster
acquires in the present day, when he is constituted a


hv INTRODUCTION.


member of the King's Privy Council "There is, however, à
passage in the Annales de Wintonia, A.D. 1256, which
casts, as it were, a side light on the subject, * Erant jus-
* titiarii itinerantes apud Wintoniam post festum Sancti
* Hilarii, quorum Robertus de Wallerand fuit capitalis."
The phrase *capitalis," as here used, may either mean
that Robert de Wallerand was at the head of the com-
mission, or that he was & member of the highest order of
justieiaries. King Henry III. during the long interval of
twenty-four years, during which he personally presided
over the administration of the law without a Chief Jus-
ticiary,and during part of the time without a Chancellor or
3 "Treasurer, seems to have had' the assistance of several
very &ble justiciaries. The Barons, however,. remon-
. Strated frequently against this personal exercise on the
part of the King of an immediate control over the judi- :
ciary of the realm, as unconstitutional, and demanded the
revival of the office of Justiciary of England. lItmay be
presumed, therefore, that the Barons did not feel the same
eonfidence in the administration of justice, when a court
might be constituted of members selected at the caprice
of the King, as when a * Justiciary of. England" could
stand between them and the Crown.

How far the Barons had reasonable grounds for distrust-
ing the King in his choice of justiciaries is à point some-
what obscure in the history of the reign of Henry III,
but Bracton, as à representative of the justiciaries de banco
during the interval between 18 Henry III. and 51 H. IL,
leads us to suppose that the administration of justice had
not lost anything by the ejectment of Stephen de Segrave
from the office of **Justiciary of England" in 18 H. III,
and by the non-appointment of a political Chief Justi-
ciary, until the Barons obtained the upper hand over the
King at the Parliament of Oxford (42 H. IIL); nor again
after Hugh le Despenser, the nominee of the Barons, fell
on the battle field of Evesham by the side of Simon
de Montfort, until the separation of the courts at West-


INTRODUCTION. lv


minster into three high courts, two of which had hence-
forth each its own Chief Justiciary, and the third its Chief
Baron. Sir Edward Coke, in his preface to his Ninth
Report, styles Bracton * Curie de Banco Judex," whilst
Lord Ellesmere, in his argument on the Post Nati (State
"Trials, ii. 693), describes Bracton as Chief Justice. Both
of these statements may he reconciled by supposing that
the term *Justiciarius Capitalis" was at this time ap-
plied in a different sense from that, which it bore before
18 H. IIL., and in fact that the constitution of the Courts
of King Bench and Common Pleas under distinct, Chief
Justices in 52 H. III. was founded on a practice of some
standing, in recognition of which the patent of Robert de
Brus granted to him in that year, as head of the King's
Court, designated him for the first time as ** Capitalis
. * Justiciarius ad placita coram Rege tenenda," in the
place of the ancient title, under which the President of the
Curize Regis had been designated as *summus Justiciarius
* totius Anglise."

The Editor has been unable, in his survey of Bracton's
work down to the end of the Treatise de Coroná, to dis-
eover any leanings of partiality either towards the, King
or towards the Barons, unbecoming the equity of the
judicial character. "Whilst the administration of justice
was under the direction of Hubert de Burgh, as Chief
 Justieiary of England, which lasted from the grant of
ihe Charter of Liberties of King John down to the six-
leenth year of the reign of Henry III. (1215—1232),
although Hubert de Burgh administered justice with a
strong hand, he respected the spirit of the Great Charter
and of the Charter of the Forest, and thus we find
Bracton quoting * the Charter of Liberties" as furnishing
the rule, by which the coroner was to govern his inquest
in cases of homicide (p. 283). With the advancement
of Peter des Roches, who had been Justieiary of England
in the reign of King John immediately before the Great
Charter was signed at Runimede, to the post of Prime
Minister in 1232, and the appointment of Stephen de


lvi INTRODUCTION.


Segrave to the office of Justiciary of England in the
same year, the difficulties between the King and the
Barons may be said to have commenced. It here be-
comes interesting to see how Bracton deals with the law
of high treason, the greatest of public crimes, which he
discusses first in the order of capital crimes in Chap-
ter IIL, de Coroná. Having laid down broadly the duty
of every subject of the Crown (quilibet de populo) to
denounce the crime of high treason, he proceeds to con-
sider before what court it should be tried. * And then,"
he says (p. 265), *it is to be seen, who can or ought to
* judge, and it is to be known, that it is not the King
* himself, otherwise he would be plaintiff and judge in
* his own cause in & judgment of life or members or dis-
* inheritance, which would not be the case, if the com-
* plaint were made on the part of others. Likewise the
* justiciaries? No! sinee the justiciary represents the
* person of the King, whose post he fills. Who there-
* fore shall judge? Jt appears without preyudice to a,
* better opinion, that the court and the peers shall
* judge (quod euria et pares judicabunt), lest; misdeeds
* should remain unpunished, where there is peril of life
* or members or disinheritance, since the King himself
* ought to be the plaintiff in the action." "This opinion
of Bracton, which he advances with great caution, marks
an epoch in the history of our law of high treason. In
Glanville's time there was no other mode of trial of high
ireason than by wager of battle (L. xii. c. 1), except in
the ease where the party accused was above sixty years
of age or maimed, in either of which cases he was bound
to submit to the judgment of God by the ordeal of water
or of hot iron; but since Glanvilles time a cardinal
prineiple of the feudal law, which is embodied in the
so-called Laws of Henry IL! (xxxi. 3), had received &


l'This compilation, which was | reign of Henry I. (1107-1135), con-
probably the work of Roger, Bishop | tains the germs of an intelligent
of Salisbury, Chief Justiciary in the | system of legal procedure, which


INTRODUCTION. | lvii


solemn recognition in the Great Charter of King John,
: namely, the ** Judicium Parium," the right of being judged
by one's peers. 1i was & maxim recognised in the
* Leges Henrici Primi," *quod unusquisque per pares
* suos judicandus est. On the other hand, the Great
Charter of King John provided in the 21st article that
* eomites et barones non amercientur, nisi per pares
, * suos, eb. non nisi secundum modum delicti ;" but this
law, strictly speaking, only applied to cases of trespass,
notof felony. Bracton has no hesitation in laying down
thelaw on the subject of irespass in accordance. with
this provision of the Great Charter. *Butif, he says,
* the trespass has been grave and close on disinherit-
" ance, so that it may bring. on ransom (redemptionem),
* there the peers of the accused ought to be associated
* with the justiciaries, lest the King himself by himself
* or his justiciaries without any peers shall be both the
* plaintiff and the judge" (p. 267). .Whilst Bracton
affirms this rule of procedure as being undisputed in the
case of trespass against the King, he commends its adop-
tion on parity of principle, in the case of high treason,
thus leaning, as it were, in the matter of procedure
towards the Barons. On the other hand, as regards the
jurisprudence of the crime of high treason, he adopts
the whole doctrine of the Roman Law as to what con-
stitutes the * crimen lese majestatis" as well as the
collateral penalties attached to the crime, such as the
eonfiscation of the traitor's property on conviction, and
the incapacity of his issue to inherit. So far he may:
be said to redress the balance in favour of the Crown.
Further, in discussing the crimes of concealing treasure-
irove and appropriating wreck of the sea, he rests the
Crown's right in both cases upon the principles of the
Roman law, that treasure-trove and wreck are *res


has been the ground work of English | the permanence of our legal in-
. civilisation, and is the secret of | stitutions.


lvii INTRODUCTION.


* nullius" and as such devolve to the Crown in accord-
ance with the law of Nations (jus gentium), which has
superseded the right of the finder under the law of
Nature (jus Naturale).

After discussing the capital erimes which touch the
person of the King alone, Bracton proceeds (Chapter IV.)
to deal with the greater crimes, which touch both the
King himself, whose peace is broken, and the person of
the subject, who is slain or injured ; and here indeed,
in dealing in the first place with the law of homicide,
Bracton's intimate acquaintance with the Canon Law
has enabled him to treat the subject from the highest
point of legal science then attainable. Thus, in defining
the various species of homicide, having put aside the
discussion of spiritual homicide, he divides corporeal
homicide under two heads, as being committed linguá
vel facto.  * Linguá," he says, *tribus modis, scilicet,
* precepto, consilio, defensione sive tuitione; facto,
* quatuor modis, scilicet, justitia, necessitate, casu et
* voluntate. These distinctions were familiar to the
canonists of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, for the
crime of homicide was intimately connected with the sin
of homicide, and it was on the ground that homicide in
certain cases was & mortal sin, that the judge was held
not to commit sin in condemning to death a man guilty :
of such homicide, and in ordering his officers to slay
him. The question of necessity only arose, according to
Braeton's view, where the homicide was inevitable, when
* & man slays another man without any meditation of
* hatred, in fear and pain of mind, in delivering himself
.* or his property, where he eould not otherwise escape."
Here again Bracton stands upon the same platform with
the canonists with regard to homicide committed casually
(casu). Bracton follows the same line as the canonists
in distinguishing the circumstances under which it was
eommitted (utrum quis dederit operam rei licite vel


1 Decreti Pars. 1i., Caus. xxiii., Qu. v.


INTRODUCTION. lix


illicite), holding that in the course of lawful employ-
ment the act of homicide might be excusable, whilst in
the case of unlawful employment the act of slaying
would be culpable; and again as regards the former
case, although the work on which the person was en-
gaged. should be lawful, still if due diligence to avoid
the aet of homicide has not been used, blame will be
imputable (Decretal V. tit. xii. De homicidio voluntario,
: vel casuali).

Although Bracton's theory of penal law, as applicable
io the crime of homicide, may not be regarded in the
present day as perfect, it will be found that he has laid
the foundations upon which our English system of
criminal jurisprudence has been built up, and still rests,
and. when his treatment of the subject of the punish-
ment of crime is compared with the treatment, which
the same subject has received in Glanville's treatise, the
progress of legal science in criminal matters, during the
quarter of & century which intervened between the
reigns of Henry IL. and of Henry IIL, is little short of
marvellous. In explanation of this fact it must be borne
in mind that it was precisely during this interval of time
that the body of Canon Law, known as the Breviariwm


ezitravagamtéum, containing many older Decretals which:


Gratian had not collected, together with the later Decre-
tals from Alexander IIL to Clement IIL, was compiled
by Bernhard of Pavia. This Breviarium was framed
 &fterthe model of the Code of Justinian, and it was taught
in the law schools of Bologna, together with the Decre-
tum of Gratian. The work of the learned Provost of the
Church of Pavia, although it has been cast into the shade
by the subsequent and more complete Digest of the Canon
Law, known as the Decretals of Gregory IX., which was
compiled in 1234, was the first collection which received
the stamp of the papal authority, and Bracton must have
been familiar with its contents, for his:language is
frequently framed after the Decretals contained in it


lx INTRODUCTION.


(Decretal V. tit. xiv. $ 2, De Clericis pugnantibus). Thus
he lays down the law as to the punishment of accessories
to an act of homicide in perfect accordance with the prin-
ciples embodied in the famous Decretal of Alexander IIT.
addressed to the Bishop of Exeter on the occasion of the
homicide of Archbishop Becket of Canterbury: "Several
** persons," he says, p. 279, * may be culpable of homicide,
* just as one person ; as, for instance, if several persons
* have quarrelled amongst themselves in a conflict, and
* gome one has been slain among such persons, and it
* does not appear by whom nor by whose blow, all may
* be called homieciders, both those who struck him and
* those who held him with an evil intention until he
* was struck. Likewise also those who have come with
* an intention of slaying, although they did not strike.
* Tikewise also those who have not slain, nor had an.
* intention of slaying, but came that they might give
* counsel and help to the slayers, although their violence
* may happen to be repelled. Likewise not only is he
* ]iable who strikes and slays, but also he who advised
* how to strike or slay, because since they are not ex-
.'* empt from blame, they ought not to be exempt from
* punishment,  Bracton's exposition of the law on this
subject is evidently framed upon the Decretal of Alex-
ander III. (Decretal V. tit. xii. c. vi), and it must be re-
membered that in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries the
Roman Pontiff, when pronouncing his opinion on such a
subject, was the judicial oracle of Christendom. Professor
Güterbock, of Konigsberg, whose learned work on the
relation of Bracton to the Roman law has already been
referred to in the Introduction to the first volume, signals
out many propositions of Bracton in matters of criminal
law, which have their counterpartin the earlier Decretals
of the Roman Pontiffs. The University of Oxford, with
which an oral tradition connects Bracton as & teacher, or
at least à high graduate in the schools of law, was not
likely to lag behind the Universities of Pavia and of


INTRODUCTION. lxi
Bologna in studying the writings of the canonists on the
subject of crimes, and Bracton had evidently acquired a
familiarity with the most advanced teaching of the canon
law on that subject, which enabled him to develope a well
considered scheme of criminal jurisprudence for his own
country. So much for the sources whence Bracton de-
rived his principles of criminal law, but when he comes
to the procedure of the courts, and the execution of the
law itself, he takes his stand on the established customs
of the realm of England. Thus, for instance, he follows
up his chapter on the various species of felonies against
. the Crown, with a chapter on the office of the coroner
concerning homicide, and here arises a question whether
the so-called statute of Edward I. on the office of the
coroner was drawn up after the model of Bracton's Chap-
ter V. of the Treatise de Coroná, or whether Bracton's
chapter was framed upon the so-called statute. The
identity of Bracton's chapter with the so-called statute
of 4 Edw. I. is so striking, that many writers have laid
Stress upon this fact, as an argument that Bracton's work
was not completed in its present form until the early part
of the reign of Edward L, more particularly as no MS. of
Bracton's work is known to exist of a handwriting earlier
than that reign. MS. Rawlinson C. 160, for instance,
. Which the Editor has considered not to be surpassed by
any other MS. in the accuracy of its text, was written
some short time after 4 Edward I. But if Bracton's work


H


!'The Editor is disposed to agree
with the Hon. Daines Barrington
in regarding the document De
Officio Coronatoris as a body of in-
Structions for the coroners, and not
properly speaking a Constitution.
Itis not unlikely, that these instruc-
tions were drawn up in pursuance
of the Statute of Westminster the
First, ch. x. (3 Edw. 1.)), which
established certain reforms in the
election of the coroners. As these

VOL. II.


instructions for the coroners have
been retained in the last revised
edition of the Statutes of the Realm,
published by authority, they may,
without impropriety, be spoken of
in the present day as a statute.
The text of these instructions has
been printed amongst the Statutes
of the Realm, published by the
Record Commissioners in 1812, after
the text of MS. Harleian, No,


xu INTRODUCTION.


was nob completed in the form, in which it is presented
to us in the printed book of 1569, until Edward I. had
ascended the throne, it was completed by other hands
than those of Bracton himself, as there are documents in
the archives of the Dean and Chapter of Exeter Cathedral,
which show that a mass for the repose of the soul of
Henrieus de Braeton was being daily said in] that cathe-
dral before Henry III. had ceased to reign. It is difficult
to resist the conclusion, that the Statute de Officio Coro-
natoris (4 Edw. L) was framed upon the model of Brae-
. ton's Chapter V. de Corona, and not the converse, and
that Bracton's chapter has embodied the common law '
amended in certain matters of procedure by the pro-
visions of the Charter of Liberties.

Thus under the common law, as it existed in the
reign of Henry IL, the coroner had no power to allow
& person accused, either as à principal or an accessory,
in a ease of homicide to remain out of prison on bail
to await the iter of the King's justiciaries. In Glan-
villes time, however, a writ was issuable in such a case
to release the party accused on! bail (Lib. xiv. c. 3.) as
a matter of royal favour (ex regie potestatis beneficio).
Meanwhile great abuses had attended the exceptional
issue of such writs, and during the reign of King John
large sums of money had come to be required and to
be paid for the grant of a writ *De odio et atya," as it
was termed, in other words for a writ directing the vis-
count to inquire, whether the charge of homicide had not
been brought through enmity and spite. "The Charter
. of Liberties of King Henry IIT. (Article 36) endeavoured
to remedy this mischief by providing that such writs
should be granted gratuitously, and Bracton, whilst he
still maintains the limitation of the coroner's discretion
as in olden time, takes care not merely to cite the pro-
visions of the Charter of Liberties in Chapter V., $ 3, but
in Chapter VIIL, $ 7, to give the form of the writ itself,
which was to be addressed to the viscount on such occa-
sions. He adds, that & writ for an inquest of this


INTRODUCTION. ' ]xiii


kind, which was grantable by the favour of the King (de
gratia domini regis), ought to be denied to nobody, lest
innocent persons should be detained a long time in
prison. The inquest in such cases was to be conducted
by the viscount, with the assistance of twelve good and
loyal men of the county, and if it was favourable to the
aceused party, he might be released on bail to come up
for judgment before the King's justiciaries, when they
should next visit the county. In continuing his discus-
sion on the course of procedure in cases of homicide and
other categories of crime, Bracton treads on ground, which
is purely English, namely, on the customs of the realm or
of the counties as known to himself, or upon the decisions
of the King's justiciaries. We go back with Bracton on
the subject of harbouring fugitives from justice to the laws
of King Edward (the Confessor) and to the practice of
the Anglo-Saxon frankpledge (Chapter X., $ 2); we travel
back with him on the special topic of murder (murdrum)
to the laws of Canute, King of the Danes, where he .
initiates us into the mystery of Englishery (Chapter XV.,
$ 2); we are introduced by him on the subject of the
rape of women to a law of King Athelstane, of which
no other record has been preserved, and tío certain
singular laws of the Franks and the Anglians on the
same subject, and further, to the origin of the cus- |
tomary law, which was received in his time, under which
rape might be condoned by the woman consenting to
marry her ravisher. This custom he traces back to the
Franks in the time of King Robert under circumstances
of romance, for the narrative of which he has evidently
been indebted to some ancient French Chronicle (Chap-
ter XXVIIL).  Bracton further explains all the cere-
monial details of the Wager of Battle (Chapter XXI.) ;
the process by which a criminal is compellable to abjure
the realm, if he has sought sanctuary in & church (Chap-
ter XVI); the form of surrender to the Court of Chris-
tianity of & clerk, who has been cast into prison by the
e 2


lxiv INTRODUCTION.


secular power for any crime, and his subsequent degrada-
tion by the bishop, and in case of his apostacy his
committal to the flames by a lay hand, of which he cites
an example in the proceedings of the Council of Oxford
under Stephen Langton, Archbishop of Canterbury
(Chapter IX.) In fact Bracton enables us to survey
the whole field of the criminal law of the realm, and we
discern, under his guidance, how its procedure worked
independently of à Crown prosecutor, the mainsprings of
its action being & local centre in every county, and the
connecting links being the periodical visits of the King's
justiciaries. | Even in the case of homicide, except in
instances in which hue and cry had been immediately
raised, no one could prosecute, who was not a kinsman
of the person slain, and it was only in cases where the
prosecutor had died or deserted the wager of battle, that
the Crown was accustomed to interfere ez officio. Here,
however, as the King did not fight with his subjects, nor
had any champion but the country, battle did not ensue,
but recourse was had to the country (ad patriam), in other
words, the case was sent before a jwrata patrie, and was
determined by its verdict.

A brief allusion has been made to the privilege of
Englishery, which deserves notice as being & link, which
conneets the medieval $ystem of personal law, founded
on race, with the modern system of territorial law, which
.is universally aecepted in Europe outside the Turkish
Empire. The crime of murder, as distinguished from
simple homicide, was the slaying of à man when no one
was present, who could raise the hue and cry, and could
speak from sight or hearing as to the slayer or his coad-
jutors. Bracton deals with this question in Chapter XV.
According to the Anglo-Saxon laws in all cases, where &
man was found slain, and no one had raised the hue and
ery in pursuit of the slayer, the township, where the man
was found slain, was liable to be amerced.  Bracton traces
the origin of the distinction between the homicide of an


INTRODUCTION. Ixv.


Englishman committed under such circumstances, and
the homicide of a foreigner, to the time of Canute the
Great, when a fixed sum was settled between the King
and the Barons as. payable by the township, if the mur-
derer should escape after he had slain a Dane. It would
appear that in Bracton's time a practice had been esta-
blished in the interests of the townships, and with a
view to restrain the arbitrary power of amercement at
the discretion of the King's justiciaries, that in all cases
of murder it should be presumed that the person slain
was Frank-born (Francigen3), unless Englishery was
proved. Further Bracton proceeds to enumerate a variety
of cases in which the Anplo-Saxon law of murder was
no longer held to be applicable to the townships, and,
in illustration of the saeredness of local custom, he
observes that since in different counties presentments of
Englishery are made in different ways, it will have to
be inquired on every circuit from the commencement,
what is.the custom of presenting Englishery. ^ Here
we have an illustration of the peculiar character of -
English jurisprudence, under which a new law has been
from time to time grafted upon an old stock, instead of
the old stock being rooted up and a new law planted,
which might wither away before it could strike root.
The subject of punishments has not been overlooked
by Bracton. He warns the judge *to keep in mind
* that nothing should be done either more harshly or
* more remissly than the cause requires. For he ought
* not to affect the vain boasting either of severity or of
* clemency, but he should determine wiih & well weighed
* judgment according as each thing demands. In lighter
* eases he ought to be more lenient towards leniency.
* But in graver punishments.he should follow up the
* severity of the laws, tempered with a certain benig-
* nity. And punishments are rather to be mitigated than
* exasperated," Ch. VL, f. 105. And further, in order that
the judge should not be at aloss how to discriminate
between different shades of criminality, Bracton has


Ixvi


INTRODUCTION.


brought together all the learning of the Roman jurists
upon the subject of punishment in terms very much


akin to those of the Digest, l. xlviii,
xix. $ 16.


«€


ec


«c


e«


«c


H1


^
^


Laj
*


-
La


e
La


De Poenis, tit.
* Acts are punished," he says, *such as thefts,
homicides ; writings, such as false and infamous libels ;
designs, such as conspiracies. But these four ! kinds are
io be considered from seven points of view, the cause,
the person, the place, the time, the quality, the quantity,
and the event. "The cause, as in the case of & master
or à father, unless the acts exceed moderation, because
they seem to be applied for amendment, and not for
punishment, and a man is punished, when any one is
struek by a stranger through anger. 'The person is
doubly considered, of him who has done the act, and
of him who has suffered it, for serfs are punished on &
different scale from free men for the same actions, and
differently i in the case where one has struck one's lord
or one's pareníts, than where one has struck a stranger ;
also where one has struck a magistrate, than where one
has struck & private person. And in a similar manner
regard is to be paid to age. Pl«ce causes the same act
to bea theft or à sacrilege, and accordingly the punish-
ment is greater or less. Time distinguishes the robber
from the thief, and the thief by day from the thief by
night. Quanti? distinguishes the thief from the cattle-
lifter, according as the theft is greater or less, as if à
person shall have stolen à sow he is a thief, and if he
has stolen a herd of swine, he is a cattle-lifter. "The
event, as if with design and certain purpose a person


1 Dracton has omitted the catoe-
gory of Dicta, which is mentioned
in the Digest as the fourth element
of crime.

2 Braeton has also omitted the
ilustration of * Qualitas" which
is given in the Digest, * Qualitate,
* cum factum vel atrocius, vel levius
« ost, ut furta manifesta a nec mani-
*€ festis discerni solent, rixte & gras-


* saturis, expilationes a furtis, petu-
* lantia a violentia, It is pos-
sible that Bracton has designedly
omitted the illustration of ** Quality"
given in the Digest, inasmuch as
the English distinction of fürtum
manifestum from furtum non mani-
festum (ch. xxxii, S 2.) has no
affinity to the Roman distinction.


INTRODUCTION. 2o lxvi


* has done an act, such as homicide, or if eventually, as
* &bove, and aecordingly it will be either a felony or a
* misfortune.! 0

These are not speculative distinctions, nor are they
traditions of the Theodosian Code, which may have been
taught in the schools of York by Alcuin in the ninth
century, and of which some outlines were preserved
during 'the Anglo-Saxon period, and are traceable in the
so-called laws of Henry I. It is to the University of
Oxford, and to the teaching of Magister Vacarius, that
the introduction is due of an intelligent jurisprudence,
which proved itself capable of controlling that collision
of jurisdiction amongst the different courts, which was
the characteristic of England after the Norman conquest,
as of every other feudal kingdom. The reign of Henry
IIL, of which unfortunately the most valuable legal
records are not readily accessible, was especially the
period when a modus vivend?, as regards the due supre-
macy of the law, had to be established between the Crown
and the Barons. But it would have been a vain enter-
prise to have sought to bring the decisions of the local
courts under the review of the King's justiciaries, if care
had not been taken to qualify the justiciaries for the
proper discharge of their duties by furnishing them with
means of ready access to a/ store house of juridieal science,
to which they might have recourse, where there was
neither & previous judgment, nor an established usage to
guide them. ^ Under what cireumstances Henricus de
Bracton undertook the task is unknown to us. The
. fame of his work has somewhat suffered from the cireum-
Stance that the French tongue found its way into the
statute law towards the end of the reign of Henry III.?


ferent text from the Florentine toxt,

see p. Ixxxiii.
?'The Statutum de Seaccario,

which is generally assigned to. 51


! A collation of Bracton's Latin
text with the Florentine text of the
Digest, as now received, is sugges-
tive that Bracton may have had


before hi i if-
efore him on this occasion a dif. in the French language.


Henry IIL., is the earliest Statute


Ixviii INTRODUCTION.


and French also came to be the language of the text
writers on the law, of which we find instances in Britton
and in the fragment known as Fet Assavoir, published
by Selden as an addition to Fleta.

Strange to say, the burial place of Bracton, like the
burial place of the great lawgiver of the Jewish nation,
and the burial place of the great lawgiver of the Roman
people,! has remained unknown to us down to the present
day, not by the design of his contemporaries as in the
case of the Jewish and Roman lawgivers, but by the
neglect of a forgetful posterity. Dr. Prince, in his learned
work on the Worthies of Devonshire (Exeter, 1701),
terminates his account of Bracton's life by the observa-
tion, *The precise time of his death I have no where
* met with, nor the particular place of his 3nterment."

We will now proceed to draw aside the veil, which
has hung so long before the tomb of Bracton.

There was in the thirteenth century in the Cathedral
Church of Exeter an altar of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
which stood in the nave on the south side of the entrance
into the choir. It is beyond all reasonable doubt, that
the mortal remains of Henricus de Bracton, the Chan-
cellor of Exeter Cathedral, were interred in front of this
altar, which was known, as long as it remained unde-
stroyed, as * Bratton's altar." "The altar is said to have
stood under what was then the rood-loft, and is now the
organ-loft. The Dean and Chapter of Exeter Cathedral
have in their possession a deed of the year 1272, the
effect of which is thus stated in the calendar of their
documents, recently prepared by Mr. Stuart Moore :—
* No. 1846, February 1272. Stephen the Abbot and the


! Livy, xl. c. 29, gives a4 curious | stone-chest, supposed to contain
account of the supposed discovery, | the writings of Numa, was found
A.C.181, of the coffin of Numa Pom- | to contain MSS. of a character so
pilius under the Janiculum. "There | contrary to the received religion,
were, however, no human remains | thatthey were burnt by order of the
within the coffin, and a companion | Pretor.


INTRODUCTION. lxix
* Brethren of the Abbey of Marmoustier of Tours to Sir
* John Wiger, knight. Grant of the manor of Thor-
* verton, rendering yearly 61. to vwo chaplains in the
* church of Exeter celebrating for the soul of Henry de
* Bratton, formerly chancellor of the same church ; and
* 8s. 6d. towards the light of the altar, before which his
* body is buried, the four marks formerly due to us for
* & pension out of the said church being reckoned in
* that sum, and an acknowledgment of the receipt of
* 400 marks (less 8) of the goods of the said Henry de
* Bratton, deceased, and the goods of the said Sir John
* Wiger" There is also à deed in the archives of the
Dean and Chapter, by which the above-named Sir John
Wiger grants the manor of Thorverton to the Dean and
Chapter of Exeter * to have and to hold to the said dean
* and chapter and to their successors for ever, on their
* finding therefrom and appointing three chaplains,
* namely, two celebrating divine offices a£ the altar of
* the Blessed. Virgin, 4n the nave of the chwrch of Exeter,
* qn. front of which the body of Sir Henry de Bracton
* lies ànterred, for the souls of the kings of England and
* of the same Sir Henry, and in the third place for my
* own soul and for the soul of my benefactors. Let each
* of the aforesaid chaplains receive annually sixty shil-
* lings."? "This last-mentioned document is numbered


!The annual payment of six
pounds seems to have been in-
creased by the dean and chapter to
ten pounds before the endowment
of Bracton's chantry was swept
away. There are two entries in
the Valor Ecclesiasticus respecting
it, vol. ii. p. 294 and p. 297, from
which it appears that John Horne-
broke and John Solfyld, the priests
Of a chantry called * Bratton's
* Chantzy," received each of tbem
ten pounds a year from the founda-
ton of Sir John Wiger, knight.


.deed is as follows :


The Abbey of Marmoustier was at
the village of Saint Radegonde,
about threc-quarters of a league
distant from Tours. It was founded
in the fourth century by St. Martin of
Tours, and a relic called the Sainte
Ampoule, which contained the con-
secrated oil used at the coronation of
the kings of France, was there de-
posited. A porch only of the abboy,
one of the grandest abbeys in lF'rancc,
exists in the present day.

? 'The Latin text of the original
* Tenendum


—— — — — MÀ ——— — — —— HM — € —


Ixx INTRODUCTION.


No. 1848 in the catalogue above mentioned, and is under
the date of A.D. 1276. It is not improbable that Sir
John Wiger, who is mentioned in these documents, and
whose name appears twice in the list of the sheriffs of
Devon, was & kinsman of Henrieus de Bracton, or at
all events a neighbour. He resided at Broad wood-Wiger,
and was patron of the advowson of that párish, which
adjoins the parish of Bracton-Clovelly, between which
parish and that of Bracton-Fleming there is a friendly
rivalry, as to which is entitled to enrol Henricus de
Braeton amongst its parishioners. "The preponderance
of opinion amongst antiquaries is in favour of Bracton-
Clovelly, but the scale is weighted somewhat heavily in
favour of Bracton-Fleming by the circumstance that, Wil-
liam de Radlegh, who has been mentioned above as one of
the most eminent of the justiciaries, who adorned the bench
in the early part of the reign of Henry IIL, and who was
& protector of Henricus de Bracton, was rector of the
parish of Bracton-Fleming, and as such was brought into
relations of intimacy with Odo de Bracton, at that time
vicar of the same parish. Amongst the Patent Rolls of
the fourteenth year of King John there occur Letters
Patent of the date of 12 August 1212, under which the
King presents William de Radlegh to the church (that is
to the rectory) of Bracton, in the archdeaconry of Barn-
staple, saving to Odo de Bracton the perpetual vicarage.
"This reservation of the perpetual viearage to Odo de
Bracton serves to illustrate an early stage of a practice,
which became more prevalent in after times, and to
whieh Bracton himself alludes, fol. 241 b., under which


* et habendum dictis Decano et
* Capitulo et eorum successoribus
** in perpetuum, inveniendo inde ct
« faciendo tres capellanos, viz.
* quos divina celebrantes in altari
* beate Virginis in navi ecclesie
* Exon. coram quo corpus Domini


* Henrici de Bracton jacet huma-
* tum, pro animabus regum Anglie
* et ejusdem Domini Henrici, et
* tertium pro anima mea et bene-
** factorum meorum. Quilibet is-
* torum eapellanorum annuatim
** percipiat sexaginta solidos."


INTRODUCTION, [xxi


benefices in the gift of the Crown might be taxed by the
Ordinary for the reasonable support of a perpetual vicar,
whilst the other profits of the benefice accrued to the
parson (persona), who was an ecclesiastice employed else-
where in the service of the Crown, and not resident
within the parish." It would be rash to asserb that
Henricus de Bracton was a kinsman of Odo de Bracton
from the cireumstance that each had an identical sur-
name, but that Henricus de Bracton came from the
parish, of which William de Radlegh was rector and Odo
de Bracton was vicar, is highly probable. "There is men-
tion of Thomas, Robert, and Humfred de Bracton in the
Plaeitorum Abbreviatio, f£ 11, and we may be' certain
that William de Radlegh, who was treasurer of Exeter
Cathedral before he was advanced to the higher pre-
ferment of the bishoprie of Norwich and afterwards of
the bishoprie of Winchester, enlisted into the service of
the Crown many intelligent clerks from the parish, of
"which he was the rector. The investigation, however,
of the birthplace and genealogy of Henricus de Bracton
may be fitly reserved for a future volume. |

In aecordance with the deeds above mentioned the
memory of the burial place of Henricus de Bracton was
: kept alive for three centuries by a daily mass, celebrated
at the altar of the blessed Virgin Mary in the nave of
Exeter Cathedral Further, the statutes of the cathedral
make us aware, first, that Bracton's mass was the earliest
mass celebrated every morning, and. secondly, that the
gates of the close of the cathedral were not allowed to
be opened before the celebration of Bracton's mass.
The statutes of Bishop) Veysey! (1519— 1551) have a


! Bishop Veysey or Voysey was | accession of Queen Mary, when
twice Bishop of Exeter. His first | Bishop Voysey was restored and
appointnent was in 1519, but he | occupied the see till his death in
was ejected in 1551. Miles Cover- | 1555. . His name is one of the
dale was then appointed in his | earliest. names recorded id the
place, who was deprived on the | Register of the Society of Doctors


Ixxii INTRODUCTION.


special provision enjoining the members of the College
of Annivellars! attached to the cathedral to attend and
take part in the choral service of Bracton's mass. *'* Like-
* wise the chanters, called Annivellars, are bound: to be
* present at divine service and to perform the choral
* offices, to which they happen to be designated, and,


-


* after the first morning mass, called, * Bractom ys masse,


* 1s finished, to celebrate their masses successively and
* jin regular order, as has been hitherto accustomed to


* be done." ?


The provision as regards the cathedral close is found
in & statute of Bishop Oldham (1511): * We order


La


* further the gatekeeper of the close that he do close


* the gates and wickets from the feast of Easter up to
* the feast of St. Michael at nine o'elock, and from the
* feast of St. Michael to the feast of Easter at eight


.--


* o'clock, and that he do not open them afterwards


of Law, who established themselves
in Doctors Commons early in the
sixteenth century. "They were en-
titled at that time * the College of
* Doctors and Advocates of the
* Church of Christ, Canterbury."
The earliest date in the Register
Book of Advocates is 1511. The
Register Book itself is in the Ar-
chives of Lambeth Palace, having
been deposited there after the sale
of the property of the College and
the dispersion of its members.
l'The word *'annivellar" is a
corruption of *annuallarius," which
meant & chantry priest, who had
no eure of souls, but was bound
to chant annuals or anniversary
masses on the obits of deceased per-
sons, Mention is made of such
priests in 30 Edward I1II., cb. viii.
under the term** chantantz anuales "
as distinguished from chappelleins
parochiels, and also, in 2 Henry V.


st. 2. c. 11, as chapelleins annuelers.
Chaucer, in his Canterbury Tales,
makes use of the word in his Cha-
nones Yemanes tale: * In London
* there was a preest, an annuelere."
The annivellars or chantrv priests
attached to Exeter Cathedral resided
in à separate college, assigned to
them within the close next adjoin-
ing the sub-deanery, and these
buildings retained at the commencc-
ment of the present century the
name of * tbe Annivellaries Col-
€€ lege."

? [tem cantariste vocati annivel-
lariitenenturetiam interesse Divinis,
officiaque subire choralia, ad quc
ipsos intitulari contingat, necnon
post priman missam matutinam
vocatam ** Bratton ys masse," fini-
tam, missas suas successive et ordi-
natim celebrare, prout hactenus
fieri consuevit.


INTRODUCTION. Ixxiii


* without reasonable cause before the morning mass of
* Braiton, under a penalty to be fixed by the dean and
* ehapter."' "There was also a bell, which hung in the
south tower of the cathedral, which was called * Bracton's
* bel" and which was rung every morning to summon
the industrious population to hear Bracton's mass before
tliey commenced their labours of the day. In the Fa-
brie Rolls of the chapter from 1415 to 1416 there is
'" the following entry :—' Timber for Bracton's bell, 14d."
It is hardly necessary to say that Bracton's bell is no
longer in existence; in fact there are no bells in the
cathedral of & date earlier than A.D. 1611. Further,
in the inventory of the goods of the cathedral made on
the sixth of September 15006, which is still in the pos-
session of the Dean and Chapter, there is & statement
of the goods belonging to Bratton's altar, altare Brat-
* ton," and in addition we learn from an inventory of
books belonging to the cathedral, made in 1327, that
Bracton was & donor of MSS. to the chapter. À cursory
examination of the volumes in the present possession of
the Chapter has not as yet brought to light any which
were the gift of Bracton, but the Bodleian Library at
Oxford may contain some MSS. which await discovery,
as the Chapter of Exeter gave eighty very precious MSS.
many years ago to the Bodleian Library. The original
catalogue of these latter MSS. is still preserved, but the
MSS. themselves are dispersed in different parts of that
vast library, so that the discovery of a literary relic of the
great justiciary, if any such exists, must be a work of time.
It is matter of surprise, and at the same time evidence of
the torpor, which had benumbed our cathedral institutions
ab thé commencement of the last century, that Dr. Prince,


! Precipimus ulterius janitori | Pascha: ad horam octavam, et eadem
clausm, quatenus januas et ostia | ultra non aperiat sine causa ratio-
claudat a Festo Pasche usque ad | nabili ante missam matutinam de
Festum Michaelis ad horam nonam, | Bratton,sub pena exarbitrio Decani
et a, Festo Michaelis ad Festum | et Capituli limitanda.


oec o.c 9 -— m co TES 00004), nc ms onc im EP Ptr OTI TREE T*


]xxiv INTRODUCTION.


in his carefully prepared work on the Worthies of Devon-
shire, London, 1705, has coneluded his sketch of the
Life of Bracton by observing that the place of Bracton's
interment is unknown, and * that it is believed that he
* was buried at or about London. Dr. Prince states,
amongst other facts, that Bracton was Archdeacon of
Barnstaple, but it does not appear to have occurred to
him, or he deemed it to be useless, to apply for in-
formation at the chapter house of the cathedral or
at the registry of the bishop, whereas the Editor has
sought information at both of those sources, and has.
received not merely a courteous reply to his inquiries, but
ample and interesting information from records kept
in the best possible order, and which have thrown
the most complete light upon the particular subject of
his investigation.!

Lord Chancellor Campbell has raised & question in his
Lives of the Chief Justices of England, which is not
merely of interest as regards the person of Bracton him-
self, but also as regards the legal profession, of which he
was so brilliant à luminary. *It would be à matter;" he
says, ^of the highest interest to know how & man, so en-
* lightened and accomplished, was formed during the very
* darkest period of English history, when the civilisation
* introduced by the Normans seemed to be entirely


.* obliterated, and when the amalgamation of races in


* this country had not yet begun to produce the native
* energy and refinement, which afterwards sprung from
* it; but while we have the pedigree, atleast up to the
* Conquest, and & minute account of the military ex-
* ploits, of those who were employed in desolating the
* world, we have no information whatever of the origin,
* and very little of the career of & man, who explained
* to his savage countrymen ihe benefits to be derived


l'The Editor has to thank Mr, | obliging assistance in procuring
Arthur Burch, the Deputy Registrar | extracts from the documents of the
of the Diocese of Exeter, for his | Dean and Chapter of Exeter.


INTRODUCTION. - Ixxv


* from an equitable system of laws, defining and protect-
* ing the rights of every class of the community, who,
" drawing his sentiments from the rich fountain of
* Roman jurisprudence, expressed them in the Latin
* tongue with a purity seldom reached by the imitators
* of the Augustan age, and who was rivalled by no juri-
* dical writer, till Blackstone arose five centuries later."
Such is the judgment, which has been pronounced on
Braeton's work within the memory of the living by à
great lawyer, who had filled not merely, the office of
Chief Justice of the King's Bench, but also that of
Lord High Chancellor of England. He was himself
perplexed to understand how PBracton had obtained
such à grasp of the great principles of jurisprudence,
which are amassed within the vast treasure house of
.the later Roman law, whilst he had:at the same time
aequired à complete knowledge of the municipal law of
England in all its titles, as i6 stood when he wrote. Some
few words may be not out of place to elucidate this
branch of the subject.

The origin of a school of learned lawyers in England
dates back to the visit of Theobald, Archbishop of Canter-
bury, to Rome in 1143. The Archbishop had been long
engaged in a series of harassing disputes with Henry,
Bishop of Winchester, the Papal Legate, and the brother
of King Stephen; he resolved at last to present himself
at Rome and to demand from Pope Celestin II his recog-
nition as * legatus natus " of the Holy See in right of the
primacy of his Metropolitan See. The Archbishop on his
arrival at Rome was not slow to perceive the great in-
fluence, which à new school of jurists, trained in the method
of legal study, which Irnerius had recently introduced in
the University of Bologna, exercised over the affairs of
the Church at Rome. He procured accordingly a collec-
tion of the works of the more important Gloss-writers,
and brought them back with him to England, aecom-
panied by a& pieked body of jurists, the chief of whom


]Ixxvi INTRODUCTION.


was Magister Vacarius, & Lombard by birth! — He esta-
blished Vacarius at Oxford, where he taught the principles
of the Roman jurisprudence to crowded audiences both
of nobles and of poor scholars, who flocked from all
quarters to hear him. * Tam nobiles quam pauperes ad
* eum causa discendi confluebant" are the words of
Robertus de Monte. Vacarius was promoted by the
Archbishop to a canonry in Canterbury Cathedral, and
he published à valuable body of extracts from the Digest
and the Code, sufficient, as he says, to decide all the
questions of law, which were discussed in the schools, if
& person only knew them thoroughly. His work was
entitled * Liber ex universo enucleato jure exceptus et
* pauperibus presertim destinatus." ^ Vacarius taught
at & period, when the text of the Corpus Juris Civilis
was not yet finally settled at. Bologna, and his object
being to adjust the principles of the Roman jurisprudence
to the eustomary law of the realm of England, he has
modified many passages of the original texts, which he
had before him.  Amongst the pupils and friends of
Vaearius was John of Salisbury, who was Treasurer of
Exeter Cathedral in 1174, and died Bishop of Chartres
in 1180. He has left behind him a work entitled
* Polieraticus, sive de nugis Curialium et vestigiis
* Philosophorum," Lugd. Batavorum, 1627. "This work,
which is full of citations from the Pandects, the Code, and
the Novelle, contains an exposition of certain branches
of the Roman procedure in language, which is conclusive
that the author had the original texts before him. — Fre-
deriek Charles von Savigny, no mean authority on such
& subject, considers this work to be & proof of the great
influence exercised by the new school of law established
at Oxford under Vaearius, Peter of Blois, who was born
at Blois in the middle of the twelfth century, and who,


1 'The story as here told rests on | There is a version somewhat dif-
the authority of John of Salisbury. | ferent in Gervasius Dorohornensis.


INTRODUCTION. Ixxvii


having filled the offices of Chancellor of the Diocese of
Canterbury and Archdeacon of Bath, died in the ungrate-
ful oceupancy of the unendowed office of Archdeacon of
London in 1200,! was & pupil of John of Salisbury. He
went himself to Bologna to study the law in that univer-
sity, and after his return he has given an account of the
mode, in which the study of the law was encouraged in
England by Richard, the Archbishop of the Metropolitan
See. *In the house," he says, *of my Lord the Arch-
* bishop of Canterbury there are resident men of the
* highest culture in letters, amongst whom are found the
* best qualities of the judicial faculty combined with the
* greatest wariness and prudence. They practise them-
* gelves regularly, after prayers and before the refection,
* jn reading aloud, in arguing, and in deciding causes.
* All the difficult and knotty causes of the realm are
* brought forward in the common hall of audience, and
* each person aecording to his order, without strife or
* objurgation, sharpens his mental faculties of advocacy,
" and propounds in a subtle view, what seems to him to
* be the wiser and sounder argument." We have here
the first germs of the system of legal exercises, which was
transplanted at à later period to the Inns of Court and
to the College of Advocates in Doctors Commons, and
which has tended so much to impart a scientific character
to the English civil, as distinguished from the criminal,
law. We must, however, make no mistake in apprecia-
üng the true value of the new studies introduced by
Archbishop Theobald. It has been customary to speak
of the study of the Roman law, as having been revived in


! Án interesting letter exists (No. | were 120 parish churches and 40,000
151) addressed by Peter of Bloisto | inhabitants. Vol. ii. p. 84.
Pope Innocent III. (A.D. 1199), in ? Petri Blesensis, Bathoniensis
which he complains of there being | Archidiaconi opera omnia. Edidit
no endowment whatever àttached | J. A. Giles, LL.D., Oxonii, 1847,
to the Archdenconry of London, | cf. Epistola Sexta, A.D. 1177, vol. i.
within which he states that there | p. 15.
VOL. II. f


€"


]xxviii INTRODUCTION.


Europe in consequence of the Pisans having discovered &
copy of the Pandects of Justinian amongst the spoils,
which they carried away at the sack of the city of
Amalfi in 1135. "Whatever credit is to be given to this
legend, whether the MS. of the Pandeots, which is pre-
served in the present day at Florence in the ancient
palace of the Republie, formed part of the Pisan spoils of
Amalfi, which the Florentines in their turn wrested from
the Pisans on the capture of Pisa in 1406, or whether it
was brought direct from Constantinople to Pisa as Von
Savigny holds to be the better opinion, the legend points
to the fact of & rivalry having sprung up in the twelfth
eentury between the school of law at Pisa and the youth-
ful university of Bologna, of which the origin dates back
to the privilege accorded to its schools by the Emperor
Frederick I. at the Diet of Roncaglia in 1158. The
legend of the Pandects having been discovered at Amalfi
has been demonstrated by Von Savigny to have had its
origin long after the sack of Amalfi, and it was probably
invented by the Pisans in their desire to maintain the
superiority of their text of the Laws of Justinian (Litera
Pisana) over that of the School of Bologna (Litera Bono-
niensis) Be this as it may, and whether or not it may
be justly asserted that the intercourse maintained be-
.Vween the southern cities of the Italian peninsula and
the eapital of the Eastern Empire had made the former
acquainted with the legislation of Justinian at & com-
paratively early period, thus much is certain that the
traditions of the Roman law, which maintained them-
selves in Spain after the conquest of that country by the
Visigoths, and in the countries north of the Alps, were the
traditions of the Theodosian Code, embodied either in the
Breviarium Alaricianum or in the Lex Romana Burgun-
diorum. The conquering hordes of Gothic and Wendic


!lBraeton most probably refers | secundum legem — Romnnorum,
to this * Lex Romana," when he | Francorum et Anglorum, fol, 147 b.
speaks of the punishment of rape,


INTRODUCTION. lxxix


origin, which overran the southern portions of the Western
Empire, equally with the Alemannic tribes which subse-
quently overran the northern portions, accepted the civil
laws of the people whom they conquered, and the Saxon
invaders of England were no exception to this rule, when
they established their supremacy over the earlier inhabi-


tants of that island. We have trustworthy evidence, in |


a letter addressed by St. Aldelm to the Venerable Bede,
in the seventh century, that * the marrow " of the Roman
laws was still being drawn out of them by earnest
students, and from a poem of Alcuin, in the eighth cen-
tury, we gather that the study of the Roman jurispru-
dence was at that time still maintained in the school of
York. But this jurisprudence was the jurisprudence of
the Western Empire, the jurisprudence in fact of the
Theodosian Code, which had been adapted by Anianus to
the use of the Visigothie conquerors of Spain, and had
found acceptance subsequently in the conquered provinces
north of the Pyrenees under its new name of the Bre-
viarium. "This compilation, which was a collection of
legal rules rather than of legal principles, was received
both in France and in England, and it served to keep
alive during the dark ages a flickering lamp of legal
learning in those countries, until the torch which had
been kindled by the teaching of lIrnerius at Bologna
flashed a new light across the Alps, and laid the founda-
tion of a new jurisprudence based on the study of the
labours of Tribonian and his colleagues. Vacarius initi-
ated in England the study of such branches of this new
jurisprudenee, as were in harmony with the principles
of the common law of England, and were calculated to
promote its scientific development. His teaching had its
fruits. But since his time a great master had sprung up
at Bologna, the most learned, as he is considered, of. the
Gloss-writers, namely, Azo, a native of Bologna, who pub-
lished à summary (Summa), as it was termed, of the nine
books of the Code of Justinian, and of the four books
f?


——M "——M à


lxxx INTRODUCTION.

of the Institutes. "This treatise was so complete and so
systematic, that it cast into the shade al] the labours of
his predecessors. Bracton appears to have been perfectly
alive to the merits of Azo's improved teaching, and lost
no time in selecting his writings as à subject of careful
study, and he quotes repeatedly from them.  Bracton
thus appears to have brought up his knowledge of the
Roman jurisprudence to the highest level of his age,
keeping in mind always, as regards his great work, the
principle of the school of Vacarius, that he should adopt
such parts only of the Roman jurisprudence as would
develope the jurisprudence of the English courts in the
spirit of the common law of England. In that spirit
Bracton may be studied with advantage in the present
day. Sir E. Coke speaks of Bracton in the highest terms
in the preface to his Eighth Report and to his Ninth
Report, but he does more than speak of him approvingly.
He cites the authority of Bracton continually, both in
his judgments and in his Commentary on Littleton. In
à word, as long as the law of England lives, the memory
of Bracton will never die. Such is the forecaste of Lord
Chancellor Campbell, who has pronounced the author of
the treatise *De Legibus et Consuetudinibus Anglis"
to be one of the greatest jurists who ever lived in any
age orin any country. That Bracton would not have
been able to accomplish so comprehensive a work with-
out official aid is the Editor's conviction, who is disposed
to think that when King Henry III assigned to his dear
clerk (dilecto clerico nostro) Henricus de Bracton, the
mansion of the young Earl of Derby, then an infant, for


! 'This eardinal principle of Aca-
demie instruction in the Roman law
was maintained at the University of
Oxford in the regulations of the
Professorship of Civil Law, form-
erly in force under the Laudian
Statutes. ** Professor Regius Juris
* Civilis bis item in qualibet Septi-


* manü &c. . . quamlibet partem
* Corporis Juris Civilis exponat,
* eosque precipue titulos, qui ad
* usum et praxin in hoc regno
* condueunt." Corpus Stat. Univ.
Oxon, 1768.

? Lives of the Chief Justices,
vol. i. p. 68.


INTRODUCTION. . lxxxi


his chambers during the minority. of the heir (Letters
Patent, 38 H. IIL), he not merely authorised him to
have access to the Archives of the Exchequer for the
Rolls containing the judgments of Martin de Pateshull
and Willielmus de Radley, and other justiciaries (Maddox
on the Exchequer, vol. ii. p. 257), but he also placed at
his disposal whatever means he might require to aid him
in reducing into writing the common law of England.
Such indeed was the true character of Bracton's enter-
prise which he modestly describes *as an attempt to
* reduce into a summary (Sununa) the ancient judg-
* ments of righteous men, to be commended to perpetual
memory by the aid of writing, requesting the reader,
* if he should find anything superfluous or erroneous
* stated in his work, to correct and amend it; or to pass
* jt over with eyes half closed, since to retain every-
* thing in memory, and to make no mistake, is an at-
* tribute of God rather than of man."

À. few additional words may not be out of place to de-
fend Bracton against the possible assaults of a superficial
eritieism. I6 will be obvious to persons familiar with
the established text of the Corpus Juris Civilis, which
1s in fact founded on the Litera Pisana, in other words on
the Florentine Manuscript, that Bracton's citations from
the Digest do not always harmonise with the text of the
Florentine Manuscript. They may,therefore, be disposed
in good faith to accuse Braeton of negligence, and may
even incline to censure the Editor for not having cor-
rected what they may suppose to be Bracton's mis-read-
ings. This, however, would be on their part a very
shallow view of the probable cause of the diversity
between a reading adopted by Bracton, and the corre-
sponding reading of the text of the Digest as now re-
ceived. It is open to grave doubt, whether Bracton was
ever acquainted with any text of the Digest, but that
known as the Vulgate, which differed in many respects
from the Florentine Manuscript. X The Gloss-writers


[11


xxxii INTRODUCTION.
for instance (Glossatores), of the school of Bologna, in
the age which immediàtely preceded Bracton, worked
upon à text known as the Litera Vetus, Antiqua, Com-
munis, as they could not readily get access to the Litera
Pisana, which was guarded at Pisa from publie inspec-
tion, under precautions as extraordinary as those, which
fenced in the original text of the Assises de Jerusalem
in the Treasury of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre at
Jerusalem. It is Von Savigny's opinion, and no higher
authority can well be cited, that the Vulgate text dif-
fered considerably from the Pisan text. Such also was
the opinion of Cujacius, one of the greatest masters of
medieval jurisprudence, who considers that there are
readings to be found in several existing MSS. which
do not altogether agree with the Florentine Manuscript,
and that the explanation of those diversities is to be
found in certain peculiarities of the Vulgate text. On
the other hand, the Litera Vetus, which was the text fol-
lowed by the Gloss-writers of the twelfth century, is
believed on good evidence to have been brought from
Ravenna to Bologna in fragments. The Code, for in-
stance, came in two separate parts. The first nine books,
which constituted 'the Code of the Gloss-writers, were
received in the Law School of Bologna, some considerable
time before the last three books arrived there, which
were known under the distinctive title of * Tres Libri"!
and have been commented on under that title by Placen-
tinus and by Pillius.?


! According to Odofredus, a con-
temporary of Bracton's, the diffe-
rent parts of the Vulgato text had
been originally brought from IRRome
to Pentapolis, subsequently called
Ravenna, when the Law-School of
Rome was transferred to thc latter
eity ; and at a much later period,
when Irnerius transferred his teach-
jug from Ravenua to Bologna, he
brought with him the first nine


books of the Code, and subsequently
procured from Ravenna the texts of
the Digestum Vetus and the Di-
gestum Novum and the Institutes.
? Pillius was the advocate of the
monks of Canterbury against Bald-
win, Archbishop of Canterbury, in
their appeal to Pope Urban III. in
33 H. IL, when the King supported
the. Archbishop. — Peter. of. Blois
was the Arehbishop's idvoeate.


INTRODUCTION. Ixxxiii


The Digest, on the other hand, was introduced at
Bologna in a dislocated condition, having been divided
at Ravenna into three parts, of which the first and third,
known subsequently as the Digestum Vetus and the
Digestum Novum, arrived in advance of the intermediate
part, known by the distinctive title of Infortiatum, the
origin of which term is not altogether clear. The
memory of these divisions of the Digest has been per-
petuated by their retention in all the editions of the
Corpus Juris Civilis of the fifteenth century, and in
many of those of the sixteenth century. These various
divisions of the Roman Law, to omit minor subdivisions,
were recognised at Bologna at the time when Azo wrote
his * Summa " of the first nine books of the Code and
his *Summa" of the Institutes, inasmuch as he also
wrote separate Glosses on the Digestum Vetus, on the
Digestum Novum, and on the Infortiatum, and Braeton
has made frequent use of Ázo's "Summa" in preparing
the first two books of his work. In one place, indeed,
fol. 10, Bracton cites the Summa of Azo by name, in
other .places he does not confess his obligation to it ; but
it has been aptly remarked by a jurist of the United
States that in Bracton's day *to copy what was deemed
* useful was noi considered plagiarism."

Owing to the great difüculties thrown in the way of
scholars desirous to inspect the Manuscript of Pisa!
before i& was carried away to Florence, A.D. 1406, the
text of that manuscript had less influence than the
Litera Vetus in forming the text of the Vulgate, which
history, better studied in the present day, authorises
us to call the Litera Bononiensis. "The manuscripts
of that century, which are reported to have contained
the Bolognese text, have all disappeared, and even its
existenee under that name had come to be doubted, when


! The term * Pandecte," as dis- | the Manuscript of Pisa to dis-
tinguished from **Digesta," was | tinguish it from other manuscripts.
appled by the Gloss-writers to


à
Í
»,
i
|
I


]xxxiv INTRODUCTION.


ihe researches of Professor Wenck, of Leipsig, brought to
light the treatise of Magister Vacarius, the first Pro-
fessor, as he has been termed, of the Roman Civil Law '
in the University of Oxford, in which there is express
reference to the Litera Bononiensis. It appears from
one of the Glosses on Vacarius, according to the authority
of Von Savigny, that the Bolognese text, as cited by
Vaearius in several parts of his work, was very different
from the Florentine Manuscript. It would, therefore,
be an act of some presumption to dispute the correctness
of any text quoted by Bracton as an extract from the
Digest, on the ground that it differs from the text of the
Digest, as settled upon the model of the Florentine MS.
subsequently to Bracton's time. The Vulgate text un-
fortunately exists no longer, at least no such text is
known to be extant, but fragments of a text different
from the Florentine Manuscript are scattered about in
various MSS. from which Cujacius on one hand and Von
Savigny on the other have pronounced a decided opinion
that the Vulgate text, which we may call the Litera
Bononiensis, differed very considerably from that of the
Florentine Manuscript. The latter text has been adopted
in the editions of the Corpus Juris Civilis since the seven-
teenth century. Under such circumstances the Editor
has refrained from altering the text of Bracton in passages
where Bracton might seem to have misread the Digest, lest
he should possibly be seeking to be wiser than Bracton
himself, and with a sciolistic self-complacency should risk
to destroy a curious relic of an ancient text, which is now
lost to us.

Another word of caution to the reader of Bracton
may not be inopportune. It will be found in several
passages of his work, more particularly in the two first
books, that Bracton frequently makes use of the text of


! Magister Vacarius, Primus Juris Romani in Anglia Professor. Lipsig,
1820.


INTRODUCTION. ]xxxv


the Institutes, and also of Ázo's text, without aeknow-
ledging his obligation to either of them, and thai in
several instances he has not adhered to the strict letter
of the passage, as we find it extant in the original work.
In such cases great caution is required in arriving at
the conclusion that Bracton has misread the passage,
which he intended to make use of. It has been an
observation of Spence in his work upon the Equitable
Jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery, and more recently
of Professor Güterbock in his treatise on Bracton's
relation to the Roman law, that Bracton, where he
makes use of the Roman law without acknowledging it,
reproduces Roman elements, which were in his time
valid law in England, and that in reproducing those
elements as English law he in some cases interpolates
& word or makes & slight addition to the text, whilst
in other cases he omits or alters & word, because it
did not precisely conform to the law, as received in
England. It would be unwise, therefore, for the student
to seek in alleases to replace in the text of Bracton
readings, which he may find in the Institutes or in Azo,
under the idea that the readings which he finds in
Bracton are wrong readings. It has been the Editor's
object to retain all such readings in Bracton's text as
are intelligible and are borne out by existing MSS.
although other readings may be suggested, which are
easier of construction, and therefore moré inviting. The
Latinity of Bracton is not always such as might be
desired, and his sentences are sometimes clumsy in their
strueture, and sometimes elliptical.

The lovers of antiquarian research may feel some
dissatisfaction with the Editorfor not having published
a * Variorum " edition of Bracton, in other words, an
edition which should exhibit the various readings of the
various MSS. The subject of such an edition was care-
fully discussed between the Editor and the late Sir
Thomas Duffus Hardy, the Deputy Keeper of the Public


Ixxxvi INTRODUCTION.


Records, and was after mature deliberation abandoned.
The Editor had himself been originally inclined to
publish àn edition of Bracton with the various readings
of the various MSS. which he might be able to collate,
but on inspectinyg more than twenty MSS. none of
which he could identify with any of the twelve MSS.
consulted by the Editor of the printed book of 1569, he
found the variations in the text of them to be infinite,
and where those variations were not caused by the
omissions of words, and sometimes of entire sentences,
they were for the most part structural variations,
which might be of curious interest to the bibliographical
antiquary, but were of little advantage to the scholar,
and of no value to the law student. The MSS, which
are written in a monastie hand, are for the most part
distinguished from those which are written in a curial
hand by the fact that they have been tlie subject of a
more scholarlike treatment in regard to. the structure of
the sentences, exhibiting a higher classical taste in the
arrangement of the substantive and the adjective, the
place of the verb, and the rhythm of the sentences, &c. ;
but these variations are evidently arbitrary and attri-
butable to the superior scholarship of the scribe, and
worthless except as evidence, that the Latinity of the
cloister was superior to that of the courts. lf there had
been only six or seven known MSS. of Bracton, and the
printed text of 1569 had been notoriously corrupt, a
* Variorum edition" might have been reasonably under-
taken, and might have been of interest to the scholar and .
of advantage to the student; but to have encumbered the
Rolls edition of Bracton with the fanciful amendments
of cloistered monks and the careless blunders of legal
copyists, to say nothing of the transposition of whole
sentences, which is a feature of many of the existing
MSS. would, in the Editors opinion, have served no
useful purpose, and would have encumbered the text
with a * Campana supellex."


| INTRODUCTION. (0 kxxvii


Mr. Brinton Coxe, in his annotations on Professor
Güterbock's work on the relation of Bracton to the
Roman law, published at Philadelphia in 1866, repre-
. Sents the views of men of letters in the United States,
as to what they would desire to see in & new edition of
Braeton, namely, not mere variations of the text, which
may not be without bibliographical interest, but a purer
lext, if it exists in England, than any of those which the
Editor of the printed book of 1569 had before him, more
particularly, he goes on to observe, as regards the inter-
polated reference to the Statute of 3 Edward I. in
folio 258 b. of the printed book of 1569. Such a desi-
deratum, is supplied by Manuscript Rawlinson C. 160,
and by that manuscript alone amongst those MSS. which
the Editor has been enabled to inspect. Further, the
same MS. supplies a reading, which supports the reading
of the printed book of 1569 against the conclusion of
Mr. Emlyn in à note appended to Chief Justice Hale's
Pleas of the Crown, vol. 1, p. 77. Mr. Emlyn, in com-
menting ón à passage in Bracton concerning the crime
of high treason, where the printed book, fol. 118 b., has
the following reading: "vel aliquid egerit vel agi pro-
* curaverit ad seditéonem domini regis vel exercitus
* sui," has remarked that in most of the MSS. of Bracton
the word in this place is *seductionem." "The Editor
has cited in & note to the present volume, p. 258, the
two Rawlinson MSS. and two of the best MSS. in the
British Museum as supporting the reading of the printed
book of 1569. "Twoof these four MSS. are in à monastic
hand, one being from the Archives of the Monastery of
bt. Augustine at Canterbury, and the other having be-
longed to the Abbot of Glastonbury. "The other two
MSS. are in a curial handwriting, one being in the Bod-
leian Library at Oxford, and the other being the Crewe
MS. in the British Museum (Add. MSS. No. 11,353), so
called by the Editor as having belonged to Sir Thomas
Crewe, knight, who was the King's Serjeant in the reign


]Ixxxviii INTRODUCTION.


of James I. The Editor has accordingly maintained the
reading of "seditionem " in the text of the present
volume, notwithstanding other MSS, the most important
of which is MS. Galeaezo in the National Library of
Paris, exhibit the reading *seductionem." "The Editor
is the more satisfied, that. the reading of MS. Rawlin-
son C. 160 is the original reading of Bracton himself,
from the circumstance that Bracton has evidently had
in mind the text of Glanville, who, in enumerating the
various acts of high treason, illustrates the highest spe-
cies in these words, *ut de nece vel sedtione persone
* Regis vel regni vel exercitus," l i ch. 11. "The Edi-
tor has thought himself called upon to add these few
words in further explanation of the grounds upon which
he has selected. MS. Rawlinson C. 160 as his "test
* manuscript," and in justification of his confidence in
that manuscript. He may add that his present impres-
sion is, that. the arrangement of Bracton's work in the
form, in which it has come down to us in the printed
book of 1563, was completed after Bracton's death, and
not before the reign of Edward I. On the other hand
he has not met with anything in the MSS. to confirm
Professor Biener's suggestion, that the Chapters on the
Law of Obligations, fol. 99, sq., are not Bracton's own
work.


T.
The Temple, 1879.


XC


INDEX


EORUM OMNIUM, QUZE IN HOC OPERE
CONTINENTUR.


LIBER sECUNDUS. Dk AcQquiRENDO RERUM DowiNIO.


Cap, XXXVII. fol. 86.
Page


1. De custodia heredum  . ; : 2
2. Item. de xtate heredum, eb dup de feodo
militari; In sokagio potest et debet re-
spondere, sicut petore . . : 4
9. De state foemine . 6
4. Si plures sint. domini capitales et unus te-
nens, ad quem pertinet maritagium hzredis — 10
5. Quod maritagium pertinet ad e


feoffatorem ; 12
6. De hzxerede sockmanni, sub us custodia esse
debet : . : E 4 . . 16


CAP. XXXVIII. fol. 88.


1. De maritagiis hzredum, et ad quem pertinere
debeat maritagium . 22

2. &i plures . et diverso hzereditates sint alicui
descendentes tam ex parte patris, quam


ex parte maíiris. 26
3. Quando feodum alieujus:  deliber ibus quod ad
dominum pertineat maritagium hseredis .: 28


4. Cum plures sint domini capitales, iam ex
parte patris, quam ex parte matris . . 80


xci


TABLE


OF ALL THINGS WHICH. ARE CONTAINED IN


jmd


THIS WORK.
THINGS,


CHAPTER XXXVII. leaf 86.


. Of the custody of heirs . A ;
. Likewise respecting the age of heirs, and in the


case of à military fief. In sockage one can
and ought to be a Voca as well as à
plaintiff


. Of the full age of à woman
. If. there be several chief lords, and. one "—


to whom belongs the maritage of the heir .


. That the maritage belongs to the most ancient


feoffor


. Of the heir of à SOS xinder liceo cus-


tody he should be


CHAPTER XXXVIII. leaf 88.


- Of the maritage of heirs, to whom the maritage


ought to pertain


. If there are several inheritances descending to


any one, as well from the tathen S side as
from the mother's side


. When the fief of any one is delivered: that the


maritage of the heir belongs to the lord


. When there are several chief lords, as well on


the father's side, as on the mother's side ,.


ThE SEcoNp Book. Or AcqQUIRING THE DOMINION OF


29


31


xeli


5.


b2


INDEX.


Cum autem maritagium petatur, refert quis
fuerit in seysina de hzrede, utrum do-
minus, vel extraneus


. Ád quem pertineat maritagium de ska ;
. Provisio, si quis hs:eredem subtraxerit


CAP. XXXIX. fol. 91.


. De donationibus propter nuptias ob causam


dotis, dotis constitutione, et quid est dos.


. Quse est rationabilis dos

. Quis possit dotem constituere
. Item quando et ubi

. Quot sint species dotis.

. Item de qua re


CAP. XL. fol. 96.


. Quod uxor vidua remanere debet in capitali


mesuagio per quadraginta dies post mor-
tem viri, donec dos sua fuerit ei assignata,
et de dotis assignatione post mortem viri


. Qualiter dos fuerit ei assignanda.
. Qualiter advocatio ecclesi? transferatur in


dotis assignationem, et qualiter non, et
quod aliud est dare ecclesiam et advoca-
tionem ecclesiz .


. Quod dos libera esse debet .


Page


80
82


90
. 98


HE OC» L9


TABLE.


. When however maritage is claimed, it is of


importance, who is in seysine of the heir,
. whether the lord or a stranger .


. To. whom belongs the EM in case of


sockage


. À provision, in case ds one hás abdusted an


heir .


CHAPTER XXXIX. leaf 91.


. Concerning donations by reason of nuptials for


the object of dower, the ads of
dower, and what is dower .


. What is reasonable dower
. Who can appoint dower .
. Likewise when and where dose sliuld be


appointed .


. What are the specific kinds of dower
. Likewise of what things dower is constituted .


CHAPTER XL. leaf 96.


. That the widowed wife ought to remain in the


chief mesuage forty days after the death of
the husband, until her dower has been as-
signed to her, and concerning the assign-
ment of dower after the death of the hus-
band .


. In what way dower ls to be Sd to her
. In what way the advowson of a church is


transferred for the assignment of dower,
and in what way not so, and it is à different
thing to give a church and to ET the ad-
vowson of a church


. That dower ought to be free.


VOL. YI. g


xl


Page
39
48


45


81
83


91
99


,


Xciv INDEX.


«5 Qo I O» C iR C9 b9 I


10.


LibBEeR TEeRTIUSs. DE ACTIONIBUS.


Cap. I. fol. 98 b.


. De actionibus, et quid sit actio. Unde oriatur


Car. II. fol. 99.


. Quid sit obligatio, et qualiter eonirahitur .
. Quid est stipulatio .

. Si fiat stipulatio sub conditione i

. Facta in stipulationibus deducuntur

. Item loca in stipulationibus deducuntur

. Quid sit judicialis stipulatio

. Si res plures in stipulationem deducuntur
. Quis non possit stipulari ;

. Cause quare invente fuerunt vipulaione


et obligationes .
De obligationibus quz nascuntur quasi ex
contractu .


. De traditione et junetura

. Per quas personas acquiritur elioxdid-

. Quibus modis tollitur obligatio

. Oriuntur obligationes ex delicto vel quasi


Car. IIL. fol 101.


. De prima divisione actionum

. Quas sunt actiones personales

. Quee sunt actiones in rem de re Wnnidbih

. Quse sunt in rem de re mobili, et quod oportet


apponere precium de re pun ;


. Quse sit actio mixta
. Quod quidam indidas sunt in | implum


eb sic


. De actionibus Geilibus in rem


co 00 *I C» Gv d» C5 tO rS


x C2 9 or


TABLE.


TuEe TuigD Book. CONCERNING ACTIONS.


. OHAPTER I. leaf 98 b.


. Of actions, and wbat i is an action, Whencee it


arises .


CHAPTER II. leaf 99.


What is an obligation, and how it is contracted
What is à stipulation


. If the stipulation is made under a bondition
. Áets are brought into stipulation


Places also are brought intostipulation .
What is a judicial stipulation .


. If several things are brought into stipulation
. Who cannot stipulate


The causes, why stipulations and obligations
have been invented


. Of obligations, which arise as it were from à


contract


. Of delivering and joining

. By what persons an obligation is acdtired

. In what ways an obligation is got rid of

. Obligations arise from a delict or a quasi-delict


CHAPTER III leaf 101.


. Of the first division of actions

. What are personal actions i

. What are real actions for an limmovsbls à

. What are real actions for & movable, and that


it is requisite to state & price for the thing
claimed ; : ;


. What is à mixed action .
. That some actions are for à single sum p and


So on


. Of civil actions against a hing , "I


gq
to


xov


Page


139
141.


xevi INDEX.


8, De actionibus civilibus in personam Dent
nascuntur .
|.9. De possessoria haereditatis nctiione. que diei
possit assisa nova disseysins .


Car. IV. fol. 103.


. Cui eompetant actiones quze oriuntur ex male-
ficiis, e£ contra quem
2. Cui actio injuriarum competit et contra quem
3. Cui actio quod metus causa et conira quem
4. Cui et. eontra quem competat interdictum,
quod vi aut clam
5. Cui et contra quem competat interdictum de
itinere actuque privato  . ; , .
. De interdicto quorum bonorum ;
Alia divisio actionum, si plures eompetant.
super una re, et una fuerit electà .
8. Si quis se retraxerit ab una, cum fuerit
electa ;
Actüonum tertia divisio.


bud


«Ic


fo


Car. V. fol. 104 b.


l. Ubi terminari debent actiones criminales  .


Car. VI. fol 104 b


1. De generibus poenarum, quibus homines
afficiuntur propter eorum iniquitates


Page
142


142


150


152


-I c


£o


].


TABLE.


. Of civil actions against a person, how they


arise .


. Of a possessory petition of an inheritance, whidh


may be called an assise of novel disseysine.


CHAPTER ÍV. leaf 103.


. Who are entitled to bring actions, which arise


out of a tort, and against whom .


. Who is entitled to bring an action for i mE


and against whom


. Who is entitled to bring an. eciion on account


of fear,'and against whom .


. To whom and against whom the interdici


** quod vi aut clam " is competent


. To whom and against whom the interdict con-


cerning a right of footway or of private
carriage-way is competent .


. Of the interdict * Quorum bonorum " :
. Another division of actions, if several are com-


petent on one subject, and one has been
elected


- If & person has abandoned one form of action,


after electing it . i
Á third division of actions  .


CmaAPTER V. leaf 104 b.


: Where criminal actions ought to be determined


CuaPTER Vl. leaf 104 b.


Of the kinds of punishment, with which men
&re visited on account of their iniquities .


xevii
Page


143


151


158


xevlli INDEX,


Q9 b9 rm


Cx E c3


e» C9 b9


Car. VIT. fol. 105.


. Ubi terminande sunt actiones civiles
. De diversitate justitiariorum . .
. Quee placita immediate placitari et idis


debent in euria domini, et rationes quare


CaP VIII. fol. 106.


. De et coram quibus personis proponende


sunt actiones et terminande


. Quid sit judicium et in quibus consistit, et


quod judicium judicis consistit in tribus .


. Quod quadruplex est munus.
. De potestate judicis à; : ;
. De divisione jurisdietionum sacerdotii et


regni


Car. IX. fol. 107.


. De regimine jurisdictionis, quie pues ad


regnum


. De sacramento, quod rex fücore debet i in coro-


natione


. Ad quod rex reatus. sit in ordinaria juris-


dictione


CAP. X. fol. 108.


. De jurisdictione delegata, quse ad justitiarios


pertinet


. De differentia justitiariorum à;
. De potestate justitiariorum
. Qualiter et quando finiatur eorum potestas e


jurisdietio .


C3 t9 HF


TABLE.


CHAPTER VII. leaf 105.


. Where civil actions are to be determined
. Of the diversity of justiciaries
. What pleas ought to be pleaded and determined |


immediately in the lord's court, and ihe
reasons wherefore , : . :


CmaPTER VIIL leaf 100.


. Where and before what persons actions are to


be propounded and determined .


. What is à judgment, and of what it consists


and the cdi of à sr consists of three
things ; : .


- That a bribe is s fourfold .
. Of the power of the judge
. Of the division of the jurisdictions of the pris


hood and of the kingdom .


CHAPTER IX. leaf 107.


- Concerning the regulation of the jurisdiction,


which pertains to the king


- Concerning the oath, which the king ought to


make at his coronation


- For what purpose the king has been ereated


with ordinary jurisdiction .


CHAPTER X. leaf 108.


- Of delegated jurisdiction, which belongs to


justices .


- Of the difference of ost on
: Of the power of justices . .
. In what way and when their power rand juris-


diction is terminated .


xcix


Page
157
161


163


165


1.


. INDEX.


Car. XI. fol. 108 b.


Qualiter constituendi sunt justitiarii ad itine-
randum de comitatu in comitatum gene-
raliter ad omnia placita vel specialia

De sacramento, quod justitiarii facient. cum
justitiariam receperint "EA


. Breve uni eorum clausum
. Breve omnibus justitiariis simul, quod erit


eorum warrantus, et publice legetur in
comitatu patens


. Breve de eodem omnibus justitia simul


patens


. Breve clausum vieccamibt quod venire faciat


coram justitiariis omnia placita


. Breve de generali summonitione clausum
. Breve cum ipsi justitiarii fecerint. summoni-


tionem nomine proprio et per breve suum


. Item omnibus quatuor justitiariss simul, ubi


constituuntur ad qusdam Tes et non
ad omnia placita


, Breve clausum vicecomiti, quod venire faciat


assisam


. Si autem tonii cdm DE quatuor milites Puoi


tiarii ad unicam assisam LAE novae
disseysinz . . . .


. Breve de eodem vieecomiti elausum, quod


venire faciat assisam ; : ;


. Si justitiarius banci solus eonstituatur, quod


assumat  . , j i " "


. Breve vicecomiti leu de eodem  . .
. Breve si de banco transferatur assis& usque


ad eomitatum ad certos justitiarios . .


. Breve elausum de eodem vicecomiti dirigen-


dum . ; : , ; ; : :


14.


15.


16.


TABLE.


CmAPTER Xl. leaf 108 b.


How justiciaries are to be appointed to travel
from eounty to county generally for all
causes, or for special causes


. Concerning the oath which the Vus


make, when they take upon themselves the
office of justiciary ,
A close writ for one of them .


. À writ for all the justiciaries together, which


shall be their warrant, and which shall be
read open in the county

An open writ to all the justiciaries together on
ihe same subject


. À elose writ to the viscount, that He eause all


pleas to come before the justieiaries

À. elose writ of general summons

À writ, when the justiciaries themselves have
issued à summons in their names and by
their writ .


. Likewise to all the four justieiaries together,


when they are appointed to hear certain
special, and not all pleas


3 e


, .À elose writ to the viscount, that he cause an


assise to come


. But if four knights be appointed io hold a a


single assise of novel disseysine .


. .À. close writ on the same to the viscount, that


he cause an assise to come .


. Yf a justiciary of the Bench alone be sppoiniad


that he may assume others.

A. close writ to the viseount upon the same

A writ,if the assise be transferred from the
Bench to the county to certain justiciaries .

À. elose writ concerning the same to be ad-
dressed to the viscount


Page


188


185


187


187


*. 189


191


193


195


201


203


17.


18.


19.


INDEX.


Si assis& transferatur & quatuor justitiariis
usque ad iter justitiariorum extra comita-
tum, cum in comitatu incepta fuerit

Breve de consuetudinibus justitiariorum ad
inquisitiones faciendas super contentiones
ad querelam ; "D

Breve vicecomiti clausum güper Sod


Car. XII. fol. 112.


. De modo et ordine proponendi actiones coram


justitiariüis, et de eorum officio .


. Breve, ne quis implacitetur sine brevi et prz-


cepto domini regis


. De ordine actionum
. Quod prius agendum est PUDE Bostuione


quam super proprietate


. De actionibus vi bonorum raptorum
. De ordine actionum in triplici


TRACTATUS SECUNDUS LIBRI TERTII.


DE ConoNA.


Car. I. fol 115.


. Qualiter procedere debent justitiarii in itinere


suo, et quo ordine


. Di sacramento duodecim militum dlestaruia ad


dicendum veredictum in placitis coronze


. Capitula de quibus duodecim respondere de-


bent .


Page


202


204
206


206


208
210


214
222
226


234


288


240


17.


18.


19.


].


2,


9.


TABLE.


If an assise be transferred from four justiciaries
to the circuit of the justiciaries beyond the
eounty, when it has been begun within the
county


À writ concerning the ET of the us.


claries to make inquisitions upon conten-
tions at the complaint of any one

À elose writ to the viscount on the same
subject


CHAPTER XII. leaf 112.


. Of the mode and order of propounding actions


before the justiciaries, and of their office


. A writ that no one be impleaded without a


writ and precept from the king .


. Of the order of actions
. That an action for possession takes ind


of an action for property .


. Concerning actions for goods taken by violense
- Concerning the order of actions in triplicate


THE SECOND TREATISE OF THE THIRD


BOOK.
CoNcERNING THE CROWN.


CHAPTER 1. leaf 115.


How the justiciaries ought to proceed on their
circuit, and in what order. ,

Concerning the oath of the twelve knights
eleeted to pronounce a verdict in the pleas
of thecrown  .

Articles — which hey ought t to an-
Swer.


Page


203


205


207


207


209


211


215
233
227


235


289


241


"m


civ


Ox HE Q2 bo FH


I)


INDEX.


Car. II. fol, 117 b.


. Breve de generali summonitione in itinere jus-


ütiariorum itinerantium apud Shipwey in
comitatu Kancii infra libertatem Quinque
Portuum. ltem capitula


. Breve vicecomiti Norffoleie et Suffolcis, quod


seiri faeiat hominibus in Jernemewe et
Donewiz


Car. IIT. fol. 118 b.


. De crimine lese majestatis et suis speciebus
. De crimine falsi et suis speciebus.

. De oceultatione thesauri inventi

. Quid est thesaurus :
Quid 8i& wreckum, et de noe Bises; 8. stur-


gione et balena.


. De assisis regni juratis, si non observentur ;


Car. IV. fol. 120 b.


1. De crimine homicidii et qualiter dividitur
2. Quid sit homicidium . : .

Car. V. fol. 121.
1. De officio coronatorum circ& homicidium  ..
2. De inquisitionibus, ubi occisus fuerit .
3. De attachiendo culpabiles  . ; : .
4. Si in campis vel in boscis . : : "
5. Si notus vel ignotus  . : i ; ]
6. Si oecisor fugiat .. ; . , ; ,
7. De submersis . : i deut ; : .
8. Que» sunt deodanda — . ; : .


Cap. VY. fol. 1229.


. De officio eoronatoris in thesauris invenlis .


Page


252


286


TABLE. ev


CHAPTER II. leaf 117 b. |
Page
1. A writ of general summons on the iter of the
justices itinerant to Shipwey in the county
of Kent, within the liberty of the Cinque
Ports. Likewise the articles. 258
2. À writ to the viscounts of Norfolk and of
Suffolk, that they should notify the men of
Yarmouth and of Dunwich. — . : . 2954


CHAPTER IIl. leaf 118 b.


1. Of the erime of high treason, and its species . 257
2, Of the crime of forgery and its species . — . 207
3. Of the hiding of treasure-trove — . à; . 2069
4. Whatis treasure .. 271
9. What is. wreck, and concerning great fish, that

is, sturgeon and whale : —
06. Of the sworn assises of the realm, if they are —

notobserved  . .. . . 275


CHAPTER IV. leaf 120 b.


1. Ofthe crime of homicide TC .. 255
2, Whatishomiedde . . . . . . —


CHAPTER V. leaf 1921.


1. Ofthe office of coroners coneerning homicide . 281
2. Concerning the inquests, where he has been


slain . . . . e —
3. Of attaching the eulpable & o0 0 d — uw 89
*. Ifinfieldsorin woods . . . . . —
9. If known, or unknown . . |. .  . 285
6. Iftheslayerhasrunaway .. . . . —
7. Concerning the drowned E. 4 e x 45x
$. Whataredeodand —.  . . . . 287


CHAPTER VI. leaf 192.
l1. Of the office of the coroner in treasure-trove . 9287


MT


-— o —


|


INDEX.


Car. VIL. fol. 122.


. De officio coronatorum in. raptu virginum


Car. VIII. fol. 122 b.


. De officio coronatorum de pace et plagis

. De officio vicecomitis in appello de pace, et
plagis amensurandis .

. S8 plaga periculosa sit, ponantur appellati in
prisonam, nec sint per plegios dimittendi,
sed videndum, in cujus prisona sunt cus-
todiendi, s. in prisona illius, qui habet
potestatem judicandi.

. De probatore et socke et sacke ;
. Quod prisones non debent de terris suis dis-
seysiri, sed inde debent sustentari :
. De inquisitione facienda, utrum appellati sunt
odio et atia

. Breve de inquisitione '

. Si per inquisitionem culpabilis inveniatur

. 9i non sit culpabilis, dimittatur per plegios .
. Aliud breve de eodem

. Sài eaptus infra libertatem et dilata fuerit
deliberatio et captor attachiatur, quod sit
ad respondendum, quare talem cepit et
imprisonavit


Car. IX. fol 123.


. De clerico imprisonato
. Cum in curia Christianitatis defecerit in
purgatione, et si apostata fuerit


Page
288


300


TABLE.


CHAPTER VII. leaf 122.


1. Of the office of coroners in the rape of
'  virgins |


CHAPTER VIIJ. leaf 122 b.
1. Of the office of the coroner EL peace
and blows .
2. Of the office of the sheriff j in an aono on con-
cerning peace, and in measuring wounds
3. If the blow be dangerous, let the accused
parties be placed in prison, nor are they to
be released on sureties, but itis to be seen
in whose prison they are to be kept in cus-
tody, that is, in the prison of him who has
the power of judging.
4. Concerning an approver and soeko and sacke .
5. That prisoners ought not to be disseysed of
. their lands, but ought to be sustained out
ofthem  .
6. Of holding an indniution whether they are
accused through enmity or hatred ;
7. Writofinquisition. — .
8. If by the inquisition he should be found eul-
pable . à
3. If he be not culpable, le& him be dismissed on
sureties . ;
10. Another writ on the same 6 'pubject CH
ll. If he has been seized within a franchise, ánd
his release has been deferred, and the seizor
is attached, that he be ready to answer why
he has seized and imprisoned such a person


CHAPTER IX. leaf 123.
l. Concerning a clerk cast into prison
2. When in the court of Christianity he has failed


to purge himself, and if he shall be an ud
State . j


cvii


eviii INDEX.


3. Breve, si ordinarius noluerit ei purgationem
inducere, cum sit ei liberatus :
4. De custodia reorum, qui sunt in prisonam
mittendi, et qui per plegios dimittendi, et
de carceris fractione : . ;


Car. X. fol 124.


Page


300 .


302


1. De criminosis, qui statim fugiunt post felo-


niam, et tune qualiter secta fieri debeat
post tales, et quorum quidam sunt in
franco plegio, et quidam de ES OA
alicujus

2. Quod prima nocte D poteri uncuth, se-
cunda vero gust, tertia nocte hoghene-


hyne . L LI LI 9


Car. XI. fol 125.


]. Qualiter reus criminosus sib requirendus, et
si non veniat, qualiter utlagandus

2. Cum malefactor fugam ceperit, , qualiter inter-
rogandus erit in eomitatu, et de comitatu in


comitatum, et qui sequi debeant et possunt :


3. In quibus mulier habet appellum .

4. Quis utlagari possit et debeat :

5. Quod aliquis non possit utlagari, qui infra
duodecim annos fuerit, et quod foemina
non potest utlagari, sed weyviari

6. Qualiter quis sequi debeat, et Tus comi-
tatus : , i

7. De secta non rite facia.

8. Si sectam resumere voluerit, sine secta non
procedatur ad utlagationem : :


302


306


TABLE.


3. Writ, if the ordinary is unwilling to impose
upon him a purgation ;

4. Of the custody of the property of diode. who
are to be sent to prison, and of those who
are to be released on $ureties, and concern-


ing prison breaking .


CHAPTER X. leaf 124.


1. Of criminous persons who take to flight im-
mediately after a felony, and then how
pursuit is to be made after them, and some
of whom are in frankpledge, and some are
members of a household  .

2. That on the first night he may be called un-

 euth, but on the second gust, on the third
night hoghenehyne . -


CmHaPTER XI. leaf 125 b.


l In whàt way & criminous defendant is to be
required, and if he does not come, in what
way he is to be outlawed .

2. When a malefaetor has taken flight, in "what
way he is to be sought for in the county,
and from county to county, and who ane
and may pursue him .

3. In what cases à woman has a right of accusing

*. Who may and ought to be outlawed

5. T'hata person cannot be outlawed, who is of less
than twelve years of age, and that a woman
cannot be outlawed, but may be waived

0. In what way a person ought to sue, and at
how many county courts

7. Concerning a suit not duly made . ;

S. If he is. willing to resume the suit, let no 9 pro-
ceedings to Vaid take Iu without &
suit . ,

VOL, 1I, h


cix,
Page


301


303


300


ex


CO) Ov d» 95 bo H2


13.


14.


INDEX.


Car. XIX. fol. 126 b.


. De causa utlagationis vera et presumpltiva .


Si vulneratus curari noluerit, cum possit


. Item eausa presumpliva

. Si nulla subfuit causa . : k

. Si eausa non sit periculosa . .
. Si quis fuerit utlagatus ob nullam causam


vel minus rationabilem, ei gratia est
major quantum ad inlagationem


. Item potest utlagatio pronunciari nulla, et;


fiat breve regis super hoc, et nulla dici
poterit multis rationibus


. Quse. dici poterit nulla, et, quibus rationibus,


quia minus rite facta


. Item tam ille de fortia, quam ille de facto


fugerint, et ntlagatur quis tam propter
factum quam propter fortiam, et contrario


. Qualiter et quando pronuntiari debet utla-


garia de facto, et quando de fortia, an
statim et eodem die diversa opinio


. Si ille de forcia presens sit, et ille. de facto


fugerit, vel si uterque i .


. Si quis in quarto comitatu velit oanncapere,


non audietur
Ile de fortia non est interrogandus, donec
factum eonvineatur . :
Cum uterque presens fuerit, et ille de facto
convietus, qualiter sit procedendum con-
tra illum de fortia


324


. :936


C» €x


TABLE.


CHAPTER XII. leaf 126 b.


. Of à true and of & DES eause of out-


lawry


. If & wounded von will not, when. he can, be


lreated for his cure


. Likewise à presumptive cause

. If there be no substantive cause
. If the cause be not dangerous . à .
. If à person has been outlawed for no Rud or


an unreasonable cause, more grace should
be shown to him as regards inlawing.him


null, and a royal writ may be issued thereon,
and it may be declared null for many
reasons


. What may be callod null and in what WAys,


because it has been unduly made


. Likewise as well one accused of being an ac-


cessory, as of being a principal, if they run
away, and a person is outlawed on account
as well of being an aecessory as of being &
principal, and the contrary


10. How and when ought outlawry to be proclaimed


against a principal, and when againstan ac-
cessory ; whether forthwith and on the same
day opinions differ


1l. If he who is accused as an accessory is present,


12. Tf


&nd he who is accused as & principal has
taken flight, or if each has done so

any one wishes to give bail at the fourth
county: court .

e accessory is not to be interrogated, until
the act has been proved


14. But when each is present, and the ER is


convicted, how proceedings are to be taken
against the accessory
h 9


exi


. 925
. Likewise the outlawry may be pronounced


931


333


exi


pd


00 -I O» C i» 05 r$


16.


17.


INDEX.


Car. XIII. fol. 121 b.


. Quid utlagatus forisfaciat per utlagationem,


et utlaugh dicitur frendlesman


. Cum-utlaugh qui scienter talem rocoptaverit
. Si fugerit, et se defenderit


Si nec fugerit, nec se defenderit .


. Quod sola fuga non inducit .


Forisfacit, quee juris sunt


. Item forisfacit. actionem ]
. Item dissolvit donationes, vanditiones. et om-


nes contractus, et obligationes .


. Quod quaedam catalla sua sunt domini idle
. Si terram liberam habuerit, statim capiatur


in manum domini regis per unum annum
et unum diem .


. Cum autem post annum et diem terra non


fuerit domino capitali restituta, ad quere-
lam veri domini fiat vicecomiti tale breve


. Faeta inquisitione de restituenda terra do-


mino capitali


. Aliud breve de eadem, de restinerdü —
. Si terra data in maritagium cum filia ali-


eujus de hsereditate materna extiterit in
manu domini regis per annum et diem
per feloniam, quam vir ipsius filie fecit,
breve de restituenda .


. Breve, si rex alienaverit infra torii


suum, vel ballivi sui

Item aliud breve de eadem i tona

Quod nunquam revertitur terra ad dominum
capitalem, nisi felonia convieta fuerit


944


TABLE. exiii


CHAPTER XIIL leaf 128 b.
T Page
1.. What an outlawed person shall forfeit by out-
lawry, and that an outlaw is called a
friendless man . . 987
2. He who knowingly receives sueh à , person ! is
&com-outlaw  . e —
3. If he has taken flight, and defended himself . 339
4. If he has not taken flight, nor defended himself —
5. That flight alone does not entail outlawry .  —


6. It forfeits all rights ; ; . 941
7. Likewise it forfeits his right of action : 0 —
8. Likewise it dissolves donations, sales, and all

contracts and obligations . 943-
9. "That certain of his chattels are forfeited io ilia


ling . —

10. If he shall liso 8 freehold, lei it be: seied ito
the hand of the king for à year and à day. | —

1l. But when after à year and & day the land has

not been restored to the chief lord, upon

the complaint of the true lord, let à writ
of this kind issue to the viscount  . . 945

12. An inquest having been held as to PEE
the land to the chief lord . ; —

13. Another writ concerning the same, concerning
the restitution of the land . -—

l4 If land given in maritage with the daughter

of & certain person from her mother's in-

. heritance has been in the hand of the king

for & year and a day for & felony, which

the husband of the daughter has com-
mitted, & writ for its restitution.- .. . 947

15. A writ, if the king has alienated [the land]
within his term or that of his bailiff . 0 —
16. Another writ in the same matter .  . 349

17. That the land shall never return to the chief
. lord, unless there is à conviction of felony . | —


a- — em -— de s


c» ZA mea. cC 9C mn Un


om^ coo RULES Ls


exiv INDEX.


18.


19.


20.


2].


22.


29.


1.


2.


3.


4.


5.


6.


7.


Si felo ante feloniam convictam obierit

Si donationem fecerit ante feloniagm convic-
tam, vel post |

Item non valebit felonis Benemildo, nec üd


. 950


hereditatem paternam, vel maternam ha- .


bendam  . ; : : .
Exemplum de filio senatoris .
Quod nihil forisfacit quis, antequam fuerit
convictus


Diversa opinio Martini de Pateshull el Ste- |


phani de Segrave de h:reditate mulieris


Cap, XIV. fol. 181.


De inlagatione, qualiter utlagati post utlaga-
riam ex causa mittuntur ad pacem .

Breve, quod dominus rex perdonat fugam et
utlagariam, omnibus ballivis i AE a
tempore suo

Aliud, quod rex perdonat (quantum ad i ipsum
pertinet) utlagariam & tempore patris sui

Item, quod rex perdonat utlagariam, quia
tempore, quo appellum factum fuit, ipse
appellatus in alio comitatu appellatus fuit
de eadem roberia

Si quis falso coram justitiariis fuerit indie-
tatus, et postea se reddiderit prisons do-
mini regis, et remittit rex utlagpariam

Si ille. qui interfici debuit, sanus et vivus
redierit . n .


Breve de eo, qui interfici debuit, si sanus et.


vivus revertatur


352


358


18.


19.


20.


21.
22.


239.


' TABLE.


If the felon has died before a conviction of |


felony i
If he has made a donation before à  eonvietion
of felony
Likewise the generation. of à , felon will not
' avail for a paternal or maternal inheritance
Àn example from a son of a senator
That a person forfeits nothing, before he shall
have been convicted .
À diversity of opinion between Martin de
Pateshull and Stephen de Segrave concern-
ing the inheritance of à woman . ;


CHAPTER XIV. leaf 131.


. Of inlawry, in what way outlawed persons after


their outlawry for cause shown are admitted
io the king's peace.


. À writ, that the king pardons the flight and


outlawry, to be directed to all bailiffs from
his own time ' .


. Another writ that the king pasdons; as far as


pertains to him, an. outlawry from the time
of his father


. Likewise, that the king pardons the outlawry,


because at the time, ab which the charge
was made, the party charged was charged
in another county for the same robbery


. If any one has been falsely indicted before the


justiciaries, and. has afterwards surrendered
himself to the prison of the lord the king,
and the king remits to him his outlawry


. If. he, who ought to have been slain, returns


safe and alive
. À writ concerning him, who ought to have
been slain, if he returns safe and alive í


Page


353


959


— c— la — 000m 007 7
—— —


MENDES M Mpe LED


- A ——


exvi | INDEX.


8. De inlagatione, et ad - restituatur inla-


galus .
9. Quod judicanda erit CAUSA nus ne inla.


Pago


gationem, per quam fuerit utlagatus, ut


facilius admittatur ad pacem secundum
causam utlagationis .

10. Si nulla causa, sed infortunium sine felonis.

11. Si nulla omnino causa . i

12. Non restituitur quis nisi tantum ad pácem i

13. Quid felo forisfaciat, sive utlagatus

14. Item restituuntur legi maxime im mins:
bus, quod ipsi aliis respondeant, et ali
ipsis non, in civilibus vero ipsi aliis

15. Quod rex remittit eis suam sectam sine prze-
judicio aliorum . :

16. Quod oportebit, quod versus "ipsum loquetur
per verba appelli

17. Item si antenatus filius ex pluribus feloniam
fecerit in vita patris, et fuerit, utlapatus in
vita patris

18. Cum utlagatus captus fuerit, non alicui lici-
tum est eum interficere, nisi in ipsa cap-
tione se defendat

19. Quod aliquando potest dominus rex de prati
sua vitam concedere restitutis .


Car. XV. fol. 134 b.


1. De homicidio, quod palam et pluribus astan-
tibus perpetratum est, et postea de homi-
cidio, quod nullo presente perpetratum est,
et quod dicitur murdrum .


378


. 2382


384


TABLE. exvii


Page
8. Concerning inlawry, and to what things d d
person inlawed is restored . — . 367
9. That the cause, for which a person lins bein
| outlawed, must be judged;of first before the
inlawry, that he may be admitted more
easily into the peace of the king BePOEOIRE
to the cause of the outlawry  . —
10. If there be no cause, but misadventure sitbsut
felony  .. à . 969
-11. If there has been no cause e at all —
12. A person is not to be restored to any biu but
. the king's peace —.
18. What a felon forfeits, or an outlaw . 971
14. Likewise they are restored to the law chiefly
in criminal matters, that they may answer
to others but not others to them, and in
civil matters themselves to others  .. 977
15. The king remits to them his suit, vithout
prejudice to others  . —
16. It will be incumbent that the accuser ios
against him in the words of the charge  . 379
17. Likewise, if & firstborn son out of several has
| committed à felony during the lifetime of
the father, and has been outlawed in the
time of the father à
: 18. When the outlaw has been seized, itd is not
allowable for any person to kill him, unless
he resists the seizure . à 383
19. That sometimes the king may of his. grace
grant to restored persons theirlife  . e —


CHAPTER XV. leaf 134 b.


. Of homicide, which is perpetrated openly, and
When several persons are standing by, and
afterwards of homicide, which is perpetrated
When no one is standing by, and which is
called murder . ; . 985


e


i
*


priu. cac aur. ,- ZEE P :
LL ———


exvii INDEX,


2. Quid sit murdrum ;

9. Quid eausa inventionis € à ;
4. Quid dicitur murdrum .

5. Qualiter patria excusatur & murdro

6. Si interfector captus fuerit, nullum erit mur-


T


drum


. Item qualiter debet Englescheria  prasentari


secundum consuetudinem diversorum comi-
tatuum


Car. XVI. fol. 135 b.


. Si malefactores fugiunt ad ecclesiam, qualiter


debeant regnum abjurare, si cdita
latrocinium et feloniam


. De sacramento, qualiter debent abjurare i6:


num .


. Quod non debel rnorari ecclesia, ulira quad-
raginta dies; si velit, quid tunc Sgen |


dum sit


. De divisione exiliorum .


Car. XVII. fol. 136 b.


. De homicidio per infortunium et casuali


Car. XVIIL fol. 136 b.


. De illis qui capti sunt, quod non debent


spoliari bonis suis, sed debent inde sus-
tentari


. Breve, quod de bonis suis sustententur
. Qualiter captus produci debet coram justiti-


ariis, et quare justiciarii examinare debent
in duello injungendo et judiciis


992


304


396
398


398


OU E Q2 b9


TABLE,


. Whatis murder .. . :

. What is the cause of the invention of ibus dess
. What is called murder

. In what way ihe country is exoused. Boii


murder


. If the slayer has been captured, there is no


murder


. Likewise in what mE Englishery -—1 to be


presented according to the customs of dif-
ferent counties . : : ;


CHAPTER XVI. leaf 135 b.


. If malefactors take refuge in a church, in what


way they ought to abjure the realm, if
they acknowledge robbery or felony .


beyond forty days,if he wishes: what is
then to be done . ;


, Of the division of exiles


. CuaPrER XVIL leaf 136 b.


. Of homicide by. misadventure and casual


CHAPTER XVIII. leaf 136 b.


. Of those who are captured, that they ought


not to be spoiled of their goods, but they
ought to be sustained from them


. A writ that he may be sustained of his goods
. How the captured person ought to be pro-


duced before the justiciaries, and wherefore
the justiciaries ought to examine him in
enjoining the duel and in judgments , ;


. 393
. Of the oath, by which they abjure the realm .
. That he ought not to delay in the church


995


307
399


399


408


INDEX.


. Vadiatio duelli, et si appellatus victus fuerit


vel appellans


. Ne quis extraneum hospitetur à nisi de. clara


die


Car. XIX. fol. 138.


]. De quibus loqui debeat appellans


Q2» t2


-IO) 00d


12.


13.


. De appello de morte hominis
. Quod possunt plures appellari, sicut, unus, de


morte alterius


. Verba appelli de morte fratris vel alterius
. Item appellum de fortia i

. Qualiter debent appellati defendere

. Si duellum declinare noluerit per hoc, quod


transiit statem


. Si omnes concurrunt, qui jungunt appellum,


statim vadietur duellum


. Si plures appellaverint unum, sed de diversis


factis, sicut, de diversis plagis .


. Si ante duellum percussum omnes appellantes


mori contingat .


. Si autem appellatus victus fuerit de facto,


tune demum procedatur versus alios de
forcia et de prsecepto

Si plures unum appellaverint de morte alic
eujus, de pluribus plagis . i

Si unus plures ADrennverit de diversis plagis
mortalibus . :


Page


404


12.


13.


TABLE.


. The pledging of battle, and if the appellor or


the appellee be vanquished


. That no one receive à guest, except by day-


light .


CHAPTER XIX. leaf 138.


. Concerning what PUE an appellor "n. to


speak


. Of an appeal eoncerning he death of a man
. That several persons, just as one, may be ap-


pealed for the death of à, man


. The words of an appeal concerning the death


. of & brother, or of another person


. Likewise an appeal against an accessory
. How the parties appealed ongnt to make their


defence


. If he has declined battle, joue m has passed


the age


. If all concur, who j Bod the SEOH let battle be |


ab once waged


. If several persons have appealed one jnenon for


different acts, as for different wounds


. But if before the battle is begun, all the ep-


pellants happen to die


. But if the party appealed for the act has beon


vanquished, then le£ proceedings go on
against others accessory ud force and Li
counsel à

If several have appealed one Brani 'eoncerning
the death of another from many wounds

If one hasappealed several rad different
mortal wounds .


exxi
Page
405


407


419


cxxil INDEX.


Qo -1 C» QU x


Car. XX. fol. 139 b.


. Quod appellatus det vadium defendendi et


&ppellans det vadium disrationandi. Item
de exceptionibus contra appellum


. Quod quidam sunt exceptiones, qu: generales
sunt ad omnia placita, quedam speciales -


et diverse secundum diversitatem placi-
torum et appellorum.


. Prima exceptio et generalis in omni appello


de secta, si bene et secundum legun
terree facta sit .


. Si de recordo inter justitiarios contento ha-


beatur, tune quid agendum sit.


. Contra appellum poterit excipere appellatus.


Exceptiones eontra 'appellum. .


Car. XXI. fol 141 b.


. De duelli vadiatione. Cum nulla sit exceptio,


tune statim vadietur duellum .


. De forma sacramenti
. Facto sacramento ex utraque A éorctiit-


tetur defensor duobus militibus


. De sacramento faciendo in campo.
. De banno domini regis .

. Si appellatus victus fuerit
. &i appellans in campo se retraxerit
. Cum omnes de facto convicti fuerint, tunc


procedatur contra eos de forcia, et de
sacrámento a&b appellato faciendo


. De saeramento faciendo ab appellante .


Page


424


go 10» Cv


TABLE. exxili -


CHAPTER XX. leaf 139 b. |
Page


. The appellee gives bail to defend himself.


and the appellor gives bail to derayne.
Likewise concerning the exceptions against
an appeal . . ; . 425


. That there are certain TETTE which are


general to all pleas, and certain special and
divers according 'to the diversity of pleas
and appeals . —


. The first, which is à general cadem d in all


appeals, is concerning the suit, if it has been
well instituted and according to the law of
theland .. s s


. If there be contention Bacon the Susliciarios


concerning the record, whatis to be done . 431


. The appellee may except against the ppea.


Exceptions againstan appeal  . ; 493


CHAPTER XXI. leaf 141 b.


. Concerning the wager of battle. When there


is no exception, let battle be forthwith
waged "AE . . 439


. Concerning the form of the oath : 441
. On the oath having been taken by both parties,


let the defendant be committed to the charge
of two knights . : ; e —


. Of the oath to be taken on the field 00. 4438
. The proclamation of the king . e —
. If the appellee has been conquered .. e —
. If the appellor has retracted on the field . . 445
. When all the principals have been convicted,


then let proceedings commence against the
accessories. Of the oath to be taken id the
appelee . —


. Of the oath to be taken by the appellor . ; —


exxiv | INDEX.


10. Si appellans de facto victus fuerit vel se
retraxerit, ilh de fortia liberantur

]1. Si primo appellans de facto mortuus fuerit,
vel defaltam fecerit, dominus rex potest
procedere ex officio

12. Item defenditur quis ab appello mos mahe-
mium, et quia transit statem . ,

13. Si mulier per vim oppressa .


Car. XXII. fol. 143.


1. De indietatis per famam pee ex suspi-
cione . ; ;

2. Qualiter Sasdriarius debeat examinare .

3. Quod omnes a jurata amoveantur, quos appel-
latus sufficienti habet ratione suspectos

4. Quod villatee jurabunt per se, vel omnes

* simul erectis manibus .

5. Verba, qui & justitiariis prooedenda, sunt
post sacramentum factum

6. Generalis observantia in sacramentis coram
justitiarüis faciendis .


CaP. XXIII. fol. 144.


1. De appello de pace, et plagis factis contra
pacem, et de verbis àppelli, et de modo ap-
pellandi et defendendi, e&t de modo defen-
dendi et disrationandi

2. De exceptionibus contra hujusmodi appellum

3. Item quid dicetur de eo, qui virilia abscidit
alicujus ; i .


450
452


458
460


462


. TABLE.


10. If the appellor against & principal has been


11.


12.


18.


vanquished, or has retracted, tho Spo
as accessories are liberated .

If in the first place the appellor against à iu
eipal has died or made default, the lord the
king himself may proceed of office


Likewise a person is defended from an appeal


on account; of being maimed, or because he
has passed the age ;
If à woman has been ravished by foreo


CHAPTER XXII. leaf 143.


. Of persons indicted upon common fame or sus-


picion


. How the justiciary ought T examine
. That all be removed from the jury, whom the :


appellee has sufficient reason to suspect


. That the townspeople shall swear singly, or all


togéther with uplifted hands


. The words which are to proceed from the dus


ticiaries after the oath has been taken


. À general observance in the oaths to be taken


before the justiciaries


CmAPTER XXIII leaf 144.


. Of an appeal for breach of the peace, and for


wounds inflicted against the peace, and of
the words of the appeal, and the mode of ap-
pealing, and of defending, and of the mode of
defending and of deraigning


. Of-the exceptions against an appeal of this


kind.


. Likewise what is i5 be md of NN m has


eut off the private parts of another
VOL. II. i


OxxVv


Page


447


451


459


461


exxvil INDEX.


e


CAP. XXIV. fol. 145.


. De appello de plagis et mahemio, et de modo


appellandi et defendendi .


. De exceptionibus conira i a appel-


lum


. Quid dici debeat mahemium.. : :
. Quid sit deformitas, e& non mahemium


Car. XXV. fol. 145 b.


. De appello de pace et imprisonamento, et de


verbis appelli, e& de modo appellandi et
defendendi


. De exceptionibus contra hujusmodi appellum
. Qualiter in appello isto agi poterit civiliter


vel criminaliter, cum adjeotione felonise
vel non


Cap, XXVI. fol. 146.


. De aetione criminali sic de pace et roberia,


et de appellis, e& de modo d ot
defendendi.


. De appellis de felonia " paco regis, " de


verbis appelli et TOM et respon-
sione appellati . . .


Ca», XXVIL fol. 146 b.


. De appello de iniqua combustione et roberia,


et de modo appellandi et defendendi


Car. XXVIII. fol. 147.


. De appellis de raptu virginum .
, De verbis appelli mulieris qos de napi


et defensione appellati


414


476


478


480


8S


l.


2
3.
4


-


TABLE.


CHAPTER XXIV. leaf 145.


Of an appeal for wounds and mayhem, and the
mode of appealing and of defending


. Of exceptions against this kind of appeal


What ought to be termed mayhem .


. What is disfigurement, not mayhem


CHAPTER XXV. leaf 145 b.


. Of an appeal for a breach of the peace and im-


prisonment, and of the words of the appeal,
and the mode of appealing and of defend-
in


. Of exceptions against this kind of appeal
. In what manner in this appeal a civil or a


criminal action may be brought with the
addition of felony or not


CHAPTER XXVI. leaf 1460.


. Of a eriminal action for a breach of the peace


and a robbery, and of appeals, and of the
. mode of appealing and of defending .


. Of appeals of felony and the peace of the king,


, &and of the words of the appeal and the
defence, and the answer of the defendant .


CHAPTER XXVII. leaf 146 b.


. Ofan appeal for malicious arson and robbery,


" and the mode of appenling and of de-
fending ..  . :


CHAPTER XXVIII leaf 147.


. Of appeals concerning the rape of virgins
. Concerning the words of the appeal of a wo-


man complaining of rape, and concerning the
defence of the appellee
i2


exxvi |


475


477


479
481


489


|
!
|


o2


e


XB CS b orm


10.


exxvih - INDEX.


. De exceptione contra appellum
. Si appellatus per patriam fuerit convictus,


qus poena sequatur .


. De appellatis de fortia .


CAP. XXIX. fol. 148 b.


. In quibus mulier habet appellum .
. De appello de morte viri sui


Car. XXX. fol, 149.


. De appellatis attachiandis

. Breve de attachiamento

. Aliud breve ad idem de eadem ,
. Breve de faciendo venire illum coram ges


titiarlis


. Aliud breve ad idem ds Scdoni: et nis) in-


veniatur, quad utlagetur et interrogetur
de comitatu in comitatum


. Breve quod tradatur per ballium
. Breve de summonendo appellum coram do-


mino rege.


. Breve, si appellum factum fuerit immediato


coram rege : . .


. Breve vicecomiti de faciendo veconduim in


comitatu eoram custodibus
Aliud breve de eodem vicecomiti .


CAP. XXXI. fol. 150.


. Si quis fecerit feloniam de seipso .


504


TABLE.


3. Concerning the exception against an appeal


4. If the appellee be convicted by the ME


what punishment follows .
o. Concerning those, who are appealed as aeces-
Sories. ;


!


CHAPTER XXIX. leaf 148 b.


1. In what things a woman has an appeal . ;
2. Of an appeal concerning the death of her hus-
band . à; ; à;


CHAPTER XXX. leaf 149.


l. Of attaching appellees . .

2. .À writ of attachment

3. Another writ to the same, tous the same

4. 4 writ for causing the appeal to come before
the justiciaries .

9. Another writ to the same àbout the same, un
unless he be found, that he be outlawed

. and sought for from county to county
6. À writ, that he be delivered up by his bail
7. À writ for summoning the appeal before the


9. À writ, if the appeal has been made imme-
diately before the king ;
9. A wrib to the viscount to make à record in
the county court before the keepers of it
10. Another writ on the same subject to the vis-
count.


CHAPTER XXXI. leaf 150.


1. 1f &àny one has committed a felony against
himself |


Q» S Ai C5 b5


CAP. XXXII. fol. 150 b.


. De actione furti, et quid sit furtum
. Quot species furti . à '

. De appello de latrocinio : i .

. Si defendat, vadietur duellum : icu

. Si appellatus patriam elegerit

. Breve de faciendo venire warrantum per


auxilium


. S] warrantum vue per PIE Cis


breve de venire faciendo warrantum


. Si furtum in manu alicujus inveniatur
. Si uxor teneatur ex furto viri

. Si uxor eum viro convicta fuerit .

. Si civiliter pregnans fuerit damnanda .


Car. XXXIII. fol. 152.


. De furto manifesto et probatore cognoscente
. Breve, quod rex dat justitiarüis potestatem


concedendi probatori vitam et membra


. Quod vicecomes attachiet eos, quos RENE


appellaverit


. De capiendo appellatum per probatorem, ui


se cognoscit esse latronem .


Car. XXXIV. fol. 152 b.


. Cum presens fuerit appellatus, qualiter


probator proponere debet intentionem et
appellum suum, ct de modo defendendi


526


TABLE.


CmaPrER XXXIIL leaf 150 b.


X. Concerning the action for theft, and what is
theft . ; ; ; :
2. How many species of theft
3. Concerning an appeal for robbery
4. If he defends, let battle be waged .
5. If the appellee has chosen the country
6. À writ to cause à warrantor to come in aid.
7. If he has called à warrantor by the aid of the
court, a writ to make the warrantor come .
& Lf the thing stolen has been found in the hand
of any one.
9. If the wife be liable for the theft of lior hus-
band . :
10. If the wife has been convicted with her hus-
band .
1l. If according to the Civil Law a pregnant woman
ought to be condemned  .


CHAPTER XXXIII. leaf 152.


l Concerning manifest theft, and an approver
"who confesses

2. À. writ, whereby the king gives to the M d
aries the power of granting to an approver
hislifeand hmbs  .

9. À writ, that the viscount atach He hon
theapproverhasaecused .  .

4. A writ to capture the persons accused by an

approver, who confesses himself to be a
larcener


CuAPTER XXXIV. leaf 152 b.


l. When the accused shall be present, in what
way the approver ought to state his charge
and his aecusation, and of the mode of
defence


exxxi


597


[4A——.


exxxii — INDEX.


' 9. Quod appellatus primo juret per verba nega-
tiva, et postea RES per verba affir- .


mativa

3. Si autem defensionem non spend in propria
persona, sed excipiat et judicium petat, si
eontra talem cognoscentem se esse lairo-
nem . ; $4 ; ;

4. Si probator fecerit quod promisit, teneatur
ei conventio, et sic in fine abjuret, regnum

5. Si comitatus vel curia alicujus petentis
appellum tenuerit de probatore, veniat
recordum ad curiam regis per hoc breve.

6. Item breve vicecomiti, quod  probatorem
habeat coram rege et omnes, quos ipse
appellaverit de societate, quia plures forte
propter appellum probatoris se subtrahunt

7. Si autem appellati tenuerint et finem fecerint,
quod. redire possunt, et esse sub plegiis

8. Ubi quis appellatus per patriam fuerit del
beratus, quod habeat catalla sua

9. Breve de replegiando aliquem, quem iális
cepit, et captum detinet ;


Car. XXXV. fol. 154 b.


1. Quod nemo potest curiam suam habere de
probatore vel latrone cognoscente. Item
qua placita pertineant ad curiam, et quse
&d comitatum, et de libertatibus singulo-
rum . í i "E" i


Page


528


538


TABLE. cexxxli


2. That the accused person shall first swear in
words of denial, and afterwards the accuser
shall swear in affirmative words.

3. But if he shall not undertake his defence i in
his own person, but shall except and seek
judgment, if against such a person aeknow-
ledgiag himself to be a larcener .

4. If the approver has done what he promised, let
the agreement be kept with him, and so in
the end let him abjure the realm

5. If à county or & court has entertained the
accusation of any plaintiff upon an approver's
evidence, let the record come to the "e"
court under this writ .

6. Likewise à writ to the viscount, that he jin:
duce before the king the approver and all
whom he has accused of being accomplices,
because several perchance withdraw them-
selves on account of the accusation of the
approver

7. But, if the accused bave come and made : à fine,
that they may return and be under sureties

8. Where a person accused has been acquitted by
the country, that he should have his
chattels

9. A writ for releasing on gurety adv one, whom
80-and-so has seized and' detains a prisoner


CHAPTER XXXV. leaf. 154 b.


l. That no one can hold his court at the instance
of an approver or confessed larcener. Like-
wise. what pleas belong to a court, and what
to & county, and concerning the franchises
of individuals


Page


529


531


533


535


599


Cet eam cR I n EP ce cms NRI onlpRe—c c PP erc enn —


cxxxiv INDEX.


r2


Car. XXXVI. fol 155.


. De minoribus et levioribus e quze


civiliter intentantur .


. Qualiter quis patitur injuriam p lav Suos .
. In quibus casibus servi habent personam


standi in judicio contra dominos suos


. Quod atrox injuria sstimatur multis modis .


Car. XXXVII. fol. 155 b.


. De vetito namii :
. Si vero captio fuerit injuste . .
. Si querens queratur de utraque, scilicet p


tione et detentione


. Si dominus post "m vadiatam defaltam


fecerit


. Quod non potuit ouis aliquia doditorà de


receordo adversari


. De officio vicecomitis
. Breve de attachiando, quare cepit. averia, et


fugavit extra comitatum .


. Cum vicecomes vel serviens regis visum


habuerit de averiis sine impedimento


. De responsione captoris, Ts juste, qua in


damno suo


. Si lex vadiatur ex utraque parte, ita quod


querens dieat, quod juste .


. Item si captor dieat, quod juste
. Si serviens alicujus ceperit &veria sco jus


in absentia domini sui


. Cum averia alicujus semel juri per udi:


eium deliberata, et iterum capta, breve
quod deliberentur


eG» t9


"E:


TABLE. CXXXV


OmaPTER XXXVI. leaf 155.


. Of minor and lighter Dn which are brought


civilly


. How a person. suffers an injury in reped of


his relatives


. In what cases serfs have i a personality in iue


io appear against their lords


. That an atrocious injury is estimated in various


WAyS.


CHAPTER XXXVII. leaf. 155 b.


. Of the refusal of a distress
. But if the seizure has been unjust .
. I£ the plaintiff complain of both, that, i is, the


seizure and the detention .


. If the lord after the wager of law has made


default


. That & person may not deny anything i in the


record of his adversary

Of the office of the viscount .

À writ to attach, wherefore he has seed the
beasts, and has driven them beyond the
county

When the viscount or à  serj jean of tho king
has had & view of the beasts seized without
impediment i

Of the answer of the seizor, that he has justly
Seized, because he was suffering damage


. If thelaw be waged on either side, so that the


complainant says, that he claims justly


. Likewise if the seizor say, that he seized justly
. If the servant of any one has seized the cattle


of any one in the absence of his lord .

When the cattle of any one have once been
released by a judgment, and M E seized, à
writ that they be released .


be-


L 2M wonNDEEL. CEU AUT" ae, 7v & AO EN SU c QE.


exxxvl INDEX


APPENDIX [.


Item nova capitula de tempore regis Edwardi,
filii regis Henrici tertii ;


APPENDIX II.


Item capitula tengentia prima statuta Westm
in anno regni regis dg: filii MEE
Henrici, tertio


APPENDIX III.


Placita apud West&i coram domino rege in
Octabis Sancti Michaelis anno in ejus
decimo octavo . :


Page


584


596


606


TABLE. exxxvll |


APPENDIX L
Page
Likewise the new articles of the time of king
Edward, the son of king Henry III. . — . 585


!


APPENDIX II.


Likewise the articles touching the first statutes of
Westminster in the third year of the reign
of king Edward, the son of king Henry III. 597


APPENDIX III.


Pleas a& Westminster before the lord the king in
the octaves of St. Michael in the eighteenth
year of his reign ; ; i . 607


T i .
: /
.
!
- "
"E
*
E
] I
n à
* n
n
LI
[
[]
.
d !
'
]
'
.
P
*
.
"
f
]
'
"
$e.
r L
, L:
,
"
'
*
.
'
LU


HENRICI DE BRACTON


DE


LEGIBUS ET CONSUETUDINIBUS ANGLLA.


HENRICUS DE BRACTON


ON THE


LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF ENGLAND.


4 H
2d 671. Wt. B 444. A


HENRICI DE BRACTÓN


DE


LEGIBUS ET CONSUETUDINIBUS ANGLLA.


I
De custo-
dia hzre-
dum.


LIBER SECUNDUS.


(ONGCONQECSNNGCCONV NFCS)CSQEISI CS CSISISVESNG SNÁCSNZASQUSIUS S NSICUSFNASSCSUNI NDS USUS S


CAP. XXXVII.


Dict' est. supra de h:seredib? majorib? institutis, &
qui tetur ad homagia & relevia, & qui ad fidelitate:
nunc aute dicend' est de illis qui minores sunt &
infra state, & quos oportet esse sub tutela & cura
aliof, eó q se ipsos regere no norüt, & quof quidà
debent esse sub custodia düf cüm terris & tentis, q
sunt de feodo eoi, & quida sub custodia parent & pxi-
morü eonsanguineoi, ut pdiet' est; et quib? datur cus-
todes aliquando de jure de antiquo feoffamto, & ali-
quàdo curatores ab homine, ubi quis aliq feoffaverit
infra setate existente, cüm ipse curator esse non possit
similiter & custos. Quia copetit aliquado diio capitali
custodia terree d est de feodo suo p se & nó custodia
heredis nec maritag' cüm heres fuerit maritand?, &
quàdoq, copetit dto custodia utriusg. lte sunt hz-
redes, de quib? constat quód majores sunt, & de quib?
constat q minores, & de quib? dubiu erit, utru majores


THE SECOND BOOK


or


HENRICUS DE BRACTON


ON THE


LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF ENGLAND.


b oM i M


CHAPTER XXXVII.


We have spoken above of heirs instituted of fullage 1.
and who are bound to homage and reliefs, and who are ndr T
bound to fealty. Now we must speak of those who are heirs.
minors and under age, and who ought to be under the
wardship and curatorship of others, because they do not
know how to govern themselves, and of whom some ought
to be under the custody of & lord, with the lands and the
tenements which belong to their fiefs, and some under the
custody of relatives and the nearest kinsfolk of blood,
as has been said above. And to whom are given some-
times guardians of right under an ancient feoffment, and
sometimes guardians by man, where a person has enfeoffed
any one who is under age, when he himself cannot be at
the same time curator and guardian ; because a chief
lord is sometimes entitled by himself to the custody of
the land, which is of his fief, and not to the eustody of the
heir, nor to the maritage when the heir is to be married,
and sometimes the lord is entitled to both. Likewise
there are heirs, of whom it is certain that they are of
full age, and. others of whom it is certain that they are
under age, and others of whom it is doubtful whether

A 3


4 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


sunt vel minores, in quo casu, cüm constiterit, q mino-
res sunt, sub custodia dior remanebunt de feodo mili-
tari; donec plenà habuerint setate, vel aliof secund'
diversa genera teütor. Si aute dubium fuerit uif
majores fuerint vel minores, in hoc dubio, in custodia
remanebüt, donec constiterit de setate.


2. Sunt autem diverse setates, secund' diversitate. hse-
f.86b. red' & teütof. De feodo veró militari, habebit heres
m plena statem cu 21. annü ipleverit & 22. attigerit. Si
heredum, vero fuerit heres & filius sockmani, tunc demü, cu 25.
et quod de » . . E , ,
feodo mi. &nnos cópleverit. Si auté filius burgensis, tune seta-
tari in — tem habere intelligitur, ci denarios discret? sciverit
sockagio 3 : $c uad
potestet numerare, & pannos ulnare, & alia negotia similia
debet re- paterna exercere. Sed sic no definitur cert temp?, sed
spondere, z , - :
sieut pe- p Sensu & maturitatem sua. Fcemina veró plens esse
tere. poterit statis in sockagio oni casu, cüm possit & sciat
domui sus disponere, & ea facere dj ptinent ad dispo-
sitionem & ordinatione dom?, ut sciat dq ptineat ad
cone & keye, q quidem esse no poterit ante quart
deciiü anti vel deci quint, quia hiüodi stas requirit
discretionem & sensü. ltem vires requirit setas sock-
agii & diseretiot| & sensü, & secund q hseres sockmàni
possit & sciat ea exercere, d ptinent ad agricultura.
Item majores vires, & majorem sensu, & discretionem


requirunt eo, j-ptinent ad servitia militaria, ut hreres


!* one & keye," such is also the reading of MS. Rawl., C. 160.


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. S)


they are of full age or under age, in which case, when it
is established, that they are under age, they will remain
under the guardianship of their lords in the case of &
military fief, until they arrive at full age, or of others
according to the different kinds of tenements. But if it
be doubtful, whether they be of full age or under age,
they will remain under guardianship, until it is estab-
lished respecting their age.


But there are different ages according to the difference — 2.
of heirs and of tenements. In the case of a military nid
fief the heir will have full age, when he has completed the age of
his twenty-first year, and has touched his üwenty-second. heirs and
But if he be the heir of & sockman, he will be of age case ofa
then, when he has completed twenty-five years. But if "n
he be the son of & burgher, he is then understood to have sockage
[full] age, when he knows how to count pence rightly, d ougtit
and to measure cloths by the ell, and to perform other like 9e? .
business of his father! But thus no certain time is as well as
defined, but it is [determined] by his sense and maturity. ? Plaintiff
Buta woman may be of full age in sockage in every tune.
case, when she can and knows how to arrange her house
and those things which belong to the arrangement and
management of her house, that she may know what per-
tains to *eone and keye," which cannot be before her
fourteenth or fifteenth year, for this kind of [full] age
requires diseretion and sense. And the [full] age of
Sockage requires strength and discretion and sense, and
according as the heir of à sockman can and knows how
to exercise those things, which appertain to agriculture.
Likewise those things which appertain to military ser-

ViCé$ require greater strength, and greater sense and
discretion, as an heir for instance in military service


' This test of eapacity, namely, ; App. p. 511, Rolls edition. ** Cone
knowledge how to count. and mea- |

sure,
See


and keye "' is, probably, not so cor-
Và8Scommon in many boroughs. | rect a reading as '* coffer and keye,"
Year Book, 32 & 33 Edw. L, which occurs in some MSS:


3.
De :wtate
femine.
Britton,
III., ch. ii.
85


Fleta 6.


6 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


vid. in servitio militari tal' habeat robustatem, q pos-
sit arma portare, d sufliciat ad officium suu militare
secunt diversa genera teüor & servitiot.  Itém est
ctas placitadi & petendi restitutione pprie seysin:e, vel
alicuj? antecessoris. Et est setas placitadi & petendi pprie-
tatem, & respondendi sup pprietatem, quia qualitercung,
acquirere possit possessionem infra :etate, ante plena
:wtate 21. anü non respondebit, nec iplacitabit, nec etia
iplacitabitur sup pprietate, respodendo in feodo militari,
licét possit aliquado petendo in sockagio ; potest & debet
respondere, sicut & petere, cüm plenz setatis fuerit. Et
hzc vera sunt nisi iplacitat" fuit de facto suo pprio, &
sj feoffat? fuit infra :etatem, vel si fecerit disseysinà,
quàdo autein petere possit minor, cu sit infra setate, &
quid, & quado respodere, dicetur infrà pleni? de excep-


LII


tionib? d pveniüt ex minori state in placitis & assisis.


Fosminà veró hwres, & mascul^ secund quosdà, ad
paria judicatur quoad ois states, secund diversitate
teütor, sc. q habeat statem burgagii sicut. mascuP?, &
sockagii sicut mascuP?, sc. 15. annor, & feodi militaris
sicut mascul? sc. 21. anü, & q tunc primó finiatur
custodia; secund alios veró dicitur foemina habere plena
ctatem, cüm 15. annos (g ver est) copleverit, quoad
feod' militare, tunc eni poterit, ut dicunt, domui suz
disponere, & nubere viro, qui possit p se vel p alium
militaria exercere, & ideó prjüs ad :etatem pvenerit,
quia magis doli capax est q masculus, & quia matu-
riora sunt vota mulieris q viri. Sed si ita esset, sic
plena setatem haberet, cüm esset duodec. anno?, quia


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. rj


ought to have such à robustness, that he can bear arms,
which are suflicient for his military duty according to
the different kinds of tenements and services. And
there is àn age of pleading and of claiming restitution of
one's own seysine, or of that of an ancestor. And there
is an age of pleading and of claiming property, and of
responding [in a suit respecting property], for in what-
Soever manner a person may acquire property when
under age, he cannot be made a defendant before the age
of twenty-one; nor shall he implead or be impleaded
respecting property, as respondent in & military fief,
although he may sometimes, as claimant in sockage. He
may and ought to respond, as well as to claim, when he -
shall be of full age. And these things are true unless
he is impleaded respecting his own act, or if he has been
enfeoffed when under age, or if he has made a disseysine ;
but when à minor may claim, since he is under age, and
what and when he may respond, will be stated below
more fully on the subject of exceptions, which arise from
minority in pleas and in assises.


A female heir and & male are according to some ,, 9

: : e fu

reckoned upon an equality as regards all ages according to age of a

the diversity of tenements, provided that the female has "oman.

the full age of burgage like a male, and the full age of sock-

age like a male, that is, fifteen years, and the full age of

a military fief like a male, that is twenty-one years, and

that their wardship is first finished : according to others

however a female is said to have full age, when she has

completed fifteen years (which is true) as regards a

military fief, for then she may, as it is said, provide

for à home, and be married to à man who can either by

himself or by another perform military duties, and there- |

fore she comes of age earlier for she is more wily :

than a male, and because the desires of & woman are

earlier than those of & man. But if i& were so, then

she would be of full age when she was of twelve years

because she has then a desire for the male and can support


Britton,
]. iii. ch. ii.


S 5.
Fleta 5 b.


f. 87.


8 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


tune esset viri potens & posset vif sustinere, p quod
videtur, quod quoad state no sit differentia inter mas-
eul' & foemina, quod falsü est. Sed si ita esset, tunc
sequeretur istud inconveniens, quód infra legittima
ctai novem & unius anni, posset placitare & implaci-
tari p breve de recto, & respondere ante tempus legit-
timum, & cüm esset quatuordecim vel quindecim an-
norum, & unde videtur, quód talis stas intelligenda
sib de sockagio, & non de feodo militari, quia in tali
cate potest disponere domui sue & habere cone &
keye, & septimo anno consentire matrimonio, & virum
sustinere anno duodecimo.  Plenam itaq, custodiam
habent domini capitales feodorum suorü omnium, sine
psonis hzered, quandoq, cüm personis eorum, & ita quód
inde plenam habent dispositionem, in ecclesiis confe-
rendis cüm  vacaverint, & in custodis concedendis,
dàdis, & vendendis, & in mulierib? maritadis, & mari-
tagiis vendeédis, si d fuerüt maritade, & generaliter de
oüb? disponere, ad comod' hsredis, sicut de ppriis
essent disposituri  & meliüs si fieri possit. Et vendere
possunt custodia terraf, & maritag! hsered' si non fue-
rint maritati, sed de hzreditate nihil possunt alienare,
vel offendere possüt?! ad remanentia. Heredes aute
quadiu fuerint in custodia p quantitate hsreditatis
honorificé exhibebunt, & debita hzreditaria acquieta-
büt p quantitate hereditatis, & p rata, secund' temp?
custodie.  Negotia vero hsered' agere possunt, & de
eof jure acquirendo, in quib? minorib? placitare licet,
placitum movere & psequi de jure possessorio, ppris
seysinz videlicet, vel alicujus antecessoris: sed super
recto in causa pprietatis p illis agere non possunt,
nec respondere, nisi hoc sit in casu, sc. de aliquo, de


! '** Vel offendere possunt" omitted MS. Rawl. C. 160,


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 9


[intereourse with] the male, from which it seems, that as
regards age, there is no difference between the male and
the female, which is false. But if it were so, then there
would follow this inconvenience, that below the legitimate
age of nine years and one, she might plead and be im-
pleaded by à writ of right, and respond before the legi-
timate time, and when she was of fourteen or fifteen
years, and hence it seems, that such age is understood of
sockage, and not ofa military fief, because at such age
she can manage her house and have * cone and keye," and
in her seventh year consent to matrimony, and support
intercourse with a male in her twelfth year. The chief
lords have thus full wardship of all their fiefs without the
persons of the heirs, and sometimes with their persons,


and so that they have the free disposal thereof, in con-


ferring churches, when they are vacant, and in granting,
giving, and selling wardships, and in marrying women,
and in selling maritages if there are any women to be
married, and generally to dispose of everything for the
advantage of the heir, as they would dispose of their
own things, and better, if they can. And they may sell
the wardship of the lands, and the maritages of the
heirs, if they are not married, but they cannot alienate
any part of the inheritance or they may offend as regards
a remaindership. But they shall honourably maintain
the heirs, who are in their wardship, according to the value
of the inheritance, and they shall acquit the hereditary
dues according to the quantity of the inheritance, and
proportionately according to the time of the wardship.
They can also transact the business of the heirs and may
move pleas to acquire their rights for them, in matters
in which it is allowable for minors to plead and to pro-
secute a right of possession, for instance of his own
seysine or of that of an ancestor, but they cannot bring an
action for them on a question of right in a cause of
property, nor respond [in an action] unless it be in à
case for insíance concerning some property with which


f. 87.


4.
Bi plures
sint domini
capitales,
et unus


10 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


quo minor infra zetatem fuit feoffatus. Si veró minor
de felonia infra statem fuerit appellatus, p salvos &
securos plegios attachiabitur, sed dum fuerit infra seta-
tem inde regpodere no tenebitur,.sed tunc demü cum
major sit factus. Item custos, quàüdiu custodia terree
habuerit, sustentet domos, parcos, vivaria, stagna, mo-
lendina, & csetera omnia ad terram illam ptinentia, &
de exitibus ejusdé terre reddat heredi, cüm ad plena
eate pvenerit, terrà illam sua tota instaurata de ca-
rucis & oib? aliis, & saltem non minüs q secund' quod
ila instauratam invenit. Item nihil capiet de terra
hazredis, dü fuit infra state, nisi rationabiles exitus,
& rationabiles consuetudines, &,rationabilia servitia, &
hzc sine destructione & vasto hominum & ref, q si
fecerit, sive pcedat phibitio sive non, amittet custo-
diam, & emendabit damnum, & tradetur terra ppter
delietum talibus discretis & legalibus hominib? de feodo
illo, vel ppinquiorib? consanguineis, secund' q inferiüs
dicetur de aetionib?. Si autem düs rex, quacunq, de
causa, custodiam alicujus terre habuerit, & illam vicec.
vel alteri tradiderit, qui de exitibus regi debeat respon-
dere, & talis destructionem fecerit & vastum, ille diis
rex & tali capiat custodiam & emenda, & terra comit-
tatur duobus legalibus & discretis hominibus de feodo
illo qui de exitibus respondeant domino regi, vel ei,
cui dominus rex illos exitus assignaverit. $i autem
illa dederit vel vendiderit alicui, qui destructionem vel
vastü inde fecerit, &mittet custodia illa, & tradetur
duobus, ut pdietuim est.


Cüm sit heres masculus vel foemina, & plures dii
capitales, omnes maritagiü heredis habere non possunt,


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 11


the minor was enfeoffed when under age. But if the
minor be accused of felony, when under age, he shall be.
attached by safe and certain sureties, but whilst he is
below age he shall not be compelled to answer, but then
only when he has come of age. Likewise the guardian,
as long as he has the custody of the land, should keep
up the houses, parks, stews, ponds, mills, and all other
things appertaining to the estate, and with the rents of
that land should restore to the heir, when he has arrived
at full age, the whole of his land stocked with ploughs
and all other implements, and at least not less so stocked
than as he received 1t. Likewise he shall take nothing
from the land of the heir, whilst he was under age,
except reasonable rents, and reasonable customs, and
reasonable services, and these without destruction or
waste of men and things, which if he should make,
whether a prohibition is issued or not, he shall lose the
guardianship and shall make good the damage, and the
land on account of such delinquency shall be handed
over to certain discreet and loyal men of that fief, or to
the next kinsfolk by blood, according to what will be
said below about actions. But if the lord the king for
any cause has had the custody of a certain land, and shall
have delivered it to & sheriff or to another, who should
answer respecting the revenues to the king, and that
person has committed destruction and waste, let the lord
the king take from such a one the guardianship and a
fine, and let the land be entrusted to two loyal and
discreet men of that fief, who shall answer to the king
respecting the revenues, or to him to whom the king has
assigned those revenues, But if he has given or sold it
to anyone, who has caused destruction or waste therein,
he shall lose the wardship, and it shall be delivered to
two discreet persons, as aforesaid.


4,
When the heir 1s male or female, and there are several If there be


chief lords, all cannot have the maritage of the heir, €Yeral
chief lords,


and one


tenens, ad
quem per-
tinet mari-
tagium
heredis.

5.
Quod mari-
tagium per-
tinet ad
antiquio-
rem feoffa-
torem.
Britton, iii.
ch. ii. S 2.
Fleta 10.


f. 87 b.


12 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


licàt omnes jus habuerint in maritagiu, eó quód, talis
heres tenuerit de quolibet per servitium militare.


Dnus tamen plurium pfertur oftb?, & maj? jus habet
in maritagiu, sc. primus feoffator dominus capitalis, de
quo antecessor heredis suum primü habuit feoffamen-
tum, & cui p omnibus alis fecit legeantiam. Sed


. custodia terrarum aliüs dominis remanebit, quc sunt


de feodo illorum cum servitiis, sed si aliquis heres
terram aliqua tenuerit de dio rege in capite, sive alios
dominos habuerit sive non, dís rex aliis prefertur in
custodia hzeredis, & sive ipse heres ab aliis priüs fue-
rit feoffatus sive posteriüs, cüm rex parem non habeat,
nec superiorem in regno suo. Cüm igitur dominus rex
aliis pferatur tam in custodia terre de cujuscunq, feodo
fuerit ut supradictu est, si aliquis tenuerit de eo hz-
reditate aliqua p feodi firma, sockagiu vel burgagiii, &
de alio teneat terra p servitii militare, no habebit rex
custodia heredis vel terre alicujus, qua tenet de alio
p servitiü militare, nec etià occasione parvse alicujus
serjantie, quà tenuerit de dno rege p servitiü reddendi
ei cultellos, vel sagittas vel hujusmodi. Ite si diis
rex tenuerit aliqua baronia vel alià terra ut eschaeta
sua, sc. ubi heres non apparuerit ppter defect' vel
ppter delict' vel si hzeredes extiterint, cüi no sunt ad
fidem domini regis, sicut. de terris Normannorü & Flan-
drentiu, & aliquis tenens de tali baronia vel altera
ierra moriatur, heres ejus non dabit aliud releviüi diio
regi, nec aliud faciet servitium, g faceret baroni vel
Normano, si illa esset in manu baronis vel Normanni,
nec eam tenebit alio modo q baro eà tenuit, vel Nor-
mannus, nec Occasione talis baronise, vel eschaete,
habebit domin? rex aliqua eschaeta, vel custodiam


- — — —À À — ——— — 9


) * Flandrensium," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 13


although all may have a right to the maritage because fenóntb Uo


the said heir holds of each by military service. longs the
martage
One, however, of several is preferred to all, and has a as ues
greater right to the maritage, namely the chief lord who That the
is the first enfeoffer, from whom the ancestor of the heir on M
had his first enfeoffment, and to whom he did allegiance the most


in preference to all others. But the custody of the lands enfeoffo .
will remain with the other lords, which are of their fief
with services, but if any heir holds some land of the lord
ihe king in chief, whether he has other lords or not,
ihe king is preferred to the others in the custody of the
heir, and whether the heir himself was enfeoffed first
or afterwards by the others, since the king has no peer
nor superior in his realm. Since then the king is pre-
ferred to others as well in the custody of the land of
whosoever's fief i& may be, as above said, if any one f.87 b.
holds of him any inheritance in fee-farm, sockage, or
burgage, and holds from another person by military
service, the king shall not have the custody of the heir
nor of any land which he holds from another by military
service, nor on pretext of any petty serjeanty, which he
holds from the lord the king by the service of rendering
to him knives or arrows or such like. Likewise if the
lord the king has held any barony or other land as his
escheat, that is, where the heir has not appeared, owing
to failure or to delinquency, or if there be heirs who are
not in the fealtiy of the lord the king, as for lands in
Normandy or in Flanders, and some one holding from
such a barony or other land dies, his heir will not pay
any other relief to the lord the king, nor do him any
other service than what he did to the baron or the
Norman, if ii was in the hands of a baron or of a
Norman, nor will he hold it in any other manner than
that, in which the baron or the Norman held it, nor on
pretext of such barony or escheat shall the king have
any escheat,or the custody of the men tenants of that


Britton,

l. iii. ch. ij.
$ 3.

Fleta 6.


5.
Fleta, ib.


14 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


hominum de baronia illa vel eschaeta tenentium, nisi
alibi tenuerit alia tenementa de domino rege in capite,
ille qui tefitum tenuerit de baronia illa vel eschaeta,
nisi sit ita q ipse düs rex tales feoffaverit de eadem
baronia vel eschaeta, de aliqua parte tenenda de eo
hzereditarié, pur& & sine aliqua conditione, & ad quam
warratizandam obligavit se & heredes suos. Si autem
tenuerit quis de domino rege serjantiam magnam vel
parva, habebit rex custodiam, ac si de eo teneretur p
servitium militare. Magna autem dici poterit secund'
quosdü, ub si valeat C. s. & si tantum, habebit rex
eustodiam omium aliorü, etiam si valerent M. marec. &
cüm tali ratione sint alor feoda in manu dii regis,
pdieta ratione alii capitales domini feodorum illorum
nihil exigere possunt de terris & tenementis illis, nec
in servitiis nominatis, nec in auxiliis ad filiam mari-
tanda, aut filiü primogeniti militem faciend, vel etia
sectis, quamdiu terre fuerunt in manu & custodia
,domini regis, sed peipietur vie. quód p hujusmodi dis-


Briton,;i,tringpere non pmittat.  Parvze autem serjantie dici


poterunt, qure sunt dimidium mare. vel 5. s. ut si quis
teneatur invenire domino regi equum & saccum cum
brochia! eunti in Walliam cum exercitu & hujusmodi,
ut de termino San. Hit. anno reg. . H. decimo septimo
in coii Kant, de Warino de Monte Canis. & Roberto
de Hucham. Item per servitium equitandi cum diis
& dominabus, vel tenendi curiam, vel portàdi biia, vel
híinodi.


! * Saccum cum brochia," MS. Rawl. C. 160; **sellam cum brothia,"
MSS. varia.


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 15


barony or escheat, unless he, who held & tenement of
such barony or escheat, held other tenements elsewhere
of the lord the king in chief, unless it should be that the
lord the king himself enfeoffed such persons with the
same barony and escheat, of some part to be held of him
hereditarily, absolutely, and without any condition, and
to warrant which he had obliged himself and his heirs.
But if any one has held from the lord the king a great
or petty serjeanty, the king shall have the custody, as if
ib was held from him by military service. But aecording
to some it may be called great [serjeanty] if it is worth
one hundred shillings, and if so much, the king shall
have the custody of all the others, although they may be
worth one thousand marks; and since by such reason
the fiefs of others are in the hands of the king, for the
same reason the other chief lords of those fiefs can
exact nothing from those lands and tenements, neither
in the services named, nor in the aids to marry a
daughter or to make the eldest son a knight, nor even
in [the case of] sects, as long as those lands are in the
hand and custody of the lord the king, but let the sheriff
be enjoined that he should not permit a& distraint for
such like purposes. But petty serjeanties may be termed
such as are worth half & mark or five shillings, as if a
person be bound to find for the lord the king a horse
with a sack! and & brooch when going into Wales with
an army, or such like, as in a case in St. Hilary's term
in the seventeenth year of the reign of King Henry, in
the county of Kent, concerning Warin de Monte Caniso
and Robert de Hucham. — Likewise by a service of riding
with the lords or the ladies, or of holding & court, or of
carrying writs, or such like services.


——————————————M— —————— — A — — Ó—D ——d


! The same phrase occurs in fol. | fasten the mouth of the sack;
36 with the same various readings. | by others it is interpreted to mean
The term ** brochia "' is thought by | a flagon : see Ducange, Glossar.
some to mean a brooch or pin to '


6.
De herede


Sockmanni,


sub eujus
custodia
esse debet.


f. 88.


16 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


Heres veró sockmàni, mortuis antecessorib^ suis,
sub custodia capitaliu düi no erunt, sed sub custodia
eoságuineof suof ppinquiof, hoc est eor qui cóojuncti
sunt jure saguinis & no jure successionis, hoc est
ppinquiorum hzered', quibus posset aliquod jus descen-
dere, sive ppinquiores sunt, sive ppinqui, sive remoti,
& ilis cópetit custodia, ex parte quof non descendit
hzreditas, ut si descendat ex parte patris, ptinet ad
matre custodia, cüm sit parens ppinquior, ppter ppin-
quitatem sanguinis, qua deficiente, vocatur pater maris
vel mater, & ilius deficientibus frater vel soror, & defi-
eientibus illis, avunculus vel amita. Si autem bhere-
ditas descendit ex parte matris, tunc fiat à contrario.
Et regulariter verum est, q nunquam remanebit ali-
quis in custodia alicujus, de quo haberi posset suspitio,
q veli jus elamare in ipsa hsreditate, & unde si
plures sint fili; & hseredes, & tenere debeant in sock-
agio, nulla debet esse in alteri? custodia, sed sint in
eustodia consanguineor, modo quo pdictum est. Si
autem tenere debeant p servitium militare, omnes
erunt sub custodia dii capitalis, & nulla eat sub cus-
todia alterius, ppter pdictam suspitionem, & donec
plena habuerit statem. Et cüm quslibet illa& ad
celatem pvenerit, tenetur düs ear eas maritare, singulas
eum suis rationabilibus portionibus, & si ab initio ois
majores extiterint, nihilominüs in custodia dominor
erunt, donec per consilium & dispositionem domino-
rum maritentur, quia sine ipsof dispositione & assensu,
mulier hereditatem habens maritari non potest, nec
etiam in vita antecessorum de jure, sine assensu dii
eapitalis, quod si olim fecissent, hzreditatem amitte-


OF ACQUIBING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 17


But the heir of à sockman, upon the death of his . 6.
ancestors, will not be in the custody of chief lords, but pibe.
under the custody of his nearest of blood kinsfolk, that is, sockman,
of those who are united to him by right of blood, and eius duds
not by right of succession, that is of near heirs, to whom ed
soie right might descend, whether they are next, or Poereeet
near, or remote, and those are entitled to the custody,
from whose side the inheritance does not descend, as if
jt descend from the father's side, the custody belongs to
the mother, since she is the next relative, on aecount
of proximity of blood, failing whom, the father or the
mother of the mother is called, and failing them, the
brother or the sister, and failing them, the uncle or
the aunt. But if the inheritance descends from the
mother's side, then let it be done in the contrary man-
ner. And regularly it is true that no one shall remain
in the wardship of any one, of whom a suspicion may
be entertained that he would wish to assert a right to
ihe inheritance itself, and hence if there gare several
daughters and heirs, and they ought to hold in sockage, f 88.
none of them ought to be in the custody of the other,
but let them be in the custody of their kinsfolk in the
manner aforesaid. But if they ought to hold by mili-
tary tenure, all will be under the wardship of their
chief lord, and none of them under the wardship of the
other on account of the suspicion above mentioned, and
until she has full age. And when any one of them |
comes to full age, their lord is bound to provide & hus- |
band for them [and to provide] each with a reasonable .
marriage portion, and if they are all of full age from. -
the commencement, nevertheless they shall remain in .
the wardship of their lords, until through the counsel
and arrangement of their lords they are married, be-
cause without their arrangement and assent a woman
having an inheritance cannot be married, nor even in
the life of her ancestors of right, without the assent of
the chief lord, which if they had done formerly, they

VOL. II. B


e esami c srpcepa trn zx


Britton

l iii. ch. ii.
8 17.

Fleta 13.


18 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


rent sine spe recuperandi, nisi solüm p gratiam, hodié
tamen aliam poenam incurrunt, sicut inferiüs dicetur,
& hoc ideó, ne cogatur diis homagium capere de capi-
tali inimico, vel de alio minim$ idoneo. Cüm auté
quadocunque licentia & consensus domini requiratur,
tenetur dominus consentire, aut justam causam osten-
dere, quare consentire non deberet, & cüm nullam
eausam ostenderit nec consentire velit, possit mulier,
de consilio parentum, impun? & licit maritari. Ex
hoe autem sequitur qusestio, si mulier dotem habens,
possit p voluntate sua alicui nubere, pter assensum
warranti sui de dote sua, & si fecerit, si debeat dotem
suam amittere, cüm maritus suus inde nullum homa-
gium warranto suo teneatur facere, sed cum affidatione
fidelitatem tantüm, cim olim ex tali causa dotem
amitteret, nune tamen non amittet. Cüm foemina
plenz setatis heres extiterit, & de feodo plurium do-
minoi tenere debeat, tunc sufficiet. ad se maritandum,
requirere assensum diüi capitalis primi feoffatoris, &
eui antecessores sui fecerint ligiantiam. ltem cüm
semel legittimà  maritate fuerint, &  posteà vidus
effectze, iterum non tenebuntur sub custodia dominor,
licét teneantur assensum eorum requirere maritandi se:
pdicta ratione solet dici aliquando, q putagium hieredi-
tatem non adimit generaliter, sed hoc non esset intel-
ligend' de putagio filia & hszered' sed de putagio
matris quia filius hsres legittim? est, quado nuptise
demonstrat, quia psumitur quis esse filius, eó q nasci-
tur ex uxore, du tamen talis no sit psuptio q admit-
tai pbatione in eotrariü, secüd' q suprà in parte dict


-


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 19


would have lost the inheritance without hope of reco-
very, unless solely through grace; in the present day,
however, they incur another penalty, as will be stated
below, and that for this reason, lest the lord should be
obliged to receive homage from his enemy or from
another unsuitable person. But since whenever the
license and. consent of the lord is required, the lord is
obliged to consent, or to show just cause, why he ought
not to consent; and when he shows no cause, nor is
willing to consent, the woman may, upon the advice of |
her relatives, marry with impunity and licitly. Upon
this indeed follows the question, if the woman, having a
dowry, may marry anyone at her pleasure, on account
of the assent of her warrantor as to her dowry, and if
she do so, if she ought to lose her dowry, since her hus-
band is not thereupon bound to do any homage to her
warrantor, but only fealty with affidation, although for-
merly she would have lost her dowry from such a cause,
now, however, she will not lose it. When a female of
full age has become an heiress, and ought to hold in
fee of several lords, then it will be sufficient to enable
her to marry, that she should require the assent of the
chief lord the first feoffor, and to whom her ancestors
did allegiance. Likewise when they have once been
legally married and afterwards have become widows,
they shall not again be bound under the wardship of
lords, although they shall be bound to obtain their
assent to their iÁarrying: for the aforesaid reason it is
sometimes usual to say that whoredom does not take
away generally the right of inheritance, but this is not
to be understood of the whoredom of daughters who are
heiresses, but of the whoredom of a mother, because a
son is the legitimate heir when marriage points him out,
inasmuch as & person is presumed to be & son from the
fact that he is born from à man's wife, provided, how-
ever, the presumption is not such as to admit of proof to
the contrary, according to what has been said above in part.
B. 2


f. 88 b.


920 DE ACQUIBENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


est. In custodia sockagii, ubi plura sunt feoffamta
teüdi in sockagio, no erit required' de prioritate vel de
posterioritate feoffaiütoru, cu tant un? sit custos, &
cosanguinitatis jure, parens ppinquior. Nec mult refert
utrum talis legittimus sit, vel bastardus, & hsc vera
sunt, q locum non habebit prioritas &  posterioritas,
nisi it& sii de consuetudine, q ad dios capitales pti-


"nere debeat oustodia, & maritagium de sockagio, sicut


de feodo militari, sicut observatur in episcopatu Wynt.
& alibi. Et unde si plura sint feoffamenta in sockagio,
& à pluribus, ubi talis observatur consuetudo, erit ad
prioritatem recurrendum.  Ét si non nisi unus, talis
dominus eapitalis, qui tale habeat privilegium, & alibi
unus vel plures sint domini, non credo in hae parte
privilegium esse preferendum. Esto etiam quód quis
de uno tenuerit in sockagium, & de alio per servitium
militare, queritur quis capitalium dominorum preferri
debeat in maritagio ? & verum est quód ille qui feof-
favit per servitium militare, nec erit habend? respectus
ad prioritate teporis, vel posteritate ppter privilegiü
militare. Ite retento primo casu, si eotingat q ex parte
patris descedat hereditas, d tenetur p servitiu militare,
& ex parte matris in sockagio, vel é cotrario si coten-
tio fia& de maritagio hsredis, in eujus psona eojungi
debeat ille: duse hereditates, ille in maritagio pferen-
dus erit, cuj? feod' pri? fuerit deliberat, secund' q
inferiàs pleni? dicetur. In fine vero notand' q no
potesó quis, qui sub custodia alterius est & infra setate,
habere aliü, qui infra setate fuerit sub custodia sua:
quia regulariter vef est q alios regere non potest, qui
seipsum regere non novit. Nec ptinebit maritagiu ad
ipsum, qui fuerit custos ejus de quo ipse debuerit
tenere, nisi tenemenft illus minoris fuerit de feodo


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 21


In the wardship of sockage, where there are many feoff-
ments of & holding in sockage, it will nob be requisite to
inquire into the priority or the posteriority of the feoff-
ments, since there is only one guardian, and in right of
consanguinity the nearest relative. Nor does it much
matter whether such a person be legitimate or a bastard,
aüd these things are true, that priority or posteriority
wil have no place, unless it be so by custom, that the
eustody ought to appertain to the chief lords and the
maritage in the case of sockage, as in the case of a mili-
tary fief, as is observed in the bishoprice of Winchester
and elsewhere. And hence if there are several feoff-
ments in sockage and by several [feoffors], where such
eustom is observed, recourse must be had to the first
[feoffor|. And if there be only one such chief lord, who
has that privilege, and elsewhere one or more are lords,
I do not think the privilege is to be maintained in this
part. For let it be that a certain person holds of one in
sockage, and of another by military service, ib is asked
who of the chief lords is to be preferred in the maritage,
and it is true that he is to be preferred, who has feoffed
by military service, nor js respect to be had to priority of  £.e8 b.
time, or to posteriority on account of the military privilege.
Likewise in retaining the first case, if it should happen
that the inheritance, which is held by military tenure,
descends by the father's side, and on the mother's side by
sockage, or the contrary, if à contention arises concerning
the maritage of the heir, in whose person those two inhe-
ritances ought to be united, he is to be preferred as to
the maritage, whose fief was first delivered, according as
will be explained more fully below. But it is finally to
be noted that no one, who is in the custody of another
and is under age, can have another who is under age in
his custody, for it is true as a rule that no one can
govern others who cannot govern himself Nor will
the maritage belong to him, who is the guardian of him,
from whom he ought to hold, unless the tenement of the


99 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


ipsius custodis. Si aute de alteri? feodo quà ipsi?
custodis, ille habebit maritagium hzeredis ejus, qui feof-
fat? fuerit p tenente suu, & custodia teüti, d quide
tenens suus habitur? esset, si esset plensc setatis, licót
maritagiü tenentis sui ptineret ad alium dim suu
capitale, ratione veterioris feoffamenti. Casus Herici
de Tercy & Wilhelmi de Punchardon de hzrede Rogeri
de Venpel & unde antecessores Wilhelmi feoffaverat
Roger Venpel de terra de Hiwisse & Reginald & Ro-
gei filii suü, & quorum haredes simul & semel fuerunt
infra statem, & heres Reginaldi in custodia pdieti
Henrici ratione terre de Cokkeslege, & heres Rogeri
in custodia Wilhelmi, quia tenemit Reginaldi & tene-
mentum Rogeri non fuerunt in feodo.


Cap. XXXVIII.


|. Dict' est suprà de hzredibus, qui plenz setatis sunt,

De mari- HIE NAPE " m E ;

tagiohmre. & Sui juris in morte parenti, & qui infra setate exti-

ue 913 terint, sub cujus eustodia & cura esse debeant us, ad

tagium de- legittima etate, sive maritati fuerint in vita parent

und un sive non. Nunc aute dicend' est de illis, qui in vita

Brito, P8rent non sunt maritati, ad quem pertineat eoi

l.ii.ch.iii maritagiü, secund' q fuerint sub custodia parent vel
Eleta, 9. m Sp enero sn

capitalium dominof. Sed imprimis non est omitten-

dum videre quid juris sit, cüm plens setatis extiterint

& non maritati in vita parent, sive masculi fuerint,

sive foemins, ad quod sciend', q cüm plene setatis ex-

titerint, tales haeredes se ipsos maritare poterunt sine

injuria dominoir, dum tamen si foemina fuerit heres &


c


OF. ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 23


minor be of the fief of that guardian. But if it be of
the fief of another than the guardian himself, he. shall
have the maritage of that heir, who was enfeoffed by his
tenant, and the custody of the tenement which his heir
would be about to have, if he was of full age, although
the maritage of his tenant belongs to another chief lord
by reason of an older enfeoffment. The case of Henry
de Tercy and William de Punchardon concerning the
heir of Roger de Venpel, and wherein the ancestors of
William had enfeoffed Roger Venpel with the land of
Hiwisse and Reginald and Roger his son, and whose
heirs were at one and the same time under age, and the
heir of Reginald was under the wardship of the afore-
said Henry by reason of the land of Cokkeslege, and the
heir of Roger was under the wardship of William, be-
cause the tenement of Reginald and the tenement of
Roger were not in fee.


CHAPTER XXXVIII.


We have spoken above of heirs, who are of full age, and ld
independent on the death of their fathers, and [of those] don
who are minors, under whose wardship and curatorship of heirs,

. . ] h
they ought to be until they arrive at lawful age, whether tp "om.
they have been married during the lifetime of the parents tage ought


. ornot. We must now speak of those, who have not been $9.2PP^"


married in the lifetime of their parents, to whom their
maritage belongs, according as they are under the ward-
ship of their relatives, or of their chief lords. But in the
firs& place we must not omit to consider what is their
right when they have come to full age, and have not
been married in the lifetime of their parents, whether
they are males or females, in regard to which it is to be
known that, when they are of fullage, such heirs may
marry of their own choice without injury to their chief
lords, provided, however, that if the heir is à female and
marriageable, although she may be of full age, she cannot


?
i
!


f. 89.


24 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


maritanda, licét plene setatis extiterit, se maritare noh
poterit sine assensü capitalis dii, ad quem ptinere di-
noscitur inaritagiü, ratione pauló antedicta, ne cogatur
domin?, &c. Si autem maseuP & heres & plensw setatis
fuerit, se maáritare potest quando voluerit & ubi, üs-
sensu éGapitalis düi non requisito. Nulla ernihi poterit
esse causa in máàsculo herede, quare uxorem non du-
cáb, Q esse possit in foemina, cüm viro nubat. Si aute
cüm heres infra statem extiterit, & sub custodia pa-
rentü de sokapio, ppinquior ceosanguine? eum maritare
poterit, sine alicujus injutia, vel aliis vendere màrita-
gium, dum tamen in femina herede observetur, quod
superiàs dictum est de feodo militari. Cüm autem
hesres minor & non. maritatus extiterib sub custodia
domini, masculus vel fcemina, sic ut in feodo militari,
ad düm capitalem, sub cujus custodia ipse fuerit,
pünebit maritagium pleno jure, & ipsum maritare po-
terit eüm voluerit, & ubi, dum tamen non disparagetur,
vel vendere ei maritagium, cui voluerit, dum tamen in
vita venditoris maritetur, & eum maritare potest, non
tantüm semel sed scpiüs, quamdiü fuerit infra statem,
& sine uxore. $i auté düs capitalis, cui competit rmari-
tagium, negligens extiterit, quód hseredem infra setatem
non maritaverit, nec ei maritapiutn obtulerit, quod de
jure recusare non possit, extunc cüm heres effectus
fuerit plens;? setatis & sui juris, seipsum maritare possit,
sine injuria alicujus, & eodem modo, si elim capitales
domini contenderent de maritagio, cài pvenerit ad
statem, fi autem infra selatet h:zeres pprià voluntate
se maritaverit, vel p consilium alterius quàin capitalis
domini, sive sit maseul? vel foemina: item si cüm diis
capitalis ei uxorem obtulerit, quam de jure recusare
non possit, & ad volütatem domini capitalis se maritare


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 95


marry of her own choice without the assent of the chief
lord,.to whom the choice of a husband is decided to
belong, for the reason above-said, that the lord may not
be compelled, &c. But if the heir be à male and of full
age, he can marry when and where he pleases, without
requiritig the assent of the chief lord. For there can be
no eause ih the case of & male heir, why he should not
marry a wife, which there tay be in à woman, when she
is married to a màn. JButif, when the heir is under
age; and under the wardship of relations in sockage, the
nearest blood-relative may choose a wife for him without
injury to any one, or sell the right of choice to others,
provided, however, in the case of a female heir that is
observed, which has been stated above concerning a
military fie But when the heir, being à minor and
not married, is under the wardship of a lord, whether the
heir be male or female, the maritage belongs in full right
to the chief lord, under Whose wardship he is, as in the
case of a military fief, and he may choose a wife for him
when he will and where, provided, however, he is not
disparaged, or he may sell to him the right of marrying
with whom he pleases, provided he is married in the life-
time of the seller, and he may choose a wife for him, not
only once but repeatedly, as long as he is under age, and
without à wife, But if the chief lord, who is entitled to
the maritage, has been negligent, that he has riot chosen à
wife for him when under age, nor has offered him the
choice of à wife, whom he could not of right refuse, tien


the heir, when he has come of full age, and is indepen-


dent, may choose a wife for himself without injury to
any person, and in the same way as when a chief lord
should contend for the maritage, when he has come to
fullage. Butif the heir, being under age, has married
of his own choice, or upon the counsel of another than
his chief lord, whether the heir be male or female: like-
wise when the chief lord has offered him a wife, whom
he cannot of right refuse, and he has been unwilling to


f. 89,


26 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


noluerit, dicendo quód nondum voluntatem habet mari-
tandi se, dominus in hoc non poterit necessitatem im-
ponere, quód hoc faciat invitus, cüm libera debeant
esse conjugia, pspicitur tamen ei in hac parte, quód
ultra :etatem heredis retineat hsreditatem, quousq,
inde perceperit ad valentiam maritagii, vel donec ei
inde fuerit satisfactum aliter. ltem quotienscunq, con-
tgerit unum ex pluribus infra :etatem mori & alii
sunt infra statem, masculi vel fceminz, habebit düs
capitalis maritagium cujuslibet post aliu, dum fuerint
infra statem.


| 2. Dietum est in precedentib? quid juris sit,si una sit
Siplure5*thoreditas descendens à patre vel à matre tantüm, &
peibeud , Unus sib capitalis dominus. Nunc autem dicendum est,
alieui de. S91 diverse sint hereditates descendentes tam ex parte
scendentes, patris quàm ex parte matris, quz conjungi debeant in
tam ex . . . TONT. .
parte pa PSona unius hzredis, & utriusq, hsreditatis sit unus
terna, 3m. dominus capitalis, de quo tenetur p servitium militare,
mairiss X quo casu quantum ad maritagium hsredis habendum,
refert cujus feodum priüs fuerit deliberatum, ita quód
hzres teneatur domino suo ad homagium, quia non
poterit capitalis dominus, nee debet homagiü alicuj?
hzeredis capere, antequam hzereditas sic deliberata fu-
erit, ppter quod hzres teneatur ad homagium, & nullus
alius. ltem nec potest dominus capitalis ab hsrede,
qui plenze setatis extiterit, relevium petere, vel servi-
tium aliquod, antequam homagium h:zredis receperit,
cüm fuerit hzreditas deliberata. ltem nec alicujus
heredis, qui fuerit infra statem, ptinet ad ipsum cus-
todia terre & heredis, &  maritagium, antequam
feodum suum sie fuerit deliberatum, eó quód non du-
raverib homagium antecessorum.  Durare autem sic
poterib homagium antecessoris tota vita eorum, si ab


eo non sit recessum, ut videri poterit. Esto, quód quis


*
OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 97


marry in aecordance with the choice of his chief lord,
saying that he has not at present the desire to marry,
the lord cannot impose upon him the necessity to do this
against his will, since marriages ought to be free, regard
however is had to him in this way, that he may keep the
inheritance of the heir after he comes of age, until he
has received from it up to the value of the maritage, or
until satisfaction has been made to him otherwise. Like-
wise as often as ib happens that one out of many dies
under age, and there are others under age, male or female,
the chief lord shall have the maritage of each after the
other, as long as they are within age.


We have discussed in the preceding chapters, what is ^ 2.
the law, if there be one inheritance descending from the i ho
father or from the mother alone, and there be one chief inherit-


lord. Now, however, we must discuss, if there be divers Mii "
inheritanees descending as well from the father's side as any one, as
from the mother's side, which ought to be united in the don.
person of one heir, and there be one chief lord of each side as
inheritance from whom it is held by military service, in nc.
which case, as regards the having the maritage of the sie.
heir, it is of importance whose fief has been first de-

livered, so that the heir may be held to his lord to do

him homage, because à chief lord neither ean, nor ought

to take the homage of any heir, before the inheritance

has been so delivered to him, on aecount of which the

heir is bound to do him homage, and no one else.  Like-

wise the chief lord eannot claim & relief from the heir,

who has come to full age, or any service, before he has
received the homage of the heir, when the inheritance

has been delivered. Likewise the custody of the land

and of the heir, and the maritage of any heir, who is

under age belongs to him, before his fief has been so
delivered, because the homage of the ancestors is not

lasting. But the homage of an ancestor may last all

their lives, if they have not withdrawn from it,as may


be seen. Let it be, that a certain person holds from


e


28 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


teneat de alio per homagium & per servitium militare,

& concedat filio suo, quód teneat hereditatem ad vitam

f 89b. filii sui heredis de se, vel de dominis capitalibus, et

sub tali conditione, quód si filius moriàtur in vita

patris, quód hsreditas integre revertatur ad patrem

ienenda ut priüs, sine conditione, vel sub conditione

ad vitam suam, per talem concessionem adhuc non

mutatur homagium, sed tenet inter patrem et dominum

suum capitalem, quia nunquam fuit ab eo recessum,

nec filius, quamvis hsres, qui non tenuit nisi ad vitam,

ad homagium tenebatur. Quod quidem aliter esset si

pater ab hzreditate se dimitteret, & filium haeredem
instituerit.

Qua B3 Videndum igitur qualiter et quando feodum alicuj?

feodum — deliberatur, et sciendum quód tune demum deliberatur,

ore quantum ad dominum ptinet, càm heres sine impedi-

quodad | mento, vel aliquo modo! ad homagium teneatur, &

POENAE nunquam deliberabitur, quamdiu duraverit homagium

maritagium antecessoris: ut ecce, A. habens hereditatem, ducit

heredis, xorem B. habentem h:reditatem, et quilibet illorum

habet unum dominum capitalem, pereatur ex eis hzeres

comunis, filius vel filia, preemoritur À. in vita uxoris,

jam deliberata est hseereditas ipsius À. ita quód ad do-

minum suum ptinet custodia terre & heredis, & q hseres

teneatur ad homagium, & pinde est q dominus suus ha-

beat maritagium. ltem esto q PB. uxor przemoriatur,

videtur igitur sicut in casu prsemisso, g feodum dni sui

de quo tenuit sit deliberatü, & q ei competat custodia

terre, et heredis, & maritagiü, q quidem non est verum,

quia adhuc durat homagium ipsi? À. factum diio capitali

nomine uxoris, q in vita ipsius Á. non dissolvitur, cüm

tenere debeat hzreditatem uxoris sug per legem An-

glie ad vitam suam. Et unde durante homagio ipsius

A. hsres suus sub potestate sua remanebit, et capi-

tali dio non tenebitur ad homagium vivente patre,

cüm no possit quis duo homagia de uno tenemto simul


! ** Aliquo medio," M8. Rawl. 160.


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 29


another by homage and by military service, and grants to
his son that he may hold the inheritance for the life of
his son the heir from himself or from the chief lords,
and under such condition, that if the son should die in
the lifetime of the father, the inheritance should return
entire to the father to hold as before, without any con-
dition or under the condition for his life, by such a grant
the homage is not yet changed, but holds good between
the father and his chief lord, because he has never with-
drawn from it,nor was his son,although his heir, who
only held for life, held to homage. Which would be other
wise, if the father released himself from the inheritance
and instituted his son his heir.


Let us see then in what way and when the fief of any
one is delivered, and it is to be known that 1t 1s then at


f. 89. b.


3.
When the
fief of any


last 'delivered as far as the lord is concerned, when the ne Due
lvered,


heir without impediment or in any way is held to homage, i4; qe
and it will never be delivered, as long as the homage meritage


; : , . Oofthehei
of the ancestor lasts ; as for instance A. having an inheri- Belonr eo


tance takes for wife B. who has an inheritance, and each the lord.


of them has one chief lord, there 1s proereated from them
& common heir, a son or à daughter, À. dies first in the
lifetime of B., the inheritance of À. himself is now de-
livered, so that the custody of his land and of his heir
belongs to his chief lord, and the heir is held to homage,
and by parity of reason his lord has the maritage. Like-
wise let it be that B. the wife dies first, 16 seems therefore
as in the first. case, that the fief of her lord, from whom
she held, is delivered, and that he is entitled to the
eustody of the land and of the heir, and to the maritage,
whieh indeed is not true, because the homage of A. done
to the chief lord in the name of his wife, 1s not dissolved
during the lifetime of A., since he ought to keep the
inheritance of his wife by the Law of England for his
life. And hence as long as the homage of À. lasts his
heir will remain under his power, and will not be bound
to do homage to the chief lord whilst his father is living,
Since à person cannot take two homages for one tenement


V


"Um, ^ uEREMPRI T P —————vRRRRRRT Em MR m Rr NR T ee e SNR M s TA LC T


T—— 0 C Ms


50 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


capere à duobus. Quod autem dictum est, locum ha-
bet in hsrede eomuni . Si autem sunt diversi, aliud
erit, ut si vir primó contraxerit cum quadam habente
hereditatem, & hserede pcreato decesserit vir, adhuc
non est hsereditas deliberata vivente uxore, nec mari-
tagium ; et si posteà nupserit alteri viro, vel pluribus
suecessivó, nunquam deliberabitur custodia vel mari-
iagium in vita sua, vel virorum, ut praedictum est.
Si autem uxor premoriatur et ipse aliam uxorem
duxerit, adhue erit illud idem dicendu de h:zreditate
uxoris primz:. Sed eum vir przmoriatur, deliberabitur
hereditas heredis de alio viro. Prrwmori autem pote-
rit vir vel uxor, per maj? tempus, vel minus, vel mini-
mum, hora, vel momento, eb ille dominus semper prze-
ferendus erit, cujus feodum  priüs fuit deliberatum.
Sed esto quód constare non possit, quis illorum priüs
moriatur, tunc recurrendum est ad antiqui? feoffamtum
vel feodum, nullo habito respectu ad prioritatem deli-
berationis.


4. Cüm autem tam ex parte hrereditatis patris, quàm


Cum plures ox. parte hsreditatis matris plures sunt & diversi diii
sunt do- : . . :
minieapi- capitales, & deliberata fuerit hrereditas ex una parte,


Red antequa utraq, hereditas cojuneta sit in psona uni?
patris, heredis ex parte illa qus deliberata fuerit, erit. ille
Purto ma. díis preferend? qui prim? est feoffator, & diis lige?, et
tris. cui ille antecessor, qui obiit, fecit ligeantia. Eode modo,
eàüm hereditas utriusq, tà patris quàm matris, una vel

plures, cojucta sit in psona uni? h:wredis, adhuc erit

ille pferend?, qui primó feoffavit p servitiu militare,

f.90. omnib? alüs penit? exclusis, licét ibi sint infinita feof-
pron j; fafta. Plures autem capitales domini feoffatoris p
s e ^ servitium militare jus habere poterunt in maritagium


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 31


ab the same time from two persons. But what has been
said holds good in the case of a common heir. But if
there be divers heirs, it will be otherwise, as if the man
has first contracted marriage with a certain woman
having an inheritance, and an heir having been pro-
created the man dies, the inheritance is not delivered
whilst the wife is living nor the maritage; and if she
should afterwards marry another man, or several suc-
cessively, neither the custody nor the maritage will be
delivered during her own life, or those of her husbands,
as aforesaid. But if the wife predeceases, and the man
himself takes another woman to wife, the same thing
wil have to be said concerning the inheritance of the
firs& wife. But when the man predeceases, the inheri-
tance of the heir by another husband will be delivered.
But the husband or wife may die first, by à great time,
or à less time, or the very least time, an hour or a
moment, and that lord shall always be preferred, whose
fief was first delivered. But let it be, that it cannot be
established, which of them died first, then recourse must
be had to the more ancient enfeoffment or fief, no regard
being paid to the delivery.


But when there are several and different chief lords as —— 4.
well on the side of the inheritance of the father, as on the (sere are
side of the inheritance of the mother, and the inheritance several
on one side has been delivered before each inheritance uiua
has been united in the person of one heir on that side, on A father's
which i& has been delivered, that lord will have to be onthe
preferred who is the first feoffor and the liege lord to mother's
whom that ancestor, who died, did allegiance. In the ie
same way, when the inheritance of each, as well the
father and the mother, one or more, has been united in
the person of one heir, he will still have to be preferred,
who first enfeoffed by military tenure, to the exclusion of
all the others, although there be there infinite enfeoff- :
ments. But several chief lords, who have enfeoffed by £90.
military service, may have a right to the maritage of a


82 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


alieuf?, sed non omnes obtinebunt, càm  maritagium
non recipiat divisionem. . Oportet igitur de necessitate,
quód un? aliis preferatur, secundüm q predictum est.


Càm autem maritagiü alicuj? heredis petatur ab


um autem . . TEE .
Cumantem vno ve] à plurib?, refert quis fuerit in seysina, utrum


marita-


gium peta- s, ille qui jus habet, an ille qui jus non habet, sicut


tur, refert " :
quisfuerip IDater, vel alius propinquus, parens, vel extraneus, vel


rs rbi unus ex pluribus capitalibus dominis, qui jus habet.
utrum do- 9i &utem ille qui jus non habet, & ab eo petatur ab
minus vel aliquo domino capitali, uno vz. aut confitetur quód
extraneus. . . .
habeat ipsum, aut negat. Si autem negaverit, proce-
datur contra ipsum, secundüm q inferiüs dicetur in
tractatu de actionibus. Si autem confiteatur quód ip-
Sum habeat, & unus ex pluribus dominis petat, pro-
bante eo quód antecessor hsredis de eo tenuit per
servitium militare, oportet quód tenens restituat, vel
rationem ostendat quare restituere non debeat. Non
enim sufficit si dicat, quód alius majus jus habeat in
maritagio, quia in ore tenentis non jacebit talis excep-
tio. Cüm autem sint plures, qui dicunt:se habere jus
in maritagio, & petunt ab uno, qui jus non habet, licét
cognoverint quód hsredem habuerit, tamen non tene-
tur alieui eorum hereditatem restituere, donec ei con-
stüituerit de jure petentium, & quis eorum sii alteri
preesferendus, sed dicetur ei, quód illum salvo custodiat,
donee eonstiterit de veritate, & erit hswres el restitu-
end? qui prioritatem habet feoffationis & plus juris.
Si autem constare non possit per aliquam pbationem,
quis eorum majus jus habuerit, ppter hoe non rema-
nebit seysina cum eo, qui nihil juris habet, sed erit
transferenda ad petentes, eó quód pbant se jus habere.


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 33


certain person, but all shall not obtain it, since maritage
does not admit of division. lt is incumbent therefore
of necessity, that one be preferred to the others, according
io what has been said above.

When however the maritage of any heir is claimed by ,,., ?-
one or by more, it is of importance who is in seysine, however,
whether for instance he who has the right, or he who mene
has not the right, as the mother or another near relative, is of im-
or à stranger, or one of several chief lords, who has the sd
right. Butif he who has not the right [is in seysine], seysine of
and it is claimed from him by some chief lord, one for *h9 bem
instance, he either admits that he has the right or he thelord or
denies ihe fact; but if he denies, proceedings may be IDRHARONES
taken against him, according to what will be explained
below in the treatise concerning actions. But if he
admits that he has the right, and one of several lords is
the claimant, upon his proving that the ancestor of the
heir held of him by military service, it is incumbent that
the tenant restore, or shew reason why he should not
make restitution. For it is not sufficient if he should
say, that another has a greater right to the maritage, for
such an objection does not lie well in the mouth of a
tenant. But when there are several, who say that they
have a right to the maritage, and they claim from one
who has not the right, although they have established
that he had an heir, nevertheless he is not bound to
restore the inheritance to any of them, until it has been
made clear to him as to the right of the claimants, and
which of them is to be preferred to the other, but he
shall be told that he must keep it in safe custody, until
it shall be made clear to him respecting the truth, and
the heir will have to be restored to him who has the
priority of the feoffment and the greaterright. But if it
cannot be established by any proof, which of them has
the greater right, the seysine for that reason shall not
remain with him, who has not any right to it, but. shall
be transferred to the claimants, because they prove that

YOL. II, C


pam UEUCT Dr NEC Ae ilr MEE od


o9 —u mE MEER a Gp — Er — e i m p E inm m. am o


«amp —-———üsmemr aca prep cU Po dt emn ado ap c


f. 90b


34 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


Sed restat videre, utrum omnino debeat cum uno re-
manere, ut ita quód.satisfaciat alteri de medietate
valoris, vel quód uni ex toto remaneat sine satisfac-
tione, cüm maritagium divisionem non recipiat. Vide-
tur quód uni remanere debeat ex toto, sine aliqua
recompensatione medietatis, si pbari possit, quis eoru
ultimó fuit in seysing. Si autem non, et omnino de-
fieiat pbatio, videtur quód ille prseferri debeat, qui
primó instituit actionem. Esto etiam, quód unus ex
pluribus capitalibus dominis, qui jus habet in marita-
gio, fuit in seysina, & unus vel plures petant marita-
gium, ille, qui tenet, in seysina remanebit, donec con-
stiterit quis eorum maj? jus habuerit in maritagio.
Non sufficit enim q petentes pbent se jus habere,
omnes vel quidam eorum, ad hoe, quód auferatur pos-
sessio à tenente, nisi sib qui pbet se majus jus habere:
paritas enim juris non auferb seysinam à tenente,
propter commodum possidendi, & privilegium  posses-
sionis. lgitur nisi sit aliquis qui pbare possit, se ipsum
esse primum & principalem feoffatorem, cüm tenens
negaverit, cüm p negationem fiat res dubia, tenens
remanebit in seysina, quasi deficiente pbatione, licét
revera jus habuerit, càm defecerit pbatio, licót jus non
deficiat. Si autem dicat inquisitio, quód omnes feof-
fati sunt uno eodem tempore, petens & tenens, s. à
conquestu Anglis, adhuc erit judicandum p possidente,
eó quàd pares sunt jure & tempore, cüm paritas non
aufert possessionem, ut suprà. ltem si sciri non possit
omnino, nec pbari cujus feoffafitum sit vetustius, vel
si fort? juratores dubitaverint, adhue remanebit pos-


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 35


they have & right to it. But it remains to be seen,
whether it ought altogether to remain with one, on con-
dition thab he satisfies the other to the amount of half its
value, or whether it should remain in totality with one
without any satisfaction [to the other], since a maritage
does not admit of division. It seems that it ought io
remain in totality with one, without any recompense of
mediety, if i6 can be proved, who of them was the last in
seysine. But if it can not be proved, and the proof
altogether fails, it seems that he ought to be preferred,
who first instituted an action. For let it be, that one
out of several chief lords, who has a right to the mari-
tage, wás in seysine, and one or more claim the mari-
tage, he who has seysine shall remain in seysine, until
it shall be established which of them has the greater
right to the maritage. For it is not sufficient, that the
elaimants prove that they have right, all or some of
them, in order that possession shall be taken away from
the tenant, unless there be some one who proves that
he has a greater right: for parity of right does not
take away seysine from a tenant, because of the ad-
vantage of being in possession and the privilege of pos-
session. Therefore unless there be some one, who can
prove, that he is the first and the principal feoffor, when
the tenant denies it, since the matter is rendered doubt-
ful by the denial, the tenant will remain in seysine, as
if 'the proof failed, although he had in reality the right,
since the proof has failed although the right is not
wanting. But if the inquest says, that all have been
enfeoffed at one and the same time, claimant and tenant,
that is, from the conquest of England, it will still have
to be adjudged in favour of him in possession, since
they are.equal in right and in time, and parity does
not take away possession as above. Likewise if it
eannot be known altogether and it cannot be proved,
whose enfeoffment is the most ancient, or if the jurats
by chance have doubted, the possession will still remain
c 2


f. 90 b.


36 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


sessio tenenti, quasi deficiente pbatione: quia qui dubi-
tat, vel obscuré loquitur, non pbat; quia quotienscunq,

dubitatur an quid sit, perinde est ae si non esset illud, -
cim autem loquatur pbatio de uno tempore, adhue
poterit esse prioritas de die vel hora, de quib? si dubi-
tatum fuerit, vel penitus nescitum, adhuc non valet
pbatio petentis. Item cüm juratores nihil sciant de
prioritate temporis, vel diei, vel hors, sed dicant quód
petens ultimam habuit seysinam, adhuc non sufficiet
. hoe, quó majus tenens possessione privetur; poterit
enim quis esse in seysina, quamvis jus non habuerit,
vel jus maj?.  Cüm autem descendat hzreditas tam
ex parte patris, quàm ex parte matris, & patre pre-
mortuo, eàm hseres non maritetur, reddit mater heredi
" heereditatem, & instituat ut hszredem tenendum de
capitalibus dominis, tenebitur hsres statim ommib^
capitalib? dominis utriusq, hsreditatis ad homagium,
quia feoda omnium sunt deliberata, & tune fiat, sicut
predietü est, de prioritate deliberationis alterius hseredi-
tatis, et de prioritate feoffationis ejusde hsereditatis &
non utiriusq, antequam & postquam in psona uni?
hseeredis semel conjuncta fuerit utraq, hsereditas, et
heres semel fuerit maritat? ratione prime paternz de-
liberationis. Extunc enim si infra zetatem  hseres, et
iterum maritand?, non observabitur ordo hereditatis
quze primó deliberata est, sed cojunetis omnib? feoffa-
torib? utriusq, hereditatis, iste aliis prwferend? erit,
qui primus & principalis erit feoffator in cojunctione
utriusq, hzreditatis. Item esto, quód pater vel mater
feoffaverit hseredem suum simul & semel, de pluribus
feodis, quee tenentur de diversis capitalibus dominis,
tenendw de seipsis & eorum hseredibus, patre vel matre


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 37


to the tenant, as if the proof were defective; because he
who doubts or speaks obscurely, does not prove ; because
as often as ib is doubted, whether a thing is, it is the
same as if it did not exist, but when the proof speaks of
one time, there may still be priority of time, of a day or
of an hour, concerning which if there be doubt or there
be complete ignorance, the proof of the claimant is still
invalid. Likewise when the jurats know nothing of
priority of time or of à day or of* &n hour, but say that
the claimant had the last seysine, this will still not be
sufficient, in order that the tenant should be deprived of
possession: for & person may have been in seysine,
although he had no right, or not the greater right, But
when an inheritance descends as well from the father's
side as from the mother's side, and the father being
predeceased, when the heir has not been married, the
mother restores to the heir his inheritance, and institutes
him as heir to hold of the chief lords, the heir will be
bound immediately to do homage to all the chief lords
of either inheritance, beeause the fiefs of all have been
delivered, and then it should be done as has been said
above concerning the priority of the deliverance of the
one or other inheritance, and concerning the priority of
the enfeoffment of the same inheritance and not of each,
before and after each inheritance has been once united
in the person of one heir, and the heir has once been
married, by reason of the first paternal delivery. From
that time, if the heir be under age and is to be married
for the second time, the order of the inheritance, which
has been first. delivered will not be observed, but, all the
feoffors of either inheritance being united, he will have
to be preferred to the others, who shall be the first and
the principal feoffor in the union of either inheritance.
Likewise let it be that à father or a mother has enfeoffed
their heir once and. together of several fiefs, which are
held from different chief lords, to be held of themselves
&nd their heirs, upon the father or mother, the feoffor,


f. 91.


38 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


feoffatore preemortuo, herede non maritato, ptinebit
maritagiü ad primum  feoffatorem, nec mutatur ordo,
nec prioritas: si autem immediate de capitalib? diis,
adhuc illud idem observabitur, dum tamen simul &
semel & eode tempore, quia si aliter esset, sciri no
posset, quis ipsorü esset in maritagio prsefferendus. Si
autem pater vel mater no simul, sed diversis tempori-
bus, feoffaverunt hzredem de diversis feodis tenendü
de se, vel de díiis capitalib?, & si de dnis capitalibus,
tune mutatur ordo prims prioritatis, & tenet novus
ordo novi feoffamenti; si autem de se & hsredib? suis,
adhue tenet vet? ordo & prioritas, quee non mutatur
quantum ad psonas eorum p novum feoffaitum, & ad
ipsos ptinebit maritagium quamdiu vixerint; illis ta-
men fprazmortuis, hsrede non maritato, cüm heres,
ralione successionis antecessorü, & non feoffamti sibi
facti, incipiat esse sub potestate capitalium dominoru,
reincipit esse ordo prim? prioritatis, qui mutat? fuit et
alterat? p feoffamtu hseredis. Et q dictum est de filio
antenato & herede, locü habet de filio postnato, si
post feoffamentü suum cotingat ipsum esse hsrede.
Si aute non, teneat feoffafitu, & maritagium inter
ipsum & suü warrantü. Si aute pater vel mater parté
hereditatis dederint filio & hseredi simul & semel, vel
successivo, & parte retinuerint, quid juris esse debeat
de maritagio habendo, satis elici poterit ex premissis.
Item si pat & inat hereditate habentes, simul vel suc-
cessivé hsrede, feoffaverint vel filiü postnat de uiraq,
hereditate, & aliquid retinuerit, mortuo ta patre q
imatre, filio infra state existente, & non maritato, erit


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 39


being predeceased, the heir not having been married, the
maritage will belong to the first feoffor, nor is the order or
the priority changed ; but if they are [to be held] imme-
diately of the chief lords, the same thing will still have to
. be observed, provided it be done together and at one and
ihe same time, because if 16 were otherwise, it could not
be known, which of them was to be preferred as regards
the maritage. But if the father or the mother have
enfeoffed the heir at different times and not at the same
time with different fiefs to be held from themselves, or
from the chief lords, if indeed from the chief lords, then
the. order of the first priority 1s changed, and the new
order of the new enfeoffment holds good; but if from
themselves and their heirs, the ancient order and priority
still holds good, which is not changed, as regards their
persons, by the new enfeoffment, and the maritage will
belong to them as long as they live; but on their prior
decease, the heir not having been married, when the
heir, by reason of the succession of his ancestors, and not
of the enfeoffment made to him, begins to be under the
power of the chief lords, the order of the first priority,
which was changed and altered by the enfeoffment of
. the heir, recommenees to be in foree. And what is said
of à son and heir born beforehand, takes place in regard
to a son born afterwards, if it happens after his enfeoff-
ment, that he is the heir. Butif not, let him hold the
enfeoffment and the maritage between himself and his
warrantor. But if the father or the mother have given
& part of the inheritance at one and the same. time, or
successively to their son and heir, and have retained à
pari, what right there ought to be to have the maritage,
may be sufficiently gathered from the premisses.  Like-
wise if the father and the mother having an inheritance,
have enfeoffed together or successively, as heir, an after-
born son with either inheritance, and have retained
something, upon the death of the father as well as of
the mother, and the son being under age and not married,


40 ,. DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


illud q retentu est prifà feoffament, cüm hzeres in man?
dif devenerit, licàt illud esset ultimu in psonis ante-
cesso. tem cu filium & hzredem feoffaverint de
uiraqg, hereditate pater & mater, teda de eis, & nihil
Sibi retinuerint, tunc illud feodum erit pferend', g fuit
primum p novum feoffament, exclusa prioritate feoffa-
tionis antecessot. ltem esto q successive feoffaverunt
filium postnatü, de se tenend' & hzsredib? suis, mari-
tag heredis talis ad eos ptinebit, nec habenda est
ratio, quantum ad eos & hsredes suos de prioritate
feoffamti, cüm unus sit feoffator & unus hzres, nisi
ita sit forté, q ille postnatus hsres pficiatur, quo casu
pfertur ille in maritagio habendo, de cujus feodo talis
fuit primo feoffat?, & tenebit novitas, exclusa vetus-
tate, aliter eni esset, si de utraq, hereditate simul &
ex toto esset feoffatus. ltem & eodem modo, si cü
hasres patris vel matris feoffatoris sit infra wtatem &
in custodia dii capitalis, cüm parentes feoffatores sibi
partem hereditatis retinuerunt, morietur filius postna-
tus, herede suo infra statem existente, & ratione hs-
reditatis antecessor qui feoffaverut, devenerit custodia
terraf hseredis postnati in man? düor capitaliu, de
maritag' ipsius heredis erit habenda ratio prioritatis,
secund' g ipse à patre & .matre feoffatus fuit, simul
vel vicissim, quia si simul de pluribus feodis, erit ille
capitalis dis in maritagio preferendus, de cujus feodo
antecessores feoffatores primó fuerunt feoflati. Si au-
iem vicissim, tunc erit ille preeferendus, de cujus feodo
pater & mater primum fecerunt feoffament filio post-
nato.


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 41


that which has been retained will be the first enfeoffment,
when the heir comes into the hands of the lord, although
it was the last in the persons of the ancestors.  Like-
wise when the father and the mother have enfeoffed a
son and heir with the inheritance of each, to be held of
them, and have retained nothing for themselves, then
that fief will have to be preferred, which was the first
under the new enfeoffment, to the exclusion of the
priority of the enfeoffment of the ancestors. Likewise
let it be, that they have successively enfeoffed an after-
born son to hold of them and their heirs, the maritage of
. Such an heir will pertain to them, nor is respect to be
paid, as far as regards them and their heirs, to any
priority of enfeoffment, since there is one feoffor and
one heir, unless it should be by chaneg, that the after-
born heir should be set first, in which case he, with whose
fief such [heir] was first enfeoffed, is preferred in having
the maritage, and the more recent will prevail to the
exclusion of the more ancient, for i& would be otherwise,
ifhe had been enfeóffed with each inheritance at one
and the same time. Likewise and in the same way, if
when the heir ofthe father and of the mother is under age
and in the wardship ot the chief lord, when the parents,
who are the feoffors, have retained for themselves &
part of the inheritance, the after-born son dies, his heir
being under age, and by reason of the inheritance of the
ancestors who have enfeoffed him, the custody of the
lands of the after-born heir has come into the hands of
the chief lords, regard will have to be had to priority in
what concerns the maritage of the heir himself, according
as he has been enfeoffed by the father and by the mother,
at the same time or in turns, for if he has been enfeoffed
at the same time with several fiefs, that chief lord is to
be preferred in the maritage, with whose fief his ances-
lors and feoffors were first enfeoffed. But if in turns,
then he will have to be preferred, with whose fief the
father and the mother first made an enfeoffment to the
after-born son. 5


42 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


m 6. De sockagio vidend' est, ad quem  ptineat maritag
quem : ; : : ; $a
pertinet & seiend' quod ad ipsum, ad g ptinet custodia terrat
zysbor E & teütorum, seeund' diversam consuetudinem locor, vel
agio. ad düm capitalem, vel ad ppinquiore consanguineu qui
nihil juris clamare possit in hereditate, ppter suspitio-
nem exhzredationis, & ipsius consanguinei maxim$, ex
eujus parte hsreditas no descendit, vel qui aliquid
juris clamare possit in hsreditate, vel qui hzeres esse
possit toti? vel p parte, & ideó non deberet esse filia
postnata in custodia primogenite, vel mariti sui, si
viro fort? nupta fuerit. Et ideó si quis emerit cus-
todia terrat, & maritag' filia, & alig illaf duxerit in
uxore, stati oritur suspitio, & amittit custodià corporis
& maritag aliat ipso jure, ppter suspitione, & ideó
ptinebit ad parentes ut dict' est, custodia corporis &
maritag. Esto etii q quis feoffatus fuerit de aliquo
tendum in sockagio primó, & posteà de eode vel ab
alio tenendi p servitium militare, vel é conira, videtur
& vei est, q ille pferend? est, qui feoffavit per servitiu
militare, ppter privileg' militare; & si feoffat? dapnu
incurrat p tale feoffai quoad maritag' hoc sibi ipsis
poterunt iputare. Si cüm hsredes extüiterint sub po-
testate parentum, ad quos pertinuerit maritagium mero
jure, parentes ipsorum maritagium heredum vendide-
rint, & ab emptore maritati non fuerint in vita vendi-
toris, statim mortuo venditore, ad dominum capitalem
pertinebit maritagium, & ex tune, si alius eum mari-
taveritb, emptor, parens, extraneus, vel alius ad quem
non pertinuerit, € jus non habuerit, vel si jus habue-


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS.  -: 43


Concerning sockage let us see to whom the maritage 6.
belongs, and it is to be known that it belongs to him, to iem
whom the custody of the lands and tenements belongs, the mari-
according to the different custom of the places, either to G8 7». Me
the chief lord, or to the next kinsman by blood, who can sockage.
assert no right to the inheritance, on account of the sus-
picion against him of disherison and against that kins-
man chiefly, on whose side the inheritance does (not?)
descend, or who can asserb some right to the inberi-
tance, or who can be the heir of the whole, or for a
part, and on that account an after-born daughter ought
not to be in the wardship of the firstborn (daughter), or
of her husband, if by chance she is married to a man.
And accordingly, if any one has bought the custody of
lands and the maritage of daughters, and has taken to
himself to wife one of the daughters, suspicion against |
him immediately arises, and he loses the custody of her -
person and the maritage of the others by operation of
law on account of the suspicion against him, and aecord- ,
ingly the custody of the person and the maritage will .
belong to the parents as said above. Let it be also that :

a person has been enfeoffed by some one with a fief to be |
held in sockage first of all, and afterwards by the same
person or by another with the same fief to be held in
military service, or the contrary, it seems and it is true,
that he is to be preferred who has enfeoffed on condition
of military service on aecount of the military privilege ;
and if the person enfeoffed incurs loss by such an enfeoff-
ment as regards the maritage, they may impute the blame
to themselves. If when the heirs are under the power of
their relatives, to whom the maritage belongs of absolute
right, the parents sell the maritage of those heirs, and
they have not been given away in marriage by the
buyer during the life of the seller, immediately upon the
death of the seller, the maritage will belong to the chief
lord, and thenceforth 1f another gives away the heir in
marriage, à buyer, & relation, a stranger, or another to
whom it does not belong, and who has no right, or if


44 DE ACQUI&ENDO RÉRUM DOMINIO.


f91b. rit, & alius majus jus habet, facit domino capitali
prejudicium, ad quem mero jure ptinuerit maritagium,
cüm illud sit ei deliberatum, càm emptor illam sey-
sina vera habuerit in vita venditoris, ppter non usum,
nec poterit in hoe casu heredem vocare ad warrantum.
Si autem haeredes, cüm sint sub potestate parentum,
Sine consensu eorum se maritaverint, propter hoe non
sunt exhsredandi, lieét aliter quodammodo puniendi,
si parentes voluerint. Si autem, cüm hszredes in po-
testate dominorum devenerint non maritati, ipsi domini
capitales vendiderint maritagium cüm jus habuerint,
lieét ali? pl? juris; & ille qui plus jus habuerit peti-
erib maritagium ab emptore, & custodiam hsredis, in
hoc easu erit venditor voeandus ad warrantum. Et q
dieitur de uno emptore, dici poterit de plurib?, si ma-

ritagiu sit venditum pluribus de manu in manum.
A M Provisio de ceómuni consilio facta, de hseredibus
si quis — infra statem existentibus, si, dum fuerint infra sta-
SUM tem, p malitiam abducti fuerint, & detenti p parentes
Briton, à custodia dominorum, quód si laicus inde convietus
"Ari -il fuerit quód puerum abduxerit & maritaverit absq,
Fleia11. licentia domini capitalis, restituat vel reddat custodi
valorem maritagii, & corp? p delicto tradatur p balli-
vos prisons, quousq, custodi emendaverit delictum, &
quousq, domino regi satisfecerit de üransgressione illa,
& hoc intelligatur de hsredibus infra xiiij! annos ex-
istentibus: de hzredibus autem qui sunt quatuordecim
annorum & ultra, usq; ad plenam statem, & si se
maritaverint sine licentia dominorum, ut eis auferant
maritagium suum, & dis capitalis talis heeredis obtu-
lerit ei rationabile maritagiü, ubi non disparagetur, &
q recusare non deberet, domin? suus tune teneat ter-


—— — ———' ——  ——— MÀ M RÀ — — M M — — —:— A ——— —— —« - — À M — MÀ e n s ns c a p RR


1 Sic MS. RawL, C. 160.


— —— —


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINMÓN or THINGS. 46


he has any right, another has a greater right, he does
prejudice to the chief lord, to whom the maritage belongs  f.91.
of absolute right, since it has devolved to him from non-
user, although the buyer had true seysine of it during
the lifetime of the vendor, nor ean he call the heir in
this case to warrant. Butif heirs, when they are under
the power of their relations, get. married without their
consent, they are not on that account to be disinherited,
although they are to be punished in some other way, if
the relatives wish. Butif, when heirs unmarried have
come into the power of their lords, the chief lords them-
selves have sold the maritage, whilst they had the right,
although another had more right, and he, who has the
greater right, claims from the purchaser the maritage
and the custody of the heir, in this case the vendor will
have to be summoned to warrant. And what is said of
one purchaser may be said of several, if the maritage has
been sold to several from hand to hand.


À provision has been made by the Common Council [of 7.
the realm] concerning heirs being under age, if, whilst they ^ P'^-..
are under age, they have been maliciously abducted and case any
detained by their relations out of the custody of their 929 75,
lords, that if à layman be convicted thereof, that he has an heir.
earried off a boy and given him away in marriage with-
out the licence of the chief lord, he shall restore or render
to the guardian the value of the maritage, and his body
shall be delivered by the bailiffs to prison, until he shall
have compensated the guardian for his delict, and until
he has made satisfaction to the king for that transgres-
sion, and this is to be understood of heirs under four-
teen years of age: but of heirs, which are of fourteen
years of age and upwards up to full age, if they have
married themselves without the $onsent of their lords,
that they might deprive him of the maritage, and the
chief lord has offered the heir à reasonable marriage,
by which he would not be disparaged, and which he
ought not to refuse, then let his lord keep his land


f. 92.


l.
De dona-
tionibus
propter
nuptias ob
causam


46 DE ACQUÉENDO RERUM DoMINIO.


ram ejus ultra terminü setatis sus, s. xxj. anni, p
quantum temp" pceipere potest duplicem valorem mari-
tagii, secundüm :zestimationem legalium hominum, vel
secundüm q ei priàs p eodem maritagio oblatum fue-
rib sine fraude & malitia, vel secundüm quod pbari
possit in curia domini regis. De dominis autem capi-
talibus custodibus, si illos maritaverint, quos habent
in custodia, villanis vel aliis, sicut burgensibus, ubi
disparagentur, si talis hseres infra statem xiiij anno-
rum, vel talis :ztatis extiterit, quód non possit consen-
tire, tune si parentes conquerantur, düs ille amittet
custodiam usq, ad statem h:eredis, & omne commoduin
q inde pceptum fuerit, convertatur in commodum  ip-
sius qui infra etatem fuerit, secundüm dispositionem
& pvisionem parentum, contra dedecus ei factum... Si
autem fuerit xiiij annorum & ultra, quód consentire
possit, & tali maritagio cósenserit, nullà poena subse-
quatur. Si quis hzres, eujuscunq, statis fuerit, p diio
suo se maritare noluerit, non copellatur hoc facere con-
ira voluntatem suam, sed cüm ad etatem pvenerit,
domino suo satisfaciet de tanto, quantu diis su? peipere
posset ab aliquo p maritagio, antequa terram suam
recipiat, & sive voluerit se maritare, sive non, pdict?
heres, quia maritagium ejus, qui fuerit infra :etatem,
de mero jure ptinet ad dominum feodi.


CA». XXXIX.


Quoniam utile est mulieres esse dotatas multis de
causis, aequiruntur enim eis cim fuerint maritand:
rerum düia ex causa donationis, ut cüm fuerit fcemina
maritanda, fi& ei donatio à viro suo multis modis ppter


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINIOg OF THINGS. | 47


beyond the term of his twenty-first year, for so long a
time as will enable him to receive double the value of
the maritage, according to the estimate of loyal men, or
aecording to what has been previously offered to him,
for the 'same maritage without fraud or malice, or ac-
cording to what can be proved in the court of the lord
the king. But concerning chief lords who are guar-
dians, if they have married those whom they have in
wardship, to villeins or to others, as to burghers, where
they are disperaged, if such heir be under fourteen years
of age, or of such age that he cannot consent, then if the
parents complain, that lord shall lose the [profits of the]
wardship up to the full age of the heir, and every ad-
vantage, that can be derived from it, shall be turned to
the advantage of him who is under age, according to the
disposition and provision of the relatives against the
disgrace inflicted upon him. But if he be of fourteen
years and upwards, that he may consent and he has
consented to such marriage, let no penalty follow. If
any heir, of whatever age he may be, should be unwilling
to be married for the advantage of his lord, let him not
be compelled to do this against his will, but when he
has come to full age, he shall make satisfaction to his
lord for so much as his'lord could have obtained from
any one for the marriage, before he shall receive his land,
and whether he the aforesaid heir has wished to marry
himself or not, because the choice of à wife (maritage)
for him who is under age, pertains of absolute right to
the lord of the fief.


CHAPTER XXXIX.
f. 92.


Since it is useful, for many reasons, that women should 4,
be endowed, for the dominion over things is acquired by ripae
them when they are about to be married, by reason of tions by
donation,as when & woman is about to be married, a !6850n of

. ; : I nuptials
donation is made to her by her husband in various ways for the
object of


48 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


dotis, dotis nuptias de re ppria viri; vel de re patris, vel matris,
Du fratris, vel sororis, vel alterius amici, de eorum con-
quidest sensu & voluntate, qu: quidem donatio dicitur dos, &
Glscsillu quee quidem perfecta esse non potest ante mortem viri,
vi. 1. nec, quamvis in vita viri possit constitui, tamen ante
Brito^ mortem seysina non poterit assignari: inprimis igitur
videndum quid sit dos & quse sit dos, & quse sit
rationabilis dos, & quis possit dotem constituere, & cui.
Item quando, & ubi, & de qua re, et quantum. Item
quis possit dotem assignare, et quando, et infra quod
tempus, et ubi assignetur, qusee competat actio mulieri
ad dotem suam consequendam. Et sciendum, quód dos
est id, quod liber homo dat sponse sus ad ostium
ecclesie, ppter nuptias futuras, e& onus matrimonii, et
ad sustentationem uxoris, et educationem liberorum,


cüm fuerint pcereati, si vir preemoriatur.


S 1.
Fleta 340.


LI


5 2. Rationabilis aute dos est cujuslibet mulieris de quo-

uc es . .

rationabilig Cun qy tenemento tertia pars omnium terrarum & tene-

Lu mentorü, qua» vir suus tenuit in dominico suo, et ita
r1tton,


ib.$4. 1n feodo, quód eam inde dotare poterit, die quo eam
Fleta, 34. desponsavit.


. 8. Item quis possit dotem constituere, et sciendum
HS pos. ód tam minor, quàm major masculus. Cui uxori?
sit dotem d" ? mos 1 us. x
constituere. (am majori, quàm minori. Poterit enim ille qui infra

eelate est, uxorem suam dotare, quamvis existentem
infra :etatem, dum tamen possit dotem pmereri, et
virum sustinere, eb, quamvis vir infra statem  moria-
tur, uxor sua, sive infra statem fuerit sive non, dotem


obtinebit. De hae aute materia, inveniri poterit de


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 49


on &ecount of the nuptials from the property of the hus- do ep. |
band, or [a donation is made to her]from the properiy pointment
of the father, or of the mother, of the brother or of the 9f bet
sister, or of some other friend, with their consent and is dower.
good will, which donation indeed is called dower (dos)

and which eannot be eompleted before the death of the
husband, nor, although it may be appointed in the life-

time of the husband, can seysine of it be assigned before

his death; we must see in the first place what thing is
dower, and what is dower and what is reasonable dower,

and who may appoint dower and to whom? Likewise

when, and where, and of what thing, and how much.
Likewise, who can assign dower, and when, and within

what time, and when it is assigned, to what action a
woman is entitled to obtain her dower. And it isto be |
known that dower is what & Ííree man gives to his
spouse at the door of the church in consideration of the

future nuptials, and the burden of matrimony, and for

the sustentation of the wife and the education of the
children when they are born, if the husband should die ,
first.


But the reasonable dower of any woman whatsoever, iis
in respect of any tenement whatsoever, is the third part reasonable
of all the lands and tenements, which her husband has dover.
had in his domain, and so in fee, that he could endow
her therewith on the day on which he espoused her.


Likewise who can appoint dower? And it is to be — 3.
known that à minor, as well as & major of the male bs
sex [may do so] To what wife? To a major, as well dower.
as io & minor. For he who is under age may endow a
wife, although she is under age, provided however she
can earn her dower and support her husband, and al-
though the husband dies under age, his wife, whether
She be under age or not,shall obtain her dower. But
on this subject à judgment may be found in Easter

VOL. ll. D


-—À


Fleta 340.


5 *.
Quot sint
species
dotis.


50 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


termino Pasch» anno regni regis H. nono in comitatu
Devon, de Sara, quz fuit uxor Wilhelmi Burnell.


Quando? et sciendü, quód ante desponsationem, in
initio contractus. Ubi? et sciendum quód in facie
ecclesie, & ad ostium ecelesie, non enim valet consti-
tutio facta in lecto mortali. vel in camera, vel alibi,
ubi clandestina fuerint econjugia, quia si non valeant
clandestina conjugia hzredib? quoad successionem, nun-
quam valebunt uxoribus ad dotis exactionem. Oportet
igitur q constitutio dotis sit facta publicà, & cum so-
lemnitate ad ostiü ecclesize, & ubi nullü omnino matri-
monium, ibi nulla dos. Igitur videtur à contrario
sensu, ubi matrimonium, ibi dos, q quidem verum est,
si matrimoniu in facie ecclesi; contrahat. Ad ostiü
eeclesize fiat dotis constitutio inter quascunq, psonas
consanguinitate vel affinitate conjunctas, vel exiraneas,
dum tamen matrimoniü in vita cotrahentium accusa-
tum non fuerit, nee dissolutum. Si tamen accusatu &
dissolutüi quaeunq, ratione, desinit esse dos, cüm defi-
ciat matrimonium, & desinit esse dotis exactio. Nec
debet aliquis ratione uni? viri, in dotis petitione, duab?
uxorib? respodere.


Et dotis species sunt dus, alia pfectitia, alia adven-
titia, pfectitia dici poterit quse datur à patre, vel
maire, vel alio parente in ipso contractu p filia mari-
landa, & terra sic data dici poterit maritagiü, et patri-
moniu mulieris, et aliquado cadit in partem int cohs-
redes foeminas, si talis parte habere voluerit hzredit'


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 51


term in the ninth year of King Henry, in the county
of Devon, concerning Sarah, who was the wife of William
Burnell.


When? And itis to be known, that it is before the T 4.
espousal, at the commencement of the contract. Where ? zr du
And it is to be known, that it is in the face of the where
church and at the door of the church, for an appointment rider be
is not valid, which is made in the bed of death, or in s sPPointed.
chamber, or elsewhere, where clandestine unions are ,
made, because if clandestine unions are not valid for the
heirs as regards succession, they are not valid for the
wives as regards their exaction of the dower. t is |
incumbent, therefore, that the appointment of dower
should be made publicly and with solemnity at the door
of the church ; and where there is no matrimony at all, :
there is no dower. lt seems therefore, in the contrary
sense, where there is matrimony, there is dower, which
is true indeed, if matrimony is contracted in tue face of
the Church. The appointment of dower may be made
at the door of the church between any persons whatso-
ever united by consanguinity or by affinity, or between
Strangers, provided however the marriage is not im-
peached nor dissolved in the lifetime of the contracting
parties. But if it be impeached and dissolved in any
manner, there ceases to be dower, when matrimony fails,
and there ceases to be the right to exact dower. Nor
ought any one in regard to one husband in a petition of
dower make answer to two wives.


- — E


-—Á


And there are two kinds of dower, the one profecti- 5.

tious, the other adventitious. Dower may be said to be bis t
| ip ou e specific

profectitious, when it is given by a father or a mother, kinds of
or another relative, in the contract itself for the maritage 49er.
of & daughter, and the land so given may be a maritage
and the patrimony of the woman, and it sometimes
comes into partition between female coheirs, if such an
one wishes to have a part of the inheritance, as &bove


D 2


f. 92 b.


0 [jJ
Item de
quare.


59 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


ut suprà. Et non! dicitur pura donatio facta sine
causa matrimonii. lte advetitia dos dici poterit mari-
tagium, quod ab aliis datur, quàm à patre vel matre,
sive parens sit vel extraneus. Item est dos pàra-
pherna? quas fit juxia dotem, vel preter & ante ma-
trimonium, non constante matrimonio, ui si fiat viro
& uxori simul, vel uxori p se; & talis non cadit in
parte, licét facta fuerit à parentibus, quia pura est, &
non ob causam matrimonii ut suprà dietu est. Item
fit donatio ppter nuptias, q sponsus dat sponse ad
ostium ecclesie, & de qua híc agitur, die desponsatio-
nis. Et hoc pprié dicitur dos mulieris secundüm con-
suetudinem  Anglicanü, & íalem dotem lucratur vir,
uxore preemortua, & uxori remanet ad vitam viro pre-
mortuo, & lucratur sic vir dotem, uxore prsemortua.
Item lueratur vir aliquando dotem ex lege in vita
mulieris, cüm celebratum fuit inter eos divortium, qua-
cung, ratione, sed non si fiat tantüm separatio thori.
Item aliquando dotem lucratur? post mortem viri càüm
fuerit assignata ex cosuetudine civitatü & com, sicut
in Kane. & London, Lincoln & alibi. Et sciendum,
quód maritagium ob causam mairimonii, semper rema-
net mulieri & hseredib? suis, si hsredes habuerit, si
autem non, revertitur p defectu hsredis, & eodem
modo dos paraphernalis* hwredibus quibuscung,


De qua re? & sciendum, quód si vir terras habuerit
& tenefita, dotare poterit uxorem suam, dum iamen
modum non excedat, de quaeunq, terra voluerit, & de
cujuseunq, feodo extiterit, quamvis p hoc auferat diio


i 3 «* Ttem. havres quandoque dotem
1 MS. l. C. 160. q q
PICADURN » lucratur," MS. Rawl.
? ** Parapharna," MS. Rawl. * * Parapharnalis," MS. Rawl.


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 58


said. And an absolute donation made without any
reason of matrimony is not called [dower] Likewise
dower may be called adventitious, when it is à maritage  f.92 b.
given by others than the father or the mother, whether
1b be a& relative or à stranger. Likewise there is para-
phernal dower, which is made by the side of dower, or
beyond or before matrimony, matrimony not being a
thing settled, as if it be made for the husband and the
wife together, or for the wife by herself: and such dower
does not come into partition, although it may have been
made by relations, because it is absolute, and not on
account of matrimony, as above said. "There is likewise
a donation on account of nuptials, which the spouse
gives to the spouse at the door of the church, and which
is treated of here, on the day of espousal ^ And this is
properly called the dower of the woman according to the
custom of England, and such dower the husband gains if
the wife predeceases him, and it remains to the wife for
life, if the husband predeceases her, and the husband thus
gains the dower if the wife predeceases him. Likewise
the man sometimes gains the dower by law during the
lifetime of the woman, when & divorce is celebrated
between them, for whatever reason, but not if there be
only a separation of bed. Likewise she sometimes gains
the dower after the death of the husband, when it has
been assigned to her according to the custom of cities or
of counties, as in. Kent and in London, in Lincoln and
elsewhere. And itis to be known that the maritage in
consideration of matrimony always remains to the woman
and her heirs, if she have heirs, but if not, it reverts
from failure of heirs, and in the same way the paraphernal
dower [remains] to heirs of any kind whatsoever.


Of what things? And it is to be known, that if& . 6.
man has lands and tenements, he may endow his wife, Li5emse
provided he does not exceed moderation, with whatever things |
land he pleases, and with whosever fief he possesses, dd x


although he thereby takes away from the chief lord the


54 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


capitali custodiam feodi sui, eüm uxor dotem obtinue-
rit, damnum quidem ei facit, sed nulla injuriam, cüm,
si custodiam non habuerit, sufficiat ei releviu, & de
hae materia inveniri poterit de termino P. anno regis
H. duodocimo com Lincolü, de Idonea, que fuit uxor
Nicholai Burdeth. tem de terris & tenemtis ppriis,
quie 'tenuerit in feodo sibi & hseredibus suis, & non ad
lerminum vite vel annorum, sive illa tenuerit vir ex
eausa successionis sive ex causa pquisitj, vel alio quo-
cunq, modo, & unde si feoffatus fuerit puré: & sine
aliqua conditione sibi & hsredib? suis certis & expres-
sis, vel indeterminatis, quavis tales hzeredes non habue-
rit, sive bastardus fuerit, sive legittimus, vel si tales
hzeredes habuerit & defecerint, ita quód terra data re-
verti debeat ad donatorem p conditionem tacitam vel
expressam: uxor dotem obtinebit, quia pura est dona-
tio ab initio, & purum feoffamentum, quamvis p con-
ditionem tacitam vel expressam dissolutum. Si autem
iia facta esset donatio, ut si dicam, do tibi tantam
terram, nulla facta mentione de hsredibus, ista dona-
tio se no extendit ad heredes, nisi tantüm ad vitam
donatorü, & quia non in feodo nisi ad vitam, ideó
cessab dotis petitio. Si autem adjiciat in donatione
ita, Do tibi & heredibus tuis, si hseredes habueris
tales, vel de tali uxori, ista donatio non est perfecta
&b initio, sed dependet ex insidiis fortunsz, nec erit
perfecta antequam existat conditio, quód hseredes ha-
bueris tales vel ex tali uxore, d si defecerit, non erit
ibi feod', sed tantüm liberum tenementum ad vitam, &
ita cessabit dotis petitio. Si autem tales hseredes ha-
buerit, vel de tali uxore, qvis defecerint, statim inci-
pit donatio esse perfecta, & feod', & competit uxori
petitio dotis. In primo autem casu est donatio pura,


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 55


custody of his fief, when his wife obtains her dower; he
does him harm, but no injury, since if he has not the
custody, a relief will suffice to him ; and on this subject a
case will be found in. Easter Term in the twelfth year of
King Henry, in the county of Lincoln, concerning Ido-
nea, who was the wife of Nicolas Burdeth. Likewise [he
may endow her] with lands and tenements of his own,
which he holds in fee to himself and his heirs, and not
for the term of his life or for a term of years, whether
ihe man holds.them by right of succession, or by right of
acquisition, or in any other manner, and hence if he has
been enfeoffed, absolutely and without any condition for
himself and his heirs, either certain and expressed, or
indefinite, although he may not have had such heirs,
whether he be a bastard or legitimate, or if he has had
such heirs and they have failed, so that the land ought
to revert to the donor in virtue of a condition tacit or
expressed: the wife shall obtain her dower, because it is
an absolute donation from the commencement, and a pure
enfeoffment, although under a condition tacit or expressed.
But if the donation has been so made, as if I should
say, l give you so much land, no mention being made
of heirs, that donation does not extend itself to heirs,
except for the life of the donatory, and because it is
notin fee except for life, therefore the claim of dower
ceases. But if he add in the donation thus, I give to
you and to your heirs, if you should have sucb heirs, or
from such & wife, that donation is not complete from
the commencement, but it depends upon the snares of
fortune, nor will it be complete until the condition is
fulfilled, that you have such heirs or [heirs] from such
wife, failing which, there will be no fief there, but only
a free tenement for life, and so the claim of dower will
cease, But if you should have such heirs or [heirs] from
such wife, although they may fail, the donation forth with
becomes complete and the fief, and the wife is entitled
to a elaim of dower. But in the first case it is & pure


f. 93.


Britton,
l. v. ch. i.


$ 4.
Fleta 341.


56 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


sed resolvitur sub conditione tacita vel expressa. In
secundo veró casu non est pura, sed dependens quo-
usq, extiterit conditio, vel deficiat. Item constitui
potest dos rationabiliter, secund' q predictum est, &
ideó ulira tertiam partem, quia in majori quantitate, q
in tertia parte, constitui non potest, potest tamen in
minorj,; dum tamen uxor in constitutione se teneat
contentam. Si tamen ulteriüs q rationabiliter consti-
tuatur, cüm fuerit assignata, id q excedit per admen-
surationem revocabitur, si capitalis düs, vel alius ab
herede dotem  assignaverit. Secus autem esset, si
heres hoc fecerit sciens & prudens. Et hsec quse dicta
sunt de tertia parte, vera sunt de feodo militari, nisi
aliter observetur de aliqua cosuetudine speciali, vel
nisi terra teneatur in sockagio, ubi diversimode fit
dotis constitutio, vel in gavelkind, vel si sockagium
adjungatur feodo militari. ^ Et de hac materia habetis
de teri P. anno reg. Re. H. decimo quinto in com
Cantabrigie. tem constitui potest dos, non tant in
terris & tenementis perquisitis, sed etiam pquirendis,
Si perquisita fuerint, vel acciderint in vita viri sui, ut
de teríà P. anno reg. Re. He. septimo in coii Somer-
set, de Emma, q fuit uxor Wilhelmi Daci, & licbt vir
suus jus habuerit in terris pquirendis, cessat dotis
exactio sive petitio, nisi in vita viri fuerint pquisita,
qvis post mortem viri acciderint vel fuerint pquisita,
quia de eo, de quo vir nunquà seysinam habuit, non
potest dos petii: nisi ita esset, quód dos constitueretur
in aliquo tenemito, g post mortem tenentis esset ad vit
reversurum, quód si dos ita constituta fuerit, sive re-


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 57


donation, but it is resolved under a& tacit or expressed
condition. In the second case it is not à pure donation,
but dependent, until the condition is fulfilled or fails.
Likewise dower may be appointed reasonably, according
to what has been seid above, and therefore beyond the
third part, because it cannot be appointed in greater
quantity than for the third part, but it may be appointed
in less quantity, provided however the woman keeps
herself content. But if ib be appointed to an extent
greater than is reasonable, when it has been assigned,
ihat which exceeds by measurement shall be revoked, if
the chief lord or another than the heir shall have assigned
&dower. Butit would be otherwise, if the heir should
have done this knowingly and intentionally. And what
has been said concerning the third part, is true of à mili-
tary fief, unless it be otherwise observed by some special
custom, or unless the land be held in sockage, where
the appointment of dower is made in another way, or
in gavel kind, or if sockage is united to a military fief.
Ánd on this subject you have a case in Easter term in
the fifteenth year of King Henry in the county of Cam-
bridge. Likewise doweér may be appointed, not only in
lands and tenements which have been acquired, but also
in lands and tenements to be acquired, if they have been
acquired, or have fallen in during the.life of her hus-
band, as in Easter term in the seventh year of King
Henry in ihe county of Somerset, concerninp Emma
who was the wife of William Dace, and although her
husband had a right to lands to be acquired, the exaction
and the claim of dower ceases, unless they have been
acquired during the lifetime of the man, although they
may have fallen in or have been acquired after the death
of the man, because dower cannot be claimed of that, of
which the man never had seysine; unless i6 were that
dower was appointed in à certain tenement, which after
the death of the tenant was &bout to revert to the man,
but if dower has been so appointed, whether it revert


f. 93.


Britton,
]. v. ch. i.


S 6.
Fleta 342.


58 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


vertatur in vita viri, sive post mortem, erit locus
petitioni dotis, ut videri poterit, si constituatur dos in
tenemento, quod alia uxor tenuit in dotem, si in vita
uxoris dotate acciderit (gvis non in vita viri) recu-
perabit eam uxor ut dotem suam, si inde sectam
habuerit sufficientem propter constitutionem dotis spe-
cificatam, q quidem aliter esset, nisi esset specificata.
Et de hac materia habetis de terfi Sanct. Hil. anno
reg. H. decimo quarto in cof Northampton de Chris-
iiang quz fuit uxor Walteri, qu; recuperavit, quam-
vis vir suus inde seysimnam non haberet, dum vixit.
Et cüm uxor sie dotata fuerit de re, quam alius tenet,
& quz post mortem tenentis reverti debeat ad here-
dem warrentum de dote sua, videndum si expectare
debeat mortem tenentis antequam dotem habeat, vel
si ei debeat assignari ad valentiam in tenantia, quo-
usque dos sic nominata ei fuerit deliberata. Et vide-
tur quód expectare debet, nisi aliter specialiter conve-
nerit ab initio constitutionis. ltem ab initio constitui
poterit dos in re certa & nominata, & re incerta &
non nominata. ln re certa & nominata, sicut de ali-
quo manerio certo, de cujuscunque feodo extiterit, cüm
vir plura tenementa teneat de diversis feodis, & diver-
sis dominis capitalibus, quia secundüm quod predic-
tum est, in electione viri erit, de cujus feodo velit
uxorem suam nominatim dotare, dum tamen manerium
illud non sit caput baronie, si plura alia habuerit
maneria qus non sint capita baronis, quia manerium,
quod est caput baronis, integré remanebit heredi &
warrento de dote sua, cüm inde dotari non debeat,
si de aliis terris eonsequi possit dote sua, & de hac


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 59


: during the lifetime of the man or after his death, there
will be place for a petition of dower, so that it may be
seen, that if dower be appointed in à tenement, which
another wife held as dower, if it should fall in during
ihe lifetime of the wife (although not in the lifetime of
the husband) the wife shall recover it as her dower, if
she have a sufficient sect in support of the specified
appointment of dower, which would be otherwise, unless
it were specified. And on this subject you have a case
in St. Hilary term in the fourteenth year of King Henry,
in the county of Northampton, concerning Christiana,
who was the wife of Walter, who recovered, although her
husband had not seysine thereof when he was alive. And
when the wife has been endowed with an estate which
another holds, and which ought after the death of the
lenant to revert to the heir the warrantor of her dower,
we must see whether she ought to wait for the death of
ihe tenant, before she have her dower, or if there ought
to be assigned to her up to its value in the tenancy,
until the dower so named has been delivered to her.
And it appears that she ought to wait, unless it has been
otherwise agreed upon from the commencement of the
appointment. Likewise the dower may be appointed
from the commencement in a certain named estate, and
in an uncertain estate not named. In a certain named
estate, as in a certain manor, to whosever fief it belongs,
when à man holds several tenements of different fiefs
and from different chief lords, because, according to what
has been said &bove, it will be in the election of the
man, from which fief by name he wishes to endow his
wife, provided that manor is not the capital manor of
the barony, if he have several other manors, which are
nob the capital manors of the barony, because the manor
which is the capital manor of a barony, should remain
in its entirety for the heir and the warrantor of her
dower, since she ought not to be endowed therefrom
if she can obtain her dower from other lands ; and on


f. 93 b.


60 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


materia inveniri potest de termino Sancte Trin. anno
regis H. quarto in cofü Northampton de Theobaldo de
Lassel Et si plura maneria sint, & in hwreditate, quz;
sunt de capite baronize, tunc q de uno manerio tali
dict est, fiat de plurib?, du tamen uxor alibi doté co-
Sequi posset, q si non posset, oportet de necessitate, q
aliter fiat, cü necessitas sub lege non cótineatur, quia
q aliàs non est licit, necessitas licit facit. Sed q dici-
tur de baronia, non est observand in vavassoria, vel
aliis minoribus feodis q baronia, quia caput non ha-
bent, sicut baronia. Et dicitur de baronia, & barone,
servari debet in comi & comite, sive castrum ibi fuerit
sive non. Cü autem possit uxor dotem nominatà alibi
eosequi q de manerio, q est caput baroniz, & ei petenti
dotem de tali manerio respondeatur g dotem inde ha-
bere non debeat pdicta ratione, & ipsa e$ contra dicat,
q aliquis antecessor hzredis dotavit uxorem suam de
tali manerio, replicari potest ex parte hsredis, quód
hoc non fuit de jure, immó de ignorantia hzredis, vel
gratuita permissione, q quidem impostef trahi no debet
in exempl. Si aute onia maneria sint capita baronis,
& teneantur in capite de dio rege, nec sit alia terra
quae sufüiciat ad dotem, dotari poterit ex tali manerio,
salvo iamen hsredi castro, si ibi fuerit, vel capitali
mesuag, si non castrum. Sed quoniam quandoque
onerosa est custodia castri, vel capitalis mesuagii sine
tenente hsredi, càm uxor dotata sit de tali manerio
sine exceptione, dissimulatur quandoque uxori seysina
casüri, propter onus, dum tamen restituatur regi tem-


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 61


this subject à case may be found in Holy Trinity term
in the fourth year of King Henry, in the county of
Northampton, concerning Theobald de Lassel And if
there should be several manors, and those inheritable
which are the head of the barony, then what has been
said of one such manor, will apply to several, provided,
however, that the wife can elsewhere obtain her dower,
which if she cannot do, it is incumbent from necessity
that i& should be otherwise, since necessity is not re-
Strained by law, because necessity makes that allowable
which otherwise is not allowable. But what is said of
& barony,is not to be observed in a vavassory orin other
minor fiefs beneath à barony, because they have no chief
place, as & barony. And what is said of & barony and
of a baron, ought to be observed in the case of an earl-
dom or an earl, whether there be a castle there or not.
But when & wife can obtain her specified dower else-
where than in the manor which is the head of the
barony, and to her petition of dower from such manor it
should be answered, that she ought not to have her
dower from it for the reason above said, and she on the
other says, that some ancestor of the heir endowed his
wife from the said manor, it may be replied on behalf of
the heir, that. this was not done of right, but from the
ignorance of the heir, or with his gratuitous permission,
which cannot be drawn into a precedent for the future.
But if all the manors are heads of baronies, and are
held in chief from the king, and there is no other land,
which suffices for dower, she may be endowed from such
à manor, reserving to the heir his castle, if there be one,
or his eapital messuage, if there be no castle. But since
the custody of & castle is sometimes burdensome, or of à
eapital mesuage without the tenant heir, when the wife
has her dower from such manor without exception, the
wife's seysine of the castle is sometimes dissembled on
account of the burden, provided it is restored to the
king in time of war or other necessity, if he wishes, and


f. 93 b.


62 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


pore guerre, vel alterius necessitatis, si voluerit, & cüm
voluerit; secund quod factum fuit de comitissa Lincoli,
qua fuit uxor Walteri com  marescali, de quodam
castro in Hibernia, ubi comitissa dotata fuit de toto
manerio sine aliqua exceptione, quod fuit caput baro-
nie. Poterit etiam uxor dotari nominatim sub condi-
lone vel sine, ut si dicat vir uxori, quód dotat eam
de tali manerio cum pertinentiis, quo casu, si sufficiat
ad dotem pro tertia parte totius hereditatis viri sui,
ienere se debet contentam, & omnes pertinentie ad
ipsam pertinent, in advocationibus, & collationibus ec-
clesiarum, in custodiis, releviis, & maritagiis, & ommni-
bus aliis rebus, cüm nihil inde excipiatur specialiter.
Excipitur quandoque multipliciter, secundüm quod in-
feriüs dicetur. Si autem ibi minus fuerit, quàm quod
sufficere possit ad dotem, & in constitutione dotis se
ienuerit contentam, plus petere non poterit in assig-
natione. Si autem plus, supfluum tollitur per admen-
surationem, & uterque modus duci poterit in conditio-
nem, ut si quis ita& dotaverit uxorem suam, de aliquo
manerio integré & sic dicat, & si illud sufficiat pro dote,
sic ei remaneat integré & sine contentione. Si autem
minus ibi fuerit, id, quod defuerit, perficiatur ei in alio
certo & competenti loco. Si autem plus ibi fuerit,
faeta extentione & rationabili appreciatione, quód illud
superfluum restituatur heredi — Et rever&á qualiseunque
fuerit dotis constitutio facta, semper erit modus con-
stitutionis observandus, & sequendus, dum tamen legit-
tima sit dotis constitutio, & non contra legem terrse.
Et càüm uxor sic dotata fuerit nominatim de quacunque
cería re, in ipsa constitutione dotis statim incipit
habere jus in re nominata, ita quód si vir eam con-


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 68


when he wishes, according to what was done in the case
of the eountess of Lincoln, who was the wife of- Walter
Earl Marshall, concerning a certaim castrum in lreland,
where the countess was endowed with the whole
manor without exception, which was the capital of ba-
rony. À wife may also be endowered by name, subject
to à, condition or not, as if the husband shall say to his
wife, that he endowers her with such a manor and its
appurtenances, in which case, if it is sufficient for a
dowry of & third part of the whole inheritance of her
husband, she ought to keep herself content, and all the
appurtenances belong to her in advowsons and in colla-
tions to churches, in wardships, reliefs, and maritages,
and in all other things, since nothing is specially ex-
cepted. But manifold exceptions are sometimes made,
as will be explained below. But if there be less there
than will suffice for dower, and she has kept herself
content at the appointment of the dower, she cannot
claim more at the assignment of it. But if more, the
superfluous quantity is removed by mensuration, and
each mode may be brought under a condition, as if a
person shall have so endowed his wife of some manor
in its entirety, and says so, and if it is sufficient for
dower, ib so remains to her in its entirety and without
contention. But if there be less there, the deficit may
be made good to her in another certain and suitable
place. Butif there be more there, à valuation having
been made and a reasonable appraisement, what is su-
perfluous should be restored to the heir. And in truth
Whatever appointment of dower there may have been
made, & mean is always to be observed and followed,
provided the appointment of dower be legitimate, and
nob against the law of theland. And when the wife
Shall have been so endowed in terms of any certain
thing whatsoever, on the actual appointment of dower
She forth with begins to have a right in the estate named,
So that if the husband should transfer it to another from


f. 94.


Britton,
l. v. ch. ii.


. $1.
Fleta 342.


04 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


siante matrimonio ex quacunque causa ad aliu trans-
tulerit, uxor post morte viri habebit versus quemcung,
tenenté repetitionem, & cüm per occasionem de dote
petierit, & teiüis hseredé vocaverit ad warrant, & ipse
warrantizaverió/ uxor recuperabit ipsam rem, & teüs
de warrento suo excàbiü ad valentia, q quide esse non
debuit si dotata fuerit de re incerta, sicut de tertia
parte ref acquirendar, vel acquisita. Sed à contrario,
se. si res fuerit à viro alienata constante matrimonio,
& ipsa petat tertii parte versus tenentem, cüm hzres
warrantizaverit, tenens retinebit id q tenet, & uxor
recuperabit ad valentiam de herede, si hzres habeat
unde, si &utem non, ipsa recuperabit quod petit, &
ienens de excábio expectet tempora meliora versus
hserede, donec ad ipsum aliquid pervenerit de h:zredi-
tate, & si ad ipsü aliquid pvenerit, tunc habeat uxor
de hzreditate excambium, & tenens rehabeat tenemtum
suum, si autem .nihil de hsreditate in vita uxoris
pvenerii ad hszredem, tune remaneat ei terra illa. ad
vitam suam nomine dotis, càm esse non debeat indo-
tata, ad tentem tamen stati post mortem suà reversura.
Non nominata veró dici poterit dos & incerta, ubi quis
uxorem suà dotaverit in generali de omnibus terris &
tenemtis in tertia parte acquisitis, & aequirendis. Item
sicul poterit quis uxorem sua dotare in certis terris
nominatis, ità ea poterit dotare in certa suma& pecunis,
sive terras habuerit & tenemita, sive non, ut si bur-
gensis fuerit: maximé si tenuras habuerit exteriores
sive non, sive alius tenens exterior, & quo casu, cü
uxor contenta semel se tenuerit de suma illa p dote
sua, nihil ampliüs petere potest nomine dotis de aliis


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 65


whatever cause during marriage, the wife will have &
claim of restitution against the tenant whomsoever, and
when on some occasion she has made a claim for her
dower, and the tenant summons the heir to warrant,
and the heir shall have warranted, the wife shall recover
the estate itself, and the tenant shall recover from his
warrantor an equivalent by way of compensation, which
ought not to be the case, if she had been endowed with
an uncertain thing, as with à third part of things to be
aequired or already acquired. But on the contrary, for
instance, if the estate has been alienated during the
marriage, and tbe wife claims a third part against the
tenant, when the heir has warranted, the tenant shall
retain what he holds, and the wife shall recover the
value of it from the heir, if the heir has wherewithal,
but if not, she herself shall recover what she claims,
and the tenant must expect compensation from the heir
in better times, until some part of the inheritance de-
volves to him, and if some part shall have devolved to
him, then the wife shall have compensation from the
inheritance, and the tenant shall resume his tenement ;
but if no part of the inheritance has devolved to the
heir during the life of the wife, then let that land
remain to her for her life in the name of dower, since
She ought not to remain without dower, with the rever-
sion to the tenant immediately after her death. But
dower may be called not named and uncertain, when a
person has endowed his wife in general terms with the
third part of all his lands and tenements acquired, or to
be acquired. Likewise as & person may endow his wife
with certain lands by name, so he may endow her with
an uncertain sum of money, whether he has lands and
tenements or not,as if he be & burgher: chiefly if he
has external tenures or not, or there is another external
lenant, and in whieh ease, when the wife has once been
content with that sum for her dower, she can claim
nothing more in the name of dower from the other chat-
VOL. II. E


Britton,
ib. S 2.
Fleta 342.


66 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO,


cattallis, & tenemitis, q fuerit ei constitut, & unde si
nomine dotis aliquid petat de catallis, audiri non debet,
quia e& ratione q consequi debet plenarie dotem suà,
q diu ibi fuerit unicus obolus, vel quaten? catalla viri
sufficiant, ea ratione si plus ibi fuerit, nihil ulteriüs
ibi consequetur, & sicut vult esse in luero quaten?
catalla sufficiant, ita esse debet in dàpno in eatallis q
excedut, ex alia tamen causa, q ex causa dotis, sicut
ex eausa testamitaria vel ex consuetudine approbata,
ulteri? petere potest, si forté vir aliquid ei reliquerit
in testaíhto ultra dotem nominatà, vel non nominatà,
certa vel incertam. Item & sicut potest dos constitui
in pecunia numerata, ita poterit in rebus dq consistunt
in pondere & mensura, & tam in liquido q in solido,
& sicut in isto vel in illo, itg & in utroq. Ite con-
stitui poterit dos &b uno viro, tà plurib? uxorib? q
uni, in vita onium vel successivé cü decesserint, vel
ex quacung, causa, celebrato divortio, in eode reg. vel
eadem pvincia, vel diversis, sed una illaf alüs prsfe-
retur in dotis petitione, pbato in foro ecclesiastico d
ilar sit uxor legittima, vel si difficilis sit pbatio, vel
deficiat omino, tunc erit illa pferenda, q in possessione
viri extiterit tepore mortis viri. Si aute, càm quis
uxore habuerit & legittima, aliam superinduxerit ille-
gittimam, vel plures, legittima preeferetur. Si aute
nulla ex pluribus in possessione extiterit, neque que
illat legittima extiterit constare possit, tunc nulla illaru
obtinebit, pro defectu probationis. ltem si uxor una
pluribus nupserit in vita omnium, cüm decesserit ab
omnibus, dotem non obtinebit, càóm omnium uxor le-


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 01


tels and tenements, than what has been appointed to her,
and hence if she should claim any portion of the chattels
in the name of dower, she ought not to be heard, be-
cause for the same reason that she ought to obtain fully |.
her dower, as long as there is & single farthing, or as
long as the chattels of her husband suffice, for the same
reason, if*there be more there, she shall obtain nothing
further, and as she is willing to have the advantage as
long as the chattels suffice, so she ought to bear the
disadvantage as regards the chaltels in excess; for an-
other reason, however, than by reason of dower, as by
reason of a testament or an approved custom, she may
claim further, if by chance the husband has left to her
in his will something beyond the dower named or not
named, certain or uncertain. Likewise as the dower
may be appointed in money counted, so it may be ap-
pointed in things by weight or by measure, and as well
in liquids as in solids, and as in one or the other, so in
both of them. Likewise dower may be appointed by
one man to more wives than one, in the life of all, or
successively when they have departed, or when a divorce
has been celebrated, for.whatever cause, in the same
kingdom or in the same province, or in different, but
one of them shall be preferred to the others in a claim
for dower, upon proof in the ecclesiastical court which
of them is the legitimate wife, or if the proof is diffi-
eult, or it fails altogether, then she is to be preferred
who was in the possession of the husband at the time of
' his death. But if when a man has one legitimate wife,
he has introduced into his house another illegitimate one
or several, the legitimate shall be preferred. But if none
out of several has been in the possession [of the man at
the time of his death], nor can it be ascertained which of
them is & legitimate wife, then none of them shall obtain
[dower] from failure of proof. Likewise if à woman has
married several [men] in the lifetime of all, when she
has left them all,she shall not obtain dower, since she
| E 2


68 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


gittàima esse no possib simul & semel, sed unius, licàt
Suecessivé secund q inferiüs dicetur in actione de dote.
Si quis sub spe pquirendof uxorem suà dotaverit, de
omnibus rebus, terris, & tenementis que tenuerit die


f. 94 b.
Britton, desponsationis, non valet talis dotis constitutio, cu
nid A 4,5, Ceri& esse debeat, & sic constituta incerta fit, cu depen-
deat ex insidiis fortuns», & bene esse poteft q nunq


faciet pquisitum, & càüm pquisit non fecerit nec uxor
esse debeat indotata, restringitur talis dotis constitutio
&d legittima costitutionem tertie partis, vel dimidiwe
secund' diversa cosuetudinem ]locof, & diversitatem
tentor. Costitui etiam poterit dos in terris & tentis, d
quis tenuerit in feodo sibi & hseredibus suis, & non in
hiis q teütur ad terminum vitz, vel annorum, nec si
ita tenuerit quamvis in feodo, q alius jus habeat ut
rem evincere possit, q quidem, si p judicium evicta
fuerit, licét uxor inde dotata sit, petitio dotis cessabit,
quia p judicium constabit manifeste, quód vir suus
non fuit seysit? inde in dominico, qvis ut de feodo,
non tamen ita in feodo, quód inde dotare possit uxo-
rem, & sic non poterit quis de jure alieno dotare
uxorem sua cum effectu ppter evictionem. Sed cüm
vir uxore sua dotaverit de re certa, & alius eandem
rem petierit, & vir ante judieium illà ei p concordia
recognoverit & reddiderit, nihilominüs post morte viri
sui integra erit exaetio dotis, si uxor dotem petierit,
secüd quosdà qui dueti sunt hac ratione, q vir potest
adeó bené remittere jus pprium sieut alienum, & in
hoe dubio dotem obtinebit, in quacunq, recognitione &


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 69


could not be the legitimate wife of all at one and the
same time, but of one only, although successively, accord-
ing to what will be said below on the action for dower.
If any one in the hope of making acquisitions has en-
dowed his wife with all the estates, lands, and tenements,
which he held on the day of his espousals, such an
appointment of dower is not valid, since it ought to be
certain, and so appointed it is uncertain, since it depends
upon the snares of fortune, and it may well happen that
he wil| never make an acquisition and when he has
nob made an acquisition, and the wife ought not to
remain without dower, such an appointment of dower
is restricted to the legitimate appointment of the third
part or of the half according to the divers customs of
localities, and the diversity of tenements. But dower
may be appointed 'in lands and tenements which a
person holds in fee to himself and his heirs, and not
in those which & person holds for the term of his life,
or for a term of years, nor if he should hold them,
although in fee, so that another may evict the estate,
because indeed if it be evicted by a judgment, although
the wife may be endowed with it, her claim of dower
will cease, because it will be clearly established by the
judgment, that her husband was not seysed thereof
in domain, although as in fee, but not so in fee that
he could endow therewith his wife, &nd thus & person
cannot endow his wife effectually with another person's
right on account of the eviction. But when a man has
endowed his wife with an estate certain, and another
person elaims the same estate, and the husband before
the judgment has by an agreement acknowledged it and
rendered it to her, nevertheless after the death of her
husband the exaction of her dower will be maintained to
her, if she claims her dower, according to some who have
been led by this reason, that the husband may as well
remit his own right as another's right, and in this doubt
she will obtain her dower in whatever way it be acknow-


f. 94. b.


7o. tUe OmU UDPMUUEAPEUSMMSn


— c —— A— "o —VÁr A — UMS AR, t 96 wo PDaccililt


40 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


redditione, p pacem. Sed dicunt alii, quód adeó bené
potest recognoscere jus alienum sicut pprium, licét
judicium non intervenerit, & quo casu, cu uxor dotem
petierit de re recognita, & excipiatur contra, q dotem
habere non debeat, eó q vir suus die, quo eam despon-
savit non fuit inde seysitus ita in dominico, & ita in
feodo q eam inde dotare potuit, & ipsa & contrario
dicat «q sie, videtur & verum est, cu per negationem
effieiatur res dubia, quód locus sit inquisiGoni, non
obstante recognitione & concordia, secundüm g videri
poteri& per exempl. Esto, quód quis alium feoffaverit
de aliqua terra, & mortuo feoffato, hzrede infra sta-
tem relicto, deveniat custodia terre & hsredis in ma-
nus düi capitalis, qui durante custodia alium feoffave-
rit de eadem terra, qui ducendo uxorem ipse ei in
dotem constituerit, cüm autem heres ad statem pve-
nerit, Ipetret assisà nove disseysins, vel mortis ante-
cessoris, vel breve de ingressu, vel de recto versus
tenentem, teüs, sive warrantum vocaverit sive non ante
judicium, eum de jure suo constiterit, vel forté etsi
non constiterit, jus petenti recognoscit & ei reddit sey-
sinà & decedit, uxor ejus petit dotem, objicitur ei q
vir non fuit ita seysitus in dominico, & it& in feodo
quód eam inde dotare posset, & ipsa e contrario q sic,
& petit judicium de recognitione p concordiam, propter
predietum eventum dubium de jure proprio sui viri
vel alieno, quo casu, si de jure petentis contra virum
suum constiterit, non erit &d aliam probationem ulte-
riüs pcedend, sed uxor per hoc cadet ad dotis petitio-
nem. Si &utem de jure non constiterit, per patriam


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 71


ledged and rendered, peacefully. But others say that
he may acknowledge another's right as well as his own,
although à judgment has not intervened, and in which
case, when the wife claims dower from an estate acknow-
ledged, and it is excepted against her, that she ought
nob to receive dower, because her husband on the day, on
whieh he espoused her, was not so seysed thereof in
domain and in fee, that he could endow her with it, and
she on the contrary says that he was so, ib appears, and
it is true, since a thing is rendered doubtful by the denial
of it, that there is room for an inquest, notwithstanding
the acknowledgment and the agreement, according as
may be seen by examples. Let it be, that à person has
enfeoffed another with some land, and the feoffee having
died, leaving an heir under age, the wardship of the
land and of the heir devolves into the hands of the
chief lord, who during the wardship has enfeoffed another
with the same land, who upon marrying a wife appoints
ib to her for dower, but when the heir has come to
full age, he obtains an assise of novel disseysine, or of
the death of his aneestor, or & writ of eniry, or of -
right against the tenant, the tenant, whether he has
called a warrantor or not before judgment, when the
, claimant's right has been established, or by chance if
it has not been established he has acknowledged it
and has restored seysine to the claimant, departs, and
his wife claims dower, it is objected to her that her
husband was not so seysed in domain and in fee as to
be able to endow her therewith, and she on the con-
irary says he was so seysed, and asks for judginent on
the acknowledgment by the agreement, on aecount of
the aforesaid doubtful event concerning the proper right
of her husband or [the right] of another, in which case
if the right of the claimant against her husband is
established, i& will not be requisite to proceed to any
other proof, but the wife through this will fall to her
petition of dower. But if her right has not been estab-


Britton,
l. v. ch. ii.


S 5.
Fleta 3439.


72 . DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.
e.

veritas inquiratur, hoc tamen adjecto, q videndum erit
uirum vir, qui jus alienum recognovit, se defendere
possit per exceptionem & non defendit, sed gratis. resti-
tuit, vel càüm se defendere vellet, & per exceptionem
opponeret, judex per patriam judieando exceptionem
propositam non admisit. ln hiis veró casibus non
cadit actio dotis, càm de hujusmodi ratio sit habenda.
Poterit etia costitui dos certa & nominata, & incerta
& non nominata, & in re aliena sicut in re ppria, ui
8i quis. uxorem suà dotaverib de hereditate paterna,
vel materna in vita eofdem, dum tamen hoc fiat per
assensum & voluntatem eorundem, aliter autem, nisi
de assensu & voluntate eorundem extiterit, constitutio
non valebit. Constare eni poterit multis modis, p
instrument & scriptura ubicunq, facta, dum tamen pbari
possit q parentes assensum pbuerunt, in qua scriptura
non expedit si contineatur, quód pater vel mater dotem
constituerit, sed tamen ille qui duxit uxorem, cüm
alius dotem constituere non possit. ltem p vivam
vocem, ub si pater vel mater vel alius psens parens ad
ostium ecclesie viva voce ptestetur, q filius suus dotat
uxorem suum de hzareditate, quam ipsi tenent, coram
pluribus ad hoc vocatis, & quód voluntarium ad hoo
praebent assensum. Et ilud idem erit, si alibi quàm
ad ostium ecclesi; ante desponsationem, dum tamen
hoe ante desponsationem, vel in ipsa desponsatione
revocatu non fuerit p dissensum, & licét de necessitate
fieri debet dotis eonstitutio, & modus constitutionis ad
ostium ecclesize, non tamen necesse est omnino quód
&d ostium ecclesie adhibeatur consensus, valet eni sive


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 78


lished, let the truth be enquired by the country, this
however being added, that it will have to be seen
whether the husband, who has recognised another's right,
can defend himself by an exception, and does not defend
himself, but has restored gratuitously, or when he wished
to defend himself, and opposed an exception, the judge
in judging by the country has not admitted the excep-
üon. PButin those eases the action does not fall, since
regard is to be paid to such matters. There may be
likewise appointed à dower which is certain and named,
and a dower uncertain and not named, and in another
person's property as in one's own, as if a8 person has
endowed his wife with the inheritance of his father or of
his mother during their life, provided however this is
done with the assent and willingness of the same, but
otherwise, unless i& has been done with the assent and
willingness of the same, the appointment will not be
valid. For it may be established in many ways by an
instrument or à writing anywhere made, provided it can
be proved that the parents have given their assent, in
whieh writing ib is not expedient, if it be contained that
the father or mother has appointed the dower, but rather
he who has taken the woman to wife, since another could
nob appoint a dower. Likewise by oral parole, as if the
father or the mother or other relation being present at
the door of the church bears witness by oral declaration,


that his son endows his wife with the inheritance, which .


they themselves hold, in the presence of several persons
called for that purpose and that they give their volun-
tary assent to this. And the same thing shall be done,
if elsewhere than at the door of the church before
espousals, provided this has not been revoked before
espousals, or at the moment of espousals by dissent, and
although the appointment of dower ought of necessity to
take place, and the mode of the appointment is at the
door of the church, it is not altogether necessary that
the consent should be given at the door of the church,


f. 95.


74 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


matrimonium peedat sive subsequatur cósensus, ae si -
valeret, si fieret. ad ostium ecclesie, dum tamen pbari
possit, viva voce. Si autem uxor dotata ad proban-
dum consensum instrumentum proferat in judicio, quód
vir sic dotaverat uxorem p assensum, sufficit illa pba-
tio. Si autem p vivà vocem, suflicit quzlibet illarum
p se. Si autem utramq, simul, & conveniant, sufficiet
unam psequi & probare. Si autem contrarie fuerint,
unam illarum eligere poterit ab initio, & una electa ad
aliam recurrere non poterit, cui per electionem renun-
ciavit, & inde si validam elegerit, sufficit, si autem
invalidam, amittit, secund quod videri poterit, cüm
uxor ad pbandum assensum producat vivam vocem &
testes, qui dicunt quód maritus uxoris eam dotavit, &
instrumentum similiter probatu ad probationem dicat,
q pater vel mater vel alius parens dotavit uxorem,
cüm deberet dicere eos prebuisse assensum, & unde
cüm uxor pr:cisé se tenuerit ad utrumque, neutra
valebit, cüm sint contrarie, nisi sit qui dicat, quód
ilam, quae utilis est, sufficit tenere, & quód utile non
est videatur per inutile, & quia valet plus quod actum
est q q scriptum, forté ppter errorem seribentis, & be-
nigna interpretatione posset ita interpretari instrumen-
ium, q ad hoc tant valere debeat, quód antecessor
constitutioni dotis facte p hseredem pbuit assensum &
ppter simplicitatem contrahentiü, secund' q dicitur de
layco psentante ad ecclesiam, qui dicit in instrumento
Dsentationis, q dat tali clerico talem ecclesiam sed in-
congrué, quia episcopus dat, & laycus tantüm psentat,
ex benigna igitur interpretatione, ppter simplicitatem


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 45


foritis valid whether the consent precedes or follows
matrimony, as it would be valid, if i&, were made at the
door of the church by oral parole, provided it can be
proved. But if the endowed wife to prove consent shall
produce an instrument at the judgment, that the hus-
band has so endowed his wife with his assent, such
proof is sufficient. But if by oral parole, any of those
proofs is sufficient by itself. But if by both at once, and
they agree, it will be sufficient to follow up one and to
prove it. Butif they are contrary, she may choose one
of them from 'the beginning, and upon one having been
chosen, she cannot have recourse to the other, which
she had renounced by her election, and hence if she has
chosen a valid proof it is sufficient, but if an invalid
one she loses, according to what may be seen when a
wife to prove assent produces oral parole and witnesses,
who say that the husband of the wife endowed her,
and an instrument similarly proved says for proof that
the father or the mother or another relative endowed
the wife, when it ought to say that they gave their
assent, and hence if the wife holds herself precisely to
both, neither will avail, since they are contrary, unless
there be some one who says, that it is sufficient to hold
to that which is useful and that what is not useful
is seen through what is useless, and because that which
has been done is of more force, than that which has
been written perhaps by an error of the writer, and a
benignant interpretation may so interpret the instru-
ment, that it ought to avail for this only, that the an-
cestor gave his assent to the appointment of dower made
by the heir, and on account of the simplicity of the
contracting parties, according to what is said of a lay-
man presenting to a, church, who says in the instrument
of presentation that he gives to such & clerk such a
church ineongruously, because the bishop gives and the
layman only presénts, therefore from a benignant in-
terpretation, on aecount of the simplicity of laymen, it


f. 95 b.


76 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


laycorum, admittitur quód nó sit vacua psentatio ppter
incongruam dictionem donationis, sed admittitur dona-
tio pro pressentatione, dat tamen laycus advocationem
ecclesiz, licet ecclesiam dare non possit. Sed si cüm
advocationem dederit, dieat in instrumento donationis,
quód dat ecclesiam, valebit donatio advocationis ex
benigna interpretatione, propter simplicitatem layoeo-
rum, & sic fit interptatio ab antiquis, q cü laic? dicat,
Do ecclesiam, dat quiequid juris habet in ecclesia, ta
in advocatione, q in psentatione, benign: eni faciendze
sunt interptationes, ut res magis valeat q pereat. Sed
(sine pjudieio melioris sententiz) videtur q uterq, doté
constituit pater scilicet & mater vel alius parens, ppter
eonsensum, & vir ppter nominatione dotis, quof neutft
valet sine alio, nec unu sufficere possit p se, unde si
pater instrument confecerit sup consensum ad pbatio-
nem constitutionis, & uxor habuerit vivam vocem ad
pbationem nominationis, neutf istof erit alteri contra-
rium, & ideó bené simul stare possunt, & nunq valebit
nominatio viri sine consensu parentis, nec à conirario,
& sic uterq, simul stat. Poterit etia vir dotare uxore
sua de reb? alienis paternis vel maternis, vel utriusq,
ipsof, & alteri? antecessoris, p assensum & voluntate
ipsof, eisdé modis quib? de reb? ppriis nominati vel
non nominatim acquisitis vel acquirendis, & de illis
etia, sed nominati & specialiter de quibus antecessores
nung fuerunt in seysina, dum tamen post tepus ad
hseredes sunt reversurze secund' q superiüs dicitur in
parte. De dote alterius uxoris, quz in vita viri nung


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 74


is admitted, that the presentation is not void on account
of the incongruous language of the donation, but the
donation is admitted as & presentation, the layman,
however, gives the advowson of the church, although he
cannot give the church. But when he gives the advow-
son, he says in the instrument of donation, that he gives
the church, the donation of the. advowson will avail
from a benignant interpretation on account of the sim-
plieity of laymen, and so the interpretation is made
from ancient time, that when a layman says I give a
church, he gives whatever right he has in the church, as
well in the advowson as in the presentation, for inter-
pretations ought to be benignant, that a thing should
rather prevail than perish. But without prejudice to
any better opinion it seems, that each has appointed the
dower, the father, for instance, and the mother or ano-
ther relative by reason of their consent, and the hus-
band by reason of his nomination of the dower, neither
of whom avails without the other, nor can one suffice by
himself, hence if the father has made the instrument
his own by his consent to the proof of the appoint-
ment, and the wife has oral parole for the proof of
the nomination, neither of them will be contrary to
the other, and therefore they may well stand together,
and the nomination of the husband will never avail
without the consent of the parents, nor the opposite, and
so each stands together. The husband may also endow
his wife with the property of others, as of his father or
of his mother, or of both of them, and of another of
his ancestors, through the assent and willingness of
themselves, in the same way, in which he may endow
her with his own property, by name or not by name,
already acquired or to be aequired, and of those things
also, but by name and specially, of which his ancestors
were never seysed, provided, however, they are about to
revert to the heirs according to what has been said
above, in part. Concerning the dower of & second wife,


f. 95 b.


Britton,

l. v. ch. ii.
$ 6.

Fleta 343.


78 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.

fuit deliberata, de alienis veró reb? à evinci poterunt,
non valet dotis constitutio cuin effectu. Ite si cüm
pater uxorem habuerit, & ei dotem constituerit in tertia
parte hereditatis sc. de trib? unciis una, & de con-
sensu ipsius, vivente maire, constituat filius uxori suse
dotem, non poterit ea dotare, nisi de tertia parte duar'
partium sc. duar' unciarum, quia mater dotata est de
parte totius, s. de tertia parte trium unciar. Si autem
pater uxorem non habuerit, cüm filius uxorem suà
dotaverit, & facta costitutione à filio de consensu pa-
tris, tunc pater post uxorem duxerit, tunc fiat ? con-
trario illius, q supra diet est, & secund q inferiüs
dicetur, de actione dotis.  Vidend etia, si postq dos
semel fuerit rit costituta, in reb? ppriis vel alienis
de cosensu, ex aliqua conventione facta inter vir &
uxorem, constante matrimonio, augmentari possit in
pjudicium vel ad dampnum heredis, & dicitur q no, ut
de itinere W. de Ralegh in com Midd', assisa mortis
antecessoris, si Johannes Blund?, & unde videtur, q
eadem ratione, minui non debet'in pjudicium uxoris.
Facta sie costitutione dotis ut pdiet est, non poterit
uxor in vita viri cirea dotem  constitutà nominata
qvis certa, aliquid disponere, eüm inde liber tenemtü
habere non possit ante assignationem, nec uxor viro
contradicere possit, si velit dotem vendere vel alienare,
q si faceret, de jure dotem amittet, quód si vir aliena-
verit, licót, uxor in vita non potuit cotradicere, ipsa
tamen post mortem viri, regressum habebit versus quos-


*0 ow c ——H


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 79


which has never been delivered during the lifetime of
the man, of the property indeed of others which may
be evicted, the appointment of dower does not avail
with effect. Likewise if & father has & wife, and has
appointed her & dower of the third part of the inhe-
ritance, that is, one third part out of three, and with
his consent, during the lifetime of his mother, his son
appoints a dower to his wife, he cannot endow her with
more than a third part of the two parts, that is, of the
two thirds, because the mother has been endowed with a
third part of the whole estate, that is, with a third part
of the three thirds. But if the father has not a wife,
when the son has endowed his wife, and an appointment
[of dower] having been made by the son with the con-
sent of the father, then the father afterwards takes a
wife, then the contrary takes place of what has been
said &bove, and according to what will be said below
concerning an action for dower. It is also to be seen, if
after the dower has been duly appointed in the property
of the husband or of others with consent, upon some
agreement made between the man and his wife, whilst
the marriage lasts, it can be augmented to the prejudice
or damage of the heir, and it is said that it cannot be
done, as in the circuit of Walter de Ralegh in the county
of Middlesex, at an assise of the death of an ancestor, if
John Blundus, and hence it seems that for the same
reason ib cannot be reduced to the prejudice of the wife.
Àn appointment of dower having been made as above
said, a wife cannot during the life of her husband dis-
pose of any thing of her dower appointed by name and
certain, since she cannot have a free tenement thereof
before its assignment, nor can the wife contradict her
husband if he wishes to sell or alienate the dower, which
if she were to do, she would of right lose her dower,
but if the husband should alienate it, although the wife
eannot contradict him during his life, she may after the
death of her husband have redress against those who


l.
Quod uxor
vidua re-
manere
debet in
capitali
mesuagio
per quad-
raginta
dies post
mortem
viri, donec
dos sua
fuerit ei
assignata,
et de dotis
assigna-
tione post
mortem
viri.
Britton,

l. v. ch. iii.


8 1.
Fleta 344.


80 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


eunq, detentores. Sed si p judicium vel p concordia
ui pdict' est, vel ppter delict, (secund q inferiüs dice-
tur) uxor regressum non habebit.


Car. XL.


Mortuo viro, confirmatur tunc primó dotis constitu-
tio, & si dos deliberata ei fuerit, statim fiat ei dotis
assignatio, sine aliqua difficultate, & nihil det pro dote
sua, vel maritagio, vel hereditate sua quam maritus
& ipsa tenuerüt die obitus ipsi? mariti, & maneat in
capitali mesuagio mariti sui per quadragita dies post
obit mariti, infra quos assignetur ei dos sua, nisi priüs
el fuerit assignata, vel nisi domus illa fuerit castrum,
& de castro illo si recesserit, statim provideatur ei
domus eompetens, in qua possit honesté morari, quo-
usque dos sua ei assignetur secundüm quod praedictum
est, & habeat rationabile estoverium suum interim de
communi, & pro dote sua, cüm fuerit ei deliberata,
assignetur ei tertia pars totius terre mariti sui, quse
sua fuit in vita sua, vel alio modo satisfaciat ei secun-
dàüm quod ad ostium ecclesie dos fuit ei constituta,
nec distringatur ad maritandum se, dum vivere volue-
rit sine viro, & ita tamen, quód securitatem faciet
capitali domino, quód se non maritabit sine assensu
suo, de quocunque tenere debeat, de domino rege, vel
de alio. Item quis debeat dotem assignare videndum,
càüm mulier per se authoritate propria non possit se
ponere in seysinam, propter assisam mortis antecesso-


4^


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 8l


detain ib whomsoever. But if it be through a judgment
or à convention, as aforesaid, or through à misdemeanour
(according to what will be said below), the wife shall
not have any redress.


CHAPTER XL. $:96:


Upon the death of the husband the appointment of the — 1.
dower is for the first time confirmed, and if the dower P es
has been delivered to her,let an assignment of her dower vife ought
be forthwith made without any diffüeulty, and let herj, deg
give nothing for her dower or her maritage or her in- mesuage
heritance, which her husband and herself held on the oi n2"
day of the death of her husband, and let her remain in iine of
the chief mesuage of her husband for forty days after panà "until
the death of her husband, within whieh days let her herdower
dower be assigned to her, unless it has been previously a iR eined to
assigned to her, or unless her house shall be a castle ; and oeEH UE
if she shall have withdrawn from that castle, let there be the assign-
forthwith provided for ber 2 suitable house, in which she mentof,
may honestly dwell, until her dower is assigned to her the death
according to what has been said above, and let her have 25 the bus-
her reasonable maintenance from the common stock ;
and for her dower, when it has been delivered to her, let
there be assigned to her the third part of the whole land
of her husband, which was his in his lifetime, or let
satisfaction be made to her 1n some other manner accord-
ing to what has been appointed to her at the door of the
church, nor let her be constrained to marry herself, whilst
she wishes to live without a husband, and on such terms
however, that she shall give security to the chief lord,
that she will not marry herself without his assent, from
whomsoever she ought to hold, from the lord the king or
from another. Likewise it is to be eonsidered who ought
to assign the dower, since the woman cannot of her own
authority put herself into seysine, on aecount of the
assise of the death of an ancestor, since the heir ought


VOL. II. F


9.
Qualiter
dos fuerit
ei assig-
nanda.


89 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


ris, cüm haeres primam seysinam habere debeat cüm
fuerit plenz statis, vel dominus capitalis nomine hee-
redis, si hgeres fuerit infra statem. Et sciendum, quód
haeres cüm fuerit plenz setatis, & non dominus capi-
talis, quia se intromittere non debet, nisi contentio
fuerit de hrreditate. Cüm autem heres fuerit infra
retatem, tunc dominus nomine heredis infra quarente-
nam, alioquin currit tempus, & sequantur dampna, nisi
excuset rationabilis causa.


Si autem tota dos vacaverit, tunc infra quadraginta
dies assignetur ei dos sua legittima, & secundàüm quod
ei ad ostium ecclesie fuit constituta, secundüm quod
tunc fuerit culta vel inculta, cum fructibus & redditi-
bus, & omnibus alis pertinentiis, & nihil refundatur
executoribus vel haeredibus pro cultura & cura, quia
antiquitüs solet observari, quód sicut uxor dotem suam
recipit post mortem viri sui cultam vel incultam, ita
post mortem uxoris solet restitui hseredi culta vel in-
culta, quia de bladis & fructibus à tenemento non
separatis non habuit uxor testamenti factionem, sed
nova superveniente gratia & provisione, sicut patet de
provisionibus apud Merton, inter placita quse sequun-
tur regem Henrieum anno regni sui decimo octavo,
poterit uxor de fructibus & bladis, sive à solo separata
fuerint, sive non, testari, & pro voluntate sua dispo-
nere. Si autem pars dotis vacaverit, & pars non, tunc
ilam partem, quie vacaverit, recipiet, & non vacantem
petat per actionem per breve de recto si voluerit, nisi
de consilio ad tempus duxerit abstinendum, ne per
receptionem partis, sibi przjudicet quantum ad exac-
tionem residui, propter dilationem quse venire poterit


— ——— -^ ——— ———— — ——  Qu—— — —— — —— 9 — —— MÀ —— -- --— Lo o— -——


! * Apud Merton." Such is the reading of MSS. Rawlinson, C. 160
and C. 159. -


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 83


io have the first seysine, when he is of full age, or the
chief lord in the name of the heir, if the heir be under
age. And it is to be known that the heir, when he is of
full age, and. not the chief lord, because he ought not to
intrude himself, unless there should be a dispute about
the inheritance. But when the heir is under age, then
the lord in the name of the heir within the forty days,
otherwise time runs, and losses may follow, unless a
reasonable cause excuse.

But if the whole dower has been vacant, then let her d
legitimate dower be assigned to her within forty days, "n ann
and according to what has been appointed to her at the ii nn
door of the church, according to what it was at that time, to hor.
cultivated or uneultivated, with its fruits and revenues
and all its other appurtenances, and let nothing be re-
funded to the executors or to the heirs for its cultivation
or management, because ib has of old been accustomed to

' be observed, that, just as a wife receives her dower after
the death of her husband, cultivated or uneultivated, so
after the death of the wife it has been accustomed to be
restored to the heir, cultivated or uncultivated, because
the wife had no power to make a will of the crops
and fruits not separated from the tenement: but by a
new supervening grace and provision, as is apparent
from the provisions of Merton, amongst the pleas which
follow the King Henry in the eighteenth year of his
reign, a wife may make a will and dispose according to
her pleasure of the fruits and crops, whether they have
been separated from the soil or not. But ifa part of the
dower has been vacant, and a part not, then she shall
receive that part which is vacant, and let her claim by an
action the part, which is not vacant, by a writ of right if
she wishes, unless upon advice she has considered it expe- '
dient to abstain for a time, lest by the acceptance of a
part she should prejudice her right to exact the residue,
on account of the delay which may ensue through a writ
of right, if she should receive anything therefrom, on

F 2


f. 96 b.


84 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.
7


per breve de recto, si aliquod inde recipiat, propter
verba in brevi de dote contenta, scilicet, *& unde nihil
* habet," secundüm quod inferiüs dicetur inter actiones
de exceptionibus contra petitionem dotis. Cüm autem
nihil vacaverit tempore, quo vir moritur, sed tota
hereditas alienata extiterit in manib? aliof, nó habent
tenentes necesse stati dotem restituere, nisi velint, cüm
justam causam habeat resistendi, & vocadi warrentum
suum, unum vel plures successivó usq, ad personam
heredis & warrenti uxoris de dote sua, infra quod
tempus non tenentur mulieri ad restitutionem damp-
norum, vel expensarum. Qui quidem, cum warrantiza-
verit, statim dotem restituat mulieri, nisi justam causam
habuerit resistendi, quam si non habuerit, sed resistat
per malitiam, omnia dampna restituet mulieri petenti,
secundüm valorem totius dotis illam contingentis à
tempore mortis viri sui, & omne interesse, quatenus suá
interfuit dotem su& habuisse usque ad diem, quo sey-
sinam suam per judicium recuperaverit, & nihilominus
warrentus in misericordia remanebit. Et illud idem
erit, si cü dos tota vacaverit, die quo maritus obierit,
& nihil fuerit alienatum in vita sua, sj uxor se in
dotem nominatam posuerit, & inde ante assignationem
ejecta fuerit, nee fuerit ei satisfactum sine placito &
dilatione, & hoc semper erit tenendum, nisi hzres vel
custos justam causam habeant resistendi. lllud etia
erit, si à tenemento, quod ei assignatum est ad qua-
rentenà suam, ante assignatiqnem dotis ejiciatur infra
quarentenam vel post. ltem illud idem, si omnino
extrà teneatur, quód non habeat ubi caput suum recli-


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 85


account of the words contained in à writ concerning
dower, for instance, *and whence she has nothing," ac-
eording to what will be explained! below amongst the
actions concerning exceptions against a claim of dower.
But when nothing is vacant at the time when the hus-
band dies, but the whole inheritance is alienated and in
the hands of others, the tenants are not necessarily
obliged to restore the dower, unless they are willing, f. 96 b.
when they have & just cause for resisting and calling
their warrantor, one or more suecessively up to the
person of the heir and the warrantor of the dower to the
wife, within which time they are not bound to the wife
to make restitution of her losses and expenses. Who
indeed, when he has warranted, should forthwith restore
the dower to the woman, unless he has a just cause for
resisting, which if he have not, but he resists from malice,
let him make good all the losses to the woman claimant,
aecording to the value of the whole dower falling to her
ab the time of the death of her husband, and all the
interest, as far as ib was her interest to have her dower
up to-the day when she recovered her seysine by a judg-
ment, and nevertheless the warrantor shall be liable to be
amerced. And the same thing will happen, if when the
whole dower has been vacant on the day when the hus-
band died, and nothing has been alienated during his
life, if the wife has put herself into the dower named,
and has been ejected thence before the assignment, nor
has satisfaction been made to her with a plea and a delay,
and this will always have to be maintained, unless the
heir or the guardian have just cause of resisting. The
same thing will happen, if she has been ejected before
the assignment of dower from the tenement, which has
been assigned to her for her quarantaine, within her
quarantaine or after it. The same thing will happen, if
She be kept out altogether, so that she has not where to


l'The words et unde nihil habet ut dicit" form part of the writ |
as set forth below in folio 296 b.


86 "^ DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


net. Si auté cüm tota vacaverit, & heres contendere
nolit, sed gratis & sine placito ei dotem restituere
velit, vidend est q sint ei nomine dotis restitueda. Et
si de incerta parte fiat dotis constitutio ad ostiu eccle-
sie, de acquisitis sc. & acquirendis, conveniens erit q.
heres ei assignet in dotem tertiam partem totius liberi
tenediti, q habuit antecessor su? in dominico suo ut de
feodo die, quo eam desponsavit, & ita in dominico &
feodo, quód ea inde dotare potuit, & hsec vera sunt,
nisi constitutio dotis alio modo tempore constitutionis
ad ostium ecclesie facta fuerit, & quo casu sequenda
Britton, — erit constitutio, cu de ea costiterit. Integró eni & non
aM ch. Hh p particulas, vel in parte, fieri debet assignatio, sc. de
Fleta 345. omb? terris & tenemitis, secund' mod' constitutionis.
In dominicis, villenagiis, feodis militum, homagiis, &
serviàüis liberor hominum, in advocationibus ececlesiar,
& secund' quod fuerit nominatim dotata vel non nomi-
natim, càm advocatione vel sine, & sive ibi sunt plures
advocationes sive una, semper in constitutione dotis,
& in assignatione erit habenda inde ratio, ut vel unam
ex pluribus retineat, vel quód ei inde aliunde satisfa-
ciat ad valentiam, cüm advocationes aliquando non
recipiant divisionem : & semper tenend? est mod? con-
stitutionis. Et lieét de advocationib? in constitutione
dotis nulla facta sit mentio, nec in assignatione, nec
sib in hsereditate nisi unica ecclesia, cüm post mortem
virijin vita uxoris, non debet hsres de jure illam
conferre sine assensu uxoris Sed quid si noluerit
consentire ? heres, qui duas partes habet in psentatione,


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 87


lay her head. But if when the whole [dower] is
vacant, and the heir is unwilling to contest it, but gra-
tuitously and without a plea is willing to restore her
dower to her, it is to be considered what is to be restored
to her under the name of dower. And if there be an
appointment of dower at the door of the church of an .
uncertain par& from property acquired for instance, or
to be acquired, it will be suitable, that the heir should
assign to her for dower the third part of the whole free
tenement, which his ancestor had in his domain, as of fee,
on the day on which he espoused her, and so in domain
and in fee that he could endow her therewith, and these
things are true, unless the appointment of dower has
been made in a different manner at the time of its ap-
pointment at the door of the church, and 'in which case
the appointment is to be observed, when it has been
clearly established. For the assignment should be made
as &à whole and not in parcels, nor partially, namely of
all the lands and tenementis according to the mode of
appointment. In domains and villenages, military fiefs,
homages, and the services of free men, in advowsons of
churches, and aecording to what has been given for
dower by name or without name, with the advowson or
without, and whether there has been more advowsons or
one, regard is always to be had thereto in the appoint-
mer& of dower and in the assignment of it, so that she
should retain one out of many, or that satisfaction should
be made to her for its value from other sources, since
advowsons sometimes do not admit of division, and the
mode of the appointment is always to be observed. And
although no mention has been made of the advowsons in
the appointment of dower, nor in the assignment of it,
&nd there is only à single church on the inheritance,
after the death of the husband and during the lifetime of
the wife the heir ought not of right to confer i& without
the consent of the wife. But whatif she be unwilling
to consent? "The heir, who has two parts in the pre-


Britton,

l. v. ch. ii.
S 5.

Fleta 345.


f. 97.


!


88 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


pferetur, quia quavis ecelesia qagni valoris extiterit,
tamen occasione dotis non dividitur, quia non patitur
secationem, & maxim? quia ab antiquo divisa non fue-
rit. Si autem de advocatione non sit mulieri aliter
satisfactum, videtur prima facie, quód si in vita ipsius
ter vacaverit, quód de squitate tertiam habere debeat
psentationem. Sed refert ad hoc qualiter sit dotata,


& dos ab initio constituta: si autem de tertia parte, &


no sit nisi unicum maneriü & una advocatio, vel si ibi
sint plura maneria et plures advocationes, nil petere
possit uxor de advocationibus ratione sus tertis partis,
nisi in ipsa dotis costitutione vel assignatione speciali-
ter convenerit, quod aliquid inde habere debeat, et est
ratio. Esto quód quis habeat maneriü aliquod integrum
cum advocatione ecclesi , et inde partem dederit ter-
tiam vel dimidiam vel minimam uni, et posteà alii
alteram partem, et sic successivo pluribus usq, ad unam
acram, vel etiam minimam partem, dum tamen aliquid
retinuerit, licót quzlibet pars magna sive minime data
si& cum omnimodis ptinentiis suis, donator semper ad-
vocatione integré retinebit, nisi specialiter cum aliqua
particula data transferatur, et sive donatio facta fuerit
simul et semel, et una die, uni vel pluribus successivé,
& unde cüm tertia pars ubique costituta sit et assig-
nata uxori nomine dotis, nulla facta mentione de ad-
vocatione, nihil transferri potest de advocatione ex
talis partis constitutione cum tertia parte assignata p
dote, e& unde non poterit uxor aliquid petere de advo-
catione ex tali dotis constitutione, nisi aliter inde spe-
cialiter covenerit in ipsa costitutione vel assignatione,


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 89


sentation, shall be preferred, because although the church
may be of great value, nevertheless i& is not divided on
occasion of dower, for it does not admit of being cut into
two, and chiefly because from ancient time it has nob
been divided. But if satisfaction has not been made to
the womaz in the matter of the advowson from another
source, ib seems at first sight that, if it has become vacant
three times in her lifetime, that she ought of equity to
have the third presentation. But it is of importance for
this purpose how she has been endowed and how the
dower has been appointed originally ; and if it has been
of the third part and there is only a single manor and one
advowson, or if there be three several manors and several
advowsons, the wife cannot claim anything of the
advowsons by reason of her third part, unless in the
appointment or in the assignment of dower it has been
specially agreed, that she ought to have something
therefrom, and it is reasonable. Let it be, that à person
has à certain entire manor with the advowson of the


church, and he gives à third part ora halfora very


small part to one person, and afterwards to another
person another part, and so suecessively to several persons
down io one aere, or even the smallest part, provided
however he retains something, although any either great
or small part has been given with all its appurtenances,
the:donor will always retain the advowson entirely,
unless it shall have been specially transferred with a
certain given part, and whether the donation has been
made at one and the same time, and on one day, to one
or to several suecessively, and hence when the third part
has been every where appointed and assigned to the
wife in the name of dower, no mention having been
made of the advowson, no part of the advowson is trans-
ferred by sueh an appointment of dower with the
third part assigned for dower, and hence the wife cannot
claim any part of the advowson from such an appoint-
ment of dower, unless it has been specially agreed there-
on in the very appointment and assignment, that the


f. 97.


90 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


quód tota advoeatio transferatur cum parte assignata.
Si autem dotata fuerit de aliquo manerio integro, ad
q ptinuerit advocatio cum omnib? ptinentiis suis, sine
aliqua retetione vel exceptione, advocatio transit cum
universitate et ipsa re, cüm specialiter retenta non sit
nec excepta. Et eodem modo fiet si p tertia parte
fuerit ei aliqg manerium cum ptinentiis assignatu. ltem
esto q quis ita dicat in donatione sua, Do tali mane- :
rium tale cum omnib? ptinentiüs suis, videtur p hzc,
omnia transferre ad donatarium, et advocatione, si ibi
fuerit: si dicat posteà, excepta tanta terra ad op? meum,
cüm igitur ab initio totum transferat, & ab illo toto
certa partem extra capiat, videtur q advocatio non
revertatur ad ipsum cum parte excepta, sed verum est
q debeat cum donatario remanere. Si aute sic dicat,
Do tali tale maneriü cum omnib* ptinentiis suis nulla
facta mentione de advocatione, et posteà dicat, reteta
mihi tanta terra, vel prseter tantam terram quam re-
tineo, advocatio cum parte retenta remanebit donatori,
et illud 1dem erit, salva mihi tanta terra.


8. Cüm autem sie dotata fuerit, ut predictum est, de


Qualité tertia parte cum advocatione nominatim & expresso,


ecclesie — vel cüm de manerio integro expresse cüm advocatione,


transfera- . . . .
turin doti; V9! sine expressione, dum tamen sine exceptione, ben?


assigna- — poterit ecclesià cóoferre cüm vacaverit, & quotiens vaca-
tionem, et 3t d illa d tent T list ] alibi
qualiter — Verit, sed illà dare non poterit loco religioso, ve i,


uL 3 antequam vacet & sit in possessione przesentadi, quó
'! . . . LJ . [ *. LJ
bt dare magis impediatur presentatio hseredis & warreti sui, q


ar desga si fecerit, hzres restituetur ad seysinam prsesentationis
cationem Sui vel antecessoris sui p assisam, q si preesentaverit


eccesi*. uxor in viduitate su& post mortem viri qui dotavit


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 91


whole advowson should be transferred with the part
assigned. But if she has been endowed with any entire
manor, to which an advowson appertains, with all its
appurtenances, without any reservation or exception,
the advowson passes with the whole body and the
estate itself, since it has not been specially reserved or
excepted. And in the same manner it will take place, if
for her third part there has been assigned to her a certain
manor with its appurtenances. Likewise let it be that
& person in his donation says thus, I give such a manor
with all its appurtenances to such & person, he appears
by these words to transfer everything to the donee, and
the advowson, if it be there; if he say afterwards, ex-
cepting so much land for my use, when then he at the
commencement transfers the whole and from that whole
takes out & certain part, it appears that the advowson
does not return to him with the part excepted, but it is
irue, that 1t ought to remain with the donee. But if he
say thus, I give to such à person such a manor with all
its appurtenances no mention having been made of the
advowson, and says afterwards, reserving to myself so
much land, or except so much land which I retain, the
advowson will remain to the donor with the part reserved,
and it will be the same, saving to myself so much land.


. But when she has been so endowed as aforesaid with 3.
the third part conjointly with the advowson by name dd d
and expressly, or with an entire manor expressly with advowson
the advowson or without the expression, provided it be "i ik :


without any exception, she may properly confer the ferred for
"En TC the assign-
church when it is vacant, and as often as it is vacant, ment of


but she cannot give it to & religious body or to any one dowcE Md
" * " . . 1n wha
else, before it is vacant and she is in possession of the way not so,


presentation, in order to impede the presentation of the Ma
heir and her warrantor, which if she should do, the thiug:o


heir will be restored to the seysine of his presentation aie
or of his ancestor presentation by an assise, but if and to give


the wife has presented during her widowhood after the advow.


f. 97 b.


09 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


eam, vel si nupserit secundo, et ipsi simul dederint
advocationem loco religioso, vel alicui privates psonse,
p hoc auferetur seysina prsesentationis suo warranto,
et warrantus pos&í mortem uxoris non audietur, nisi
tantüm sup pprietate p breve de recto, & quo casu
donatari? warrantum vocabit donatorem, vel ejus hz-
rede, ut excambium consequatur. Sed quid si cüm
uxor secundum virum suum supervixerit, et advocatio-
nem petat p breve de ingressu, eó quód viro suo co-
iradicere no potu, in vita viri, nec finis nec chiro-
graphu intervenerit in curia regis, qusritur an audin
debeat? Et videtur quód sicut de qacunq, alia re.
Ite si cüm ipsa petere ceperit p breve de ingressu,
warrant? su? similiter agere incipiat p breve de recto,
uxor in hoc casu erit pferenda, & si illa obtinuerit, p
hoe jus warranti reformabitur ei, ut eande seysinà,
quam uxor habuit, habeat warrant? post morte uxoris,
& si in pbatione juris defecerit uxor, videtur quód
remanere debet actio warráti usq, ad morte uxoris, ae
Si esset, si ipsa p se in viduitate sua post psentatione
dedisset advocationem. Et longé aliud est dare eccle-
siam, quàm dare advocationem, quia qui advocatione
dat, transfert ecclesia, & ipsum jus psentandi, s. sey-
sina, cüm fuerit in seysina psentandi Si autem eccle-
siam dederit quis alicui, qui ad prssentatione admit-
tatur, retinet sibi jus psentandi & seysinam ut jus
patronatus, ecuicunq, sic facta fuerit donatio, private
psonz, vel loco religioso, in pprios usus, vel alio modo.


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 98


the death of the husband who endowed her, or if she
has married another husband, and they shall have
together given the advowson to a religious body or to
Some private person, the seysine of the presentation
will be by such means taken away from her warrantor,
and the warrantor after the death of the wife shall
not be heard, except only upon the property by a writ
of right, and in which case the donee shall call the
donor or his heir to warrant, that he may obtain com-
pensation. But what if, when the wife has survived
her second hubband, and claims the advowson by a writ
of entry, on the ground: that she could not contradict
her husband during his lifetime, and no fine nor chiro-
graph in the Court of the King has intervened, it is
asked whether she ought to be heard? And it seems
that [she should be heard] as in any other matter.
Likewise if, when she herself has commenced her claim
by a writ of entry, her warrantor in like manner begins
an action by & writ of right, the wife in this case is to
be preferred, and if she prevails, the right of the
warrantor will thereby be reformed so that the war-
rantor shall have after the death of the wife the same
seysine, which the wife had, and if the wife fails in
her proof of right, it seems that the action of the
warrantor ought to remain until the death of the wife,
as if ib were the case, that she of herself during her
widowhood after the presentation had given the advow-
son. Andit is a far different thing to give a church from
giving an advowson, because he who gives the advow-
son, transfers the church and the right itself of present-
ing to it, that is the seysine, when he was in the seysine
of the presentation. But if a person gives a church to
another, who is admitted to the presentation, he retains
to himself the right of presenting and the seysine as the
right of patronage, to whomsoever the donation may
have been so made, to a private person or to a religious
plaee, for their own uses or in some other manner.


son of &
church.


f. 97 b.


04 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


Ité esto, quód prim? vir, qui dotavit nominatim cum
advocatione vel alio modo, ut przedictü est, in vita sua
advocationem dederit alicui loco religioso, hseres ejus,
eàüm obierit, tenetur advocationem illam, quam ante-
cessor suus incumbravit, deliberare si possit, vel ei
satisfacere ad valentiam si non possit, & si illam uxori
deliberaverit, illa poterit ad ecclesiam illam presentare,
si vacaverit. Et sive vacaverit, sive non, advocatio
illa post morte uxoris revertetur domui religiosz, ppter
donum primi viri, quod firmum esse debet. Cüm autem
de tertia parte dotata fuerit, & tota dos vacaverit, sive
in uno manerio sive in pluribus, de nullo, q de sua na-
tura indivisibile sit & secationem sive divisionem non
patiatur, nullam partem habebit, sed satisfaciat ei ad
valentiam alibi. Item nec de aliquo q de consuetudine
dividi non solet: quia esto, quód vir non haberet nisi
unicum manerium suum, sive illud fuerit caput baronis,
vel non, uxori non assignabitur in ttia parte sua ali-
quid de capitali mesuagio, ipsa enim nihil capiet de
capitali mesuagio, sive un? sit ibi hsres, sive plures,
quia ips& partem non capit, sicut facit cohseres parti-
ceps cum cohsrede participe. Nihil enim capiet de
capitali mesuagio, secüdüm q vallatu fuit & inclusum
fossato, haya, vel palatio. De hae materia& inveniri
poterit de termino Sancte Trinitatis anno regni regis
H. septimo in com Essex de quadà lIdonea petéte do-
tem. Item nec de aliquo q infra clausum coótineatur,
sicut de gardinis, servoriis, vel vivariis. De hfnodi
vero si fuerint extra, erit inferiüs dieedü, quid juris.
Sed eàüm nihil capere possit de capitali mesuagio, &
ipsa sine mesuagio esse no debeat, eligat ipsa de vil-
lenagiis honestü aliq; & q competens ei esse videatur


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 95


Likewise let it be, that the first husband, who endowed
[his wife] by name with an advowson or in any other
way, as aforesaid, has given during his lifetime the ad-
vowson to some religious place, his heir after his death is
bound to deliver to her, if he can, that advowson which
his ancestor has encumbered, or to satisfy her up to its
value, if he cannot, and if he has delivered it to the wife,
she will be able to present to it, if it has become vacant.
And whether it has become vacant or not, that advowson
after the death of the wife will revert to the religious
house on account of the gift of the first husband, which
ought to remain firm. But when she has been endowed
with the third part, and the whole dower has become
vacant, whether in one manor or in several, she shall
have no part of any thing, which is of its own nature
indivisible and does not admit of being cut or divided,
but satisfaction shall be made to her elsewhere of its
value. Likewise not of anything, which by custom is
not accustomed to be divided : because let it be, that a


man has only a single manor of his own, whether that be .


the head of à barony or not, there shall not be, assigned
to the wife in her third part any thing of the chief
mesuage, for she shall take nothing of the chief mesuage,
whether there be one heir there or several, because she
herself does not take a part,as & coheir parcener does
with a coheir parcener. For she shall take nothing of
the chief mesuage, according as it is surrounded and en-
closed with a fosse, or & hedge, or a palace. On this
subject a case will be found in Holy Trinity Term in the
sixth year of King Henry in the county of Essex respect-
ing a certain Idonea claiming dower. Likewise not of any
thing, which is contained within the close, as of gardens,
stews, or fishponds. Butifthere be such things outside the
close, we shall discuss below, what right there is to them.
But since she can take nothing of the chief mesuage, and
ought not to remain without a mesuage, let her choose
of the villenages some honest one and which seems to


"


Britton,
]. v. ch. iii.


S 6.
Fleta 345.


96 ^ DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


& inde se teneat cotenta. Si aute nullü mesuagiü in-
veniat in villenagio, tune pvideat ei in loeo copetenti
quzeda platea, quse ei sufficere possit ad mesuagiü, ad
valentia ttis partis, s. in latü et longü, & non ad
valentiam sedificiorum, & fiat mesuagium de bosco co-
muni Si autem nullü sit mesuagium de villenagio,
nec aliquid in dnico ubi fieri possit mesuagium, tunc
de necessitate recurrendu erit ad capitale mesuagiü,
sicut in burgagiis ad liberü banceu. Et hsc oia vera
sunt, nisi ab initio velit hsres ei gratis parte coce-
dere de capitali mesuagio, q ben? licitum erit, cüm
heres hoc voluerit. Item si in eodem manerio, in quo
tertia pars erit ei assignanda, fuerint plura capitalia
mesuagia, duo, vel plura, ipsa ad minus unicum habe-
bit, dum tamen heres electionem habeat. Si autem
nominatim & integré dotata fuerit de aliquo manerio,
vel qualitereunq, fuerit dotata, si convenerit inter ip-
sam & hzredem, quód habeat manerium aliquod integre
pro dote, illud totum habebit cum mesuagio & aliis
pertinentiis, nisi aliquid fuerit specialiter exceptum, vel
nisi valor excedat dotem rationabilem. Item cüm as-
signanda fuerit ei tertia pars, facta assignatione de
mesuagio, assignetur ei tertia pars de omni, quod vir
suus tenuit in dominico, secundüm statum presentem
in terra arabili, secundüm quod fuerit culta vel inculta,
seminata vel non seminata, & si fuerit seminata vel
non seminata, nihil dabit pro cultura. ltem assignetur
ei tertia pars de pratis, boscis, pascuis, pasturis, & de
omnibus aliis commoditatibus, exceptis parcis vivariis,
de quibus nihil percipiet. Nihil enim ampliüs perci-
piat de piscibus & feris in parcis inclusis, quàm de
animalibus, & ovibus in ovilibus, eo excepto, quód si


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 97


be suitable to her and let her be content therewith. But
ifshe finds no mesuage in villenage, then let there be
provided for her in a suitable place a certain open site,
which will suffice for à mesuage, to the value of a third
part, that is in breadth and in length, and not to the
value of the buildings, and let à house be built of the
common timber. But if there be no mesuage in the
villenage, nor any part of the domain in which à mesuage
may be built, then of necessity recourse must be had to
the chief mesuage, as in burgage tenures to the Free
Bench. And all these things are true, unless from the
beginning the heir wishes to concede to her gratuitously
& part of the chief mesuage, which is perfectly allowable,
when the heir is willing. Likewise, if in the same
manor, in which à third part is to be assigned to her,
there shall be several chief mesuages, two or more, she
shall have at least a single one, provided, however, that
the heir shall have the choice. But if she has been en-
dowed by name and in its entirety with a certain manor,
or in whatever way she may have been endowed, if it
has been agreed between her and the heir, that she shall
have one manor entirely as her dower, she shall have it
altogether with the mesuage and other appurtenances,
unless something has been specially excepted, or unless
its value exceeds & reasonable dower. Likewise, when
8 third part is to be assigned to her, the assignment of
the mesuage having been made to her, let a third part be
assigned to her of every thing, which the husband held
in domain, according to its present state in arable land,
according as it is eultivated or uneultivated, sown or un-
sown, and if it be sown or not sown, she shall give
nothing for the cultivation. Likewise let there be
assigned to her & third part of the meadows, woods,
grass, pastures and of other commodities, excepting parks
of live animals, of which she shall receive nothing. For
she shall receive nothing more of the fish and wild
animals in inclosed parks, than of animals and of sheep
VOL. II. G


f. 98.


p»


4.
Quod docs
libera esse
debet,


98 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


piscari, ibi fuerint, quarum commoditates dependent
ex insidiis fortunze, ibi percipiet tertiam partem com-
moditatis, vel tertium piscem, vel jactum retis tertium,
secundüm quod convenerit. Item assignanda erit ei
tertia pars villenagii, quod est quasi dominicum. Item
tertia pars servitiorum liberorum hominum, & de qui-
bus habebunt custodias & relevia, salvis tamen homa-
giis dominis capitalibus. Item habebit hrredum ma-
ritagia. ltem habebit eschaetas sive venerint propter
defectum vel propter delictum, sed hoec non nisi ad
vitam, quia post mortem pertinet ad haeredem: & gene-
raliter omnes commoditates ex dote provenientes uxo-
ris erunt, quoad vixerit, nisi hoc forté auferat coventio
Specialis.


Assignata dote, libera debet esse dos, nihil enim
confere& uxor de dote sua ad debita mariti acquie-
tanda, quia si peculium mariti non sufficiat ad debita,
quicquid fuerit ulteriüs solvendum, h:wredem & h:ere-
ditatem onerabit. Item h:seres tenetur dotem suam
defendere & warrantizare, & pro ea sequi comitatus,
hundredas, & curias dominorum., Ipsa enim ad alia
intendere non debet, nisi ut domui su:e disponat, & ut
pueros suos, si qui fuerint, nutriat & educat. Curiam
autem suam propriam habere debet de omnibus placi-
tis,.que ad ipsam pertinent, terminandis.  Placita veró
per breve de recto placitari debent & terminari in
curia h:zredis, & warrenti sui de dote sua, propter
vineulum homagii, quod inter liberos tenentes suos &
warrentum de dote sua non est dissolutum, & quia
ipsa placitum super recto tenere non poterit, cüm non
habeat nisi liberum tenementum. ltem nee pertinent
ad ipsam placita, qus pertinent ad coronam, pro jus-
titia & pace domini regis, quia nullus hujusmodi placita


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 99


in the sheep-folds, with this exception, that if there be
fishponds, the advantages of which depend upon the
snares of: fortune, she shall thence derive a third part of
the advantage, or a third fish, or a third cast of the net,
aecording as shall be agreed upon. Likewise a third
part of the villenage is to be assigned to her, which is as
ib were domam. Likewise à third part of the services
of the free-men, and of those of whom they have the
wardships and the reliefs, saving always the homage to
the chief lords. Likewise she shall have escheats, whether
they fall in on account of defect or delict, but. this only
for her life, because after her death it belongs to the heir,
and generally all advantages resulting from the dower
shall belong to the wife,as long as she lives, unless by
chance a special agreement has taken them away.


, Upon dower having been assigned, the dower ought to Mus
be free, for the wife shall contribute nothing from her ought to
dower to acquit the debts of her husband, because ife free
the special property of the husband is not sufficient
for his debts, whatever further has to be paid, shall
be & charge upon the heir and the inheritance.  Like-
wise the heir is bound to defend and to warrant his
dower, and in defence of it to attend counties, hundreds,
and the courts of lords. For she herself is not bound
to attend to other things, except to manage her house,
and to nourish and educate her boys, if she has any.
For she ought to have her own court for the determina-
tion of all pleas which concern herself. But pleas by
a writ of right ought to be pleaded and determined in
the court of the heir, the warrantor of her dower on
aecount of the tie of homage which is not dissolved be-
tween her free tenants and the warrantor of her dower,
and because she cannot maintain a plea of right, since
she has only a free tenement. Likewise the pleas, which
appertain to the crown, in defence of justice and the
peace of the king, do not pertain to her, for no one can

| a 2


100 DE ACQUIRENDO RERUM DOMINIO.


placitare poterit, nisi hoc eis specialiter concessum fue-
rii, sicut justitiariis domini regis, sicut placitum per
breve de recto, visus franci plegii, placita de vetito
namii, si latro fuerit judicandus, vel si transgressum
sit contra assisas domini regis, hujusmodi veró placita
non pertinent ad dotem. Alia veró placita, quz perti-
nent ad dominum feodi, placitare poterit in cut sua.


OF ACQUIRING THE DOMINION OF THINGS. 101


plead pleas of this kind, except it be specially conceded
to them, as, for instance, to the justiciaries of the lord
the king, as a plea by a writ of right, a view of frank
pledge, pleas of unlawful distraint, if a robber has to be
judged, or if there has been a trespass against the assises
of the lord the king; but these kinds of pleas do not
belong to dower. But other pleas, which belong to the
lord of the fief, she may plead in his court.


1


f. 98 b.
1.


De actioni-


HENRICI DE BRACTON


DE


LEGIBUS & CONSUETUDINIBUS ANGLUE


LIBER TERTIUS.


QUI DIVIDITUR IN DUOS TRACTATUS, QUORUM PRIMUS
EST DE ACTIONBUS.


CAP. I.


Dictum est suprà de personis, & rebus, nune autem


bus, et quid dicendum est, de actionibus, & videndum quid sit actio,


sit actio.
Instit. iv. 6.
Azo p. .
1118.


& unde oriatur, & qualiter dividatur, & qualiter pro-
ponatur, & intentetur, & qualiter proposita fundetur, &
qualiter fundata probetur, & sciendum quid sit actio.
Aetio nihil aliud est, quàm jus prosequendi' in judicio,
quod alieui debetur. Jus autem ponitur ad differen-
tiam eorum, quae non sunt juris, vel eorum, quz» quam-
vis jus habeant & actionem, elidi tamen poterunt per
legittimam exceptionem contrapositam. Vel dicitur jus
ad differentiam officii judicis, quod latissimum est &
non est actio. Multa enim expediuntur per officium
judicis, quee non expediuntur jure actionis, & jus non
est ipsum ofüeium, sed appellari poterit factum. Sed
S1 Sit, qui quzerat, cur dicatur quis prosequi per actio-


! Azo employs the word ** persequendi," as uscd in the Institutes IV. 6.


THE THIRD BOOK


OF


HENRICUS DE BRACTON


ON THE


LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF ENGLAND,


WHICH IS DIVIDED INTO TWO TREATISES, OF WHICH
THE FIRST IS ABOUT ACTIONS.


—-— — € 0e


CHAPTER I. f. 98 b.


We have treated above of persons and of things, we — 2.
wil now treat of actions, and we must see what an ud dc
action is, and whence it arises, and how it is divided, isan action.
and how it is propounded and intended ; and how, after
it has been propounded, it is founded ; and how, after it
has been founded, it is proved; and we must know
what is an action. An actioh is nothing else, than the
right of pursuing in court what is due to & person. Ánd
the term *right" is used to distinguish it from those
things which have no element of right in them, or from
those things which, although they partake of right and
of an action, may be eluded by alegal demurrer taken to
them. Or the term "right" is used to distinguish them
from the office of the judge, which is most extensive and
is not an action. For many things are settled by the
office of the judge, which do not admit of settlement by
& right of action, and a right is not an office itself but
& plaint against an act. But if there be any one who
asks, why is &à person said to pursue by an action, when


f. 99.


104 DE ACTIONIBUS.


nem, cüm proponat actionem injuriarum, ciun ibi ex
officio judicis summa constituatur. Respondeo, bené
poterit diei actio, cüm agitur ex injuria, & est ratio,
quia habet querens jus querendi & petendi, si aliquid
ei debetur. Si quzras quid, Respondeo, id videlicet,
q querens zstimaverit. Nam antequam querens in
judicio conqueratur, sstimare non poterit injuria sibi
factam, s. quale damnum sustinuerit, ex qualitate facti
& injurive enormitate, quae quidem sstimatio, si injusta
fuerit vel superflua, bené pmittitur judici ex officio suo
summa quam querens zstimavit moderare & minuere,
non aute augere, nisi fort? ita sit, quód ille de quo
queritur, gratis se posuerit in voluntatem & gratiam
ipsi? eonquerentis. Et quo casu sstimatio & taxatio
erit in voluntate conquerentis, & aufertur judici offi-
eium & potestas taxandi. Item q dicitur, psequendi,
hoc autem ponitur ad differentiam exceptionis, qua non
psequimur alium, sed magis ab alio psequuti, nosmet
ipsos defendimus, licét in exceptione partes actoris
sustineam?. Ite de eo, g dicit, in judicio, hoc etiam
ponitur ad differentiam eorum, quee non in judicio, sed
extra psequimur, sicut furem nocturnum, vel diurnum,
sieut predonem vel alium, & non licebit unicuig, se
sine judicio vindicare, hoc excepto, quód si tales vivi
capiantur, vita & mors et membrum ptinent ad regem.
Item, q sibi debetur, ponitur ad differentiam crimina-
lium actionum, quib? non solüm mihi debitum prose-
quor, sed cuilibet de populo, propter pacem regis &
communem utilitatem


OF ACTIONS. .. 105


he propounds an action for injury, since the sum is in
that case fixed by the office of the judge, I answer, it
may well be called an action, when an injury is treated
of, and there is reason, because the plaintiff has the
right of complaining and claiming, if something is not
due to him. If you ask what is that something, I an-
swer, that forsooth, which the plaintiff has estimated.
For before the plaintiff complains in court, he cannot
estimate the injury done to him, that is, what damage
he has sustained, from the character of the act and the
enormity of the injury, which estimate, if it shall be
unjust or excessive, the judge 3s wisely allowed from his
office to modify and diminish the sum which the plaintiff
has estimated, but not to increase it, unless it happen
that the person, against whom the plaint is brought,
places himself gratuitously at the will and grace of the
plaintiff himself. In which case the estimate and tax-
ing will be at the discretion of the plaintiff, and the
duty and power of taxing is withdrawn from the judge.
Likewise when itis said [the right] of * pursuing," this
term is used to distinguish it from a demurrer, by which
we do not pursue another, but rather when pursued by
another, we defend ourselves, although in demurring we
sustain the part of a plaintif. Likewise as regards the
words **in court," they are used to distinguish an action
from those things, which we do not pursue in court but
out of court, like à thief by night or by day, like a
robber or another, and where it wil not be allowed to
every one to avenge himself without & judicial inquiry,
with this exception, that if such persons are captured
alive, their life and death and members pertain to the
king. Likewise the words, * what is due to himself,"
are used to mark the difference from criminal actions,
by which I pursue not merely what is due to me, but to
any of the people, on aecount of the king's peace and the
common interest.


£. 99.


2.
Unde actio
oriatur.
Inst. III.,
14.
Britton,

l. 1. ch.
xxix. S 2.
Fleta 120.


106 DE ACTIONIBUS.


Videndum est etiam unde actio oriatur? et sciendü
est q ex obligationib? praecedentib?, tanqua à matre
filia! Obligatio aute, quee est, mater actionis, originem
ducit & initium ex aliqua causa przecedente, sive ex
cotraetu vel quasi sive ex maleficio vel quasi. Ex
eotractu veró oriri poterit multis modis, sicut ex con-
ventione, p interrogationes & responsiones, ex concep-
tione verborum, quze voluntates duorum in unum trahit
cosensum, sicut sunt pacta, conventa, quz nuda sunt
aliquando, aliquando vestita, quz: » si nuda fuerint, ex-
inde non sequef actio, quia ex nudo pacto non nasci-
tur actio. Oportet igitur q habeat vestimta, de quib?
inferiüs dicendü est, et hujusmodi causa ex coótractu,
vel quasi, semper erit civilis. Ite nascitur obligatio
ex maleficio, vel quasi, & maleficii pvenit ex delicto


 & injuria, quze quidem plures sub se continet species:


l
Quid sit
obligatio,
et qunliter
contra-
hitur.


ut si quis crimen lese majestatis commiserit, homici-
dium, vel furtum, et hujusmodi: vel quasi ex male-
ficio, ut. si judex scienter malé judicaverit, obligatus
esse videtur quasi ex delicto, sed quia nec prrecise ex
maleficio nec ex céüractu obligat? est, & aliquid pec-
casse intelligitur licét per imperitia, ideó videtur quasi
ex malificio teneri.


Car. II.


Quüm autem nascantur actiones ex obligationibus,
qua ex contractu, vel quasi, substantiam capiunt, &
etiam ex maleficio vel quasi, videndum est in primis
quid sit obligatio, et qualiter cótrahatur, et p qus
verba, et p quas psonas acquiritur obligatio, & qualiter
dissolvatur & tollatur, & qualiter cüm fuerit dissoluta


— — M o — M — HMM —U— m € p ——— Ha


! Bracton seems to have borrowed | tanquam de matribus earum, primo
his comparison from Azo, who says, | loquamur. — Summa in Inst., p.
" Sed quis actiones nascuntur ex | 1101.
obligationibus, et de obligationibus, :


OF ACTIONS. 107


We must see likewise whence an action arises, and — 2. .
it is to be known that it arises from preceding obliga- hips EOS
tions like à daughter from a mother. But an obligation,
which is the mother of an action, derives its origin and
commencement from some preceding cause, either from
a contract or a quasi-contraet, or a tort or & quasi-tort.
But it may arise in many ways Írom a contract, as from
a covenant, by questions and answers, from a form of
words, which draw together the will of two parties to.
one consent, as are pacts, conventions, which are some-
times nude, sometimes clothed ; which if they were nude,
an action would not thereupon follow, for an action does
not arise from a naked fact. It is necessary therefore
that it should have some clothing, respecting which we
will treat below, and this kind of cause arising from.
contraet or quasi-contract, will always be civil  Like-
wise an obligation arises from a tort or a quasi-tort, and
& tort proceeds upon a delict and an injury, which con-
iains many species under it, as if à person should com-
mit the erime of treason, homicide, or theft, or such like,
or from quasi-tort, as if à judge should knowingly judge
badly, he seems to be under an obligation as it were
from a delict, but because he is not obliged precisely
from a contract or from a tort, and he is understood to
have committed a fault from inexperience, he seems to
be liable as it were from a tort.


CHAPTER II.


Since, however, actions arise out of obligations, which |,
derive their substance from contract, or from quasi- Wbatis an
. . ] obligation,
contract, and likewise from tort or from quasi-tort, we and how
must consider in the first. place what is an obligation, $5 22n-
and how it is contracted, and through what words and
through what persons an obligation is acquired, and in


what way it is dissolved and got rid of, and in what way


COMMA — UH


Inst. III.
14.

Azo, p.
1,101.


108 DE ACTIONIBUS.


renovetur, & qualiter in aliam psonam transfundaiur,
& qualiter una obligatio in aliam mutetur. Et primó
seiendum, quód obligatio est juris vinculum, quo neces-
Sitate astringimur ad aliquid dandum vel faciendü, ut
si quis ligatus fuerit & astrictus alicui ad aliquid, &
ille aliàás ei ad aliud contra obligatus. Est enim obli-
gatio, quasi contra ligatio, & quatuor habet species,
quibus contrahitur, & plura vestimta. Cotrahit enim
re, verbis, seripto, consensu, traditione, juncetura, quse
oia dicunt vestimta pactoru. Re aute contrahitur obli-
gatio, veluti in mutui datione, quze eosistit in reb?, d
pondere, numero, mensura suni: pondere, sicut in reb?
qui ponderani: numero, sicut pecunia numerata, pó-
dere,! sere, argeto, & auro: mésura sicut in vino, oleo,
fruméto. Qus res aute in appendendo, numerando,
metieédo in hoc datur, ut statim fiant accipientiu, qa
mutuü pprié dicitur id q ex meo fit tuü, & quandog,
non ezedem res, sed alice ejusde nature reddutur cre-
ditor Hiis aute, cui res aliqua utenda datur, re obli-
gatur ( comodata est, sed magna differetia est ini
mutuü & comodatu, da is qui rem comodatam ? acce-
pit? ad ipsam restituendam tenetur, vel ejus preciü,
si forte incendio, ruina, naufragio, aut latronum vel
hostium incursu, consumpta fuerit vel deperdita, sub-
stracta, vel ablata. Et qui rem utendam accepit, non
sufficit ad rei custodiam, quód talem diligentiam ad-
hibeat, qualem suis rebus ppriis adhibere solet, si alius
eam diligentiüs potuit custodire. Ad vim autem ma-


! * Pondere. 'T'his word seems to ? Coggs v. Bernard. Lord Ray-
be redundant, but it occurs in the | mond's Reports, 915, 916. . Holt,
oldest MSS. Chief Justice, cites this passage as


?« Commodatam." "This is the | **quia is qui rem muttam accepit."
reading of the oldest MSS.


M


OF ACTIONS. 109


after it has been dissolved it may be renewed, and how
it may be transferred to another party, and how one
obligation may be changed into another. And it must
be known, in the first place, that an obligation is a bond
of law, by which we are constrained by a necessity to
give or to do something, as if one was tied and con-
strained to another person for a certain thing, and that
other person was bound to him on the contrary for
anotherthing. For an obligation is as 16 were a, counter-
tie, and it has four forms under which it is contracted,
and several vestments. For it is contracted in substance,
in words, in writing, by consent, by delivery, by joining,
all of which are called the vestments of compacts. An
obligation is contracted in substance, as in granting a
loan, which consists in things, which exist in weight,
number, or measure: in weight, as in things which are
weighed; in number, as in money counted of weight,
brass, silver, or gold ; in measure, as in wine, oil, or corn.
Which things also by weighing, or by counting, or by
measuring are given for this purpose, that they forth-
with become the property of the receivers, because that
which becomes éuwm instead of mewm is properly called
mutwwnm, &nd sometimes not the same things, but others
of the same nature are returned to the creditor. But he
to whom a thing is given to be used,is obliged in sub-
stance when it is lent to him, but there is à. great differ-
ence between a loan on mutuality and & loan on accom-
modation, that he who accepts & thing by way of
accommodation is bound to return the identical thing
or its value, if by chance it has been consumed or lost,
or subtracted, or carried away by fire or by tumbling
down, or by shipwreck, or by an incursion of robbers
or of enemies. And he who has received a thing to
be used, it is not sufficient for the safe custody of
the thing, that he should apply such diligence as he
is aecustomed to apply to his own property, if another
could have guarded it better. But as regards "force


f. 99 b,


"


Glanville,
€.49.


2.
Quid est
stipulatio.


Britton,
l. i. ch.
xxiv., S 4.


110 DE ACTIONIBUS.


jorem, vel casus fortuitos non tenetur quis, nisi culpa
sua intervenerit, ut si rem sibi commodatam domi
secum detulerit, cüm  peregré pfectus fuerit, & illam
ineursu hostium, vel preedonum, vel naufragio amiserit,
non est dubium, quin ad rei restitutionem teneatur!
Commodata autem res dictür ad comodum data &
pprié dicitur commodata, cüm nulla mercede accepta
res utéda datur. Gratuitum enim esse debet comoda-
tum, & si merces intervenerit, potiüs dici debeat loca-
tio & coduetio quàm commodatum. Is, apud quem res
deponitur, re obligatur, & de ea re quam accepit resti-
tuenda tenetur, & etiam ad id, si quid in re deposita
dolo commiserit. Culpe autem nomine non tenetur,
s. desidive vel negligentie, quia qui negligenti amico
rem eustodiendam tradit, sibi ipsi, & pprime fatuitati,
hoe debet imputare. Creditor, qui pignus accepit, re
obligatur & ad illam restituendam tenetur, & cüm
hujusmodi res in pignus data sit utriusq, gratia, s.
debitoris quó magis ei pecunia crederetur data sit, &
creditoris, quó magis ei in tuto sit creditum, sufficit
ad illi? rei custodia diligentia exaetam adhibere, quam
Si preestiterit, & rem casu amiserit, securus esse possit,
nec impedietur creditum petere.


Verbis contrahitur obligatio p stipulationem, est enim
stipulatio quedam verborum conceptio, qui consistit
ex interrogatione & responsione, ut si dicatur, promit-
tis? promitto. Dabis? dabo. Facies? facia.  Fide-
jubes? fidejubeo. Et omnis talis stipulatio, aut fit


! 'This paragraph is almost copied literatim from the Institutes of Jus-
tinian, l. iii. lib. xv. S 2.


OF ACTIONS. 111


majeur" or fortuitous accidents, a person is not respon-
sible, unless his own fault has intervened, as if he
carried about with him when he travelled abroad
& thing lent to him in his house, and he lostit by an
attack of enemies or of robbers, or by shipwreck, there
is no doubt that he would be bound to make good the
thing. But a thing is said to be lent on accommodation
when its use is granted for the benefit of another, and it
is properly called an. accommodation, when its use is
granted without any payment. For an accommodation

. ought to be gratuitous, and if a payment for the use
should intervene, it ought rather to be styled a letting
and a hiring, than an accommodation. He, with whom
the thing is deposited, is in substance obliged, and is
bound to return that very thing which he has received,
and also for anything which may have been done by
way of deceit with the thing deposited«with him. But
he is not responsible on the ground of fault, namely, of
carelessness or of negligence, for he, who trusts a thing to
à negligent friend to guard for him, ought to impute any
loss to himself and his own folly. A creditor, who has
received a pledge, is in substance obliged and is bound to
return it ; and since a thing of this kind given in pledge
is given in the interest of either party, for instance, of the
debtor in order that money may be entrusted to him,
and of the creditor that he may entrust his money safely,
it is sufficient for the custody of such a thing that exact
diligence should be applied, which if the creditor has
applied, and has lost the thing by a casualty, he may be
secure, and not be barred from seeking to recover the
thing entrusted.


Àn obligation is contracted verbally by a stipulation, . X
for a stipulation is à form of words, which consists of a West
question and an answer, as if it should be said, Do you
promise? I promise. Will you give? lI will give.

Will you do it? I willdo it. Do you pledge yourself ?


Inst. III.,
16, 8 2.


ib. S 4.


3.
Si Bat
stipulatio
sub con-
ditione.


ib. 8 5


4.
Facta in
stipulatio-
nibus de-
ducuntur.


112 DE ACTIONIBUS.


puré, aut in diem, aut sub conditione: puré, uti si di-
catur, tantam pecuniam dare spondes? sine aliqua
adjectione diei vel conditionis, pecunia illa statim peti
poterit. Sed si dies adjiciatur, quo solvi debeat, statim
debetur, sed peti non poterit ante diem, nec etiam eo
die, quia totus is dies relinquitur arbitrio solventis,
nec veró certum erit eo die solutum non esse, prius-
quam dies preterierii, nee. eodem modo recté petet
quis, si quis hoc anno, vel mense, dare stipulat? est,
nisi omnibus partibus preteritis anni vel mensis.  Eo-
dem modo, si quis hominem vel fundum stipulatus
fuerit, non recté petet, antequàm lantum spacium pre-
terierit, quód tradi possit.


Fit aliquando sub conditione, ut si dicatur, si Titius
consul factus fuerit, tantam pecuniam dare spondes.
Et notandum, quód in econditionali stipulatione tantüm
Spes concipitur, & eonditiones, quz; ad preeteritum vel
ad presens tempus referuntur, aut statim infirmant
obligationem, aut omnino non differunt, ut si dicatur,
si talis vixerit, vel consul factus fuerit dare spondes,
nam si ita non fuerit,nihil valet. .Si autem res ita se
habeant, statim valet, quia ea qus p rerum naturam
certa sunt, statim non viciant obligationem, quamvis
apud nos incerta fuerint.


Facta autem in stipulationibus deducuntur, ui si
facta fuerit stipulatio, aliquid fieri, vel non fieri, quo
easu optimum erit poenam adjicere, ne quantitas sti-
pulationis sit in incerto, vel necessesit actori probare,
quid ejus intersit, & tali modo adjieiatur poena. Et si


OF ACTIONS. 118


I do pledge myself. And every such stipulation is
made either absolutely, or for a given day, or under &
condition ; absolutely, as if it be said, do you undertake
to give so much money, without any addition of a day or
3, condition, that money may be demanded at once. But
if à day be added on which it ought to be paid, it is due
immediately, but it cannot be claimed before the day,
nor even on that day, because the whole of that day is
left to the choice of the payer, nor will it be certain that
it has not been paid on that day until the day is past ;
norin the same way will he claim it rightly, if he has
stipulated to give it in this year or month, unless upon
all the parts of the year or month being past. In the
same manner, if any one has stipulated for a man or a
farm, he will not rightly claim, unless so much space will
have passed, that it may be delivered.


À stiipulation i$ made sometimes under a condition, p
as if it be said, If Titius has been made consul, do you pulstion be
undertake to give so much money? And it is to be madeunder

a condi-
noted, that in a conditional stipulation hope only is tion.
conceived, and conditions, whieh have reference to the
past or the present, either immediately invalidate the
obligation or altogether are unimportant, as if it be
said, Do you undertake to give, if such an one has lived
or has been made consul? for if 1i& be not so, it avails
nothing. But if the things be so, it avails at once,
for those things which by the nature of things are
certain, do not vitiate forth with the obligation, although


they may have been uncertain in our minds.


Aets are also brought into stipulation, as if it be stipu- "mos
lated that something be done or not done, in which case brought
it will be best to add the penalty, lest the quantity of Hio up
the stipulation be uncertain, or it be Decessary for the
plaintiff to prove, what his interest is, and by such
means a penalty be added. And if this be done or


VOL. II. H


f. 100.
Britton,

I. eli. xxix.,
S 6.


5.
Item loca
in stipula-
tionibus
deducun-
tur.

Inst. 1II.,
20, S 2.


ib. 8 3.
ib. $ 5.


ib. & 14.


ib. S 11.


114 DE ACTIONIBUS.


hoe factum non fuerit vel non erit, tunc nomine poenze
tantum dare spondes. Item si de una resenserit sti-
pulator, & de alia pmissor, non valet, non magis quàm
si ad interrogatum non esset responsum. ltem non
valet, si quis ita stipuletur, quód quis homicidium
perpetret vel furtum vel hujusmodi.


Item loca deducuntur in stipulationem, ut si dicas,
existens Oxoii1 hodie Londoü dare spondes: talis stipu-
latio erit inutilis, nisi temp? adjiciatur, quo fieri pos-
sit id q deducitur in stipulationem, quia omnino erit
impossibile, ac si quis rem pmitteret, quce in rerum
natura non esset, vel esse non posset, vel si rem
sacram vel publicam, quz» non est in alicujus bonis.
Item si quis stipulat? fuerit, qui alium daturi vel fac-
turu pmiserit quim eum qui in potestate su& extiterit,
vel si quis ad ea quse interrogat? fuerit non respon-
derit, nec secundüm q interrogat? fuerit, ut si quis
decem aureos dari stipuletur, & alius quinq, pmittat,
vel si unus puré, & alius sub coditione, stipulatio non
valebit. Item erit inutilis, si quis ita stipulatus fuerit:
si navis venerit de Asia hodie, dare spondes. Quia
preepostere concepta est, tamen licót przpostera fuerit,
non erit rejicienda. Item non valebit, si impossibilis
adjecta fuerit conditio, cui natura in impedimento
fuerit quód existat. Veluti si dieat, si coelum digito
tetigero, dare spondes: si autem sie, si ccelum digito
non tetigero, tune valet, quia puré facta est, & statim
peti poterit.


Judicialis autem esse poterit stipulatio, vel conven-
tionalis: judieialis, quse jussu judicis fit vel preetoris.


— —M—ÁÀ aua RABIA — c epo ue n o rr RR e a a t s I a teta em m


!* hodie." "The condition is | dare spondes, inutilis erat stipulatio,
thus stated in the Institutes, Sit | quia prepostere conceptu est."
navis [cras] ex Asia venerit, hodie


OF ACTIONS. : 115


not done, do you then undertake to give so much in

the name of & penalty? And if the stipulator has had  f.100.
one penalty in view, and the promiser another, it is

not valid any more than if no answer had been given

to the question. Likewise it is not valid, if any one
should stipulate thus, that he would perpetrate a homi-

eide or a theft or such like.


Likewise places are brought into stipulation, as if m alis
you should say, being at Oxford to day, do you promise brought
to give at London? such a stipulation will be useless, bnc Pan
unless a time be added in which the thing brought
into stipulation may be done, for it will be altogether
impossible, as if à person should promise a thing which
is not in the nature of things, or cannot be, if he should
promise à thing which is sacred or publie, which is not
amongst any one's property. Likewise if any one has
stipulated, who has promised that another will give or
do, than he who is in his own power, or if he has not
answered to the interrogatory nor according to the
interrogatory, as if a person stipulates that ten gold
pieces be given, and the other promises five, or if one
absolutely and the other eonditionally, the stipulation
will not he valid. Likewise it will be useless if à person
should thus stipulate, If a ship shall come from Asia to-
day, do you undertake to give. Because it is à prepos-
terous conception, nevertheless although it be prepos-
ierous, it is not to be rejected. Likewise it will not be
valid, if an impossible eondition be added, to which
nature is an impediment that it should exist. As if he
should say, If I shall touch the sky with my finger, do
you undertake to give, but if he should say thus, If I
shall not touch the sky with my finger, then it is valid,
because it is made absolutely, and may be forthwith
claimed.


But a stipulation may be judicial or conventional,
Judicial,if it is made by order of the judge or of the
x H 2


6.
Quid sit
judicialis
stipulatio.
Inst. III.,
19, $ 3.
Azo ad
Inst.


r-]


'
Si res
plures in
stipulatio
nem de-
ducuntur.


8.
Quis non
possit
stipulari.
Inst. III.,
20, S 7.


116 DE ACTIONIBUS.


Coventionalis, quze ex conventione utriusq, partis con-
cipitur, nec jussu judicis vel prztoris, & quarum toti-
dem sunt genera, quot poene rerum contrahendarum,
de quib? omnib? omnino euria regis se non intromit-
tit, nisi aliquando de gratia.


Si cum res plures in stipulationem deducantur,
pmissor simpliciter respondeat, sie dare spondeo, ppter
omnes tenetur. Et si unam rem tantüm ex pluribus
se daturum jpmiserit, vel quasdam, obligatio in iis con-
trahitur p quibus responderit. Ex plurib? enim stipu-
lationibus, una vel quadam videntur esse perfecte, &
cum plures sint res, ad singulas respondere debet.


In fine autem videndum, quis non possit stipulari
nec pmittere, ut sciri poterit quis possit stipulari: &
sciendum q mutus nec stipulari potest nec promittere,
ecàüm loqui non possit, nec verba stipulationi congruen-
tia proferre, quod quidem in surdo exceptum est, quia
is qui stipulatur, verba pmittentis & is qui pmittit,
verba stipulantis audire oportet, nisi sit qui dicat, q
hoc facere possunt p nutus, vel p scripturam. Nec
dieitur hoc de eo qui tardiüs audit, sed de eo qui
non omnino exaudit. Et q p seripturà fieri possit
stipulatio & obligatio videtur, quia si scriptum fuerit


in instrumto aliquem misisse, pinde habetur, ac si


interrogatione precedente responsum sit. F'uriosus au-
tem stipulari non potest, nec aliquod negotium agere,
quia non intelligit quid agit. Eodem modo nec infans,
vel qui infanti pximus est, & qui multü à furioso
non distat, nisi hoc fiat ad comodü suu & cü tutoris
authoritate.


OF ACTIONS. 117


prietor. Conventional, which is drawn up on the agree- ,, 9...
ment of each party, and not by the order of the judge judicial.
or of the pretor, and of which there are as many kinds, SHpUIBHOH.
as there are penalties for contracts, with which the Court

of the King does not interfere, except as & matter of

grace.


If when several things things are brought intoa 7.
stipulation, the promiser simply answers, I undertake to VERA
give, he is bound on account of all. And if he under- brought
takes, that he will give one only out of many, or certain Stats
of them, an obligation is contraeted on those for which:
he has &nswered. For out of several stipulations one or
more of them seems to be perfect, and when there are


several things, he ought to answer for each.


But we must see finally, who cannot stipulate nor 8.
promise, that it may be known who can stipulate : and it biis abi
is to be known that à dumb man can neither stipulate !ate.
nor promise, since he cannot speak nor utter words suit-
able to a stipulation, which in a deaf man is excepted,
because he who stipulates ought to hear the words of
ihe party promising, and he who promises ought to hear
the words of the party stipulating, unless there be some
one who says, that they may do this by nods or by writ-
ing. Nor is this said of him who is slow of hearing,
but of him who does not hear at all. And it seems that
a stipulation and an obligation ought to be made by
writing, because if it be written in an instrument that
some one has promised, it is held the same, as if an
answer had been made upon a preceding interrogation.
But à madman cannot stipulate, nor do any business,
because he does not understand what he is doing. In
the same way neither an infant nor one who is next to
an infant or who does not differ much from à madman,
unless this be done for his own advantage and with the
authority of a tutor;


(o M APRI I au rp te T MER ERAI RNC. a TEE CI:


9.
Causz,
quare
fuerunt
invento
&tipula-
tiones et
obliga-
tiones,

f. 100 b.


Inst. IIL.,
20, S 19.


Inst. III.,


29,


ib. 23.


]0.
De obliga-
tionibus,
quae nas-
cuntur


118 DE ACTIONIBUS.


Invéte auté sunt hinodi stipulationes & obligationes,
& hoe, quód unusquisg, habeat & sibi acquirat, g suà
interest, si contra ea agat que in stipulatione dedu-
cuntur. Et si res in stipulatione deducta alii detur,
nihilominüs intererit stipulatoris, quia ille qui pmisit,
tenebitur ad interesse, vel ad peenam si poena fuerit
in stipulatione deducta. Per sceripturà veró obligatur
quis, ut si quis scripserit alicui se debere, sive pecunia
numerata sit, sive non, obligatur ex scriptura, nec
habebit exceptionem pecunie non numerate contra
scripturam, quia scripsit se debere, & non solüm obli-
gatur quis p verba, sed p scripturam, & p literas, non
ut litere quidem ipse vel figura literarum obliget, sed
oralio significativa quam exprimunt litere, sed utrumq
cooperatur ad obligationem, oratio significativa simul
cum litera.  Contrahitur etiam obligatio non solüm
scripto & verbis, sed & consensu, sicut in contractibus
bonz fidei, ut in emptionibus, venditionib?, locationib?,
conductionib?, societatib^, e£ mandatis, e£ ideó dicuntur
obligationes hujusmodi cotrahi ex consensu, quia nec
scriptura, nec presentia semper est necessaria. Et
notandum, quod in his contractibus nominatis, uterq,
obligatur alteri, s. in mutuo vel in literarum obliga-
tione & aliis casib? pluribus, sicut. in commodato &
deposito & alis hujusmodi. Et si non à principio,
tainen: posteà potest uter incipere alteti obligari, vel
ratione expensarum et hujusmodi.


Dictum est suprà de obligationibus qux nascuntur
ex contractu, nune autem dicendum est de obligationib?
quae naseuntur quasi ex contractu. Et sciendum, q
quasi ex contractu nascuntur actiones, sicut. negotiorum


— -————-- - —————— —Ó 0 —M MM — MÀ MÀ M —— M M — MÀ MÀ — MÀ


!1* Mt hoc." **Ad hoc? is the | original reading of Dracton's text,
reading of MS. Rawl. C. 160. as in MS. Rawl, C. 160.
2*]/6t notandum." "This is the


OF ACTIONS. 119


But these kinds of stipulations and obligations have . 9.

R , à The causes,
been invented, that, each may have and acquire for him- py stipu.
self what interests himself, if he acts contrary to what Re ies
has been brought under the stipulation. And if the Puve oen.
thing made subject to the stipulation is given to invented.
another, it will nevertheless interest the stipulator, for
he, who has promised, will be bound to the amount of tf 100b.
his interest, or for the penalty, if a penalty has been
brought under the stipulation. But a person is obliged
by a writing, as if à person shall write that he owes
money to another, whether the money has been paid to
him or not, he is bound by the writing, nor can he object
that the money has not been paid in the face of the
wriüng, because he has written that he owes it, and a
person is obliged not only by words but by writing and
by letters, not that the letters themselves or the figures
of the letters oblige him, but the significative language
which the letters express, but each co-operates to the
obligation, the significative language together with the
letters. An obligation likewise is contracted not only
in writing and in words but also by consent, as in
contracts of good faith, as in buying and selling, in
letting and in hiring, in partnerships, and in agencies,
and obligations of this kind are said to be contracted
from consent, because neither writing nor presence is
always necessary. And it is to be noted that in these
named contracts each is bound to the other, that is in a
loan or in the obligation of & writing, and in other
various cases, as in a case where a thing is lent or
deposited or such like. And if at the commencement,
nevertheless afterwards each may be bound to the other
by reason of the expenses or otherwise.


We have spoken above of obligations which arise from 10.
à contract, we must now, however, speak of obligations : dius ud
which arise as it were from & contract. And it is to be arise as it
known that actions arise as ib were from a& contract, as V*Te from


bum a contract.
in matters of agency, wardship, the division of common


quasi ex
contractu.
Inst. III.,
28.


11.
De tradi-
tione ct
junctura.
Bnitton I.,
ch. xxxix.,
rj


12.
Per quas
personas
acquiritur
obligatio.
Inst. III.,
29.


3.
Quibus
modis
tollitur
oDligatio.


Inst. III, '
90.


120 DE ACTIONIBUS.


gestorum, tutele, communi dividundo, familie hercis-
eunde, aetio ex testaiüto, condictio indebiti, & hujus-
modi.


De traditione fiat, ut suprà in titulo de donationibus.
Junetura, ut si plura pacta de eadem re deducantur
in stipulatione, possunt plura pacta in stipulationem
deduci, sicut plures res, & si incontinenti adjiciantur
etiam in initio contractus, insunt contractibus, & legem
dant eisdem, & contractus informant. Si autem ex
intervallo non sit ut si primó pactum intervenerit ne
peteret, & posteà de eadem re ut peteret, primü pactü
p posterius eliditur, non quidem ipso jure, sed opere
exceptionis.


Videndum etiam est p quas psonas acquiratur obli-
gatio, & sciendum, quód p pceuratores, & p liberos, quos
sub potestate nostra habem?, & p nosmet ipsos, & filios
nostros, & p liberos homines servientes nostros, ex
duabus causis, s. ex operibus suis & re nostra, acquiri-
tur obligatio: item p servos pprios vel communes, vel
in quibus usum fructum habemus, vel alios, quos bona
fide possidemus, dum tamen nomine nostro fuerint
stipula.


Videndum etiam quibus modis tollitur obligatio, &
sciendum, quód tollitur quandoq, p exceptionem multi-
plieiter, ut. si quis petat, & alius doceat se solvisse.
Item ratione pacti, ut si priüs convenit ut peteret,
posteà ne peteret. Item per exceptionem doli, vel
metus, ut si exorta fuerit obligatio per dolum vel per
metum. ltem per exceptionem rei judicat;, ut si per
judicium recessum sit ab obligatione. Item per excep-
tionem jurisjurandi, càm delatum fuerit jusjurandum


! * Non sit^ "This is the reading of the oldest M88.


,


OF ACTIONS. 121


property, the distribution of an inheritance, an action
arising out, of a testament, a suit to recover a sum paid,
and not due, and such like.


Repecting delivery, let it be done as above in the — 11.
title respecting donations. By joining, as if several Rochi
paets on the same matter are brought under a stipula- ing.
tion. Several pacts may be brought under a stipulation
like several things, and if they are forthwith added even
&t the beginning of a contract, they are included in the
contract and give a legal character to it, and give form
to the contract. But if it be not after an interval, as if
at first à pact has intervened not to sue, and. afterwards
in the same matter to sue, the first pact is rendered
nugatory by the second, not by operation of law but
by means of exception.

We must also see by what persons an obligation is By e
acquired, and it is to be known that an obligation is persons an
acquired through agents, and through children whom we a red
have under our authority, and through ourselves, and
through our sons and, through free men our servants
from two causes, namely their work and our substance;
likewise through our own or through common serfs, or
through others of whom we have the usufruct, or others
whom we possess in good faith, provided only they have
stipulated in our name.

We must see also in what ways an obligation is got 13.
rid of, and it is to be known that it is got rid of some- 2s
times by an exception in various ways, as if a person obligation


should claim, and another show that he has discharged vi jos


it. Likewise by reason of a pact, as if it has been first
agreed upon that he should sue, and afterwards that he
should not sue. Likewise by an exception of deceit or
of fear, as if the obligation has arisen through deceit or
through fear. Likewise by an exception of a judgment,
as if by à judgment the obhgation has been renounced.
Likewise by an exception of an oath, when an oath has


CA O^ QHNONENED rS DUO S TR RN ET Ly TIER e UR c. TTA RR T o e


f. 101.


Inst. III.,
30 8 3.


192 DE ACTIONIBUS.


vel relatu & posteà juratum. Item p exceptionem
preseriptionis ppter defectum probationis, quia sicut
tempus est modus inducend: obligationis, ita & tol-
lendze per dissimulationem & negligentiam, & per con-
sequens actionis quae. sub certis temporibus limitatur,
currit enim tempus contra desides & sui juris contep-
tores. It& tollitur morte alterius contrahentium, vel
utriusq, maxime si fuerit poenalis, vel simplex, si au-
tem duplex, se. poenalis & rei psequutoria! in hoe q
penalis est tollitur, & non extenditur contra h:zredes,
nec datur heredib?, quia poena tenet suos authores, &
extinguitur cum psona. lté tollitur cüm sic sit ex-
tincta, quód nulla remaneant ejus reliquie, sicut p
veram solutionem, quia soluto eo q debetur, omis tol-
litur obligatio, sive ipse solvat qui debeat, sive alius
pro eo, sive debitore sciente, sive ignorante, & eo etià
invito. ltem si reus solverit, fidejussor liberatur, & &
contrario. ltem per acceptilationem, qu:ze dicitur ima-
ginaria solutio, ut si dicatur: Omne quod tibi debui
ex quacunque causa habesne acceptum ? & respondea-
tur, vel scribatur, habeo, acceptumque fero. Et in
partem debiti poterit acceptilatio fieri, sicut, in toto, &
possunt omis res, qui aliqua ratione in stipulatione
deducuntur, toli per acceptilationem, & eodem modo
quo tolluntur per acceptilationem obligationes, ita po-
terunt renovari & deduci im aliam obligationem plures
& unam, ut si pro pluribus debitis, causis, & obliga-
tionibus, promittatur certa summa pecunie. Jtem per
novationem, ut si transfusa sit obligatio de una per-
sona in aliam, d in se susceperit obligationem.  Inter-
vetu enim novse psone nova nascitur obligatio, &


- — M À— — ——À ——


! * Maxime, si fuerit ponalis ct rei persecutoria." MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ACTIONS. 123


been tendered, and it has been refused and afterwards
sworn. Likewise by an exception of a prescription on
account of defect of proof, because as time is a mode of
bringing in an objection, so it is a mode of getting
rid of it through dissimulation and negligence, and
by eonsequence of an action which is limited under
certain times, for time runs against the indolent and
those who are careless of their right. Likewise it 1s got
rid of by the death of eithér of the contracting parties
or of both, especially if it is à penal obligation or a
simple one, but if it be a double one, namely penal and
for recovery, it is got rid of as far as it is penal and does
not extend to the heirs, nor is it allowed to the heirs,
because a penalty binds the original parties and is ex.
tinguished with the person. Likewise it is got rid of,
' when it is so extinguished that no relies of it remain, as
by a true payment, because upon payment of that which
is due, all the obligation is removed, whether he, who
owes, pays, or another for him, whether with the
knowledge of the debtor or with his ignorance, and even
if against his will Likewise if the principal is released,
the surety is released, and on the contrary. Likewise by
aeceptilation, which is the name of an imaginary dis-
charge, as if it should be said, Do you hold to have
been received by you whatever I owe to you from what-
ever cause, and it be answered or written, I [so] hold,
and. regard it as received. And an acceptilation may
be made for a part of a debt, as for the whole, and all
things, which by any means are brought under a
stipulation, may be got rid of by an acceptilation, and
in the same manner, in which obligations are got rid
of by an acceptilation..so they may be renewed and
be brought under another obligation either one or
more, as if for several debts, suits, and obligations a cer-
tain sum of money is promised. Likewise by novation,
as if the obligation has been transferred from one person
unto another, which has taken upon itself the obligation,
For by the intervention of à new pun a new obligation


f. 101.


Oriuntur
obliga-
tiones ex
delicto vel
quasi,


194 DE ACTIONIBUS.


prima tollitur, sicut, de constituta, ut si quis in se
susceperit alterius obligationem. Item si ab una per-
sona iransfusa sit in aliam, qus obligari non possit,
amittitur, ut si in persona minoris à persona majoris.
Item in novatione intervenire poterit fidejussor & poena.
Item sub conditione, ut si secundus benó solverit, alio-
quin durat prima. ltem p confusionem, utí si mass&
confusa fuerit cum alia, ita quód non appareat. Item
p interit rei & speciei. Ite solutione, tamen notand'
q pdicta vera sunt, si corporale erat, quod deducet fuit
in obligationem : si autem incorporale, sicut servitus,
vel aliud jus quod est ineorporale, non poterit inde
fieri solutio, cüm res incorporalis traditionem non pa-
tiatur. Videtur tamen quasi traditionem fieri, per
contidianam patientiam, & p usum. Et in summa
notandum, quód eisdem modis dissolvitur obligatio,
quae nascitur ex contractu vel quasi, quibus contrahi-
tur. Re, ut si res petenti restituatur: verbis, ui si
fiab in contrarium, & contrariis verbis. Scripto, ut si
coseripserim me debere, scribat creditor se accepisse.
Consensu, ui si communiter consensum fuerit ex utraq,
parte, recedatur à contractu p communem dissensum
uiriusqg, & non alterius tani. "Traditione, ut si res
tradita retradatur. Junctura, ut si fiat, contrarium.


Oriuntur etiam obligationes ex delicto vel quasi, ex
maleficio vel quasi: delicta veró, & maleficia, ex dictis
& factis peedentibus, q quidem distingui debent quo
animo fiant, & qua voluntate, voluntas enim & pposi-


OF ACTIONS. 125


arises, and the first is got rid of as it were by arrange-
ment, as if à person has taken upon himself the obligation
of another. Likewise if it be transferred from one person
io another, which cannot be a subject of obligation, it is
lost, as if it be transferred to the person of a minor from
the person of one, who has attained majority. Likewise
in & novation a surety and a penalty may intervene.
Likewise under & condition, as if the second shall well
discharge it, otherwise the first continues. Likewise by
confusion, as if à mass is confused with another mass, so
that it is not apparent. Likewise by the perishing of
the thing and of the species. Likewise by the discharge
of it, nevertheless it is to be noted that the aforesaid
things are true, if it be a corporeal substance, which has
been brought under an obligation: but if it be incorpo-
real like à servitude or another right, which is incorpo-
real, a discharge of it cannot be in that manner effected,
since an ineorporeal thing does not admit of transfer. Tt
seems however that a kind of transfer takes place, by
daily sufferance and by use. And in sum it is to be
noted, that an obligation, which arises from a contract or
a quasi-contract, is dissolved in the same ways in which
it is contracted. In reality, as if the thing be restored
to the elaimant: in words, if it be done to the contrary
and in contrary words. In writing, as if I have written
that I owe it,and the creditor writes in return that he
has received it. By consent, as if it has been consented
in common on both sides, and the contract is abandoned
by & common dissent of both parties, and not of one only
of them. By delivery, as if the thing delivered has been
delivered back.


Obligations arise from a deliet or quasi-delict, or from — 14,
a malicious aet or a quasi-malicious aet: but delicts and Obliga-.
tions zu
malicious acts arise from preceding sayings and doings: from
which ought to be distinguished according to the inten- delit o


üon with which they have been done, and the will with aelict.
whieh they have been done, for the will and the purpose


f. 101 b.


].
De prima
divisione
actionum.


196 DE ACTIONIBUS.


tum distinguunt maleficia, seeundàüm q inferiüs dicetur.
Ex 1nalefieiis autem  pcedunt crimina majora vel mi-
nora, sicut crime less majestatis, homicidia, furta, &
raping, X alia plura de quibus inferi? dicetur. Ite
quasi ex maleficio trasgressiones sive psumptiones, ut
si judéx scienter malé judicaverit, & hujusmodi Ite
ex maleficio vel delicto pcedunt injurie & transgres-
siones. Injuria auté dici possit one illud, q non jure
fit. Transgressio autem, cüm modus & mensura non
servatur. Et in iis casibus, considerand est quo animo,
quave voluntate quid fiat, in facto vel judicio, ut pinde
sciri possit 4 sequatur actio, & ( poena. Tolle enim
voluntate, & erit onis act? indifferens, quia affectio tua
nomen iponit:operi tuo, & crimen non cotrahitur, nisi
nocendi voluntas intercedat, nec furtum eomittitur, nisi
ex affectu furandi. In iis aute delictis sive maleficiis,
obligatur ille qui delinquit, ei cotra q delinquitur, nec
dissolvitur obligatio quoad poena, nisi morte utriusq,
vel alterius. Pena veró non transgreditur psona delin-
quentis, non enim debet pcenam sentire, qui in culpa
non fuit, juxta illud :


* Peena potest demi, culpa perennis erit."
p


Car. III.


Diet' est suprà quid sit actio, & qualiter de obliga-
tionib? oriatur: nüc aute vidend' qualiter dividatur.
Et sciend', q oniü actioi sive placitor (ut inde utatur
squivocé) hs»e est prima divisio, q ddà sunt in re, jdà
in psonà & (da mixte. Item ear 4 sunt in psonà,
alia eriminalia, & alia civilia, seceüd q descendunt ex


OF ACTIONS. 197


distinguish malicious acts, according as will be explained
below. But from malice proceeds greater or minor
crimes, as the crime of high treason, homicides, thefts,
and robbery and other things, of which it will be treated
below. Likewise as it were from malice [proceed] tres-
passes or presumptions, as if a judge has knowingly judged
wrongly and such like. Likewise from malice or delict
proceed wrongs and trespasses. But wrongs may be said
to be all things, which are not in accordance with right.
But trespasses, when manner and measure are not ob-
served. Likewise in those cases, we must consider f. 101b.
with what intention or with what will & thing is done,
in fact and in law, that it may be known accordingly
whatí action follows and what punishment. For take
away the will, and every act will be indifferent, for your
meaning imposes à name upon your act, and a crime is
not committed unless a guilty intention intercede, nor is
& theft committed unless with the intention to steal.
But in those deliets or malicious acts, he who is the
delinquent is under an obligation to him, against whom
he has committed the delict, nor is the obligation dissolved
as regards the punishment, except by the death of both
or of one of them. But the punishment does not pass
beyond the person of the delinquent, for he ought not to
suffer a punishment, who: is not in fault, according to the
verse * The punishment may be taken away, the fault
* will be eternal,"


CHAPTER III.


It has been said above what is an action and in what 1.
ways it arises out of obligations: now we must see, in rbudages
what way it is divided. And it is to be known that of actions.
allactions or pleas (to use these terms as equivalent)
this is the first division, that some are real and others
personal, and some are mixed. Further of those that


are personal, some are criminal, others are civil, according


-


198 DE ACTIONIBUS.


maleficiis vel cotractib?. ltem criminaliu, alia major,
alia minor, aliaà maxima, secund crimiii -. quantitate.
Sunt eni crimina majora, & dicuntur capitalia, eó q
ultimü inducunt suppliciü, vel truncationé mébrorum,
vel exiliü ppetuu, vel ad tep?. Minora veró d fusti-
gatione inducunt, vel poena pillorat, vel tüuboral, vel
carceris inclusione, quandoq, cü infamia, quandogq, sine,
Secund' q fuerit talis aut talis. Ict? eni fustiu infamia
non irrogat, sed eausa, ppter q id plecti meruit. ltem
eaf (Qj sunt in psona & d ex delicto oriuntur, vel quasi,
sicut actio injuriaf, de qua civiliter agitur, ddam major
est, & ddam minor. Est autem atrox injuria, & est
levis, & secundu hoe sequitur poena, major vel minor,
juxt& illud: * Quod tamen admissum, d sit vindicta
* docebo." Nee debet poena ad alios extendi q ad
suos authores, nec ulteri? pgredi q se extendit delict'.
Item poterit injuria sub se continere transgressione, ut
si quid psumatur contra statuta regis & regni, exce-
dendo mod & mensura, vel faciendo citra debit, vide-
licet minus q deberet, p malitiam & fraudem, negligen-
tiam & omissionem. ltem sunt actiones in personà
civiles, quee oriuntur ex contractu vel quasi, ut suprà
dictum est. Viz. ubi quis alteri tenetur ad aliquid
dand', vel faciend', ex aliqua causa pcedente. Et no-
tad' ! q nulla actio civilis in psona civile criminaliter
potest nec debet intétari unde oportet q judex in qua-
libet actione tali fact' & initiü diligenter examinet, &
secund hoc pcedat actio civiliter, & si utraq, pars
voluerit eriminaliter agere in civili, ut si quis actione


1*Et notandum."  'This ijs in accordance with the text of MS.
Rawl. C. 160.


OF ACTIONS. 199


as they are derived from torts or from contracts. Fur-
ther of criminal, some are greater, others are less, others
are of the gravest kind, aecording to the magnitude of
the erime. For some kinds of crimes are greater and
are called capital, from the cireumstance that they entail
the most extreme punishment, or the loss of limbs, or
exile either perpetualor temporal. Buütthe minor crimes
entail flogging or the punishment of the pillory or of the
tumbrel or locking up in prison, sometimes with infamy,
sometimes without, according as he has been such or such
& person. For the blow of the rod does not inflict infamy,
but the cause wherefore he has deserved to be punislied.
Further of those actions which are personal and which
arise from a delict or asit were a delict, as an action for an
injury, for which there is a civil action, some are greater,
some are less. For an injury is severe or it is light, and
accordingly a greater or less penalty attends it according
to the verse, *I will teach you what is the penalty when
* the act has been admitted." Nor ought the punishment to
extend to others than the authors of the act, nor advance
further than the delinquency extends. Likewise an in-
jury may contain within itself a trespass, as if any thing.
should be presumed against the statutes of the king or
of the kingdom, by exeeeding mode and measure, or by
acting within what is due, that is in doing less than one
ought, through malice and fraud, negligence or omission.
Likewise there are civil actions against the person, which
arise from & contract or & kind of contract, as above said,
for instance where a person is bound to give something
or to do something from some preceding cause. And itis
to be noted, that no civil action against a civil person can
or ought to be brought in'aà criminal form, wherefore
the judge ought in every such action to examine carefully
the fact and the origin, and aecordingly the action should
be by & civil procedure, and if either party wishes to
proceed criminally in à civil matter, as if either party
Should institute an action criminally against & man,
VOL. II. I


fol. 102.


2.
Quee sunt
actiones
personales.


130 DE ACTIONIBUS.


institueret contra aliü criminaliter cu sit civilis, &
diceret, q p felonia excussisset pulveré de capa sua, vel
quid tale, & hoc paratus esset disrationare, judex fae-
tium examinado & causam, deberet pnunciare appelt
esse null, & causam civilem, & no eriminalem. Et hoc,
etiam si appellatus paratus esset p corp? suum defen-
dere, & etiam si per imperitiam esset inter eos duel-
lum vadiat, deberet devadiari per judicium. Sed restat
quaerendum, utrum talis ulteriüs ad civilem actionem
habere possit regressum, vel non.  Cüm aute actio
fuerit mer? criminalis, institui poterit ab initio erimi-
naliter, vel civiliter, sed eüm ceriminaliter, fuerit semel
instituta civiliter, quaeritur an accusans mutare possit
& agere criminaliter, & & contrario. Dicunt quidam q
à criminali descendere non poterit ad civilem minu-
endo, sed à civih ad criminalem augendo, quibuscum '
ego non assentior, cüm in hoc casu admitti non deberet
variatio. |


Personales veró actiones sunt, quze competunt contra
aliquem ex contractu, vel quasi: ex maleficio, vel
quasi: cüm quis teneatur ad aliquid dand, vel facien-
Uum, & locum habent adversus eum qui contraxit, &
hs;eredem suum, nisi fuit poenalis, & dicuntur actiones
nativi, eó q nascuntur ex contractibus, & omnes fere
personales actiones sunt ex contractu, sicut mutui,
commodati, depositi, mandati, ex empto, vendito, locato,
& conducto. Personales veró actiones quse nascuntur
ex maleficio, ali;e. persequuntur poena tantüm, ut actio
furti, ali»;» veró persequütur ipsam rem & pcenam, sicut
actio vi bonorum raptorum, & ita sunt duplices, eà
quód sunt rei persequutorio, & poene, & it& tam in
rem, quàm in personam, & cüm sint uno modo rei


OF ACTIONS. 131


when it is a civil action, and should say that he had
feloniously shaken off the dust from his cloak and some-
thing of that sort, and should be ready to argue it, the
judge upon examining the fact and the eause ought
to pronounce the accusation to be null, the cause to
be civil and not criminal. And this, even if the accused
be ready to defend himself with his person, and even if
sureties have been produced for & duel, the sureties for
the duel should be dismissed judicially. But it remains
to be inquired, whether such à person may have a further
recourse to à civil action or not. But when an action
is strictly criminal, i& may be instituted from the
commencement either eriminally or civilly, but when a
criminal action has been once instituted civilly, ii is
questioned whether the accuser can change and proceed
criminally, and the converse. Some say that he cannot
descend from a criminal to a civil action by diminution,
but he may from a civil to a criminal by increasing, with
whom I do not agree, since in this case variation ought
not to be admitted.


Personalactions indeed are sueh as may be brought
against any one upon a contract or something like &
contracb; upon a tort or something like a tort, when
any one is bound to give or to do something, and they
have a place against him who has made the contract and
against his heir, unless there be a penalty, and they are
called native actions, from the fact that they are born
out of contracts, and almost all personal actions arise out
of à contract, such as a borrowing, a lending, à deposit,
a mandate, a purchase, à sale, a letting, a hiring. But
personal actions, which arise out of a tort, some sue for
2 penalty only, as an action for theft, but others sue for
the thing itself and for à penalty, as an action for robbery,
and so they are double, in the circumstance that they
sue for the thing itself and the penalty, and thus they
are aetions for a thing and actions against a person, and
since they are in one sense suits for à thing, they may

I2À


f. 102.


2.
What are
personal
actions.


8.
Quae sunt
actiones in
rem, de re
immobili.


132 DE ACTIONIBUS.


persequutorie, competunt contra omnes qui possunt
restituere, sive ille possideat qui spoliavit, sive alius.
Secundàm veró quód fuerint poenales, non persequun-
tur nisi tantüm authores delicti, & quandoq, competunt
versus unum qui deliquit, cüm possit restituere, cüm
sint conjunctz in una psona, & quandoq versus duos,
vel plures, cü sint disjuncte, & bifurcate, cüm ille qui
deliquit, non possideat, nec restituere possit, nec ille
qui possidet non deliquerit, sed restituere possit. Item
illa q sunt in persona ex maleficio, vel quasi: qusedam
sunt criminales & qdam civiles. Criminalium quedam
majores, ddam minores, & civilium eodem modo, secun-
düm quod superius in parte tangitur.


Actiones veró in rem sunt, quee dantur contra pos-
sidentem, qui nomine pprio possideat ex quacunque
causa, & non alieno, quia habet ré, vel possidet g
restituere possit, vel dim nominare: ut si quis petat
&b alio rem certa, fund' aliquem, vel terram, & se con-
tendat habere jus & inde esse dominum, & persequatur
rem illam, & non ejus precium, nec ejus zstimationem,
nec tantumdem quod sit ejusdem generis, & sic res
corporalis immobilis, quc; petitur ex quacunque causa
versus aliquem, qui nullo jure personali obligatus est.
Et per hoc quod petens, rem petitam intendens esse
suam, actionem instituerit. versus tenentem, & tenens
negaverit, in rem erit actio, sive placitum, & hoe sive
proprio nomine petat, sive ratione rei, quam ipse pos-
sidet, sicut viri religiosi vel rectores nomine ecclesia-
rum suarum, vel ali nomine alicujus universitatis
sicub& in rem communem, & hoc etià sive principaliter


OF ACTIONS. 133


be brought against all persons who can restore it,
whether he who spoiled it possesses it, or another person.
But according as they are penal, they do not sue any but
the authors of the delicet, and they may sometimes be
brought against one, who has committed the delict, when
he can make restitution, since they are conjoined in one
person, and sometimes against two or more, when they
are disjoined and bifurcated, when he who has committed
the delicet has not possession of the thing, and cannot
make restitution, and he who has possession has not
committed the delict, but he ean make restitution. Like-
wise of those actions which are personal arising out of à
tort,or something like a tort, some are criminal, and
some civil. Of criminal actions some are greater, some
are minor, and of civil actions in the same manner, accord-
ing to what has been partially touched upon above.


But actions for a thing are those, whieh are allowed ,, ^.
against a possessor of it, who possesses it in his own realactions
name from whatever cause, and noi in the name of DE
another person, because he has the thing or possesses it,

80 that he may restore it, or name the person who has
control over it: as if any one claims from another a
certain thing, some estate or land, and contends that he
has the right over it and therefore is the owner, and he
sues for that thing, and not its price, nor its value, nor
an equivalent of the same kind, and so it is & corporeal
immovable thing, which is claimed for whatever cause
from some one, who is not bound by any personal right,
And on these grounds, that the claimant setting up the
thing claimed to be his own has instituted an action
against the holder of it, and the holder denies [the
claim], there will be an action or a plea for the thing,
and this, whether he claims it in his own name, or in
regard of g& thing which he himself holds, as persons
under religious vows or rectors in the name of their
churches, or others in the name of à corporation, as for
8 thing common [to the members], and this also whether
he claims the thing itself, or à right which is attached


f, 102 b.


apponere
precium de
Te repetita.


134 DE ACTIONIBUS.


petat ipsam rem, sive jus quod rei adhsreat sive
lenefito, & quod à tenemento separari non possit, ut
si quis petat advocationem alicujus ecclesie, vel comu-
niam pasture, vel q liceat ei ire, vel agere, vel quid
tale q consistit in jure, in ré erit placit, sive actio;
quia hujusmodi jura omnia sunt res incorporales, &
quasi possidentur, & insunt corporibus, & acquiri non
possunt nec retineri sine corporib? quibus insunt, nec '
haberi aliquado sine corporibus ad qd ptineant.


Dietum est suprà, si res sib. immobilis quse petitur,
nune cüm sit res mobilis quie petatur, sicut leo, bos,
vel asinus, vestimentum, vel aliud quod constitit in
pondere, vel mensura. "Videtur prima facie quód actio
sive placitum esse debeat tam in rem, quàm in perso-
nam, eó quód certa res petitur, & quód possidens tene-
tur restituere rem petitam, sed revera erit in person&
iantüm, quia ille à quo res petitur, non tenetur pre-
eise ad rem restituendam, sed sub disjunctione, vel ad
rem, vel ad precium, & solvendo tantàüm precium libe-
ratur, sive res appareat, sive non. Et ideó si quis rem
mobilem vendicaverit ex quacung, causa ablatam, vel
commodatam, debet in actione sua definire precium, &
Sic proponere actionem suam. Ego talis peto, q talis
restituat mihi talem rem talis precii: vel conqueror q
talis mihi injuste detinet vel robbavit talem rem tanti
precii, alioquin non valebit rei mobilis vendicatio, pcio
non apposito. Idem erit si res mobiles petantur, quz
consistunt in pondere, numero, vel mensura, sicut
massa, pecunia, vel triticum, vel ali: quee in liquido
consistunt, sicut, vinum & oleum, quo casu, si hujus-


OF ACTIONS. 135


io the thing or the tenement, and which cannot be sepa-
rated from the tenement, as, for instance, if & person
Should elaim the advowson of & ehurech, or à common
right of pasture, or that it is allowable for him to go
on foot, or to drive cattle [across certain land], or some- f. 102 b,
thing of the same sort, which consists in a right, there
will be & plea or an action for the thing; because all
such rights are incorporeal things, and are as it were
possessed, and are adherent to corporeal substances,
and cannot be acquired nor retained without the sub-
stances to which they are adherent, nor be held in any
way without the corporeal substances to which they
appertain.


We have discussed above, if the thing be immovable, wu m
which is claimed, now when the thing claimed is mov- realactions
able, as a lion, an ox, or an ass, a robe, or anything else A ng
which consists in weight or in measure. 1t appears thatitis
on first glance that the action or plea ought to be for equae il
the thing as well as against the person, on the ground prios for
that a certain thing is claimed, and that the holder of it !hething
is bound to restore the thing claimed, but in truth [the -
action] will be against the person only, because he from
whom the thing is claimed, is not bound precisely to
restore the thing itself, but disjunetively either the
thing itself or its price, and upon paying the price he is
released, whether the thing itself appears or not. And
therefore if anybody claims a movable, from whatever
cause ib may have been carried off or lent, he ought in
his action to define the price, and so to state his action :

I, so and so, sue that so and so restore to me such a
thing of such à price: or, Í complain that so and so
unjustly detains from me or has robbed me of such a
thing, of such & price, otherwise the claim for à mov-
able will not avail if the price of it be not stated. "The
same thing will happen if movable things are claimed
which consist in weight, or number, or measure, like
bullon or money or barley, or things which consist of
liquid, as wine or oil in which case, if things of such


136 DE ACTIONIBUS.


modi res petantur, sufficit si implacitatus tantundem
restituat quod sit ejusdem ponderis, numeri, generis &
mensurz, & unde, quia non compellitur precise ad rem
quze petitur, erit actio in ipsam personam, cüm impla-


citatus per solutionem tantundem possit liberari.


Est autem actio mixta, tam in rem q in psonam, &
ideó sunt mixte, quia mixtam habent causam ad
utrumq, sicut est divisio hzreditatis inter coheredes
partieipes, vel de proparte soror. Vel alio modo de
pparte, seceund quod res fuerit dividenda, ratione per-
sonarum, vel ratione rei, vel utriusq. Et eodem modo
si res dividenda fuerit inter vicinos & non coh:eredes,
vel si distinguendi sint fines agro inter vicinos &
baronias, per rationabiles divisas, vel p perambulatio-
nem, in quibus casibus, hujusmodi actiones videntur
esse mixte tam in rem, quàm in psonam, cüm quili-
bet sit eorum actor & reus, actor tamen dici poterit
ile, qui priüs ad judicium pvocaverit, & ita comparatee
sunt qusedà actiones sola gratia rei psequendse, vel sola
gratia poene psequendz, & sic sicut! simplices, vel gra-
lia utriusque, & sic sunt duplices, vel tam in rem
quam in personam, & sic sunt mixte, in rem ratione
rei principalis, in psonam gratia personalium pstatio-
num. ltem mixta esse poterit & mixtam causam ha-
bere, secund' quod fuerit rei persecutoria & pcenalis, &
ita erit quelibet actio in rem, persequitur enim rem
ipsam & poenam, propter injustam detentionem. Et
eodé modo de actione in rem & in personam, & ita
possit esse mixta & mixtam habere causam quzelibet
criminalis & civilis, sive oriatur ex mialeficio vel quasi.


! ^ sunt? instead of * sicut seems to be required by the context.


OF ACTIONS. 137


sort are claimed, it will be sufficient if the defendant
restores so much as is of the same weight or number or
kind or measure, and hence, because he is not compelled
to restore precisely the thing itself which is claimed,
there will be an action against the person, since the de-
fendant may be released by payment of an equivalent.


But a mixed action is for a thing and against a per- |, »
. . atisa

son, and they are for this reason mixed, because they mixed
have a mixed cause of action for each, just as there is a 8ction.
division of an inheritance amongst coparceners, or for
the proportionate share of sisters. Or in another way
for & proportionate share according as a thing is to be
divided in regard of the persons, or of the thing, or of
both. And in the same way if à thing is to be divided
between neighbours, who are not coheirs, or if the boun-
daries of fields have to be distinguished between neigh-
bours and baronies by reasonable divisions, or by peram-
bulafion, in which cases actions of this kind seem to be
mixed, for a thing as well as against a person, since each
of them is à plaintiff and a defendant, but he shall be
best entitled to be called the plaintiff; who has first
applied for à judgment; and so certain actions are
brought solely for the sake of sueing for a thing, or
solely for the sake of sueing for a penalty, and so they
are simple actions, or [otherwise] for the sake of both,
and so they are dauble, or for à thing as well as against
a person, and so they are mixed, being for a thing by
reason of the principal thing, and against a person for
the sake of the personal contributions. So an action
may be mixed and have a mixed cause, according as it
is in prosecution of à thing and penal, and so it will be
a kind of action for & thing, for it pursues the thing
itself and the penalty on account of an unjust detention.
And in the same way respecting an action for a thing
and against à person, and so a kind of criminal and civil
action may be mixed and may have a mixed cause, whether
it arises from a tort, or something like a tort. "There


1538 DE ACTIONIBUS.


Sunt quedam qus aliquando fiant perpetue & durare
solent sine téporis prefinitione, hodie veró feré omnes
infra certa tempora limitantur, pro defectu probatio-
num, & sic sunt temporales, secundüm quarundam:
actionum diversitates. Feró dico, propter res, que de

f 103. jure gentium pertinent ad coronà, ppter privilegium
regis, sicu&, de rebus qus in nulh? bonis sunt, nec
habent dominum. ltem de rebus, & libertatibus, &
dignitatibus, quae pertinent ad dignitatem domini regis,
& coronam, & in quibus casibus nullum tempus currit
conira ipsum, si petat, eüm probare non habeat necesse,
& sine probatione obtinebit, si implacitatus warrentum
non habuerit, nec specialem libertatem, quia se ex
longo tempore non defendet. Si aliqu: veró sunt ac-
tiones, quee ex quacunque causa dentur in heredes vel
cotra, dici poterunt transitorie, eó quód transeunt ad
heredes vel contra.


6. Item actionum, qusdam concepto sunt in simplum,
Pochi quedam in duplum, gdam in triplum, quedam in
ceptesunt quadruplum, & ita competere poterunt versus unicam
M gra , Personam, vel plures, & secundüm quod fuerint rei

persecutorie, vel poene. tem ex uno delicto plures
oriri poterunt actiones, contrà unum vel plures, &
quandoque una actione poterunt terminari omnes.
Item plures competere poterunt actiones alicui contra
alium, quarum una erit prejudicialis & preambula, &
priüs terminanda. ltem in uno libello, possunt dus
eontineri actiones, quarum una in personam, alia veró
in rem, & quarum quzlibet simplex erit per se. liem
actionum qusedam directa, quszedam indirecta, qusedam
contraria. ltem qusdam vulgaris, quzedam generalis,
quzdam singularis. Item qusdam communis, quzedam
propria, secundàüm quod, res quo petitur communis


OF ACTIONS. 139


are some which sometimes become perpetual, and are ac-
customed to last without any limit of time, but in the
present day nearly all are limited within certain times,
on account of a [possible] failure of proof, and so they
are temporary, according to the diversities of actions.
Isay *nearly all" on. account of certain things, which  f.103.
under the law of nations belong to the crown, in virtue
of the privilege of the king, as concerning things which
are the goods of nobody, nor have any owner. Like-
wise concerning things and liberties, and dignities, which
appertain to the dignity of the king and to the crowm,
and in which cases time does not run against the king,
if he is claimant, since it is not necessary for him to
prove, and he will prevail without any proof, if the de-
fendant has no warranty, nor special franchise, for he
shall not defend himself by length of time. But if
there be some actions, whieh for whatever reasons are
allowed to heirs or against them, they may be called
iransitory from the cireumstance that they pass to the


heirs or against them. :


Likewise of actions, some are brought for a single lbat some
amount, some for a double amount, some for a triple for a single
amount, some for a quadruple amount, and thus they ;o o. -
may be brought against a single person or several, and
according as they are suits for a thing or for a penalty.
Likewise many actions may arise out of one delict,
against one person or against several, and sometimes all
máy be determined by one action. Likewise a person :
may be entitled to bring several actions against another
person, of which one will be preliminary and preambular
and to be determined first. Likewise in one libel two
actions may be contained, of which one will be against
a person, but another for a thing, and of which each
will be simple by itself. Likewise of actions, some are
direct, some are indirect, some are contrary. Likewise
some are popular, some are general some singular.
Likewise some are common, some are private, according


140 DE ACTIONIBUS.


erit vel propria. ltem earum qus sunt in rem, qu:z-
dam prodite sunt super ipsa possessione, & qusdam
super ipsa proprietate, es& enim possessio rei & pro-
prietas. |


7. |  Aetionum autem civilium & in rem, sieut rei vendi-
De actioni- : ; ; , . .
buscivili. catio, alia confessoria, alia negatoria: confessoria, cüm
businrem. dieat quis, aliq rem corporalem suam, sieut hunc ser-
vum, hune fund, hune equum, hanc veste. Ite in re,
ida recuperande possessionis causa, quzedà adipiscendse,
& queda retinenda. —|Recuperandz, hoc est, seysine
pprie priüs habit, p assisà novre disseysinz: adipis-
cendsz, hoc est aliene, vid. alicujus antecessoris. Re-
tinends, sicut interdicta, ne quis alteri vim faciat.
Ite quandoq, gratia recuperand:z (tam possessionis qg
pprietatis simul. Ite quandoq, causa recuperand:e pos-
sessionis, q quis ei concessit ad termiü vite, vel annor.
Item confessoria est, qua dicis tibi jus esse eundi p
fundum vicini tui, aquàmve ducendi, eo invito, &
hiodi Et hze actio in rem ideó dicitur, quia rem
tuam incorporalem petis, sc. jus eundi p fund, & ideà
confessoria dicitur, quia constituta est verbis atlirma-
tivis. Actio veró negatoria est, quam dominus fundi
intendit adversüs te solitó euntem per fundum suum,
dicens tibi non esse jus ire per fundum suum. Et
hzc actio dieitur in rem, quia& dominus fundi in hoc
suam vendicat libertatem. Et hujusmodi actiones non
competunt de dominio rei, sed de jure prediorum.


OP ACTIONS. 141


as the thing sued for shall be common or private. Like-
wise of those actions which are for a thing, some are
brought upon the possession, and some upon the pro-
perty, for there is the possession and also the property


of & thing.
Of civil


But of civil aetions for a thing, as for instance a soon for
claim for a certain thing, some are affirmative, others 9 thing.
negative; affirmative, as when one asserts that a cor-
poreal thing is his own, as for instance this serf, this
estate, this horse, this robe. Likewise for a thing, some
are for the object of recovering possession, some for
acquiring it,and some for retaining it. For recovering
1t, that is, one's own seysine formerly enjoyed, by means
of an assize of novel disseysine. For acquirimg it,
that is, another person's seysine, as the seysine of an
ancestor. For retaining it, as for instance interdiets, to
prevent a person doing violence to another. Likewise
sometimes for the object of recovering as well the
possession as the property at the same time.  Like-
wise sometimes for recovering the possession of a thing
which one has granted for a term of life or of years.
Likewise an affirmative action is, when you say that
you have the right of going across the land of your
neighbour or of drawing water from it, against his will,
orsuch like. And this is called an action for & thing
because you seek an incorporeal thing of your own,
namely the nght of erossing the land [of your neigh-
bour] and it is called an affirmative action, because it is
drawn up in affirmative words. But an action is called
negative, when the owner of an estate brings an action
against you for usually going across his land, saying
that you have no right to go across his land. And this
is termed an action for a ihing, for the owner of the
estate claims his release from this. And these actions
are not 'about the ownership of a thing, but about pre-
dial rights.


142 DE ACTIONIBUS.


8. | ltem actionum civihum in personam, ex coniractu
De aetioni- . ;
buscivii. Vel quasi, queedam nascuntur ex pacto. Ex quasi con-
businper- tractu nasci dicuntur, que mec omnino ex pacto, nec
Band omnino ex maleficio, sed tamen majorem cum pactis
nascuntur habent affinitatem, q cum maleficiis. ^ Ex maleficiis
nascuntur actiones, quibus delicta hominum coercentur,
sicut condietio rei furtive, actio vz. bonor raptoru,
actio legis Aquilie, & injuriat. Ex quasi maleficio
f.103b. nascuntur actiones, que nec ad pacta accedunt nec
pprié ad maleficia, sed similiora sunt maleficiis quàm
pactis. Ex contractu & obligatione oriuntur actiones,
secundüm q superiüs dictü est, alice re, alie verbo,
alie literis, alie cosensu. Re, ut conditio cerà de
mutuo. Conditio autem certi copetit ex omni causa,
& obligatione, ex qua quid certu petitur, sive ex có-
iractu certo, vel incerto. Cause veró hujusmodi ac-
tionu sunt quatuor contract? superiàs nominati, de
quibus superiüs dictum est, in titulo de donationibus.
Ut do ut des, do ut facias, facio ut des, facio ut facias.
Item est petitoria hereditatis actio, & competit illis,
quib? jus merum descendit ab antecessorib?, sicut hze-
redib? ppinquioribus.


D D ] Fossessoria veró hsereditatis petitio est de possessione
sessoria propria, & quse dieitur actio unde vi, per quàm resti-
n tuitur spoliato sua possessio, & dici poterit assisa
que dioi novae disseysins. Tte dicitur possessoria petitio de
Loc ERR possessione aliena, sicut alicuj? antecessoris, de aliquo
disseysine, telito, de quo antecessor obiit seysit? ut de feodo, d


dieitur actio quof bonof, sive assisa mortis antecessoris.


OF ACTIONS. 143


Likewise of civil actions against a person upon &.. 8.

contract or something like a contract, some arise upon a Mods
pact. They are said to arise from something like a con- against a
tract, when they do not arise altogether upon a pact, how tlioy
or altogether upon a tort, but have a greater affinity rise.
with a pact than with a tort. Actions arise from torts,
by which the delicts of men are restrained, as for in-
stance an action for a thing stolen, an action for goods
carried off by force, an action under the Aquilian Law, f.103 b.
an action for injury. Actions arise from something like
a, tort, which approach properly neither to pacts nor to
torts, but are more like torts than pacts. Actions arise
from contract and obligation, aecording to what has
been said above, some by a thing, some by a word, some
by a writing, some by consent. By a thing, as & condi-
tion of something certain in à case- of borrowing. But
the condition of something certain may arise from any
cause or obligation, under which any thing certain is
claimed, whether from a certain or an uncertain contract.
But the causes of these kind of actions are the four
contracts above-named, concerning which we have made
mention in the title upon donations. As I give that
you may give, I give that you may do, I do that you
may give, I do that you may do. There is also à peti-
tory action for an inheritance, and those persons are
entitled to it, to whom the absolute right descends from
ancestors, as to next heirs.


But a possessory petition of an inheritance is concern- — 9.
ing one's own possession, and which is called an action D
wnde vi, by which a person who has been spoiled of his petition of
possession has it restored to him, and it may be called ueri
an assize of novel disseysimme. Likewise the term pos- may e
sessory petition is applied to a petition for the possession eri of
of another, as of a certain ancestor, concerning a certain novel dis-
tenement, of which the ancestor died seysed as of a fee, ud
which is called an aetion Quorwm bonorwm, or an assize


upon the death of an ancestor.


144 DE ACTIONIBUS.


Car. IV.


1. Ite videud cui cópetant actiones, d ex maleficio ori-


E untur, & cotra q. Et sciend', q actio furti, sive con-
actiones, dictio, diio rei cópetat, contra fure, & ejus successore,
Jue € cotra glibet detentoré. Actio vi bonot raptor, de
malefieiis, reb? mobilibus vi ablatis, sive robbatis, datur diio rei,
ibtd vel de eujus custodia surreptz sunt, & qui intravit in
Inst. IV., solutione erga dim suü, ita q ejus intersit agere.  Ac-


LE$19 (io vero legis Aquilie de hominib? p felonià occisis,
vel vulneratis, dabitur ppinquioribus parentibus, vel
extraneis homagio vel servitio obligatis, ità g eorum
intersit agere.

Ec Actio veró injuria, competit ei, qui cotumeliam vel
iir aidi injuria passus est, contra eum qui injuria intulit, vel


competit, pulsavit, verberavit, & malé tractavit, & in qua judex

et contra .: - : LA . .

quem. eum tanti condepnabit, quati actor dixerit se nolle
injurià sustinuisse, adhibita tamen p judice taxatione.


E Actio, q metus causa, datur ei qui pbabili metu
kicipus coactus, rem sua tradidit, vendidit, vel pmisit, versus
eausa, t eum qui metum intulit. Et dicitur metus pbabilis, qui
contra . . . .
quem. in virum constantem cadere posset, & non in hominem

meticulosum. Actio de dolo competit ei, contra q
dolus eomittitur. Actio veró sive interdict', vnde vi,
sc. q. duplex est, scil rei restitutoria, & poenalis, datur
contra eU, qui vi dejecit, & datur ei, qui vi deject?
est, ad restitutione possessionis rei immobilis, qua quis
vi dejectus est, & quo casu duplex est in persona


OF ACTIONS. 145


* CHAPTER IV.


Likewise we must see, who are entitled to bring actions — 1,
which arise out ofa tort, and againsó whom. And it is Whore
tio be known that the action for a theft or for the bring
recovery of the thing stolen is competent to the owner actions,
of the thing against the thief and his successor, and outof a
against the holder of the thing [stolen] An action for íerb 2nd
robbery, on account of movables carried off by force or whom.
robbed, is allowed to the owner of & thing, or to him
from whose custody they have been carried off, and who
has entered into a contract of payment to their owner, so
that he has an interest to bring the action. But an
. &etion under the Aquilian Law for men slain or wounded
feloniously will be allowed to near relatives or to strangers
bound to them by homage or by service, so that they


have an interest to bring an action.


But an action for injury is competent to him who has — 2.
suffered an insult or an injury, against him who has in. qo
inflieted the injury, or has beaten, struck, or ill-treated bring an
him, and in which the judge will condemn him for so much d
as the plaintiff says he would not have suffered the injury und


for, the judge however taxing the amount.


An action on account of fear is allowed to him, who a.
eonstrained by probable fear has delivered' up, or sold, Wh entit e *
or promised a thing, against him who has caused the fear. bring an
And probable fear is that which falls upon a resoluie 9^lon on.
man, and not upon a timid man.  Àn action for deceit fear, and
is competent to him, against whom the deceit has been 3f"i?*
practised. But an action or interdict for violent dispos-
session, which is of à double character, to wit for restitu-
tion and for à penalty, is allowed against him, who has
by violence dispossessed another, and is allowed to him
who has been dispossessed, for the restitution of the
possession of an immovable, of which a person has been
dispossessed by violence, and in which case double

VOL. II. K


146 DE ACTIONIBUS.


dejectoris, secundüm quod inferiàs dicetur in assisa
novis disseysine, & in qu& nec mortalitas, nee casus
fortuit? liberat dejectore.


4. Áectio sive interdictum, quód vi,aut clam, datur
Sig kelisE adversus eum, qui in solo vel fundo alterius novum
competat opus manu factum costruxit, vel destruxit, & se occul-
midpuer tavit ne sibi phiberetur, & qui talia cóostruxit vel
viautclam. destruxit, p hanc actione copelletur, ut id q fecit in
£104. pristinu stat suis süptib? reponat, ut res sit, sicut solet

esse & debet. Hujusmodi veró actiones sive interdicta,
non datur heredibus nec in h:redes, in eo q poenalia


sunt, sed datur in eo q sunt restitutoria.


E Actio veró sive interdict', de itinere actuq, privato,
e ME datur adversus eos, qui injuste aliq phibent uti su&


RAP servitute. Ait eni ptor, q itinere aetuque privato agi-
in T Q- . . e.
tum de tur, vel via hoc anno, ubi nec vi, nec clam, nec pre-


Hinere — eario ab adversario usum est, quà min? ita utatur,
actuque L . e . . .
Salo. vim fieri veto. Et hace ona interdicta ex maleficio


oriuntur.


6. Est etià interdiet sive aetio, quof bonof, j non ori-
Deiner- tur ex maleficio sed ex quasi cotraetu, & datur hsere-
eto, : e: : 2
quorum Gib? ppinquiorib? de seysina mortis antecessof, & datur
Imt IV. adversus quoslibet possidentes.
t. xv.


" Acti aute civiliuj d sunt in re, alie date sunt


Aliadivisio sup ipsa possessione, alise pditeo super ipsa pprietate.
actionum,
siplures E 81 super eadem re uni petenti competat plures


Mid rem actiones, sicut assisa novs disseysing mortis anteces-


OF ACTIONS. 147


damages may be recovered against the person of the dis-
possessor, according to what will be stated below in the
assise of novel disseysine, and in which neither morta-
lity, nor fortuitous accident sets free the dispossessor.


The action or interdict * quod vi aut clam" is allowed | 4.
against him, who on the soil or ground of another has Rex
constructed a new work made with the hand, or has Maur) i
demolished it and hid himself that he may not be pro- 4 quod vi
hibited, and he who has constructed or demolished such aut clam "
things shall be compelled by this action to replace at his ine
own expense in its previous state that which he has f104.
done, that the thing may be as it has been aecustomed
io be, and ought to be. But actions or interdiets of*this
kind are not allowed to heirs nor against heirs, as far as
they are penal, but they are allowed as far as they are


for restitution.


But an action or interdiet concerning a right of foot- ^ 5.
way or private carriage way is allowed against those, unn
who unjustly prevent a person using his servitude. For whom the
the prztor says, The enjoyment of a right of footway RM
and private carriage way or road during this year, a nghi of

. e . ootway or
where it has been enjoyed by the adverse party neither private ear-
by violence nor clandestinely nor permissively, I forbid Tage way
any violence to be used to prevent it. And all these E


interdictis arise out of torts.


There is likewise the interdict or action * quorum TT E
* bonorum," which does not arise out of a tort, but out nteráict
of à kind of contract, and it is allowed to next heirs !quorum,
upon the seysine of the death of an ancestor, and it is EGG
allowed against any kind of possessor.


But of civil actions, which are for a thing, some are — 7


allowed in regard to the possession, others in regàrd to EN


ihe property. And ii upon the same subject several actions,


$ » . several
aclions are competent to one claimant, as an assise of ,,, corüpe-


novel disseysine, an assise of the death of an ancestor, tent on one
K 2


re, et una:
fuerit
electa.


Si quis se
retraxerit
ab una,
cum fuerit
electa.


Actionum
tertia di-
visio.


148 DE ACTIONIBUS.


Soris super possessione, & breve de ingressu, & breve
de recto super proprietate, simul & semel omnibus uti
non poterit, sed unam eligat quà voluerit, & una
electa, nung habebit regressum ad alias, pendente illa,
q Si ad aliam recurrat, impetratio de secunda non
valebit. Si veró, quocunq, modo, ab incepta recesse-
rit, per licentiam vel judicium, in pponendis actionib?
hune ordinem observabit. Si enim ab assisa novse
disseysinze recessum fuerit, statim habeatur recursus
ad assisam mortis antecessoris, si competat, & posteà
ad breve de ingressu, & ad ultimum ad breve de recto,
& ita ascendendo de possessione usque ad pprietatem,
sed non ? contrario descendendo, quia nunqua de
brevi de recto fit descensus ad alia brevia inferiora,
quia, qui semel egerit per breve de recto, totum jus
tam super possessione quam super proprietate deducit
in judicium secund' quod videri poterit infrà, ubi trac-
tatur de brevi de recto.  Nunq eni à causa pprieta-
tis fit descensus ad causam possessionis, nec postq
semel actum fuerit de seysina antecessoris non possit
quis agere de seysina propria per assisam.


Cüm autem ab actione in rem quis semel recesserit,
vel ab actione se retraxerit, vel judicium contrarium
habuerit, nunqua ad eandem redire poterit, cüm semel
actio extincta non reviviscit. Si autem ex quacunque
causa à brevi se retraxerat pro aliquo defectu, & non
&b actione, aliud erit.


Item actionum qusedam preejudiciales, quse oriuntur
ex ineidentibus qusstionibus vel emergentibus, in qui-
bus queritur utrum aliquis sit ingenuus vel libertinus,


OF ACTIONS. 149


concerning the possession, and & writ of eniry and a subject,
writof right as regards the property, he cannot make jhi9ne
use of all at one and the same time, but he must choose elected.
one at his pleasure, and after he has chosen one, he shall
never have recourse to the others, whilst that is pending,

but if he shall have recourse to another, his claim on

the other shall not be entertained. But if by any means

he has abandoned the suit which he has commenced,
either by leave of the court or by a judgment, he shall
observe this order in preferring his actions. For if he

has abandoned an assise of novel disseysine, let him

have forth with recourse to an assise of the death of an
ancestor, if it is competent to him, and afterwards to a

writ of entry, and lastly to a writ of right, and so
ascending from the possession to the property, and not

on the contrary descending, for à descent from a writ of

right to other inferior writs is never allowed, for who-

ever has brought an action upon a writ of right has
brought before the court the whole title as to the pos-
session as well as to the property, according as will be

seen below when a writ of right will be treated of.

For a descent is never made from a cause of property

io a cause of possession, nor after an action has been
brought respecting the seysine of an ancestor, can a
person bring an action about his own seysine by an
assise.

But when a person has abandoned an action for & 8s.
thing, or has withdrawn from it, or had an adverse ji» Lereon
judgment, he can never return to the same, since an doned one
action once extinguished never revives. But if from Min :
whatever cause he has withdrawn from a writ on ac- after elec-
count of some defect, and not from an action, it will be d


different.


Likewise some actions are prejudieial, which arise ^ 9.
upon incidental or emergent questions, in which it is rns of


questioned whether a person is freeborn or a freedman, actions.


. f. 104 b.


l.
Ubi ter-
minari de-
beant ac-
tiones cri-
minales.
Glanville
1v.,1&7;
iii. S 3.
Fleta, 1.,
c. 20 & 21.


150 DE ACTIONIBUS.


& si libertinus, liber, vel servus? filius annon, & si
filius, utrum legittimus vel bastardus? & hujusmodi, &
dicuntur prejudiciales, quia priüs judicantur quàm actio
principalis. Et ut per hoc remaneat principalis vel
procedat in quaeunq, eausa tam incidenti vel emergente,
ut si incidat conventio sive pactum, res judicata vel
finis factus, vel alia quasvis exceptio.


| CAP, V.


Ubi terminari debeant actiones criminales, vel placita
vidend, Et sciedum, q, si actiones criminales sint, in
curia dii regis debent terminari, cüm sit ibi poena
corporalis inflivenda, & hoc cora ipso rege, si tangat
psonam sua, sicut crimen les» majestatis, vel cora
justitiarüis ad hoe specialiter assignatis, si tangat psonas
privatas. Vita veró, & membft homiü sunt in manu
dii regis, vel ad tuitionem, vel ad poena cüm deli-
querint, nisi ita sit forte, quód aliquis gaudeat spe-
ciali libertate, q habeat Tol] & Tem, &c. ut infrà.
Ad düm regem & coronam suam pertinet, cognoscere
de crimine lese majestatis: ut de nece, vel seditione!
psonze suc, vel regni, vel exercit? sui. ltem crimen
falsi, quod sub se continet plures species, & multiplici-
ter fieri poterit, ut si quis falsaverit sigillum dii regis,
vel falsam moneta fabricaverit, vel de non re pba
rem pbam fecerit, vel si quis falsario consenserit scienter.


Item occultatio thesauri inventi fraudulosa, placiti do


l*Soeditione" is the reading of | Inn. MS. Hale reads ** ut de nece
MSS. Rawl. C. 160 & C. 159, MSS. | ** vel seditione persone sut, vol
Crewe & Glastonbury.  *Sedue | * suorum, vel regui, vcl exercitus
tione? is the reading of MSS. | ** sui.
Galeaezo, Bodley, 170, and Gray's


OF ACTIONS. 151


and if a freedman, whether he is free or a serf? whe-
ther he is & son, and if a son, whether he is legitimate
or à bastard ? and such like, and they are called pre-
judicial because they are judged before the principal
action, and so that by this the principal action may be
stayed or proceed in any kind of cause as well incident
as emergent, as, for instance, if a convention or agree-
ment should be incident, or à judgment or a fine, or any
other exception.


CHAPTER V. f. 104 b.


We must see where criminal actions or pleas ought to nace sam
be determined. And it is to be known that if actions; SUTp
are criminal, they ought to be determined in the court of Qught. id
the king, since it 1s there that eorporeal punishment is to mined.
be inflicted, and this in the presence of the king himself,
if it touches his person, as the crime of high treason, orin
the presence of justiees specially appointed for that pur-
pose, if it touches private persons. But the life and the
limbs of men are in the hand of the king, either for pro-
teetion, or for punishment when they have been delin-
quent, unless it be that some one enjoys a special franchise,
that he has Toll and Tem, &c.,as below. Tt appertains to
the lord the king and to his crown to take cognisance of
the crime of high treason as concerning the death or the
sedition! of his person, or of his kingdom, or of his army.
Likewise the crime of falsification, which contains under
it several species, and may be committed in manifold
ways, as if a person should falsify the seal of the lord
the king, or should fabrieate false money, or of a thing
not genuine should make one [apparently] genuine, or if
any one shall knowingly eollude with a falsifier.  Like-
wise the fraudulent eoncealment of treasure trove, pleas


!Sedition. — Mr. Emlyn in his | in saying that *seductione" is the |
note on Hale's Pleas of the Crown, | reading of the oldest MSS.
1. p. 79, appears to be not warranted


152 DE ACTIONIBUS.


pace dini regis fracta, et ista graviora sunt crimina &
majora, quia. principaliter tangunt psonam ipsius regis.
Sunt etiam crimina aliquantul minora, eó q in parte
iangunt ipsum regem ppter pacem suam infractam, in
parte privatas psonas, contra quas delinquitur, sicut
erimen furti, crimen roberie contra pacem, & plagai.
Item crimen homicidii, sive sit casuale vel voluntarium,
licét eandem poenam non contineant, quia in uno casu
rigor, & in alio misericordia. ltem crimen incendii,
nequiter facti. Ite raptus virginis, vel sanctimonialis,
vel matronz honesté viventis. ltem crimen roberie &
imprisonamenüi, contra pacem. ltem de libero homine
imprisonato, quor omia poenam corporalem infligunt, &
secund q fuerint majora vel minora, gravem inducunt
poenà vel minüs gravem. Inducunt eni ddam ultimum
supplicium, eu poena graviori & tormentis, ne statim
deficiant, quandoq, sine tormentis. Item dam inducunt
membrof truncationem, jdam exilium ppetuum, vel ad
tempus, & eodem modo imprisonamentum. Pon: au-
tem ad correctionem & correptionem hominum sunt
invente, ut. quos divinus timor à malo non revocat,
téeporalis salte poena coereeat, & cohibeat à peccato.
Ipse enim Deus propter iniquitatem corripit homines.


Car. VI.
1 Genera poenaf, quib? afficiuntur malefactores, sunt
eor haee. Sunt autem didam, que adimunt vitam, vel


narum,qui membr. Sunt autem d auferunt civitatem, burgum,


bus hom vel provincià. Sunt autem d continent exilium ppe-


unturprop- iuum, vel ad tempus, vel corporis eoertionem, sc. im-


-————— ám


|


OF ACTIONS. i 153


of & breach of the king's peace, and these are more grave
and greater crimes, because they concern principally the
king's person. There are also crimes of & somewhat
minor character, because they concern partly the king
on aecount of a breach of his peace, partly private per-
sons, against whom a delict has been committed, as for
instance the crime of theft, the crime of robbery against
the peace of the king, and of battery. Likewise the
crime of homicide, whether it be accidental or inten-
tional, although they do not contain the same punish-
ment, because in one case there is rigour, and in the other
mercy. Likewise the crime of arson, maliciously caused.
Likewise the rape of a virgin or à nun, or à matron
living honestly. Likewise the crime of robbery and
imprisonment against the peace of the king. Likewise
concerning the imprisonment of a free person, all of
which inflict corporeal punishment, and according as they
are more or less grave, they entail a punishment more or
less grave. For some of them entail the last punishment,
with more severe pain and torture, so that they faint
not immediately, sometimes without torture. Likewise
some of them entail mutilation of the limbs, some perpe-
tual exile or temporary exile, and in the same manner
imprisonment. But punishments have been invented
for the correction and conirol of human beings, that those
whom the fear of God does not recall from evil, temporal
punishment at least may coerce and restrain from sin.
For God himself corrects men on account of their
iniquity.


CHAPTER VI.


The kinds of punishments, with which men are visited, — 1.
are these. "There are likewise some which deprive them Noe
of life or limb. There are also some which deprive them punish- -
of a right of citizenship, or of burghership, or of province- ra
ship. There are likewise some which contain perpetual ore visited


: 2 P y; on aceount
imprisonment, or temporary exile, or personal restraint,


ter eorum
iniquitates.


f. 105.


154 DE ACTIONIBUS.


prisonament vel ad tempus, vel imperpetuum. Sunt
ida q fustigationem, verberationem, poenam pillorat &
tymboral & dapnü cum infamia inducunt. Sunt etia
ida, d dignitatis & ordinis inducunt depositionem, vel
alieujus actus privationem, vel prohibitionem. Et non
alio modo puniatur quis, quàm secundüm quod se ha-
beat eondemnatio, ut si gladio animadverti debeat in
aliquem, tune non securi, nec telo, nec fustibus, vel
laqueo, alio quove modo. Item qui vivi exuri debent,
non eis verberibus noceatur, nec virgis, nec tormentis:
quia plerique defieiunt dum torquentur, & hoc nisi
aliter exigat enormitas delicti. Solent prssides in
earcere continendos damnare ut in vinculis continean-
tur, sed hujusmodi interdictee sunt à lege, quia carcer
ad continendos, & non puniendos haberi debeat. Re-
Spieiendum est judicanti, ne quid aut duriüs aut remis-
siüs constituatur, quàm causa deposcit, nec enim aut
severitatis aut clementie gloria affectanda est: sed
ppenso judicio, prout queque res expostulat, statuen-
dum. In leviorib? causis leniores esse debent, ad leni-
tatem. In gravioribus autem pcenis, severitatem legum,
eum aliquo temperamento benignitatis, subsequi. Et
poene potiüs molliendze sunt quàm exasperands.  De-
linquunt latrones pposito, p factionem, ebrii impetu p
ebrietatem, cüm ad manus vel ferrum pvenitur. Casu,
cüm p infortunium, ut si aliquis venando, p telum in
feram missum, hominem interfecerit, & similia ppetra-
verit. Crimen vel poena paterna nulla maculam filio
infligere potest. Igne coneremantur, qui saluti domi-
noru suorü insidiaverint. Facta puniuntur, ut furta,


OF ACTIONS. 455


such as imprisonment for a time or in perpetuity. There of their
are some which entail beating with a stick or with a niqities.
whip, the punishment of the pillory or of the tumbril,
and damages with infamy. There are some which bring
on deposition from a dignity or an order, or the depriva-
tion of some act or à prohibition. And no one should be
punished in any other way, than according to his con-
demnation, as if a man is to be put to death with a sword,
then he is not to be put to death with an axe, nor with
a spear, nor with eudgels, nor with & rope, nor in any
other way. Likewise those who ought to be burnt alive,
they are not io be pained with stripes, nor with rods,
nor with tortures, for most persons faint when they are f. 105.
tortured, and this unless the enormity of the crime exaets
otherwise. The governors of prisons are accustomed to
condemn all persons ordered to be confined, that they
shall be kept in chains, but these kinds of punishment
are interdicted by law, because a prison ought to be kept
for confinement, not for punishment. The judge ought
to keep in mind that nothing be done either too harshly
or too remissly than the cause requires, for he ought not
to affect the vain boasting of severity or of clemency,
but he should determine with a well weighed judgment
according as each thing demands. Inlighter causes they
ought to be more lenient, towards leniency. But in
graver punishments they should follow up the severity
of the laws tempered with some benignity. And punish-
ments are rather to be mollified than  exasperated.
Robbers commit delicts with design through faction,
drunkards upon impulse through drunkenness, when
they betake themselves to their fists or to & weapon.
By accident, when by misfortune, as if any one in hunting
has slain & man with a dart cast at à wild beast, and has
perpetrated such like aets. The crime or punishment of
a father inflicts no stain upon the son. "They are burnt
in the fire, who plot anything against the safety of their
lords Acts are punished, such as thefts, homicides.


l.
Ubi ter-
minande
sunt
actiones
civiles.


156 DE ACTIONIBUS.


homicidia.  Seripta, ut falsa & libelli famosi.  Con-
silia, ut conjurationes: sed hsc quatuor genera con-
sideranda sunt septem modis, causa, psona, loco, tem-
pore, qualitate, quantitate & eventu. Causa, ut in
verberibus, quie impunita sunt à magistro vel parente,
nisi modum excedant, quia emendationis & non injurie
gratia videntur adhiberi, & puniuntur, cüm quis p iram
ab extraneo pulsat? est. Persona dupliciter spectatur,
ejus s. qui fecit, & ej? qui passus est: aliter enim
puniuntur ex eisdem factionib? servi quàm liberi, &
aliter qui quide aliquid in dim parentémve cómiserit
quàm in extraneum, in magistratum quàm privatu.
Et similiter setatis ratio habenda est. Loc? facit, ut
idem sit furtum vel sacrilegiu, & secundàüm hoc minor
poena vel major. Temp? discernit predonem à fure,
vel effraetorem, & furem diurnum à nocturno. Quan-
titas discernit furem ab abigevo, secundüm q furtü
fuerit maj? vel minus, ut si quis sue surripuerit fur
erit, & si quis gregem, abigev? erit. Event?, ut si ex
voluntate & conscientia certa fecerit quis aliquid, sicut
homicidiu, an ex eventu, ui suprà: & secüdu.hoc, aut
erit felonia aut infortunium. ltem est poena pecuni-
aria, sicut corporalis, & quslibet poena corporalis,
quamvis minima, major est qualibet poena pecuniaria.


Car. VII.


Dictum est superiüs, in cujus curia actiones crimi-
nales debeant terminari, sive in com vel extra, sive in
curia domini regis, vel alibi: nune autem dicendum,
ubi triandze sunt actiones civiles, quze sunt in rem vel


OF ACTIONS. 157


Writings, such as false and infamous libels. Designs, - Te) VENE
such as eonspiracies. But these four kinds [of offences] | |
are to be considered from seven points of view, the cause,

ihe person, the place, the time, the quality, the quantity,

and the event. The cause, as in the case of stripes,

which are unpunished on the part of & master or a father,

unless they exceed moderation, because they seem to be

applied for improvement and not for punishment, and

they are punished when any one through anger is struek

by à stranger. "The person is doubly considered, of him

who has done the thing, and of him who has suffered it,

for serfs are punished on a different scale from free men

for the same actions, and differently in the ease where

one has struck one's lord or one's parent, than where one

has struck a stranger ; also where one has struck a magis-

trate, than where one has struck a private person. And

in à similar manner regard is to be paid to age. Place

causes the same act to be a theft, or a sacrilege, and

accordingly the punishment is greater or less. Time dis-

tinguishes the robber or the burglar from the thief, and

the thief by day from the thief by night. Quantity distin-

guishes the thief from the cattle-lifter, aecording.as the

theft is greater or less: as if a person shall have stolen a

sow he is a thief, and if he has stolen a herd of swine he i
is à cattle-lifter. The event, as if with design and certain

purpose a person has done any act, such as homicide,

orif eventually as above, and accordingly it will be either

felony or misfortune. Likewise there is a money penalty

just as à bodily punishment, and any corporeal punish-

ment, however small, is greater than a pecuniary penalty.


CHAPTER VII.


It has been said a&bove, in whose courts criminal 1
actions ought to be determined, whether in the county e pa
or outside of it, whether in the king's court or elsewhere, to be de-


now we must see where civil actions are to be tried, "mined.


f 105 b.


158 DE ACTIONIBUS.


in personam. Et scendü, quód earum qus sunt in
rem, sicut rei vendicationes p breve de recto, terminari
debent in curia baronum vel aliorum, de quibus ipse
petens clamaverit tenere, si plenum rectum ei tenere
voluerit, vel possit vel sciverit. Si aute noluerit, vel
non possit, vel nesciverit, tunc probato à tenente, quód
euriaà düi sui ei de recto defecerit, transferri debet
placitum ad comitatum, ut vic. rectum teneat, & sic à
com transferri possit ad magnam curiam, ex certa
eausa, si dominus rex voluerit, & ibi terminari. Sed
hoe fieri non debet contra voluntatem dominorum,
sicut olim fieri solet p principem, nisi ex preedictis
causis, vel si düs curie sponte curiam suam remiserit
ipsi regi. Et de hac materia habetis pleniüs infra, de
actionib? civilib? in rem, sup ipsa pprietate p breve
de recto. n coi vero terminari possit placitu, p
breve de recto, & cora vic. si ad magna curia diii regis
iranslatü non fuerit ut predictum est. Ite quzestio
Status, sicut, placitum de nativis, nisi ille, qui petitur,
exeipiendo se dieat esse liberü, & coram justitiariis
düi regis in adventu ipsorum se esse pbaturum, & quo
casu, pacem habebit usq, ad adventu ipsorum, vel
transferri poterit judicium & pbatio ad magnam curiam,
si dno regi placuerit. Item in cof & coram vic. pla-
citari possunt plura plaeita, in quib? vic. est justiciari?
eostitut? p breve, q justiciet, sicut de servitiis & con-
suetudinib?, de debitis & aliis placitis infinitis. Item
placitum de vetito namii, in quo vie. justitiarius est
& vic. & qualiter hujusmodi terminentur, inferiüs dice-


ur. Et quare non potest vic. in eofü judicare de ali-


OF ACTIONS. 159


which are either for a thing or against a person. And
itis to be known that those which are for à thing, like
claims.of realty through a writ of right, are to be deter-
mined in the court of the barons or others, from whom the
plaintiff asserts his holding, if it is willing or able or
has the knowledge to do bim full justice. But if it is
unwilling, or is unable, or is ignorant, upon proof by the
tenant that the court of the lord has failed to do him
justice, the plea ought to be transferred to the county,
that the viscount may do him justice, and so it may be
transferred to the great court, on certain grounds, if the
king so wills, and there be determined. But this ought
not to be done against the will of the lords, as was ac-
eustomed formerly to be done by the sovereign, excepi
for the causes above said, or if the lord of the court has
of his own accord remitted his jurisdiction to the king
himself And upon this matter you have a more full
Statement below, upon civil actions for a thing concern-
ing the property itself by & writ of right. But the plea
may be determined in the county by a writ of right and
before the viseount, if i& has not been transferred as
above said to the high court of the lord the king himself.
Likewise à question of síatus, as a plea of eaifty, unless
he who is claimed [for a naif] demurs by saying that
he isa free man, and that he will prove it before the
justices of the king on their next coming, and in which
case he shall live at peace until their coming, or the
judgment and proof may be transmitted to the High
Court, ifit pleases the lord the king. Likewise in the
county and before the viscount several pleas may be
pleaded, in which the viscount is the justice appointed
by & writ, that he should execute justice, as concerning
services and customs, debts and other infinite pleas.
Likewise the plea of forbidden distress, in which the
viscount is the justice and the viscount, and how such
pleas are to be determined will be explained below.
And wherefore the viscount cannot in the county judge


f. 105 b.


2,
De diver-
sitate jus-
titiariorum.


160 DE ACTIONIBUS.


eujus libertate, sicut de ipsi? nativitate, cüm  pbatio
libertatis sit. quasi incidens placito de nativis, sicut
possit in curia domini regis: nescio aliam causam
assignare, nisi hoc sit ppter favorem libertatis, quie
est res insstimabilis, & qus insipientibus & min?
discretis committi non debet ppter discrimen.


Plaeita veró civilia in rem, & in psonam, in curia
dfiüi regis terminanda, coram diversis justitiariis ter-
minantur. Habet enim plures curias, in quibus diverse
actiones terminantur, & illarum curiarum habet unam
ppriam, sicut aulam regiam, & justitiarios capitales qui
pprias causas regis terminant, & aliorum omnium, p
querelam vel p privilegium sive libertatem: ut si sit
aliquis, qui implacitari non debeat nisi coram ipso
domino rege. Habet etiam curiam, & justitiarios in
banco residentes, qui cognoscunt de omnibus placitis, de
quib? authoritatem habent cognoscendi, & sine war-
ranto jurisdictionem non habent, nec coertionem. Ha-
bet etiam justitiarios itinerantes de coim in com, quan-
doq, ad omnia placita, quandoq, ad qusdam specialia,
sicut assisas novsw disseysine  & mortis antecessoris
capiendas, &4^ad gaolas deliberandas, quandoq, ad uni-
cam vel duas & non plures: in iis casibus omnib?
erunt curie ipsi? domini regis. Et sunt 2. recogni-
tiones, s. de nova disseysina, & de morte antecessoris,
quie capi non debent nisiin suis comitatibus per com-
munem libertatem, & hoc nisi incept» fuerint in comi-
tatibus, quia si incepte fuerint in com, transferri pos-
sunt extra com de loco in locu, & extra comi terminari,
eum omnib? sequelis suis, sicut in covictionib? & cer-


tificationib?, cüm evenerint, & sive hífodi recognitiones


in com terminato fuerint sive non, non est phibitum
quin covictiones & certifieationes extra com trahi pos-


OF ACTIONS. 161


of the freedom of any one, as of his own naifty, since the

proof of freedom is as it were incident to a plea about naifs

as he may in the eourt of the lord the king: I know not

how to assign any other cause, unless it be this, on ac-

count of freedom being favoured, which is an invalu-

able thing, and which ought not be enirusted to the
unlearned and indiscreet on account of the risk. |

But civil pleas for a thing or against a person, to be — 2.
determined in the court of the king, are determined dues of
before different. justices. ^ For he has several courts, justiciaries.
in which different actions are determined, and of those
courts he has a special court of his own, as the King's
Hall, and chief justices who determine the special causes
of the king and of all others upon complaint, or through
a privilege or franchise. As if there be some one, who
ought not to be impleaded, except before the king him-
self. He has also a court and resident justices of the
Bench, who hold cognisance of all pleas, respecting which
they have authority to take cognisance, and without a
warrant they do not exercise jurisdiction nor coercion.
He has also justices itinerant from county to county, some-
times to hear all pleas, sometimes to hear special pleas,
as to hold assises of novel disseysine or of the death of
an ancestor, and to deliver jails, sometimes for one singly,
or for two and not more. In all these cases the courts
will be those of the king himself. And there are two.
recognitions, for instance, of novel disseysine and of the
death of an ancestor, which ought not to be held except.
in their own counties by a common franchise, and this un-
less they have been commenced in the counties, because
if they have been commenced in a county, they may
be transferred out of the county from place to place and
be determined outside the county with all their conse-
quences, as in convictions and in certifications, when
they have taken place, and whether recognitions of this
kind have been determined in the county or not, it is
not forbidden, that convictions and certifications may be
VOL. II. L


3.
Quz pla-
cita imme-
diate placi-
tari et
terminari
debent
]n curia
domini, et
rationes
quare.

f. 106.


162 DE ACTIONIBUS.


sunt. Et sicut predictum est in parte, trahuntur placita
causis supradictis à curiis baronu usq, ad com, & ibi
iminàtur quàdoq, & quadoq, inde trasferuntur, & ponu-
tur corà justiciariss itineratib? in cof, & inde corà
justice. de bàco, vel corà rege multis de causis.


Sunt etia int alia placita, quceda quc no p tràsla-
tione, sed immediate tminari debent cora justitiariis
vel cor rege, s. placitum de baroniis, ubi ipse petens
tenere clamat immediaté de diio rege in capite p breve
de recto, Qq vocatur precipe in capite, & hoc ideó, quia
hic tagit ipsum regem in toto, vel in parte. ltem
immediate in curia domini regis terminari debent pla-
cità de advocationib? ecclesiarum, vel capellarum, &
assisis ultimze prsesentationis, & est ratio, quia si alius
à rege mandaret episcopis de admittendo clericum, &
ipse non obtemperaret, alius à rege coertionem non
haberet, & quia episcopus ad alterius mandatum, quàm
regis, clericum admittere non tenetur. ltem immediate
in curia domini regis placitantur placita de dotibus,
ubi mulier nihil habet, & est ratio, quia si contra
mulierem dotem petentem exciperetur quód dotem
habere non posset, eó quód viro, eujus nomine dotem
petit, nunquam fuit legittimo | matrimonio copulata,
nullus alius przter regem posset episcopo demandare
inquisitionem faciendam. ltem immediate pertinet ad
regem querela finis facto in curia domini regis & non


Observate, & est ratio, quia nemo potest finem interpre-


lari, nisi ipse rex, in cuj? curia fines fiunt. Est enim
ejus interpretari cujus est concedere. Item in curia
domini regis immediate? placitantur plura placita, ppter


OF ACTIONS. | 163


made outside the county. And as it has been said
before in part, pleas in the above causes are carried from
the courts-baron to the county, and there determined
sometimes, and sometimes they are thence transferred
and laid before the justices itinerant in à county, and
thence before the justices of the bench, or before ;the
king himself in many causes.


There are also amongst other pleas, which ought to be — a.
determined immediately, and not by transference, before iis p
the justices or before the king, as the plea for & barony, pleadedand
where the claimant to hold it claims immediately of the E
lord the king in chief by à writ of right, which is called ately in the
& '" precipe in capite, and on the ground, that this dh and


touches the king himself, either altogether or in part. the reasons
Likewise pleas about the advowsons of churehes and "rre.
cehapels and about assises of last presentation ought to
be determined immediately in the court of the lord the
king, and the reason is because if another than the king
were to send a mandate to à bishop to admit a clerk,
and he should not obey, another than the king would
nob have coercive power, and because, a bishop is not
bound to admit & clerk at the mandate of any other
person than the king. Likewise pleas of dower, where
the woman has nothing, are pleaded in the court of
the lord the king, and the reason is, because if it
were objected against & woman claiming dower, that
she could not have dower, because she was never joined
in lawful matrimony to the man, in whose name she
elaims dower, no one else than the king could demand
from the bishop an inquiry into the subject. Likewise
& complaint of a fine having been made in the court of
the king, and of its not being observed, pertains imme-
diately to the king, and the reason is, because no person
may interpret a fine, except the king himself, in whose
court fines are made. For it is for him to interpret,
whose office it is to grant. Likewise in the court of the
king are immediately pleaded several pleas, on account
L 2


164 DE ACTIONIBUS.


impotentiam aliorum ex necessitate, cüm non possit
aliquis baro, vie. vel alius de liberis tenementis cog-
noscere, nec tenens tenetur respondere, sine przecepto vel
warranto düi regis, nec etiam possunt aliquem de hujus-
modi, ad saeramtu sine warranto compellere, & hujusmodi
placita sunt infinita. Qualiter autem placita ppter
necessitatem, de curia in euriam transferuntur multi-
plieiter, vel propter indulgentia privilegiatorum sicut
Templariorum, & hujusmodi, infrà dicetur pleniüs, p
translatione p pone.


]


Ubi, et

coram Cap. VIII.

quibus

personis Videndum etiam ubi, & coram quibus personis pro-
proponen-


dm sunt  Dponende sunt actiones & probandze, & sciendum quód


actiones e£ in judicio. Videndum est igitur quid sit judicium.
tezmman-
da.


9. Et sciendum, quód judicium est in qualibet actione
S irinus actus trium personarum: judicis vz., actoris, &
judicium,


etinquibus Tel, secundüm quod largé aecipi possunt hujusmodi
od" persons, s. quód dus sint persone ad minus, inter
judicium quas vertatur contentio, & tertia persona, ad minus,
jwdids. ^ qui judicet, alioquin non erit judicium, cüm iste per-
intribus. S0nc» sint partes principales in judicio, sine quibus
judicium consistere non potest. Judex veró sive jus-
titiarius, uti debet veritate, & veritas judicii in tribus
consistit, s. in indifferenti & zequali personarum suscep-
tione, ut legitur in Deuteronomio, audite illos, & quód
justum fuerit, judicate: sive civis sit iste, sive pere-
grinus, nulla erit distantia personarum, ita parvum
audietis uà, magnum, nec accipietis cujusquam perso-
nam, quia Dei judicium est. ltem in eodem libro
capitul 16. non accipies personam, nec munera, quia


munera excsceant &e. ut infrà de justice. Item consis-


OF ACTIONS. 165


of the want of power in others, from necessity, since &
baron, or à viscount, or another cannot hold cognisance
of free holdings, nor is the freeholder bound to answer
without a precept or warrant from the king, nor can
they without a warrant compel any one on a subject of
freehold to make oath, and pleas of this kind are infinite.
But how pleas are transferred in manifold ways from
court to court from necessity, or from indulgenee in the
case of privileged bodies, as the Templars and such like,
will be stated more fully below, through a transference
by & * Pone."


CHAPTER VIII. l.
Where, and


We must see also where, and before what persons before
actions are to be propounded and proved, and it is to be Meng RN
known that itis in a judgment. "We must see therefore are to be
what is a judgment. pers

And it is to be known, that a judgment is in each
action a threefold act of three persons, namely, the What' is a
judge, the plaintiff, and the defendant, according to J"dEment
what may be loosely said of such persons, namely, that what it
there are two persons atleast between whom the con- eric
tention turns, and a third person at least who is to the EE.
judge, otherwise there will not be à judgment, since these judge con-
persons are the principal parties in à judgment, without ists of
whom a judgment cannot take place. But a judge or things.
justice ought to use truth, and the truth of à judgment
consists of three things, namely, in an impartial and
equal acceptance of the persons, as it is read in Deu-
teronomy, ** hear them, and judge what is just ;" whether
he be a citizen or a stranger, there shall be no distinction
of persons, you shall hear the lowly equally as the great,
neither shall you respect the person of any one, because
it is the judgment of God. Likewise in the same book -
(chapter 16), thou shalt not respect persons, neither take
a, gift, for gifts blind [the eyes of the wise] &c., as below
concerning justices. Likewise it consists in a diligent


d ac :


v ed


f. 106 b.


166 DE ACTIONIBUS.


üt in diligenti examinatione, quia oportet judicem
euneta rimari. Hoc intelligens Job, ait, 29. Causam,
quam ignorabam, diligentissim? investigabam, non enim
dicit diligenter vel diligentiàs, immo diligentissime.
Debet enim judex p examinationem de dubiis facere
certum, &,de credulitate veritatem, de ignorantia no-
titià & notorium, sive notitiam de ignoto. Item con-
sistit veritas judicii, in justa sententie prolatione, &
juste & diligenti executione, ut in Deuteronomio xvi.
Just$ g justum est psequeris, ut vivas & possideas
terram, quam Dominus Deus datur? est tibi. Et se-
eundo libro Paralipomenón, 19. ubi dicitur. Videte
quid faciatis, non enim hominis exercetis judicium sed
Dei, & illud idem g judicaveritis, in vos redundabit,
sit timor Domini vobiscum, & cum diligentia cuncta
facite. Non enim est apud Düm Deum vestrum ini-
quitas, nec psonarum aecepiio, nec cupido munerü, quae
execcant oculos sapientum, & pvertunt verba justorum,
ut legit in Ecclesiastico, ca. 20.


Xenia! & dona exezcant oculos judicum, & qui dona
& munera dixit, omne gen? muneris intellexit. Munus,
s. à manu, quale est res corporalis quse preestatur.
Munus à lingua, quale est blandiens & adulatoria sup-
plieatio, laudum celebre preconium, vane glorie sym-
phonia. ltem munus ab obsequio, quale est servitium
acceptum & impensum, p quo extorquetur judicii rec-
titudo. Item nec munus? munus à sanguine vocari
meretur, eàm p sanguinis linea recti judicii linea re-
eurvatur. In hoc enim tangit sanguis sanguinem. Hsec
pfecto genera munerum sordidorum nomine nuncupan-
tur, & lex humana gravem poena infligit judici cor-
rupto p sordes, s. p munera sordida, ubi si judex vel


1 * Exennia." MS. Rawl. C. 160. | It is omitted in MS. Gal *nec
2 «nec minus." MS.Raw1.C.160. | munus" is an error of the scribe.


OF ACTIONS. » 167


. examination, for à judge ought to search out every thing.
Understanding this, Job says (chapter.29), * The cause
* which I knew not I searched out most diligently ;" for
he does not say 'diligently," or * more diligently," but
* most diligently." For a judge ought by examination
to make certainty out of doubtful things, truth out of
things believable, knowledge out of ignorance, things
well known out of things unknown. Likewise the truth
of a judgment consists in the just pronouncement of a
sentence, and in the just and diligent execution of it, as
in Deuteronomy (chapter 16): * Thou shalt pursue justly
* what is just, that thou mayest live and possess the land
* which the Lord thy God is about to give thee." And
in the second. book of the Chronicles: * Take heed what
* you do, for you do not exercise the judgment of man,
* but of God, and that which you judge, the same shall
* redound to you, let the fear of the Lord be with you,
* and do all things with diligence." For there is no
iniquity with the Lord your God, nor respect of persons,
nor desire of gifts, which blind the eyes of the wise and
and pervert the words of the just, as is read in Eccle-
siasticus, chapter 20.


* Presents and gifts blind the eyes of the wise,"
and he who says ''presents and gifts" meant every


f. 106 b,


3.
That gifts
are foure


kind of gift. Mwnus is from manus (the hand), as in feH-


ihe cease of & corporeal substance, which is offered [to
the judge] | Munus is [likewise] from the tongue,
such as à fawning and flattering supplication, a public
address of laudation, the symphony of vain glory.
Likewise mwnus is from obeisance, such as a service
received and performed, in return for which the recti-
tude of judgment is warped. Likewise no less a gift
deserves to be so called from [ties] of blood, since the
straight line of judgment is warped by the line of blood.
For in this blood touches blood. Forsooth these kinds of
gifts are named by the title of filthy, and human law
inflicts a heavy penalty on a judge who is corrupted by
filth, that is by filthy gifts, where the judge or the justice


168 DE ACTIONIBUS.


justitiari? paciscatur cum litigatore ad certam partem
litis, u&' C. ad legem vel repetet! L. omnis, ubi dici-
tur: omnes cognitores & judices, à re cuivis manus*
abstineant, nec alienum jurgium putent suam  pre-
dam. Etenim privatarum quoq, litium cognitor, idemq,
mercator, statutam legib? cogetur subire jacturam.
Jactura enim sine poena erit, quód idem, q recepit,
restituat in quadruplum. Ut C. s. L5 ultima in fine,
quia ibi tenentur in quadruplum, sive tempore admi-
nistrationis aliquid receperint sive post, quocunq, titulo
vel quocunq, velamito, ut si finxerit intervenisse titu-
lum donationis, vel venditionis. Re vera sordid? est
ile, quem judicii veritas non adornat, ut si favor, vel
odiu, timor, invidia vel praemium inducunt contrarium,
ut judicii veritas corruat in plateis, de quo dici pote-
rit, ve illi sordido, p quem veritas sordescit in palu-
dibus platearü, nec erit inter beatos connumerand?, de
quib? dicitur, beat? qui excutit manus suas ab omni
munere. Ab omni tamen munere non est abstinendum,
quia licét ab omnib? & passim avarissimum sit acci-
pere & vilissimü: à nemine tamen erit inhumanum, ut
si amic? accipiat ab amico solo intuitu amicitie &
amoris. ctor veró, sive sit petens sive querens, uti
debet intentione. JDocere enim debet, & ratione prw-
lendere, q ad ipsum ptineat actio, & q pars esse possit


singular reading is a corruption of
* & pecuniis manus," which is the


! * ad legem vel repetet" MS.
Rawl. C. 160 and M$. Gal. both read


* ad legem Jul. repet," which Selden
ad Fletam, ch. iii., had suggested to
be the correct reading in accord-
ance with the text of the Code of
Justinian.

? £4 re cuivis manus."  'This


reading of MSS. Rawl. C. 160, and
Gal.

3* C.s. L^ C.e. L. is the read-
ing of Rawl. C. 160, Eadem L. of
MS. Gal.


OF ACTIONS. | 169


bargains with the litigator for & certain part of the
thing in litigation, as in the Code upon the law of bri-
bery, the law * Omnes," ! which says, let all arbitrators
and judges keep their hands away from money, nor
let them regard the lawsuits of others as their own
booty. For an arbitrator in private suits and likewise
a merchant shall be compelled to suffer the loss imposed
by thelaw. For the loss shall be without punishment,
that he shall restore fourfold what he has received, as in
the Code in the same place, in the last law at the end,
where they are bound in a fourfold penalty, whether
they have received anything at the time of their admi-
nistration or after, under whatever title, or whatever
veil, as if he shall have feigned, that the title of a gift
or & sale has intervened. In truth he is filthy, whom
the truth of justice does not adorn, as if favour or
hatred, fear, envy, or a reward should induce the con-
trary, that the truth of justice should be prostrate in
the streets, concerning which it may be said, Woe to that
filthy man, by whom truth is defiled in the puddles of
the streets, nor shall he be accounted amongst the blessed,
of whom it is said, Blessed is he who keeps his hand free
from gifts. But persons are not to abstain from every
gift, for although it would be most avaricious and most
vile to accept from every one and from every quarter, to
accept from no one would be inhuman, as if a frierid
should accept from a friend with the sole motive of
friendship and of love. Dut the plaintiff, whether he is
a petitioner or & complainant, ought to state the issue.
For he ought to show and maintain by argument that
he has & right to the action, and that he may be a party
to the judgment, for he ought to set forth before him,


l'The reference is to the Code, | ** neant, neque alienum jurgium
] ix. tit. xxvii. Ad legem Juliam | ** putent suam predam. Etenim pri-
repetundarum, $ 3. *' Omnes cog- | * vatarum quoque litium cognitor,
* mnitores et judices a pecuniis | ** idemque mercator, statutam legi-
* atque patrimoniis manus absti- | * bus cogetur subire jacturam.?


4.
De potes-


tate judicis.


f. 107.


5.
De divisi-
one juris-
dictionum
Sacerdotii
et regni.


»
De regi-
mine juris-
dictionis,
qu& per-
tinet ad
regnum.


2 .
De sacra-


mento,quod


rex facere


170 DE ACTIONIBUS.


in judicio, ponere enim debet corà eo, qui jus dicturus
est, intentione suam, & illam fundare & pbare. Reus
vero uti debet exceptione & defensione, secundüm quod
inferiüs dicet pleniüs.


Oportet etiam, quód ille qui judicat, ad hoc quód
rata sint judicia, habeat jurisdictionem ordinariam vel
delegatam, & non sufficit quód jurisdictionem habeat,
nisi habeat coertionem, quód si judicium suum execu-
tioni demandare non posset, sie essent, judicia delusoria.
Non enim habet ordinarius jurisdictionem & executione
in omni causa, càüm jura sint separata & limitata.


Sunt enim cause spirituales, in quibus judex secu-
laris non habet cognitionem nec executionem, cüm non
habeat eoertionem. In hiis enim causis pertinet cog-
nitio ad judices ecclesiasticos, qui regunt & defendunt
sacerdotium. Sunt autem cause seculares quarum cog-
nitàio pertinet ad reges & principes, qui defendunt
regnum, et de quibus judices ecclesiastici se intromit-
tere non debent, càm eorum jura sive jurisdictiones
limitatte sunt et separate, nisi ita sit quód gladius
juvsre debeat gladium, est enim magna differentia
inter sacerdotium et regnum.


CAP. IX.


Cum autem de regimine sacerdotii nihil pertineat
ad tractatum istum, ideó videndum erit de iis, qus
pertinent ad regnum, quis primó et principaliter possit
et debeat judicare. Et sciendum quód ipse rex et non
alius, si solus ad hoc sufficere possit, càm ad hoc p
virtutem sacrafüti teneatur astrictus. |


Debet enim in coronatione sua, in nomine Jesu
Christi prestito saeraüito, hzc tria pmittere populo
sibi subdito. Inprimis se esse prscepturum & p viri-


OF ACTIONS. 171


who is to give judgment, the issue, and to found it and
io prove it. The defendant on the other hand ought to
state his demurrer and his defence, according. as will be
stated more fully below.


It is requisite also that he, who judges, in order ^ 4
that his judgments should be ratified, should have juris- od
diction, ordinary or delegated, and it is not sufficient the judge.
that he have jurisdiction, unless he has coercive power, f. 107.
for if he cannot carry his judgment into execution, his
judgment would be illusory. For à judge ordinary has
not jurisdiction and the power to enforce it in every


case, since rights are separated and limited.


There are for instance spiritual causes, in which the 5.

. : : . Of the
secular judge has no cognisance nor execution, since he divisions in
has not coereive power. For in these causes the cog- the juris-
nisance pertains to ecclesiastical judges, who rule and Toss
defend the priesthood. But secular causes, of which the pn and
cognisance belongs to kings and princes, who defend the Kinrnodt:
kingdom, and with which ecclesiastical judges may not
intermeddle, since their rights are separated and limited,
unless it be that the sword ought to help the sword,
for there is à great difference between the priesthood


and the kingdom.


CHAPTER IX.


But since nothing which pertains to the regulation of 1|.
the priesthood belongs to this treatise, therefore we must the


See concerning the things which pertain to the kingdom, b uie


who in the first place and prineipally may and ought to jurisdie-
judge. And it is to be known that the king himself tion, which


ertaims to
and no one else, if he alone can suffice to do it, since he ihe king-


is bound by virtue of his oath to do it. dom.


For the king ought at his coronation, having taken an — 2.


oath in the name 'of Jesus Christ, to promise three things Wired


io the people, who are placed under him. In the first oath, which


172 DE ACTIONIBUS.


debetin bus opem impensurum, ut ecclesi:te Dei & omni populo
tone Ohristiano vera pax omni suo tempore observetur.


tione.
Secundó, ut rapacitates & omnes iniquitates omnibus
gradibus interdicat. 'Tertió, ut in omnibus judiciis
squitatem precipiat & misericordiam, ut indulgeat ei
suam misericordiam clemens & misericors Deus, & ut
per justitiam suam firma gaudeant pace universi.

8. Ad hoc autem creatus est & electus, ut justitiam
Ad quod


rex creatus Làclab universis, & ut in eo Dominus sedeat, & per
sit inordi- ipsum su& judicia discernat, & quod justé judicaverit
dietiohe, ^ sustineat & defendat, quia si non esset, qui justitià
faceret, pax de facili posset exterminari, & supervacuum
esset leges condere, & justitia facere, nisi esset qui
leges tueretur.  Separare autem debet rex (cüm sit
Dei vicarius in terra) jus ab injuria, equum ab ini-
quo, u&. omnes sibi subjecti honesté vivant, et quód
nullus alium ledat, & quód unicuig, q suum fuerit,
recta contributione reddatur. Potentia veró omnes sibi
subditos debet precellere. Parem autem habere non
debet, nec multo fortiüs superiorem, maxime in justitia
exhibenda, ut dicatur veré de eo, magnus dominus
noster , & magna virtus ejus &e. Licet in justitia re-
ciplenda minimo de regno suo comparetur, & licet
omnes potentia pr:cellat, tamen (cüm cor regis in
manu Dei esse debeat) ne sit ineffrenata, frenum ap-
ponat temperantice, & lora moderantise, ne cüm inef-
frenata sit, trahatur ad injuria. Nihil enim aliud
potest rex in terris, càm sit/Dei minister & vicarius,
nisi id solu q de jure, potest, nee obstat q dicitur, q
principi placet, legis habet vigore, quia sequitur in fine
legis, cum lege regia, quee de imperio ej? lata est, i.


OF ACTIONS. 173


Ld ;
place that he will enjoin and as far as in his power lies the king
take care, that a true peace shall be maintained for the 2"£ht to
church of God and all Christian people at all time. his corona-
Secondly, that he will interdict all rapacities and other xx
iniquities in all grades.  Thirdly, that in all judgments
he will enjoin equity and mercy, so that a clement and
merciful God may indulge him with his mercy, so that
all persons may enjoy a firm peace through his justice.


But for this purpose he has been created and elected, ; PM
that he should do justice to all persons, that in him the purpose
Lord should sit, and that he should of himself decide his the king
own judgments, and maintain and defend what he haa eredi
justly judged, for if there was no one to do justice, peace Vith Bang
would be easily exterminated, and it would be super- aiction.
fluous to make laws and to distribute justice, unless
there was some one to maintain law. But the king (since
he is the vicar of God on earth) ought to separate justice
from injustice, right from wrong, so that all his subjects
may live honestly, and that no one may hurt another,
and that to each there may be rendered by a just contri-
bution what is his own. But he ought to surpass all his
subjects in power. But he ought not to have a peer,
much less à superior, chiefly in showing justice, so that
it may be truly said of him, Our high lord, and his high
excellence, &c. Although in receiving justice he may be
compared to the least person within his kingdom, and
although he surpasses all in power, nevertheless (since
the heart of the king should be in the hand of God), lest
his power should be unbridled, let him apply the bridle
of temperance and the reins of moderation, lest if his
power should be unbridled, he may be led onwards to
injustice. For a king can do nothing on the earth, since
he is the minister and vicar of God, except that which
he may do of right, nor is that an objection which is
said, that the pleasure of the prince has the force of law,
for it follows at the end of the law with the Lex Regia,
which is passed to grant him empire, to wit, not whatever


f. 107 b.


174 DE ACTIONIBUS.


non quiequid de volutate regis temere presumptu esi,
sed animo condendi jura, sed quod consilio magistra-
tuum suorum, rege authoritatem prestante, & habita
sup hoc deliberatione & tractatu, recte fuerit, definitum.
Potestas itaq, sua juris est, & non injurie, & cüm ipse
sib author juris, non debet inde injuriarum nasci oc-
casio, unde jura nascuntur, et etiam qui ex officio suo
alios prohibere necesse habet, id ipsum in propria per-
sona committere non debet. Exercere igitur debet rex
potestatem juris, sicut Dei vicarius & minister in terra,
quia illa potestas solius Dei est, potestas autem injurize
diaboli et non Dei, & cujus horum opera fecerit rex,
ejus minister erit, cujus opera fecerit. Igitur dum


facit justitiam, vicarius est Regis ZEterni, minister au-


tem diaboli, dum declinet ad injuriam. Dicitur enim
rex à bené regendo, & non à regnando, quia rex est
dum bené regit, tyrannus dum populum sibi creditum
violenta opprimit dominatione. "Temperet igitur poten-
liam suam per legem, quz frenum est potentie, quód
secundüm leges vivat, quód hoc sanxit lex humana,
quód leges suum ligent latorem, & alibi in eadem,
digna vox majestate regnantis est legibus, s. alligatum
se principem proficiscere, i. profiteri. Item nihil tam
proprium est imperii, quàm legibus vivere, & majus
imperio est legibus submittere principatum, & meritó
debet retribuere legi, quia lex tribuit ei, facit enim
lex quód ipse sitrex. Item càüm non semper oporteat
regem esse armatum armis sed legibus, addiscat rex
sapientiam, et conservet justitiam, et Deus preebebit
illam sibi, et ecàüm illam invenerit, beatus erit si tenue-
rit eam, cüm sit honor & gloria in sermone sensati, &


OF ACTIONS. 175


* is-presumed rashly of the king's own will, but with the
intention to make law, and that which has been rightly
defined with the counsel of his magistrates, the king him-
self authorising it, and deliberation and discussion having
been had upon it. His power therefore is the power of
justice, not of injustice ; and since he himself is the author
of justice, an occasion of injustice ought not to arise from
the source whence justice originates; and likewise he,
who from his office is obliged to prohibit others, ought
not to commit anything in his own person. The king
ought therefore to exercise à power of justice, as being
the vicar and minister of God on earth, for that power
belongs to God alone, but the power of injustice is the
power of the devil, not of Cod, and the king will be the
minister of that one of these, whose works he does.
Therefore whilst he does justice, he is the viear of the


Eternal King; but he is the minister of the devil, when.


he turns aside to injustice. For he is called king (rex)
from ruling (regendo) well, and not from reigning (reg-
nando), for he is king whilst he rules well, and a tyrant
(tyrannus) when he oppresses with violent dominion the
people entrusted to him. Let him therefore temper his
power by law, which is the bridle of power, that he live
according to laws, because a human law has sanctioned
that laws bind the lawgiver himself, and elsewhere in
the same ib 1s à saying worthy the majesty of one who
reigns, that the prince should avow himself to be bound
by the laws. Likewise nothing is so appropriate to
empire as to live aecording to laws, and to submit the
princedom to law is greater than empire, and it is a
deserved tribute in return to, law, as the law pays tri-
bute to him, for law makes that he is king. Likewise,
since it is requisite for a king to be armed, not always
with weapons but with laws, let the king learn wisdom
and maintain justice, and God will supply him with it,
and when he has found it, he will be blessed if he has
kept it, since there is honour and glory in the conversation


f. 107 b.


De juris-
dictione
delegata,
que ad
justitiarios
pertinet.


176 DE ACTIONIBUS.


lingua imprudentis subversio ipsius, & principatus sen-
sati stabilis, & rex sapiens judicabit populum suum.
Si autem fuerit insipiens, perdet ilm, quia à capite
corrupto descendit corruptio membrorum, et si sensus
& vires non vigeant in capite, sequitur quód csetera
membra suum non poterunt offieium exercere. Non
solüm autem sapiens esse debet sed misericors, & cum
sapientia misericorditer justus, & licét tutius sit red-
dere rationem pro misericordia, quàm pro judicio:
tutissimum tamen est, ut ita palpebre ejus precedant
gressus suos, quód judicium non vacillet per impru-
dentiam, nec misericordia decipiat per incireumspectio-
nem. Misericordia siquidem injusta est cum incorri-
gibili, & non est in eos liberalitatis auguste referenda
humanitas, qui impunitatem veteris admissi consuetu-
dinibus! potiüs quàm emendationi deputarunt. Et cüm
indulgeat judex indigno, nonne ad prolapsionis con-
tagium provocat universos? Sie ergo misereatur in-
digno, ut semper homini condoleat. ltem pauperis non
misereatur quis in judicio, misericordia, s. remissionis,
eui tantüm misericordia compassione? est, sicut &
omnibus miserendum. Et quib? & qualiter sit miseren-
dum, eum doceat? merita vel demerita personarum.


Car. X.


Dietum est in proximo de ordinaria jurisdictione,
quie pertinet ad regem, consequenter dicendum est de
jurisdictione delegata, ubi quis ex se ipso nullam ha-
bet authoritatem, sed ab alio sibi commissam, cüm
ipse, qui delegat, non sufficiat per se ommes causas sive
jurisdietiones terminare. Et si ipse dominus rex ad
singulas causas terminandas non sufficiat, ut levior sit


1 * consuetudini," MS. Rawl. C. ? ** compassionis," id.
160. 3 * doceant," id.


OF ACTIONS. 174


of the sensible man, and in the tongue of the foolish
there is his own overthrow, and the princedom of the
sensible man is stable, and a wise king will judge his
people. But if he be unwise he will destroy it, because
from a corrupt head proceeds the corruption of the mem-
bers, and if there be not sense and strength in the head,
it follows that the rest of the members cannot perform
their functions. For he ought to be not only wise but
merciful, and with wisdom mereifully just, and although
it be safer to state reasons for mercy than for judgment,
nevertheless it is most safe that his eyelids should pre-
cede his steps in such manner, that his judgment should
not vacilate from want of practical knowledge, nor his
mercy blunder from want of circumspection. Since
mercy without justice is on the side of the incorrigible,
and the humanity of an august liberality is not to be
exhibited towards those who attribute the impunity of
an old offence to custom, and not to improvement. And
when the judge is indulgent to an unworthy person, does
he not encourage all to the contagion of giving way ?
Let him show so far mercy to the unworthy, as always
io sympathise with his fellowman. Likewise let him
not have mercy for the poor in his judgment, that is the
mercy of forgiveness ; for to them only the mercy of com-
passion is due, as it is due to all mankind. And to whom
and in what degree mercy is to be shown let him be
taught by the merits or demerits of the individuals.


CHAPTER X. f. 108.


It has been treated above of ordinary jurisdiction, Of dele.
which pertains to the king, ib follows that we should S&ediuri*-
speak of delegated jurisdiction, where a person has no Maus be-
authority of himself, but authority committed to him e
by another, when he who delegates is not able to deter-
mine of himself all the causes or the jurisdictions. And
if the lord the king himself is not sufficient to determine


VOL. Il. M


* zh luogo apad aos ccc nC rS cibles tola v


178 DE ACTIONIBUS.


ilh labor, in plures personas partito onere, eligere de-
bet de regno suo viros sapientes, & timentes Deum, in
quibus sit veritas eloquiorum, & qui oderunt avaritiam,
(quae inducit cupiditatem,) & ex illis constituere jus-
titiarios, vic. & alios ballivos & ministros suos, quibus
referantur tam quszestiones super dubiis, quàm queri-
monie sup injuriis, & qui nec ad dextram nec ad
sinistram vie propter prosperitatem terrenam, vel ad-
versitatis metum, à tramite justitiee non declinent, sed
judieent populum Dei in zquitate, ut dici possit de
eis cum psalmista, quód de vultu eorum judicium pro-
diit zquitatis; et considerent efficaciter, quid oportu-
erii secundüm necessitatem, quid expedierit secundüm
utilitatem, quid liceat secundüm promissionem, quid
deceat secundàüm honestatem. Et tale judicium diligit
honor regis, cujus personam in judicio & judicando
reprzsentant. Nulli autem juris beneficium denegent,
à nullo premium petant, ut predictum est, vel recipi-
ant, ut quis jus suum liberé persequatur, ut causa
viduze ad eos liberé ingrediatur, ut sint orphano &
pupillo adjutores, ut nulli ealumniam fieri patiantur,
ui constitutiones & eorum edicta, juri & consuetudini-
bus approbatis, & communi utilitati sint convenientia.
Coram eis nulla deprimat adversariorum potentia, sed
agat quilibet, quod causa sua desiderat, & se temperet
ab injuria, nec à limitibus judiciorum justorum avertab
eos odium, favor, vel gratia, ut dici possit de eis, justus
es, domine, & rectum judicium tuum, &c. Item sapi-
entes oportet eos esse qui judicant, ut honestatem judi-
candi ab alis non mendicent. Si quis autem minuüs
Sapiens & indoctus sedem judicandi conscendere, &
honestatem judicandi sibi preesumpserit, ex alto corruit,


TWE, NE o Net S ALS


OF ACTIONS. 179


alleauses, that the labour may be lighter for him, the
burden being shared amongst several persons, he ought
to choose from his kingdom men wise and fearing God,
in whom is the truth of exposition, and who hate avarice,
(which brings on covetousness,) and of them to constitute
justices, viseounts, and other bailiffs and ministers, to
whom may be referred as well questions as to doubtful
rights, as complaints about injuries, and who will not
lurn aside from the path of justice either to the right
hand or to the left hand on account of earthly prosperity
or the fear of adversity, but. will judge the people of .
God with equity, so that ib may be said of them with
the psalmist, that from their countenance the judgment
of equity came forth, and will consider effectually, what
is requisite according to necessity, what is expedient
aecording to utility, what is lawful according to promise,
what is becoming according to honesty. And the honour
of the king loves such judgment, whose person they
represent in their judgment and in judging. But let
them deny to none the benefit of justice, let. them ask
from none and receive from none a reward, as already
said, that each person may freely attain his right, that
the cause of the widow may freely find access to them,
that they be helpers to the orphan and to the ward, that
they allow no one to suffer by quirks of the law, that
their ordinances and edicts be in accordance with justice
and approved customs, and general utility. In their
presence let not the power of adversaries depress, but let
each plead what his cause requires and restrain himself
from injustice, nor let hatred, favour or grace turn. them
aside from the limits of just judgments, so. that ib may
be said of them, thou art just, O lord, and thy judgment
is right. Likewise they ought to be wise, who judge,
that they may not have to beg from others correctness
of judgment. But if any one ascends the judgment seat
insuffciently wise and unlearned, and presume for him-
self correctness of judgment, he falls down from on high,
M 2


180 DE ACTIONIBUS.


Azo,ad quia volare satagit, antequam pennas assumat, & qui
rion. tali potestatem judieandi dederit, perinde erit ac si
gladium poneret in manum furientis. Item non solim
oportet judicantem sapientem esse, immo potentem,
juxta illud Salomonis: Noli qusrere fieri judex, nisi
virtute valeas eruinpere iniquitates, ne fort extimescas


faciem potentis, & ponas scandalum in agilitate tua.


2, Item justitiariorum, quidam sunt capitales, generales,
sei perpetui & majores à latere regis residentes, qui om-
titiariorum. nium aliorum corrigere tenentur injurias & errores. :

Sunt etiam alii perpetui, certo loco residentes, sicut in

banco, loquelas omnes de quibus habent warrantum
Lerminantes, qui omnes jurisdictionem habere incipiunt
prestito sacramento. ltem sunt alii itinerantes de
loco in locum, sicut de comitatu in comitatum, quan-
doque ad omnia placita, quandoque ad qusdam speci-
alia, sicut ad assisas tantüm & gaolas, & qui authori-
tatem habere incipiant sine sacramento, cüm breve
domini regis receperint de warranto. Sunt etiam jus-
titiarii constituti ad quasdam assises, duas vel tres vel
plures, qui quidem ppetui non sunt, quia expleto officio
jurisdictionem amittunt.


f1085. — Est autem eorum potestas, quód ex quo eis com-

De Pie missa est causa, una vel plures, licet simpliciter, exten-

tetejusti- ditur eorum jurisdictio ad omnia, sine quibus causa

UA terminari non potest, quantum ad judicium et execu-
Vionem judicii. Et eodem modo, si eausa fuerit inci-
dens vel emergens et prejudicialis, ad alias veró res &
alias psonas, non possunt jurisdictionem suam exten-
dere, nec de aliis cognoscere, quàm de hiis quee in
commissione cotinentur, càmn fines mandati diligenter
sint attendendi.


. OF ACTIONS. 181


because he endeavours to fly before he has got wings,
and he, who gives to such a person the power of judging,
as lb were puts a sword into the hands of a madman.
Likewise à judge ought not only to be wise, but power-
ful, according to the saying of Solomon. void seeking
io bea judge, unless thou art strong in virtue to break
through iniquities, lest by chance thou shouldst fear the
face of the powerful man, and cause scandal in thine


agility.


Likewise of justices some are chief, general, perpetual Once
and supreme, resident by the side of the king, who are àiterence
bound to correct the injuries and the errors of all the of justices.
others. "There are others perpetual, resident at a cer-
tain place, as at the bench, determining all arguments
respecting which they have a warrant, all of whom com-
mence exercising their jurisdiction by taking an oath.
Likewise there are others itinerant from place to place,
as from county to county, sometimes [to determine] all
pleas, sometimes only special pleas, as for assises and
gaols, and who begin to exercise authority without an
oath, when they have received the king's writ of war-
ranty. There are also justices appointed for certain
assises, two or three or more, who are not perpetual,
because, when their duty has been fulfilled, they lose
their jurisdiction.


But their power is, that from the time when à cause, f. 108 b.

one or more, has been committed to them, although Ot is
singly, their jurisdiction is extended to all things, with- power of
out which the cause cannot be determined, as far as Justices.
regards the judgment and the execution of the judgment.
And in the same way, if a cause be incident or emergent
or preliminary, but it has reference to other things or
persons, they cannot extend their jurisdiction, nor take
cognisance of other things than of those which are con-
tained in their commission, since the limits of their
mandate are to be diligently attended to.


4.
Qualiter,
et quando
finiatur
eorum
potestas et
jurisdictio.


1.
Qualiter
constitu-
endi sunt
justitiarii
ad itinc-


buihes tc OU I WEE C LM x ccc ME Rud due 7 CES


182 DE ACTIONIBUS,


Et quamvis quidam eorum perpetui sunt, ut videtur,
finitur tamen eorum jurisdiectio multis modis, s. mortuo
eo qui delegavit, vel mortuo eo sub eujus pprio nomine
causa delegatur. ltem cüm delegans revocaverit juris-
dictionem, vel alium dederit justitiarium, re integra ex
toto vel ex parte. Item si ipse delegatus remittat
causam ad ipsum delegantem, vel ad alium delegatum,
ex eausa, propter certum diem & certü locum. Item
finitur, lata sententia & executione demandata, quia
judex per judicium redditum functus est officio suo, &
juratores liberati sunt à sacramento, nisi sit qui dicat,
q reddito judieio, nihilominüs possit justiüarius jura-
lores revocare ad certificandum, vel inquirere de falso
sacramento, secundüm q justitiari? fuerit capitalis, vel
itinerans generaliter ad omnes causas. Re vera, cüm
judicium debito modo redditum sit, non potest justiti-
arius, qui judicium reddidit, illud posteà corripere vel
mutare, eodem tamen die quo redditum est, supplere
poterit in iis, qus pertinent ad consequentias. Sed
hoe ultimum locum habet in personis eorum, qui con-
stituti sunt justitiarii ad aliquas assisas specialiter
capiendas, ut unam, duas vel plures. Et notandum in
fine, quód nullus justitiarius à domino rege sic dele-
gatus, poterit aliquem sibi subdelegare.


Car. XI.

Ut auté de capitalib? justitiariis in b&co residétib?
ad pses taceam?, videdü qualit costituedi sunt justiti-
arii ad itinerádu de eofir in ceofb, ones causas generalit
vel ad certas, et posteà, quali ad speciales, una, duas


randum de vel plures. Si auté costitui debeat ad ones causas gene-


comitatu


Bii


OF ACTIONS. 188


Ánd although some of them are perpetual as it 4.

appears, their jurisdiction is terminated in many ways, ^ Wis
for instance by the death of him who ;delegated it, or when their
by the death of him under whose own name the cause Pover and
has been delegated. Likewise when the principal has tion is ter-
revoked the jurisdiction, or has appointed another jus- "insted.
tice, the thing being fresh either in whole or in part.
Likewise if the delegate himself has resigned the cause
io the principal himself, or to another delegate for a
special cause on account of a certain day and a certain
place. Likewise it is terminated, when the sentence
has been passed and the execution ordered, for the
judge has completed his duty by passing sentence, and
the jurats are liberated from their oath, unless there be
some one who says, that after sentence has been passed,
the justice may call back the jurats to certify, or to make
inquisition as to perjury, aceqrding as the justice is a
chief justice, or itinerant generally to hear all causes. In
reality, when sentence has been passed in due manner,
the justiee who has passed the sentence, cannot after-
wards correet it nor change it, but upon the same day,
on which he has passed sentence, he may supplement it
in those matters, which appertain to the consequences.
But this last has a place only in the persons of those,
who have been appointed justiees to hold certain special
assises, as one, two, or more. And it is to be noted
finally, that no justice delegated thus by the king, can
sub-delegate another in his own place.


CHAPTER XI.


But to be silent for the present concerning the chief 1.
justiees resident in the Bench, let us see how justices ticod B Msg
are to be appointed to travel from circuit to circuit to to be ap-
hear all causes generally, or to hear certain causes and eiie id
afterwards for special causes, one, two, or several. But county to


if they are to be appointed for all causes generally, then gon


f. 109.
in comita-
tum gene-
raliter ad
omnia
placita, vel
specialia.


2.
De sacra-
mento,
quod jus-
titiarii
facient,
cum justi-
tiariam re-
ceperint.


93.
Breve uni
eorum
directum. .


4.
Drevo
omnibus
justitiariis


simul, quod


crit eorum
warrantus,
ct publico


184 DE ACTIONIBUS.


ralit, tüe pstito sacrafito, qualiter se gerere debeant in


itinere suo, fiat cuilibet eorü breve specialiter p se, &
posteà omnib? in comuni. Forma aute brevis specialis
talis erit.


Et sacramentum tale erit. Jurabit quilibet post.


aliu, quod rectam justitia facient p posse suo in comi-
tatu, in quib? itineraturi sunt, tam pauperib? quàm
divitibus, & q assisam servabunt secundüm capitula
subscripta, & inferiüs exprimenda, & q faciet omnes
rectitudines & justitias, spectantes ad corona domini


regis. Et post sacramentu suü dieatur eis expresso, q


p posse suo intendat ad faciendü coinodu regis.


Rex dilecto & fideli suo A. salute. Sciatis q consti-
tuimus vos justitiariü nostrü unà cum dilectis & fide-
libus nostris A. B. C. ad itinerandu p comitatum talem,
vel cof tales A. de omnib? assisis & placitis tà coron
nostre q aliis, secundàüm q in brevi nostro, de generali
summonitione inde vobis directo, pleniüs cotinetur. Et
ideó vobis mandamus, rogautes q in fide qua nobis
tenemini, unà cum predictis sociis vestris, ad hoc
expedienda fideliter & diligenter intendatis, ut tam
fidem vestram q diligentia ad hoe appositam debeamus
meritó commendare. Teste &c. & hwc eadem forma
fiab singulis eorum per se.


Rex dilectis & fidelibus suis A. B. C. D. salutem.
Selatis quód constituim? vos justitiarios nostros ad
itinerandum in comitatu tali, de omnib? placitis &
assisis tam corons nostre q aliis, quee emerserint, post-
quàm justitiarii nostri ultimó itineraverunt in coi illo,
& etia de illis, quee summonita fuerunt & atterminata


b,


OF ACTIONS. 185


having taken an oath, as to the manner in which they , f.109.
ought to conduct themselves on their circuit, let there mike or
be made out for each of them a& writ specially by itself, 2E special
and afterwards a writ in common for them all.


And the oath shall be of this kind. Each after the 2.
other shall swear, that he will do righteous justice as far M erdim
as is in his power in the county, in which they are about oath which
io make circuit, as well to the poor as to the rich, and Es
that they will keep the assise according to the articles cun
underwritten and to be hereafter expressed, and that he UP dien:
will execute all righteousness and justice, which pertain *elves E
to the crown of the lord the king. And after this oath Justicia
let it be explained to them expressly, that. they should
endeavour as far as is in their power to promote the
king's advantage.

The king to his beloved and faithful A. health. Know , 3
ye that we have appointed you our justice, together zoe:
with our beloved and faithful A. B. C. to make circuit one of
through such a county or through such counties A. con- ue
cerning all assises and pleas as well of our crown as
others, according to what is contained more fully in our
writ of generalsummons thence directed to you. And
thereupon we command you, requiring you by the faith
by which you are bound to us, together with your asso-
ciates to apply yourself diligently and faithfully to ex-
pedite these things, so that we ought deservedly to com-
mend your faith and diligence applied to this. Witness,

&c.: and let this same form be addressed to each by


himself.


The king to his beloved and faithful A. B. C. D., health. — 4.


; JT. A. writ for
Know ye, that we have appointed you our Justices to^ the jus-


make circuit in such a eounty concerning all pleas and ticiaries
assises of our erown and others, wh ich have eome to Ea
light since our justices made their last circuit in that be their


county, and likewise concerning those, which were sum- Jn4 sail


legetur in
comitatu
patens.


Breve de
eodem
omnibus
justitiariis
simul pa-
tens.


6.
Brevo
clausum
vicecomiti
quod veni-
ens faciat
coram jus-
titiariis


186 DE ACTIONIBUS.


fuerunt, & non finita coram justitiarüis nostris de banco
apud Westm, vel cora justitiarüis nfis itinerantibus qui
ultimó itineraverut in eode cof, de omnibus placitis,
vel tantu de assisis nov: disseysine, mortis antecesso-
ris capiedis, vel gaolis deliberandis, ita q omnes assise
ille & omnia placita illa, sint cora vobis in eode statu
quo remanserunt p prseeptu nostru, vel p prefatos
jusüitiarios nostros itinerantes, vel p prefatos justitia-
rios nostros de baneo. Mandavimus enim vicecofi nio
À. q ad diem & locu, quem ei scire facietis, faciat
coram vobis summonitiones fieri, & attachiamenta ve-
nire, cum brevibus assisarum & placitorum preedictoru.
Et ideó vobis mandamus, rogantes q in fide, qua nobis
lenemini, ad h»c exequenda fideliter, &e. ut suprà.


Rex A. B. C. salutem. Sciatis quód constituimus
vos justitiarios nostros &e. ut suprà. Et ideó vobis
mandamus, rogantes quód tali die conveniatis apud
talem locum, facturi inde quod ad justitiam ptinet &
in fide qua nobis tenemini ad negotia nostra ibidem
expedienda ita fideliter &e. ut suprà.  Mandavimus
enim vic. nostro tali q ad praedictum diem & locum
faciat cora vobis summonitiones fieri, & attachiamenta
venire cum brevibus assisarum predictarum & placito-
rum predictorum. In cujus rei testimoniu mittim?
vobis has litteras nostras patentes. "Teste &c.  Posteà
fiant brevia vic. clausa, quód venire faciat coram jus-
titiars omnia placita, & de generali summonitione,
omnib? facienda tam majorib? q minorib?,


Rex vie. vel vieecomitib? talib? salute. recipimus
vobis, q ad certos dies & loca, qus vobis scire faciant
dilecti & fideles nostri tales, vel aliter tales & socii
sui, quos justitiarios nostros assignavimus ad itineran-
dum per cofi vestros ad omnia placita, venire faciatis
eoram eis omnia placita corone nostre, qus placitata


OF ACTIONS. 187


moned and attermed, and not finished before our justices be read
of the Bench at Westminster, or before our justices iti- dard the
nerant, who made the last circuit in the same county, county.
concerning all pleas, or only to take assises of novel
disseysine or of the death'of an ancestor, or to deliver
gaols, so that all those assises and all those pleas shall be
before you in the same state in which they remained
through our precept, or through our aforesaid justices
itinerant, or through our aforessid justices of the
Bench. We have also commanded our viscount A. that

on the day and at the place, which you shall make
known to him, he cause summonses to be made before

you, and attachments to come, with writs of assises and

the pleas aforesaàid. And thereupon we command you,
requiring you that by the faith by which you are bound

to us you attend to the faithful performance of tho afore-

said, &c. ;


The king to À. B. C. health. Know ye, that we have — 5,

appointed you our justices, &c. as above. And thereupon 4n Dn.
.)we command you, requiring you that on such a day you the justices
shall meet, at such & place, to do there what pertains to together
justice, and in the faith by which you are bound to us to same sub-
expedite our business there as faithfully as &c., as above. J***
For we have commanded our viseount such a one, that
on the aforesaid day and at the aforesaid place he cause
summonses before you to be made, and attachments to
come with writs of the assises aforesaid and of the pleas
aforesaid. In testimony whereof we send you these our
letters patent. Witness, &c.


6.
The king to such a viseount or to such viscounts, A e
greeting. We enjoin you, that on certain days and at hinidis :


certain places, which our beloved and faithful so and so hh he "
or otherwise so and so and their companions will make pleas to
known to you, whom we have assigned as our justices z9me be-
NM : ore the
to go circuit through your counties to hear all pleas, you justices.


shall cause to come before them all the pleasof ourerown, 109


omnia
placita.
f. 109 b.


Breve de
generali
summoni-
tione clau-
sum.


188 DE ACTIONIBUS.


non sunt, & d emerserunt postquam justitiariüi nostri
ultimó itineraverunt in partibus illis, ad omnia placita
& similiter omnia attachiamenta ad placita illa ptinen-
tia, & omnes assisas & omnia placita qus posita sunt .
ad primam assisam coram justitiariis, cum brevibus
assisarum & placitorum, sicut pleniüs continetur in
literis nostris clausis, quas singulis vestrum aliàs inde
misimus. Teste &c. scilicet. de generali summonitione,
quie tales sunt.


Rex vicecomiti salutem. Summoneas per bonos sum-
monitores, omnes  archiepiscopos, episcopos, abbates,
priores, comites, barones, milites & libere tentes de tota
balliva tua, & de qualibet villa quatuor legales homi-
nes & preposii, & de quolibet burgo duodecem legales
burgenses per totam ballivam tuam, & omnes illos qui
coram justitiariis itinerantibus venire solent & debent,
quód sint apud talem locum, tali die, anno regni nostri
tali, coram dilectis & fidelibus nostris A. B. C. D. quos
justitiarios nostros constituimus, audituri & facturi
preceptum nostrum.  Facias etiam venire tunc coram
eisdem justitiariis nostris, omnia placita coronz nostre
quie placitata non 'sunt, & quse emerserunt postquam
justitiarii nostri ultimó itineraverunt in partibus illis
ad omnia placita & omnia attachiamenta ad placita
illa pertinentia, & omnes assisas & omnia placita que
posita füerunt ad primam assisam coram justitiariis
cum brevibus assisarum, ita quód assise ille & placita
pro defectu tui vel summonitionis turee non remaneant.
Facias etiam elamari & sciri per totam ballivam tuam,
quód omnes assise, & omnia placita qu» fuerunt at-
tachiata &  a&tterminata & non finita cora justitiariis
nostris de bàeo, vel coram justitiariis nostris qui ultimó
itineraverunt in comitatu tuo de omnibus placitis, vel
coram justitiariis nostris illuc missis ad assisas novz
disseysinee capiendas, & gaolas deliberandas, tunc sint
coram przefatis justitiariis nostris apud talem locum, in


OF ACTIONS; 189


which have not yet been pleaded and which have come
to light, since our justices made their last circuit in
those parts to hear all pleas, and in a similar manner all
attachments pertaining to those pleas, and all assises and
all pleas which have been entered at the first assise before
the justices, with the writs of the assises and of the pleas,
as is more fully contained in our close writs, which we
have sent to each of you otherwise. Witness &c.: namely
[writs] of general summons, which are in such form.


The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good


A d


summoners all archbishops, bishops, abbots, priors, writ of
counts, barons, knights, and freeholders of your entire sip


bailiwick, and of each vill four lawful men and provosts,
and of each borough twelve legal burghers through your
entire bailiwick, and all those who are a ccuELoI Od and
ought to come before our justices itinerant, that they be
ab such a place on such a day in such a year of our reign,
before our beloved and faithful A., B., C., D., whom we
appoint our justices, in order to hear and execute our
precept. Cause also to come then before the same our
justices all the pleas of our erown which have not been
pleaded, and which have cropped up after our justices
last travelled in those parts, for all pleas and all attach-
ments pertaining to those pleas, and all assises and all
pleas which were brought at the first assise before our
justices with the writs of assise, so that those assises
and pleas may not remain through the failure of yourself
or of your summons. Cause also to be proclaimed and
known throughout your entire bailiwick that all assises
and all pleas, which were attached and attermed and
nob finished before our justices of the Bench or before
our justices, who last travelled in your county to hear
all pleas, or before our justices there sent to hold assises
of novel disseisin, and to deliver the goals, should then
be brought before our aforesaid justices at such a place


8.
Breve,
cum ipsi
justitiarii
fecerint
summoni-
tionem
nomine
proprio et
per breve
suum.


f. 110.


190 DE ACTIONIBUS.


eodem statu in quo remanserunt, p preceptum nostrum
vel per preceptum justitiariorum nostrorum prwdietoru
iüinerantium, vel per justitiarios nostros de banco.
Summoneas etia per bonos summonitores, omnes illos
qui vicecomites fuerunt post ultimàá itinerationem prz-
dictorum justitiariorum nostrorum in partibus illis, q
tune sint ibidem coram  przedietis justitiariis nostris
itinerantibus cum brevibus assisarum & placitorum quz
tempore suo receperunt, & ad respodendum de tempore
suo, sicut respondere debet coram justitiarüs itineran-
tibus, & habeas ibi summonitores & hoc breve. "Teste,
&c. Aliquando veró cüm justitiarii itinerare debent in
diversis comitatibus, bene facere possunt summonitiones
generales sub nomine suo proprio in predicta forma,
sic.


Talis & socii sui justitiarii itinerantes in tali comi-
tatu vicecomiti, tali salutem. Mandamus vobis, ex parte
domini regis, quód summoneas per bonos summonitores
omnes archiepiscopos, &c., omnia ut suprà. Facta igi-
tur generali summonitione, ut predictum est, viden-
dum erit quando loquele quse sunt in banco vel alibi
incipient esse coram justitiarus itinerantibus, & esse
desinat coram justitiariis de banco, vel aliis, càm pos-
sib summonitio fieri per multum tempus ante iter, &
sciendum q non antequam justitiarii inceperint itine-
rare, quia bené poterit iter multipliciter impediri, re-
vocari, vel suspendi, & unde semper dabitur dies par-
tibus à justitiariis de banco, sub tali conditione, nisi
justitiarii itinerantes priüs venerint ad partes illas,
& quo casu semper remanebunt placita illá in banco,
quousque iter inceptum fuerit. Si autem datus fuerit
dies ante summonitionem generalem partibus, & infra
diem illum incipiat itineratio, retro trahetur dies illa
ad diem itinerationis per generalem summonitionem, &
desinit placitum coram justitioriüis de banco. Sed quid
dicetur de eo qui eoram justitiariüis de banco essoniatus


OF ACTIONS. 191


in the same state in which they remained, through our
precept or the precept of our aforesaid justices itinerant,
or our Justices of the Beneh. Summon likewise by good
summoners all those who have been viscounts after the
last journey of our aforesaid justices in those parts, that
they be there before our aforesaid justices itinerant with
the writs of the assises and the pleas which they received
in their own time, and to answer concerning their own
lime, as they ought to answer before the justices itine-
rant, and have there summoners and this writ. "Witness
&c. But sometimes when the justices ought to journey
in different counties, they may well issue general sum-
.monses under their own name in the aforesaid form,
thus.


Such a one and his associate justices 1tinerant in such » 8.
: : writ
a county to such a viscount greeting. We command you 7,7 4


on the part of the lord the king, that you summon by justices
good summoners all archbishops, &c., as &bove set forth. themselves
À general summons having thus been made, it, will have a summons
io be seen when the arguments which are in the Bench Dh he |
or elsewhere begin to be before the itinerant justices, and by their
cease to be before the justices of the Bench or others, vns
since the summons may be made a long time before the

iler, and it is to be known that not before the justices

have commenced their iter, because the iter may be in f.110.
many ways hindered, revoked, or suspended, and thence

a day will always be given to the parties by the justices

of the Bench under such a condition, unless the justices
itinerant should come beforehand to those parts, and in

which case those pleas will remain in the Bench, until

the iter has been begun. But if a day shall have been
appointed before à generalsummons to the parties, and

within that day the circuit shall have begun, that day

shall be drawn back to the day of the circuit by the

general summons, and the plea before the justices of the

Beneh ceeases. But what shall be said of him, who

has been essoined to the justices of the Bench on


199 DE ACTIONIBUS.


fuerit de malo lecti? fiat de eo secundàüm quod visus
fuerit vel non visus, & si visus fuerit, tunc seceundàüm
quod languor fuerit ei adjudicatus, vel secundüm quod
fuerit ei malum transiens. Et si visus fuerit, si possit
sine licentia surgere videndum, vel si non possit, à quo
petenda sit licentia surgendi, utrum à justitiariis itine-
rantibus, vel de banco, vel s&i1 visus fuerit & habeat
malum transiens, coram quibus debet comparere, vel si
languor ei fuerit adjudicatus, coram quibus debeat tes-
tificari visus, vel si justitiarii itinerantes, si in eodem
comitatu jacuerit essoniatus, mittere possint ad ipsum
ut faciat attornatum, eüm essonium de malo lecti co-
ram eis non habeat locum.  Cüm veró post generalem,
summonitionem itineris non venerit quis liber homo,
nee se essoniaverit de communi summonitione, licet
placitum non habuit, nec fuit implacitatus primo die,
pro defalta erit in misericordia, lieét postmodü com-
pareat, nisi rationabili de causa docuerit se esse impe-
ditum, & si fort? se essoniaverit, nisi posteà comparu-
erit, non valebit essonium, & idem erit si venerit, &
sine licentia recesserit. Si autem constituantur justi-
tiarii ad assisas, & non ad omnia alia placita, sed ad
placita specialia, sicut ad assisas omnimodas, ad gaolas
deliberandas, & ad placita de dote tantüm coram qua-
tuor justitiariis, tunc fiat breve sub hae forma quatuor
justitiarlis patens omnibus simul.


9.
Item omni- mox dilectis & fidelibus suis A. B. C. D. salutem.


bus quatuor . ] i
justitiariis Seiatis, quód constituimus vos Jjustitiarios nostros ad
nere assisas novs disseysins, mortis antecessoris, ultims
turad ^ preesentationis capiendas, & ad alia placita de dote,
eecanin. unde mulieres petentes nihil habent, generaliter tenenda,
etnonad quicunque conira assisas predictas terras vel advoca-


omnia : . . . . .
placita. tiones ecclesiarum deforciaverint, Vel sie: ad assisas


OF ACTIONS. 193


aecount of illness confining him to his bed? Let it be
done towards him according as he has been seen or not
seen, and if he has been seen, then according as it has
been adjudged that he is languishing, or that his ailment is
passing. And if he has been seen, it 1s to be seen whether
he ean leave his bed without leave, and if he cannot,
from whom leave is to be obtained, whether from the
justices itinerant, or from the justices of the Bench, and
if he has been seen and has & passing ailment, before
whom he ought to appear, or if it has been adjudged a
languor, before whom it ought to be testified that he has
been seen, or if the justices itinerant, if the person
essoined is lying within the same county, may send to
him that he may constitute an attorney, since an essoin
confining him to his bed has no place before them. But
when any freeman after à general summons of the iter
has nob come nor execused himself from the common
summons, although he had no plea, nor was impleaded on
the first day, he will be for his default liable to a fino,
although he may afterwards appear, unless he has shown
that he has been hindered by a reasonable cause, and if
by chance he has exceused himself, his exeuse will not
avail unless he shall have afterwards appeared, and it
will be the same, if he has come and gone away without
leave. But if they be appointed justices for tho assises
and not for all other pleas, but for special pleas, as for
assises of all kinds, for gaol-deliveries and for pleas of
dower only before four justices, then let an open writ
issue under this form to all the Justices together.


The king to his beloved and faithful A. B. C. D, ,., 9-
a . ikewise
greeting. Know ye, that we have appointed you our to all the


justiees to hold assises of novel disseysine, of the death four Ju
of an ancestor, of a last presentation, and to hold gene- gether,
rally other pleas of dower, where women plaintiffs have - ey
nothing, [against those] whoever have, contrary to the pointed to
aforesaid assises, seized by force lands or the advowsons ite cul
of churches. Or thus: for the assises of the death of an and not all


YOL. II. N pies.


10.
Breve clau-
sum vice-


faciat as-
sisam.


f. 110 b.


11.
Si autem
constitu-
antur qua-


194 DE ACTIONIBUS.


mortis antecessoris & magnas assisas, & omnes juratas
per preceptum nostrum summonitas coram justitiariis
nostris ad primam assisam, vel coram justitiariis nos-
iris apud Westmonaster. atterminatas, pterqugm super
ilos qui profecti sunt in servitio nostro tali, & simili-
ter ad gaolam deliberandam, tam de illis qui in prisona
nostra inveniuntur, quàm de illis qui per preceptum
nostrum in custodia committuntur. Et ideó vobis man-
damus, rogantes quód ad diem talem & tali loco con-
veniatis, &e. ut suprà, de constitutione justitiariorum
ad omnia placita: & de hoc statim fiat vicecofi breve
clausum in hac forma.


Rex vicecofi salutem.  Seiatis, quód constituimus
dilectos & fideles nostros À. B. C. D. justitiarios nos-
tros, ad assisas novse disseysinzs, &e. ut suprà per
omnia usque ad clausulam (& ideà) & tune sic. Et
ideó tibi precipimus, quód tali die venire facias coram
eisdem justitiariis nostris apud talem locum omnes
assisas novsie disseysins, mortis antecessoris, ultime
presentationis, magnas assisas & ors juratas, & onia
placita de dote, secundàüm quod predictum est, & quee
summonite sunt coram justitiarüis nostris ad primam
assisam, cüm in partes illas venerint, vel coram justi-
liariis nostris apud Westmoü atterminate, & omnia
abtachiamenta quz pertinent ad gaolam deliberandam,
vel alios in custodia positos deliberandos. Et summo-
neas per bonos summonitores, omnes illos qui viceco-
mites fuerunt postquam, &c. ut suprà. "Teste, &c. Si
autem constituantur justitiarii ad unam assisam novze
disseysinz  tantüm, vel mortis arntecessoris tantüm,
unam, duas vel plures, tunc fiat eis omnibus simul
breve patens in hac forma.


Rex dilectis & fidelib? suis, A. B. C. D. salutem.
Seiatis quód constituimus vos justitiarios nostros, ad
assisam nove disseysinse capiendam, quam À. arrama-


OF ACTIONS. 195


ancestor and the great assises and all juries summoned.
by our precept to the first assise before our justices, or
prorogued before our justices a6, Westminster, except re-
garding those persons, who are travelling in our service
of such a kind, and in like manner to deliver the gaol,
as well of those who are found in our prison, as of those
who by our precept have been committed to custody.
And accordingly we command you, requiring you, that
you should meet on such a day and at such a place, &c.
as &bove stated conéerning the appointment of justices
for all pleas; and concerning this let there be made out
for the viscount a close writ in this form.


The king to the viscount, greeting. Know ye, that we 10.
have appointed our beloved and faithful A. B. C. D. our & 256...
justices for the assises of novel disseysine, &c. as above, viscount


and so on throughout until the clause (^ and accordingly p, inde -
and then in this manner: * Ànd accordingly we enjoin assise to
* you that on such a day you cause to come before our pon Ó B.
à justices ab such a place all the assises of novel dissey-

* gine, of the death of an ancestor, of a last presentation,

* the great assises and all juries and all pleas of dower,

* according to what has been before said, and which

* have been summoned before our justices at the first

* assise, when they should come into those parts, or

* prorogued before our justiees at Westminster, and all

* attachments which pertain to gaol delivery or to the

* delivery of others placed in custody. And summon by

* good summoners all those who have been viscounts since

* &c., as above. Witness &c." But ifjustices should be
appointed for one assise of novel disseysine only, or of the

death of an ancestor only, one, two, or more, then let

there be issued to them all together an open writ in this

form.


The king to his beloved and faithful A. B. C. D, *


greeting. Know ye, that we have constituted you our pu our


justiees to hold an assise of novel disseysine, which A. justices be
N 2


o


196 DE ACTIONIBUS.


tuor milites Viu Versus B. coram vobis per pceptum nostr, de libero


éustitiarii
ad unicam
assisam
capiendam
novg dis-
Seysingm.


19.
Breve de
eodem
vicecomiti
clausum,
quod ve-
nire faciat
assisam.


tenemento suo in tali villa, vel sie: quam À. arrama-
vit versus B. coram justitiariis nostris ad primam as-
sisam, cüm in partes ilas venerint, &c. Si autem
constituantur tantüm ad unam assisam mortis anteces-
Soris, tunc sic. Sciatis, quód constituimus vos justiti-
arios nostros, ad assisam mortis antecessoris capiendam,
quam À. arramavit versus DB. de tanta terra cum per-
tinentiis in tali villa, & ideó vobis mandam? quód ad
diem & loeum, quib? ad hoc intendere poteritis, vel
quos duxeritis providendos, vel sic: quód tali die, con-
veniatis apud talem locum ad assisam illam capiedam,
facturi inde quod ad justitiam pertinet, secund' legem .
& consuetudinem regni nostri Anglie, salvis nobis
amerciamentis inde provenientibus, mandavimus enim
vicecomiti nostro tali, quód assisam illam, dictis die &
loco, vel ad diem & locum quem ei scire facietis, co-
ram vobis venire faciat, & in hujus rei testimonium
mittimus vobis istas literas nostras patentes. Teste
&e. & super hoc fiat vicecomiti breve clausum, quod
respondeat form: precedenti per omnia in hac forma.


Rex vicecomiti tali salutem. — Sciatis, quód constitui-
mus ÀÁ. B. C. D. justitiarios nostros ad talem assisam
capiendam, vel talem quà talis arramavit, &c. ut suprà.
Et similiter ad assisam mortis antecessoris quà talis
arramavit, &e. ut suprà. Possunt enim plures assisse
una justitiaria contineri sicut una, si unus fuerit pe-
tens vel querens, & sive plures ibi fuerint disseysinte
vel disseysitores, sive plures tenentes sive unus. Et
ideó tibi precipimus, quód assisam illam, vel assisas-
ilas ad predictos diem & locum, vol ad diem & locum,


OF ACTIONS. 197


has brought against B. before you by our precept, con- appointed
cerning his free tenement in such a vill; or thus: which up. 2
À. has brought against B. before our justices ab the first assise of
assise, when they should come into those parts, &c. But Sdbsieg
if they be appointed only for one assise of the death of

an ancestor, then thus: Know ye that we have appointed

you our justices, to hold an assise of the death.of an ances-

tor, which A. has undertaken to bring against B.eoncerning

so much land with its appurtenances in such & vill, and
therefore we command you that at the day and place, on

and at which you can attend to this, or which you bave
thought fit to provide; or thus: that on such a day you

meet at such a place to hold that assise, in order to

do thereupon what pertains to justice, according to the

law and eustom of our realm of England, saving the fines
thereupon accruing to us, for we have commanded such

. an one our viscount that he cause to come before you that

assise on the said day and at the said place, or on the

day and at the place which you shall make known to

him, and in testimony of this thing we send you these

our letters patent. Witness, &c., and thereupon let there

be made out to the viscount a close writ, which shall
answer to the preceding form in all respects, in this

form.


The king to such a viscount, greeting. Know yethat 12.
we have appointed A. B. C. D. our justiees to take ad um
such an assise, or such at which such an one has under- sametothe
taken to prove his right, &c. as above. And in like Maro :
manner for the assise of the death of an ancestor, at which cause an
sueh an one has undertaken to prove his right, &c. as inni »
above. For several assises may be contained in one
commission of justices equally as one assise, if there be
one claimant or complainant, and whether there be several
disseysines, or persons who have committed a disseysine,
and whether there be several tenants or more than one.
tenant. And therefore we enjoin you, that you cause to


come before our aforesaid justices that assise, or those


o f. 111.


13.
Si justi-
tiarius
banci solus
constitua-
. tur, quod
assumat.


14.
Breve vicc
comiti


198 DE ACTIONIBUS.


quem vobis scire facient, coram prefatis justitiariis
nostris venire facias, &c. Teste, &c. Si autem assisa
ultimse prszsentationis capienda sit coram talibus jus-
litiariis, &c. sic: ad recognoscendum per sacramentum
suum, quis advocatus tempore pacis presentavit ulti-
mam personam, &c. secundüm formam brevis per om-
nia. Si autem ad assisam utrum, tunc sie: ad assisam
capiendam, quz» summonita est coram vobis per pre-
ceptum nostrum, inter À. personam talis ecclesi pe-
tentem, & B. laicum, scilicet. tenentem, vel é contrario:
ad recognoscendum utrum tantum terre vel redditus
cum pertinentiis in tali villa, sit. libera eleemosina per-
tinens ad ecclesiam praedicti ÀÁ. in laicum feodum prz-
dieti B. vel é contrario: utrum tani terre vel redditus
eum pertinentiis in tali villa, sit laicum feodum prz-
dicti B. vel libera eleemosina ipsius À. Si autem con-
stituatur aliquis justitiarius de banco, vel alius & solus
costituatur, tune fiat ei breve patens de justitiaria in
hac forma.


Rex dilecto & fideli suo tali salutem.  Seias, quod
constituimus te! justitiarium nostrum unà cum iis, quos
vobis duxeritis associandos vel assumendos, ad assisam
nove disseysinc? capiendam, quam AÀ. arramavit corà
vobis per preceptum nostrum versus B. & alios nomi-
natos in brevi nostro originali de libero tenemento suo
in tali villa, vel sie, ad capiendam assisam mortis an-
tecessoris, vel aliam quamceunq, secundüm formam brevis.
Et ideó vobis mandamus, quód ad diem & locum, &c.
ut suprà, facturi, &c. salvis, &c. mandavimus, &c. in
cujus, &e. & fiat breve vicecomiti super eodem clausum,
quód venire faciat assisam coram justitiariis in hac
forma.


Rex vicecomiti salutem.  Questus est nobis talis, &c.
& sie totum originale de verbo in verbum, usque: et


! * Sciatis, quod constituimus vos, &c.," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ACTIONS. 199


assises at the aforesaid day and. place, or at the day or
place, which they shall notify to you, &c. Witness &c.
But if an assise of last presentation is to be holden before
such justices &c. in this manner, to recognise by his oath,
what advowsoner in time of peace presented the last
parson, &c., according to the form of the writ throughout.
But if to an assise of * whether," then thus: to hold an
assise which has been summoned before you by our
precept, between À. the parson of such a church the
plaintiff, and B. a layman, forsooth the tenant, or the
contrary ; to recognise whether so much land or rent, fll
with its appurtenances in such a vill, be free alms per-
teining to the church of A. or a lay fee of the aforesaid B.
or the contrary ; whether so much land or rent with its
appurtenances in such a vill be a lay fee of the afore-
said B. or free alms of A. himself. But if some justice
of the bench, or another and a single one be appointed,
then let an open writ of justiceship be issued to him in
this form. |


The king to his beloved and faithful such an one, 13.
greeting. Know thou, that we have appointed thee our dosis of
justice together with those persons whom "we have the Bench
thought fit &o be associated or assumed with you to hold cede
an assise of novel disseysine, which A. has undertaken to that he
bring before you in accordance with our precept againstzupe —
B. and others named in our original writ concerning his others.
free tenement in such a vill; or thus: to hold an assise
of the death of an ancestor, or any other whatsoever
aecording to the form of the writ. And accordingly we
enjoin you, that at such a day and place, &c. as above,
with intent to do &c. saving &c. we have commanded &oc.,
in testimony of which &c., and let a close writ issue to
the viscount on the same subject, that he cause an assise


to come before our justices in this form.


The king to the viscount greeting. So and so has M.


complained to us &c., and so the original word for word 9999,


clausum
de eodem.


15.
Dreve, si
de banco
transfera-
tur assiea8
usque ad
comitatum
ad certos
justitiarios.


200 DE ACTIONIBUS.


tenementum illud esse in pace, usque ad certum diem,
quem dilect? & fidelis noster talis tibi scire faciat &
interim, &c. & summoneas eos, &c. quód sint coram prz-
fato tali & sociis suis quos, &c. ad certum locum quem
tibi scire faciat, &c. parati, &c. & sic fiet. de aliis assi-
sis. Et in quo casu contingit multotiens, quod aliqua
de causa fit tali justitiario associatio alterius justitiarii
ad impetrationem disseysitoris forté, ut captio assisce
differatur & in fraudem, & quo casu si talis venerit,
bonü est, si autem non, nihilominus procedat assisa,
quia plus habet authoritatis breve patens de capienda
assisa, quàm breve clausum de associatione: misi ita
sit q mandetur express, quód sine tali non capiatur.
Si autem primó summonita fuerit assisa coram Jjustiti-
aris fort? apud Westm, & constituantur postmodum
justitiarii in cori ut capio assise maturetur, tunc fiat
breve in hac forma.


Rex A. B. C. salutem. Sciatis, quód constituimus
vos justitiarios nostros ad assisam ultim:se presentatio-
nis capiendam, quce summonita fuit coram justitiariis
nostris apud Westm inter À. querentem & B. impedi-
entem de ecelesia tali, & ideó vobis mandamus, &c. ut
suprà. Mandavimus enim vicecomiti nostro tali, quod
venire faceret eoram nobis tali die, & tali loco, vel ad
certos diem & locum quando ad hoc intendere poteri-
tis, recognitores assise illius ad faciedà assisam illam,
in eo statu & sicut venire debuerunt tali die coram
justitiarüis nostris apud Westm ad idem faciend. Man-
davimus etiam ei quód scire faciat predieto B. quód
tunc sit ibi auditurus assisam illam in eodem statu quo
atterminata fuit coram justitiariis nostris apud West-


OF ACTIONS. 201


as far as: and that tenement was at peace up to a certain viscount
day, which our beloved and faithful so-and-so will notify gp e
to you and meanwhile &c. and summon them &o. that
they be before such an one and his associates whom &c.
ai a certain place which he will notify to you &c. pre-
pared &c. and so it shall be done concerning the other
assises. And in which case it happens frequently, that for
some cause there is made to such justice the associa-
tion of another justice at the request of a disseysor,
perchance that the holding of the assise may be deferred
and fraudulently, and in which case, if such an one has
come, i6 is well, but if noi, nevertheless the assise shall
proceed, because the open writ for holding the assise has
more authority than the close writ for the association,
unless it be that there is à mandate expressly, that the
assise shall not be held without the associate justice.
But if the assise has been at first summoned before
the justices by chance at Westminster, and afterwards
justices have been appointed in à county in order that
the holding of the assise may be hastened, then let a
writ be issued in this form.

The king to A. B. C. greeting. XKmnow ye, that we PRG

: n . , writ, if
have appointed you our justices to hold an assise of the assise
last presentation, which has been summoned before our ^ ird -
justices at Westminster, between A. claimant and B. the Bench
opponent concerning such a church, and therefore we Íothe
U

command you &e.as above. For we have commanded to certain
our viscount so-and-so, that he cause to come before J"süctaries.
us on such a day and at such a place, or on a certain
day or at & certain place, when you may be able to
attend to this [business], recognisors of that assise to
hold that assise, in the state and as they ought to have
come on 2 certain day before our justices at West-
minster to do the same. We have also commanded him
that he make known to the aforesaid B. that he be then
there to hear that assise in the same state in which it
was prorogued before our justices at Westminster on


16.
f. 111 b.


Breve
clausum
de eodem
vicecomiti
dirigen-
dum.


17.
Si assisa
transfera-
tur a qua-


202 . DE ACTIONIBUS.


monasterium tali die, &c. non obstante eo, quód idem
dies datus fuit ipsi B. p essonium suum, postquam
defaltam fecerat coram eisdem justitiariis apud Westin:
& sive venerit sive non, procedatis ad illam assisam
capiendam, tum propter lapsum sex mensium, tum q
si presens esset nihil dicere posset contra assisà, quare
remaneret post pdictam defaltam &q fecit in prefata
curia apud Westm. In cujus rei testimonium, &c.
Teste, &c. Aliud breve de eodem clausum vic. diri-
gendum est in hac forma.


Rex vie. salutem. Scias, quód constituimus tales
justitiarios nostros ad assisam ultime presentationis
capiendam, qui» summonita fuit coram justitiariis nos-
iris apud Westm inter tales, ad recognoscendum quis
advocatus, &e. & sic totum originale. Et ideó tibi
precipimus, quód diligenter inquiras qui fuerunt recog-
nitores ejusdem assise, & illos sine omni dilatione
venire facias coram justitiarüs nostris apud talem lo-
cum tali die ad faciendam recognitionem assise illius,
sicut venire debuerunt coram justitiariis nostris apud
Westmonasterium tali die ad idem faciend' constitutos.
Scire etiam facias predicto B. & sic deinceps per om-
nia sicut in brevi precedenti usque ad clausulam (in
cujus rei, &c.) Et habeas, &ce. "Teste, &c. Cüm au-
tem assis& mortis antecessoris posMa fuit aliquando
coram talibus justitiarüis in com, & post defaltam vel
essonium vel diem datum vel warrantum vocatum
posita fuerit coram justitiariss nostris itinerantibus, &
primo die non venerit tenens, tunc summoneatur quód
sit coram talibus justitiariis itinerantibus per tale
breve.


Rex vicecomiti salutem. |. 'Summoneas per bonos sum-
monitores, &e. À. quód sit coram talibus justitiariis
itinerantibus, ad audiendam assisam mortis antecessoris,


OF ACTIONS. 208


such a day &ce., notwithstanding that the same day was
appointed to B. himself by his essoin after he had made
default before the same justices at Westminster, and
whether he shall have come or not, ye shall proceed
io hold that assise, as well on account of the lapse of
six months, as because if he were present he could say
nothing against that assise, why it should be à remanet,
after the aforesaid default which he made in the afore-
said court at Westminster. In testimony of which &oc.
Witness &c, Another close writ on the same subject
is to be addressed to the viscount under this form :


. The king to the viscount greeting. Know thou, that 16.
we have appointed such persons our justices to hold fon à
an assise of last presentation, which has been sum- writcon-
moned before our justices at Westminster between such iine. rd
persons, to recognise which advowson &c.,and so the aaáresseá
whole original writ. And accordingly we enjoin you,'9 te .
that you inquire diligently who were the recognisors

of that assise,and you cause them without any delay

to come before our justices at such a place on such a day

io make à recognisance of that assise, as they ought to

have come before our justices at Westminster on such

a day appointed to do the same thing. Make it known

also to the aforesaid B., and so in order through all

things as in the preceding writ, as far as the clause (in
testimony of which thing &ec..  Ánd you should have

&c. Witness &c. But when an assise of the death of

an ancestor has been brought sometime before such jus-

tices in & county, and after a default or an essoin ora

day given or & warrantor called has been brought before

our justices itinerant, and on the first day the tenant

has not appeared, then let him be summoned that he


appear before such justices itinerant by such a writ.


The king to the viscount greeting. iSSummon by good ir.


summoners &c. À., that he be before such justices cia


itinerant, to hear an assise of & death of an ancestor, transferred


tuor justi-
tiariis
usque ad
iter justi-
tiariorum
extra co-
mitatum,
eum in
comitatu
incepta
fuerit.


18.
Breve de
consuetu-
dinibus
justitiari-
orum ad
inquisi-


tiones faci-


204 DE ACTIONIBUS.

quam B. in curia nostra, coram talibus justitiariis nos-
tris ad hoc constitutis, arramavit versus eundem A.
de tanta terra cum pertinentiis in tali villa, ita quód
assisa illa tune procedat in eodem statu in quo fuit
apud talem locum, & quando posita fuit coram pre-
fatis justitiariis itinerantibus. Et venire facias coram
eisdem justitiariis nostris itinerantibus apud fdictum
locum C. D. E. recognitores ejusdem assise ad pfatum
iermiü, ad faciendam assisam illam, & habeas ibi no-
mina recognitot & hoc breve. "Teste &c. Si veró con-
stituisse! debeant justitiarii ad aliquam inquisitionem
faciendam, vel de contentionibus habitis inter aliquos
de libertatib?, vel de roberia? vel de alis, sicut de in-
juris & hujusmodi, si duo constituantur vel plures,
fiat singulis eof breve clausum in hac forma.


Rex dilecto & fideli suo A. salutem, sciatis, quód
constituimus vos justitiarium nosti simul cum B. ad
quandam inquisitionem faciendam inter C. querentem
& D. super contentionibus inter eos ortis de talib?
libertatibus, & de talibus occupationibus feodor, & de


endassuper QUibuscung, aliis injuriis, roberia,! verberibus & plagis,


contentio-
nibus ad
querelam.


& hujusmodi, de quibus contentio fuerit inter eos se-
eundüm formam litterarum nostrarum, quas inde misi-
mus viceco. nostro tali, & ideó vobis mandamus, rogan-
ies quatenus ad diem, quam predictus vicecomes noster
vobis scire faciat, accedatis apud talem locum ad inqui-
sitionem simul cum pr:edicto B. & prefato vic. nostro
faciendam, ut diligentiam vestram & discretionem me-
ritó debeamus commendare. In cujus rei, &c. Teste,
&c. Et fiat aliud breve consocio suo consimile & clau-
sum, & etiam super eodem fiat breve vicecom clausum
in hac forma.


! Constitui, MS. Rawl. C. 159.
2 Robberia, MS. Rawl. C. 160. Roboria, id. 159.


OF ACTIONS. 205


which B.in our court before such our justiciaries ap- om four
ries
pointed for that purpose, has undertaken to prove against Tu


the same À. concerning so much land with its appurte- « cuit of
nances in such & vill so thatí such assise may then jag
proceed in the same state, in which it was at such a place county,
and when i& was brought before our aforesaid justices has D
itinerant. And cause to come before our same justices b Sade
itnerant at the aforesaid place C. D. E. recognitors of county.
the same assise at the aforesaid term to mako that

assise, and have there the names of such recognisors and

this writ. Witness &c. But if the justices ought to

have been appointed to hold an inquisition either con-

cerning contentions between certain persons respecting
franchises, or concerning robbery, or concerning other

things, such as injuries and such like, if two or more

be appointed, let there be made out to each a close writ

in this form.


The king to his beloved and faithful A., greeting.
Know ye that we have appointed: you our justice Avi
together with B. to hold a certain inquisition between C. ud pr
the complainant and B. upon certain contentions, which te; jus-
have arisen between them concerning certain franchises Papers
and certain occupatións of feuds, and concerning certain inquisitions
other injuries, robbery, blows and stripes, and such PES "OU.
like, respecting which a contention has arisen between the com-
them, according to the form of our letters, which we edi)
have thereupon sent to so-and-so our viscount, and ac-
cordingly we command you, requiring you, that on the
day on which our aforesaid viscount shall notify to you,
ye go to such a place to hold an inquisition together
with the aforesaid B. and our aforesaid viscount, so that
we ought deservedly to commend your diligence and
- discretion. In testimony of which thing &c. Witness
&c. Andlet another similar writ, also elose, be issued
to his fellow-associate, and also let & close writ be issued
on the same subject in this form.


206 DE ACTIONIBUS.


19. Rex vicecomiti salutem, precipimus tibi, quód as-
Brev "*-sumptis tecum dilectis & fidelibus nostris A. & B.
clausum quos ad hoc justitiarios nostros costituimus, in propria
eodem, persona tua aecedas ad talem locum, & illic coram te

& coram prefatis justitiariis nostris venire facias vi-
ginti quatuor de legalioribus & discretioribus militibus
de com tuo per quos rei veritas, &c. & qui nec pdictos
C. & D. aliqua affinitate attingant, vel qui aliquo modo
no sint essoniabiles, ad recognoscend super sacramen-

5112. (tum suum, si predictus C. pdictum D. robbavit, vel

aliam injuriam ei fecit contra pacem nostram, & ita q
onia peedant secund querelam querentis. Et tunc sic.
Et inquisitionem illam, vel inquisitionem q inde fece-
ris, venire facias coram nobis, vel scire facias nobis
tali die vel sine dilatione. Et scire facias pdicto D.
ad quem die facere volueris inquisitionem illa, ut inde
tempestive pmuniatur, & ut pdicta inquisitio in psentia
utriusq, pceedat, si voluerint interesse: & it& te habeas
in hoc negotio, &e. Teste, &c. Et infiniti sunt casus,
& forms infinite quib? constituuntur justitiarii, secund
q inferiàs videri poterit in multis locis, Sed hsc ad
psens sufficiant exempli causa.


Car. XII.


In adventu justitiariot ad omnia placita ex jurisdic-
Demodo tione sibi delegata, pünent ad eos audire querelas


, etordine gingulof & petitiones, ut unicuig, justitia fiat, & q suum


n fuerit tribuatur. Et si sib qui putat se habere petitio-


POR doe nem, &etionibus debet experiri, quia nemo sine actione
larus, e


' deeorum experitur, & hoc non sine brevi sive libello conventio-


oficio. ^ pali, quia nemo de libero tenemto suo sine brevi vel


OF ACTIONS. 9207


The king to the viscount, greetinp. "We have en- , 19.
joined you, that having associated with you our be- la
loved and faithful A. & B. whom we have appointed nm
our justices for this business you go in your own per- is as
son to such a place, and there before yourself and before Ject
our aforesaid justices you cause to come iweniy-four
of the more legal and discreet knights of your county by
whom the tri&h of the matter &c., &c., who do not touch
the aforesaid C. & D. by any affinity, or who are not
excusable in some manner, to recognise upon their oath
if the aforesaid C. has robbed the aforesaid D. or has done ^ !!*
any other injury to him contrary to our peace, and so
ihat all things may proceed, aecording to the complaint
of the complainant. And then so: And cause that inqui-
sition, or the inquisition which you thereupon have
made, to be brought before us, or make i& known to us
on such à day and without delay. And notify to the
aforesaid D. on what day you wish to hold that inquisi-
tion, that he may be forewarned in time, and that such
inquisition may proceed in the presence of each, if they
wish to be present ; and so conduct yourself in this busi-
ness &c. Witness. And the cases are infinite and the
forms infinite, in which jusüees may be appointed,
'according to what may be seen below in many places.

But these things may sufhice for the present by way of
example.


CHAPTER XII.


On the arrival of the justices it appertains to them — 1.


to hear all the complaints and petitions of individuals on Ofthe..
all pleas aecording to the jurisdiction delegated to them, order of
that justice may be done to each, and that each may P. Kind
have his own. And if there be any one who thinks that before tho
he has & petition, he ought to proceed by actions, for no d
one proceeds without an action, and this not without n their


& writ and a formal libel, beeause no one shall an- "^
swer for his freehold or its appurtenances without a


208 DE ACTIONIBUS.


ejus ptinentiis, nisi gratis voluerit, respondebit. Quód
si ad hoc injusté arctatus fuerit, subvenitur ei p tale
breve dii regis vicecomiti directum in hac forma.


2- Rex vicecoiü salutem.  Precipimus tibi, quód non
Breve, ne


quisim-  implacites vel implacitari pmittas talem de libero. tene-
Placte'ur íito suo in tali villa sine speciali peepto nostro vel


sine brevi
etprecepto capitalis justitiarii nostri. Teste, &c. Kt sieut non
iim debet sine brevi respondere, ita nec debet sine judicio


disseysiri. Et dicitur ideó breve, quia rem de qua
agitur & intentionem petentis paucis verbis breviter
enarrat, sicut facit regula juris, qd re dq est breviter
enarrat, & ideó videtur quód sine brevi sive libello
non debet quis experiri in judicio, ne mutari possit
petentis intentio vel mod? petendi. ltem sine brevi
no debet quis experiri nec tenens sine brevi respon-
dere de ptintiis, non magis q de ipso teneito, sicut
de pastura & aliis de quibus vicecom & comitatus non
habent recognitionem, sicut de placito namii vetiti, p
servitiis & consuetudinib?, quia ubieung, loquela de-
ducta fuerit in curiam baronum vel aliorum qui liber-
iates habent de averiis captis & detentis contra va-
dium & plegiü, & querela pvenerit ad comitat, si
contentio fiat de terra, servitiis & consuetudinibus,
pastura vel hujusmodi q pertinent ad liberum teneüi-
tum sine brevi, remanebit loquela, & querens sibi
pquirat si voluerit, & tenens semp in seysina more-
tur. Et quoniam quandog, competat uni actio unica
contra unum, quandog, plures contra unum vel plures,
qui tenent in communi vel separatim & per se, quan-
dog, competunt plures actiones vel ung pluribus qui


OF ACTIONS. 909


writ, unless he is gratuitously willing. But if he be
unjustly constrained to this, he is helped by a writ of
this kind from the lord the king SHOE to the vis-
count in this form.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you 2.
that you do not implead nor allow to be impleaded such eeu as
an one concerning his freehold in such a vill without our be im-
Special precept, or that of our chief justice. Witness &c. doces :
And as he ought not to answer without à writ, so he writ and
ought not to be disseysed without a judgment. And it D.
is called a. writ (a brief ) for this reason, because it states lord the
briely the matter at issue, and the claim of the peti- ""&
tioner in a few words, as a rule of law does, which states
briefly the thing, what it is, and therefore it appears that
without a writ or alibel no one ought to proceed in judg-
ment, so that the claim of the petitioner or his mode of
petitioning may not be changed. Likewise no one ought
to proceed without & writ, nor ought the freeholder to
answer without & writ concerning the appurtenances, no
more than concerning the freehold, as concerning the
right of pasture, and other matters, concerning which
the viscount and the county have not recognition, as
concerning & plea of forbidden distraint, concerning ser-
vices and customs, for wherever the discussion has been
brought into the court of the barons or others who have
franchises concerning cattle taken and detained against
surety and pledges, and the complaint has come before
the county, if the contention be made about land, ser-
vices and customs, pasture and such like which apper-
tain to &à freehold without & writ, the discussion shall
remain, and the complainant shall seek [a writ] if he
chooses, and the freeholder shall always remain in sey-
sine. And since sometimes a single action alone may be
brought by one person against one person, sometimes
several against one or more who hold in common or
separately and by themselves, and sometimes several ac-
tions or one action may be brought by several, who hold

VOL. II. 0


De ordine
actionum.


f. 112 b.


3


210 DE ACTIONIBUS.


tenent in communi contra unum vel plures, quaft quse-
dam sunt pjudiciales, e quod primo debent terminari
secundum quod sunt criminales vel civiles, & si omnes
criminales, tunc una major & altera minor, vel si un&
criminalis & altera civilis, vel si omnes civiles in rem
vel in personam, & si in rem, vel super possessionem
vel super proprietatem, ideó de ordine actionum &
judiciorum, & d actio debeat alteri preferri.


Et inprimis sciendum, quód si alicui plures com-
petant actiones criminales contra unum vel plures, illa,
d major est, primó debet terminari, ne maleficia re-
maneant ipunita, & extinguatur poena, ut si de minori
crimine priüs ageretur, sic extincta persona criminosi,
exiingueretur poena in majori, sicut videri poterit, ut si
quis aecusatus fuerit de furti crimine, vel homicidii, &
similiter de crimine lese majestatis & convictus, gra-
viüs punitur erimen lesc majestatis quàm crimen furti
vel homicidii, quia ex uno sequitur quód criminosus
Vrahitur, frangitur, & suspenditur, ex alio non sequitur
nisi tantüm suspensio. Et ideó si de minori crimine
priis ageretur, ita extüingueretur poena in majori p
parte, scilicet quód non traheretur nec frangeretur, q
esse non debet. Si autem du: vel plures cóopetant
actiones contra unü, quaf una criminalis sib & altera
civilis, criminalis priüs debet terminari, & est ratio,
quia si quis appellatus est de vita & mébris, competit
ei exceptio contra glibet agentem civiliter, quód. appel-
latus ei respondere non tenetur, antequa se defenderit
in criminali, nec mutare poterit statum suum, quamdiu


OF ACTIONS. 9211


in common, against one or more, of which some are pre-
judicial, inasmuch as they ought to be determined first
according as they are criminal or civil, and if they are
all criminal, then one is major and the other minor, or
if one is criminal and the other civil or if they are all
civil against a thing or against a person, and if against a
thing, either regarding the possession or the property,
therefore we must treat of the order of actions and of
judgments, and which aetion ought to be preferred to
another. |


And in the first place, it is to be known, that if à


f. 112 b.


8.
the


person is entitled to several criminal actions against one oraer of
or. more persons, that which is major ought to be deter- actions.


mined first, les& misdemeanours remain unpunished and
the penalty be extinguished, inasmuch as if the minor
erime be first dealt with, the person of the criminal
having been thus extinguished, the penalty would be
extinguished in the major case, as may be seen, as [for
instance] if à person be accused of the crime of theft or
of homicide, and in a similar manner of the crime of high
ireason and be convicted, the crime of high treason is
punished more severely than the crime of theft or of
homicide, because it follows from the one that the crimi-
nal is drawn [on a hurdle] broken [on the wheel] and


hung, whilst from the other it follows only that he is


hung. And aecordingly if the minor crime be first dealt
with, the penalty in the major crime would be propor-
tionately extinguished, for instance he would not be drawn
nor broken, which ought not to be. But if two or more
actions are to be brought against one person, of which
one is criminal and the other civil, the criminal ought
io be first determined, and the reason is, because if a
person is called in question for his life or limb he may
take exception against any one proceeding against him
civilly, that he is not bound to answer his claim, before he
has defended himself in the criminal action, nor can he
change his own condition, as long as his condition is


919 DE ACTIONIBUS.


dubius fuerit status ppter crimen. Si autem contra
unum dus cópetant actiones civiles, quat una in pso-
nam & alia in rem, utraque simul poterit intentari,
quia neutra aliam tollit vel excludit, ex quo sese inter
easdem psonas compatiuntur, ac si unus illas contra
plures intentaret. Si &utem utraq, fuerit in rem, &
utraq, super possessione, illa quse fuerit super possessione
ppria priüs terminari debet, sicut in assisa novze dis-
seysine, q illa qus fuerit super possessione aliena,
Sicut assisa mortis antecessoris de morte alicuj? ante-
cessoris. Si autem plures petierint seysinam ppriam
versus unum, per assisam nov:? disseysinz, ultima sey-
sina priüs erit determinanda, & sic fiat de pluribus
quod de duobus. Et illud idem fiat de assis& mortis
antecessoris, si plures petant versus unum per assisam.
Si autem uni competant plures actiones civiles versus
unum, tam super possessione propria & aliena, quàm
Super proprietate, petens habet electionem, quam primó
voluerit intentare, & una electa, ad alias regressum non
habebit pendente illa, si processerit secundàüm ordinem
actionum, & si ordine non servato processerit ad illas,
postmodüm regressum non habebit, & unde si plures
competant actiones versus unum, sicut assisa novis dis-
seysinee de possessione ppria, & assis& de seysina ante-
eessoris, & breve de ingressu, & breve de recto, primó
(si velit ordinem servare, quód una terminata possit
ad alias habere ingressum) eligat actiones super pos-
sessione, & illam primó de seysina ppria, & posteà de
seysina aliena, & tunc demüm agat de proprietate, &


. OF ACTIONS. 213


doubtful on aecount of the criminal charge. But if two
civil aetions are to be brought against one person, of
whieh one is against his person, the other against his
property, each may be proceeded with at the same time,
because neither removes nor excludes the other, whence
they are compatible with each other against the same per-
sons, just as if one person brought them against several
persons. But if both of them are against the property,
and each respecting the possession of it, that which is
concerned with one's own possession ought to be first
determined, as in an assise of novel disseysine, before that
which is concerned with another person's possession, as
an assise of the death of an ancestor concerning the death
of another's ancestor. But if several claim seysine of
themselves against one person by an assise of novel
disseysine, the last seysine will first have to be determined,
and so let it be done with several,as with two. And
let the same thing be done concerning the death of an
ancestor, if several claim against one by an assise. But
if one person is entitled to bring several civil actions
against one person, as well concerning his own possession
and the possession of another, as concerning the property,
the claimant has the election which he will first proceed
with, and one having been elected, he has no right of
recourse to the others, whilst it is pending, if he has
proceeded aecording to the order of the actions, and if,
the order not having been observed, he shall have pro-
ceeded with them, he shall have afterwards no recourse
to them, and hence, if he is entitled to bring several
actions against one person, as an assise of novel disseysine
concerning his own possession and an assise concerning
the seysine of an ancestor, and a writ of eniry, and &
writ of right, first (if he wishes to observe order, that
one having been determined, he may have an entry to
the others) let him choose his action concerning the
possession, and tha first of all concerning his own seysine,
and afterwards that concerning the seysine of another,


f. 113.


4


Quod prius
agendum
est super
possessione
quam super


proprie-
tate.


214 DE ACTIONIBUS,


primó eligat actionem de ingressu, & postea super ipso
recto, quia si primó elegerit agere super ipso recto,
nung postmodum regressum habebit ad inferiores, nisi
ita sib q aliquando per narratione revertatur breve de
recto in breve de ingressu, quia& quamvis teneat ordo,
ut pdict' est, de actione in actionem ascendendo usq,
ad breve de recto, nunquam tenebit ordo descendendo
à superiore actione ad inferiorem. Item incidit quan-
doq, questio pprietatis in actionem intentatam super
ipsa possessione, sive possessorium intentetur causa
recuperandze possessionis, sicut in assisa novae dissey-.
sino, vel adipiscends possessionis, sicut assisa mortis
antecessoris, & quo casu, simul quandog, intentatur pro-
prietas cum petitorio judicio, quoad cognitionem pos-
sessionis, & non quoad pnuntiationem sup pprietate.
Et ssepius inquirendum erit de ipsa pprietate, ut de
possessione magis constare possit, & sic nihil comune
habet possessio cum pprietate, quoad pnuntiationem,
licót quoad cognitionem, ut praedictum est, quia forté
aliter judex non posset cognoscere de uno, s. de pos-
sessione, nisi priüs cognosceret de reliquo, s. de pprie-
tate, pnuntiatio veró justitiarii erit super possessione.
Et notandum, quód verbum possessionis quandog, poni-
tur p re possessa, & quandoq, p restitutione.


Et quód de possessione priüs agendum sit quàm de
pprietate, & quód causa possessionis est preemitteda,
uavis in fine debet pprietas prevalere, videri poterit
manifesté. Quia esto, quód justitiarius priüs de pprie-
iate & recto pnunciet, quàm de possessione inter ali-
quos, si posteà de possessione cognoscere voluerit inter


OF ACTIONS. 215


and then at length let him deal with the property, and
first choose an action of entry, and afterwards respecting
ihe right itself, because if he should have elected first to
proceed upon the right itself, he shall never have recourse
to the inferior claims, unless it so be that sometimes a
writ of right reverts in tlie narration to a writ of entry,
because although the order is binding, as aforesaid in
ascending from action to action up to a writ of right, the ' £f. 113.
order in descending from a superior action to an inferior
shall never bind. Likewise sometimes the question of
property is incident to an action brought concerning the
possession itself, whether a possessory claim is made for
the sake of recovering possession, as in an assise of novel
disseysine, or of acquiring possession, as in an assise of
the death of an ancestor, and in which case sometimes
the property is claimed with a petitory judgment, as
regards the cognisance of the possession, and not as re-
gards & pronunciation eoneerning the property. And
frequently inquiry will have to be made concerning the
property itself, that i& may be more clearly ascertained
respecting the possession, and so the possession has nothing
in common with the property as regards the pronun-
tiation, although as regards the cognisance, as aforesaid,
because otherwise the judge may by chance not be able
to hold cognisance of one, that is, the possession, unless
he takes cognisance of the other, namely the property,
but the pronunciation of the justiciary shall be respecting
the possession. And it is to be noted that the word
* possession " is sometimes used for the thing possessed,
and sometimes for the restitution.


And that possession must be dealt with prior to pro- 4
perty, and that an action for possession must have prece- bed
dence, although in the end property ought to prevail, can possession
be clearly seen. For let it be that the justice pronounces peri uu
concerning the property and the right prior to the pos- an dd
session between certain persons, if he should afterwards Ío th


à property.
wish to take cognisance of the possession between the


LE. di ucib- mand apud tcc icm


Dig.
XLVIII.
t. vi. 5.


8 1.


216 | DE ACTIONIBUS.


eosdem, nihil ageret, quia placitum de recto, quod prze-
cessit, inter eosdem de eodem tenermito, recognitionem
de petendo seysinam ppriam vel alienà de eodem tene-
ito extinguit inter eosdem, quia placitum de recto
utrumq, jus determinat, tam possessionis quàm pprie-
tatis. Ut de termino S. Trinitatis anno regni regis H.
tertio, in com Eboruü, assisa mortis antecessoris si Wil-
helm? le Seneschal Et idem erit si duo implacitave-
rini unum, unus videlicet p recognitionem in causa
possessionis, & alius per breve de recto in causa pprie-
tatis, suspenditur placitum p breve de recto, donec
sciatur, cui debeat possessio remanere, ubieunq, fuerit
placitum de recto, in curia díüi regis vel in com. Et
Si possessio p recognitionem tenenti remanserit, tunc
demum pcedat placitum de recto inter eos: si autem
tenens amiserit p recognitionem, tune cadit breve de
recto, & tunc agat petens versus eum qui evicit p
recognitionem. Sed cüm psequutio p breve de recto
ita suspensa sit p recognitionem, petens p breve de
recto semper apponit clameum suum, p quocunq, fera-
tur sententia in causa possessionis. Et quód priüs
cognoscendum sit de possessione quàm de pprietate si
violentia adhibita sit, pbatur, ss. ad legem Juliani! de
vi publica, lege, Si de vi, ubi dicitur, quód si de vi
& possessione vel dominio qusratur, anté cognoscen-
dum est de vi, quàm de proprietate rei, & etiam priüs
quairitur de vi quàm de jure dominii sive possessionis.
Item est & alia ratio quód qui rem petere voluerit,
8i cauté sibi pviderit, videat primó an aliqua ratione


! * Juliam is the correct reading. *Jul.do vi publica. LL. si de vi."
MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ACTIONS. 217


5ame persons, he could do nothing, because the plea of
right, which has preceded, between the same persons con-
cerning the same tenement, extinguishes the recognition
betwéen the same persons for claiming seysine, either of
one's own or of another's, concerning the same tenement,
because a plea of right determines both rights, that of
possession as well as of property. As in Trinity Term,
in the third year of King Henry IIL in the county of
York, an assise of the death of an ancestor, if William
the Seneschal And the same will happen if two im-
plead one,the one, for instance, in à cause of possession,
and the other by a writ of right in & cause of property,
the plea by the writ of right is suspended, until it be
known with whom the possession ought to remain,
wherever the plea of right may be brought, in the court of
the lord the king or in the county. And if the possession
remains with the tenant by the recognition, then let the
plea of right proceed between them; but if the tenant
has lost it by the recognition, then the writ of right
takes effect, and then let the claimant proceed against
him who has evicted [the other] by the recognition. But
when the suit by & writ of right has been so suspended
by a recognition, the claimant by à writ of right always
appends his claim, for whomsoever the sentence may
be pronounced in the cause of possession. And that
cognisance should be held concerning possession prior to
property, if violence has been used, is proved from the
Digest on the Julian Law on the subject of public violence,
in the passage which commences * If concerning violence,"
where it is said "if & question is raised respecting
* violence and possession or dominion, cognisance should
* be held concerning the violence before the proprietor-
* ship of the thing, and also an inquest is made respect-
* ing the violence before the right of dominion or of
* possession." Likewise there is another reason, why a
person who wishes to claim a thing, if he provides cau-
tiously for himself, should see first of all if he can by any


f. 113 b.


218 DE ACTIONIBUS.


nancisci possit possessionem: quoniam commodius est
possidere quàm petere. Multi enim sunt qui si pos-
Sessionem habuerint, se defendere poterunt per excep-
lionem: si autem fuerint extra, vix aut nunquam fortà
recuperabunt per actionem. De hoc autem quod dici-
tur, quod qui primó petierint! per breve de recto, quód
ad inferiores actiones descendere non possit, videndum
qualiter usus fuerit brevi de recto. Sunt quidam qui
dieunt, quód si in tantum usus fuit petens per breve
de recto quód tenens summonitus sit, & ad summoni-
tionem essoniatus, quód hoc sufficit quód regressum non
habeat ad actiones inferiores, quia tunc inceptum est
placitum cum effectu, per breve de recto. Quidam
autem dicunt contrarium, quód. non est inceptum cum
effectu, antequam summonitus comparuerit, & ad breve
responderit, vel warrantum vocaverit, vel ulteriàs pro-
cesserit. Sed re vera, sufficiat si fiat ut, primó dictum
est. Et hsc vera sunt, si breve, per quod actio in-
cepta est, teneatb in suo casu. Ut si assisa mortis
antecessoris impetrata fuerit, & non jacuerit inter par-
tes, pro non impetrata reputabitur, e& ideà descendere
poterit petens ad assisam nov:e disseysine ad seysinam
propriam recuperandam. Eodem modo videtur quód
esse debeat, si quis usus fuerit & impetraverit parvum
breve de recto, seceundüm consuetudinem manerii do-
mini regis, ubi impetrasse debuit magnum breve patens:
si eo utatur, nihilominüs habebit regressum ad breve
magnum ad petendum liberum tenementum suum, et
à contrario: quia cüm in suo casu non suni impetrata,
ideó nulla. Si autem utraque actio duorum "versus
unum super proprietatem, & ubi uterque agere poterit
tam Super possessione quàm super proprietate, sed
ratione diversorum temporum: semper de ultima sey-
Sina priüs erit cognoscendum, et si de ultima seysina


1 * petierit," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ACTIONS, 219


means obtain possession, since ibis more convenient to
possess than to claim. For there are many, who if they
had possession, could defend themselves by an exception,
butif they are out of possession will scarcely or never
recover by an action. But concerning this which is said,
that he who has first claimed by a writ of right, cannot
descend to inferior actions, we musti first see how he has
used the writ of right. There are some who say that if
a claimant by writ of right has used it so far, that the


f. 113 b.


tenant has been summoned, and has been essoined to the .


summons, that this is sufficient to preclude him from
having recourse to inferior actions, for then the plea by
' writ of right is effectüally commenced. But some say the
contrary, that ib is not commenced with effect, before the
person summoned has appeared and has answered to the
writ and has called a warrantor or proceeded further. But
in truth it is sufficient, if i&. be done as first sajd. And
these things are true, if the writ, by which the action has
been eommenced, holds good in its ease. As for instance,
if an assise of the death of an ancestor has been ob-
tained on request, and has not lain between the parties,
it shall be regarded as not having been obtained, and
therefore the claimant may descend to an assise of novel
disseysine to recover his own seysine. In the same
manner it appears that it ought to be, if any one has
obtained and used a little writ of right, according to
the custom of & manor of the lord the king, when he
ought to have obtained a great open writ of right; if
he uses it, he may nevertheless have recourse to a great
writ to claim his freehold, and on the contrary, since as
they have not been obtained in his own case, therefore
they are null. JButif there are actions of two persons
agains& one respecting proprietorship, and where each
may proceed as well respecting the possession as respect-
ing the proprietorship, but by reason of different times,
cognisance must always be held first concerning the last
seysine, and if it can be ascertained as to the last sey-


290 DE ACTIONIBUS.


eonstare non possit, tune observetur quód dicitur, quód
qui priüs appellat priüs agat, quod fallit in quatuor
casibus. Cim autem ab una parte plures actiones
civiles proponantur versus unum vel plures, de pluribus
rebus & diversis, poterit qui eas proponit, quam volu-
erit, preemittere, & omnes simul tractare. De hoc au-
tem quod dicitur, quód si plures alicui competant
actiones, una debet experiri, et una electa ad alias non
poterit recurrere pendente prima: sciendum est, quód
istud fallit in quatuor casibus. Primus casus est, quód
cüm quis plures habeat actiones, vel duas de una re,
quae fuerint contrarie, si utrasque proposuerit, audiri
. non debet, magis quàm si contraria allegaret. Oportet
igitur quód unam istarum proponat, quam voluerit,
quia sese non compatiuntur nec simul stare possunt,
quia una excludit aliam ; ut si quis peteret simul sor-
iem & usuras, & terram in dominico & ad terminum.
Secundus casus est, ut si illa quz primó proponitur,
pendeat ex alia, & qu:e posteriüs proponi deberet per
ordinem, ut si quis tanquam hsres petat debitum
hereditarium, antequam se probaverit hszredem, & pos-
leà vult inquiri, si sit heres vel non.  Prepostera est
enim talis petitio. ltem si quis petat fundum rei ven-
dicatione, & statim vult percipere fructus vel colligere,
antequam fundum acquisiverit, vel de fructibus agere,
antequam prima aetio terminetur de principali, repelli
debet à secunda actione de fructibus.  Primó enim
debet constare de re principali per actionem primam,
eujus esse debeat, & posteà de ejus pertinentiis. Et
unde videtur rationibus predictis, quód si quis petat


OF ACTIONS. 221


sine, then let i& be observed according to what is said
that he who first applies must first proceed, which fails
in four cases. But when several civil actions are pro-
pounded by one party against one or several persons
concerning several different things, he who propounds

them may proceed with whichever he pleases first in
order, and treat them allsimultaneously. But concern-
ing that which is said, that if any person is entitled to
bring several actions, he ought to commence with one,
and one having been elected, he cannot have recourse to
the others pending the first, ib is to be known that it
fails in four cases. The first case is, that when a person
has several actions or two concerning one thing which
are contrary to one another, if he propounds both, he
ought not to be heard, any more than if he alleged con-
irary facts. It is necessary therefore that he propound
one of them, whichever he wishes, for they are not com-
patible with one another, nor are they consistent, be-
cause one excludes the other. As if à person should
claim the capital sum and the interest, and the land in
demesne and the land for a term. The second case is,
" as if that, which is first propounded, depends upon
another and ought to be propounded last in order, as if
& person claims an hereditary debt in the character of
heir, before he has proved himself to be heir, and after-
wards wishes an inquest to be held if he is heir or
not. For such a petition is preposterous. Likewise if
& person claims an estate, by vindication of the thing,
and wishes immediately to enjoy the crops or to collect
them, before he has acquired the estate, or to bring an
action concerning the crops, before the first action on
the principal matter is terminated, he ought to be re-
jected from his second action concerning the crops. For
it ought first of all to be settled concerning the principal
matter by the first action, whose property it ought to
be, and afterwards concerning the appurtenances. And
hence it seems for the aforesaid reasons, that if anybody


omm liM. fmc —————
2.


9299 DE ACTIONIBUS.


manerium cum pertinentiis, ad quod pertineat advo-
catio, sicut de pertinentiis, et pendente placito de


manerio, antequam convineatur cujus esse debeat, con-


f. 114.


5.
De actioni-
bus vi
bonorum
rüptorum.


D e x


tingat ecclesiam vacare, & ile qui petit manerium,
presentaverit antequam principale terminetur, si pla-
citare voluerit,non audietur per breve de quare impe-
dit nec de ultima presentatione, & plures sunt hujus-
modi actiones, & infinite. "Tertius casus est, cüm
seeunda sit prejudicialis prim;, q non est in primo
casu, sed é converso. Utü&si à te petam fundum Tyci-
anum, quem tu possides & negas meum esse, & petam
viam ad ipsum fundum Tycianum per fundum Sem-
pronianü, qui Tycii est, non sum audiendus in hac
secunda aetione de via, qu:e prejudieat primes, & quia
primó oportet discutere, cujus debeat esse fundus Tyci-
anus, ad quem via pertinere debeat. ltem si vendico
à te aliquem fundum, & antequam convincatur, velim
interim tecum agere de communi dividundo, non sum
audiendus, p eo quód p hane actionem de dividendo
prejudieatur primse, de principali recuperando. Quar-
tus casus est, si tales sint actiones pposite, quód una
tollitur electione alterius, ut si agam in causa pprie-
tatis p breve de recto, et posteà velim recurrere ad
aliam quse sit de possessione, non possum, quia p hoc
fieret prejudicium primsz, & tamen utraq, actio tam
pprietatis quàm possessionis sub actione de pprietate
continetur.


Et notandum in fine, quód càüm quis plures habeat
actiones coneurrentes de eadem re, una debet experiri,
ut F. quód metus causa, L. similiter, $ si coactus, & C.


1 ** dividendo," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


VEN
p FURGIEE . Dao Su ni ^ f£
us ] "n b, CN /
; seed uds er Usb Wd
i goo Ue 0 ] S. N :


OF ACTIONS. 293


claims & manor with its appurtenances, to which an ad-
vowson appertains, as parb of the appurtenances, and
whilst the plea is pending concerning the manor, before
it is ascertained whose it ought to be, it happens that the
chureh becomes vacant, and he, who claims the manor, f.114.
has presented, before the principal question is deter-
mined, if he wishes to plead, he shall not be heard by a
writ of * quare impedit," or by à writ of *last presen-
* tation," and there are several actions of this kind and
without end. A third case is, when the second is prz-
judicial of the first, which is not in the first case, and
conversely. s if I claim from you the Tycian estate
which you possess, and you deny that it is mine, and I
claim à road to the same Tycian estate through the
Sempronian estate, which belongs to Tycius, I am not
to be heard in this second action concerning the road,
which prejudges the first, and because it ought first
to be discussed, whose ought to be the Tycian estate,
to which the road ought to pertain. Likewise if I
claim from you any land, and before it is settled, I
should wish meanwhile to proceed against you for a
common division of it, Í am not to be heard on this
account, that by this action for a division prejudice is
worked to the first action, eoncerning the recovery of
the principal. The fourth case is, if such actions have
been propounded, that one is removed by the election of
the other, as if I proceed in a cause of proprietorship
by & writ of right, and afterwards wish to have aecourse
to another which is about the possession, I cannot, be-
cause thereby prejudice would be worked to the first
action, and nevertheless both actions, that of proprietor-
ship as well as of possession, are contained under the
action for the proprietorship.


And itis to be noted at the end, that when a person — 5.


has many concurrent actions for the same thing, he ought Migus c


to proeeed by one of them [only], as in the Digest *Quod for goods
* metus causa." The Law beginning «Si coactus " taken by


violence,


Dig. IV.
tit. ii, 21,
l.


Dig. XIV.
tit. iv. 9,
l.


o
Q
^L e ; R


| ! EN 4 K:
—U pct uelim ir.


A poat. t
MN jt (yx
tX eet


224 DE ACTIONIBUS.

de tributoria actione, L. quód in haeredem $ Hlipere.
Sed videtur contra F. quorum legatorum LL. prima.
Ubi dicitur quód si duze competant actiones, quas actor
sciat sibi competere, et ptestatus fuerit ex una rem
suam consequi velle, licebit ei, et it& potest indefinité
pponere actiones. Solutio. Ubi certus sum duas mihi
competere actiones, eligere cogor, ut F. de tributoria
L.g in haeredem, $ Eligere. Si autem ignorem quse
mihi competat, tunc sub generali verbo, indefinité pos-
sum pponere actiones, ut in L. contraria. Vel ubi ex
confessione adversarii dependet mea actio, cogitur ad-
versarius exprimere cüm fuerit interrogatus, utrum p
herede vel p possessore possideat, ut sciatur p medium,
quz &etio mihi competat actori: liebt titulü suse pos-
sessionis dicere nemo cogatur. Ut C. de heredibus L.
cogi possessorem. ltem si quis duo brevia simul vel
diversis temporibus impetraverit, dum tamen ille usus
fuerit, electo uno brevi p q agere voluerit & alio priüs
usus fuerit, ex secundo agere non poterit, antequam


E.
TT, l/t. / XXX [/se retraxorit à primo, ut de abbate de Ryvall & Petro


Dig. XIX.
tit. ii. 25.


de Sabaudia! coram rege. Et notandum quód ubi dus
actiones de eadem re concurrunt, aut sunt rei psecu-
tori, aut poene. Si autem rei tantüm, tunc in elec-
tione actoris erit, quam voluerit eligere, ut pdictu est.
Et una electa &c. ut suprà. Ut F. locati, L. si mer-
ces, $ Culpe nomine. $i autem poenzg, tunc aut ex
uno facto vel diversis, ex uno & eodem facto, ut si quis
aliquid p vim rapuerit, tenetur actione furti, & inter-


1 * Petro de Sabaudia," mentioned below, fol. 159.


OF ACTIONS. 995


similarly and the Code de tributoria actione, the law
beginning ** Quod in hz;eredem," 8 eligere. Butthe contrary
appears from the Digest, * Quorum legatorum," the first
Law, where it is said that, if à person is entitled to two
actions of which the plaintiff is aware, and he has avowed
his intention to gain his cause by one action, it will be
allowed him, and so he may indefinitely propound
actions. The Solution. Where I am certain that I am
entitled to two different actions, I am compelled to elect,
as in the Digest * De iributoria, the law beginning
* Quod in heredem," $ eligere. But if I am ignorant
to what action I am entitled, then under a general word,
I may propound actions indefinitely, as in the law begin-
ning * Contraria. Or, where my action depends on the
confession of my adversary, my adversary is compelled
to declare, when he shall be interrogated, whether he
possesses as heir or as possessor, so that it may be known
through means thereof, to what action I am entitled,
although no one is compelled to disclose the title of his
possession. As in the Code * De heredibus," the law
beginning * Cogi possessorem." Likewise if à person has
obtained two writs at the same time or at different times,
whilst nevertheless he has used one writ, which he has
elected by which he wished to proceed, and has used the
other previously, he cannot proceed under the second,
until he has withdrawn from the first, as in the case of
the abbot of Ryvaux and Peter of Savoy before the
king. And it is to be noted that where two actions
concur concerning the same thing, they are either
claiming the thing or & penalty. But if they are
for à thing only, then it will be in the election of the
plaintiff to choose which he wishes, as has been said
&bove. And one having been elected &c. as above. As
in the Digest * Locati," the law beginning * Si merces," $
culpe nomine. But if [in pursuit] of à penalty, then out
of one act or different acts: out of one and the same act,
as if any one has carried away a thing by violence, he
VOI. IT. P


P


f. 114 b.


Dig.
XXXIX.
tit. iv. 16,
S 18.


Decretum
caus. IIl.
l. 9. c. 8.

Code IX.
T. xxxv.

11.


6.
De ordine
actionum
in triplici.


296 DE ACTIONICUS.


dicto unde vi, in quo cssu, ung electa, non potest
recurrere ad aliam, nisi quatenus minus consecutus
fuerit ex una: ut F. de privatis delictis L. non utique,
e& F. de actionibus & obligationibus, ss. Si servum.
Gi autem ex diversis factis, tunc neutrà tollitur per
aliam, et ibi duc actiones de eadem re concurrentes,
una aliam non consumit, ut in Justic! ltem notan-
dum,? quód poenalis actio non datur in heredes, nec
transit in eos, nisi lis fuerit contestata cum defuncto.
Ad hoc facit F. de publicanis? & vectigalibus L. inter-
dum, ss. poene, — Ubi dicitur, quód pons ab heredibus
peti non possunt, si non est quzestio mota vivo illo
qui delinquit. Et hoc sicut in exteris quog, poenis,
iia & in vectigalibus. Item in causa criminis, &
maxim? si civiliter agatur. Et injuriarum, illustres
person: p peuratorem agere possunt ut iii. Q. ix. in
fine & C. de injuriis L. ultima. Item in eo, quód
poenalis est, non datur in hseredes similésg, personas,
pisi in quantum ad eos pvenerit. Item, si conira pu-
pillum agatur, vel furiosum, ad damna inde non tenen-
tur, nisi in quantum ad eos pervenerit ut suprà: quia
affectu carent, nisi pupillus forté doli eapax sit.


Item actio civilis càm aliquando triplex sit, & quasi
mixta, s. personalis, pomnalis & yel persecutoria, sicut
de restitutione spoliatorum, quód res corporalis & im-
mobilis restituatur spoliato, vel quód res incorporalis,
sicut, jus aliquod, in debitum statum reformetur. Sicut
dici poterit de servitutibus, ut de jure eundi, agendi,


ni ipudiuptosd cte Leer citi piuuas duele dedere


l1«gtinJustic." Thisistheread- | sage down to *doli capax est" is
ing of MSS. Raw. C. 160 and 159. | omitted in MS. Rawl. C. 159.
?«]Item notandum." "This pas- 3 « publicanis. MS. Rawl. C. 160-


OF ACTIONS, . 997


is liable to an aetion of theft, and an interdict * unde vi,"
in which case, after one has been elected he cannot have
recourse to the other, unless as far as he has obtained
less from one, as in the Digest De privatis delictis, the
law *non utique," and in the Digest De actionibus et
obligationibus, $ siservum. But if from different acts,
then neither is taken away by the other, and where there
are two concurring actions concerning the same matter, the
one does not eonsume the other, as in Justice. Likewise
it is to be noted, that a penal action is not allowed
against the heirs of a person, nor does it pass to them,
unless the suit was in contest with the deceased party.
This is supported by the Digest De publicanis et
vectigalibus, the law * Interdum," $ poenze, where it is said
that * penalties cannot be exacted from heirs, if no ques-
* tion has been raised during the lifetime of the delin-


f. 114 b.


* quent, And this as in other penalties holds good in the -


* ease of the publie taxes"  Likewisein a cause of crime,
and chiefly if there is a civil proceeding. And for libel,
illustrious persons may proceed through a proxy as in the
Decretum of Gratian, causa iii, q. 9, at the end, and the
Code * De injuriis," the law at the end. Likewise in à
case, which is penal, an action is not allowed against the
heir and like persons, exeept for as much as may have
come into their hands. Likewise if an action be brought
against a ward or a mad person, they are not bound to
make good damages, unless for as much as has come into
their hands as above, because they are without intention,
unless the ward is capable of deceit.


Likewise a civil action, since it is sometimes a triple
action and as ib were mixed, namely, personal, penal,
and in pursuit of a thing, as for instance for the restitu-
tion of things of which one has been despoiled, that a
corporeal and immovable thing may be restored to the
party despoiled of it, or that an incorporeal thing, as
some right for instance, shall be replaced in its original
State, as may be said of servitudes, as of the right of

P2


6.
Of the
order of
actions In
triplicate.


998 DE ACTIONIBUS.


& de jure pascendi in fundo alieno, & hujusmodi:
bene poterunt hsc omnig unica actione terminari,
Sicut per assisam novze disseysinz, secundüm diversas
Species disseysinarum.  Personalis enim est, quia tan-
tum datur spoliato, & competit contra spoliatorem in
eo, quód peenalis est. Est etiam poenalis ppter delie-
tum, quia injuste & sine judicio, & quandoque perse-
quitur spoliatorem, si spoliator superstes sit, & in eo
quód peenalis est extinguitur p mortem utriusq, vel
alterius ipsorum. Est etiam restitutoria tantüm ali-
quando, & non poenalis, quantum ad eos qui immunes
sunt à delicto disseysins, quia poena sentire non de-
bet, qui immunis est à culpa, secundüm quod inferiüs
dicetur de assisa nove disseysins. Item ex uno facto
injurioso plures possunt oriri actiones poenales in causa
civili, & uni competere vel pluribus contra unum vel
plures, & omnes simul bené poterunt intentari, cüm
non sint contrarie vel pre;judiciales, sed sese compati-
untur, ut videri poterit, ut si quis nihil juris habeat
in fundo alieno, nec aliquam servitutem, contra volun-
tatem domini, eujus fundus ille fuerit, fossatum ]leva-
verit, plures competere poterunt ex hoc domino fundi
actiones, s. assisà novse disseysine de libero teneito,
ex quo talis sic novum opus fecerit in fundo alieno,
& rem alienam sic invito domino contractaverit. Ex
hoe etiam poterit ei competere & alia, quód fossatum
illud levatum est ad nocumentum liberi tenemiti sui,
eó fortó quód per fossatum illud poterit obstrui via
aliqua. ltem competere poterit ei & tertia, quia& per
fossatum illud poterit alicujus aquse cursus injustó ad
noeumtum domini diverti, & quia ibi sunt plures in-
jurie ex uno facto, p hoc poterit delinquens plurib?


OF ACTIONS. 299


pathway or of a driving road, or the right of pasturage on
another's land, and such like; all these matters may be
well determined by a single action, as by an assise of
novel disseysine, according to the different species of dis-
seysines. For it is à personal action, because so much is
given to the person despoiled, and it holds good against
the spoiler in respect of its being penal. It is likewise
penal on account of the delinquency, because it has been
. done unjustly and without a judgment, and sometimes it
prosecutes the spoiler, if the spoiler is alive; and in so
far as it& is penal, it is extinguished after the death of
both, or of either of the parties. It is also sometimes
only for restitution and not penal, as regards those who
are free from the delinquency of the disseysine, for he
ought not to suffer punishment, who is free from blame,
according to what will be said below concerning an as-
sise of novel disseysine. Likewise from one injurious
act, several penal actions may arise in a civil cause, and
may be brought by one or by several parties against one
or several, and all may well be proceeded with simul-
taneously, when they are not contrary nor prejudicial,
but are compatible with one another, as may be seen, as
if any one has no right in another person's estate, nor
any servitude contrary to the will of the lord, whose
estate i& may be, should he have raised a foss, several
actions may be thereupon brought by the lord of the
estate, for instance an assise of novel disseysine concern-
ing & freehold, seeing that such & person has made a
new work on anothers ground, and so has dealt with
another's property against the will of the owner. There-
upon also another action may be brought by him, that
the foss has been raised to the nuisance of his freehold, on
the ground perhaps that some road may be blocked up by
that foss. Likewise & third action may be brought, that
somebody's water-course may be diverted by that foss
unjustly to the nuisance of the owner: and because
several injuries thus result from one act, the delinquent


oid Pile ^ innuens — Piel timed 7 VP PRU PS MENMCAUT EH WE NAP Pp ne e


f. 115,


230 DE ACTIONIBUS.


actionib? teneri uni, & aliquando pluribus, & poterit
ille, cui injuriatum est, omnib? simul si voluerit expe-
ririj vel vicissim, plures enim actiones poenales de
eadem re sive de eode facto coneurrentes, una aliam
non consumit, quia, quatenus minus consequitur p unam,
consequi poterit si voluerit p aliam, si vicissim egerit
& suecessivo, Sed cüm plures competant actiones ex
uno facto, ut predictum est, videndu erit utrum omnes
injurie uniea actione possint terminari, quia cüm lites
restringende sunt, non expedit pluribus actionibus uti,
cüm una sufficiat pro omnibus, ad demoliendum illud
totum quod injuriosé factum est, & ad pristinum sta-
tum reformetur,! quód res sit sicut solet esse & debet.
Unde necessarium erit,quód procedat assisa nov: dis-
seysine, quód fossatum omnino prosternatur, & fiat
lenementum adeó planum sicut esse solet: per hoc
enim poterit via obstrueta aperiri, & aqua trestornata
recipere cursum debitum, & sie possunt omnes injurie
unie& actione terminari & secundüm diversitatem no-
cumentorum poterunt damna sstimari Si autem primó


'tantüm ageretur de via obstructa, adhue pro magna


parte remanere poterit injuria de fossato & aqua tre-


' Stornata, & si primó tantüm de aqua trestornata, adhuc


remanere posset in magna parte injuria de fossato, &


etiam omnino de via obstructa, & ideó melius est quód


per unicam actionem omnes ille simul terminentur
injurie, quàm per plures. ltem ex uno delicto sive ex
facto plures oriri poterunt actiones criminales & poe-
nales, & competere pluribus sieut uni, & conira unum
& plures , sive nascuntur ex uno facto vel pluribus,
secundüm quod pleniüs dicetur infrà de placitis co-


1 « reformetur," the context seems to require ** reformandum."?


OF ACTIONS,  * 291


for that reason may be liable to several actions from one
person, and sometimes from several persons, and he who
has been injured may have recourse to them all, if he so
wills, simultaneously, or in turns, for several penal ac-
&ions about the same thing or the same act concurring,
one does not eonsume the other, because inasmuch as he
may obtain less by one, he may obtain [more] by ano-
ther, if he wishes, if he proceeds in turns and succes-
sively. But when several actions may be brought upon
one act, as has been said above, we must see whether all
the injuries can be determined by à single action, for
since lawsuits ought to be restrained, it is not expedient
to make use of several actions where one will suffice for
all to demolish the whole of that which has been done
injuriously, and should be reformed in its pristine state,
so that the thing be as it is accustomed and ought to be.
Hence it will be necessary that the assise of novel dissey-
sine proceed, that the foss be altogether levelled, and the
freehold be made as plain as it used to be; for the ob-
structed way may be by this means opened, and the water
lurned aside may regain its due course, and so all the
injuries may be terminated by a& single action, and the
damages may be estimated aecording to the diversity of
the nuisances. Butiif the proceeding should be at first
only for the obstruetion of the way, the injury from,the
foss and the water turned aside may remain for the most
part, and if it should be at first only for the turning aside
of the water, the injury from the foss in a great part might
remain, and likewise altogether that from the obstruc-
tion of the way, and therefore it is better that all these
injuries should be terminated by a single action, than
by several Likewise from a single delinquency and a
single act many criminal and penal actions may arise,
and may be brought by several persons as well as by
one, and against one or several, whether they arise out
of one fact or several, aecording to what will be said
more fully below concerning pleas of the crown, con-


f, 115.


232 * DE ACTIONIBUS.


ronze, de appellis & poenalibus actionibus. ltem ex.
uno facto vel delicto plures possunt oriri actiones
ponales, & pluribus competere sicut uni, ut si cui
injuria illata fuerit per illos qui sunt sub sua potes-
tate, sicut, sunt filius, filia, vel alii qui sunt de alicujus
familia, & in servitio suo verberaverit, vulneraverit, &
malé tractaverit contra pacem, competit ei quidem
actio, qui ictus sustinuit & vulnera, et ipsam violen-
tiam directa, ut consequatur suum interesse secundüm
restimationem injuries.  Competit etiam domino actio
indirecta, quatenus suà interfuit non caruisse servitiis
famulorum & operibus servorum & hujusmodi. Com-
petit etiam domino actio ex hoc, si tales verberati sunt
vel pulsati in dedecus ipsius domini, etiam si servitio
& operibus servorum non caruerit, & ita poterit inter-
esse sua aliquando, ratione alterius istorum, & aliquando
ratione utriusque, ut si dicat se nolle sustinuisse dam-
num pro tanto, nec pudorem vel dedecus pro tanto,
conjunctim vel divisim. Sed videndum inter csetera
quie istarum sit prejudicialis, & si una dependeat ex
alia, e& videtur quód sic: quia esto quód serviens vel
servus, cui violentia illata est, in probatione sua defe-
cerit, licét, querela vera sit, videtur quód per hoc ex-
tineta sit actio domini, quia si factum non probetur,
quód est principale, valere non debeat aliquid, quod
dependeat ex eo, & proinde quód talis non verberatur
ad dedecus ipsius, nec ad damnum. Sed revera quam-
vis talis in probatione sua defecerit, nihilominüs sub-
esse possit verum, quód ita fuit. Et unde si unus
non probaverit, alius potest. Idem erit, si tales se
retraxerint, vel sequi noluerint.


OF ACTIONS. ^ 233


cerning appeals and penal actions. Likewise from one
fact or delinquency several "penal actions may arise, and
may be brought by several persons as by one, and if injury
has been done by those who are under their power,
such as are à son or daughter or others who are of any
person's family, and in their service they have struck,
" wounded, and ill-treated any one against the peace he,
who has suffered the blows or the wounds and the actual
violence, may bring a direct action, that he may obtain
his own interest according to the estimate of the injury.
For the lord may bring an indirect action, inasmuch as
it is his interest not to be in want of the services of
his attendants and the labour of his serfs and such like.
The lord may likewise bring an action on this account,
if such persons have been struck or beaten to the dis-
grace of their lord, even if he should not have been in
want of the services and the labour of his serfs, and so
he may in his own interest sometimes, in respect of
either of them or in respect of both, as if he shall say
that he is unwilling to have sustained loss for so much,
nor shame or disgrace for so much, conjointly or divi-
sibly. But we must see amongst other things, which of
them are prejudicial, and if one depends upon another,
and it seems so; begause let it be that & servant or a
Sserf, to whom violence has been done, should fail in his
proof, although his complaint.is true, it seems that
thereby the action of the lord is extinguished, because
if the act is not proved, which is the principal thing,

that which is dependent upon it ought not to avail, and
 &aecordingly that such & person is not beaten to disgrace
him or to damnify him. But in truth although such a
one should fail in his proof, nevertheless the truth may
subsist, that it was so. And hence if one has not proved
it, another may. "The same will result if such persons
withdraw themselves, or refuse to prosecute.


—— — —


l.
Qualiter
precedere
debent
jusütiarii
In itinere
Suo, et quo
ordine.


INCIPIT


TRACTATUS SECUNDUS LIBRI TERTII,


IN QUO TRACTATUR


DE CORONA.


Car. I.


Facta coram justitiarüis itinerantibus generali sum-
monitione, ad certos diem & locum, quz ad minus
continere debet spacium xv. dierum, videndum erit in
primis, qualiter pcedere debeat & quo ordine. Et
sciendum quód in primis incipere debent de placitis
coronz, in quib? terminantur actiones criminales, tam
majores quàm minores, nisi ipse dominus rex forté in
aliqua parte aliter duxerit faciendum. Et inprimis
legantur brevia, quce dant eis authoritatem & potesta-
iem itinerandi, ut sciri poterit de eorum authoritate :
quibus auditis, si justitiariis placuerit, quidam major
eorum & diseretior, publicó coram omnib? proponat
qui sit caus& adventus eorum, & quise sit utilitas iti-
nerationis, & qus comoditas, si pax observetur, &
pponi solent verba ista p M. de Pateshull? In primis
de pace domini regis & justitia ejus violata, p murdri-
tores & robbatores & burglatores, qui malitiam suam
exercent die ac nocte, non solüm in homines, de loco
in loeum itinerantes, sed in homines in lectis suis dor-
mientes, & quód düs rex mandat omnib? fidelibus suis,


lThe headnote throughout this , 1229, but our author cites an Iter of
treatise. in MS. Rawl. C. 160, is | Martin de Pateshullin the county
* Tiber Tertius de  Itineratione | of Lancaster of a date as late as 16
« Justitiariorum." H. III. (A.D. 1232), f. 50 b. vol. i.

2 Martinus de Pateshullis stated | p. 399. Sce Introduction to vol. I.
by Matthew Paris to havodied A.D. — p. xv.


HERE BEGINS THE


SECOND TREATISE OF THE THIRD BOOK,


IN WHICH IS TREATED


CONCERNING THE CROWN.


CHAPTER I.


À. general summons to appear before the justices itine- 1.
rant at certain days and places having been issued, which neam
ought to contain at least a space. of fifteen days, we must ought to
see in the first place in what manner and in what order P'^c2e1
proeeedings should be held. And it is to be known in circuit and
the first, place, that they ought to begin with the pleas of ^ hat
the Crown, in which criminal actions, as well greater and
less, are determined, unless the lord the king himself by
chance has in some part ordered it to be done otherwise.

And in the first place let the writs be read, which give
them authority and power to make an fer, that it may
be known respécting their authority, which having been
heard, if it should please the judges, let some one of the
older and more discreet in the presence of them all set
forth the eause of their coming, and what is the utility
of their itineration, and what is the advantage, if peace
is observed, and these words are accustomed to be set
forth by Martin de Pateshull  In'the first place, con-
cerning the peace of the lord the king and the violation
of his justice by murderers and robbers and burglars,
who exercise their maliee by day and by night, not only
against men travelling from place to place, but men
sleeping in their beds, and that the lord the king com-


mands all his faithful subjects, that in the faith by which


ime qe


£f. 116.


290 DE CORONA.


quód in fide qua ei tenentur, & sicut sua salvare
voluerint, efficax & diligens prszstent consilium & aux-
ilium, ad pacem '& justitiam suam conservandam, &
malitiam prwdictorum tollendam & reprimendam, &
hujusmodi plura. Quibus ppositis, debet justitiarii se
transferre in aliquem locum secretum, & vocatis ad se
quatuor vel sex vel plurib? de majorib? de com, qui
dicuntur busones! coi, & ad quorum nutum depen-
dent vota aliorum, & sie inter se tractatum habeant
justitiarii ad invicem, & ostendant qualiter à dio rege
& consilio suo sit pvisum, quód omnes tam milites,
quàm ali qui sunt quindecem annorum & ampliüs,
jurare debent quód utlagatos, murdritores? robbatores
& burglatores non receptabunt, nec eis consentient, nec
eorum receptatoribus, & si quos tales noverint, illos
attachiari facient, & hoc vie. & ballivis suis monstra-
bunt, & si hutesium vel clamorem de talibus audive-
rint, statim audito clamore, sequatur cum familia &
hominib? de terra sua. Ad q notari possit, quód si
quis feloniam fecerit, & statim capt? fuerit, levato
hutesio, cessabit secta. Et unde si homo p infortu-
nium oppressus fuerit, submersus, vel aliquo alio modo
mortuus, vel interfect?, statim levetur hutesium, sed
sequi non oportet de terra in terram, villa in villam,
cüm malefactor captus sit, s. la bane? "Et posteà tra-
ceam condueant per terram suam, & in fine terrze sus
illam monstrabunt dominis terrarum vicinarum : et
sic quód * fiat secta, de terra in terram eum omni dili-
gentia, donec malefactores comprehendantur, & quód
non remaneat iracea facienda, nisi impedimtum inter-
veniat p noctem supervenientem, vel alia rationabili
causa, et quód illos quos suspectos habent p posse suo


1 ^ Buzones," MS. Rawl. C. 160. 3«]a bane," from the Saxon
« Barones," MS. Crewe. '*Burga- | bana, a murderer.
tores," MS. Glas. 1 *gije quod." MS. Raw. C. 160.
? « murdritores," omitted in MS. | reads * quod sic."
Rawl. C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. 2347


they are bound to him, as they wish to preserve their
own goods, that they should afford efficient and diligent
counsel and advice to preserve his peace and justice, and
io remove and repress the malice of the aforesaid, and
more words of this kind ; which having been set forth,
ihe justices ought to transfer themselves to some retired
place, and having called to themselves four or six or
more of the greater men of the county, who are called
the * busones" of the county, and upon whose nod de-
pends the votes of the others, the justices should there-
upon have a consultation with them in turns, and explain
to them how it has been provided by the king and by
his counsel, that all as well knights as others, who are of
fifteen years and more, ought to swear, that they will not
harbour outlaws, murderers, robbers, or burglars, nor
confederate with them or their harbourers, and if they
should know of any such, they will cause them to be
attached and declare it to the viscount and his bailiffs,
and if they shall hear hue and cry respecting such people,
immediately on hearing the cry they shall follow with
their household and the men of their land. Upon which
it may be noted, that if any one has committed a felony
and has been forthwith captured, hue and cry having
been raised, the pursuit shall cease. And hence if à man
Shall be suffocated by misfortune or drowned, and be
dead in any other manner or be slain, let hue be raised
forthwith, but the pursuit ought not to be carried on
from land to land, from vill to vill, when the malefactor
shall have been ta&ken, that is ia bame. And after-
wards let them lead a track along their own land, and at
the end of their land they shall show it to the lords of
the neighbouring lands, and so that the pursuit be made
from land to land with all diligence, until the malefactors
are captured, and that there be no delay in making the
track unless an impediment intervene through night
coming on, or for some other reasonable cause, and that
they shall arrest, as far as may be in their power, those


f. 116.


9.
De sacra-
mento duo-
decim mili-
tum elec-
torum ad


288 DE CORONA.


arrestabüt, non expectato mandato justitiarii vel vic.
& quód inde fecerint, scire faciant justitiariis vel vic.
Jurabunt etiam quód, si aliquis venerit in villa vel
burgum vel alibi, et emerit panem, cervisiam vel alia
vietualia, & suspectus habeatur quód hoc sit ad op?
malefactorum, ipsum arrestabunt, et ipsum arrestatum
vic. vel ballivis suis liberabunt. Jurabunt etiam quód
nullum de nocte recipient in domü suam ad hospitan-
dum, nisi ben? not? sit, et si fort? ignotum aliquem
hospitaverint, quód non pmittent eum in crastino re-
cedere ante elarum diem, et hoc sub testimonio trium
vel quatuor proximorum vicinorum.  Convocentur post-
modüm servientes & ballivi hundredorü, & per ordine
irrotuletur hundredari! sive wapentakia et nomina
servientü, quorum quilibet affidabit, quód de quolibet
hundredo eliget quatuor milites, qui statim veniant
coram justitiariis ad faciendum preceptum dfi regis,
et qui statim jurabüt, quód eligent xii milites vel
liberos et legales homines, si milites non inveniantur,
qui neminem appellant, nec sunt appellati, nec male
crediti de pace infracta, de morte hominis, vel alio
maleficio, & per quos negotia düi regis possint meliüs
et utiliàs expediri. Et nomina eorum xii statim im-
breviari faciant in quada schedula et illa liberent
justitiàriis, qui etià cum venerint, jurabunt in hac
forma, prim? sic.


Hoe audite justitiarii, quód ego veritatem dicam de
hoc q à me interrogabitis ex parte dii regis, et fideli- -
ter faciam id q mihi prwcipietis ex parte dii regis, et
p aliquo non omittam, quin it& faciam p posse meo,


1 *hundredarij." MS. Rawl. C. 160 reads ** hundred,"


OF THE CROWN. 289


whom they regard as suspected without waiting for the
mandate of the justice or of the viscount, and that what
they shall have done thereupon they shall certify to the
justices or the viscount. "They shall swear also that if
any one shall come in the vill or the borough or else-
where, and shall buy bread, beer, or other victuals, and
shall be held to be suspected that he is doing this for
the help of the malefactors, that they shall arrest him
and deliver him arrested to the viscount or his bailiffs.
They shall swear also that they will receive no one into
their house at night to lodge there, unless he be well
known to them, and if by chance they shall have received
any one to lodge, they shall not allow him to go away
on the morrow before clear day, and this upon the testi-
mony of three or four of the next neighbours. Let there
be convoked afterwards the serjeants and bailiffs of the
hundreds, and let there be enrolled in order the inhabi-
tants of the hundreds or the waperntakes, and the names
of the serjeants, of whom each shall pledge his faith,
that he will choose from each hundred four knights,
who shall come forthwith before justices to perform the
precept of the lord the king, and who shall forthwith
swear that they will choose twelve knights, or free and
loyal men if knights cannot be found, who have no suit
against any one, and are not sued themselves, nor have
evil fame for breaking the peace or for the death of a
man or other misdeed, and through whom the business
of the king may be better and more usefully expedited.
And let them cause the names of those persons to be
enrolled in a certain schedule, and let them deliver the
schedule to the justices, who also, when they shall have
come, shall swear in this form, in the first place thus:


* Hear this, ye justices, that I will speak the truth con- — 9».
cerning this, whieh ye shall ask me on the part of the nA EE
lord the king, and I will do faithfully that which you osth of the
Shall enjoin me on the part of the lord the king, and I krights


will not omit for any one not to do so according to my elected to


dicendum
veritatem
in placitis
corons&e.


- Britton,
i.ch. v. S 1.


3.
Capitula
de quibus
duodecim
respondere
debent.


f. 116b.


240 '" DE CORONA.


sic me Deus adjuvet, et hzc sancta Dei evangelia.
Et post eum jurabit quilibet aliorum separatim, et p
se. Tale sacratum quale À. prim? jurator, s. hic
juravit, ego tenebo ex parte mea, sic me Deus adjuvet
& hsec sancta &e. Et cüm it& juraverint omnes, le-
gantur eis capitula p.ordinem, de quib? coram justiti-
ariis respondebunt. Quib? sic auditis, statim dicatur
eis, quód de quolibet capitulo, separatim & p se suffi-
clenter, distincté & aperté respodeant in veredicto suo,
& ilud habeant ad certum diem, & secreté dicatur eis,
quód si sit aliquis in hundredo vel wapentakio suo,
qui malé creditus sit de maleficio aliquo, illum statim
capiant si possint, si autem non, tunc secretó habere
faciant justitiariis nomina talium, et omnium illorum
qui malé crediti sunt in quadam schedula, et prezecipi-
etur vieec. quód illos statim capiat, et captos venire
faciat coram justitiariis, ut justitiarii de iis faciant
justitiam. Capitula veró, quz illis duodecim propo-
nenda sunt, quandoque variantur, secundüm varietatem
temporum & locorum, & quandoque augentur, quando-
que minuuntur. Sed tamen aliquid dicatur de capitu-
lis (exempli causa?) qualiter per ordinem proponuntur.


Inprimis de veteribus placitis coronse, qu:e aliàs fue-
runt coram justi&ariis, €& non fuerunt terminata. De
novis placitis coronz, qure posteà emerserunt tempore
pacis? p q notari poterit p capitula ista, quód non erit


1* Dei evangelia." "These words
are not part of the original oath,
whichin MSS. Rawl.and Crewe ends
with the words ** ista. sancta," that


is, *these holy relics.? — See Statu-.


tum de Sacramento Ministrorum
Regis. Statutes of the Realm, 1810,
vol. i. p. 232.

3*C' exempli causa," The articles
immediately following are in all pro-
bability not the articles of the Iter


of the king's justices used in any
particular year, but *general ar-
* tjeles?? of which the details have
been collected from articles used in
various Itinera of the justices.

3 ^tempore paucis" omitted
MS. Rawl. C. 160.  Seethe ** Capi-
* tula Itineris," published in the
Statutes of the Realm, Record
Edition, 1810, vol. i. p. 238.


OF THE CROWN. 241


ability, so may God help me and these holy gospels of pronounce
God. And afterwards they shall each of the others ege m
swear separately and by himself: The like oath which A. ofthe
the first juror has here sworn, I will keep on my part, YE
so may God help me and these holy &c. And when they  -
have all so sworn, let there be read to them the articles

in order, concerning which they shall answer before the
justices, which things having been heard,let it be told
them forthwith that they sball answer distinctly and
openly in their verdict upon each article, separately and
sufüciently of itself, and shall have their verdict by a
certain day, and let it be said apart to them, that if there

be any one in their hundred or wapentake who is of
evil repute respecting any misdeed, they shall seize him,

if possible, but if that be not possible they shall cause
the names of such persons to be given secretly to the
justices, and the names of all persons who are of ill re-
pute, in a certain schedule, and the viscount be enjoined

to seize them forthwith, and to cause them when so

. seized to appear before the justices, that the justices may
execute justice against them. But the articles, which are

to be propounded to those twelve, are sometimes varied
according to the variety of times and places, and some-
times they are augmented and sometimes they are di-
minished. But nevertheless let something be said con-
cerning the articles (for example's sake) in what manner
they are propounded in order.


In the first place concerning the ancient pleas of the xs 2 .
Crown, which were before the justices at another: time concerning
and were not determined. Concerning the new pleas of xim d
the Crown, which have afterwards emerged in the time xci
of peace, regarding which it may be noted through those f. 116 b.


articles, that, inquisition will not have to be made con-


VOL. II. Q


wert


Britton,
l. ch v.


$7.


949 DE CORONA.


querendum de placitis illis coronz, quee? emerserunt
ante aliud iter justitiariorü, & quse coram eis pposita
non fuerunt. Et si aliquis illorü de hujusmodi fuerit
&ecusatus, inde habebit exceptionem, & etiam possunt
juratores xii. de alio itinere argui de pjurio, ut de ter-
mino S. Michaelis ann regni regis H. nono incipiente
decimo, de quoda Henrico Romband in comitat Hert-
ford. De illis qui sunt in misericordia domini regis,
& non sunt amerciati, ad q videndum, qualiter quis sit
amerciandus. Et sciendum, quód miles & liber homo
non amerciabitur nisi secundàüm modum delicti, se-
eundüm q delictum fuit magnum vel parvum, &
salvo contenemento suo. Mercator veró non nisi salva
merchandisa sua; et villanus autem non nisi salvo
wannagio! suo, & hoc p judicium pborum hominum
de visneto, qui aflidabunt simul cum serviente. Co-
mites veró, vel barones non sunt amerciandi, nisi
p pares suos, & secundüm modum delicti, & hoc p
barones de seaccario, vel coram ipso rege. Clericus
vero non amerciabitur, secundüm beneficium suum ec-
clesiasticü, sed secundüm quantitatem laici feodi sui,
& secundüm modum delicti. Et ad hoc fideliter faci-


endum affidabunt amerciatores, quód neminem grava-


bunt p odium, nec alicui deferent ppter amorem, &
quód celabunt ea que audiverunt? De valectis &
puellis, qui sunt & esse debent in custodia dfi regis,
qui sunt, et qui illos habent, & p quem, & quantum
lerree eorum valent. De dominab?, que sunt & esse
debent de donatione domini regis sive sint maritate
sive non, & si sint maritato, quibus & p quem, &
quantüu terrz illaru valent p anü? De ecclesiis, qu:


1 * wannagio," MS.'Rawl. C. 160. 5 «*per annum," omitted in MS.
* waynagio," MS. Crewe. Rawl. id.
? * audiverint,? MS. Raw]. id.


. OF THE CROWN. 248


cerning those pleas of the Crown which have emerged
before the other iter of the justices, and which were not
propounded before them. And if any one of them has
been accused of such like, he will thereon have an excep-
tion, and even the twelve jurors of the other iter may
be charged with perjury, as in the term of St. Michael in
the ninth and in the beginning of the tenth year of the
reign of king Henry, concerning a certain Henry Romband
in the county of Hertford. Concerning those who are at
the mercy of the lord the king and have not been amerced,
in regard to which it is to be seen, in what manner each
is to be amerced. And it is to be known, that a knight
and a free man shall not be amerced. except according to
the measure of the delict, according as it is great or
small, and saving his tenement. Also the merchant in
like manner saving his merchandise, and the villein saving
his waggonage, and this by the judgment of honest men
of the neighbourhood, who shall pledge their fealty with

the serjeant. But counts and barons are not to be
amerced exeept through their peers, and according to
the measure of the delicet, and this by the barons of the
Exchequer or before the king himself. But a clerk shall
not be amerced according to his ecclesiastical benefice,
but according to the quantity of his lay fee and according
io the measure of the delict. And the amercers shall
pledge their fealty to do this faithfully, that they will
aggrieve no one through enmity, nor show deference to
any one through love, and that they will conceal those
things which they have heard. Concerning valets and girls,
who are or ought to be in the guardianship of the lord
. the king, who they are and who have control of them,
and through whom, and how much their lands are worth.
Concerning ladies of any manor, who are or ought to be
of the donation of the lord the king, whether they be
married or not, and if they have been given in marriage
to whom and through whom, and how much their lands
are worth by the year. Of churches, which are of the


Q 2


-- anm 7 C o OR Sco» sm € 7. M 0T * ens Mc: Ck. —8 0 7o 77. 0
.


XEGEUU qM
V -Am—MÁLG.——
*


Ao. TR y


944 DE CORONA. "


sunt de advocatione! dfi regis, quie ecclesim ill; sunt,

& qui illas habent & p quem, & quantum valent p

ani. De eschaetis diii regis, quee sunt, & quis illas

tenet, & p q servitium, tam de terris Normannorum,

quàm de alis, & si quse teneantur sine warranto,

Wr upUR capiantur in manum dii regis? De serjantiis dii
$ 4. regis, quee sunt, & qui illas tenent & p quem, & cujus-
| modi serjantie ille sunt, & quantum valent & qure
j servitia reddant. De purpresturis factis sup diim
regem, sive in terra, sive in mari, sive in aqua dulci,

sive infra libertatem, sive exlra, sive alibi ubicunq.

De mensuris factis & juratis p regnum, si servatz sint

sicub& pvisum fuit, & si custodes mensurarum mercedes

ceperint ab aliquo, quód possint p alias emere & p

alias vendere, quod quidem intelligatur de omnib?

mensuris, tiam ulnis quàm ponderibus, & si assisa& de

latitudine pannorum servata sit, sicut fuit pvisum, &

Si quis denarios ceperib p pannis cotra assisà venditis.

De vinis venditis in civitate, burgis, (v aliis villis

mereatoris, ubi ving vendita sunt, contra assisam, &

ji quis ea vendiderit? et quot dolia per annum & per
quot annos. De illis qui ceperunt denarios ab illis,

qui extraneos hospitati sunt contra assisam inde fac-

tam anno preterito. De vie. & aliis ballivis dii regis,

qui tenuerunt placita coronzs, & que placita sunt? &

; | qui convenire faciunt hundreda sive wapentakia p in-
quisitionib? faciendis de morte hominis vel aliis pla-

citis eoronz, & si ceperint misericordias pro defaltis,

vel pro uthesio non levato vel non seeuto. De usu-

f117. raris Christianis mortuis, qui fuerunt, & q catalla
: habuerunt, & quis e& habuerit. De catallis Judeor


| | !«de donatione regis," MS. |  *''et qum servitia reddant"
Rawl. C. 160. omitted MS. Rawl. id.

! "" 5 * T)e vinis venditis contra assi-

| | hs Lap Tent Por SU7 | « sam et quis ea vendiderit? is the

| num," omitted MS. Rawl. id. reading of MS. Rawl. id.

| | 3 €* ogpiantur in manum domini 9 * gunt? omitted, MS. Rawl.
| regis," omitted MS. Rawl. id. id.
| !


OF THE CROWN. 945


advowson of the lord the king, what churches they
are, and who hold them, and how much they are
worth by the year. Of escheats to the lord the king
what they are, and who holds them and by what service,
as well regarding the lands of the Normans, as other lands,
and if any are held without a warrant,let them be taken
into the hands of the king. Concerning serjeanties of
the lord the king, what they are, and who holds them
and through whom, and what kind of serjeanties they
are, and how much they are worth, and what services
they render.: Concerning purprestures made upon the
lord the king, whether upon the land or upon the sea or
upon fresh water, whether within a franchise, or without
it, or anywhere else whatsoever. Concerning measures
made and sworn throughout the kingdom, if they have
been preserved as provided, and if the keepers of the mea-
sures have taken payment from any persons, that they
may buy by one measure 3nd sell by another measure,
whieh should be understood of all measures, as well ells
as weights, and if the assise of the width of cloths is
observed, as has been provided, and if any oneghas taken
coin for clothes sold contrary to the assise. Of wines
sold in a city, boroughs, and other mercantile vills,
where wines are sold, contrary to the assise, and who has
sold them, and how many barrels by the year, and for how


many years. Concerning those, who,have taken coin,


from those, who have entertained strangers contrary to
the assise made in the past year. Concerning the vis-
count and other bailiffs of the lord the king, who have
held pleas of the Crown and what pleas they were, and
who have caused the hundreds or wapentakes to be
convened to make inquisition respecting the death of a
man, or other pleas of the Crown, and if they have taken
amercements for defaults, or for not raising the hue or
not following it. Concerning Christian usurers who are
dead, who they were and what chattels they had, and
who has had them. Concerning the chattels of Jews,


f. 117.


Britton,
1. ch. v.
8 14.


Britton,


l1. ch. xxi.


8 7.


246 DE CORONA.


occiso? & vadiis & debitis & chartis eof, & quis ea
habeat. De falsonariis & retonsoribus denarior. De
moneta & chambio domini regis, sc. quis fecit mone-
tam & chambium sine domino rege, vel justitiariis
suis. De burglatoribus & malefactoribus & eor recep-
tatoribus tempore pacis. De fugitivis, & quis! redie-
rit post fugam sine warranto düi regis. De utlagatis
& fugitivis? & eor catallis, quis ea habeat & si qui
uilagati redierint sine warranto. De hiis per quor
terram utlagati, raptores? vel burglatores transierunt,
qui non fecerunt secta post eos, sicut facere debuerunt.
De mercatis remotis ab uno die in alium, sine licentia
düi regis, nisi sit *^ de die Dominica, & si quod mer-
cat de novo levat fuit, sine warranto aut precepto
düi regis? De novis consuetudinibus levatis, sive in
lerra sive in aqua, quis eas levavit & ubi De mer-
cede capta pro blado & alis catallis dimittendis, ne
caperentur ad castella & hujusmodi? & similiter de
prisis factis p vic. constabularium" vel alios ballivos
contra voluntatem eof, quorü catalla illa fuerunt. De
defaltis, sqi. de iis qui summoniti fuerunt ad esse hic
coram justitiariüis & non sunt. Et qui non venerunt
primo die. De gaolis deliberatis sine warranto domini
regis, & similiter de illis qui tenuerunt placita de pba-
toribus, sine warranto. De evasione latronum. De
wrecko maris. De malefactoribus in parcis & vivariis,
qui ill sunt, & eodem modo de columbariis, & qui
columbas capiunt revertentes ad columbaria. De rapi-
nis & prisis factis extraneis, per quos hoc factum fuit,
& quado & ubi & in eujus potestate. De illis, qui non
pmittunt ballivos dii regis intrare in terras suas, ad
sumonitiones & attachiamenta, vel districtiones facien-


1 € gi quis," MS. Rawl. C. 160. 5 «sine prixcepto domini Regis,"
. 3*'et fugitivis" omitted, MS. | MS. Rawl. id.
Rawl. id. 5**et hujus modi" omitted, MS.
3 * raptores? omitted, MS. Rawl. | Rawl. id.
id. ? * eonstabularios" MS. Rawl.


1 « git "omitted, MS. Rawl. id. id.


OF THE CROWN. | 247


who have been slain, and their securities and debts and
deeds, and who has them. Of falsifiers and clippers of coin.
Concerning the mint and exchange of the lord the king,
for instance, if any one has made à mint or an exchange
without the lord the king and his justices. Concerning
burglars and malefactors and their harbourers in time of
peace. Of fugitives, and who has returned after his flight
without the warrant of the lord the king. Of outlaws
and fugitives and their chattels, who has them, and
if any outlaws have returned without warrant. Of those,
through whose land outlaws, robbers, or burglars have
passed, who have not made pursuit after them, as they
ought to have done. Of markets removed from one day
to another, without the licence of the lord the king, ex-
cept it be from the Lord's Day, and if any market has
been set up anew without the licence of the lord the
king. Of levying new customs, whether in land or in
water, who has levied them and where. Of payment
taken for releasing corn and other chattels, that they
may nob be taken to castles and such like, and in like
manner of prises made by the viscount, constable, or
other bailiffs against the will of those, whose chattels
. they were, for defaults, that is, from those who were
summoned to be here before the judges and were not so.
And those who have not come on the first day of gaol
deliveries, without a warrant from the king, and likewise
of those who have held pleas concerning approvers with-
out warrant. Of the escape of thieves. Of wreck of the
sea. Of malefaetors in parks and fishponds, who they
are, and of dovecotes, and who eapture doves returning
to their dovecotes. Of robberies and prises made against
strangers, by whom this has been done, and when and
where and in whose power. Of those who do not permit
the bailiffs of the king to enter upon their land to make
summonses and attachments or distraints for the debts due


f 117 b.


248 DE CORONA.


das, pro debitis dni regis vel pro placitis, & aliis rebus


sine speciali libertate. De ballivis, qui ceperunt dona


vel denarios pro recognitoribus amovendis de juratis
& assisis, & similiter de vic. & ballivis qui ceperunt
redemptionem de valetis! integí feod militis tenenti-
bus, vel viginti libratas terre habentib?, ne milites
fierent ad mandat dii regis, cü vic. & ahi ballivi dii
regis inde pceepi haberent speciale, de talibus, plen:e '
setatis existentibus, milites faciedis. De vie. & aliis
ballvis, qui placita coronzg & namii vetiti placitat &
terminant in coih, hundredis, vel p sacrament vel alio
modo, ci nullam inde habeant potestate sine speciali
mandato dii regis  & per breve suum, nisi tani vic.
qui est in lioe justitiarius dii regis super injusta
captione & detentione. De excessibus vic. & aliof bal-
livot, si aliqua litem suscitaverint occasione habendi
terras vel custodias, vel perquirédi denarios, vel alios
pfeetus, vel p q justitia & veritas occultetur vel dila-
tionem capiat. De vic. & alüs ballivis ambidextris,
qui capiunt ex utraque parte. De thuthingis, hundre-
dis, sive wapentakiis & aliis ballivis domini regis po-
sitis ad firma, tempore predictorum vie. quantum
valent, & p quanto posita fuerunt quolibet anno tem-
poribus predictorum vicecomitum, & pro quanto modó
posita sunt? De prisis domini regis in terra, sive in
aqua dulci, vel salsa, & libertatibus spectantibus ad
castella sua, sive ad comitatum, sivo ad burgos suos,
sive ad alia quzcunque loca, quie sunt, & quantum.
valeant per annum, & quis ea oceupaverit vel celave-
rii vel detinuerit. De vicecom & alis ballivis qui
ceperunt denarios ab illis, qui rectati fuerunt de morte


! * vgllectis," M&S. Rawl. C. 160, | * comitum, et pro quanto modo
? * quantum valent, et pro quan- | ** positasunt," omitted in MS. Rawl.
* to posita fuerunt quolibet auno | id.
* temporibus predictorum  vice-


OF THE CROWN. 249


io the king or for pleas and other things without a special
franchise. Of bailffs who have taken gifts or money for
removing recognitors from juries and assises, and simi-
larly concerning the viscount and bailiffs who have
taken redemption of service from valets holding a full
knight fee or having twenty pounds worth of land, that
they may not do military service at the command of the
king, when the viscount and other bailiffs of the lord the
king have received a special precept to enroll for mili-
tary service all such persons, being of full age. Con-
" cerning viscounts and other bailiffs, who hold pleas of
the Crown and of forbidden distraint and determine
them in the counties, hundreds, or by an oath or in some
other way, when they have no power therein without a
special mandate of the lord the king, and by his writ,
except only the viscount, who is for this purpose the
justice of the king concerning unjust caption and de-
tention. Of the excesses of viscounts and other boi-
liffs, if they have excited any litigation by occasion of
having lands or wardships, or of exacting monoy or
other profits, whereby justice and truth are obseured or
undergo delay. Concerning two-handed viscounts and
other bailiffsu who take from both parties. Concerning
tithings, hundreds, and wapentakes, and other bailiffs of
the lord the king placed out to farm in the time of the
aforesaid viscounts, how much they are worth and for
how much they have been placed out for each year in
the time of the said viscounts, and for how much they
have been lately placed out to farm. Concerning the
prises of the lord the king on land or in fresh water and
salt water, and the franchises pertaining to his castles,
whether as regards the county or his boroughs, or any
other places, what they are and how much they are
worth a year, and who has occupied them or concealed
them or detained them. Concerning viscounts and other
baillffs who have taken money from those who have
been attached for the death of a man, that they should


250 DE CORONA.

hominis, ut dimitterent eos per plevinam, cüm non
essent replegiandi sine speciali peepto domini regis.
De vieecom & alis ballivis, qui imprisonaverunt illos
qui rectati fuerunt de latrocinio per indietamentum vel
appellum probatoris, & illos in prisona detinuerunt
quousque haberent de illis redemptionem, càüm possent
& deberent per legem terre replegiari, sine aliqua re-
demptione, vel si à talibus redemptionem ceperunt ne
imprisonarentur. De vicecomitibus & aliis ballivis, qui
bis vel pluries denarios ceperunt ab aliquo, ae si plu-
rilés esseb amerciatus, cüm amereiatus non esset nisi
semel. De vicecom & aliis ballivis, qui distrinxerunt
plures unum, nomen habentes pro pluribus amercia-
mentis, ubi non fuit amerciatus nisi unus tantüm. De
vicecoi & alis ballivis qui distrinxerunt aliquem ad
payandum & faciendum ! plus, qid ad quod fuit amer-
ciatus per summonitionem sceaccarii De ballivis qui
faciunt eervisias suas, quas quandoq, vocant Sothale?
quandoque Filetale? ut pecunias extorqueant ab eis
qui sequuntur hundreda sua & ballivas suas, & de illis
similiter qui, licét cervisiam non faciant, blada tamen
colligunt in autumno, agnos & alia pretextu ballivs
suze, per quod pauperes gravant & molestant. De ca-
tallis extraneorum de potestate regis Francie existen-
lium, dum rex fuit in Vasconia, quo devenerunt, &c.
De denariis captis pro defaltis per ballivos de iis qui
non venerüt ad summonitionem vicecomitis, quis eos
ceperit & quantum. Deiis qui levaverunt warrenniam
sine sufficienti warranto. De iis qui manuceperunt


! € pacandum," MS. Rawl. C.160, | reading of MS. Rawl. C. 160, whereas


* et faciendum ? being omitted.

?«Sothale." 'Thisis probably a
misprint for * Seothale," which is
the reading of MS. Glas. and Rawl.
C.160. **Scotale" is the reading
of MS. Crewe.


3 Ejctale.? Such also is the


* Filecale? is the reading of MS.
Glas., and **Ildale ? of MS. Crewe.

**jn Vasconia." "This may re-
fer to the absence of king Henry
IIL in Gascony in 1248. He rc-
turned on the 25th Sept. 1243,
landing at Portsmouth.


OF THE CROWN. 951


dismiss them by a plevin, when they ought not to bé
released on pledges except under a special precept from
the king. Concerning the viscount and other bailliffs,
who have imprisoned those who have been attached for
robbery by an indictment or the accusation of an ap-
prover, and have detained them in prison, until they
obtained from them redemption money, when they ought
io have been by the law of the land released on pledges,
without any redemption money, or if they have taken
. redemption money from such persons that they might
not be imprisoned. Of viscounts and other bailiffs who
have taken twice or several times money from any
person, as if he had been amerced several times, when
he has only been amerced once. Of viscounts and other
bailiffs, who have distrained several persons having one
name for several amercements, where only one person
has been amereed. Of viscounts and other bailiffs, who
have distrained any one to pay and do more than that
which he was amerced by the summons of the exchequer.
Concerning bailiffs who make their own ales, which they
call Sothale and sometimes P'lctale, that they may extort
from those who do suit to their hundred or bailivry ;
and concerning those likewise who, although they do not
make ale, nevertheless collect corn in the autumn, lambs,
and other things under pretext of their bailivry, by
which they aggrieve and molest the poor. Of the chattels
of foreigners, being of the power of the king of France,
when the king was in Gascony, whither they have gone
to, &e. Of money taken for defaults by bailiffs from
those who have not come to the summons of the viscount,
who has taken them, and how much. Of those who
have raised a warren without sufficient warrant. Of


L
Breve de
gonerali
summoni-
tione in
itinere jus-
titiariorum
itineran-
tium apud
Shipwey in
com. Kanc.
infra liber-
tatem


252 . DE CORONA. ! S
habendi aliquem coram justitiariis in adventu ipsorum,
& non habuerunt eum primo die. De iis qui retraxe-
runt brevia & alteri parti vendiderunt, p quod dis
rex amisit id quod ad ipsum inde ptinebat. De the-
sauris inventis, &c.! De felonibus damnatis & suspen-
sis alibi, q cora justice. ad omnia placita, ad quorum
manus catalla devenerunt, & qui terras (si quas habent)
teneat, & à quo tépore, & quant valent per anü. De
iis qui currunt in alienis warrennis sine warranto
dominof. De vie. & aliis ballivis domini regis qui
ceperint mercedem, p vigilüs constitutis & non obser-
vatis. |


Car. II.


Rex? dilectis & fidelibus suis ballivis de Hastings?
salutem.  Precipimus vobis quód omni occasione post-
posita, sitis apud Shipwey*. ad talem diem coram
dilectis & fidelibus nostris talibus, & illue tune venire
faciatis viginti quatuor de legalioribus & diseretioribus
baronibus de Hastings, & alios, sicut venire solent &
debent ad placitum de Shipwoey, ad respondendum
coram prefatis justitiariis nostris de capitulis subserip-
tis. De veteribus? placitis corono», quce aliàs fuerunt


cles of Edw. I. will be annexced in


1« "TD Jm
De thesauris inventis! Here an Appendix.


the text ends of the articles in MS.


Rawl.C.160. After those articles
of inquiry /two other collections
of articles are inserted in MS.
Raw, the first being entitled ** Item
* nova capitula de tempore regis
* Edwardi filii regis Henrici tertii,"
and the second, ** Item capitula tan-
* gentia prima Statuta Westm. in
* anno regni regis Edwardi filii
« rogis Henrici tertio," after which
comes the king's writ addressed to


. the bailiffs of Ilustings. The Arti-


? A writ of a like tenor, summon-
iug the barons of Hastings to ap-
pear nt. Shepwey before Martin de
Pateshull and his associate justici-
aries is preserved amongst the
Close Rolls of the eleventh year of
King Henry III. Rot. Claus. xi.
Henr. III. m. 4, p. 213.

3 € HIInstynges," MS. Rawl. C. 160.

* * Shipweye," MS. Rawl. id.

5 * Hastinges," MS. Rawl. id.

** Imprimis de veteribus," MS.
Raw]. id.


OF THE CROWN. 953


those who have been sureties to produce any one before
the justices on their coming, and have not produced
him on the first day. Of those who have withheld
writs and have sold them to the other party, whereby
the lord the king has lost that which pertained to him
therefrom. Of treasure found, &e. Of felons condemned
and hung elsewhere than before the Justices for all pleas,
into whose hands their chattels have come and who has
their lands (if they have any), and from what time, and
how much they are worth by the year. Concerning
those who course in others' warrens without a warrant
from the lords. Of viscounts and other bailiffs of the
lord the king, who have taken pay for watches appointed
and noti observed.


CHAPTER II.


The king to his beloved and faithful bailiffs of Hast-
ings greeting. We enjoin you that postponing all oc-


easion of delay you be at Shipwey at such a day before summons
our beloved and faithful so and so, and there cause to orinc; jus-
come twenty-four of the more loyal and discreet barons Susan
of Hastings and others, as they are accustomed and Shipwey,
ought to come to the pleading at Shipwey, io answer in the
before our aforesaid justices concerning the under- Kent, with-


written articles. Concerning the old pleas of the Crown, beris of


mn


f. 118.
Quinque
Portuum.
Item capi-
tula.


254 DE CORONA.

eoram justitiariis apud Shipwey, & no fuerüt tenminta.
De novis placitis corónz mf q infra libertate vestra
emerserunt tepore pacis, postg justitiarii ultimó itine-
raverunt apud Shipwey. De iis qui sunt in misericor-
dia dii regis & no sunt amerciati. De ecclesiis d sut
de advocatione dii regis, d ecclesi ille süt, & qui
illas habet, & p que, & quant valent p ann. De assi-
sis pannof, si servate sint sicut pvisum fuit, & si quis
denarios cepit p pannis conira assisa venditis. De
eschaetis düi regis, Q sunt, & qui illas tenent, & per q
servibiü, tam de terris Normannor q de aliis, & si q
leneantur sine warràto, capiatur in manu dni regis.
De ilis qui robbaverunt in terris vel in aqua post
pace elamata. De purpresturis factis super diim regem,
sive in terra sive in mari sive in aqua dulci, sive
infra libertatem sive extra, sive alibi ubicunq. De
mensuris faetis & juratis p regi, si servatee sint sicut
pvisum fuit, & si custodes mensura? mercede ceperunt
ab aliquo, quód possit p alias emere & p alias vedere:
q quide intelligatur de onb? mesuris ta ulnis q pode-
rb?. De vinis venditis, &c. De thesauro, &e. De
catallis Fracor! &c. De falsonarüs,? &c. De burgla-
torib?, &ec. De mereatis? &e. De chàbio* &c. De
fugitivis, &c. De mercede, &e. De novis consuetudi-
nib?, &ec. De defaltis, &c. De gaolis? &e. De rapi-
nis, &c. De navibus captis in guerra & traditis p Wil.
de Wrothehàa, cui tradebantur, & quis illas habeat vel


!1«TDo catalis Francorum vel
* Flandrensium jnimicorum nos-
* trorum, quis eas habeat. Rot.
Claus.

? « De falsonaris et retonsoribus
* denariorum." Rot. Claus.

3«* De mercatis remotis de uno
* die iu alium diem sine licentia
** nostra, nisi sit de die Dominica."
Rot. Claus.

1* De escambio monete nostre,


* quisillud fecerit sine licentia nos-
* tra." Rot. Claus.

$*]De novis consuetudinibus
* levatis in terra vel in aqua, quis
* eas levavit, et ubi." Rot. Claus.

5 ** De gaolis deliberatis sine war-
ranto." Rot. Claus.

? «Per Willielmnum de Wrotham?
is the reading of Rot. Claus. xi.
Henr.III. William of Wrotham a
famous sea-captain was the keeper


OF THE CROWN. 255


which have.been at other times before our justiciaries the Cinque
ab Shipwey and not determined. , Concerning the new dc
pleas of our Crown, which have arisen within your fran- articles.
ehise in time of peace, after our justices have last nue
held an iter at Shipwey. Of those who are at the
mercy of the lord the king and have not been amerced.

Of churches which are of the advowson of the lord the

king, what those churches are and who holds them, and
through whom, and how much they are worth a year.

Of the assises of cloths, if they have been observed as

they have been provided, and if any one has taken money

for cloths sold contrary to the assise. Of the escheats

of the lord the king, what they are and who holds them ;

and by what service, as well respecting the lands of the
Normans as other lands, and if any are held without a
warrant let them be taken into the hand of the lord the

king. Concerning those who have robbed on land or
water after peace was proclaimed. Of purprestures

made upon the lord the king whether on land or on sea

or on fresh water, whether within or without a franchise,

or elsewhere wheresoever. Of measures made and sworn
throughout the kingdom, if they have been preserved as
provided, and if the keepers of the measures have re-
ceived pay from any one, that he may buy by others or

sell by others, which is to be understood of all measures
whether ells or weights. Of wines sold, &c. Of treasure,

&c. Of the chattels of Frenchmen, &c. — Of forgers, &c.

Of burglars, &c. Of markets, &c. Of exchange, &e. Of
fugitives, &e. Of pay (received), &e. Of new customs,

&e. Of defaults, &e. Of gaols, &e. Of plunders, &c. Of

ships taken in war and delivered up by William of
Wrotham, to whom they were delivered up, and who


256 DE CORONA.


| quid de illis actü sit. De illis qui vendiderunt naves
vel maeremiü ad naves faciendas inimicis patris dni
regis & suis contra phibitionem patris ipsius diii regis.
Faciatis etiam venire corà eisdem justitiariis nfis ad
Dfat termiiüi ofia placita & omia attachiamenta, d venire
& terii debent & solét cora justitiariis placita teiütib?
apud Shepwey.| "Teste, &c. Eodé modo & per eade
verba scribatur ballivis de Romual, ballivis de Heya,
ballivis de Dover & ballvis de Sandwyz, ita q quili-
bet eof portuü habeat literas p se in pdieta forma.
Et quonià ssepius contentio est inter homes pdietof
portuu, & homines de Gernemuth & de Donwich, fiat
breve vie. Norff. & Suff in hac forma.


Rex vie. Norff. & Suff. salute. Sciatis q sumnmioneri
fecim? ad tal& die apud Shepwey,' oüia placita de
quing , portub? sieut teneri debent & solet cora justiti-
aris apud Shipwey. Et ideó tibi peipim?, q hoc sciri
facias hominib? de Jernemewe & ballivis de Donewiz,
ità g si aliquis coqueri voluerit de aliquo qui sit de
libertate vel infra libertatem quinq, portuü, tune sit
apud Shipwey corà pfatis justitiariis nostris querela
sui ppositur? & justitiam inde recepturus. Teste, &c.


CAP. III.


Cum sint quedam crimina capitalia, qure. inducunt


De crimine . um
iem ama. corporalem poenam, quandoque ultimum supplicium,


jestatis et. quandoque membrorum truneationem, secundum quod
ed SPeéi- fuerint majora vel minora, & quorum qusdam sunt
publiea & qusedam privata, & publicorum qusedam


MA c KMCINI IC CECI D" — p M C
of the king's ports, and died in the | William of Wrotham, who was
second or third year of Henry III. | archdeacon of Taunton, A.D. 1204.
It is probable that this writ was the | He was the keeper of the king's
earliest issued to the 'barons of | galleys for many years during the
Hastings after the conclusion of | reign of king John.

*the general war? st the com- 1* Shipweye? is the reading
mencement of the reign of Henry | throughout the Close Rolls.

III, and soon after the death of


OF. THE CROWN. 957


has them, and what has been done with them. Of those
who have sold ships or timber to make ships to the ene- '
mies of the father of the lord the king and of the king
himself, against the prohibition of the father of the lord
the king himself. Cause also to come before our same
justiciaries at the aforesaid term all pleas and all attach-
ments which ought and are accustomed to come and be
determined before our justices holding pleas in Ship-
wey. Witness &c. In the same way and in the same
words let it be written to the bailiffs of Romsey, to
the bailiffs of Hythe, to the bailiffs of Dover, and the
bailiffs of Sandwich, so that each of them have letters
for himself in the aforesaid form. And since there is
often contention between the men of the aforesaid
ports and the men of Yarmouth and of Dunwich, let a
writ go to the viscounts of Norfolk and of Suffolk in
this form.


The King to the viscounts of Norfolk and of Suffolk | 2.
greeting. Know ye that we have caused to be sum- du
moned at such & day to Shipwey all the pleas of the counts of
Cinque Ports as they ought and are accustomed to be dir
held before the justices at Shipwey. And therefore we Suffolk.
enjoin you that you make this known to the men ofzhoud |
Yarmouth and the bailiffs of Dunwich, so that if any nud the
body wishes to complain of any body, who is of the Yarmouth
franchise or within the franchise of the Cinque Ports, he e ich,
may then be at Shipwey before the aforesaid our justiti-
aries to propound his complaint and to receive justice


thereupon. Witness &c.


CHAPTER III.


Sinee there are certain capital crimes, which bring on


eorporeal punishment, sometimes the last punishment, pé


sometimes the mutilation of a limb, according as they high trea-
are greater or less, and of which some are public and m xd
some private, and of publie crimes some bring on the f.118 b.


VOL. II. R


"E


958 DE CORONA.


majorem poenam inferunt, propter personam conira
quam presumitur, sicut est crimen lese majestatis, ut
Si contra personam ipsius regis sit presumptum, quod
quidem crimen omnia alia crimina excedit quoad pce-
nam, ideó primó dicendum est de hoe crimine lese
majestatis. Habet enim crimen lese majestatis sub
se multas species, quarum una est, ut si quis ausu
lemerario machinatus sit in mortem domini regis, vel
aliquid egerit vel agi procuraverit ad seditionem ?
domini regis, vel exercitus sui, vel procurantibus auxi-
lium & consilium prsebuerit vel consensum, licet id
quod in voluntate habuerit no perduxerit ad effectum.
Ad accusationem veró hujus criminis admittitur qui-
libet de populo, liber homo & servus & minor infra
ceiatem constitut?, dum tamen accusatus attachietur
usque ad «setatem accusantis, & hoc dico, dum tamen
sit ille qui accusat integre fam: & non criminosus,
quia eriminosi ab omni aecusatione repelluntur, ut si
accusans fuerit latro cognitus vel utlagatus, vel aliquo
genere feloniee convictus vel convincendus. Nec etiam
admittuntur. ad accusationem in crimine lese majes-
tatis aliquo easu conspiratores, vel erimini eonsentien-
tes, & in hoc casu pertinet tota accusatio ad accusan-
iem, & ad ipsum regem. Continet etiam sub se crimen
less majestatis crimen falsi, quod quidem multiplex
esí: ui si quis falsaverit sigillum domini regis, vel
monetam reprobam fabricaverit, & hujusmodi, secundüm
quod inferiüs dicetur. Si sit aliquis, qui alium nove-
ribi inde esse culpabilem, vel in aliquo criminosum,


1 [tis stated in a note to Hale's | *ditionem " is the reading of MSS.


Pleas of the Crown, i. p. 77, that in
most of the MSS. of Bracton the
reading in this place is *seduc-
* tjonem." 'T'he editor of the printed


. text of 1569, however, does not


appear to have met with any such
reading, as he has not. noticed it in
hislist of various readings. **Se-


Rawl. C. 160 and 159, also of MS.
Crewe, and MS. Glas On the
other hand *seductionem?' is the
reading of MS. Galeaezo and of seve-
ral MSS. of & subsequent period. '
It seems probable that * seditionem
is the older reading. —


OF THE CROWN. 259


greater punishment on account of the person against
whom they are directed, such as the crime of high
treason, as if it be directed against the person of the
king himself, which crime exceeds all other crimes as
far as regards the punishment, therefore let us first treat
of this crime of high ireason. For the crime of high
ireason has under it many species, of which one is, as if
any one by & rash daring should compass the death of
the lord the king, or shall have done any thing or pro-
cured any thing to be done for the sedition of the king
himself or of his army, or has afforded aid and counsel
or consent to those proeuring the same, although they
have not carried into execution what they had in inten-
tion. But for the accusation of this crime any one of the
people is admissible, à free man or a serf and a minor
below age, provided the accused be attached until the
accuser comes of age, and this I say, provided that he who
accuses is of unblemished character, and not criminous,
because eriminous persons are rejected from all accusa-
tion, as if the accuser should be à known robber or out-
law, or convicted or about to be convicted of any kind
of felony. For these are not admitted as accusers in à
charge of high treason in any case, conspirators or per-
sons consenting to the crime, and in this case the whole
&ceusation appertains to the accuser and to the king
himself And the erime of forgery, which is multifold,
contains under itself the crime of high treason, as if any
one shall have.forged the seal of the lord the king, or
shall have fabricated base coin and such like according
io what will be said below. lf there be any one, who
has known another to be thereon culpable or criminous


R 2


lou LIO EE Sor canta tone oe iru R inc 2 cc pna aec a wan amat oin tradito oa dir M.


260 J DE CORONA.


statim & sine intervallo aliquo accedere debet ad ipsum
regem si possit, vel mittere, si venire non possit, ad
aliquem regi familiarem & omnia ei manifestare per
ordinem. Non enim debet morari in uno loco per
duas noctes, vel per duos dies, antequam personam
regis videat, nec debet ad aliqua negotia, quamvis
urgentissima, se convertere, quia vix permittütur ei
quód retro aspiciat. Quod autem si ad tempus dissi-
mulaverit & subticuerit, quasi consentiens & assentiens,
erit seductor domini regis manifestus, sive accusatus
proprius füerit homo, vel alienus: & si post interval-
lum accusare velit, non erit de jure audiendus, nisi
docere poterit se fuisse justis rationibus impeditum.
Si quis autem de hoc crimine fuerit diffamatus, tunc
videndum erit utrum appareat accusator vel non, si
&utem nullus appareat, nisi sola fama, quse» tantüm
apud bonos & graves oriatur, hie salvó attachiabitur
per salvos & securos plegios, vel si plegios non habu-
erit, per carceris inclusionem, donee de crimine sibi
imposito veritas inquiratur, & si condemnandus fuerit,
ultimum supplicium sustinebit cum poencz aggravatione
corporalis, & omnium bonorum amissione, & hseredum
suorum perpetua exhsredatione, ita quód nee ad hse-
reditatem paternam vel maternam admittuntur. Est
enim iam grave crimen istud, quód vix permittitur
heredibus quód viyant. Et si aliquando fort& ad suc-
cessionem admittantur tales, hoc magis erit de gratia,
quàn de jure. Si autem appareat accusator, tunc
primó capiatur ab eo securitas de prosequendo, & si
plegios non habuerit, sufliejt pro securitate sola fidei
datio, & hsec ideó: quia si ad plegios inveniendos dis-


f.119. iricté teneretur, alii se abstinerent à consimili acceusa-
tione. Facta igitur securitate de prosequendo, ut prse-
po


OF THE CROWN. 261


in any way, he ought forthwith and without any delay
to obtain access to the king himself, and if he cannot
come himself, he should send to some attendant of the
king, and disclose every thing to him in order. For he
ought not to delay in one place for two nights or for
two days before seeing the person of the king, nor ought
he to betake himself to any business, however urgent,
for it is scarcely allowed him to look behind him. But
if he shall have dissembled and been silent for a time,
as if consenting and assenting, he will be a manifest
seductor of the lord the king, whether the accused be
his own man or another's, and if he shall wish to accuse
him after an interval of time, he will not be entitled to
be heard of right, unless he can show that he has been
impeded by just cause. But if any body shall be
diffamed of this crime, then it will have to be seen
whether an aecuser appears or not, but if none appear,
except fame alone, which arises amongst the good
and serious only, he shall be attached safely by safe
and secure sureties, or if he have not sureties, by
inclusion within & prison until the truth be inquired
after concerning the crime attributed to him, and if he
is to be condemned, he shall sustain the last punish-
ment with an aggravation of corporeal pain and the loss
of all his goods and the perpetual disinheritance of his
heirs, so that they be admitted neither to the pater-
nal nor to the maternal inheritance. For that crime is
so grave, that itis scarcely permissible for the heirs to
live. And if sometimes such persons are admitted by
chance to the succession, this will rather happen from
grace, than of right. But if an accuser should appear,
then in the first place let security be taken from him,
that he will prosecute, and if he has sureties, the simple
giving of a promise is sufficient for security: because if
he were bound strictly to find sureties, others would
abstain from a similar accusation. Security therefore
having been given for the prosecution, as aforesaid, let


f. 119.


269 DE CORONA.


dietum est, statim capiatur aecusatus &  carcerali
custodie mancipetur, nec erit per plegios dimittendus,
nec per ballivum sine speciali precepto domini regis,
non magis quàm de homicidio perpetrato, & si libere
& sine districtione venire voluerit, & liberà respondere,
liberé debet recedere, nisi judicium ei incumberet.
Utroque autem apparente, tam accusante quàm accu-
sato, proponat accusans appellum suum in hunc mo-
dum: scilicet dicere debet se interfuisse & vidisse
certo loco, certo die, certa hora, & scivisse ipsum ac-
eusatum prselocutum! fuisse mortem regis, vel seditio-
nem suam vel exercitus sul, vel consensisse, vel auxi-
lium & consilium impendisse, vel ad hoc autoritatem
prestitisse & hoc ego juxta considerationem  curiz
disrationare paratus sum.  Aceusato etiam 9$ contra per


ordinem negante, solet appellum istud per duellum


terminari, nec erit locus concordie, nisi hoc sit de
voluntate ipsius regis. Poterit tamen accusatus ad
appellum respondere, & illud determinare antequam
duellum vadietur. Dicere enim poterit appellatus, cüm
feloniam defenderit & seditionem domini regis & totum
quiequid ei imponitur, & petere sibi allocari quód
appellans est latro cognoscens, & latro captus & im-
prisonatus pro latrocinio, & quód fregit prisonam & à
prisona evasit, vel quód uilagatus fuit, ita quód nihil
restat de eo judieandum nisi tantüm executio judicii.
Item petere poterit sibi allocari, quód cüm dicat ap-
pellans quód ali plures fuerunt cum eo ubi prelo-
eutio illa facta fuit, quód ipsi nunquam simul fuerunt
aliquo tempore de die vel de nocte, vel aliquo alio
tempore. ltem petere poterit sibi allocari, quód ceàm
idem appellans post diem quo prolocutio illa fieri de-
buit & seditio, ductus esset aliàs coram justitiariis pro


1 * prolocutum," M8. Rawl. C. 160. ** prosequtum ; " MS. Rawl, C. 159.


OF THE CROWN. 268


the accused party be seized and committed to the cus-
tody of a prison, nor is he to be dismissed upon sure-
ties, nor by the bailiff without a special precept of the
lord the king, no more than where homicide has been
perpetrated ; and if he wishes to come freely and without
distraint and to answer freely, he ought to withdraw
freely, unless a judgment rests upon him. Upon both of
them appearing, as well the aeccuser and the accused
party, let the accuser propound his charge in this manner:
for instance he ought to say, that he was present and
saw in a certain place, on a certain day, at & certain hour,
and knew that the party accused proposed the death of
the king or his sedition or that of his army, or consented
to it, or gave aid or counsel, or afforded authority to it, and
this I am prepared to prove according to the consideration
of the court. The accused party on the other hand deny-
ing in order, the charge is aceustomed to be determined
by a duel, nor will there be place for concord, unless this
be upon the desire of the king himself. But the accused
party may reply to the charge, and determine it before
security is given for the duel. For the accused may say,
when he denies the felony and the sedition of the lord
the king and all whatever is imputed against him, and
claim that there be allowed to his account, that the
accuser is à known robber and a robber captured and
imprisoned for robbery, and that he has broken his prison
and has escaped from his prison, or that he has been out-
lawed, so that nothing remains to be adjudged respecting
him except only the execution of à judgment, Likewise
he may claim that there be allowed to him, that when
the aecuser says that there were several others with him
when that proposal was made, that they were never to-
gether at any one time by day or by night, or at any
other time. Likewise he may claim that there be al-
lowed to him, that when the same appellant, after the
day on which that proloecution and sedition ought to
have been made, was brought elsewhere before the jus-


264 . DE CORONA.


alia transgressione, nihil locutus fuit de tali seditione
domini regis. ltem petere poterit sibi allocari, quód
ex quo appellans talem scivit seditionem esse prolocu-
iam, statim & sine mora non accessit ad regem, ut
hoe ei ostenderet, sed hoc per tantum tempus subti-
cuit, quód interim posset domino regi (si ita esset)
perieulum iminere; et unde in appello suo audiri non
deberet,.sicut inimicus & traditor domini regis, & con-
sentiens felonie. Item petere poterit sibi allocari,
quód cüm hoc fieri deberet tali tempore, & appellans
esseb sepius in curia domini regis, & cum rege sepius
loqueretur, vel loqui posset si vellet, de hoc nihil ei
ostendit. Item petere poterit sibi allocari, quód cüm
ipse appellatus venerit coram ipso appellante, & staret
inter plures, ipsum nó cognovit nec scivit ipsum ab
alüs discernere. Poterit etiam petere plura alia sibi
allocari, de die, & hora, & variatione, & aliis plurib?,
secund q inferiüs dicetur de appellis: Ad exceptiones
istas, oportet quód appellans respondeat ad singulos
articulos per ordinem, ut sic reducat! appellum ad ju-
dicium. Et tunc vidend', quis possit & debeat judi-
care, & sciendum, q non ipse rex, quia sie esset in
querela ppria actor & judex, in judicio vite, membro-
rum, & exhsredationis, quod quidem non esset, si
querela esset aliorum. Item justitiarii ? non, càm in
f.119», judiciis psonam domini regis, cujus vices gerit, reprze-
sentet. Quis ergo judicabit? videtur, sine prejudicio
melioris sententie, quód curia & pares judicabunt, ne


! Remaneat.. MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. 265


ticiaries for another transgression, he said nothing con-
cerning such a sedition against thelord the king. Like-
wise he may claim that there be allowed to him, that
from the time, when the accuser knew that such a sedi-
tion was proposed, he did not forthwith and without
delay obtain access to the king, that he might disclose
it to him, but he kept silence as to it so long, that mean-
while, if the fact were so, danger to the lord the king
might be imminent. And hence he ought not to be heard
in his accusation, as being an enemy and betrayer of the
lord the king, and consenting to the felony. Likewise
he may claim that there be allowed to him, that when
this ought to have been done at a certain time, and
the accuser was repeatedly in the court of the king, and
repeatedly spoke with the king, or imnight have spoken
with him if he wished, he disclosed to him nothing
thereof. Likewise he may claim that there be allowed
to him, that when he the accused party came into the
presence of the aecuser, and stood in the midst of several
persons, he did not know him nor knew how to distin-
guish him from the others. He may also claim that seve-
ral other things be allowed him concerning the day, and
the hour, and the variation, and several other things ac-
cording to what will be explained below on the subject
of aceusations. To these exceptions it 1s incumbent that
the accuser should answer to each of the articles in order,
that so he may reduce the aecusation into à judgment.
And then it is to be seen, who can and ought to judge,
and itis to be known, that it is not the king himself,
otherwise he would be plaintiff and judge in his own
cause, in à judgment of life or members or disinheritance,
which would not be the case, if the complaint was on
the part of others. Likewise the justices? No, since
in judgments the justice represents the person of the


king whose part he bears. Who therefore shall judge ? f. 119 b.


It appears, without prejudice to a better opinion, that
the court and the peers shall judge, lest, misdeeds should


2.


De crimine


falsi et


e


266 DE CORONA.


maleficia remaneant impunita, & maximé ubi periculum
vit fuerit & membrorum vel exhzredationis, cum
ipse rex pars actrix esse debeat in judicio. Sed in
hae parte ut videtur, erit distinguend, quale sit factum
de quo pponitur appellum, utrum sc. sit ihi felonia vel
transgressio, quia quzelibet transgressio diei non debet
felonia, qvis à converso. 'Si autem ibi fuerit felonia,
tune judieada sunt verba appelli, ordo & processus, ut
sciri possit si inter appellat & appellantem jungi pos-
sit duell, quia si ad appellum accusantis paratus esset
appellatus, sine responsione vadiare duellum, preecedere
deberet examinatio, ut predictum est. Et si sine exa-
minatione contra justitiam esset vadiatum, per exami-
nationem posset devadiari. Si autem tale sit factum,
quód debeat ibi magis transgressio quàm felonia deno-
tari; remanebit duellum, sed tunc videndum utrum
transgressio illaque tangit regem gravis fuerit vel
levis, sive sibi, sive uxori & pueris. In suis veró
poterit rex injuriari. Si a&utem levis fuerit transgres-
sio quse poenam infligat pecuniariam tantüm, & levem,
bené possunt justitiarii sine paribus judicare. Si autem
gravis fuerit transgressio & proxima exhzredationi,
quód redemptionem inducat, ibi debent pares justitiariis
associarli, ne ipse rex per seipsum vel justitiarios suos
sine paribus actor sit & judex.


Est & aliud genus criminis lese, majestatis, quod
inter graviora numeratur, quia ltimum inducit suppli-


m sPeci- eium & mortis occasionem, sc. crimen falsi, in quadam


sui specie, & quod tangit coronam ipsius domini regis,
ut si aliquis accusatus fuerit vel convictus, quód sigil-
lum domini regis falsaverit, consignando inde chartas
vel brevia, vel si chartas confecerit & brevia & signa
apposuerit adulterina, quo casu si quis inde inveniatur


OF THE CROWN. | 267


remain unpunished, and especially where there shall be
peril of life and members or disinheritance, since the
king himself ought to be the party plaintiff in the judg-
ment. But in this part, as i6 seems, it will have to be
distinguished, what the act is concerning which the accu-
sation is propounded, whether for instance it be felony
or trespass, because every trespass ought not to be called
felony, although the converse may hold good. But if
there be felony there, then the words of the accusation are
to be judged, the order and the process, that it may be
known if between the accused party and the accuser the
duel may be joined, because if the accused is prepared
upon the aecusation of the accuser without a reply to
give security for the duel, an examination ought to pre-
cede, as has been stated above. And if security has been
given contrary to justice without examination, it may
be released upon examination. But if the act be such,
that i& ought to be denoted a trespass rather than a
felony, the duel will remain, but then it is to be seen
whether that trespass which touches the king has been
grave or slight, whether it touch the king or his wife or
his children. Forthe king may be injured in the persons
of his family. But if the trespass has been grave and
close on disinheritance, so that it may bring on ransom,
there the peers [of the accused] ought to be associated
with the justices, lest the king himself by himself or his
justiees without any peers should be the plaintiff and
the judge.


"There is another kind of treason, which is counted  . 2.
amongst the greater ireasons, because it brings on the ueif
last punishment and an occasion of death, namely, the forgery
erime of forgery,in a species of its own, and which cR
touches the crown of the lord the king himself, as if any
one should be accused or convicted, that he had falsified
the seal of the king himself, by sealing therewith charters
or writs, or if he has prepared charters or writs and
affixed to them adulterine seals, in which case if he be


268 DE CORONA.


culpabilis, vel seysitus, si warrantum non habuerit,
pro voluntate regis judicium sustinebit, & si warran-.
tum habuerit, & warrantizaverit, liberabitur & tenebi-
tur warrantus. Si autem cüm warrantum nominaverit,.
warrant' subtraxerit se, exigendus erit & utlagandus,
sed ille qui captus est, non erit propter hoc dimitten-
dus, nec liberabitur, nisi, quód culpabilis non sit, po-
suerit se super patriam, & si forte cüm venerit, de
warrantia ei defecerit, bene poterit inter eos ad duel-
lum perveniri. Est & aliud genus criminis, quod sub
nomine falsi continetur, & tangit coronam domini
regis, & ultimum inducit supplicium, sicut de illis qui
falsam fabricant monetam, & qui de re non reproba

' faciunt reprobam, sicut sunt retonsores denariorum, qui
cüm sint in seysina, sepius non contingit ipsos libe-
rari per warranti vocationem. Socios autem & coad-
jutores & ministros habere poterunt in hoc opere, quos
si appellare voluerint, audientur.


; Est inter cetera gravis presumptio conira regem &
Deoceulta- (iv nitatem & coronam suam, que quidem est quasi
tione the- But ,q q q
saudiin — crimen furti, scilicet occultatio thesauri inventi frau-
"U^ ^ duloss ut si quis accusatus fuerit, quàd thesaurum

inveniret, scil. aurum vel argentum, vel aliud genus
metalli, quocunque loco, cüm super hoe apud bonos &
graves fuerit diffamatus per patriam, statim attachietur
f120. quód sit coram justitiarlis in adventu eorum, ubi si
negaverit se aliquid invenisse, poterit veritas per pa-
iriam declarari; & cüm mon sit de aliquo seysitus,
poterit tamen contra ipsum esse presumptiones proba-
biles, quibus standum erit donec per patriam probetur
. eontrarium.  Poterunt.autem tales esse pressumptiones,
ut si solito ditiüs se habuerit in vestibus & in aliis


OF THE CROWN. 269


found culpable, or seysed of them, and not have a war-
rantor, he shall sustain judgment at the will of the king,
and if he have a warrantor and the warrantor shal
warrant, he shall be set free, and the warrantor shall be
detained. But if when he has named & warrantor, the
warrantor has withdrawn himself, he shall be exacted
and outlawed, but he who has been taken shall not on
that aecount be dismissed nor be liberated, unless he has
put himself on the country that he is not culpable, and
if by chance when he has come, the warranty fails, it
may well come then to a duel between them. There is
also another kind of crime, which is contained under the
name of forgery, and touches the erown of the king and
brings on the last punishment, as for instance of those
who fabricate false money, and who debase a thing which
is not of itself base, such as the clippers of coin, who
when they are in seysine of it, it more often does not
happen that they are liberated on calling a warrantor.
They may, however, have associates and coadjutors and
ministers in this work, whom if they wish to call, they
shall be heard. -


There is also amongst other things à grave attempt
against the king and his dignity and his e1own, which
is as 1b were à crime of theft, for instance the fraud-
ulent hiding of treasure-trove, as if & person should be
accused that he had found ireasure, for instance, gold
or silver or any other kind of metal, in whatever place,
when he shall have been ill spoken of amongst honest
and grave persons throughout the country, he shall be
forthwith attached that he present himself before the
justices at their coming, when if he shall deny that he
has found any thing, the truth may be declared by the
country, and when he shall not be seysed of any thing,


8.
Of the
hiding of
treasure-
trove.


f. 126


there may be probable presumptions against him, upon -


whieh reliance may be placed, until the contrary be
proved by the country. But the presumptions may be
of this kind, asif he has exhibited more wealth than


4.
Quid est
thesaurus.
Dig. XLI.
Tit. i. 31.
S 1.


270 DE CORONA.


ornamentis, cibis & potibus & hujusmodi, qui cüm
super hoe fuerit convictus, erit gaolce committendus, &
postea graviter, pro voluntate domini regis redimendus,
& non refert quo loco hujusmodi thesaurus inveniatur,
Ssecundüm tempora moderna, licót aliter hoc antiquitüs
fuerit observatum.


Est autem thesaurus quzdam vetus depositio pecu-
nic, vel alterius metall, cujus non extat modo me-
moria, ub jam dominum non habeat, & sic de jure
naturali! fit ejus qui invenerit, ut non alterius sit.
Alioquin si quis aliquid lueri causa, vel metus, vel
custodie reeondiderit sub terra, non erit thesaurus,
eujus etiam furtum fit. Thesaurus fortune donum
creditur, & nemo servorum opera thesaurum querere
debet, nec propter thesaurum terram fodere, sed si
alterius rei tunc operam sumebat, & fortuna aliud de-
dit. Cüàm igitur thesaurus in nullius bonis sit, &
antiquitüs de jure naturali esset inventoris, nune de
jure gentium effcitur ipsius dni regis. Et sunt alia
quaedam qus in nullius bonis esse dicuntur, sicut


 wreckum maris, grossus piscis, sicut sturgio & balena


f. 120.


5.
Quid sit
wreckum,
et de
grosso
pisce, sc.
sturgio et
balena.


& ali res qus dominum non habent, sicut, animalia
vagantia quas nullus sequitur, petit, vel advocat, & quse
sunt ipsius domini regis propter suum privilegium, &
eorum quibus ipse rex concesserit talem libertatem
aut privilegium? & unde videndum, quod dici debeat
wreckum. | |


Et sciendum quód wreckum diei poterit quasi dere-
lictü, ut si quid (navis levandze causa) à nave pjectü
fuerit ab aliquo, sine animo retinendi vel repetendi, id
pprié dici poterit wreckum, cüm res pjecta habita sit
p derelieta, & si habite sit p derelicta videri poterit


l*«de jure naturali," omitted in |  ?**aut privilegium," omitted in
MS. Rawl. C. 160. MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. | 271


usual in his dress or in other ornaments, in his food or
in his drink and such like, who when he shall have been
convieted of this, he shall be committed to gaol to be
heavily ransomed at the pleasure of the lord the king,
and i& does not matter in what place this kind of trea-
sure has been found aecording to modern times, although
in ancient times it was otherwise observed.

But treasure is an ancient deposit of money or some 4.
other metal, respecting which memory exists not, so that bats
it has no owner, and so of natural right, i6 becomes the
property of him who has found it,so that it shall not
belong to another. Otherwise if any one shall have
hidden any thing under the ground for the sake of gain,
or of fear, or of custody, it shall not be treasure of which
a theft is made. Treasure is believed to be a gift of
fortune, and no one ought to seek for treasure by the
labour of serfs, nor to dig up the ground for treasure, but
. if he was engaged at work upon one thing, and fortune
gave him another. Since therefore treasure is in nobody's
goods, and of ancient time it was by natural right the
property of the finder, it is now by the law of nations
ihe property of the lord the king himself. And there
are other things which are said to be in nobody's goods, as
for instance wreck of the sea, great fish, as sturgeon and
whale, and other things which have no owner, as stray
animals, which nobody pursues, seeks for, or calls for, and
which belong to the lord the king himself on account of
his privilege, and to those to whom the king himself has
granted such a& franchise or privilege, and therefore we
must see what is wreck.


And itis to be known that wreck may be called as ib — 5.
were derelict, as if any thing (for the sake of lightening What is


f. 120 b.


Britton,
]. i. ch.
xvili.


272 DE CORONA.


p presumptiones, ut si liber projectus fuerit, utru in-
veniatur clausus vel aptus, cüm comodé claudi possit
& bené, & sie de similibus. Item magis pprié dici
poterit wreckiü, si navis frangatur, & de qua nullus
vivus evaserit, & maxim?é si dominus rerü submersus
fuerit, & quiequid inde ad terra venerit erit dni regis,
nec aliquis alius aliquid à düo rege inde vendicare
poterit, vel habere, quamvis prope littus maris predia
possederit, nisi de wrecko habendo speciali gaudeat
privilegio. Et quód hujusmodi dici debeant wreckum
verum est, nisi ita sit quód verus dominus aliunde
veniens, per certa indicia & signa, docuerit res esse
suas, ut si canis vivus inveniatur, & constare possit
quód talis sit dominus illius canis, presumitur ex hoc
illum esse dominum illius canis & illarum rerum. Et
eodem modo, si certa signa apposita fuerint mercibus
& alüs rebus. Et ea qus dicta sunt, locum habent si
res in littore maris inveniantur, & illud idem si ppe
littus vel longiàüs in mare, dum tamen constare poterit
in veritate, quód in littore essent applicandse.' Sed
quid si in mari longiüs à littore inveniantur, ita quód
constare non possit ad q terram vel regionem esset
applieande, tune quiequid ita inventum fuerit erit in-
ventoris  eó quód in nullius bonis esse dicatur, & dici-
tur à nautis Lagan & q ideo oceupanti conceditur,
quia non est aliquis qui inde privileg' habere possit,
rex non magis q privata psona, ppter incert rei event,
De sturgione verà ita observatur, q rex illum habebit
integrü ppter suü privileg, de ballena veró, sufficit,
secundüm quosdam, si rex inde habuerit caput, &
regina caudia.


OF THE CROWN. 278


presumptions if it has been regarded as derelict, as if à
book be cast overboard, whether it has been found closed
or open, when it could well and conveniently have been
' elosed, and so of similar things. Likewise it may be
more properly ealled wreck, if the ship be broken up,
and from which no living thing has escaped, and princi-
pally if the owner of the article has been drowned, and
whatever comes to land therefrom shall be the property
of the lord the king, nor shall any one else claim or have
anything thereof from the lord the king, although he
may have lands near the shore of the sea, unless he enjoys


& special privilege concerning having wreck. And that


things of this kind ought to be called wreck is true,
unless it be that. the true owner coming from elsewhere
may show by certain marks and signs that the things
are his property, as if à live dog has been found, and it
can be proved that he is the owner of the dog, it is there-
upon presumed that heis the owner of the dog and of
the things. And in the same way, if certain signs have
been affixed to the merchandise and other things. And
those things, which have been said, are applicable, if the
things are found on the shore of the sea, and the same
happens if they are found near the shore or further off on
the sea, provided only it is certain in truth that they
will be cast on the shore. But what if they are found
on the sea at à long distance from the shore, so that it
cannot be certain upon what shore or country they will
be cast, then whatever shall be so found shall belong to
the finder, because it may be said to be nobody's property,
and it is called by sailors (agam, and because it is there-
fore granted to the first, taker, because there is nobody
who has a privilege respecting it, the king no more than
& private person, on aecount of the uncertainty of the
event. Concerning sturgeon indeed it is thus observed,
that the king shall have the whole of i6 on account
of his privilege, but of whale it is sufficient according to
some, if the king has the head, and the queen the tail.


YOL.IL S


f. 190 b.


274 DE CORONA.


" ias Est eni gravis psumptio contra regem & coronam &
regnijura- dignitate sua, ut si assisse statutz é& jurate in regno
Ede suo ad cómunem regni sui utilitate non fuerint obser-
tur. vate, secund' q superius videri poterit inter capitula
supradicta, & unde transgressorib? quandoq, infligitur
poena corporalis, sc. pilloralis vel tumboralis cum in-
famia, secundu regni statuta, & quandoq, poena pecu-
niaria, & quandog, ville abjuratio, secund diversitatem


. delictorum.


CAP. IV.


-" Est etià inter alia crimina, crimen capitale q in parte
won tangit ipsum rege, cujus pax infringitur & in parte
et DA privatà psona, qui nequiter & contra pacem dfi regis
didit. Qeciditur. Et unde inprimis dieend est de homicidio,


quid sit homicidiu, & unde dicatur, d ejus species, &
qua poena homicide puniantur.


2. Et est homicidium hominis occisio ab homine facta,
puis si enim à bove, cane, vel alia re, non dicetur pprie
dium. homicidium. Est enim diet! homicidium ab homine &

ezedo, quasi hominis czedium. Species homicidii sunt
plures, nam aliud spirituale, aliud corporale: de spiri-
tuali veró ad prsesens non est dicend', sed corporale
j est, quo homo occiditur corporaliter, & hoc dupliciter
eommittitur, lingua vel facto. Lingua tribus modis,
sc. peepto, consilio, defensione sive tuitione. Facto,
quatuor modis, sc. justitia, necessitate, casu & volun-
tate. Justitia, ut cüàm judex vel justitiarius vel mi-
nister reum juste damnat occidit. Istud autem homi-
cidiü, si sit ex livore vel delectatione effundendi humaü


OF THE CROWN. 27 5.


It is à grave presumption against the king and his 6.
crown and his dignity, if the constituted and sworn is,
assises in his kingdom should not be observed for the assises of
eommon utility of his kingdom, aecording to what may E iiged
be seen above amongst the aforesaid articles, and there- not ob-
upon eorporeal punishment is sometimes inflicted upon ToU
transgressors, for instance, the pillory or the tumbril
with infamy, according to the statutes of the kingdom,
and sometimes à pecuniary punishment, and sometimes
abjuration of a vill aecording to the diversity of the


delinquency.


CHAPTER IV.


There is amongst other crimes, à capital crime which 1.
in part touches the king himself, whose peace is infringed, RUP
and in part touches a private person, who is slain wickedly homicide.
and against the peace of the king. And hence it is first
to be discussed respecting homicide, what is homicide, and
whence it is so called, what are its species, and by what
penalty homicide is punished.

Homicide is the killing of à man done by à man, for 2.
if i& be done by an ox, à dog, or other thing, ib is not E
properly termed homicide. For homicide is so termed
from * homine " and * ezedo," as it were the slaying of a
man. There are several species of homicide, for one is
spiritual, and another is corporeal: concerning spiritual
homicide for the present there is nothing to be said
here, but corporeal homicide is that by which is slain
corporeally, and this is done in two ways, by the tongue
and by an act. By the tongue in three ways, for in-
stance, by precept, by counsel, by defence or protection.

By an act in four ways, for instance, by justice, by neces-

sity, by chance, and by wil. By justice, as when the

judge, or justiciary, or his. officer, slays à man justly

eondemned. But that is homicide, if it be done from

malignity or the delight of shedding human blood,
s 2


LI


f. 121.


276 DE CORONA.


sanguine, licét justé occidatur iste, tamen peccat mor-
taliter ppter intentione corrupta. Si vero hoc fiat ex
amore justitie, non peccat judex ipsum condénando
ad mortem, & peipiendo ministro ut occidat eum, nec
minister si missus à judice occidat condemnat, peccare !
tamen uterque, si hsc fecerint juris ordine non ser-
vato. Necessitate, quo casu distinguendum erit utrum
necessitas illa fuit evitabilis vel non. S1 autem evita-
bilis, & evadere posset absque occisione, tunc erit reus
homicidiü. Si autem inevitabilis, quia occidit homi-
nem sine odii meditatione in metu & dolore animi se
& sua liberando, cüm aliter evadere non posset, non
tenetur ad poenam homicidii. Casu, sicut per infortu-
nium, cüm aliquis projicit lapidem ad avem vel animal,
& alius transiens ex insperato percutitur & moritur,
vel si quis arborem inciderit, & per casum arboris,
aliquis opprimatur & hujusmodi. Sed hic erit distin-
guendum, utrum quis dederit operam rei licite vel
ilieitee: si illicitee, ut si lapidem projiciebat quis ver-
sus loeum, p quem consueverunt homines transit facere,
vel dum insequitur quis equü vel bové, & aliquis à
bove vel equo percussus fuerit, & hujusmodi, hoc im-
putatur ei Si vero licitz? rei operam ddbat, ut si
magister causa discipline discipulum verberat, vel si
cüm ,quis deponebat fomnum de curru, vel arborem
ineídebat & hujusmodi, hie si adhibuit diligentiam
quam potuit, s. respiciendo & proclamando, sed non
nimis tardé vel dimissé, sed tempore congruo & alte,
& ita quód si aliquis ibi erat vel illuc veniebat posset
aufugere & sibi preecavere, vel magister non excedendo
modum in verberando discipulum, non imputatur ei.


| € peccat," MSS. Rawl. C. 160 and 159.


OF THE CROWN. 274


although he be justly slain, nevertheless he sins mortally
on aecount of his corrupt intention. But if this be done
from his love of justice, the judge does not sin in con-
demning him to death, and in ordering his officer to slay
him, nor does the officer sin, if being sent by the judge
he slays the condemned person, but they both sin, if
they have done this without observing the order of the
law. From necessity, in which case it must be distin-
guished, whether that necessity was avoidable or not.
But if it were avoidable, and he could avoid it without
slaughter, then he will be guilty of hormieide. But if it
was inevitable, since he slew à man without any medi-


tation of hatred, in fear and grief of mind in delivering -


himself and his property, when he could not otherwise


escape, he is not liable to the punishment of homicide.


By chance, as by misfortune, when a person has pro-
jeeted a stone against a bird or an animal, and another
person passing unexpectedly is struck and dies, or as if
à person has cut down a tree, and some one has been
crushed by the fall of the tree, and such like. But here
ib is to be distinguished whether a person is employed
upon a lawful or unlawful work, as if à person has pro-
jected a stone towards & place aeross which men are
aecustomed to pass, or whilst & person pursues a horse
or àn ox, and some one has been struck by the horse or
the ox, and such like, this is imputed to his account.
But if he was employed in a lawful work, as if à master
is flogging his scholar for the sake of discipline, or if
when a person was casting down hay from a cart, or
eutting into & tree and such like, if he had taken as
diligent care.as he could, by looking out and by calling
out, but not too slowly or in too low & voice, but in
suitable time and with a loud voice, and so that if any
one were there or were coming there, he might run
away and take care for himself, or the master not ex-
ceeding moderation in flogging his scholar, blame is not
imputable to him. JButif he should be employed upon


f. 121.


978 DE CORONA.


Sed si dabat operam rei licitee & non adhibuit dili-
gentiam debitam, imputabitur ei. "Voluntate, ut si quis
ex certa scientia, & in assultu preemeditato, ira vel
odio, vel causa lucri, nequiter & in felonia & contra
pacem domini regis aliquem interfecerit. Et fit ali-
quando hujusmodi homicidium pluribus astantibus &
videntibus, aliquando veró clanculó, nemine vidente,
ita quód sciri non possit quis sit occisor, & hujusmodi
homicidium dici poterit murdrum, secundüm quod in-
feriüs dicetur. Poena vero homicidii duplex est, spiri-
tualis, vz. & corporalis, spiritualis tollitur" per patien-
tiam & poenitentiam. Et occidit quis alium dupliciter,
quando; lingua, quandoq, facto. Lingua, ut si quis
dissuadet, & sic dissuadendo retrahit aliquem à bono.
pposito volentem alium liberare à morte, & sic quo-
dammodo indirect? facit quis homicidium. Poena veró
homicidii, commissi facto, variatur: p homicidio veró
justiti:je justa & recta intetione facto, non est aliqua
poena infligenda. Si sit aliquis, qui mulierem preg-
nantem percusserit, vel ei venenum dederit per quod
fecerit abortivum, si puerperium jam formatum vel
animatum fuerit, & maximé si animatum, facit homi-
cidiu. Possunt etiam esse plures culpabiles de homi-
cidio sicut unus, ut si plures rixati fuerint inter se in
aliquo conflictu, & aliquis sit interfectus inter tales,
nec appareat ex quo nec ex cujus vulnere, omnes dici
possunt homicidze, & ilh qui pereusserunt, & qui tenu-
erunt malo animo dum percussus fuerit. Item & illi,
qui voluntate occidendi venerunt, licót non percusse-
runt. ltem & illi qui nec occiderunt, nec voluntatem
occidendi habuerunt, sed venerunt ut presstarent consi-
lium & auxilium occisoribus, quamvis aliquando eorum


OF THE CROWN. 279


& lawful work, and has not used due diligence, blame
Shall be imputable to him. With intention, as if any
one with certain knowledge and with a premeditated
assault, through anger or hatred, or for the cause of
gain, wickedly and feloniously and against the peace of
the king has slain a person.  Ànd this kind of homicide
is frequently committed when several persons are stand-
ing by and are witnesses, but. sometimes secretly, when
no one sees it, so that it càn be known who 1s the
slayer, and this kind of homicide may be called murder,
according to what will be stated below. But the pun-
ishment of homicide is twofold, that is spiritual and
corporeal, the spiritual is removed by patience and peni-
ience. And a person slays another doubly, sometimes
by the tongue, and sometimes by an act. By the tongue,
if a person dissuades, and so by dissuading draws any
one back from a good purpose, being willing to rescue
another from death, and so he indirectly commits as it
were homicide. But the punishment of homicide com-
mitted in facet, is varied ; for homicide, however, com-
mitted with & just and right intention of justice no
punishment is to be inflicted. If there be some one,
who has struck a pregnant woman, or has given her
poison, whereby he has caused abortion, if the fcetus be
already formed and animated, and particularly if it be
animated, he commits homicide. Several persons may
be culpable of homicide just as one person, as for in-
Stance if several persons have quarrelled amongst them-
selves in a conflict, and some one has been slain amongst
such persons, and it does not appear by whom mor by
whose blow, all may be called homicides, both those
who struck him, and those who held him with an evil
intention until he was struck. Likewise also those who
have come with an intention of slaying, although they
did not strike. Likewise also those who have not slain,
nor had any intention of slaying, but came that they
might give counsel and help to the slayers, although


280 DE CORONA.


violentia repellatur. ltem non solüm tenetur ile qui
percutit & occidit, verüm & ille qui prsecipit percutere
& occidere, quia. càüm non sint immunes à culpa, im-
munes esse non debeant à poena. Nee etiam ille, qui
cüm posset hominem à morte liberare, non liberavit.
Item fit homicidium in bello, & tune videndum, utrum
bellum sit justum vel injustum. Si autem injustum,
tenebitur occisor: si autem justum, sicut p defensione
patrie, non tenebitur, nisi hoc fecerit corrupta volun-
tate & intentione.


Car. V.


L-. Cüm autem contingat homicidium fieri quandoque .,
d 9c? in domibus quandoque in villis, quandoque in vicis,
torum — quandoque in campis extra villam, & etiam in nemo-
eia homi- ribus & ad eoronatores pertineat de hujusmodi occisis
f 121b. eognoscere & de interfectore, quis ille fuerit, si nescia-

tur, diligentem facere inquisitionem : ideó bonum est
videre quale sit eoru officium in hae parte. Est igitur
eorum officium, quód quàm cito habuerint mandatü à
ballivo díüi regis vel à pbis hominib? illi? paírim,
accedere debent ad occisos vel vulneratos, sive ad sub-
mersos vel subitó mortuos, & ad domorum fractiones,
& ad locum ubi dicitur thesaurü fuisse inventum, &
hoe facere debent statim & sine mora aliqua, & in
adventu ipsorum versus partes illas mandare debeant
quatuor, quinq, vel sex villis vicinis, quód statim
veniant corà ipsis & p eorü saeramtü faciant inquisi-
tionem de homine occiso, cüm à coronatorib? fuerint


requisiti.
: 2, Inprimis, s. ubi mortu? occisus fuerit, in domo vel
e inquisi- ; A a ü 1
tionibus, 12 campo. t8 si ad luctü, vel ad tabernà, vel aliam


ubi occisus Cogregationem, & ubicung, invent? fuerit mortuus, tunc
uerit.


OF THE CROWN. 981


sometimes their violence may have been repelled. Like- *
wise not only is he liable, who strikes and slays, but also
he who advised how to strike or slay, because since they.
are not exempt from blame, they ought not to be exempt
from punishment. Not even he, who when he could
rescue & man from death, did not rescue him. |. Likewise
there may be homicide in war, and then we must see
whether the war be just or unjust. But if it be unjust,
. the slayer will be liable. But if just, as for the defence
of one's country, he will not be liable, unless he has
dono it with a corrupt will and intention. |


CHAPTER V.


But since 16 happens, that homicide is committed some- — 1.
times in houses,sometimes in townships, sometimes in OLthe,
streets, sometimes in open fields outside à township, and coroners
even in woods, &nd it pertains to the coroners to take poricide.
cognisance of the persons slain in this manner, and to f. 121b.
make a diligent inquest concerning the slayer, who he
was, if he be unknown ; therefore it is good to see what
kind of office their office is in this part. It is therefore
their oflice, that as soon as they have'received à mandate
from the bailiff of the lord the king, or from the prud-
hommes of that neighbourhood, they ought to visit the
slain or the wounded, or the drowned, or those who have
died suddenly, and the breakages into houses, and the
places where treasure has been said to have been found,
and this they ought to do forthwith and without any
delay, and at their coming to those parts they ought to
order four, five, or six neighbouring townships that they
come immediately before them, and by their oath make an
inquesb concerning the man slain, when they shall have
been required by the coroner.

In the first place, that is, where à dead man has been mum ]
slain, in à house orin afield. Likewise if in à wrestling ing the
match or in à tavern or another assembly, and wherever er rid


989 DE CORONA.


diligenter erit inquirendum, qui tunc interfuerunt, sive
masculus sive foemina, major vel minor, et qui illorum
de facto fuerunt culpabiles, & qui de forcia, consilio
vel precepto, & qui fuerunt in causa aliqua illius
facti. Et facta inquisitione diligenti, quotquot p inqui-
sione inventi fuerunt culpabiles aliquorü preedictoru
modorum, si psentes fuerint vel alicubi inveniri pos-
sent, statim & sine mora capiantur, & vic. deliberen-
tur, & in gaolà detrudantur. Quotquot autem p inqui-
sitionem inventi fuerunt in domib? illis ubi mortu?
fuit interfect?, licét culpabiles non fuerunt, attachiandi
tamen sunt usq; ad adventum justitiarioru, & nomina
plegioru irrotulentur in rotulis coronatorü.


3. | Nec sunt illi, qui culpabiles inveniuntur, p plegios
nire E dimittendi sine speciali precepto dii regis, facta priüs


pabile. — inquisitione, utrum appellati sint odio vel atya, vel p
verü appellu. Et breve de tali inquisitione facieda
gratis debet concedi, secüdüm q videri poterit in charta
de libertatib?. Et no erit de aliquib? inquisitio faci-
enda, nisi tantumodo de illis qui fuerunt in prisona.


4. Si auté in campis vel in boscis inveniat 'occisus,
Pie, vel in inprimis attachient inventores, sive masculi fuerint sive
boscis.  foeminze, eujuscüq, fuerint setatis, & sive mortu? occisus

fuerit ibi, vel alibi ubicunq. Et si ibi occisus no fue-
rit, seeüdüm q ppendi poterit p preesumptiones, & mul-
totiens p sanguinis effusionem, si plagas habuerit, sta-
lim & recenter investiganda sunt vestigia imalefactorü,
& sequenda p duetü earects, passus equorü, & vestigia
hominü, & alio modo, secundüm q consultiàs & melius


fieri possit.


OF THE CROWN. 283


he may be found dead, then it is to be diligently inquired, has lx
who then took part in it, whether male or female, major or in
minor, and who of them were culpable in deed, and who

- as aecessory by force, counsel, or precept, and who were
the cause in any way of that deed. And after inquest
has been diligently made, as many as have been found
by the | inquest culpable in any of the aforesaid WAyS,
if they should be present or can be found anywhere,
let them forthwith and without delay be seized and
delivered to the sheriff and thrust into .gaol But as
many persons as have been found by that inquest in
those houses where the dead man was slain, although
they have not been culpable, they are to be bound over
until the coming of the justices, and let the names of
their sureties be enrolled in the rolls of the coroners.


Nor are those, who have been found culpable, to be
Of nus

dismissed upon sureties, without a special precept from ing the -
the king, an inquest having been first held whether they culpable.
have been accused through enmity or spite, or by a true
aecuser. Anda writ for making such an inquest ought
to be granted gratuitously, according to what is to be
seen in the Charter of Liberties. And no inquest shall
be held upon any others except upon those who were in
prison.


But if he be found slain in fields or woods, the finders —— 4.
shall be first attached, whether they be male or female, x de
of whatever age they may be, and whether the dead woods.
person was slain there or anywhere else. And if he has
not been slain there, according to what may be concluded
from presumptions, and in many cases from the loss of
blood, if he has received wounds, the tracks of the male-
factors are to be forthwith and recently investigated,
and to be traced by the wheel-marks of a cart, the hoof-
marks of horses, and the footsteps of men, and in any
other manner, according as may best be done upon after
deliberation.


5.
S1 notus
vel igno-
tus.


6.
S1 occisor
fugerit.


f. 122.


rE
De sub-
.mersis.


984 DE CORONA.


Inquiratur etià utrum mortuus ille not? fuerit vel
ignotus, & ubi nocte illa hospitat?, secundüm q inqui-
situ fuerit attachientur hospes & hospites! & tota
familia in domo inventa, ubi fuerit hospitat?.


Si autem sit aliquis qui effugerit p hfüodi occisis,
& de quo habeatur aliqua suspitio q culpabilis extite-
rit, statim  aecedat coronatores ad domos ipsius, &
diligenter inquirant, que catalla habuerit, & que blada
in horreo, si villan? fuerit, & si liber homo, quam
terra libera habuerit & quid valeat, sive blada habue-
rii in terra sive no. Et cüm ita inquisiverint, appre-
ciari faciant blada & catalla eorü sicut statim vendi
possunt, & terra libera quantu valeat p ann, & statim
liberet e& tote villatee ad respondendu de pceio cora
justitiarüis, salvo tame servitio dominorü feodi Et
istis onib^ sie inquisitis, sepeliantur eorpora mortuorü
oecisorum, quie si ante talem inquisitionem factam &
visum eoronatorum sepulta fuerint, tota villata in mi-
sericordia remanebit.


Si autem de submoersis & subitó mortuis vel oppres-
sis vel p infortunium vel alio modo extinctis fieri
debet inquisitio, simili modo erit inquirendum, qui
presentes fuerint, quando tales submersi fuerunt, op-
pressi vel subitó mortui, & tune videantur corpora
defunétorum nuda & aperta, qualiteteunque fuerunt
mortui, ut sciri possit, utrum ibi sit felonia vel infor-
tunium, seeundüm quod perpendi poterit per signa
exteriora, ut si inveniantur plagz apoerüe vel brussurz
per ietus orbos, vel si jugulati fuerunt, seeundüm quod


1 * hospites et hospite," MSS. Rawl. C. 160 and 159.


OF THE CROWN. 985


Let it also be inquired whether the dead man was,, uL
known or unknown, and where he lodged on that night, or un-
and aecording to the result of the inquiry the host and k?own.
the guests shall be attached, and the entire family found
in the house where he has been lodged.


But if there be any person who has run away on,, 6.

i: zm If the
aecount of the persons slain, and respecting whom any slayer has
suspicion is entertained that he is culpable, let the runaway.
eoroners forthwith visit that person's house, and dili-
gently inquire what chattels he had, and what corn in
his barn, if he should be a villein, and if he should be a
free man, what free land he held and what 1t is worth,
whether there be corn on the land or not. And when
they have made this inquiry, let them cause the corn
and the chattels to be appraised at the price at which
they ean be forthwith sold, and the free land at how
much it is worth by the year, and let them forthwith
deliver them to the entire township to answer for their
value before the justices, saving however the services
due to the lords of the fees. And all these inquiries
having been made, let the dead bodies of the slain be
buried, which if they have been buried before such an  f.122.
inquest has been made and the coroners have seen them,
the whole township shall be liable to be amerced.


But if an inques& ought to be held upon persons - 7.
drowned and suddenly dead, or smothered, or by mis- uo
chance or in any other way deprived of life, in a similar drowned.
manner an inquiry shall be made, who were present
when such persons were drowned, smothered, or sud-
denly dead, and then let the corpses of the defunet be
inspected nude and uncovered, in whatever manner they
may have died, so that it may be known whether there
be felony or mischance in the matter, according as may
be eoncluded from external signs, as if there be found
open stripes, or bruises by blows which have not cut, or
if they have been strangled, according as may be inferred


8.
Quo sunt


deodanda.


].
De officio
corona-
toris in
thesauris
inventis.


286 DE CORONA.


perpendi poterit per signum impressionis funiculi col.
lum econstringentis, vel per aliam lesionem in corpore
inventam, & secundüm hoc procedere debent corona-
tores ad inquisitionem in forma supradicta, & facere


a&ttachiamenta de corporibus & rebus, secundüm quod


malefactores inventi fuerint, vel non inventi.


Item batelli, de quibus tales submersi fuerint, ap-
preeientur, & alia que sunt causa mortis alicujus, &
sunt deodanda pro rege, ut si submersus fuerit quis
in aqua dulci, & non in mari, ubi nee navis nee
maeremium, si navis fracta, eri& deodanda, quia ista
omnia erunt dominorum, si vivant, sieut. eorum catalla :
nec sunt deodanda ex infortunio in mari, nec wreckum,
nec etiam murdrum! de occisis vel submiersis in mari.?
Et si nulla inveniatur felonia, sed quód subitó mortui
sunt vel per infortunium, tune attachiare debent in-
ventorem usque ad adventum justitiariorum, & simili-
ter omnes illos,'qui in societate illa fuerunt, ubi tale
aceidit infortunium.


CAP. VI.


Item de officio eorum, si thesaurus dieatur inveniri,
& de attachiamentis inde faciendis. Inprimis, inqui-
rere debent ab eis qui inde rectati sunt, & si aliquis
inde inventus sit seysitus, vel si presumptio faciat
contra aliquem quód thesaurum invenerit, eó quód quis
abundantiüs se habuerit in victu & ditiüs in vestitu
ut suprà. Et si aliquis talis inveniatur (ut suprà)
attachiari debet per quatuor vel per sex plegios &
plures, si possint inveniri.


l«murdrum. It would thus | Rawl. C. 160. "The whole passage
appear that the common law of the | *Item batelli" down to '** in mari"
roalm as to murder did not applyto | inclusive is omitted in MS. Rawl.
the high sen. C. 159.

2«in mari" omitted in MS.


—-


OF THE CROWN. | 987


from the sign of the impression of a rope confining the
neck, or from some other lesion found on the body, and
according to this the coroners ought to proceed to the in-
quest in the form above stated, and to make attachments
of persons and of things, according as the malefactors
have been found or not found.


Likewise let the boats, out of which such persons have —— 8.
been drowned, be appraised, and the other things which HLised
are the cause of the death of any one, and let them be
deodands for the king, as if à person should have been
drowned in fresh water, and not in the sea, where neither
the ship nor its timber, if the ship should break up, will
be a deodand, because all those things will belong to the
owners, if they live, as being their chattels ; nor are there
deodands from mischances on the sea, nor is there wreck,
nor even murder in respect of those slain or drowned in
the sea. And if no felony be found, but that they have
suddenly died or by mischanee, then they ought to
attach the finder until the arrival of the justices, and in
like manner all those, who were in their society, when
such misehance occurred.


CHAPTER VI.


And it is of their office, if treasure be said to have — 1.

been found, and of attachments thereupon to be made. Ofthe
B - office of the

In the first place they ought to inquire of those who eoroner in
have been reported thereon, and if any one has been tese
found seised, or if there be & presumption against any
one that he has found treasure, from the cireumstance
that & person has indulged himself more abundantly in
food and more riehly in dress as above said, and if any
such an one be found as above, he ought to be attached


by four or six securities.


].
:De officio
corona-
torum in
raptu vir-
ginum.


].

f. 199 b.
De officio
corona-
torum de
pace et
plagis.


9.
De otficio


288 | DE CORONA.


Car. VII.


Est etiam eorum offieium in raptu virginum, quód
si quis ab aliqua de raptu fuerit appellatus, & factum
recens fuerit, secundüm quod multotiens videri poterit
per judicia certa, ut si hutesium levatum fuerit &
recenter persecutum & ruptum vestimentum, & si non
ruptum, sanguine tamen intinctum, tunc attachietur
appellatus per sex vel quatuor vel plures si tot inve-
niri possunt, si autem non, ad minus per duos quód
Sib, &c. ut suprà. Si autem factum recens non fuerit,
nec hutesiu recenter levatum, nec signa appareant, quae
recenter presumptione inducant, sufliót si appellatus
attachietur per duos.


Car. VIII.


Est etiam eorum officium in appello de pace & pla-
gis, ut si quis de pace & plagis fuerit appellat?, inpri-
mis videnda erit plaga, et si plaga mortalis fuerit, et
appellat? inveniatur, statim capiatur & capt? detineatur,
donec sciatur, utrum vulnerat? convalescere possit vel non,
si autem non & moriatur, appellati retineantur in pri-
sona. Si autem covalescat, attachietur appellat? p 4. vel
p plures, secüdüm qg plaga fuerit major vel minor, si au-
tem ibi fuerit mahemium, tunc p plures ut fiat ibi bona
securitas. Si autem plaga simplex fuerit, tune sufficit,
si per duos. Et si advena fuerit & ignotus de longinquo
veniens, peregrinus, vel si pro penuria amicorum ple-
glos invenire non possit, ej? sit plegius gaola, qure ad
custodiendum deputatur & non ad puniendum.


Cüm quis alium appellaverit de pace & plagis, videre


vicecomitis debet, coronator plagas illas, & illas mensurare cuj?


in appello


OF THE CROWN. 989


CHAPTER VII.


It is also their office in ease of the rape of virgins, ,,, ,'
that if any one be aecused by any one of rape, and the office of
fact has been recent, according to what may frequently zo"9ners :
be seen by certain judgments, as if the hue has been of Vidas.
raised and recently followed up, or if the robe has been
rent, and if not rent, is nevertheless tinged with blood,
then the party accused shall be attached by six or four
or more, if as many ean be found, but if not, at least by
two, that he may be &e. as above. But if the deed has
not been recent, nor the hue recently raised, nor any
signs are apparent which recently raise à presumption,
it is sufficient if he be attached by two persons.


CHAPTER VIII. f. 192 b.


It is also the duty (of the coroners) on an accusation Bs

dic
concerning peace and blows, as where a person has been office of
accused of [breaking] the peace and of wounding, in the d irl
firs& the wound is to be inspected, and if the wound peace and
should be mortal and the accused person be found, let vox:
him be arrested immediately, and when arrested let him
be detained, until it be known whether the wounded
person can get well or not, but if he cannot get well and
should die, let the accused person be detained in prison.
But if he gets well, let the aceused person be bound over
by four [sureties] or more, aecording as the wound is
more or less serious, but if there be any mayhem, then
by more, so that the security may be good. But if it be
a simple wound, then it is sufficient, if by two. But if
he be à new comer and unknown coming from a far
distance, a traveller, or if he cannot find sureties from
want of friends, let his surety be the gaol, which is


appointed for custody and not for punishment. :


When a person has aeeused another of breaking the Of the
peace and of wounding, the coroner must inspect the the sheriff
VOL. II. T in an accu-


200 . DE CORONA.


de pace — sunt longitudinis, & cuj? profunditatis, sive factze fue-
et plagis ants 19 pf. libi. & ib TW M. *
amensu. Tint in capite sive alibi, & quibus armis, cc ola
randis. ^ faciet irrotulari cum testimonio vic. si priesens fuerit

in inquisitione facienda, vel saltem in coin, si M apporum


factum sit in com.


3. Appellati veró de morte hominis, & de pace et plagis
ii ieulosis, statim capiantur, et in prisongm detrudà-
perieulosa periculosis, s apià e p
sit, LDODAR: tur, & ibi custodiantur, donec p dim regem p plegios
t
laih " dimittantur, vel p judicium deliberentur, "vel donec de
JE ian eis petatur curia Christianitatis si clerici fuerint, eujus-
nec sun
per plegios Cüq, ordinis vel dignitatis fuerint. Appellati veró de
D E foreia salvó attachientur, quousq, appellati de facto con-
sed V - e — l|; . . -
dum in Vincantur. Sed videndu in cuj? prisona debeat, cüm
cujus P'l- capti fuerint, remanere: sive capti fuerint p latrocinio,
soba sunt . er : : :
custodi. sive morte hominis, vel p alia felonia. Et sciendum,
endi, i! quód non nisi in prisona ipsi?, qui tales posset in
prisona LJ * . . . ^e .
illus, qui curia sua judicare, sicut. diis rex, qui potestatem habet
babetP9- judieandi de vita & membris, vel tollendi vitem vel
judieandi. eoncedendi. Ut si felo convictus fuerit p morte homi-

nis, vel p alia felonia, ultimo puniatur supplicio, sicut


morte, vel membrorü Utruneatione.


4. Item econeedendi vitam vel membra, sieut dicitur de
pm pbatore, de quo nullus prisonam habere poterit, nec de
sockeet — eo placitum habere, nisi ipse dns rex, cüm nullus alius
* ^k. ^ i posset vitam concedere vel membra. Et hse vera

sunt, nisi sit aliquis in regno, qui regalem habeat
potestatem in omnibus, sicut sunt civitates! comites
Paleys, salvo dominio domino regi sicut principi, vel si
sib aliquis qui de concessione domini regis talem habeat


! * oivitates," omitted MSS. Rawl. C. 160 and 158.


OF THE CROWN. 2091


wounds, and measure them of what length they are and sation con-
of what depth, whether they have been made on the je ua
head or elsewhere, and with what arms, and he shall in mea-
cause all these things to be enrolled with the certificate oar5..
of the sheriff, if he should be present in making the in-

quest, or at least in the county, if the accusation should


be made in the county.


But let the parties accused of the death of à man or of — s.
peace [broken] and of dangerous blows be forthwith x pied
seized and thrust into prison, and there kept in custody, ous, let the
until they be released on sureties by the king himself or Srder ds
they be set free by à judgment, or until the court placed in
Christian, if they be clergy, be applied to concerning bs, mey to
them, of whatever order or dignity they may be. But par- be released
ties accused as accessories let them be safely secured, until on sureties,
those charged as principals have been convicted. But itis Spb n
to be seen, in whose prison they ought to remain, when son they
they have been seized, according as they have been seized Rel
for robbery or the death of a man or for some other felony. custody,
And it is to be known, that they are not to remain in the he orien
prison of any one, except of him, who can judge such of him who
persons in his own court, such as the lord the king n
himself, who has the power of judging concerning life judging.
and limb, either of taking away or granting life. As if
a felon be convieted for the death of & man or for an-
other felony, let him be punished by the most extreme
punishment, such as*by death or by mutilation of the


limbs.


Likewise of granting life or limb, as is said of an 4.
approver, concerning whom nobody but the king him- In:
self can exercise imprisonment, nor hold a plea, since no approver
one else can grant him his life or limb. And these ni nid
things are true unless there be some one in the realm,
who has regal power in all things, such as cities, counts.
palatine, saving the dominion of the lord the king
as prince, or if there be any one, who by a grant from


T 9


299 : DE CORONA.


libertatem, sicut sock & sack, tolnetum, team, hinfang-
thefe & hutfangthefe! qui inventus fuerit seysitus. de
aliquo latrocinio, sicut, hondhabbende &  bacberende,
& unde, qui tales habent libertates, habebunt priso-

f.193. nam suam de talib?, quia possunt tales in curia su&
judieare.


5. Prisones veró sic imprisonati, antequam convicti
iie Pa fuerint, de terris suis disseysiri non debent, nee de reb?
debent de suis quibuscunq, spoliari, sed dum fuerint in prisona,
terris snis E - - : udi
disseysir, debent de pprio in omnibus sustentari, donec per judi-
sed inde  cjum deliberati fuerint, vel condemnati, & si forte ante


Dai condemnationem in prisona obierint, terra remaneat
hsredibus, & catalla remaneant parentibus & amicis,
quamvis manifeste appareat, quód tales forent condem-
nandi si judicium expectassent, secundàüm q dicitur,
quód si aliquis sub incerto causze eventu in vinculis
vel sub fidejussorib? decesserit, ejus bona confiscanda
non erunt. Nec cüm quis in carcerem duct? fuerit,
spoliari eum bonis oportebit, sed post condemnationem.

9. . Sed càm iniquum est, quód innocentes, sicut illi qui

De inquisi- . . .. ; E . . A

tione faei- €riminosi non sint, diu inelusi detineantur in carcere,


enda utrum ido ad laerymosam querelà parentum & amicorum, de
appellati : MN . ; . e dd : ;
suntodio gratia díi regis, fieri sole inquisitio, utrum hujusmodi
etatyà.  imprisonati p morte hominis culpabiles essent de morte
illa vel no, & utrum appellati essent odio vel atya.
Et breve de hujusmodi inquisitione nulli debet denegari.


Forma brevis talis est.


7 Rex vie. salutem.  Preeeipimus tibi, quód p pbos &


n legales homines de cof tuo diligenter inquiras, utrum
tione.


1 « Sok, Sak, 'Thol, Theam, Infangenthef, et Utfangenthef," MS. Rawl.
C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. 293


the lord the king has such & franchise as sock and

sack, toll and theam, himfangthefe and hutfangthefe,

who has been found seysed of any robbery as homdhab-

bende and bacberende, and whereof those who have such
franchises, shall have their own prison for such persons, f. 123.
beeause they may judge such persons in their own

court.


But prisoners so imprisoned ought not to be disseysed |. 5. .
of their lands before they have been convicted, nor to be sedi ED
spoiled of their goods of any kind, but whilst they are in ought le
prison, ought to have sustenance from their own property Ru of
in all manner of ways, until they have been set free or ples in.
condemned by a judgment, and if by chance they shall to ve i:
have died in prison before condemnation, their land shallísined —
remain to their heirs, and their chattels to their relatives
and friends, although it be manifestly apparent that they
would have to be condemned, if they had awaited judg-
ment, aecording to what is said, but if any one, whilst
the event of his suit is uncertain, has died either in
bonds or under sureties, his goods are not to be con-
fiseated. Nor when a person is cast into prison, ought
he to be spoiled of his goods, but only after condemna-
tion.

But since it is iniquitous that innocent persons, such 6.
as those who are not, ceriminous, should be detained for Medus:
a long time shut up in prison, therefore at the sorrowful tion, whe-
complaint of relations and friends, by the favour of the htrthey |
lord the king, an inquisition is accustomed to be held, through
whether persons of this kind imprisoned for the death of poris ^"
a man were culpable for his death or not, and whether
they have been accused from enmity and hatred. And
& writ for an inquisition of this kind ought to be denied


to nobody. The form of the writ is as follows.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you T( 2 3
that you inquire diligently through good and loyal men inquisition,


204 DE CORONA


A. de N. captus & detent^ in prisona mostra, de tali
loco de morte B. unde rectatus & appellatus est, rec-
tatus sit vel appellatus de morte illa odio & atya, vel
eo quód inde eulpabilis sit: & si odio & atya, quo odio
& qua atya, vel quis inde culpabilis sit, & inquisitio-
nem quam inde feceris vic.!


R. Et cüm vic. miserit inquisitionem, & p inquisitionem
E on culpabilis inveniatur, non erit ulteriàs per.ballium
eulpabiülis dimittendus. Si autem dicat inquisitio, quód per odium
invenisUT. & p atvam, & contineatur causa in inquisitione quo
odio vel qua atya, diligenter erit causa examinanda,
cim sint plures &c. & ballivi qui non sine cause cog-
nitione in hujusmodi inquisitionibus pretendunt non
causam ut causam, & si sufficiens fuerit causa, p balliu
dimittatur usq, adventum justitiariorum, alioquin rema-
neat in prisona &e. In omni veró injuria, & trans-
gressione contra pacé dii regis cum adjectione feloniz,
solet quilibet appellat? vel rectat? p plegios dimitti,
preterquam de morte hominis, quocüiq, tempore, donec
imprisonat? p inquisitione doceat se esse immune, nec
fieri debet inquisitio de aliquo, nisi de eo qui fuerit in
prisona. Cüm aute p inquisitione constiterit, q impri-
sonat? appellat? fuerit odio vel atya, & no in eo q
culpabilis sit, tunc ad pceeptü düi regis cómittatur p

ballium p breve vic. directu in hae forma.


" 9. , Rex vic. salute. Quia costat nobis p inqsitione quam
] non 81 T - . , . "PR" *
culpabilis, tibl facere Deeperim?, & quam nobis misisti, ut sic
dimittatuF inseratur tota forma inquisitionis &c. "Tibi preeipi-


er plegios. " . : ] qt
PP PIEU mus &e, vol fit quandoq, sie, sine forma inquisitionis.


——


1 « feceris et cetera? isthe reading of MSS. Rawl. C. 160 and 159.


OF THE CROWN. 905


of your county, whether A. of N. [who is] seized and
detained in our prison at such a place concerning the
death of B. of which he is charged and accused, has been
charged and. accused from enmity and hatred, or upon
the ground that he is culpable; and if from enmity and
hatred, from what enmity and from what hatred, or who
is thereof culpable, and the inquisition which you have
made thereon for the viscount.


And when the viscount has sent the inquisition, and 8.
through the inquisition he has been found culpable, he edi
shall not be releasable on bail. Butif the inquisition say he has
by enmity and hatred, and in the inquisition the cause is uU ad
contained by what enmity and hatred, the cause shall be
diligently examined, since there are several persons, &c.
and bailiffs, who not without knowledge of the cause in
such inquisitions put forth a non-cause as a cause, and if
the cause shall be sufficient, let him be dismissed by the
bailiff, up to the arrival of the justices, otherwise let him
remain in prison &c. But in every assault and trespass
against the peace of the king with the addition of felony,
any one accused or arraigned is accustomed to be released
on sureties, except concerning the death of a man, at any
time, until having been imprisoned he shall show by an
inquisition that he is innocent, nor ought there to be an
inquisition concerning any one except concerning the
person who is in prison. But when itshall have been
established by an inquisition, that the person imprisoned
has been accused through enmity and hatred, and not
on the ground that he is culpable, then upon the precept
of the lord the king let him be committed to bail by a
writ directed to the viscount in this form.


The king to the viscount greeting. Seeing that it is s
clear to us through the inquisition, which we have en- y, Ed


joined you to make and which you have sent to us, so 3s Mu
. that there may be inserted the entire form of the inquisi- feed x .


tion &c. We enjoin you &c., or it is sometimes done sureties.


2096 DE CORONA.


Precipim? tibi, qd' si A. capt? & detent? in prisona
nia p morte B. unde rectat? est vel appellat?, invene-
rit tibi xij. pbos & legales homines de cofü tuo qui
manucapidt habedi eu ad prima assisam &c. cora jus-.
titiarlis nostris ad respodendu de morte ipsi? B. unde
eum appellat, tunc eum tradas in ballium! illis xij.
pbis hominib? usque ad pdictum adventum justitiario-
rum, & habeas ibi nomina xij. predictorum hominu,
qui manuceperint habendi eum, ut predictum est.
Teste, &c. '


f.128b. . Vel aliter: Si A. capt? p morte B. & imprisonat^
X 10. — gpud talem locum, invenerit tibi xij pbos & legales ho-
iud ; ^ : S .

brevede  Inines de cori tuo, qui manucapiat habendi eum coram

eodem. — justitiariis &c. ad standum recto, de morte predicti B.
unde appellat? est, tunc ipsum À. tradas p ballivum
predictis xij hominib? à prisona liberatum, modo quo
predictum est, & catalla sua ei deliberari facias, &
habeas ibi nomina xij &c. Si quis autem imprisona-
tus fuerit infra libertatem aliquam p morte hominis,
vel alia felonia, & balliv? libertatis talem fort? non
deliberaverit ad mandatu vic, tunc fiat breve vic. quód
eum deliberet, non obstante libertate in hac forma.


- Hs : Rex vic. salutem. Satis recolimus tibi preecepisse
u . Li * 2

infra liber. aliàs vel sspilüs, quód A. qui capt? est apud talem

tatem et | Jocum infra talem libertatem & in prisona detentus,

dilatafuerit | |. a . 6 :

deliberatio deliberari faceres, desicut non est capt? p morte homi-


cteaptor nis, vel alia occasione quare non sit deliberand? &-
quod sit  replegiandus, & adhuc in eontemptum nostri, & contra


"nd respon- : . TR . .
dendum,  PrI&eceptum nostrum, in prisona nihilominüs detinetur,


! «in ballio/^ MS. Raw]. C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. 297


thus, without the form of the inquisition. We enjoin
you, that if A., [who is] seized and detained in our prison
for the death of B. whereof he has been arraigned or
aecused, has found for you twelve good and loyal men
of your county, who will be sureties to produce him at
the first assise &c. before our justices to answer concern-
ing the death of B. himself, whereof he accuses him, then
deliver him up on bail to those good men until the afore-
said arrival of the justices, and have there the names of
those twelve men aforesaid, who have undertaken to
produce him as aforesaid. Witness &c.


Or in another manner. If A. seized for the death of f.123b.
B. and imprisoned at such a place, has found for you A
twelve good and loyal men of your county, who under- or
take to produce him before the justices &c. to stand his the same
irial concerning the death of the aforesaid B., whereof x a
he is accused, thereupon deliver up A. himself by the
bailiff released from prison to the aforesaid twelve men,
in the manner as aforesaid, and cause his chattels to be
delivered up to him, and have there the names of the
twelve men, &c. But if any one has been imprisoned
within any franchise for the death of à man or any other
felony, and the bailiff of the franchise has not by chance
released such person at the mandate of.the viscount,
then let à writ go out to the viscount, that he release
him, notwithstanding the franchise, in the following
form. |


The king to the viscount greeting. We sufficiently


recolleet that we have enjoined you, at other times and Ifhe as
been seized
repeatedly, that you cause to be released A. who has been within a
seized in such a place and. within such a franchise and franchise
is detained in prison, since he is not seized for the death release has


of & man, or on another occasion wherefore he should ferred, and
not be released and bailed, and he is still detained in the seizor


prison in contempt of us and contrary to our injunction, iere


as i6 is given to us to understand, we enjoin you, if it be ready to


quare
talem cepit
et impri-
sonavit.


b
De clerico
impriso-
nato.


298 DE CORONA.


sicut nobis datur intelligi: tibi precipim?, quód si it&
est, non obstante libertate ipsius talis, in propria psona
tua sine dilatione accedas apud talem locum, & predic-
tum ÀÁ. sine dilatione deliberari facias, ne ad nos de
eo iterató querela perveniat. Et si B. uxor ipsius A.
fecerit. te securum de clamore suo &c. tune pone p
vadium & salvos &c.! omnes ballivos predicto liberta-
tis talis, qui sic illum in prisona detinuerunt, quód sint
eoram &c. ad respondendum predicto À. de przdieta
transgressione et imprisonamento. Et habeas &c.
Teste &c.


CAP». IX.


Si clericus capt? fuerit p morte hominis, & petatur
in curia Christianitatis de eo, qualiter comittend? erit
episcopo, & qualiter episcopus debeat eum custodire.?
Cüm veró clericus, cujüscunq, ordinis vel dignitatis,
captus fuerit p morte hominis, vel alio crimine & im-
prisonat?, et de eo petatur curia Christianitatis ab
ordinario loci sicut archiepiscopo vel episcopo vel eo-
rum officiali, vel aliis literas prsedictorum deferentibus,
imprisonat? ille statim eis deliberetur? sine aliqua
inquisitione inde facienda, non tamen ut omnino deli-
beretur ut vagans sit* p patriam, sed salvó custodia-
tur? vel in prjsona ipsius episcopi vel ipsius regis, si
ordinarius hoc voluerit, donee à crimine sibi imposito
se purgaverit copetenter, vel in purgatione defecerit,
ppter q debeat degradari. Et ideó, ut predictum est,
si petatur, erit liberandus curie Christianitatis, quia
non habebit rex de eo prisonam, quem judicare non


DET UEIS TM ED. t ————— ——— ————— E eÀ


!«gspl]vos plegios omnes," MS. da vagantes sint" MS. Rawl.
Rawl. C. 160. id.

?«Si clerieus . . . . custodire." 5 *oustodiantur" MS. Rawl.
Head-note in MS. Rawl. id. id.


3 « liberetur," MS. Rawl. id.


OF THE CROWN. 299.


so, notwithstanding the franchise of such à person him- answer,
Self, you go in your own person without delay to such a m à
place, and cause the aforesaid A. to be released without and im-
delay, so that no renewed complaint should be made to P'*?ned
us. And if B. the wife of À. has satisfied you concerning person.
her complaint &c. then bind over by sureties all the

bailiffs of the aforesaid franchise, who have detained

him in prison, that they be present &c. to answer to the
aforesaid À. concerning the aforesaid trespass and im-


prisonment. And have &c. Witness &c.


CHAPTER IX.


If a clerk be seized for the death of à man, and an 1.
application be made in the court of Christianity concern- anii Et
ing him in what way he shall have to be committed to ION
the charge of the bishop, and in what way the bishop Prison.
ought to have the custody of him. When then a clerk, of
whátever order or dignity, has been seized for the death
of a man or any other crime, and has been cast into
prison, and an application has been made in the court of
Christianity respecting him by the ordinary of the place,
such as the archbishop or the bishop or their official or
others exhibiting the letters of the aforesaid, let the
prisoner be at once delivered up to them, without any
inquisition to be made thereon, not however that he
should be altogether set free, so that he may wander
about the country, but. he may be kept in safe custody
either in the prison of the bishop himself, or of the king
himself, if the ordinary wills this, until he shall have
properly purged himself of the charge brought against
him, or have failed in his purgation, and thereupon he
ought to be degraded. And therefore, as hás been said
above, if he is applied for, let him be delivered up to the
court of Christianity, for the king shall not have a right
to imprison him, whom he cannot judge, neither can he


300 DE CORONA.


potest, nec clericos degradare, quia no potest eos ad
ordines pmovere, secundüm q predictum est.


2: Càm autem clericus sic de crimine convictus degra-
MAS ^ A detur, non sequitur alia poena pro uno delicto, vel plu-
Christiani- ribus ante degradationem perpetratis. Satis enim suf-
n fict; ei pro poena degradatio, quz est magna capitis
purgatione, diminutio, nisi forté convictus fuerit de apostasia, quia
ts nb» tunc primó degradetur, & posteà per manum laicalem
tata fuerit. primo degra , Iu P

f.124. eomburatur, secundüm quod accidit in concilio Oxoii,
celebrato à bonze memorize S. Cantuarieii archiepiscopo,
de quodam diacono qui se apostatavit p quadam Ju-
dea, qui càm esset per episcopum degradat?, statim
fuit igni traditus per manum laicalem. S1 autem sit
aliquis ordinarius qui in curia Christianitatis, clerico
sic ei liberato, purgationem indicere (sine accusatore
eoram eo de novo aecusante) noluerit, tunc fiat ei breve


ex parte domini regis in hac forma.


3. Rex tali ordinario salutem. Audivimus quód cüm

s aided , quidam elericeus de morte hominis rectatus, vel appel-
nolueritei latus, vel indietatus coram justitiariis nostris product?
Purgeuo" esset, & ibi vobis sicut clericus liberatus, ut se coram
ducere, — vobis purgaret, & se inde redderet innocentem si pos-
liberas, 8e&, non vultis (ut dicitur) ad purgationem poedere,
nisi sit aliquis, qui de novo coram vobis in foro eccle-

siastico versus eum psequatur, & instituat accusationem.

Et quoniam p accusationem faetam in curia nostra, de

morte illà satis habetur suspectus, & per talem diffa-
mationem & indictafmütum, nihil aliud restat nisi quód

coram vobis admittatur purgatio, que quidem fieri


deberet, si laicus esset in curia nostra, 8i ordo impedi-


OF THE CROWN. 901


degrade clergy, since he cannot promote them to orders,
as has been said above.


But when a clerk so convicted of & crime is degraded,
no other punishment follows for one offence or for several t, Fia
perpetrated before his degradation, which is the great of et
forfeiture of civil rights, "unless by chance he be con- ns pen
vieted of apostacy, because then he should be first de- beta
graded and afterwards burnt by a lay hand, according to anà if he
what happened in the council of Oxford! celebrated by shall be an
Stephen archbishop of Canterbury of good memory, con- ? 194.
cerning a certain deacon, who apostatised for a certain
Jewess, who, when he had been degraded by the bishop,
was immediately committed to the flames by a lay hand.
But if there be any ordinary, who is unwilling to impose
& purgation in the court of Christianity upon a clerk so
delivered up to it, without an aeccuser aecusing him
afresh before him, then let a writ issue to him from the
part of the king in this form:


The king to such an ordinary greeting We have - ET
rit, 1


heard, that when a certain clerk arraigned or accused or m. oai.


indicted of the death of & man was brought before our ia
justiciaries, and there delivered over to you as being a vr rb
clerk, that he might purge himself before you and there- spuge-


upon render himself innocent if he could, you are not ton
willing to proceed to à purgation, unless there be some
one who will prosecute him anew before you in the ec-
elesiastical court, and set out an aecusation. And since
by an aecusation made in our court he is sufficiently sus-
« peeted of that death, and through such a defamation and
indictment nothing else remains than that his purgation
should be made before you, as i6 would have to be done,
if he were à layman, in our court, if his orders did not


! Probably a council held at Ox-
ford, A.D. 1222, under Stephen
Langton archbishop of Canterbury
(1216-1228), in which complaints
were made against Simon de Mont-


fort, and wherein were made 49
canons, conformable to those of the
Lateran Council of A.D. 1215, and
in which the Albigenses were con-
demned.


4.
De eusto-
dia eorum,
qui sunt in
prisonani
mittendi,
ct qui per
plegios
dimittendi,
et de car-
ceris frac-
tione.


l.
De crimi-
nosis, qui
statim
fugiunt
post feloni-


302 DE CORONA.


mentum non daret, & licit nuBus sequeretur, nos p
pace nostra sequi deberemus. Vobis mandamus, quód
seeundüm «q idem talis se purgaverit coram vobis, vel
non, quod vestrum fuerit exequamini. Teste, &c.


Cüm autem (secundüm quod predictum est) non
sunt quidam in ecareerem detrudendi in levioribus cri-
minibus, sed p plegios dimittendi, si plegios dare pos-
sint, nisi tam grave scelus eum admisisse constat, ut
nee fidejussoribus, nec militibus comitti debeat, sed ut
carceris peenam & inclusioné sustineat, sstimare debet
vice. utrum in carcere recipienda sit psona, an fidejus-
soribus tradenda, & hoc vel p criminis, quod objicitur,
qualitate & enonnitate, vel ppter honorem & amplissi-
mas facultates, vel p innocentia persone, vel p ejus
dignitate, qui accusatur. Sed cüm p criminis qualitate
in carcerem recepti fuerint, conspiraverint, ut ruptis
vineulis aut fracto carcere evadant, ampliüs quàm
causa, p qua recepti sunt, exposcit puniendi sunt, vide-
licet ultimo supplicio, quamvis ex eo crimine innocen-
tes inveniantur, ppter quod inducti sunt in carcerem
& imparcati. Sed si sit aliquis inter tales qui conspi-
rationem eorum detexerit, talis à poena liberabitur.


CaP. X.


Dictum est de illis, qui presentes sunt, vel capi
possunt in felonia faeta in publico, pluribus astantibus
& videntibus, sicut in quibuseunque congregationibus.
Sed quia sunt quidam, qui statim fugiunt post feloniam


l1 « admisisse eum constet." MSS. Rawl, C. 160 and 159.


OF THE CROWN. 208
raise an impediment, and although no one would pursue
him, we ought to pursue him for our own peace. We
command you, that according as the same person shall
purge himself or not before you, you execute what shall
be your duty. Witness &c. |


But since (aecording to what has been said above) 4.
some persons are not to be thrust into prison on lighter Ove ie
charges, but are to be released on sureties, if they can property
give sureties, unless it is clear that he has admitted so n to
great a wickedness, that he ought not to be delivered up be sent
to sureties nor to knights, but should sustain the penalty Dd Lec
of prison and confinement, the viscount ought to esti- those who
mate whether the person is to be received in prison, or to ios
be delivered up to sureties, and that in consideration of : qu
the quality and enormity of the crime with which he is cerning
charged, or on aecount of his honour and very ample E
means, or for the innoeeney of his person, or for the
dignity of him who is accused. But when in consider-
ation of the quality of their crime they have been received
into prison, [and] they have conspired, that by breaking
their chains or breaking through their prison they may-
escape, they are to be punished to à greater extent than
the eause, for which they have been received, requires,
for instance with the most extreme punishment, al.
though they may be found innocent of that crime, on
account of which they have been cast into prison and
immured. But if there be any one amongst them, who
has revealed their conspiracy, such a person shall be re-


leased from punishment.


CHAPTER X.


We have spoken of those, who are present or may be l

e. . [I . Of erimi-
seized in a aet of felony done in publie, several persons nous per-
standing by and seeing it, as in some assemblies. But Sons who


. take to
because there are some persons, who forthwith betake fight im-


304 DE CORONA.


am,et tunc & capi non possunt, statim post tales levetur hutesium,


qualiter
secta fieri
debet post
tales, et
quorum
quidam
sunt in
franco
plegio, et
quidam de
manupastu
alicujus.


f. 124.


& fiat post eos secta, de villa in villam, quousque
malefactores capiantur, alioquin tota villata in miseri-
cordia regis remanebit. Qualiter autem secta fieri
debet, qualibet patria habet suum modum, & eodem
modo levetur hutesium. Si quis per infortunium mor-
tuus fuerit, oppressus, vel submersus, vel quocunq, alio
modo interfect?, dum tamen non sciatur quis sit inter-
fector, sed sequi non oportet in hiis casibus de villa in
villam, nec de terra in terram, dum tamen hutesium
levatum sit, cüm sit quasi capt? malefactor. De eo
autém qui sic fugam ceperit, diligenter erit inquirendü
si fuerit in franco plegio & decenna, & tunc erit de-
cenna in misericordia coram justitiarlis nostris! quia
non habent ipsum malefactorem ad rectum, licét per
alios ante iterum capt? fuerit? '& prisons liberatus,
ex quo per decennam non est captus nec pduetus. Si
autem exira francum plegium fuerit talis in aliqua
villa receptatus, erit villata in misericordia, nisi talis
sit ille qui fugit, quód in decenna & franco plegio
esse non debeat: ut magnates, milites & eorum paren-
ies, elerieus, liber homo, & hujusmodi, secundàüm con-
suetudinem patrie, & quo casu tenebitur ille, in qui-
busdà partibus, de cujus fuerint familia & manupastu,
& p eis respondebit, nisi consuetudo patrie aliud in-
ducat, quód pro manupastu suo non debeat respondere :
sicut in cof Hertford? ubi non respondet quis p manu-
pastu suo p aliquo delicto, nisi redierit post feloniam,
vel post delietum eum  receptaverit, ut de itinere M.
de Pateshull in com Hertford? anno regni H. quinto.
Archiepiscopi, episcopi, comites & barones, & omnes qui
habent sok & sak, toll & team, et hujusmodi libertates,
milites suos & pprios servientes, armigeros, s. dapiferos


1 t nostris," omitted in MSS.


Rawl. C. 160 et 159. 3 « ITereford? MSS. Rawl. C. 160
2'* ante tempus captus fuerit," | and 150.
MS. Rawl. C.160,


OF THE CROWN. 905


themselves to flight after a felony and cannot be seized, meaiately
let the hue be raised after them, from vill to vill, until m ur
the malefactors are captured, otherwise let the whole E je
district (villata) be amerced to the king. But how the Phu is.
pursuit ought to be made, each country has its own mode, after them,
and let the hue be raised in that same mode. If a per- 921 5ome
son has died by a misfortune, suffocated or drowned or are in


killed in some other way, whilst it is not known who Sec -
killed him, in these cases it is not incumbent to pursue some are
from vill to vill nor from land to land, provided however ;; ORC
the hue has been raised, when the malefactor has been hol.
as ib were captured. But concerning the person who has f !?*
thus taken to flight it will have to be diligently inquired,
if he was in frankpledge and in a tithing, and then the
tithing will be amerciable before our justices, because
they have not produced the malefactor for trial, although
he has been captured again by others beforehand and
delivered to prison, since he has not been captured and
produced by the tithing. But if he be out of frank-
pledge and received into some vill, the district of the vill
will be amerciable, unless the person who has run away,
ought not to bein a tithing or in frankpledgo; as for
instance magnates, knights and their relations, a clerk, a
freeman, and such like according to the custom of the
country, and. in which case the person, of whose family:
and household he may be, will be liablein some parts, and
he shall be responsible for them, unless the custom of the
country introduces a different principle, that he ought not
to be responsible for his household ; as in the county of
Hertford, where à man is not responsible for his house-
hold for any delinquency, unless he has returned after a
felony, or he has received him after his delinquency, as
upon the iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county of
Hertford, in the fifth.year of the reign of king Henry.
Archbishops, bishops, counts, and barons, and all who
have sok and sak, toll and team, and franchises of such
kind, ought to keep their knights, and proper servitors,

VOL. IJ. U


306 DE CORONA.


& pincernas, camerarios, eoquos, pistores, sub suo fridh-
bwrgo habere debent. Item & isti suos armigeros &
alios sibi servientes, quod si cui forisfecerint, ipsi dii
sul habeant eos ad rectum, & si non habuerint, solvant
p eis fortisfacturam :! & sie erit observandum de om-
nib? alii, qui sunt de alicujus manupastu. Quia
omnis homo sive liber sive servus, aut est aut debet
esse in franco plegio aut de alicujus manupastu, nisi
sit aliquis itinerans de loco in locum, qui non plus se
teneat ad unum quàm ad alium, vel quid habeat quod
sufficiat p franco plegio, sieut dignitatem vel ordinem
Leg. Edw. vel liberum tenementum, vel in civitate rem immobi-
S nies lem. Et secundàm leges Edwardi regis, omnis, qui est
Britton,  zetatis duodecem annorum, facere debet sacramentum
li.ch.xxx.. : : ys
à 4. in visu franci plegii, quód nec latro vult esse nee
Fleta112. latroni consentire, & in franco plegio esse debet omnis,
qui terram tenet & domiü, qui dieuntur AÀusfastene? &
etiam alii qui illis deserviunt, qui dieuntur folgheves,
quia nec debet quis à se repellere servientem suum,
antequam purgatus sit de omni calumnia, unde priüs
fuit ealumniatus. ltem de manupastu alicujus est ille
& familia, qui est ad victum & ad vestitum, vel ad
victum tantüm cum mercede, sicut sunt famuli vel


servientes & domus mercenarii.


: Item secundàüm antiquam consuetudinem, dici poterit
hM ü de familia alicujus, qui hospitatus fuerit cum alio per
nocte dii tres noctes, quia prima nocte dici poterit wncuth? se-


oterit un- à ;
Phth, se. Cüda veró gusi^ tertia nocte MAhoghenehyne? ^ Et in


i veg. fine notandum, quód potest quis alium recipere in
tia nocte franco plegio, sieut bovghye aldere?) quando voluerit


hoghene-
hyne.
l*forisfacturam," MS. Rawl. 3«gest," MS. Rawl C. 160;
C. 160. * chout," MS. Rawl. C. 159.
2 « hussefesten," MS. Rawl. C. 3 * hogenhyne," MS. Raw]. C. 160.
159. * * borgyaldre," MS. Rawl. id.


1 *t nnchont," MS. Raw]. id. * borgysaldre," MS. Rawl. C. 159.


OF THE CROWN. 307


armour-bearers that is, stewards and butlers, chamber-
lains, cooks, bakers under their F*Zdhbwrg. | Likewise
they also must keep their armour-bearers and other servi-
lors, but if they have incurred forfeit to any one, let
their lords themselves produce them for trial, and if they
do not so, let the lords themselves pay the forfeit for
them, and so it shall be observed of all who are of any-
body's household. Because every man whether free or à
serf, either is or ought to be in frankpledge, or in some-
body's household, unless he be somebody itinerant from
place to place, who does not keep himself to one more
than to another, or who has something which suffices for
frankpledge, as a dignity or an order or a free tenement,
or real property in a:city. And aecording to the Laws
of King Edward, every one who is of the age of twelve
ought to make oath at the view of frankpledge, that he
is not a robber nor will conspire with a robber, and every
person who has land and house, who are called * house-
holders," ought to bein frankpledge, and also others who
serve them, who are called * followers," for neither ought
à person to repel from himself his servitor, before he is
purged from every charge, of which he has been pre-
viously charged. Likewise he is of the household and
family of any one, who has food and clothing from him,
or who has food only with wages, such as are the
domesties or servitors and hirelings of the house.


Likewise according to ancient custom, he may be said — 2.
to be of any one's family, who has dwelt in the house of 1'^t9»
another person for three nights, because on the first night night he
he may be termed uneuth, but on the second gust? on uin
the third night hoghenehyne? And in the end it is to be uneuth, but
noted, that à person may receive another in frankpledge d
gust, on


!*« Uncuth,' Anglo-Saxon, un- 5* Agen ina," Anglo-Saxon,
known. ] his own hind or domestic.
? « Gust," that is, guest.


v2


308 DE CORONA.


Britton, pro voluntate sua, sed non poterit illum à franco plegio

: an x". dimittere cum voluerit, nee vice versa, ut videtur, cüm

Fleta 40. quis se posuerit in francum plegium alicujus vel decen-
nam, vel ex antiquo secutus fuerit cum decenna, non
poterit se retrahere, cüm voluerit.


f. 195. | Car. XI
1l. Cum aute quis se ita subtraxerit, ppter homicidium
Qualiter


reuscrim;. Vel aliud crime, de beneficio principis & gratia vocabit,
nosussit quód veniat responsur? & ad stádum recto, si sit aliquis
rTequre?- qui versus eum loquatur, alioquin no erit statim vo-
dus, et si q q q


Bon yenit cand? sine secta alicujus, quia cüm absenti reo gravia
u er e . - . . .
utlagon- crimina intentetur, sententia festinari non solet, sed


dus. vocari ut requiratur, non utiq, ad poenam, sed ut potes-
prion. tas sit ei purgandi se si poterit se purgare: & dabitur
$ 9. ei temp? legittimu, scil. mensium quinq, quod est infra


quintü eof ad standum recto, & ad respondend appel.
lanti de crimine ei imposito, qui si infra tep? illud
non venerit, p exlege tenebitur, càm principi non obe-
diat nec legi, & extune utlagabitur, sicut ille qui est
extra legem, sicut. Laughelesman.! Si aute infra tem-
pus illud venerit & respondeat secund legem terrsw,
tune deducat. Si autem post talem interrogatione
infra temp? illud reversus moriatur, & se nondum pur-
gaverit, ad heredes suos proprios transmittit hzredi-
tatem, lieót revera culpabilis sit, amittit tamen catalla
su& ppter fugam.


! * Laghelesman," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. 309


as à principal surety, whenever he wishes at his own will, the rds
but he cannot dismiss him when he pleases from frank- due.
pledge, nor vice versá, as i& seems, when a person has

placed himself in the frankpledge of another, or in &

tything, or has followed from ancient time with a tything, .


he cannot withdraw himself from it when ho pleases.


CHAPTER XI. * f. 125b.


When indeed any person has so withdrawn himself 1.
on account of homicide or any other crime, by the beno- e 2.
ficence and grace of the prince he shall be called to come.criminous
to make answer and to stand on his defence, if there is Ren dant
any one who will speak against him, otherwise he is not ru
to be forthwith ealled without the suit of some one, eiu E
because when grave crimes are charged against an absent d bs
defendant, sentence is. not usually hastened, but he is hc is to Be
accustomed to be called that he may be required, not 9utlawed.
indeed for punishment, but that he may have the power
to purge himself, if he can purge himself, and a legiti-
mate time shall be allowed to him, namely five months,
thatis within the fifth county [court]to stand on his
defence and to.answer to the accuser concerning the
crime imputed to him, but if he should not have come
within that time, he shall be held to be an outlaw, since he
does not obey the prince nor the law, and he shall be
thenceforth declared an outlaw,like him who is out of
[the protection of] the law, Laughelesman.! But if he
come within that time and answers according to the law
of the land, then let him be led forth. But if after such
à search after him having returned within that time ho
should die, and has not as yet purged himself, he 'trans-
mits his inheritance to his right heirs, although he be in
iruth culpable, he loses however his chattels by his
HEN


!Lawless-man in modetn English.


910 DE CORONA.


- Cüm autem malefactor fuga ceperit, oportet q sit
Cum male- at . . ;
faetorfua- qui sequatur fugiente, qui loquatur de visu & auditu,
gam cepé- quód fugitivus, vel q redeat ad pacem infra temp?
rit, qualiter : Ee ; !
interro — prafinitum, vel quasi inobediens legi, secund legem
p * terrp» utlagetur in comitatu, & ibi proponat oia verba
tatu, et de appelli, ac si fugitiv? prwesens esset, & adjiciat in ap-
comitatum, pello & aceusatione sua, q, si ineulpatum vidisset, ver-
etquisequi sus. ipsum loqueretur ^ ÀÁd hujusmodi veró sectam
SRI * faciendà, non admittitur quilibet de populo, nisi ad
ipsum pertineat sequi propter parentelam forté, eó q
est sanguine & parentela conjunct? interfecto, & quo
casu cüm plures sint appellantes, ppinquior parens
semper pfertur remotiori. Si aute extrane? fuerit qui
sequitur, admittitur ad sequendü, ut si homagio obli- '
Brito; £8? fuit interfecto, vel dominio, ut si fuit de manu-
l.i.ch. — pastu, vel familia interfecti, & dicat se plaga vel vin-
xxiv. S l. E lere : . É
Flea 47. cula, vel quid tale in ipsa interfectione recepisse, & ad
hoe admittitur tam ille qui est infra stat g ille qui
est plene setatis, dum tamen setas minoris expectetur,
& eàüm a&d statem pvenerit, non habebit locum contra
ipsum exceptio de secta minüs riié facta, quin pcedat
appellu, & sie videtur de aliis qui appellum non habe-
rent, si appellatus presens esset, & exciperet contra
psonam appellantis, lieet aliter videatur quód bene


valeat secta à quocunq, & indeterminaté, cüm non sit
qui excipiat contra illum qui sequitur.


Non autem habet appellü foemina nisi de morte viri


ibus "t - : 1
In qui9U$ cui inter brachia sua intérfecti, vel de corpore suo


mulier


OF THE CROWN. 31ll


But when à malefactor has taken flight, there ought Wi.
to be some one to follow the fugitive, to speak from sight malefactor
and hearing, that he is a fugitive, either that he should "p
return to the peace [of the king] within a pre-defined what way
, time,or as being disobedient to the law should be ac- P meer
cording to the law of the land outlawed in the county in the
[court] and let him there state all the words of the 909m.
charge, as if the fugitive were present, and let him in county to
the charge and his accusation add that if he shall see the ders
person charged, he shall speak against him. But to make and may
this kind of suit let not any one of the people be admit- bn -
ted, unless it appertains to him by relationship to pursue
him, by reason that he is of blood and relationship con-
nected with the slain person, and in which case when
there are several accusers, the nearest relation is always
preferred to the more remote. But if he be a stranger
who pursues, he is admitted to sue, as for instance if he
be bound by homage or by lordship to the slain person,
as if he be of the household or of the family of the slain,
and says that he has received à cut or bonds or some-
thing of that sort in the very act of slaying, and for this
purpose let there be admitted as well one who is below
age equally as one who is of fullage, provided the age
of the minor be waited for, and when he shall have come
of age, there shall be no place for an exception against
him on the ground of the suit having been not rightly
made, so as to prevent the accusation being proceeded
with, and so it seems concerning others who have no
[right of] aecusing, if the person accused be present
and he except to the person of the accuser, although it
may otherwise seem that a pursuit by any person what-
soever is valid and indefinitely so, when there is no per-


son to except against him who pursues.


À woman however has not the right of accusing, ex-


3,
cept concerning the death of her husband, slain between 1^ what


! * from sight and hearing." 'The | 1. 2. c. 3.) was abolished by Stat.
oath de visu et auditu (Glanville, | Westm. I. ch. 41. (3 Edw. L)


3192 DE CORONA.


habetap- pprio p q alieui judici debeat lex apparens. Et no-
pellum. tandum, q non est aliquis, qui sequi possit versus


yd alium de aliqua felonia per attornatum, dum tamen
c. 34. ille, qui queritur & sequi deberet, potens sit sui, ita


wet: quód sequi possit, & si p aliquod tempus fuerit impo-


Bron . iens, quód parens vel amicus pro eo sequatur propter
xxiv.g 7, impotentiam, cim potens.effectus fuerit, cessabit attor-
ib.ch.xxii.ngtus, & ut dicitur, non debet alius sequi ad utlaga-
tionem pro aliquo, nisi esset interfecto ita conjunctus
parétela vel homagio, quód si appellatus presens esset,
jaceret inter illos appellü, & si vie. comitatus sine
secta aliquem interrogaverit in comitatu ad utlagadum
sine praecepto justitiariorum, erit in misericordia. Item,
si cauté agant vic. in comitatu, examinare debent fac-
tum, p quo quis interrogandus erit, quia quamvis felo-
nia adjiciatur in appello, tamen quodlibet factum non
continet sub se feloniam, quamvis aliquando contineat
injuriam & transgressionem,


f. 125 b.


4. Item videndü, quis utlagari possit & debeat ad ali-
indian eujus sectam, & quis non. Et sciendi, q quilibet mas-
et debeat. culus, dum tamen sit duodecem annorum & amplius,

quia omnes talis statis aut sunt aut esse debent in
decenna, vel in eo q tantüdem valet, sicut in manu-


pastu & hujusmodi ut suprà.


5. Minor veró, & qui infra statem duodecem annorum


Ree. fuerit, utlagari non potest, nec extra legem poni, quia


possit utla- ante talem setate non est sub lege aliqua, nec in de-
p qu , cenna, non magis quàm femina, que utlagari non
decim an- potest, quia ipsa non est sub lege, i. Inlaughe ! anglicé,
t ise s. in franco plegio sive decenna, sicut masculus duo-
femina ^ dece annorum & ulteriàs, & ideo non potest utlagari,


SNR wayviari tamen bene potest & p derelicta haberi, cüm


! * Inlaghe, anglice," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. 3913


her arms or concerning her own person, through which woman has
the law ought to be apparent to any judge. And itis um
to be noted that there is not any one, who can pursue
after another for & felony by an attorney, provided he
who complains and ought to pursue is competent so that f. 125 b.
he can pursue, and if he has been infirm for some time,
that his relation or friend may pursue for him on account
of his infirmity, when he has recovered his strength, the
attorney shall cease, and as it is said, no person ought to
. pursue to outlawry for another, unless it be for à person
slain, so connected by relationship or homage, that if
the accused party were present, an appeal would lie
between them, and if the viscount of à county without a
suit shall have sought for any one in the county so as to
outlaw him without a precept from the Justices, he shall
be amerciable. Likewise if the viscounts in the counties
act cautiously, they ought to examine into the character
of. the act, wherefore a person is to be sought for, for
although felony be charged in the appeal, nevertheless it
is not every act which comprises & felony, although it
sometimes contains an injury and a trespass.
Likewise we must see, who may and ought to be, i

à o may
outlawed at the suit of another person, and who not. anà ought
And it is to be known, that any male person, provided [9 be ett-
he is of twelve years of age or more, because all of such
age are or ought to be in some tything, or in that which
is equivalent, as in à household or such like, as above.


But & minor or à person who is below twelve years of " i
age, cannot be outlawed nor placed out of the [protection person


of the] law, because before that age he is not under any P


law, nor in à tything, no more than & woman, who can- who is of
not be outlawed, beeause she is not under the law, that er ium
is, inlaughe in English, in other words, in frankpledge years of
or & decenna, as a male of twelve years and upwards, ^£^ nd
and therefore she cannot be outlawed, she may however woman


well be waived and left derelict, when for any felony """"*t be


sed way-
viari.


Britton,
I. i. ch. xiii.


83.


6.
Qualiter
quis sequi
debeat, et
quot comi-
tatus.


Infra, c. xii.
8 ] 2.


914 DE CORONA:


p felonie aliqua fugam fecerit sive ceperit. Est enim
wayviu quod nullus advocat, nec princeps eam advo-
cabit nec tuebitur cüm fuerit rite wayviata, sicut fit
de masculo qui secundü legem terre rite fuerit utla-
gat?, extunc enim gerunt caput lupinü, ita g sine judi-
ciali inquisitione rité pereunt, & secum suü judicium
portant, & meritó sine lege pereant, qui secundüm
legem vivere recusaverint, & hzc ita, si cüm capiendi
fuerint fugiant, vel se defendant: si aute vivi capti
fuerint vel se reddiderint, vita illorüu & mors erit in
manu dom regis.


Ite qualiter quis sequi debeat, & infra q temp?
videndum, & sciendü quód ad sectam & appellum ip-
sius, qui sequi debet & poterit, interrogari debet appel-
latus ad quatuor comitatus, de comitatu in comitati,
donec appellat? utlagetur, sub hac tamen observatione,
q àd priunü comit non fiat nisi simplex vocatio, &
comitat? ille primus non computabitur infra tempus
utlagationis, nec erit un? ex quatuor comitat, quia
semper oportet quinq, preeteriri antequà quis sit utla-
gatus, & secundü hoe ad quartum comit, qui revera
dici poterit quintus, & in quo non admittitur essonium,
nec audiend? erit,si quis manucajere vellet appellatü,


de habendo ipsum ad alium comit, quia sic posset pro-


trahi tempus utlagationis in infinitum, quod esse non
debet, seeundum quod responsum fuerit Richardo Duket
per M. de Pateshull, ecàm esset apud Walsingham! in
comit Norf. Ad alios veró com precedentes bene
poterit talis manucapi, dum tamen quilibet eoíà allo-
cetur pro uno, usque ad quintum.  Usq, ad quintum
veró eom poterit talis per se vel amicos suos (si vo-
luerit) reddere se prisons vel defendere se & purgare


— À — MÀ —- —— — —— —


1* Wolsingeham," MS. Rawl.C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. 915


she has made or taken flight. For a waif is that which no outlawed,
one advocates, and no prince will advocate her or pro- P"t m&y be
tect her, when she has been duly waived, as happens in

the case of à man who according to the law of the land

has been duly outlawed, for from that time he bears à

wolf's head, so that they duly perish without any judi-

cial inquiry, and carry their own judgment with them,

and they may deservedly die without [the protection of]

law, who have refused to live in accordance with it, and

this is so, if they either take flight or defend themselves,

when they are to be arrested ; but if they have been

taken alive or have surrendered themselves, their life

and death will be in the hand of the lord the king.


Likewise we must see in what way 8 person ought to — &.
sue and within what time, and it is to be known, that at di : iun
the suit and appeal of the person himself, who ought to son feum
sue and ean do so, the person appealed ought to be sum- f? Mn
moned at four county courts, from county court to how many
county court, until the person appealed is outlawed, bind
subject however to this observation, that at the first
county court there be a simple calling, and such first
county court shall not be computed within the time of
the outlawry, nor shall it be one of the county courts, -
for five ought always to pass before à person is outla wed,
and according to this at the fourth, which may really be
ealled the fifth, and in which no essoin 1s allowed, nor is
any one to be heard, if he wishes to be surety for the
person appealed to produce him at another court, for thus
the time of the outlawry might be prolonged indefinitely,
which ought not to be according to the answer given to
Richard Duket by Martin de Pateshull, at Walsingham
in the county of Norfolk. But at the other preceding
county courts a surety may well answer for such an one,
provided, however, each county court be allowed as one,
upto the fifth. 'Upto the fifth county court, indeed, such
& person may by himself, or by his friends (if he wishes),
surrender hiinself to prison, or defend himself and purge


f. 126.


T.
De secta
non rite
facta.


8.
Si sectam
resumere
noluerit,
sine secta
non pro-
cedatur ad
utlagatio-
nem.


316 | . DE CORONA.


innocentia, post tempus veró illud, qualitercunq, fuerit
utlagatus, redire non poterit nisi de gratia principis.
Sed si infra tempus illud redierit, ut. predictum est,
& se defenderit, restituetur &d omnia, sicut ad pacem
& hzreditate, preeterqua ad mobilia, propter fuga. Sed
quid si ille, qui sequitur ab initio, rit? non fuerit per-
secutus, ut si statim, cüm posset, hutesium non leva-
verit, nec secutus fuerit ad villas vicinas, nec ad bal-
livi domi regis, nec ad coronatores. nec ad primum
comitatum ut deceret, si postea sequi voluerit, audiri
debet, cüm non sit aliquis qui causari debeat vel pos-
sit jure, propter sectam min? rité factam.


S1 autem cüm secta ab initio rité facta fuit, ille, qui
sequitur ad aliquem comitatü, fecerit intervallum, bene
poterit sectam suam resumere si voluerit, dum tamen
ille comitatus, omissus p negligentiam suam, infra tem-
pora utlagationis non eomputetur. Et quod dicitur de
uno comitatu dicitur de pluribus, quia hoc totü cedit
ad commodum appellati propter negligentiam appel-
lantis.


Si fort? sectam resumere noluerit, vel antequam
perfecta fuerit, non peedatur sine secta in comitatu
ad utlagationem, sed expectetur adventus justitiario-
rum, nisi sib aliquis qui sequi possit & velit, & resu-
mat sibi sectam incepta donec perficiatur: quse si ante
iter justitiariorum perfecta non fuerit, computatis comi-
tatibus quibus secta priüs facta fuerit, dicat ei justi-
tiarii quód eam perficiet donec appellatus utlagetur.
Si autem non sit*aliquis, qui in comitatu sectam in-


OF THE CROWN. 317


his innocence, but after that time, in whatever way he
may have been outlawed, he cannot return except -:by
the grace of the prince. Butif within that time he shall £126.
have returned as aforesaid, and shall have defended him-
self, he shall be restored to everything, as to the peace
[of the king] and to his inheritance, with the exception
of his movables on account of his flight. But what if
he, who originally pursues, has not duly pursued, as for
instance he has not raised the hue immediately, when he
could, nor has followed him to the neighbouring vills,
nor to the bailiff of the lord the king, nor to the
. eoroners, nor to the first, county court, as became him, if
he has been willing afterwards to sue him, he ought to
.be heard, since there is no one who ought or can be
blamed, on account of a suit not having been duly
made. |


But if, when a suit has been duly made from the com- . 7.
mencement, he who sues at any county court allows an pcm
interval to elapse, he may well resume his suit, if he not duly
wishes, provided the county court omitted through his "^ dis
negligence is not computed within the time for his out-
lawry. And what is said of one county court is said of
several, because all this interval goes to the benefit of
the party accused on account of the negligence of the
accuser.


If by chance he should be unwilling to resume the — s.
suit, or before it be completed, let there be no proceeding ird
to outlawry without à suit in the county court, but let to Penis
the coming of the justices be awaited, unless there be e und

pro-
some one who ean and will sue, and will himself resume ceeding to
the suit already begun, until it is completed : which, if it LT
be not completed before the arrival of the justices, Many a
after computing the county courts at which the suit has "
been previously made, let the justices say to him that
he should complete it until the accused party is out-


lawed. But if there be not any one who will resume


e


318 . DE CORONA.


ceptam resumpserit, propter sectam priüs factam, quse
violentam inducit presumptionem, & sine aliqua inqui-
sitione, utrum appellatus culpabilis sit vel non, prseci-
piatur à justitiariis quód vicecomes cofiü sectam per-
ficiat, computatis comi przecedentibus, quibus priüs ante
iter secta facta fuit, quod quidem sine inquisitione
non fieret, utrum  indietatus culpabilis esset vel non,
nisi secta & appellum pr:ecessiset. Sola autem fuga
non sufficit p se, vel latitatio sine contumacia, ad ali-
que utlagandu, nec indietamentü, rectü, vel fama, nisi
sit qui sequatur in com ante iter justitia? & appellet,
vel q à justitia? in itinere pcipiatur comitatui, quód
sequatur ex parte regis de comi in cofi, donec rectat?
secund lege terre fuerit utlagat?, facta priüs à justitia?
inquisitione si nulla peesserit secta priüs in comitatu,
utrum indictatus culpabilis sit vel non, quia si secta
peesserit, licét, deserta fuerit, tamen fale inducit psump-
tion? q non oportet ulteriüs inquirere, utrü indictat?
culpabilis fuerit vel non, quia secta p se vel inquisitio
p se ad hoc plen? sufficiunt, hoc tamen observato, quàd
si inquisitio dicat q indictatus eulpabilis non sit, dica-
tur vicecomiti comitatus, quód ad utlagationem non
procedat. Sed quandocunque talis redierit, remaneat
sub plegio ad standum recto, si quis versus eum loqui
voluerit. Et unde videtur, vice versa, quód si per
inquisitionem culpabilis inveniatur, & ante utlagatio-
nem redierit, quód non sit per plegios dimittendus, sed


OF THE CROWN. 319


the suit in the county court already commenced, on ac-
count of the suit having been previously made, which
raises a violent presumption, and without any inquest,
whether he be culpable or not, let it be ordered by the
justiees, that the viscount of the county complete the
suit, after computing the county courts preceding, in
which the suit has been made before the iter [of the
justices], which indeed would not otherwise be done
without an inquest, whether the person indicted was
culpable or not, unless a suit and a criminal charge had
preceded. For flight alone does not suffice by itself,
nor hiding, without contumacy, to outlaw any one, nor
an indictment, nor a citation, nor public fame, unless
there be some one who sues in the county court before
the iter of the justices and is an aceuser; or because
a precept has been made by the justices in their iter
to the county court, that it should pursue on the part of
the: king. from county court to county court, until the
party cited according to the law of the land has been
outlawed, an inquest having been previously held by the
justices, if no previous suit has been instituted in the
county court, whether the person indicted is culpable or
not, because if & suit has been instituted, although it
may have been deserted, nevertheless it induces such a
presumption that it is not necessary to inquire further,
whether the person indicted is culpable or not, for the
suit by itself and the inquest by itself suffice fully for
that purpose; this, however, being observed, that if the
inquesb says that the person indicted is not culpable, it
should be said to the viscount of the county court, that
he should not proceed to outlawry. But whenever such
& person shall have returned, let him remain under
surety to stand his trial if any person should wish to
say anything againsb him. And hence it seems, vice
versà, that if he be found culpable by the inquest, and
he shall have returned before the outlawry, that he is
not to be released on sureties, but to be retained in


320 DE CORONA.


sub custodia & in prisona retinendus, propter inquisi-
tionem prwecedentem, donec ab imposito crimine se
defenderit. Sed cüm preceptum fuerit alicui quód
sectam, quz) ante iter incepta fuit, post iter perficiat,
computatis comitatib? peedentibus, mori contigerit, vel
sequi noluerit post iter, vel infirmitate gravatus sequi
non possit, videndum si comitatus sectam perficere
possit sine warranto vel justitiarii prrecepto, si coram


f.196 b. justitiariis, & seot& non fuerit, perfecta sed derelicta,


1l.
De causa
utlagatio-
nis vera et
presump-
tiva.


tune precipiant justitiarii quód in coi procedatur ad
utlagariam sine alia secta.


Car. XIL


Causa veró utlag' esse poterit vera aliquado, aliquado
psumptiva: vera enim esse poterit, cüm quis nequiter &
in felon cont pace regis, plurib? astantib? & videntib?,
vel salte sub visu & auditu alicujus, cujus interfuerit
appellare, occisus fuerit vel graviter vulnerat?, & may-
hemiat? & robbatus, & imprisonat, vel ligat?, ita q p
se sequi non possit, & sit aliquis qui sequatur, cu


mmalefactor fugerit & capi non possit, & ita q factü sub


9.
Si vulnera-
tus curari
noluerit,
cum posset.


se contineat felonia. Et ppter q, ut videtur, facta
preced sunt diligenter examinanda, quia quzdá acci-
dut ex infortunio, sicut. de submersis & oppressis &
hujusmodi. |


Ité, ubi vulnerat? evadere poterit mortem p indus-
iriü medicorü, curari noluit cii posset, sed in odiüi pcus-
Soris se morti exposuit, vel si per imperitiam medic


BC T n o s os


OF THE CROWN. 321


custody and in prison on account of the preceding inqui-
sition, until he shall defend himself against the crime
imputed to him. But when it shall have been enjoined
upon any one that he should complete after the iter the
suit, which has been commenced before the iter, the pre-
vious county courts having been taken into account, and
he shall have happened to die, or he shall be unwilling
to sue after the iter, or being incapacitated by bodily
infirmity he should not be able to sue, it is to be con-
sidered whether the county court can complete the suit
without a warrant or injunction from the justices, if
ib be before the justices and the suit has not been
completed but left derelict, then let the justices enjoin
that proceedings shall be taken in the county court to f.1236 b.
outlawry without another suit.


CHAPTER XII.


But à cause of outlawry may be sometimes true, some- — 1.

: ; e f a true,
times presumptive; for i6 may be true, when any one ana of a
wickedly and feloniously against the peace of the king, Hum.
whilst several are standing by and seeing it, or at least or out.
within the sight and hearing of some one, whose interest lavry.
ib may be to accuse him, has been killed or grievously
wounded, and maimed and robbed and imprisoned or
bound, so that he cannot pursue by himself, and there be
some one who can pursue, when the malefactor takes to
flight and cannot be taken, and so that the act comprises
à felony under it. Ànd on account whereof, as it seems,
the preceding acts are to be diligently examined, because
some things happen from misfortune, as in the case of


persons drowned or crushed, and such like.


Likewise when à wounded person may escape death,, ^?
through the attention of medical men, and he is unwilling wounded
to be cured, when he can be so, and through hatred of Personwil
the man who struck him he has exposed himself to he can, be
death, or if through unskilfulness of the medical man, treated for


his cure,
VOL. II. 4


9.
Jtem causa
presump-
tiva.


5.
S1 causa
non sit :
periculosa


2022 DE CORONA,


qui ppera medicament dederint, vel ecu medic' no esset
imputandü, usus fuit cibo & potu vetito, vel forté obiit
morte natuf, & non plaga illa, & hec oia à coronat
diligent exainanda sunt, sed tam& cüm secta intervene-
rit, no erit ppter hoc utlagaria differeda.


Presumptiva poterit esse, licét no vera, tum ppt
secta, tum ppt inquisit fact' cora justit, licé&/ omnino
nulla subsit causa, ut si ille qui intfici debuit, viv? sit
& san?, & ille qui debuit intficere homo metieulosus
se subtraxerit ppt secta & appell, vel etià cü in duob?
eom esset appell, in uno se defendit vel prisons se
reddiderit, & in alio coti fuerit utlagat?. Ite si ille,
qui dicit se esse robbatu, imprisonat, vel ligat, nunqua
fuit robbat? &c.


Ité etsi subsit causa tame min? sufficiens, sicut de
submersis, & oppressis, & hujusmodi p infortuniü mor-
tuis. —


Item si plaga, de qua .appellat? est quis, periculosa
non.sit, nec mahemiü inducat, tame ppter psumptione
fuge & secta appellantis, peedendu erit ad utlagatione
sive ad utlagaria, & si secta ritó facta fuerit, & secun-
düm legem terre, tenet utlagaria, liàt nulla subsit
causa, vel minis sufliciens, ppter fugà & ppter sectam.
Et eodem modo, coram justitiariis, sine onimoda secta,


OF THE CROWN. 323


who has given him wrong medicines, [he has died,] or
when the medieal man is not to be blamed, he has used
forbidden food or drink, or has by chance died by &
natural death and not from that wound, and all these
things are to be diligently examined into by the coroner,
nevertheless when a prosecution has intervened, the out-
lawry is not on that account to be deferred.


Likewise à cause may be presumptive although not . 3.

Likewise à

irue, as well on aecount of & suit,as on account of an presump-

inques& made before the justices,' although there be tive cause.

no substantial cause at all,as if he who ought to have

been killed is alive and sound, and he who ought to have

killed him, being à timid man, has withdrawn himself

on &ecount of the suit and the accusation, or even when

there has been an aeceusation in two counties, in one he

has defended himself or has surrendered himself to prison,

and in the other county he has been outlawed. ! Like-

wise if he who says that he has been robbed, imprisoned,

or bound, has never been robbed &c.


Likewise, if there be à substantive cause, but it be — 4.
! . . If there be
insufficient, as in regard to persons drowned or crushed, 5, supstan-


and such like who have died from misadventure. tive cause.


Likewise if the blow concerning which a person is 5,
accused, be not dangerous, nor causes maim, nevertheless !f M
on account of the presumption of flight and the suit of not danger-
the aeccuser proceedings will be had for outlawing or to 9"*.
outlawry, and if the suit has been duly carried on and
in accordance with the law of the land, the outlawry is
binding, although there be no substantial cause or there
is an inadequate cause, on aecount of the flight and the
suit. And in the same way before the justices, with-
out any kind of suit, on account of flight and an indict-


! 'The proper beginning of the fourth paragraph would seem to be here.
x 2


———


— — —-—. oc


T | ——À —— À — o —
*


924 DE CORONA.


propter fugam & indictamentum, & inquisitionem fac-
iam coram justitiarlis. Sed tamen cum talib? major
f.127. gratia fieri debet à principe, quàm eum illis quibus


c6. est causa vera, secundü quod inferiüs dicetur.
Si quis ;
fuerit utla- - ?* L] . .
gatus ob Et quàvis sine causa vera quis utlagatus fuerit, ut


nulam |; si homo qui interfici debuit pducatur vivus, tamen non
minusrati- erit talis utlagaria pronuncianda nulla, cüm rex fecerit


onabilem, orgetjigm utlagato, cüm rité & secundüm legem terre
ei gratia K
est major, facta fuerit.


quantum

ad inlaga- e . ! :
tionem. Pronuntiari poterit quandoq, utlagaria nulla in suo
lista casu, quamvis subsit causa vel non subsit, vera nec


test ula. presumptiva, ut si facta fuerit contra legem terre,
£wio Pr?" quod esse poterit multis modis, & quee càm nulla esse
nulla,eet — pronuntietur, cüm facta sit contra legem terrm, de jure
nu rid deberet utlagatus restitui; & non de gratia. In quo
ho, et — Casu, non debet in literis regis contineri, quód talem
neum utlagariam remitteret, vel perdonaret, quse nulla est,
multis — quia illud quod non est, perdonare non potest, sed
radonibus. donuntiare poterit in civitatibus, comitatibus, burgis,
& vilis & aliis locis publicis, utlagariam illam esse
nullam, & quo casu non habet necesse utlagatus ha-
bere breve domini regis de pace, nisi velit ex abun-
danti, ut. eüm fuerit restitutus ad omnia debet restitui,
& potest sententialiter sine alicujus presjudicio: quia
utlagaria illà contra legem terre facta, debet defieri,
quia non tenet.  Utlagaria veró, quee fit secundüm
legem terre, licet nulla subsit causa, vel minüs suff-
ciens, tenet, & ideo remitti potest vel perdonari, sine


praejudicio alterius. Et cüm talis restitutus fuerit, non


OF THE CROWN. 325


ment and an inquisition made before the justices. Never-
theless, in the case of such persons more grace ought. to
be shown by the prince than in the case of those, against f. 127.
whom there is à true cause, according to what will be


said below.
]fa person


And although a person has been outlawed without has been
outlawed
any true cause, as if & man who ought to have been gj, p6
killed, is brought forward alive, mevartlielegs such an cause or
outlawry is not to be pronounced null when the king has Soudblo s
shown grace to the outlawed person, when the outlawry cause more
has been made duly and aecording to the law of the Should be


land. shown to
him as re-


Àn outlawry may be sometimes pronounced null in eben
its own case, although there is or there is nob a substan- — 7.
tial case, true or presumptive, as if it has been made Likewise
against the law of the land, which it may be in many 1awry may
ways, and when it has been pronounced as having been be Pro",
made against the law of the land, the outlawed person null and a
ought to be reinstated of right and not of favour. In Hard
which case, it ought not to be stated in the royal letters issued
that he has remitted such an outlawry or has pardoned E pei
it, which is already null, because he cannot pardon that be declared
which is null, but he can denounee in cities, counties, Uu
boroughs, and vills and other places that such outlawry sons.
is null, and in which case it is noi necessary that the
outlawed person have & writ of the lord the king con-
cerning his peace, unless he wishes from abundant
caution, as when he has been restored he ought to be
restored to everything, and may be so judicially without
prejudice to anybody; because that outlawry, having
been made against the law of the land, ought to be un-
made, because it does not bind. But an outlawry, which
has been made according to the law of the land, although
there be no substantial cause, or the cause be insufficient, .
is binding, and accordingly may be remitted or pardoned
without prejudice to another. And when such a person


has been restored, he shall not be restored to everything,


8.
Qui dici
poterit
nulla, et
quibus
rationibus,
quia minus
recte facta.


Britton,
l. i. ch. xiv.


S 2.


326 DE CORONA.


restituetur ad omnia, propter utlagaria rit facta, &
secundüm legem terree.


Nulla veró poterit esse utlagaria, ut si quis in comi-
tatu utlagatus fuerit sine secta, & non refert utrü
omnino nulla sit secta vel incepta & non perfecta, ut
si incepta & postmodum omissa & neglecta, quia ad
utlagatione non pcedetur sine secta. ltem nulla, si
post iter justitiariorum pcesserit comitatus ad utlaga-
tionem sine przcepto & warranto justitiaf post inqui-
sitionem. ltem nulla,si ad preceptu regis vel sectam
regis fuerit quis utlagat?, nisi priüs facta inquisitione
p justitiat, utru ille qui in fuga est, culpabilis sit de
crimine ei imposito vel non. Tte nulla, si fiat alibi
quàm in comit, preterquam apud London. in husüngo,
ui si rex p sua voluntate p literas suas fecerit ali-
quem clamare utlagatum p civitates, burgos, & villas,
& alià loca publica, sine secta (ut predict' est) vel
inquisitione przcedente. Ite erit nulla, si ille, qui
male fuit creditus, mortuus fuit ante utlagatione. Ite
nulla, si ille qui interfici debuit, pducatur viv? & sanus
ante utlagationem, cüm nulla subsit causa vera vel
psumptiva, secüs tamé si quis post utlagatione. Ite
nulla, si comitatus ad utlagationem pcesserit, cüm ille
qui aliquando secutus fuerit moriatur, vel sequi nolu-
erit, vel non possit. lIté nulla, càm appellatus in uno
eom) se defenderit secundüm legem terre, & in alio
comitatu ab alio appellatus, qui sectam fecerit, fuerit
utlagatus: quia qui in uno loco se defenderit de uno
facto versus unum de pluribus appellantibus & sequen-


OF THE CROWN. 327


on aceount of the outlawry having been made duly and
according to the law of the land.


But an outlawry may be null, as if any one has been wi
outlawed in the county court, without a suit, and it does ye aima d
not matter whether there has been no suit at all, ora died m.
suit has been begun and has not been completed, as if it ways, be-
has been commenced and has afterwards been omitted rd
and neglected, because proceedings cannot be had to out- unduly
lawry without & suit. Likewise an outlawry may be "de
null, if after the iter of the justices the county court
has proceeded to the outlawry without a precept or
warrant of the justices after an inquest. Likewise it
may be null, if a person has been outlawed on the precept
of the king or at the suit of the king, without aà previous
inquest having been held by the justices whether he,
he who is in flight, is culpable of the crime laid to his
charge or not. Likewise it may be null, if it be made
anywhere but in & county court, except in London at
the husting, as if the king, according to his will, by his
letters has caused any one to be proclaimed an outlaw
through cities, boroughs, vills, and other publie places,
without a suit,as aforesaid, or an inquest preceding.
Likewise it will be null, if he, who was of ill repute, has
died before.the outlawry. Likewise it will be null, if
he, who ought to be killed, should be produced alive and
sound before the outlawry, when there is no substantial
cause true or presumptiüive; otherwise, however, if he
should be produced after the outlawry. Likewise it will
be null, if the county court has proceeded to outlawry,
when he who has for some time prosecuted dies, or is un-
willing to prosecute, or cannot do so. Likewise it will
be null, when having been accused in one county court he
has defended himself according to the law of the land, and
having been accused by some one else who has sued him
in another county court, he has been outlawed, because
he, who has defended himself in one place concerning one
act against one out of several accusing him and prose-


f. 127 b.


398 DE CORONA.


übus in diversis comitatibus, se defenderit contra om-
nes de eodem facto: si autem diversa fuerint facta, &
diversi appellantes, et in uno loco sive diversis locis
se defenderit per legem terre versus unum vel plures,
et in aliis comitatibus fuerit utlagatus, nulla erit utla-
gatio dum tamen, eüm restitutus fuerit, respondeat
aliis, & se defendat per lege terre & oia sua retinebit,
& vice versa, si in uno coii fuerit condénat?, oía sua
amittet. Et eode modo eüm sciverit se esse appellatü
& interrogatu, ante utlagat se reddiderit prisons diii
regis, quia postqua reddiderit se prisons diii regis,
non erit ulteri? interrogand?. Item nulla erit, ut vi-
detur, cü quis semel capt? fuerit, vel se gratis obtu-
lerit càm appellat? fuerit, & de cosensu regis & regni


- exiliu elegerit, & sic secund legem exierit, non erit


Britton,
]. i. ch. xin.


$ 1.
Fleta 40.


ulteriàs utlagandus de jure. ltem nulla, càm quis
interrogatus ante tempus à lege ei concessum utlage-
tur, eàm totum tempus à lege definitum ei cedere
debeat a&d commodü: & unde videtur quód si infra
tempus illud venerit, & in prison& se miserit, q audiri
debeat sua exceptio, secüs tamen (ut videtur) si post
tempus ilud. Item nulla, si comitatus aliquem utla-
gaverit, si fuerit infra setat, cum secta vel sine secta,
quia ante stat duodecé annorum, non erit quis sub
lege, & priüs extra legem poni non poterit. Et cum
hujusmodi utlagaria in predict casibus nulla sit, &
consimilibus, de jure (concomitante gratia) ad omnia
restituendi sunt, dum tamen appellantib? respondeant,


1 Cf. 115 b., also 124 b.


OF THE CROWN. 329


cuting him in different county courts, has defended him-
self against them all as regards the same act: but if
there have been divers acts, and divers aecusers, and he
has defended himself in one place or in divers places
aecording to the law of the land against one or more,
and he has been outlawed in other county courts, the
outlawry will be null, provided that when he has been


restored, he answers the others, and defends himself by.


the law of the land, and he shall retain all his goods ; and
vice versá, if he shall have been condemned in one
county court, he shall lose all his goods. And in the
same manner, if, when he knows that he has been accused
and sought after, he has surrendered himself up to the
prison of the lord the king, because after he has sur-
rendered himself to the prison of the king, he will no
longer be liable to be outlawed. Likewise it will be
null as it seems, when any one has been once cap-
tured, or has gratuitously presented himself, when he
has been accused, and with the consent of the king and
of the realm has elected exile, and if he has gone forth into
exile cccording to law, he will no further be liable to be
outlawed rightfully. Likewise it will be null, when
any one sought for should be outlawed before the time
allowed him by law, since the whole time defined by
the law ought to be available to him for his advantage,
and hence it seems that, if he has come within that time
and surrendered himself to prison, his exception ought
to be heard; otherwise, however, as it seems, if he has
come after that time. Likewise it will be nu!l, if the
county eourt has outlawed any one, if he was under age,
with a suit or without a suit, because before the age of
twelve years a person will not be under the law, and he
could not previously be put outside the law. | And since
this kind of outlawry in the aforesaid and similar cases
is null the persons are to be restored of right to every-
thing (& pardon aecompanying them), provided they
answer the accusers and defend themselves aecording to


. f. 127 b.


3930 DE CORONA.


& p legem terre se defendant, Item videtur nulla


esse ullagaria, si factum, p quo quis interrogatus est,


9.
Item tam
ille de for-
cia, quam


' ille de
facto fuge- .


rint, et
utlagatur
quis tam


civile sit & non criminale, p quo quis vita amittere
non deberet, vel membra. Sola quidam fuga sine con-
tumacia vel crimine, vel causa vera vel jsumptiva,
utlagationem non inducit, in quibusd tamen criminibus
levioribus fuga poenam inducit graviorem, sicut videri
possit in eo qui appellatus est in crimine raptus, qui
si psens convinceretur, non amittereb nisi tantüm
membra, amittit tamen quandoq, vitam propter fugam
factam. Facta autem possunt esse plura & diversa,
sicut sunt crimina majora & minora, secundüm quod
superiüs dicitur in tractatu de criminibus, & hoc dico
si criminaliter agatur, potest quis utlagari p crimine
majori vel minori 1te p raptu virginis cont pacem,
& p omi alia trasgressione, qus fit contra pacem, &
delieto, ubi felonia & pax dni regis adjicitur: secüs
autem est de pace vicecoi & alibi, ubi non recipitur
nisi sstimatio damnorum, & ubi non sequitur poena
nisi pecuniaria. ltem p omni transgressione, licet
minima, ubi quis, ad pacem dii regis vocatus, venire
recusaverit, & hoc propter contumaciam maxime, quse
aliquando absentem condemnat ad mortem, qui si pre-
sens esset non amiütteret nisi membrum, vel non sus-
tineret nisi imprisonamentum & redemptione, vel pce-
nam pecuniariam. Nullum autem majus crimen quàm
inobedientia, quia p contemptu & inobedientia poterit
quis exeómunicari, sieut pro quolibet mortali peccato,
ecüm omnes subditi esse debent regi tanquam preecel-
lenti, maxim? in honestis, & ducibus ejus, tanquam ab
eo missis. Et sie concordat lex divina aliquantulàüm
cum humana.


Cause quidem utlagationis possunt esse plures, ut-
lagatur enim quis tam ppter foreià! q ppter factum,


l'The word **force? is used in | ** pele plusours, issi que akuns del
Britton, 1. i. ch. ii. to signify the | ** fet, et akuns de la force ou des
act of an accessory, **et si ll ap- | ** fetz accessoires."


OF THE CROWN. 391


the law of the land. Likewise an outlawry seems to be
null, if the act for which a person is sought for, is a civil
not a criminal offence, for which à person ought not to
lose his life or limb. Flight alone, without contumacy
or crime, or à cause either true or presumplive, does not
bring on outlawry, but in some lighter crimes flight
brings à more severe penalty, as may be seen in the
case of him who is accused of the crime of rape, who, if
he were present and convicted, would only lose a limb,
but he sometimes loses his life on account of taking flight.
But acts may be several and divers, as there are greater
and minor crimes, according to what is said above in the
treatise on crimes ; and this I say, if there be a criminal
action, a person may be outlawed for a greater or à minor
crime. Likewise for the rape of a virgin against the peace
of the king, and for every other transgression, which is
against the peace of the king, and [every] delict where
felony and the peace of the king is added : but it 1s other-
wise as regards the peace of the viscount, and in other
eases, where only an estimate of damages is received, and
where there only follows & pecuniary penalty. Likewise
for every transgression, even the least important, where
any one, summoned to maintain the peace of the king, has
refused to come, and this on account of contumacy chiefly,
which sometimes condemns an absent person to death,
who if he were present would only lose a limb, or would
only sustain imprisonment or ransom, or & pecuniary
fine, But there is no greater crime than disobedience,
for à person may be excommunicated for contempt and
disobedience, as for a mortal sin, since àll persons ought
to be subject to the king as supreme, especially in honest
things, and to his officers, as if sent by him. And thus


9.
the divine law agrees with human law. Likewise
as well one
accused of
There may be several causes of outlawry, for & person being an
is outlawed as well on account of being an accessory as às of belug
of being a principal at the suit of any one or by an 7 principal,
ey run


 &way,and


332 DE CORONA.


ppt — p sectam alicujus vel p inquisitionem coram justitiariis,
quam prop- U6. preediet' est, & hoc tamen ordine observato, secun-


b pde düm quosdam, cum diversi diversa sentiant in hac
trurio. parte.


10. Et si tam ille qui appellatus est de forcia, quà ille
bee qui appellatus est de facto, absentes sint, tunc uterq,
pronunti- simul interrogandus est ad quemlibet com, s! non vene-
ari debet — . . . M ] .
utlagari  Iibó, dum tamen in ultimo cofi,qui debet esse quintus,
de facto, differatur pronuntiatio utlagarize ipsorum qui appellati
et quando . : . "n
deforeia, Sunt de forcia, donee factum convincatur, ita q prim,
anstatim ^ secundum quosdam, pronuntietur utlagaria de eo qui
et eodem . .
dio diversa appellatus est de facto, & posteà eodem die de eo qui
oPiio. appellatus est de forcia, & sic in eodem judicio. Alii

f. 128. ; n ; aun
quidem dicunt, quód non eodem die, nec eodem judicio,
sed diversis. Dicunt enim quidam, quód appellatus de
facto & appellatus de forci& non sunt simul interro-
candi, sed ille de forcia tunc primó, cum factum con-
vineatur, sive ille de forcia fugerit sive przesens fuerit.
Sed ea, que dieta sunt, locum habere poterunt, cum
uterj in fugam convertatur, & quo casu presumitur

Briton, de utroque, propter fugam, & illud idem diei poterit,
"3 9. i. vt videtur, si cum ille de facto presens fuerit, & ille
de forcia fugerit, quód ille de forcia statim exigatur,!
sed judicium utlagationis remanebit, donec ille de facto


se defenderit, vel non defenderit.


1L Cum autem ille de foreia presens fuerit, & ille de
Biilede facto fugerit, non erit versus eum de forcia proceden-
sons sit et. dum, quousq, factum convincatur. Sed quid si uterq,
ille de fugam fecerit, & sit aliquis qui ad aliquem cofá illum


acto tue fugitivum principalem de faeto manuceperit, ille de


** The precept or writ, whereby the accused party was required to appear,
was styled an **exigent." Britton terms it * exigende,"


OF THE CROWN. | 333
a person
inquest before the justices as aforesaid, and this order, Ppnndde.


however, having been observed according to some, for as well of


. . uu : being an
different persons have different opinions on this matter. n600880TY
as of being


And if as well he, who is accused of force, as he, who a principal,
is accused of an act should be absent, then each is to be ecd
sought for at every county court, if he should not have
come, provided that at the last county court, which How and
ought to be the fifth, the proclamation of the outlawry of ougtit out-
those who are aecused of force is delayed, until the act wd iia
is proved, in such way that in the first place, according claimed of
to some, the outlawry may be proclaimed of him who has irdiegs
been accused of an act, and afterwards on the same day force, whe-
of him who is accused of force, and so in the same judg- !her dg
ment. Others indeed say, that both proclamations should on thc
not be made on the same day, nor in the same judgment, iua ed
but on different occasions. For some say that a person differ.
accused of an act, and a person accused of force, are not to — f. 128.
be sought for at the same time, but he who is accused of
force then for the first time when the act is proved, whether
he who is accused of force has taken flight or is present.

But those things, which have been said, may have a
place, when each has betaken himself to flight, and in
which case the presumption is against both on account
of their flight, and the same thing may be said, as it
seems, when he who is accused of an act is present, and
he who is accused of force has taken flight, that he who
is accused of force be at once exacted, but the judgment
of outlawry shall stand over until he who is accused of
the act has defended himself, or has not defended him-


self.


But when he who is accused of force is present, and he — 11.
who is accused of the act has taken flight, proceedings 1! he who
must not be taken against the accessory, until the act be ot force is
proved. But if both have taken flight, and there be any Pto?


and he who
person who has given bail to produce the principal, who S iari
has taken flight, at a county court, let the accessory be pastaken


bha--


gerit, vel
si uterque.


12.
Si quis in
quarto
comitatu
velit man-
cipare non
audietur.


13.
Ille de
forcia non
| est inter-
rogandus,
donec fac-
tum con-
vineatur.


394 |. DE CORONA.


forcia nihilominüs interrogetur propter fugam. Dum
tamen judicium remaneat, donec factum convincatur.


Si autem sit aliquis, qui ad quartum com velit ma-
nueapere appellatum de facto, ut suprà in parte dictu
esi, non audietur, secundüm quod Marünus respondit
Richardo Duket, de quadam eschaeta in com Kane.
Ad quod facit quod habetis alibi in itinere M. de
Pateshul in com' Wigorü, anno regni regis Henrici
quinto. Ibi enim dicitur, quód in quarto comitat non
admittitur essonium alicujus appellati, nec audiri de-
bet quis volens talem manucapere usq, ad alium comi-
tatum, nisi fort& hoc esset ex precepto domini regis,
quod potiüs esset voluntariu, quàm justü.


Cüm autem ambo essent presentes, ut praedictum
est, ille de forcia non erit interrogand?, donec factü con-
vineatur, si cum presens esset non teneretur priüs re-
spondere, nec agit contra ipsum aliqua presumptio, &
hzc est ratio forté, quia presentia excusat eum, & fuga
induceret presumptionem. Sed erit talis p plegiü
dimittend?, sicut esse deberet, si uterq, presens esset,
& ubi ille de facto non est replegiabilis, ille de forcia
per plevinam vel ballivi dimittatur, donec appellat?
se de facto defenderit, vel no defenderit, quia ubi
factu ibi poterit esse forcia quandoque, sed nüquam
forcia sine facto, quia ubi principale non consistit, nec
ea quiz sequuntur locum habere debent, sicut dici
poterit de prseeepto, conspiratione, &  consimilib? :
quamvis hujusmodi esse possunt etiam sine facto, &
quandog, puniütur si factü subsequatur, sed sine facto


OF THE CROWN. 995


nevertheless sought for on account of his flight.  Pro- fight, or if
vided however that judgment stands over, until the act dno Bo.


has been proved.


But if there be any one who at the fourth county
court wishes to give bail for any one accused of the ier n
principal act, as has been said in part, he shall not be give bail at
heard, according to what Martin [de Pateshull] answered cic
to Richard Duket concerning a certain escheat in the court.
county of Kent. For which also makes what you have
elsewhere, in the iter of Martin de Pateshull in the
county of Worcester in the fifth year of the reign of King
Henry. For it is there said that in the fourth county
court no essoin is admitted of any one who is accused,
nor ought any one to be heard who is desirous to give
bail for such an one to produce him at another county
court, unless this should be under à precept of the lord
the king, which would rather be an act of his pleasure,
than of his justice.


But when both are present, as aforesaid, the acces- 18.
sory is not to be interrogated until the act has been qd regla
proved, if when he is present he is not bound to answer to be inter-
first, nor is there any presumption that makes against EE
him, and this is perhaps the reason, because his presence iu
excuses him, and flight would raise a presumption against proved.
him. But such & person may be released on bail, as he
ought to be if both were present, and where the principal
party is not bailable, the accessory may be released upon
pledges or bail, until the principal party has or has not
defended himself, because where there is 4 principal
party there may be sometimes an accessory, but never an
accessory where there is no principal party, because where
a principal act has no existénee, things consequent on it
can have no place, as may be said of precept, conspiracy,
and such like, because these things may occur even with-
out any act, and are sometimes punished if an act is
Subsequent, but without any act not so, like the saying:


336 | DE CORONA.


non, juxta illud: quid enim obfuit conatus, cüm inju-
ria nullum habuit effectum. Nec etiam obesse debent
peeptu, conspiratio, pceeptü & consilü, nisi factum sub-
sequatur.


T Cüm autem uter; presens fuerit, & ille de facto
uterque Sive psens sive absens condemnatus fuerit, ppter hoc


foerit cet ille de forcia, cüum psens fuerit, non erit condemnidus :
illedefacto Sed. aget causam & se defendat, cüm habeat defen-


convictus, siones suas integras, & factum esse poterit sine forcia,
qualiter sit


proceden- & qualiter uterq, se defendere debeat, dicetur infrà


dum c9"''? pleniàs de appellatis.
forcia.
Car. XIII.

1. Cum quis fuerit ita utlagat? rito & secunid lege
Quid utla- terre, vidend quz forisfaciat p utlagaria, si cüm sit
gatus foris- 9 :- . : . TN
faciat per Quartó vocat/ non coparuerit, & sciend g in primis


in n forisfaeiat patria & regnu, & exul efficitur, & tale vo-

nod ut- Càl Anglici Utlaughe, & alio nom antiquitüs solet

laugh dici- nominari, scilice& Frendlesman,? & sie videtur quód

tur frend- 1 R : " n H

lesman.  forisfacit amicos, & unde si quis tale post utlagat &
expulsioné sciéter paverit, receptaverit, vel cum eo
seléter cómunicaverit aliquo modo, vel receptaverit vel
oecultaverit, ead poena puniri debet, qua puniretur
utlagat?, ità q careat omnib? bonis suis, & vita, nisi


rex ei parcat de sua gratia.


9. Seieter dico, quia aut potest esse not? & cognit',
) lone od vel ignot? & incognit?, & unde qui notü & cognitü
scienter — receptaverit, pari poena puniend" est, qui dieitur Couth-
telemTé- wtlaughe? sed de ignoto & ineog' non est ite, & ad


ceptaverit.


! * Utlaghe," MS. Rawl. C. 159. 3 *Cuth utlaghe" MS. NHawl.
? « Frendelesman," MS. DPawl. | C.160; * Cuthutlaghe," MS. Rawl.
C. 160. C. 159.


Lp———————— Á— A — d


OF THE CROWN. 3397


* For what harm did the attempt cause, since the injury
* took no effect,"  Norought precept, conspiracy, precept
and eounsel to do harm, unless some act follows.


But when each ls present, and the principal whether, 14.
present or absent has been condemned, the accessory shall da i.
not be condemned on that account, since he is present, sent, and
but he shall plead his cause and defend himself, when he bonded


pal is con-


has his own independent defence, and the act may have victed, how
pr roceed-
been done without an accessory: and how each ought to ings are
defend himself, will be stated below more fully in dis- t? mind bun.
cussing the subject of appeals. RERO


CHAPTER XIII.


When a person has been outlawed duly and aecording —— 1.
io the law of the land, we must see what he forfeits by "hstan
outlawry, if when he has been called for the fourth time person
he does not appear, and in the first place he forfeits his e
country and the realm, and he is made an exile, and the outlawry,
English call such & person an outlaw, and of ancient time Mp
he was accustomed to be called a friendless man, and so is called a
lt seems that he forfeits his friends, and hence if any one id S
has knowingly fed such a person after his outlawry and
expulsion, and received and held communication with
him in any way, or harboured or concealed him, he ought
to be punished with the same punishment, with which
the outlaw is punished, so that he should be deprived of
allhis goods and his life, unless the king spares him of


his grace.


I say knowingly, because an outlaw may be known 2.
and recognised, or may be unknown and unrecognised, kioviday
and hence he, who harbours one who is known and receives
recognised, is to be punished with the same punishment, Mia Hn
and he is termed a * Couthutlaughe," but it is not the com-out-
same in the ease of an unknown and unrecognised


VOL. IH. Y


SI DE CORONA.


Dig. hoe facit lex C. de iis, qui latrones & maleficos occul-
XLVII.,


"er tat, L. prima, ubi dicitur: q eos qui secu alieni erimi-

Cod.IX., nis reos oecultido vel receptàdo cii eis se sociaverint,

t. xxxix. . * -— .
par ipsos & reos pcena expectat. Et etii latrones quis-
quis sciés receperit, qui dicitur receptator maloru, &
eos offerre judiciis supsederit, supplicio corporali plec-
tetur cu amissione bonor.


3. Ite forisfacit utlagat? oi& qus pacis sunt, quia à
Enn ag que p q
ifugerit, 4a DENT 2b kao
etus defe i tepore, quo utlagat est, caput gerit lupini, iià q ab
derit. omnib? interfici poterit, & impuné, maxim? si se defen-


derit vel fugerit, ita q difficilis sit ejus captio.


t Si aute non fugerit, nee se defenderit ciun capt?
1 non . . . [odbd * L]
fugerit, nec fuerit, extune erit in manu dni regis mors & vita, &


E deteae qui taliter captu interfecerit, respondebit pro eo sicut
Lex Cor. Pro 3lio. Hoc verü est, nisi cosuetudo se habeat in
nelia. eontrariu, sicut in coi  Hertford! & Glocester prope
i marchia Wallie. Sed hoc facti aliquando dissimulatur
tit. vi. $3. ex eausa.  Quód tales, modo quo prredict/ est, interfici
poterunt & impune, legitur F. ad lege Jull. de sica-
riis? & venefieis, ubi dicitur: « (transfugas, ubicüg,

inveti fuerint, interficere licet.


5. Sola tame fuga non inducit nisi tantü bonorü amis-


Pads sioné, in suo easu, cüm coram justitiarüis vocati non
inducit. venerint ante utlagat. Et ad hoc facit F. de requi-


f. 129.


! * JTereford," MS. Rawl. C. 160 | Rawl. C. 160; * ad legem Corne-
and 159. * liam," written on an erasure,
2«ad Jul. de siccariis? MS. | MS. Rawl. C. 159.


5


Me ui. ee AMA. c quie, on. IR o Tg


——— —— ——


OF THE CROWN. . 339


person, and this is in aecordanee with the law in the Code,
* Concerning those who conceal robbers and malefactors,"
Law the first, where it is said of those who, by concealing
and harbouring persons guilty of another's erime, have


. associated themselves with them, the like punishment


awaits them equally as the criminals themselves. And
likewise he who knowingly receives robbers, who is
termed a receiver of bad men, and neglects to give them
up to justice, shall be punished with bodily punishment
coupled with the loss of his goods.


Likewise theoutlaw forfeits every benefit which be- ^ 3.
longs to the peace of the king, because from the time libe hes
when he is outlawed he carries à wolfs-head, so that he flight, and
may be killed by every one with impunity, particularly ddr
if he defends himself ov takes to flight, so that his capture
is difficult.

But if he has not taken flight, nor defended himself ^ 4  .
when he was captured, his death and life shall thenceforth E dh
be in the hand of the king, and he who kills a person so Finn
captured, shall be responsible for him as for another. himself,
This is true, unless the eustom is otherwise, as 1n the .
counties of Hereford and Gloucester, near the march of
Wales. But this aet is sometimes dissembled upon a
pretext. "Thatsuch persons in the manner aforesaid may
be slain and with impunity is read in the Digest upon
the Julian Law ! concerning assassins and  poisoners,
where it is said that it is allowable to kill deserters,


wherever they may be found.


But flight alone does not entail any thing more than s.


] "That flight
loss of goods in each case, when having been called j^ 45.


before the justiees they do not come before outlawry. not entail


And this is supported by the Digest concerning the re- ict


! The * Lex Cornelia de Sicariis | against similar offences is on re- ^
* et Veneficiis" was introduced by | cord. The Cornelian Law contains
Lucius Cornelius Sylla in 671, | the passage cited by Bracton.
A.U.C. No Julian law directed

Y 2


Forisfacit,
quae juris
sunt.


940 DE CORONA.


rendis reis L. ultima & C. eodem titulo, L. Quicung,
ubi dieitur quód si post fugam redierit quis, & inno-
centiam suam purgaverit, nihilominüs facultates ejus
apud fiseum remanebunt. tem forisfacit ea que legis
Sunt, quia si sine gratia regis, ausu temerario, post
uilagariam redierit, sine lege & judieiali inquisitione
peribit, nec alios appellare poterit, quia omnem legem
amisit: portat enim secum in suo capite suum judi-
cium, ita quód nullam habebit defensionem, càm con-
stiterit de utlagaria. Justum est enim judicium,
quód sine lege & judicio pereat, qui secundüm legem
vivere recusat. |


Ite forisfacit omnia, qus juris sunt & possessionis,
s, & juris competentis & competituri, juris adepti &
adipiscendi, & possessionem similiter in forma & modo
possidendi. Item nulli tenetur, nec aliquis ei, nec ex
aliqua causa obligatur. JDissolvuntur enim obligationes


. & homagia, fidelitates & sacrafüta, & omnia alie quz


Item foris-
facit actio-
nem.


mutua voluntate sunt contracta. ltem cui? & scien-
dum quód sibi ipsi & heredib? suis omnib?, tam re-
motis quàm ppinquis, & sic forisfaciunt hsreditates &
teneihta: & taliter fracta & dissoluta, nunquam conjungi
poterunt nec redintegrari, nisi ex novo contractu &
nova voluntate mutua, si forió fuerit aliquo casu
restitut?.


Item ex utlagaria forisfacit actionem ante utlagariam
Sibi competentem, licót postmodüm de gratia fuerit
restitutus, quia semper ei petenti obstabit exceptio
utlagarie, dum tamen fuerit secundüm legem terre
pmulgata, secüs tamen si nulla, ut predictum est.


OF THE CROWN. 941


quiring of accused persons, the last Law, and by the Code
under the same title, the Law commencing ** Whosoever,"

. where it is said, * but if he has returned after taking
* flight, and has cleared his innocence, his goods will still
" remain confiscated to the treasury." Likewise he forfeits
those things which are benefits of the law, because if
without the pardon of the king, by a rash act of daring,
he has returned after the outlawry, without law and a
judicial inquest he will perish, nor will he be able to
appeal others, because he has lost all law; for he carries
with him on his own head his own judgment, so that
he has no defence, when it is clear respecting his out-
lawry. For itis & just judgment, that he should perish
without law or judgment, who refuses to live according
to the law.


Likewise he forfeits every thing which is of right or 6.
He forfeits
possession, of right aecruing or likely to aecrue, of jn right.
right acquired or to be acquired, and all possession in
like manner in the form and mode of possessing.  Like-
wise he is bound to no person, and no person is bound to
him, nor is he obliged frora any cause. For all obliga-
lions and homages, allfealties and oaths, and all other
. matters which are contracts of mutual will are dissolved.
Likewise for whom? And itis to be known that it is
for himself and all his heirs, as well remote as near, and
thus they forfeit inheritances &nd tenements; and such
contracts broken and dissolved, can never be joined to-
gether and renewed again, except by & new contract and
& new mutual will, if by chance it should be by any
&ccident restored.


- 1-0 -


Likewise by outlawry he forfeits any action competent . f.
for him before 'outlawry, although he be afterwards of y, "np sc
grace restored, because there willalways be the excep- his action.
tion of outlawry as an obstacle to his claim, provided it
has been promulgated according to the law of the land,


otherwise, however, if i6 has been null, as aforesaid.


349 DE CORONA.


.  & ltem dissolvit utlagaria, sicut quodlibet aliud judi-
ci M eium de felonia, donationes & venditiones factas à
tiones, ven- fbempore felonie ppetrate, & ubi post convietionem


ditiones, . ! MU E D n ]
et omne, CUujuseung, felónie retrotrahitur temp? ad temp? felo


contractus nig]  ppetratze, sicut suprà de donationibus pleniüs
et obliga-


tiones, , Qicitur.
1 Catala quidem utlagati erunt domini regis, quia
Quod quaz-


o . . *. e. ^ [] . . 5) z (1
dan catalln utlagari alibi non poterit quàm 1n curia lpst regis,
sua sunt Sicut in coii vel in hustingo Londoü. Et idem dicen-


iren dum est de catallis fugitivorum ante utlagationem, &
aliorum qui vocati sunt corà justitiariis, sive culpabiles
sint sive non, facta sup hoc inquisitione, & qui, quam-
vis posteà redierint, & prisons se reddiderint, catalla
sua non recuperabunt ppter fugam.
10. Si veró terrà liberam habuerint utlagati, statim
Si terram : : NC OA"
liberam  Cplenda est in manum domini regis, & tenenda p


habuerit, unum annum & unü diem, & ad capitales dominos
statim . : : : . E
anpiatar P936 terminum illum reversura, si de alio tenuerit


» manum quàm de rege, tunc erit eschaeta ipsius regis, & hoc
omini - :
regis pg Verum est, quód p tale terminum remanebit in manu
unum an- diii regis, nisi ipse capitalis dominus vel alius pro eo
unamdiem, fihem fecerit pro termino regis habendo. Sed it
unumdiem, fibem fecerit pro termino regis habendo. Sed qu: si
causa, quare terra remanebit in manu domini regis?
videtur quód talis est, quia revera, càm quis convictus
fuerit de aliqua felonia, in potestate domini regis erit
psternendi sedificia, extirpandi gardina, & arandi prata.
Et quoniam hujusmodi verterentur.in grave damnum
Maga. — dominorum, p cómuni utilitate pvisum fuit, quód.
Chart. art. h . di difi . & o di n i t & od 1
22and a2, hujusmodi zedificia & gardina remanerent, & quód do-
ene minus rex propter hoc haberet commoditatem totius
l. CD. Vl. *331* . .
8 3. terre ilius per unum annum & unum diem, & sic


omnia eum integritate reverterentur in manus capita-


OF THE CROWN. 943


Likewise outlawry. like any other judgment of felony,
dissolves all donations and sales made from the time of Liens.
the perpetration of the felony, and where after the con- donations,
vietion of any felony the time is traced backward to the m d
time of the perpetration of the felony, as has been stated tracts and
&bove more fully on the subject of donations. Mis ue


The chattels of the outlawed person shall belong to
the lord the king, for he cannot be outlawed except in That cer-
the king's court, as in the county court or in the husting chattels are
sbLondun. Aud the caniois to bocuidot ihe thetiels or "
of fugitives before outlawry, and of others cited before
the justices, whether they are culpable or not, after
an inquest has been held upon the matter, and who,
although they should return afterwards and surrender
themselves to prison, shall not recover their chattels on
account of their flight.


But if the outlawed persons have freehold land, it is 10.
to be seized immediately into the hand of the lord the s nd
king, and to be held for a year and a day, and itis to freehold,
return to the chief lords after that term, i£ he has held it eth ino
from any other than the king himself, in this latter case 'he Bekus
it shall be an escheat of the king himself; and this is fora year
true, that for such a term it shall remain in the hand of 21d 2 day.
the lord the king, unless the chief lord himself, or some
one on his behalf, has paid a fine to the king to have the
king's term. But what is the cause, why the land shall
remain in the hand of the lord the king? It seems to
be this, because in truth, when a person is convieted of
any felony, he will be in the power of the king to pull
down his buildings, to root up his gardens, to plough up
his meadows. And since such things would turn to the
great damage of the lord, in the common interest it has
been provided, that buildings and gardens of this kind
Should be preserved, and that the lord the king on such
-&ccount should have the profits of the whole of that land


fora year and a day, and so every thing in its integrity


344: DE CORONA.


lium dominorum. Nune autem petitur utrumque, s.
finis pro termino, & similiter pro vasto, & non video

f.129 5. r&ationé quare, nisi quia terminus bené poterit esse p
se sine vasto, eó quód fugitivus & utlagatus non solüm
delinquit erga eum qui sequitur & appellat, sed etiam
erga regem, eujus pacem iníringit, contra fidem suam
cui tenetur, quia quilibet, qui facit sacramentum, Jurat
salva fide domini regis.


1. Rex vicec. salutem.  Precipimus tibi, quód p sacra-
Mis 39" mentum proborum & legalium hominum de comitatu
numet — tuo, diligenter inquiras si terra, quce fuit talis utlagati,
diem te^ vel suspensi, in tali villa, p morte hominis, vel p alia
domino tali felonia, extiterit in manu nostra per unum annum
drole & unum diem, & de quo predictus talis terram illam


lam vei tenuit, & inquisitionem inde factam sub sigillo tuo &


domini * LÀ . . *€ 9,9 .
fiat vico.  Sigillis eorum, p quorum sacramentum inquisio illa


comiti tale faeta, fuerit, nobis sine dilatione mittas, & hoe breve.


dis Teste &c. Et cüm inquisitio venerit, sequitur tale
breve.
12. Rex vicec. salutem. Quia constat nobis p inquisitio-


" bie ad nem, quàd tanta terra cum ptinentiis in tali villa, quze
derestita- fuit talis suspensi vel utlagati p morte talis & quam


Ferias ^ tenuit de tali, extitit in manu nostra per unum annum

capiti; — & unum diem, sicut esse debet secundüm ceonsuetudi-
nem regni nostri Ángli», tibi precipim?, quód eidem
tali, de preedieta terra cum pertinentiis, sine dilatione
plenaria seysina habere facias. Teste &c.


18. Rex vicee. salutem.  Przcipimus tibi, quód si terra
Aliud . .
breve de Qua fuit À. & qui utlagatus est de regno nostro &


|
!


OF THE CROWN. 345


should return into the hands of the chief lords. But

now both is required, namely a fine for the term and
likewise for the waste, and I do not see the reason f.129 b.
wherefore, unless it be because the term may well be by

itself without waste, inasmuch as the fugitive and out-

law is not only a delinquent towards him, who sues and

accuses him, but also towards the king, whose peace he

breaks, against hisfealty to which he is bound, because

every person, who takes an oath, swears saving his fealty

io the lord the king.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you,^ 11.
that by the oath of honest and loyal men of your county, Meet
you diligently inquire if the land, which was the land of and a day
so-and-so outlawed or hung in such a vill, for the death uc iens
of a man or for some such other felony, which has been eda ie
in our hand for & year and à day, and from whom so- the chief
and-so held that land, and send to us without delay the lord, wpon
inquest held thereon, under your seal and the seals of plaint of


those by whose oath that inquest has been made, and be true


. : . lord, let a
this writ. Witness &c. And when the inquest has writ of this
eome, such & writ as this follows. uu:


The king to the viscount greeting. Since it is clear to ir
us by an inquest, that so much land with its appurte- An inquest
nances in such a vill, which was the land of such & person been Beid
outlawed or hung for the death of another such person, ss to rec-.
and which he held from so-and-so, has been in our IE jn.
hand a year and a day, as it ought to be according to ncs
the eustom of England our realm, ! we enjoin you that  —
you eause so-and-so to have plenary seysine without


delay of the said land with its appurtenances.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you 1s


that, if the land which was A/s, and who is outlawed Another


! Article 22 of the articles pre- | * nisi per unum annum et unum
Sented by the barons to king John | ** diem, sed tunc reddatur domino
was, * ne rex teneat terram eorum, | ** feodi."

* qui fuerint convicti de felonia,


346 DE CORONA.


eadem, de convictus de latrocinio, extiterit in manu nosira p

E unum annum & unum diem, sieut esse debet secun-
düm consuetudinem regni nostri tunc haberi facias B.
capitali domino seysinam de predicta terra, qua fuit
pdicti ÀÁ. in balliva tua, & quam tenuit de predicto
B. & quse capta fuit in manum nostrà occasione prae-
dicta.


14. Rex vicec. salutem.  Monstravit nobis À. quód cüm
dy B. vir suus, qui mortu? est, & ipsa A. dedissent C.
maritagium tantam terram cum pertinentiis in tali villa in mari-
eru: tagiu cum D. filia sua de hszreditate ipsius A., pre-
hereditate dictus C. reetat? de morte E. fugit p morte illa, &
ie us noluit stare ad judicium & cosiderationem com talis,
manudo- propter quod predicta terra cum ptinentiis devenit in
peranmum Iianum nostrà, & in manu nostra extitit p unum annü
et diem per & uni diem, & eo ampliàs ut dicitur: & ideó tibi
eder precipimus, quód secundüm legem & consuetudinem
ipsius fllie reponi nostri Angli, predicte A. (de cujus feodo pre-
ee dieta terra est ui dicit, & ad quam reverti debet se-
enda. cundüm assisam regni nostri) sine dilatione plenarià

seysinam habere facias, ne amplhlüs &c. Teste &c.
Contingit quandoq, q ille, cui rex terminum suü con-
cessit, infta annum & diem terram alienat, vel cüm
forte illaÀam in manu sua tenuerit illam capitali dio


non restituit, & quo casu fiat breve vic. in hac forma.


, Rex vieec. salute.  Precipe A. quód juste &c. red-
Breve, si dat B. tantam terrain cum  ptinentiis in tali villa, &
erum in quam non habet ingressum, nisi p nos, qui terrà
terminum illà ei comisim? p unum annü & unu diem, postquam
suum, vel . : ] » :
balivisui, lh manus nostras devenit, & quam talis tenuit, qui

utlagatus fuib p morte talis, vel suspensus, de C. patre


OP THE CROWN. 947


from our realm, and is convicted of robbery, has been in cerning the


our hand for a year and a day, as it ought to be aecord- coris tio -


ing to the custom. of our realm, you therefore cause sey- rostitu-


sine of the aforesaid land to be made to B. the chief lord ; HORS ihe


which land of the aforesaid À. was in your bailliwick,
and which he held of the aforesaid B., and which was
taken into our hands on the aforesaid occasion.


The king to the viscount greeting. A. has represented ^ 14.
to us that when B. her husband who is dead and A. her- iere
. V3.5 5o
self have given to C. so much land with its appurtenances DAMM
un such a vill as a inaritage for their daughter D., of the dagphter


inheritance of the aforesaid À. himself, the aforesaid C. of a certain
having been cited into court for the death of E., has fom her


taken flight for that death and has been unwilling to tr
stand a trial and judgment of such a county court, erbe


wherefore the aforesaid land with its appurtenanees came pi nou
into our hand, and has been in our hand for à year and fora xx.


a day, and more than that, as it is said : and accordingly fors lon
,


we enjoin you that according to the law and the custom which the
of our realm of England, you cause the aforesaid A. (to veu
whose fee the aforesaid land belongs, as he says, and to ter has
whom it ought to revert according to an assise of our pc RE
kingdom) to have plenary seisin of it without delay, lest its restitu-
further &c. Witness &c. It happens sometimes that he "9"

to whom the king has granted his term alienates the

land within a year and a day, or when by chance he has

kept it in his own hand he has not restored it to the

chief lord, in which case let à, writ issue to the viscount


in this form.


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin A, that he — 15.
justly &e. restore to B. so much land with its appurte- cH
nances in such a vill, and into which he has no eníry, has aliena-


except through us, who have committed to him that land d villis


for à year and a day, after i& came into our' hands, and 7n his term,
: or his
which such à person who has been outlawed or hung railigs.


for the death of so-and-so, held from C. his father or his


f. 130.


16.
Itcm aliud
breve de


948 DE CORONA.


vel avo, vel alio antecessore ipsi? B. cujus hsres ipse
esí, & qus ad ipsum reverti debet tanquam eschaeta
sua, ppter predicta felonia, vel aliter: & in quam non
habet ingressum nisi per nos, qui terminum nostrum,
S. p annum & diem ei concessimus, & quse esse debet
eschaeta sua propter feloniam, quam talis fecit, & de
qua eonvietus fuit in curia nostra coram justitiariis,
&c.


Vel aliter: & in quam non habet ingressum, nisi
per talem cui nos illam commisimus, habendam per


eadem ma- unum. annum & unum diem, postquam talis rectatus


teria.


17.
Quod nun-
quam re-
vertitur -
terra ad
dominum
' eapitalem,
nisi felonia
convieta
fuerit.


de morte talis fugit & utlagatus fuit velcapt? & suspen-
sus, & qui terram illam tenuit de tali patre vel avo
talis! cujus heres ipse est, & qui tune fuit infra
state, ad quem terra illa debuit reverti post annum
& diem, tanquam eschaeta sua, & nisi fecerit &c.
sumfi, &e. Et notandum, quód nunquam habebit rex
annum & diem de aliqua terra, que non possit esse
eschaeta, ut si felo non tenuit nisi ad terminum vel
ad vitam, vel quid tale quod descédere non posset ad
hzeredes suos. De materia veró istius brevis inveniri
poterit de termino Sancti Michaelis anno regni regis
Henrici decimoquinto in comitat. Kane. de Wilhelmo


Musard.


Et notandu, quód in quolibet brevi, per quod petitur
eschaeta propter alicujus feloniam, oportet quód expri-
matur (& de qu& convictus fuerit) quia nunquam re-
verteretur terra ad dominum capitalem, nisi felonia
eonvieta fuit aliquo genere convietionum, ut si fuerit
suspensus vel utlagatus, vel feloniam cognoverit, &
regnum abjuraverit, & hujusmodi. Si autem ante felo-
niam convietam obierit, quocunq, modo, hsreditas de-


! * avo tali, ^ MS. Rawl. C, 160.


OF THE CROWN. 949


grandfather, or some other ancestor of B. himself, whose

heir B. was, and which ought to return to him as his
escheat, on account of the aforesaid felony or otherwise,

and into which he has no entry, except through us, who

have granted to him our term for à year and a day, and

which ought to be his escheat on account of the felony,

whieh so-and-so has eommitted, and of which he has  f.130.
been convicted in our court before the justices, &c.


Or otherwise: and into. which he has no entry, excopt | 16.
through such & person, to whom we have committed it - fam
to be held for & year and a day, after so-and-so having same mat-
been cited respecting the death of such an one has fled im
away and been outlawed or captured and hung, and who
held that land from such a person his father, or such à
. person his grandfather, whose heir he is, and who was
then under age, to whom that land ought to return after
8 year and a day as his escheat, and unless he do so &c.,
gummon &e. And itis to be noted that the king shall
never have a year and a day from land which cannot be
an escheat, as if the felon has not held it except for &
term or for his life, or it be such a thing as cannot de-
scend to his heirs. But concerning the matter of such
a writ information will be found in St. Michael's term
in the fifteenth year of the reign of King Henry, in the
county of Kent, concerning William Musard.


And it is to be noted, that in each writ, by which an 17.
escheat is sought on account of a certain person's felony, j^ Pu
|t is incumbent that it be expressly stated (and of which never re-
he has been convicted), because the land should never biet lord
return to the chief lord, unless there has been a conviction unless
of felony in some way or other, as if he be hung or out- Ris ud
lawed, or has acknowledged the felony and has abjured of felony.
the realm, and sueh like. ! But if has died before a con-
vietion of felony, in whatever manner, the inheritance shall


! This would seem to be the proper commencement of paragraph 18.


350 DE CORONA.


scendet ad hsredes suos, nisi it& fuerit quód, conscius
eriminis & timens sibi suspensione vel aliam poenam,
se ipsum interfecerit, & hereditas talis erit eschaeta
dominorum.


Si Pod ante 5 autem furore aut doloris impatientia, vel p infor-


feloniam — tunium, aliud esse debet.


convictam
obierit.


19. Et idem erit si donationem fecerit ante feloniam


id ine ppetratam, vel post: quod tenet, si non fuerit felonia


ante con- convicta, ut suprà. Si autem convicta fuerit, non


d eem valet, sed revocabitur, & retrotrahitur temp? ad perpe-


Britton,  trationem feloniz, & sicut non valet donatio post felo-
Er ch.v niam ppetratam, ita nec valebit generatio quoad suc-
2d cessionem, quantum ad hereditatem paterna & materni,


cüm sit pgenit? talis ex testiculo & sanguine felonis.

9
yuuon
E Si autem ante feloniam generatione fecerit, talis
. genero, generatio succedet in hereditate patris vel matris, à
ss quo non fuerit felonia ppetrata.
tem pater-

nam vel
dubedam,  Propriis autem hzeredibus forisfacit hsereditateni suam
231. — ppriam, propinquis & remotis, s. quiequid tenuit tem-
ExemPl" pore felonire ppetrate, & qualitereung  & secundüm
senatoris. quod tenuit. Et ad ea qu: dicta sunt, quód tenet


donatio si antequam convictus fuerit moriatur, quia
defuneto eo, qui reus fuit criminis, extincta est pcena.


d - Sed nihil forisfacit antequam convictus fuerit vel
bae condemnatus, quia dicit lex, quód post eontraetum cri-


quisante- men capitale donationes factre valent, nisi condemnatio


OF THE CROWN. 351


descend to his heirs, unless it should happen that con-
scious of his crime and afraid of being hanged or of
some other punishment, he has slain himself, and the
inheritance shall be an escheat of the lords. um


] . ] . ,.Ifthe felon

But if he has through phrensy or impatience of grief has died
or by misadventure, it shall be otherwise. ioo
of felony.

And the same will be the result if he has made à 19.
donation before the perpetration of a felony or after; i z
which holds good, if he has not been convicted of the donation
felony, as above. But if he be convicted of a felony, bou AN
the donation does not avail, but it will be revoked, and of felony
the time is carried back to the perpetration of the felony, 9" *f*r
and as a donation after the perpetration of a felony does
not avail, so neither will generation avail for succession


as regards a paternal or maternal inheritance, since such


a person is begotten of the testicle and blood of a felon. 20.
Likewise
But if he has generated a son before his felony, such a the genera-
hi tion of a


generation will succeed in the inheritance of the father felon will


. - : not avail
and of the mother, being from a time when no felony ;. on
has been perpetrated. nal or ma-

ternal in-

But he causes his proper heirs to forfeit their proper AD

inheritance, both near and remote heirs, that is whatever An exam-
he held at the time of the perpetration of the felony, Ple from

] : : J ? the son of

and in whatever manner and aceording as he held it. a senator!


And in regard to what has been said, a donation holds
good, if, before he should be convicted, he dies, because
by the death of the person, who is accused of a crime,
the penalty is extinguished.


But he forfeits nothing before he has been convicted 22.
or condemned, because the law says, that donations made rd c
after & capital erime has been committed are valid, un- nothing be
ore he


— —Ó— MÀ —— n ——— —  — — o


D —— ———À — ——— c M — À—


l'The title of this paragraph is | in the Index prefixed to the printed
not appropriate to the subject | editions of 1569 and 1649.
matter, but the same title is found


-—


352 — DE CORONA.
quam fuerit Secuta, sit. Quod autem rità factum est ante crimen
orm contractum, irritari non debet, sicut dicit alia lex,
xxxix. — quód nec eorrumpi nec mutari potest, quod rità trans-
tV.$15. aetum est, superveniente delicto, Si autem filius &
heres ppinquior, in vita patris feloniam fecerit, & pa-
irem supervixerit & convictus fuerit, cüm jus merum
ei descenderit, sive seysinà de hsreditate habuerit sive
non, forisfacit sibi & heredibus suis successionem, &
ita quód, cüm jus ad hszsredes descendere non possit,
de necessitate revertitur ad capitalem dominum feoffa-
torem, & licet talis seysinam non habuerit, tamen sey-
sina felonis antecessoris ad hszeredes non descendit,
f.130b. quia oportet, quód seysina sequatur dominü capitalem,
ad quem jus revertitur. Si autem in vita patris mo-
riatur, sive convictus sive non, statim ineipit postnatus
hzres esse propinquior patri communi, ac si frater
antenatus feloniam non commisisset, quia in vita patris
nihil juris ei descendit, & sie habendus erit quasi
natus non fuisset, ut quibusdam videtur, sed alüs vi-
detur contrà, qui dicunt, quód cum talis in vita ante-
eessoris feloniam fecerit, eb de qua convict? est, non
solüm forisfaeit id quod tenet sibi & heredibus suis,
sed quiequid ei aliqua ratione accidere possit, à quo-
cung, anteceessore & non solàüm heredibus suis de
carne su& exeuntibus, sed remotioribus fratrib? & aliis,
quia per eum semper fieri debet narratio descensus,
si de recto agatur, & hc fuit ratio W. de Eborum &
bona.


93. Sed quid dicetur de uxore hereditatem habente,
Divers cim vir suus ppter feloniam aliquam, quam fecerit,
opinio : : s :
Martini de fuerit utlagatus, si uxor ppter hoc ejicienda sit ab


Pateshull . ' :
ot Stephani htereditate Sua ppria, in quo casu diverse fuerunt


OF THE CROWN. | 353


less condemnation shall have followed. But what has shall have
been duly done before a& erime has been committed, Pen con-
cannot be rendered void, as another law says, that, what
has been duly transacted, cannot be annulled nor changed
upon a delinquency supervening. But if à son or next
heir has committed a felony in the life of the father, and
has survived the father and has been convicted, when
the absolute right has descended to him, whether he has
had seysine of the inheritance or not, he forfeits for
himself and his heirs the succession, and in such à man-
ner, since the right cannot descend to the heirs, i6 reverts
of necessity to the chief lord the feoffor, and although
such a person has not the seysine, nevertheless the sey-
sine of the felon ancestor does not pass to his heirs,
because it is ineumbent that the seysine should follow
| the chief lord, to whom the right reverts. But if he
| dies in the lifetime of his father, whether he has been
convicted or not; forthwith the after-born heir com-
mences to be the next heir.to the common father, just
as if the firstborn brother had not committed a felony,
. because during the lifetime of the father no right has
devolved to him, and so he is to be regarded as if he
had not been born, as it appears to some, but to others
it seems otherwise, who say that since such a person has
during the lifetime of his ancestor committed a felony,
and of which he has been convicted, he not only for-
feits that which he holds for himself and his heirs, but
whatever by any reason might devolve to him, from any
ancestor whatever, and not only to his heirs sprung from
his own flesh, but to more remote brothers and others,
because through him the line of descent must be traced,
if a question of right is raised, and this was the reason-
ing of W. de Eborum, and was good.
But what shall be said concerning a wife having an x FUNT
inheritance, when her husband on account of some felony ,r mum
which he has committed has been outlawed, if the wife un a
on that account is to be ejected from her own inheritance, Pateshull
VOL. II. Z


354 DE CORONA.


deSegrave Opiniones, & secundüm M. de Pateshull quód ppter


. de here-
ditate mu-
lieris.


factum viri sui ejici non deberet, nec in vita nec in
morte viri sui Stephanus veró de Segrave! sensit
contrarium, quód foret ejicienda, & nunquam in vita
viri sui restituenda, & hse forté potuit esse causa,
quia hereditas occasionem daret viro utlagato veni-
endi ad uxorem suam, & hoc esset contra pacem. M.
dicebat, quód ppter hoc ejici non debet ab hereditate,
nisi post utlagationem convicta esset de receptaito,
vel forté quód ab initio consentiens esset felonic: si
autem non, dicebat quód bene potuit viro suo exhi-
bere, & ei necessaria invenire in alio regno. Sed esto,
quód uxor petat hzreditatem suam vel partem, cüm
fuerit extra seysinam, postquam vir su? fuerit utlagat?,
sine viro suo non debet audiri, licót fuerit sine culpa,
nec assisam portare poterit de nova disseysina, si forté
post utlagatione viri sui fuerit ejecta. ltem cüm hz-
reditas sit comunis tam viri quàm uxoris, ut si terra
data fuerit viro in maritagium cum uxore, & alter
ipsorum feloniam fecerit, p qua judicium sustinuerit ut-
lagarie, quzeritur an ille qui sine culpa fuerit, amittere
debeat totam terram illam, an ejus partem. ltem cüm
res communis fuerit inter participes, & unus feloniam
fecerit, & convictus fuerit, queritur an plus forisfaciat
quàm parte suam? Videtur, quód non. Et in primo
casu, licét in donatione maritagii mentio fiat de viro,
tamen non erit it& viro terra data, quód eam foris-
facere possit, quia tota remanebit uxori sicut hsereditas


! Stephanus de Segrave was Lord Chief Justice of England. Ho died in
1241.


OF THE CROWN. 355


in which ease there have been divers opinions, and ace- and Ste-
cording to Martin de Pateshull, that she ought not to be sedis
ejected on account of the act of her husband, neither concerning
during the life nor upon the death of her husband. But;jof.
Stephen de Segrave thought otherwise, that she ought to woman.
be ejected and should never be restored during the life-
timé of her husband, and this perchanee may have been
the cause, because the inheritance would afford an oppor-
tunity to the outlawed man of coming to his wife, and
this would be against the peace. Martin was accustomed
to say, that she ought not to be ejected on that account
from her inheritance, unless she has been convicted after
the outlawry of having harboured her husband, or per-
chance if she has been from the commencement a con-
senting party to the felony ; but if not, he said that she
eould well supply to her husband and find for him ne-

| cessaries in another realm. But let it be that the wife

| claims her inheritance or a part of it, when she is out of

| seysine of it, after her husband has been outlawed, she
ought not to be heard without her husband, although
she may be without fault, hor can she bring an assise of
novel disseysine, if by chance she has been ejected after
the outlawry of her husband. Likewise when the in-
heritanee shall have been in community between the
husband and the wife, as if the land has been given to
the man as à marriage portion with the wife, and one of
them has committed felony, for which a judgment of
outlawry has been passed, it is questioned whether the
one who is without fault ought to lose the whole of the
land or a part of it. Likewise when a thing has been
in common between partners, and one has committed a
felony and been convicted, it is questioned whether he
Should forfeit more than his part. It appears to be not
$0. And in the first ease, although in the marriage-
donation mention is made of the husband, nevertheless
the land will not have been so given to the husband that
he ean forfeit it, because the whole of it will remain to


Z2


-


bU


f, 131.


956 DE CORONA.


sua. ltem si mulier aliqua, sicut. mater cum filio, tenu-
erii in communi, & ubi dos nunquam fuerit partita
nee assignata, si filius p felonia fuerit condemnat?,
quaeritur si forisfacere possit dotem matris sus: vide-
tur quód non, sed habebit actionem versus eum, cujus
eschaeta terra illa fuerit. ltem quid dicetur de eo,
qui cüm condemnat? fuerit, in seysina extiterit de
jure &lieno. Item si cüm hodie fecerit disseysinam,
eras fuerit condemnatus, videtur quód talis jus &
hzreditatem aliorum forisfacere non potest, sed com-
petit eis actio contra quoslibet possidentes, si volue-
ritj per breve de ingressu. ltem si quis ad vitam
accipientis concesserit terram alicui ante condemnatio-
nem, tune refert utrum hoc fecerit ante feloniam per-
petratam vel post: si autem ante feloniam, non erit
lerra eschaeta ante mortem tenentis, càm nullus possit
jus alienum forisfacere, si autem post feloniam, aliud
eri. Item si ad vitam suam propriam concesserit
condemnatus, cum vita exspirat terminus, si autem ad
firmam & ad terminum annorum concesserit quis ter-
ram alicui condemnato, erit terminus regis ut catallum,
quia accipitur terminus ad similitudinem catallorum.
Et notandum, quód non debet rex de jure habere
annum & diem de aliquo quod non possit esse eschaeta
dominorum, nec cum eis remanere, si de hoc constare
possit. Item videndum quid dicendum sit de clerico,
qui pro aliqua felonia captus fuerit, & de eo petatur
curia Christianitatis, & episcopus vel alius ordinarius
petüerit prisonam domini regis ad custodiendum eum,
& talis frangat prisonam, & fugiat ad ecclesiam, extra-
hatur ab ecclesia, & reponatur in prisona à qua evasit,


1 * voluerint," MS. Rawl., C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. 957


the wife just as her inheritance. Likewise if a certain
woman, such as & mother, has held in common with her
son, and where her dower has never been divided nor
assigned to her, if the son has been condemned for felony,
it is asked whether he causes the dower of his mother to
be forfeited ; it appears to be not so, but she will have
an action against him, to whom the land has been es-
cheated. Likewise what shall be said of him who, when
he was condemned, has been in seysine of another per-
son's right. Likewise if, when he has made a disseysine
to-day, he shall be to-morrow condemned, it appears
that such a person cannot cause the right and inheritance
of others to be forfeited, but they are entitled to bring
an action against those who have taken possession, if
they wish, by & writ of entry. Likewise if a person has
granted before his condemnation land to another person
for the hfe of the acceptor, then it is of importance
whether he has done this before the perpetration of the
felony or after it. lf indeed before the felony, the land
will not be an escheat before the death of the tenant, for
no one can cause another person's right to be forfeited ;
but if after the felony, it will be another thing.  Like-
wise if the condemned person has granted it for his own
life, the term expires with his life, but if any one has
granted to one, who is condemned, land to farm and for a
term of years, the term will be the king's like a chattel,
for the term is accepted after the likeness of chattels.
And it is to be noted that the king ought not to have of
right à year and a day of anything which cannot become
an esceheat of the lords, nor remain with them, if this can
be ascertained. Likewise it is to be seen what is to be
said of & clerk, who has been captured for any felony, and
the court of Christianity is applied to concerning him,
and the bishop or other ordinary has petitioned the
prison of the king to have the custody of him, and such
& one breaks his prison and takes refuge in the church,
and is dragged out of the church and replaced in the


f. 131.


358 DE CORONA.


nee etiam ecclesia ipsum tueri debet, nec etiam pub-
lieum latronem, quin extrahatur si ad pacem regis
venire noluerit, sicut sunt preedones publici, vel hujus-
modi, sicut latrones seysiti.


Car. XIV.


EE Quüm quis ita fuerit utlagat? qualitcunq, & ex qua-
De inlaga- SREME
tione, qua- Cung, causa, non erit ei tutum quód compareat, ante-
literutla- quam fuerit de gratia principis inlagatus. Rex enim
gnati post . . . :
utlagariam poteri& utlagatum de gratia su& inlegare, & recipere
ex C3U52 eum ad pacem suam, extra quam priüs positus fuit, &
mittuntur . E
adpacem. reponere eum in legem, ita quód si utlagaria rite facta
fuerit & secundüm legem terre, & sive ex causa vera
Sive presumptiva, pdonare ei poterit fugam & utlaga-
riam. Si autem cotra legem terre, debet eam pnun-
Liare esse nullam, & quidà sie utlagati secundüm legem
terre faciliàs recipiuntur ad pacem, secundüm gq ibi
Subfuerit causa vera vel nulla, vel minüs sufficlens:
ub& si ille, qui interfici debuit, producatur vivus &
f 181b. sanus, si autem factum iale quod non sit criminosum,
eodem modo, vel si faetum contingat per infortunium.
Vix autem aut nunquam admittuntur, si factum fuerit
criminale & feloniam contineat; tales quidem ad pacem
recipi non deberent, ne ex facilitate venie aliis tribu-
atur materia sive audacia delinquedi. Et qualitereung,
inlagetur, ita debet inlagari, quód omnibus respondeat
qui versus eum loqui voluerint, & fiant ei litere do-
mini regis patentes & testificantes, quód pacem suam
ei dederit in hac forma.


2. Rex &e. omnibus ballivis & fidelibus suis presentes


Breve, : . . e ou
duod do: literas inspecturis salutem. Sciatis nos pdonasse A.


OF THE CROWN: 359


prison from which he has escaped, the chureh ought not
io protect him any more than a publie robber, who is
dragged out if he will not come to the king's peace, such
as are publie plunderers, or such like, such as robbers
who are seysed.


CHAPTER XIV.


When a person has been so outlawed in whatever way, "T T
or for whatever cause, it will not be safe for him to ja «hat »
appear, before he has been inlawed by the grace of the iiA dure
king. For the king may inlaw an outlaw of his grace, sons after
and receive him into his peace, out of which he was pre- podio
viously displaced, and replace him within the law, so cause
that if the outlawry has been duly made and according Reda rii
to the law of the land, and whether from a true cause to the
or a presumptive cause, may pardon him his flight. and seh
outlawry. But ifit be against the law of the land, he
ought to pronounce it null, and some persons so outlawed
aecording to the law of the land are more easily received
into peace, according as there has subsisted a true cause
or none, or an insufficient cause; as if he who ought to
have been killed, is produced alive and unharmed, or if
the aet be such that itis not criminal, in the same man- f. 181 b.
ner, or if the act happened from misadventure. But
they are rarely or never admitted, if the act has been
eriminal and it contains a felony ; such persons ought not
to be received into the peace, lest from the facility of the
pardon the matter or the boldness of crime be commu-
nicated to others. And in whatever way he may be
inlawed, he ought to be so inlawed, that he may reply to
all who wish to speak against him, and let there be made
out letters patent of the lord the king testifying that he
has granted him his peace in this form.


The king &c. to all bailiffs and his faithful subjects, ^ 2.


who may inspect these letters sends greeting. Know vie


360 DE CORONA.


uda fugam quam feeit, & utlagariam in eum pmulgatam
fugam et pro recto tali vel tah, ut pro morte, mahemio, roberia
bun uium & hujusmodi, unde talis eum appellat, & volumus &
balivis — precipimus quód idem À. firmam pacem nostram inde
uiid, habeat, ita tamen quód stet recto, si quis versus eum
suo. loqui voluerit, & in huj? rei testimonium ei fieri fe-


cim? istas literas nostras patentes.


m : Selatis nos pdonasse, quantum ad nos ptinet, A.
duod ; x fugam quam fecit p morte B. interfecti tempore . do-
perdonat  pjijni regis I. patris nostri unde idem A. rectatus fuit,
om et ideó volumus & precipimus, quód idem À. firmam
enc pacem nostri inde habeat, ità tamen quód pacem
atempore faciat cum parentibus ipsius B. et stet recto &c. ut
patris Sui. suprà, Literas autem istas secum deferat inlagatus
quocunq, ierit, & in promptu habeat, ne quis, ignorans

ipsum gratiam regis adeptum fuisse, tanquam utlaga-

tum interficiat, quod quidem recenter post gratiam
adeptam posset ignorare, si inlagatus ad manum & in
promptu literas regis non haberet. Sunt etiam alim

forms literarum utlagationis, sed magistrales secundüm
qualitatem facti, ut si quis de uno .facto appellatus

fuerit à duobus, & in uno comitatu se defenderit se-

' eundüm legem terre, vel se in prisonam posuerit, &

in alio comitat fuerit utlagatus. Formas veró brevis


talis est.


; 4. " Rex vicec. tali salutem. Scias quód cüm À. in co-
E -"mitatu nostro Eborum appellaret B. de chartis, armis


donat utla- & equis C. domini ipsius A. & eidem QC. robbatis in
iue custodia ipsius À. et idem C. eodem tempore, quo


ipa i. appellum illud fuit in eodem comitat Eborum, appel-
factom fuit, lareb eundem B. de eadem roberia in comitatu Essex,


-——


H
[I
r


OF THE CROWN. 361


that we have pardoned A. his flight, which he made, and pardons
the outlawry proclaimed against him for such a trial or ie en
such, as for a death, mayhem, robbery and such like, l&wry to

' be directed
respecting which so-and-so charges him, and we will and t, ai pai-
enjoin that the same A. have henceforward our peace € di
firm, provided however that he stands his trial, if any time.
one wishes to speak against him, and in testimony of
this thing we have caused these our letters to be made


patent.


Know ye, that we have pardoned as far as pertains to | 3.
us to A. his flight which he made on account of the death dud
of B. slain in the time of our fathor, whereof the same À. the king
was eited into court, and accordingly we will and enjoin, bei
that the same À. have our firm peace on that matter, so that p E
he makes peace with the parents of B. himself and stands outlawry
his trial, &c. as above. And let the inlawed person from the

ime of his
earry with him those letters wherever he may go, and father.
have them ready,lest any person, being ignorant that
he has obtained the king's grace, should slay him as an
outlawed person, as he might be ignorant of the fact
recently after the grace has been obtained, if the inlawed
person had not the king's letters at hand and ready.
There are also other forms of letters of outlawry, but
magisterial according to the quality of the act, as if any
one.should be charged by two persons of one and the
same act, and has defended himself in one county court
according to the law of the land, or has surrendered
himself to prison, and has been outlawed in another


county court. But the form of the writ is as follows.


The king to such a viscount greeting. Know thou, | 4.
that since A. in our county court of York has charged B. Likeriso
with haviug robbed C. of the charters, arms, and horses of king par-
C. the lord of A. himself, whilst in the keeping of A. and rico


the said C. at the same time, when that charge was made because at


in the said county court of York, has charged the said B. ud do


with the same robbery in the county court of Essex, and charge was


962 DE CORONA.


seappel- & appellum illud inter predictos À. & B. per przecep-

us rali tum nostrum positum esse& coram justitiariis nostris

appellatus apud W. audito in curia nostra appello ipsius A. &

2 audita responsione ipsius B. consideratum fuit in ea-

robeia. — dem curia nostra, quód appellum illud nullum fuit, &

quód idem B. inde quietus recederet, et unde ut audi-

vimus, cüm idem B. appellatus esset de eodem facto per

ipsum C. in comitatu Essex a&d sectam & ad appellum

ipsius C. fuit idem PB. utlagatus, & publie$ pro utla-

gato eclamatus in eodem comitatu Essex, et quoniam

error prejudieare non debet veritati, & predicta utla-.

garia in preedieto comitatu Essex promulgata ex igno-

rantia processit, nec dici poterit contumax, qui in uno

com se legittim? defenderit, licét in alio comitat de

eodem facto fuerit appellatus & utlagatus ex ignoran-

tia & per errorem, de consilio magnatum nostrorum,

utlagariam illam nullam esse pronuntiamus, & illam

eidem B. si qua esset, perdonavimus. Et ideó volu-

mus & precipimus, quód idem B. firm&m pacem nos-

iram inde habeat imperpetuum, & in hujus rei testi-
monium, &e.


f. 132. Rex vicecomiti salutem. ^ Ostensum est nobis ex
Siq : us parte À. quód cüm peregré pfectus esset, tempore quo
falso cora justitiarii nostri ultimó itineraverunt in partibus tuis,
Jusitisris Quidam ex vioinis ipsius A. terram suam cupientes
dietatus, et (cüm inde culpabilis non sit) malitiosé fecerüt eum
Feddiderit indietari de latrocinio, e&, quód inde eum malé credi-
prisone — derunt, & ita quód à prefatis justitiariis nostris pree-
domini . e .
regis ec Ceptum fuit, quód nisi veniret ad standum recto de


remittit — prgedicto indictamito, exigeretur de com in comitatü,

rex utla- : . .

gariam, € Secundüm regni nostri consuetudinem utlagaretur.
Quod càüm idem À. à peregrinatione reversus audivis-
Set, de innocentia & fidelitate sua confisus, reddidit se
prisonge nostre apud talem locum, antequam esset in


comitatu tuo utlagat?. Comitat? veró tuus hoc igno-


OF THE CROWN. 365


ihat charge between the aforesaàid A. and B. by our made, th
precept was brought before our justices at W., the RA Edd
charge of À. having been heard in our court, and the was  .
veply of B. himself it was determined in the said court Charged n
that the charge was null and that the said B. should county for
depart unmolested, and subsequently as we have heard, be.
when the said B. has been charged with the same act by

C. in the county court of Essex at the suit and upon the

charge of C. himself, the said B. has been outlawed, and
publiely proclaimed an outlaw in the said county court

of Essex, and since an error should not be prejudicial to

the truth, and the aforesaid outlawry proclaimed in the
aforesaid county of Essex has proceeded upon ignorance,

nor can à person be declared in contempt, who has de-

fended himself according to law in one county court,
although he has been charged with the same act in
another county court and outlawed from ignorance and

by error, with the advice of our magnates we pronounce

that outlawry to be null, and we have pardoned it, if it

were ever in force, to the said B. And therefore we will

and enjoin that the said B. have our peace assured to

him henceforth for ever, and in testimony thereof, &c.


The king to the viscount greeting. It has been shown f. 132.
to us on the part of À. that when he had gone abroad, ;, E E
at a time when our justices last travelled in your has been
parts, certain of the neighbours of A. himself coveting falsely


indicted
his land (when he was not thereof culpable) maliciouly before the.
caused him to be indicted for robbery, and that he was A peres


in evil repute thereby, and so that our justices made afterwards
surren-


an order, that unless he came to stand his trial on the aerea him-
aforesaid indictment, he should be required to appear elf to the
from court day to court day, and aecording to the cus- od

tom of our realm be outlawed, which when A. having the king,
returned from his foreign journey had heard, having con- king remits
fidence in his own innocence and fealty, he surrendered Mus

himself to our prison in such a place, before he was out-


lawed in your county court. But your county court


6.
Si ille, qui
interfici
debuit,
sanus et
vivus red-
lerit.


[Ad


4c
Breve de
eo, qui
interfici
debuit, si
sanus et
vivus re-
vertatur.


964 DE CORONA.


rans (ut dicit) interrogationem prosequens inceptà ver-
sus ipsum ÀÁ. eundem, dum fuit in prisona, utlagavit.
Nos veró simplicitatem predicti À. attendentes & ig-
norantiam coi, utlagariam in eum hoc modo promul-
gatam 'ei perdonavimus, ita quód sufficientem inveniat
securitatem, ad standum recto, si quis inde versus eum


loqui voluerit. Et ideó tibi precipimus, quód acceptis


ab eo modó prsadieto salvis & securis plegiis, ipsum à
prisona facias deliberari, & clamari facias per totum
comitatu tuum, quód firmam pacem nostram habeat:
et quód occasione prwdicte utlagarie nullus ei moles-
tiam inferat seu gravamen. Teste, &c.


Item si cuiquam meticuloso imponatur, quód homi-
nem interfecerit, vel indictatus fuerit & fugerit, et per
sectam alicujus utlagatus, et ille qui interfici debuit
postmodum sanus & vivus appareat: dominus rex de
gratia sua remittit ei utlagariam p hoe breve.


Rex vicec. salutem. Scias, quód justitiarii nostri,
qui ultimó itineraverunt in comitatu tuo, recordantur,
quód cüm À. in curia nostra coram eisdet justitiariis
nostris appellaret B. & quosdam alios de morte C.
fratris sui: idem B. homo meticulosus & timens sibi,
subtraxit se, ita quód coram eisde justitiariis nostris
non stetit recto de appello illo, ppter quod à juratori-
bus & villatis de morte illa suspectus habebatur & male
creditus fuit inde, maxim? ppter fugam, et ita quód


.&d preceptum eorundem ;justitiariorum nostrorum in-


terrogatus fuit de comitatu in comitatu, & it& quód
secundüm legem terr: utlagat? est. "Verumtamen, quo-
niam idem B. qui interfii debuit inventus est vivus
& sanus, nos presumptionem habitam ppter fugam


OF THE CROWN. 305


being ignorant thereof (as is said), pursuing the trial
then begun against the said A., outlawed him whilst he
was in prison. We, however, taking into account the
single-mindedness of the said A. and the ignorance of
the. county eourt, have pardoned him the outlawry pro-
claimed against him, on condition that he finds sufficient
surety to stand his trial, if any person wishes to proceed
against him. And accordingly we enjoin you, that hav-
ing taken from him in the manner aforesaid safe and
secure pledges, you cause him to be delivered from pri-
son, and to be proclaimed under our protection through
the whole county that he has our peace secured to him ;
and that no one on account of the aforesaid outlawry
eause him any trouble or grievance. Witness, &c.


*


Likewise if it be charged againstany timid person, that ^ 6.
he has slain a man, or he has been indicted and has taken Suh De
flight, and upon the suit of any person he has been out- have been
lawed, and he who ought to have been slain, afterwards n ee
makes his appearance in good health and alive, the lord and alive.


the king shall remit the outlawry by writ of this tenor.


The king to the viscount greeting. Know, that our 7.
justiees, who last travelled in your county, remember p
that, when A. in our court before our said justices him, who
aecused B. and certain others of the death of C. his dn m
brother; the said B. being a nervous man and fearing slain, if he
for himself, withdrew himself, so that he did not stand eiie
his trial before the said justices concerning that accu- alive.
sation, wherefore he was regarded as suspected by the
jurors and townsmen concerning that death, and was in
bad repute therefrom, chiefly on account of his flight,
and so that by the precept of our said justices he was
required to appear from court day to court day, and so
that he was outlawed according to the law of the land.
Nevertheless since the said B., who was said to have been


slain, has been found alive and unharmed, we being un-


266 DE CORONA.


veritati przeeferri nolentes, et quia jam manifestum est,
quód nulla subfuit vera causa utlagationis, fugam illam
eidem B. remisimus, & utlagationem perdonavimus,
quód veniat ad pacem nostram, de gratia nostra spe-
ciali. Etideó tibi precipimus, quód in pleno comitatu
tuo, ubi idem B. fuit utlagatus, produci facias ipsum
C. qui dicebatur occisus, et ab omnibus videri, & tunc
demü ipsum B. inlagari facias & ad pacem nostram
recipi et etiam publicé clamari, quód ipsum ad gra-
iliam nostram recepimus, & quód ei dedimus firmam
pacem nostram. Teste, &c.
UN Cüm quis igitur ita fuerit de gratia principis inla-
us pr gat?, ad quz restituatur ? Et ad hoc distinguendum
queresi- est, utrum utlagaria rité & secundüm legem terre
tuatur 1n- . . . . .
lagatus. — facta sit, sive subsit causa vera sive presumptiva, &
sie valida & justa, vel si facta fuerit cotra legem ter-
rc», & sic invalida, & injusta & nulla.


f js *- — Ttem si subfuit causa, que & qualiter illa fuerit, &
Quodjudi- ubi de facto precedente denotari possit felonia ppe-


cess erit trata, & in qu& volutate & assultu premeditato, ut si
primo ante factum evenerit per infortunium sine felonia, aut cüm


se RA quis licitum vellet, aliud accidit p infortunium illici-
quam fuit tum, quód non vellet, vel si quid accidit ex necessi-
brad tate: ut si quis hominem se defendendo interfecerit,
admittatur cüm aliàs periculum evitare non posset, vel cüm om-


ad pa^?" nino nulla subfuit causa, sieut de meticuloso dicitur,


causam — & ubi ille qui interfici debuit viv? exhibetur. In
utagnto- p'imo veró easu, ubi felonis denotari poterit, nüquà
deberet talis admitti ad gratia, vel non misi cum


OF THE CROWN. 307


wiling that the presumption arising from that flight
should be preferred to the truth, and because it is now
manifest that there was no true cause for the outlawry,
have remitted to B. his flight, and have pardoned his
outlawry, that he may come under our protection, of our
special grace. And accordingly we enjoin you, that in
your full county court, where the said B. was outlawed,
you cause C. himself to be produced, who was said to
have been slain, and to be seen by all persons, and there-
upon you cause B. himself to be inlawed, and received
under our protection, and likewise to be publicly pro-
elaimed, that we have received him into our favour,
and that we have granted him our sure protection.
Wiiness, &c.


When therefore à person has been by the grace of the — 8


prince inlawed, to what things is he restored? And on M t


this question a distinction has to be made, whether the xin poni
outlawry has been made duly and according to the law Fic EN
of the land, and whether there has been subsisting a true lawed is

. TM restored.
or a presumptive cause, or if it has been made contrary
to the law of the land, and therefore it is unjust and


null.


Likewise if there has been a substantive cause, what it f.132 b.

is and in what manner it has happened, and where from ,,, ,.*:
. : at the
& preceding fact the perpetration of a felony may be cause, for


denoted, and in which with intention and & premeditated SEL lus
assault,as if an act has happened from misadventure been out-
without felony, or when & person intended a lawful [seed
thing, another thing happened by an unlawful misadven- of first,
ture, which he did not intend, or if anytbing has happened ia cdi
from necessity ; as if à person has slain a man in defend- that he


ing himself, when otherwise he could not escape danger, adritted
or when there has been no subsisting cause, as is said in more easily


the case of à timid person, and where he who ought to have Sm ot


been slain is produced alive. But in the first case where the king
the felony may be denoted, such a person ought never to the


io b ; . cause of
e admitted to grace, or not so, except with great the cut:


lawry.


10.
Si nulla
causa, sed
infcrtu-
nium sine
felonia.


11.
Si nulla
omnino
causa.


368 DE CORONA.


magna diffieultate, quia ex tali inlagatione & tali gra- -
tia de facili obtenta, ex tali venis facilitate, non solüm
inlagatis, verüm etiam aliis in hoc confidentibus, datur
materia delinquendi.


Si autem faetum evenerit p infortuniü sine felonia,
ut si quis se defenderit licité, recipi debet ad gratia
& ad pacem sine difficultate, gratia tamen principis
comitante.


Item in casu ubi nulla subest causa, licót tamen
utlagaria sit justa & rite facta, recipi debet quis ad
pacem de gratia & sine difficultate, & aliquantulu de
jure si null& causa sit, sed infortuniu sine felonia.
Cüm autem utlagaria ipso jure nulla, eó quód cótra
legem terre & consuetudine regni pmulgata, sive sub-
fuerit causa vera vel psumptiva, sive omnino nulla,
secundiun q ppendi poterit ex prsemissis, talis de jure
recipi debet ad gratiam, & de jure ad omnia restitui,
ac si non esset ab initio utlagatus. Cüm appellatus
fugerit, & appellans rité prosecutus fuerit usg, ad utla-
gariam, praesumitur vehementer ppter sectam & ppter
fugam, quód appellatus culpabilis sit, & huie psump-
tioni standum erit semper, quód appellatus non potest
restitui nisi ad pacem tàtàüm, & quód omnia amittit,
donec probetur contrarium, s. quód factum nullum sit,
quod bené fieri poterit, ut si ille, qui interfici debuit,
post utlagariam pducatur vivus, & quo casu, utlagatus
restituatur ad omnia, quia factu nullum, & unde talis
vera pbatio vincit psumptionem. Si aulem utlagatus
anté moriatur, forisfacit omnia suis heredib? nisi de
cosilio & gratia aliud fiat.


OF THE CROWN. 2369


difficulty, for from such an inlawry and such a grace easily
obtained, from such a facility of pardon matter for delin-
quency is supplied, not only to the persons inlawed, but
also to others having confidence in the precedent.


But if the act has been done by misadventure without 10.
felony, as if a person has defended himself lawfully, he wii
ought to be received into grace and into the king's but mis-


peace without difficulty, the. grace of the prince, how- iMi
ever, accompanying him. felony.
Likewise in the case, where there is no subsisting . 11.
| cause, although the outlawry be just and rightly y I£there
made, à person ought to be received into the peace of vi E:
the king of grace and without difficulty, and in some *
degree of right, if there be no cause, but misadventure
without felony. But when the outlawry is null in law,
because i& has been proclaimed contrary to the law of
the land and the custom of the realm, whether there has
been a subsisting cause true or presumptive, or altogether
none at all, according as may be gathered from the pre-
mises, such à person ought of right to be received into
grace, and of right to be restored to everything, as if he
had not been originally outlawed. Where the party ac-
eused has taken flight, and the accuser has duly prose-
euted him to outlawry, there is à vehement presumption
on account of the suit and on account of the flight, that
ihe person aecused is guilty, and by this presumption we
must always stand, that the accused person cannot be
restored except only to the king's peace, and that |,he
loses everything, until the contrary is proved, namely,
that there has been no act, which may well be done, as
if he who ought to have been killed, is produced afte»
the outlawry alive, and in which case the outlawed
person may be restored to everything, because there has
been no aet, and in which case such a true proof over-
comes the presumption. But if the outlawed person


HET dies beforehand, he causes his heirs to forfeit everything,
| unless it be otherwise done of counsel and of grace.
VOL. II. A A


12.
Non resti-
tuitur quis,
nisi tan-
tum ad
pacem.


f. 133.


18.
Quid felo
forisfaciat
sive utla-
garius.


970 DE CORONA.


In omnib? veró casib? predictis, qualiseunq, fuerit
causa, cüm utlagatio rite facta sib & secundüm legem
Lerre, non restituitur quis nisi tantüm ad pacem, quód
ire possit & redire & de novo contrahere, non enim
poterit id quód p utlagaria fuit dissolutum, p inlaga-
riam conjungi sine nova voluntate eorum qui priüs
contraxerunt. Non enim poterit rex gratià facere,
cum injuria & damno aliorum. Poterit quidem dare
q suum est, hoc est pacem suam, quam utlagat? ami-
sit ppter fuga & suam contumaciam, q autem alienum .
est dare non potest p suam gratia. ltem justé utla-
gatus & rité non restituitur nisi tantüm ad pacem,
quód ire possit & redire & pacé habere, & ad actiones
restitui nó potest nec alia! quia est sicut infans modo
genit?, & homo quasi modo genit". Item non potest
inlagaria restituere ad actiones & obligationes phabitas,
nec ad homagiu nec fidelitates, nec ad sacraiüta nec
ad alia p utlagaria dissoluta, cotra voluntate eoru de
quorum voluntate priüs fuerunt conjuncta & firmata,
& ideo nec ad hzreditates nec ad tenemta in prejudi-
cium dominoru, & sic ad ea qus juris sunt restitui
non possunt. Ex obligationib? veró przcedentib? nul-
lus eis tenetur, sed ipsi onibus ne sint melioris codi-
ditionis ppter utlagar, cü deteriores esse debent.


Quid felo forisfaciat & quibus, satis dict' est suprà,
sed cum restitui peuret, videndü ubi restituendus erit
de jure, & ubi de gfa, & ubi nec de jure nec de gia,
nisi hoc fiat de voluntate regis. lIté cum de jure vel
de gratia fuerit restitut? post utlagaria, ad quse resti-


tuatur & ad que non. Cum autem quis ppter suspi-
t


! * nee ad alia." MS. Rawl. C. 160. | differs altogether from the printed
The text of MS. Rawl. C. 159 | text of 1569.


OF THE CROWN. 5ya!


But in all the aforesaid cases, whatever may have 12.
been the cause, when the outlawry has been made duly sien
and aecording to the law of the land, à person is not stored to
restored except to the king's peace alone, that he may go 2279228
and return and eontract anew, for that which has been king's
dissolved by the outlawry cannot be joined anew by the P^'^*
inlawry without a new intention on the part of those
who have contracted. Forthe king cannot grant a pardon
with injury or damage to others. He may give what
is his own, that is his protection, which the outlawed
person has lost through his flight and his contumacy, but
that which is another's he cannot give by his own grace.
Likewise & person justly and duly outlawed is not re-
stored to anything except to the king's peace, that he
may go and return and have protection, but he cannot
be restored to his rights of action and other things, for
he is like à new-born infant and à man as it were lately
born Likewise inlawry does not restore a person to
his previous actions and obligations, nor to his homage
nor fealties, nor to his oaths, nor to other things dissolved
by his outlawry, against the will of those by whose will
they were previously united and confirmed, and accord-
ingly neither to his inheritances nor to his tenements
to the prejudice of the lords, and so they cannot be
restored to those things to which they had only a right.

But no one is bound to them by preceding obligations, f. 133.
but they are bound to all others, that they may not be

in a better condition: on aecount of their outlawry, since

they ought to be in à worse condition.


What a felon forfeits and to whom has been sufficiently — 13.
discussed above, but when he procures himself to be re- 3252.
stored, it is to be seen where he is to be restored of right, feits, or an
and where of grace, and where neither of right nor of ?""^v
grace, unless it be by the willof the king. Likewise
when he shall have been restored of right or of grace,
after his outlawry, to what he is restored and to what
not. But when any person on account of suspicion and


A A 2


372 DE CORONA.


tionem & malum rectu se subtraxerit, statim amittit
catalla, si coram justitiaf vocatus non comparuerit,
ppter fugam, lieàt statim ante utlagarià coparuerit.
Poterit quis utlagari. ppter fugam, sive ibi subfuerit
vera causa vel psumptiva. Presumptiva dico, ppter
fugam tantüm, lieét ibi non sit vera causa. Vera
dico, si quis interfectus sit p feloniam vel p infortu-
nium.  Presumptiva, eàm null& predictorum subsit,
vel càm ipse qui occidi debuit vivus appareat. In
omnibus autem casibus predictis sive subsit vera causa
sive presumptiva, si quis fuerit restitutus post utla-
gariam rité factam, & secund legem terre omnibus
rit eoncurrentibus, nec ad catalla habenda restituitur
nec ad hereditate, ad catalla videlicet ppter fugam,
nec ad hsereditate propter utlagariam rité factam, nisi
tantüm ad pacem, ut omnib? respodeat qui adversus
eum loqui voluerint, quia statim cüm convictus fuerit
p utlagariam, incipit jus merum reverti ad dominum
capitalem, quia cum felone ulteriüs remanere non pos-
Sit, & talis restituitur ad gratia sine pjudicio alterius
alicujus. Ite sunt quidà, qui restitui debent de jure,
ad pacem in Oni casu, & ad omnia licét fuerint utla-
gati, videlieet ubi utlagaria nulla ipso jure, ut si facta
fuerit contra legem terre & regni eonsuetud, & aliter
quàm de jure fieri deberet, vel alibi, ut si extra cof,
vel in Londoü extra hustingum: & aliter, q quidem
poterit esse multis modis, ut si ante quintuü coii,
Item si in coii, tamen ad nullius sectam, videlicet
regis, vel parentis, vel amici, & si secta ibi fuerit,
tamen ille qui utlagat? est, fuit infra setatem. Ite
eàm ile qui utlagatus est, venire non potuit, quia


OF THE CROWN. 9798


bad character has withdrawn himself, he forth with loses
his ehattels, if when summoned before the justices he
. has not appeared, on aecount of his flight, although he
may have appeared immediately before his outlawry.
À. person may be outlawed on account of his flight,
whether there has been subsisting a true cause or à pre-
sumpliive cause. lI mean by a presumptive cause, on ac-
count of his flight alone, although there be not in such case
any true cause. lI mean by a true cause, if anybody has
been slain feloniously or by misadventure. Presumptive,
when none of the things aforesaid exist, or when he who
ought to have been slain appears alive. But in all the
&bove cases whether there be subsisting a true cause or a
presumptive cause, if anybody has been restored after an
outlawry made duly and according to the law of the
land with all due solemnities concurring, he is neither
to be restored to his chattels,nor to his inberitance;
[not] to the chattels on aecount of his flight, nor to
the inheritance on account of his outlawry having been
duly made, except to the king's peace, that he [may
reply to all who would speak against him, because as
Soon as he has been convicted by outlawry, the absolute
right reverts to the chief lord, since it cannot remain any
longer with a felon, and such a person is restored to grace
without prejudice to any other person. Likewise there
are some, who ought to be restored of right to the king's
peace in every case and to every thing, although they
have been outlawed, for instance, where the outlawry is
of right null, as if it has been made contrary to the law
of the land and the custom of the realm, and otherwise
than it ought to have been of right, or elsewhere, as if
beyond the county, or in London outside the husting : and
otherwise, which may have happened in various ways, as
before the fifth county court day. Likewise in the county
court, yet at the suit of nobody, as for instance the king,
or a relative, or a friend, or if there has been a suit, yet,
he who has been outlawed has been under age. Likewise
when he, who has been outlawed, could. nob come, because


f. 133 b.


O——— — A 00 m—— ecu 9 oa EE oc nts £ -T.


3/4 DE CORONA.


ante utlagat se posuit in prisona pro facto illo vel pro
alio. Item càm de facto illo appellatus fuit & inter-
rogatus, p facto uno in uno cofi & ab uno, se defen-
dit in alio comit versus alu appellant de eodem facto,
é& multis alüs modis. Ite inlagarr debet quis sine
juris injuria, licét non ad hsereditatem nec ad catalla,
ubi nulla subfuit causa utlagationis omnino, nisi q
fuit metieulosus, & sic nullam rem (timens, subtraxit
se, vel quia ipse qui interfici debuit jam apparet vivus,
& hujusmodi: & in hoc casu denotatur jus & non
gratia. ltem restitui potest de gratia, & non de jure
ad pacem tantu, & non ad alia, cüm rite fuerit ut-
lagatus, sicut est ile qui hominem interficit per in-
fortuniu, & non ex mala voluntate, quia voluntas &
propositu distinguunt maleficia. Si quis autem per
feloniam & in assultu premeditato alium interfecerit,
talis nunquam de jure restitui deberet nec de gratia,
quia cum talibus nulla gratia facienda est, ne talis
gratia alis praebeat audaciam consimilia perpetrandi:
quia facilitas venie &e. Facit tamen rex aliquando
gratiam talibus, sed contra justitia, cum ad secta suam
fuerint utlagati, sed tamen ut omnib? respondeant.
Item esto quód filius antenatus utlagatus sit, & in vita
patris vel alterius antecessoris fuerit inlagatus & sic
ad pacem domini regis restitutus, expectaverit mortem
antecessoris sui, nec iste ad hereditatem admittetur.
Item cüm inlagatus fuerit tali modo ut & omnibus
respondeat, & se forté defendat per corpus vel per
patriam, nee adhue admittetur licót sic purgaverit
innocentiam suam. liem cüm interrogatus esset &
utlagatus, nunquam exiit à seysina, sed semper fuit in


OF THE CROWN. 9/5


before he was outlawed, he had surrendered himself to
prison for that act or for another. Likewise when he
has been charged and prosecuted for that act, for one act
in one county court and by one person, he defends himself
in another county court against another person accusing
him for the same act, and in many other modes.  Like-
wise & person ought to be inlawed without any injury
io his right, although not to his inheritance nor to his
chattels, where there has been no subsisting cause at all
of his outlawry, except that he was a timid person, and
so without fearing anything, withdrew himself, or
because he who ought to have been slain, now appears
alive, and such like, and in this case right and not grace is
shown. Likewise he may be restored of grace and not
of right to the king's peace alone, and not to other things,
when he has been duly outlawed, as for instance he who
has killed à man from misadventure, and not from evil
intention, because intention and purpose distinguish
 misdemeanors. If any one however has slain another
feloniously and by a premeditated assault, such a person
ought never to be restored of right, nor of grace, because
no grace is to be shown to such persons, lest such grace
afford to others the audacity of perpetrating similar acts,
because facility of pardon &c. The king however some-
times shows grace to such persons, but contrary to jus-
tice, when they have been outlawed at his suit, but. on
the condition that they make answer to all persons.
Likewise let it be that a son already born is outlawed,
and during the lifetime of his father or another ancestor
has been inlawed, and so having been restored to the
peace of the lord the king, has awaited the death of his
ancestor, he shall not be admitted to the inheritance.
Likewise when he has been inlawed on condition that
he shall make answer to all persons, and by chance he
defends himself by his body and by the country, he shall
nevertheless not be admitted although he has thus purged
his innocence. Likewise when he has been interrogated
and outlawed, and he has never gone out of seysine, but


f. 133 b.


376 DE CORONA.


continua 'seysina per uxorem, & liberos, & familiam
suam, adhuc hzreditatem retinere non potest, nisi do-
minus suus capitalis .hoe voluerit & hoc propter utla-
gariam rité factam. Inlagati veró dici poterunt quasi
modo geniti infantes, & novi homines quasi de novo
creati, quia in personis eorum post utlagariam rite
factam nulla preterita subsistunt, sed post inlagariam
tantüm presentia & futura succedunt & ad ea que
pacis sunt restituuntur, ut redeant ad regnum & exe-
ant càm voluerint, vel remaneant si voluerint & &ibi
provideant in futuro de acquisitionibus rerum (sicut
priüs) negotiando, contrahendo, emendo, vel vendendo,
cum firma pace domini regis.


14. Item restituuntur legi in criminalibus maximé, &
Jtem resti. . . liis d b & L t t . .
tuutur  lpsia respon ean d si en recto, si quis versus eos
legi maxi- loqui voluerit, sed alii ipsis non respondebunt. In
ms ure. eivilib eró ipsi aliis, sed non alii ipsis, qui
quod ipii utlagariam dissolvuntur quoad ipsas obligationes, &
18 TG- " . . . . !
spondeant perinde exünguuntur actiones, quce resuscitari non pote-
iud Ipsi, eunt,  Respondere autem tenentur, si quis versus eos
civilibus loqui voluerit, & ibi respondere tenentur omnibus, sed
M IP! habent exceptiones suas versus omnes, preterquam
ills, qui rité & secundu legem terre "versus eos sec-
tam fecerint per quam utlagati fuerint, & unde si


versus alios se defenderint p exceptione.


15. Rex remittit eis suam sectam, quod quidem facere
cis possit sine prej udicio aliorum. i autem, ecüm quis
suam sec- fuerit inlagatus, & sib aliquis qui versus eum loquatur,
tam sine . ' : .
prejudieio QUl Sectam suam bene fecerit & sufficienter versus
aliorum. eum, per quem utlagatus fuit, & petat judicium de hoc,


quód per sectam suam utlagatus est, si debeat eum


OF THE CROWN. 944


has been in continued seysine by his wife and his child-

ren and his family, still he cannot retain the inheritance,
| unless his chief lord has been willing and this on account
| of the outlawry duly made. For inlawed persons may
be described as a kind of new born infants, and new men
created as it were afresh, because nothing past subsists
in their persons after outlawry duly made, but after
inlawry only the present and the future succeed, and
they are restored to the benefits of the king's peace, that
they may return in the realm and go forth when they
please, or remain if they please, and provide for them-
selves in future by the acquisition of things [as before]
by trading, contracting, buying and selling, with the
firm peace of the lord the king.


Likewise they are restored to the law in criminal 14.
matters chiefly, and they may themselves answer to vein
others and stand their trial, if any person wishes to speak restored to
against them, but others shall not answer to them. Bui hiedy in
in civil matters they may answer to others, but not criminal
others to them, because by outlawry as regards them all that icy
obligations and actions are equally extinguished, which nuin
cannot be resuscitated. But they are bound to answer, oie but
if any person wishes to speak against them, and there ede
they are bound to answer to all but they have their and in civil
exceptions against all except those, who duly and ac- Mere —
cording to the law of the land brought the suit against to others.
them through which they were outlawed, and hence
if they defend themselves against others, [1t is] by an


exception.


The king remits to them his suit, which he may do 15.
without prejudice to others. But if, when a person has ied
been inlawed, there is any one who will speak against them his
him, who has conducted his suit well and sufficiently ini bed
against him, through whom he has been outlawed, and he dice to
seeks judgment against him, as he has been outlawed xc


through his suit, if he ought to convict him again, when


16.
Quod opor-
tebit, quod
versus ip-
sum loqua-


f. 134.


17.
Item, si
antenatus
filius ex
pluribus
feloniam
fecerit
in vita


9/8 DE CORONA.


iterum convincere, cüm semel eum convicerió per sec-
tam suam, videtur quód, si quis utlagatus fuerit per
sectam alicujus, non propter hoc convincitur de facto
& felonia, nisi tantàm de contemptu & inobedientia,
& hae ratione, quia poterit quis utlagari per sectam
alicujus propter fugam, ut prsedictum est, licét nulla
subfuit causa, nec factum, nec felonia.


Oportet igitur quód appellans, si sectam ben? fecit,
de novo loquatur versus eum, & quo casu, appellatus
propter sectam bene factam ab appellante amisit suas
exceptiones, amisit etiam electionem defendendi se per
corpus suum, vel ponendi se super patriam, cüm appel-
lans eum convicerit semel per appellum & per sectam,
& ideó quia appellatus hoc totam amisit propter fugam
& utlagariam, oportet quód per patriam se defendat,
quód si per patriam se defendere non possit, quód
doceat causam esse nullam per exhibitionem ejus qui
interfiei debuit, alioquin judicium sustinebit, vel si
patriam recusaverit, quasi pro convicto habetur, ita
quód in patria remanere non poterit, & si rex eum in
patria sustineret, hoc ésset ad injuriam appellantis.
Si autem non sit aliquis qui ab initio ben? secutus
fuerit, nec aliquis qui appellum habere possit, tunc
poterit utlagatus in patria remanere ad pace domini
regis.


Ite esto q quis plures habuerit filios, & antenatus
felonià fecerit in vita patris, & utlagat? in vita ptis,
mortuo patre videndu est ad quem jus & h:reditas
descédere debeat. Et videtur q non filio utlagato, ex
quo p utlagariam forisfecit jus succededi, & non solüm


OF THE CBOWN. 9/9


he has already convicted him by his suit, 16 seems, that,
ifany person has been outlawed through any person's
suit, he is not on that account convicted of the fact and
the felony, but only for contempt and disobedience, and
for this reason, that any person may be outlawed through
the suit of any person on account of flight, as aforesaid,
although there be no subsisting cause, nor fact, nor
felony.


It is incumbent therefore that the accuser, if he has 16.
well conducted his suit, proceed anew against him, and x Bia
in which case the party accused on account of the suit thet the
of the accuser having been well conducted has lost all proceed
his exceptions, he has lost also his election to defend gnat
himself by his body, or of putting himself upon the s
country, since the accuser has already convicted him by his charge.
his charge and by his suit, and accordingly because the
party accused has lost all this through his flight and
outlawry, it is incumbent that he defend himself by the
country, but if he cannot defend himself by the country,
that he show that the cause is null by exhibiting him
who ought to have been slain, otherwise he shall undergo
sentence, or if he has refused the country, he shall be
treated as convicted, so that he cannot remain in the
country, and if the king should sustain him in the country,
this would be to the injury of the accuser. But if there
be not any one, who has from the commencement sued
him well, norany one who hascharge a against him,then  r134.
the outlawed person may remain in the country under


the peace of the lord the king.


Likewise let it be that à person has severalsons, and 17. .
the eldest has committed a felony in the lifetime of the A pas
father, and is outlawed in the lifetime of the father, son out of
upon the death of the father it is to be seen, to whom iibi.


the right and the inheritance ought to descend. Anda rs M
it seems that it ought not io the outlawed son, since VOL of


"through his outlawry he has forfeited his right ofthe father,


patris, et

fuerit utla-
gatus in
vita patris.


990 DE. CORONA.


adeptum sed adipiscendu, non ergo restituetur ad suc-
cessionem, quia hoc esset, ut videtur, in prejudiciu
dii capitalis, quod esse non debet. Si autem in vita
patris moreretur, càüm esset restitutus, sine herede,
tune, quasi non esset in rerum natura, descenderet
hsereditas ad alios hzredes ppinquiores, ut quibusdam
videtur, quod non est verum secundü alios, qui meliüs
sentiunt de talibus, quia cüm antenatus moriatur in
vita patris vel alterius antecessoris, sive inlegatus fue-
rit sive non, forisfaciat omnibus hszredibus suis prze-
sentibus, apparentibus & futuris, licét, tunc non exis-
ientibus, propinquis & remotis, fratribus, sororibus, &
de carne propria exeuntibus, totum jus quod habuit
die quo felonia fuit perpetrata, velq ei accidere posset
ab aliquo antecessore, si antecessor supervixerit, &
feloniam non commisisset, & qui mortuo antecessore
futuri essent sui hseredes, si jus ei desceédisset, quia
licét gradus vacuus sib per mortem suam, si ad pacem
domini regis moreret sine felonia, oporteret quód de eo
fiat mentio in descensu ad hsredes de carne sua ex-
euntes sic. Et unde jus à tali antecessore descendisse
debuit tali, ut filio & heredi s1 viveret, & à tali, tali
ut filio & heredi talis. Et hoc dici debet de fratribus
& sororibus & aliis hsredibus remotioribus, propriis -
liberis non existentibus. Et sic non poterit dici im-
mediaté quód jus descendit à tali antecessore tali
nepoti, vel nepti, fratri vel sorori, vel heredi remo-
tior, nulla facta mentione de eo qui obiit in vita
antecessoris, & sic forisfacit actionem & hereditatem
ille qui felonià comisit, sive moriatur in vita anteces-
Soris sive post mortem, & sive utlagat?^, vel in vita


UM oS MIT SA NISL ERO TT ANE RORNET IR TINI DR CTUM, Sa RR IS Ie. ao uL LL EU. m "d Re m


OF THE CROWN. 381


succession, and not only what he had acquired, but what 2nd has


een out-


he was likely to aequire, he shall not be restored there- j«ea in
fore to the succession, because this would be, as it seems, "s Mene
to the prejudice of the chief lord, which ought not to be. father,


But if he died in the lifetime of his father, after he had
been restored, without an heir, then, as if in the nature
of things he were not, the inheritance would descend to
the other next heirs as ib seems to some, which is not
true aecording to others, whose opinion in such subjects
1s better, because when a first-born son dies in the life-
time of his father or another ancestor, whether he has
been inlawed or not, he forfeits for all his present heirs,
apparent and future, although then non-existing, near and
remote, brothers, sisters, and springing from his own flesh,
every right which he had on the day, on which the felony
was perpetrated, or which might devolve to him from
any ancestor, if the ancestor had survived, and had not
committed a felony, and who upon the death of the an-
cestor would have been his proper heirs, if the right had
descended to him, because although the degree would
have been vacant by his death, if he died under the
king's peace without a felony, it would be incumbent,
that mention should be made of him in the descent to
heirs springing out of his flesh &ec. — And hence the
right from such an ancestor ought to have descended to
Such a one, as to à son and heir, if he were living, and
from such a one, to such à one as the son and heir of
such à one. And this ought to be said of the brothers
and the sisters and the other heirs more remote, if there
be no children of his own existing. And so it cannot
be said immediately that the right descends from such
an ancestor to such a grandson or granddaughter, brother
or sister, or more remote heir, no mention having been
made of him, who died in the lifetime of the ancestor;
and so he»who has committed the felony forfeits the
action and the inheritance, whether he dies in the life-
time of the ancestor or after his death, and whether out-


382 DE CORONA.


antecessoris restitutus, & sic forisfacit actionem & jus
habitum & habendum. Item hszreditaté propria, acqui-
sitam & aequirendam, secund quod fuit in statu, die
quo felonia fuit perpetrata, in dominico & servitio, ad
terminum vitz vel annorum. ltem idem dici poterit
de fratre postnato & suis hrredibus, de omnibus quse
ei possent accidere. Ex hoc igitur sequitur, ut vide-
tur, quód antecessor, eujus hzres felonia fecerit, de qua
convict? fuerit, post feloniam heredis dare non poterit
nec alienare, non. magis quàm ipse felo, càm non sit
heres qui posset donationem & factum suum warran-
tizare, nisi hoc habeat speciale in charta feoffamenti


sui, quód dare possit & assignare, si h:wredes defece-


18.
Cum utla-
gatus cap-
tus fuerit,
non alicui
licitum est
eum inter-
ficere, nisi
in ipsa
captione
se defen-
dat.


19.
Quod ali-
quando j
potest do-
minus rex
de gratia
. gua vitam
concedere
restitutis.


f. 184 b.


rint, vel sit ita, quód donatione warrantizare non pos-
sint predicta ratione.


Cüm veró utlagatus captus fuerit, non erit licitum
alicui eum interficere, nisi in ipsa captione, si se velit
defendere, quia post captionem, vita & mors erit in
manu regis. Poterit quidem rex cüm captus fuerit,
licét rite fit utlapatus & ex causa, ex plenitudine
potestatis suze dare ei vitam & membra, & ut regnum
abjuret.


Tenetur etiam aliquando de gratia concedere ei vitam
& membra, ut si per infortunium vel se defendendo
hominem interfecerit. 'Tenetur etia, si nulla subfuit
eausa utlagarie, ut si ille qui interfici debuit, viv? &
san? pducatur. ltem si min? sufficiens sit causa, quia
forte factu p quo fuit utlagatus, non fuit felonia sed
transgressio. ltem quia utlagaria no fuit rité pmul-
gata, vel loco non debito, ut suprà, & secundüm q sic
vel sie, poterit abjurare regnü, vel in regno remanere,
secundüm gratiam regis. Ite& si clericus ordinatus fue-
rit utlagatus, tenetur rex utlagatu remittere ordinario,


OF THE CROWN. 393


lawed or inlawed in the lifetime of the ancestor, and so
he forfeits the action, and the right held or to be holden.
Likewise his own inheritance, acquired or to be acquired,
in the state in which it was on the day on which the
felony was perpetrated, in domain or in serfage, for a
term of life or of years.  Ánd the same may be said of a
second-born son and his heirs, respecting all things which
may happen to him. From this therefore it follows, as
ib seems, that an ancestor, whose heir has committed
& felony, of which he has been convicted, cannot after
the felony of the heir give nor alienate, no more than
the felon himself, since there is no heir who can warrant
the gift or his act, unless he has this special [clause] in
the charter of his feoffment, that he may give and assign,
if heirs have failed, or it be so that they cannot warrant
the donation for the reason aforesaid.


Bui when the outlawed person has been captured, it 18.
will not be allowable to any one to kill him, except "nn the
during the act of capture, if he chooses to defend himself, been seized,
because after his capture, his life and his death will be EE
in the hand of the king. The king may, when he has for any
been captured, although he has been duly outlawed and Pl him,
for & cause, from the fulness of his power grant to him unless he


his life and limbs, and that he may abjure the realm. depen


Beizure.


The king is also sometimes bound of grace to grant to — 19.
him his life and limbs, as if by misadventure or in self-de- 19^t ome
fence he has slain à man. . He is bound also, if there has king may
been no subsisting cause of outlawry, as if he who ought to des uad
had been slain, is produced alive and sound. Likewise if persons
the cause has been insufficient, because perchance the act, feat
for which he has been outlawed, has not been a felony, but f. 134 b.

& trespass. Likewise because the outlawry has not been
duly proclaimed, or not at the proper place, as above, and
according as so and so, he may abjure the realm or remain
in the realm, according to the grace of the king. Likewise


if & clerk in holy orders has been outlawed, the king is


l.
De homi-
cidio quod
palam et
pluribus
astantibus
perpetra-
tum est, et
postea de
homicidio,
quod nullo
preesente
perpetra-
tum est,
et quod
dicitur
murdrum.

2.
Quid sit
murdrum.


8.
Qus causa
inventionis


384 DE CORONA.


ubi non fiet nisi degradatio, si se purgare non possit.
Clerieus dico, sive major sive minor, etiam episcopus
vel alius, quia de talibus non poterit rex exequi judi-
cium, nec judicium factu in foro seculari de utlagaria
ligabit tales, qui in cuf Christianitatis se purgare
possunt secundüm quosdam.


CAP. XV.


Dictum est suprà de homicidio, quod palam & plu-
ribus astantibus quadoq, ppetratur, nune autem dicen-
dum de homicidio, q nullo psente, nullo sciente, nullo
audiente, nullo vidente clam perpetratur, quod dicitur
murdrum, unde inprimis videndum q sit murdrum,
quie causa invetionis & qualiter quis à murdro ex-
cusetur. |


Murdrum veró est occulta extraneorum & notorum
hominum occisio, à manu hominis nequiter ppetrata, &
quie nullo sciente vel vidente facta est, preter solum
interfectorem & suos coadjutores & fautores, & ita quód .
non statim assequatur clamor popularis. Occulta dici-
tur, quia occisor ignoratur, nee scitur, quis ille fuit qui
occidit, Item extraneorum & notorum hominum, ut
comprehendatis tam masculum quàm fominam, & sic
excludatis animalia bruta, que ratione carent. Extra- '


.neorum dieo, quia sive interfectus cognitus fuerit sive


ignot?, dicitur Francigena, nisi Englescheria, i. quód
Anglieus sit, probetur p parentes, & coram justitiariis
preesentetur.


Causa veró inventionis murdrorum talis fuit, q in |
dieb? Canuti regis Danor qui' post Angliam acquisità


T UEM Ap (d RUN RE v cA MV SUE Le Nr Am s ESI D dT28 22 ife xo Ag a


OF THE CROWN. 385


bound to remit the outlawed person to the ordinary,


where no sentence shall be passed but that of degradation,
if he cannot purge himself I say a clerk, whether in
major or minor orders, even a bishop or another, for the
king cannot execute judgment against such persons, nor
will a judgment of outlawry made in a temporal court
bind such persons, who may purge themselves in à court
of Christianity according to some. l

Of homi-

cide which


is perpe-
trated


openly, and
CHAPTER XV. when Bevds


"- : : ral persons
We have spoken above of homicide, which is perpe- ere stand-


trated openly and when several persons are standing by, ing by,and
we must now speak of homicide, which is perpetrated of homi-
secretly, when not any body is present, nor knowing, nor die
hearing, nor seeing, which is called murder, whence we trated
must first see what is murder, what is the cause of the mm
invention, and in what way à person is excused from standing
murder. vorige
Murder is the secret slaying of foreign and known T^
persons, wickedly perpetrated by the hand of à man, and what is
which has been done when nobody was knowing of it or ??'"rder.
seeing ib, except the slayer only and his coadjutors and
supporters, and so that the publie cry did not forthwith
overtake them. It is called secret, because the slayer is
unknown, nor is it known who was the person who slew

him. Likewise of foreign and known persons, that you


may comprehend male and female, and so exclude brute


animals, which are without reason. I say foreign per-
sons, for whether the slaughtered person has been known
or unknown, he is ealled Frankborn, unless Englishery,
that is, that he is an Englishman, is proved by his parents,
and it is presented to the justices.


And the cause of the invention of murders was of this LE
kind, that in the days of Canute king of the Danes, the cause
VOL. II. | BB


murdro-


f. 185.


b.
Qualiter
patria ex-


386 DE CORONA.


& pacifieatam rogatu baronum Anglorum remisit ad
Daciam exercitum suum, & ipsi baronés Anglie erga
ipsum regem JCanutum fidejussores extiterunt, quód
quotquob rex in Anglia secum retineret firmam pacem
p omnia haberent, ità g si quis Anglorum aliquem
hominu quos rex secum adduxit interficeret, si se super
hoe defédere non posset judicio Dei, s. aqua vel ferro,


fleret de eo justitia, si aute aufugeret & capi non pos-


set, solverentur p eo 66. marcos, & colligebantur in
villa, ubi quis esset interfectus, & ideó, quia interfec-


. tore non habuerunt, & si in tali villa p pauptate colligi


non possent, colligerentur in hundredo in thesauro
regis deponedz. '


Et dicitur murdrum extiraneof occisio, & notorum:
quia sive not? sit vel extrane?, ille qui interfectus est,
semp reputabitur Fracigena, nisi Englescheria rit fue-
rib coram justitiariis presentata, p hoc quód sciri possit
q Anglic extiterit. Et qualiter Englescheria psentari
debeat, infra pleniüs dicetur suo loco. Item à manu


hominu dicitur, ad differentid eorü qui à bestiüs & ani-


malibus, quse ratione carent, occidütur, vel devorantur:


.& qui non possunt diei murdrat in feloniam, quia ani-


malia, quz ratione carent, non possunt dici fecisse in-
juriam nec feloniagm. Vel hoe dici poterit ad differen-
lia eof, qui mortui sunt p infortuniü, sicut de submersis
& oppressis & hujusmodi p infortuniü ubi nulla subest
felonia, secund q inferi? dicetur. |


Exeusatur patria quandoq, à prestatione qus datur
p murdro, sicut videri poterit in multis casibus subse-


OF THE CROWN. 987 |


who after the acquisition and pacifieation of England of the in-

a the request of the English barons sent back to Den- Yention of
» mark his army, and the barons themselves of England

came forward as sureties towards king Canute himself,

that as many, as the king should retain with himself in

England, should have a sure peace in all matters, so that

ifany of the English should slay any one of the men

whom the king had brought with him, if he could not

defend himself by the judgment of God, that is by water

oriron, justice should be done against him, but if he

Should run away and could not be captured, sixiy-six
marks should be paid for him, and they were collected

in the vill where any person had been slain, and on that
, &ecount because they had not produced the slayer, and if
they could not be collected in such vill on account of its
poverty, they should be collected in the hundred to be
deposited in the king's treasury.


And murder is the term used for the slaying of foreign
and known persons: beeguse whether he be known or a Who LS
Stranger, he who is slain shall always be held to be der.
Frank-born, unless Englishery has been duly presented
before the justices, whereby it may be known that
he was an Englishman. And in what manner Englishery  f.135.
ought io be presented, shall be stated more fully below
in its own place. Likewise itis said by the hand of
men, in distinction from those who are slain or devoured
by beasts and animals that are without reason, and who
cannot be said to have been murdered feloniously, because
animals, that are without reason, cannot be said to have
done injury or felony. Or this may be said in distinction
from those who have died from misadventure, as in regard
to the drowned or the suffocated, or such like from mis-
adventure, where there is no subsisting felony, as will be
Stated below.


But the country is exeused sometimes from the tax " .
which is levied for a murder, as may be seen in many y, the


BB2


cusatur a
murdro.


6.
S1 inter-
fector cap-
tus fuerit,
nullum
erit mur-


Fleta, f. 70.


9388 DE CORONA.


quent. Inprimis excusatur patria à pstatione murdri,
si interfector cognitus fuerit, sive captus fuerit sive
non, quia ibi convinei poterit felonia vel p sectam vel
p inquisitionem patrie, & sic q utlagatus sit.


Item si interfector captus fuerit, & judicium susti-
nuerit, nulli erit murdrum, quia convincitur felonia.
Ite nullum erit murdr, cum quis vulneratus fuerit usq,
ad mortem & vixerit posteà p aliquod tempus, quia tunc
potest ipse malefactores detegere, & sic manifestare vel
cognoscere p se, utrum ipse sib ÀÁnglic? vel Francigena,
& sic nullum erit murdi. Ité licét loqui non possit,
nec detegere malefactores, si quis p morte su& confu-
gerit ad ecclesiam & mortem cognoverit, nullum erit
murdri. Ite de iis, qui mortui sunt p infortunium,
nullum erit murdi, licàt in quibusdà partibus de con-
suetudine! aliter observetur, ut si homo mortuus, sub-
mersus, vel oppressus & hujusmodi sine culpa alicujus
inveniatur, nullum erit murdrum, nec deodanda sunt
navis, nec batellus, nec alia catalla de iis qui submersi
sunt in mari, nec in salsa nec in dulci aqua wreccum
eri? cum sit qui catalla advocet & hoc docere poterit.
Ite si in mari, vel in ripa ejus, in flumine publico,
vel in ripa ejus! (& maximé quaten? salsa attigerit)
mortuus inveniatur, null erit murd, niii fort? in terra
occisus in mare vel in flumen mortu? pjiciatur, vel
vivus nequiter sit peipitatus, q quide dici posset de
omni loco publico, qui in nullius bonis esse dicitur,
nisi tantüm in bonis ipsius regis. Si autem locus fue-
rit alicujus universitatis, aliud erit. Nequiter dico, ut
si de submersis & oppressis & hujusmodi denuncietur,
Statim accedant ad mortuum coronatores, antequam
corpora sepeliantur, & mortuum videant, & nihilominus
diligenter inquirant p decennas & villatas accepto


!«]e consuetudine." 'This was | differs considerably in what follows -


abolished by 438 H. IIL, A.D. | from the printed text, although it is
1259. identical in substance
2? The text of MS. Rawl. C. 159


i WV o etc erpmvTo mcer demo wert o. T UP s. LdayEm 7 uro oot t t uo wb EIN NEAREST IPC m SUUM, o LUMNECUTUCNSUT NUS UD Ue S NL esa ET em A d RET
». UP Y :
i t E
-
'


OF THE CROWN. 989


cases following. In the first place the country is ex- country is

eused from the tax upon murder, if the slayer is known, $X605ed
| whether he has been captured or not, because there the der.
| felony can be proved either by & suit or by an inquest


of the country, and so that he may be outlawed. .


Likewise if the slayer has been captured and has 6.
suffered judgment, there will be no murder, because the ria T
felony is proved. Likewise there will be no murder, been cap-
when a person has been wounded to death and has lived eios

afterwards for some time, for then he can discover the der.
malefactors, and so may manifest or make known by
himself, whether he is an Englishman or Frankborn, and
so there will be no murder. Likewise although he
cannot speak nor diseover the malefactors, if any one on
account of the death has fled to a church and made
known the death, there will be no murder. Likewise of
those who have died from misadventure, there will be
no murder, although in some parts from custom it is
" otherwise observed, as if & dead man be found drowned
or suffocaled or such like without any person's fault,
there wil be no murder, nor are the ship nor the boat
nor the chattels of those who are drowned in the sea
deodands, nor will there be wreck either in salt or in
fresh water, when there is any one who can claim the
chattels and can prove it. Likewise if à person be
found dead in the sea or on its shores, in à public river
or on its bank, (and particularly where it meets the salt
water, there will be no murder, unless by chance having
been slain upon the land the dead man has been cast into
the sea or into a river, or when alive has been wickedly
cast into it, which may be said of every publie place,
which is the property of no person, except of the king
himself. I say wickedly, as if information be given con-
cerning the drowned or the suffocated, and such like
persons, let the coroners forth with visit the dead person,
before the body is buried, and let them view the dead body,
and nevertheless diligently inquire amongst the tithings


990 | DE CORONA.


sacramto, si libi sit felonia vel infortunium, & secund
hoc faciat suum officium, & ideó si hujusmodi corpora
sepulta fuerint sine visu coronat, villata erib in mise-
ricordia. ltem in omni casu si occisus notus fuerit &
Anglie?, licbt interfector ignoretur, murdrum erit, nisi
secundüm consuetudinem regni & assisam Englescheria
presentetur & debito modo, quia non refert utrum non
sit omnino presentata. vel minüs rit$, & ideó qualiter.
presentari debeat videndum, est.


^—— ^ . Et sciendum, q statim in ipse inquisitione & cora
im dua coronatorib? psentat Englescheria, sed diversimodé ta-
. Englesche- men, secund diversas consuetudines eofü. In quibusdà
tufaecun. Vero cof psentat Englescheria, sive mortuus fuerit
dum con- mascul? sive foemina, p duos masculos ex parte pfis,
eperudine & p duas foeminas ex parte matris, de propinquioribus
ios paretibus interfecti, qui olim dicebantur to lange! and
Britton, 0 bred. In quibusdam veró coii prsesentatur p unum
li.ch.i. maseulum ex parte patris & p una foeminam ex parte
matris. lte in quibusd comitatib?, secundü quosda, si
" masculus inveniatur interfectus, psentatur Englescheria
p unu masculum ex parte patris, & p un& fcemina ex |
. parte mairis. Et si foemina, modo predicto, p duas
foeminas vel ex parte patris tantüm vel ex parte ma-
iris tantüm, quorum quidem nomina irrotulari debent
" jn rotulis coronatorum, coram justitiat in itinere suo
psentanda, & ubi mutari non possunt persons; nec no-
mina variari, q si conirà faetum fuerit, nulla erit
Englescheria cum si& minüs rité facta, & ideó dabitur
murdrum, & ideó sie pressentatur ui sciri possit utrum
interfect? Anglicus fuerit vel Francigena, pro Anglico


! «to Jong and to bred," MS. Rawl. C.160; *to long to brod," MS.
Rawl. C. 159.


OF THE CROWN. 991


and the vills upon their oaths, if there has been there any


* felony or misadventure, and accordingly perform their


duty, and for this reason if bodies of this kind should
have been buried without the view of the coroner, the
vill shall be amerced. Likewisein all cases if the person
slain is known and is English, although the slayer is un-
known, it will be murder, unless according to the custom
of the realm and the assise Englishery has been presented
and in due manner, because ib does not matter whether
it be not at all presented, or not presented in due manner,
and accordingly we must see how it ought to be pre-
sented.


And it is to be known, that Englishery is forthwith ^ 7. .
presented in the inquest itself and before the coroners, gno way
but in different ways aecording to the different customs English-
of the counties. But in somé counties Englishery isi pe oe.
presented, whether the dead person be a male or a female, sented ac-
by two males on the part of the father, and by two iiie fd
females on the part of the mother, of the nearest, rela- of different
tions of the person slain, who were formerly said ' to accus
* Jange and to bred." But in some counties it is pre-
sented by one male on the side of the father, and by one
female on the part of the mother. Likewise in some
counties according to some, if & male is found to havc
been slain, Englishery is presented by one male on the
father's side, and by one female on the mother's side.
And if a female, in the aforesaid manner, by two females
either on the father's side only, or on the mother's side
only, whose names ought to be enrolled in the rolls of
the coroners, to be presented before the justices on
their circuit, and where the persons cannot be changed,
nor the names varied, but if it be done otherwise, there
wil be no Englishery, since it has been not duly done,
and therefore murder will be assigned, and accordingly
itis so presented, that it may be known, whether the
person slain was English or Frankborn, but for an
Englishman or à person about whom it can be estab-


f. 185 b.


392 ' A DE CORONA.


vero, & de quo constari possit q Anglieus sit, non
dabitur murdrum. Si autem Englescheria nulla sit,
vel minüs rité facta, licet interfectus Anglicus fuerit,
pro Franeigena reputabitur. Si autem dubium fuerit
utrum Anglicus fuerit vel non, & utrum pducti paren-
tes fuerint vel non, hoec p patriam declarabitur. Si
aute plures inveniantur occisi, de singulis p se oportet
Englescheria presentare. Ut sciatur quado Englesche-
ria rii& presentatur & quando non, notandum, quód
$i coram coronatoribus p quatuor & coram justitia? p
duos, vel coronatoribus! per duos, & coram justitiariis
p unum vel ? contrario, nulla erit Englescheria. ltem
si nominibus eorü qui pducti sunt vel eorum psonis
variatu sit, vel erratum coram justitiariis, non valebit
presentatio, eó quód in hoc casu non admittitur vari-
atio. It8 si producti parentes non sint parentes mor-
tui sed extranei, vel si producti sunt parentes, ex
parte patris, ubi quidam illorum produci deberent ex
parte matris & 6ó converso. ltem ubi omnes pduci
deberent ex una parte, produeti sunt ex parte uitrius-
que. ltem ubi plures pduci deberent, pducti sunt pau-
ciores, & é contrario. Et ideó non valet si ibi fuerit
variatio vel defectus. Et quoniam in diversis comita-
tibus diversimode psentatur, inquirendum erit in quo-
libet itinere ab initio quz sit cosuetudo pireestitandi
Englescheriam.


CAP. XVI.


1l. Sunt etii quida, qui, cum capi deberent, fugiunt ad


$i mal-  eeclesig vel aliü locü religiosum vel privilegiatü, & se
fugiuntad tenet in ecclesia, & quo easu nihil mediü est, nisi q
eroe veniant ad pacem díii regis ad standü recto, si quis
debeant — versus eos loqui voluerit, vel q cognoscant maleficium


—


! * ve] coram coronatoribus," MS. Rawl. C. 160,


OF THE CROWN. |... 898


lished that hé is English, murder will not be assigned.
But if there be no Englishery, or it has been not duly
made out, although the person slain has been English, he
shall be taken to be Frankborn. But if it be doubtful
whether he be English or not, and whether his parents
have been produecd or not, this shall be declared by the
country. But if several have been found slain, it is in-
cumbent to present Englishery in each case by itself.
That it may be known. when Englishery is duly pre-
sented, and when not, it is to be noted that 1f 1t be
presented before the coroners by four and before the
| .justices by two, or before the coroners by two and
NE before the justices by one, or the contrary, there will
| be no Englishery. Likewise if there be a variation
in the names of those who are produced or in their
persons, or there be an error before the justices, the
presentment will not be valid, for this reason, because
in this case à variation is not admitted. Likewise if
the parents produced are not the parents of the dead
. man but strangers, or if those produced are parents on
the father's side, when they ought to be those on the
mother's side, and conversely. Likewise when several
ought to be produced, fewer in fact are produced, and the
contrary. And accordingly it is not valid, if there has
been variation or defect. And since in different counties
presentments are made in different manners, it will have
to be inquired in every circuit from the commencement,

what is the eustom of presenting Englishery.


CHAPTER XVI.


There are some persons, who when they ought to be 1.


captured flee to & church or other religious or privileged drca E
place, and keep themselves in the church, and in which refuge in
case there is nothing intermediate, except that they uas
come within the protection of the king to stand their way they


Vrial,if any body wishes to accuse them, or that they Sfess dà


"TREore—


994 DE CORONA.


regnum propter q se tenent in ecclesia, & sic habebit electione.
siehe Et quo casu, si recognito maleficio elegerit regnü ab-
latrocinium jurare, eligere debet portu alique p quem transire pos-
et feloniam.
sit ad terrà aliam extra regnum Anglise, quia non
Bron , tenetur abjurare terrà & potestate regis peisb, sed
tantüm regnü Anglie. Et coputari ei debent rationa-
biles dietzee usq, ad portu illum, & debent ei interdici
f.136. ne exeat regiam viam, nec mora faciat alicubi p duas
noctes, nee alicubi se divertat, nec multüm declinet à
via nisi hoc fuerit ex magna necessitate vel hospitandi
eausa: sed semper tendat recta via ad portü, ita g ibi
sib ad diem sibi datu, & q transfretabit quàm citó
nave habuerit & ventum, nisi tempestate fuerit impe-
ditus, si autem contrà fecerit erit in periculo.


2. Hoc audite, justitiarii, vel Ó vos coronatores, q exibo
xis E à regno Anglie, & illuc iterum non revertar, nisi de
qualiter — licentia diii regis vel hseredum suorum, sic me Deus
| eed ,p 8djuvet, &e. Et in sacramento faciendo, nulla fiat
jurare. — mentio de aliquo impedimento. Sed quid dicetur sibi
Briton, ubi nullum eligere! voluerit portum ? quia sine portu
l.i. ch. xvii. . . . . .
$3. & mari exire poterit usq, in aliud regnum, & tunc non
Fleta,45. incompetenter dici poterit, ubi dicitur, quód elegit

portum, quód elegit transitum, per talem villa, via
quae ducit versus Scotiam, vel Hiberniam, vel alibi:
sed quód cognoscere debeat maleficium, non est semper
necesse, quia subjicere poterit. Si ad ecclesiam confu-
gerib postquàm fuerit per patriam condemnatus, sive
ante judicium sive post, vel si fugerit ad ecclesia cüm
captus fuerit seysitus, & in nullo istorum casuum, cüm
ad ecclesiam confugerit morari poterit in ecclesia p
quadraginta dies, sicut, quidam dicunt, sed statim in


1 * quid di etur, si nullum eligere," MSS. Rawl. C. 160 and 159,


OF THE CROWN. 395


acknowledge the misdeed for which they keep them- duode
selves in the church, and so he shall have an election. knowledge
And in which case, if having acknowledged his misdeed or felony.
he has elected to abjure the realm, he ought to choose

some porb by which he may pass to another land
beyond the realm of England, because he is not bound to

abjure the land and power of the king precisely, but

only the realm of England. And there ought to be
computed for him his reasonable travelling expenses as

far as that pori, and he ought to be interdicted from

going out of the king's highway, and from delayingany-  f.186.
where for two nights, and from entertaining himself any-

where, and from turning aside from the high road except

from great necessity or for the sake of lodging for the

night, but le& him always continue along the straight

road to the port, so that he shall always be there on the
appointed day, and that he shall cross the sea as soon as

he shall find a ship, unless he shall be impeded by the
weather; but if he does otherwise, he shall be in peril.


——


Hear this, ye justices or ye coroners, that I shall go m ". ih,
forth from the realm of England, and shall not return y, heonth,
thither again, except with the license of the lord the they shall
king or of his heirs, so God me help, &c. And in making die cn
this oath, le& no mention be made of any impediment.

But what shall be said, where he has not wished to
choose any port? because he may without a port and
sea go forth into another kingdom, and then it may not
be unfitly said, where it is said that he has chosen a
port, that he has chosen a& passage by such a vill, by
the road which goes to Scotland or Ireland or elsewhere :
but it is not always necessary that he acknowledge the
misdeed, for he may submit. If he has.taken refuge in
the church after he has been condemned by the country,
whether before judgment or after it, or if he has fled to
the church when he has been captured in seysine, and in
none of those cases, when he has fled to the church,
can he remain for forby days in the church, as some


396 | DE CORONA.


adventu justitiariorum vel coronatorum exire debet &
facere legem terre. Spatium veró quadraginta dierum
olim dari solet damnatis per assisam de Clarendone,
qui cüm exire deberent regnum, possent per quad-
raginta dies moram facere & quzrere subsidia amico-
rum,


3. Constitutio quidem talis fuit, quód quamvis aliquis
Quodn9" se purgaret judicio aque vel ignis, hie nihilominüs
rariinec- regnum abjuraret, & habuit spatium illud, occasione


eim us praedicta, quod quidem non est alis concedendum.
ginta dies, Sed quid si ille, qui ad ecclesiam confugerit, exire
8i velit. . . . . . .
Quid tuno Loluerit ab ecclesia, nunquid poterit per vim extrahi
egendum p manum laicalem ? non ut videtur, quia hoc esset
us horribile & nephandum. Videtur igitur quód ordina-
rius loci, sicut archidiaconus vel officialis suus, decanus
vel persona, hoc facere possent & deberent, scilicet
compellere eum exire, quia gladi? debet juvare gla-
dium, & juris executio non habet injuria, & cüm talis.
exire noluerit nisi compulsus, pressumitur vehementer
conira ipsum, q malus sit, & defendere eum in ecclesia
nihil aliud erit, quàm (càüm sit latro public?) maximé
facere contra pacem & contra ipsum regem qui pacem
tueri debet ad securitatem omnium, & si talis exire
compelli non possit, saltem càüm in ecclesia fuerit per
unam noctem ad plus, sic poterit se tenere in ecclesia
per quadraginta dies, & per annum & per biennium, si
hoe fuerit in voluntate malefactoris. Quid igitur fiet
cüm ordinarii timeant irregularitatem & laici excom-
municationem ? nihil aliud ergo video, nisi g tali de-
negentur cibaria, ut gratis exeat & petat q conteptibili-
ter recusavit, & qui tali super hoe cibaria ministraverit,


!* de Clarendone." This assise | A.D. 1166. Art. xiv. relates to ab-
was issued by King Henry II.| juration of the Realm.


OF THE CROWN. 397


Say, but forthwith upon the coming of the justiciaries
or of the coroners he ought to go forth and obey the law
of the land. But the space of forty days was to be
allowed formerly to the condemned according to the assise
of Clarendon, who, when they ought to go forth from the
realm, might have a delay of forty days, and seek the
subsidies of their friends.


The Constitution was of this kind, that although a 3.
person should purge himself by the ordeal of water or SUSht Bot
of fire, he should nevertheless abjure the realm, and he to delay
had that space on the aforesaid occasion, which is not to kat
be conceded to others. But what if he, who has fled to beyond
the church, is unwilling to leave it, can he be dragged ;r i is d
out forcibly by a lay hand? Not, as it seems, for this wishes; ;
would be horrible and unhallowed. It seems therefore then to be
that the ordinary of the place, such as the archdeacon done.
or his official, the dean or the parson, may do this, and
ought to compel him to go forth, for the sword ought to
assist the sword, and the execution of the law works no
injury, and when such a person will not go forth unless
compelled, there is à vehement presumption against him,
that he is an evil person, and to maintain him in the
church will] be nothing else than (when he is a public
robber) to act in the highest degree against the peace,
and against the king himself, who ought to protect the
peace for the security of all, and if the said person cannot
be compelled to go forth, at least when he has been in the
church for one night at most, he may maintain himself
in the church for forty days, and for & year and for two
years, if this be the pleasure of the malefactor. What '
therefore shall be done, when ordinaries are afraid of
irregularity and laymen of excommunication? I see
nothing else, than that they should deny such a person
vietuals, so that he may go forth gratuitously and seek
what he has contemptuously refused, and he, who after this
has supplied victuals to the said person, shall be taken
to be as it were an enemy of the king and a presumer


f. 136 b.


9398 DE CORONA.


tanquam inimicus regis & praesumptor conira pace re-
gis ceseatur, & sic fiat de illis qui debent regnü ab-
jurare & in exiliu mitti.


Est enim divisio triplex ad min?, aut certorü loco-
rum interdictio, sicut pvincise alicujus, civitatis, burgi,
vel villae: imperpet, vel ad temp?, secundüm-" q exposcit
quatitas delicti, secundàüm quod fuerit maj? aut min?.
Item exiliu propter crimen & latà culpam, & omniü
locorü interdictio imperpetuum, & nisi &c. vel in in-
sulam deportatio in ppetuum, vel ad temp?, q quidem.
exilium dici poterit, abjuratio regni, sive utlagatio.
Et si quis it& exulat? exilio no obteperaverit, poena
capitali puniatur, hoc est, si post exiliu tale sine licen-
lia revertatur.


Car. XVII.


De homicidio veró casuali, q multipliciter fieri po--
test, & de quo suprà tactum est, ut si quis telum in
feram mittere volens, vel quid tale egerit, vel si cüm
socius luderet cum socio, & jocosa levitate pcusserit,


vel cüm longiüs staret, arcü traheret, vel lapidem pji-


ceret, & hominem quem non vidit, peusserit, vel si
cum. pila lüderet quis, manü consortis! qué non vidit


n. pila pcusserit, ita qg gulam alicujus psciderit? & sic


homine interfeceritj non tamen cum occidendi animo,
absolvi debet, quia crimen non contrahitur, nisi volun-
tas nocendi intercedat, & voluntas & ppositum distin-
guunt maleficium, & furtum omnino non commitütur
sine affectu furandi. Et secundàüm quod dici poterit
de infante & furioso, cum alterum innocentia consilii


1 consortis." The proper read-
ing is * tensoris," as in the Digest, ? * preciderit."? MSS. eadem, as
and as in MSS. Rawl. C. 160 and | in the Digest.
159.


OF THE CROWN. 999


against the peace of the king, and so let it be done
with all who ought to abjure the realm and be sent into
exile. |


"There is à triple division at least, or a prohibition ^ 4.-
against certain places, as against a province, & city, & division of
borough, or a vill in perpetuity or for a time, according exiles.
as the quality of the delinquency requires, according as
ib has been greater or less. Likewise exile on aecount
of crime and fault committed, and a prohibition against
all places in perpetuity and unless &c., or transportation f. 186 b.
to an island.in perpetuity, or for a time, which may be
.. ealled exile, abjuration of the realm, or outlawry. And
if à, person so exiled has not obeyed his sentence of exile,
let him be punished by capital punishment, that is, if
after such an exile he has returned without license.


CHAPTER | XVII.


But of easual homicide, which may be done in various — 1..
Ways, and which has been touched upon above, as if & MES uad
person wishing to cast a weapon ai a wild beast, or has misadven-
done something of that kind, or if when companion was e n9
playing with companion and has struck him with playful
levity, or when he was standing afar off, he has drawn
& bow or east & stone-and hás struck a man whom he
has nob seen, or when a person was playing with a ball,
he has struck with a ball the hand of à barber, whom
he has not seen, so that he has cut a certain person's
throat, and so killed à man, nevertheless without having
the intention to kill him, he ought to be acquitted, be-
cause à, crime has not been contracted, unless the will of
hurting has intervened, and the will and the purpose
distinguish the misdeed, and a theft 1s never at.all com-
mitted without the intention of thieving. And according
to what may be said of an infant or & madman, when


the innocence of design protects the one, and the imbe-


400 DE CORONA.


ilueatur, & alterum facti imbecillitas excuset. In ma-
leficiis autem spectatur volutas & non exitus, & nihil
interest, occidat quis, an causam mortis prebeat. Sed
ibi distinguitur inter veram causam & infortuniu, de
animalibus qus ratione carent, vel aliis rebus inani-
matis, quz dant occasione, sicut navis, &rbor quz
oppressit, vel hujusmodi. RHRecté autem loquendo, res
firma sicut domus vel arbor radicate, quandoq, non
dant causam nec occasionem, sed facit ille qui se
stulié gerit,nec equus multotiens. ltem nec navis nec
batellus in salsa, licàt in aqua dulci, & hoc p abusio-
nem sicut in multis aliis casibus.


Car. XVIII.
.l Qui pro crimine vel felonia magna, sicut p morte
mdr "hominis capt? fuerit & imprisonatus, vel sub custodia


que non detentus, non debet spoliari bonis suis, nec de terris
Spon suis disseysiri, sed debet inde sustentari, donec de cri-


bonis Sui$, mine sibi imposito se defenderit, vel convict? fuerit,
sed debent : E04. uuo, Ru RR . vid : n E
indesus. quia ante convietione nihil forisfacit, & si quis cótra


tentari hoc fecerit fiat vic. tale breve.


2. Rex vic. salute. Scias q pvisum est in cüria nostra
Brevé ^ eorà nobis, q nullus homo capt? p morte hominis, vel
quod de g pv p


bonissuis pro alia felonia pro qua debeat imprisonari, disseysie-
fU - tur de terris, teftis, vel catallis suis, quousq, convictus
fuerit de felonia de qua .rectatus est: sed quam citó
captus fuerib p visum custodum placitorü coronz nos-
iro, & p visum tuum & ballivorum tuorü & legaliu
hominum, apprecientur catalla ipsius capti, & imbrevi-
entur, & salvó custodiatur p ballivos ipsius qui capi-
tur, & qui bonam inveniant securitatem, de respon-


Wa si GOEMMI SIE, CEN C CR P IESU eis FRAN QU Rr


OF.THE CROWN. 401


cility of the act excuses the other. But in misdeeds
the will is looked at and not the issue, and 1t does not
matter, whether & person slays or supplies the cause of
death. But there it is distinguished between a true
cause and & misadventure, in the case of animals who
are without reason or other inanimate things, which
give occasion,.as & ship, a tree which has crushed a
person, or such like. For rightly speaking a solid thing,


. Such as a house or a tree with roots, do not at any time


give cause or occasion, but he does it who conducts him-
self foolishly, nor a horse on most occasions. Likewise
neither à ship nor a boat in salt water, although [so]
in fresh water, and this by an abuse as in many other
cases.


CHAPTER XVIIT.


. . l.
Whoever has been captured and imprisoned, or de- Of those


tained under custody for a crime or great felony, as for s used.


. the death of a man, ought not to be spoiled of his goods, that they


nor disseysed of his lands, but he ought to be sustained QU£ht not


from them, until he has defended himself from the crime spoiled of
imputed to him, or has been convicted, because before edidi
conviction he forfeits nothing, and if any one has done ought to
; M :; be sus-
otherwise, let such a writ issue to the viscount. tained
| from them.


The king to the viscount greeting. Know thou, that »,
it has been provided in our court before us that no man $* Mise
captured for the death of a man, or for any other felony sustained
for which he ought to be imprisoned, should be disseysed 7» 3s
of his lands, tenements, or chattels until he has been
convicted of the felony, concerning which he has been
accused; but as soon as he has been captured, ihe chat-
tels of the person so captured shall be appraised on the
inspection of the guardians of the pleas of the crown
and on the inspection of yourself and your bailiffs and
loyal men, and shall be inventoried and safely guarded
by the bailiffs of him who is captured, and who shall

VOL. II. | 0€


Tu


f. 137.


2.
Qualiter
captus pro-
duci debet
coram jus-
ticiariis,
et quare
justciari
examinare
debent in
duello in-
jungendo
et judiciis,
Glanville,
Ji. 14. c. 1.
Britton,
l.i.ch.xxiii.
8 11.


402 DE CORONA.


dendo eoram justitia? nostris, cum ab eis exigantur,
salvo tame eidem capto & familie su: necessarim,
quamdiu fuerit in prisona, rationabili estoverio suo, ut
si idem capt? fuerit, et cora justitiariis nostris cóvict?
de felonia unde rectatus est, tune totum residuu catal-
loru illorü (ultra estoveriü illud) remaneat nobis, secun-
düm regni nostri consuetudinem, cum .termino nostro
de terra illa, p unum annu & unü die. Et si coram
Pfatis justitiartis nostris se defendere possit, et purgare
de felonia sibi imposita, tunc catalla sua sibi quiete
remaneant. Et ideó tibi prscipimus, q de estero ita
fieri facias in cofi tuo & observari Et firmiter tibi
phibem?, ne de cztero pdicta occasione manum appo-


nas in terris et catallis alicuj?, qui capt? fuerit pre- .
dicto modo: ne ampliüs inde clamore audiam". Teste,


&ec. De ills aute qui in. fuga sunt, aliter erit, ut
suprà dictum est.


Càm autem taliter captus, coram justitiariis pducend?


fuerit, pduei non debet ligatis manib? (quamvis ali-


quando compedib?, ppter periculü evasionis) et hoe ideó
ne videat coact? ad aliqua purgatione suscipiéda. Cüm
aute pduct? fuerit & de crimine ei imposito accusatus,
Si crimen statim cofiteatur, satis planu erit judiciu. Si
aute negaverit, & crimen defenderit precise, & sit ali-
quis qui eum appellat p verba'/ legittima appellum
facientia, tunc autem defendit oia prscisé qus ei
imponuntur, & nihil excipit cotra appellante, habebit
electione utrum se ponere velit super patriam, utrüu
culpabilis sit de crimine ei imposito, vel non: vel de-
fendendi se p corp? suü. Si autem patriam elegerit,
a&d defensionem p corp? suum ex poenitentia reverti


95 d


: OF THE CROWN. 403


give good security to answer before our justices, when


they shall be required from them, saving only for the cap-


tured person and his necessary family, as long has he is £187.
in prison, his reasonable estover, so that if the said per-
Son be captured and convicted before our justices. of
the felony of which he is accused, then the whole residue
of those chattels (beyond the estover) shall remain to us,
according to the custom of our realm, together with our
term of that land for one year and one day. And if before
our said justices he shall defend himself and clear
himself of the felony imputed to him, then his chattels
Shall remain with him quietly. And therefore we en-
join you, that you otherwise cause this to be so done and
observed in your county. And we firmly prohibit you
not to lay your hand otherwise on the aforesaid occasion
upon the lands and chattels of any one, who has been
captured in the aforesaid manner, that we may not hear
any more complaint about it. Witness &c. But con-
cerning those who are in flight, it will be otherwise, as
has been said.


But when à person so captured is to be produced *
before the justices he ought not to be produced with raptured
his hands bound (although sometimes in leg-irons, on ac- DooNr io -
count of the danger of escape), and for this reason, that produced
he may not seem compelléd to undertake any ordeal, before the

justiciaries,
But when he has been produced and charged with the anà where-
erime imputed to him, if he forthwith confomses tho Sosticteri 5
erime, the judgment wil be plain enough. But if he ought to
should deny, and in precise terms defend himself against bim in en-


ihe crime, and if any one shall appeal him by words joining the
legally founding an appeal, and he then defends himself uci
precisely against everything imputed to him, and makes
no exception against the accuser, he shall have an elec-
tion whether he wishes to put himself upon the country
[on the issue] whether he is guilty of the crime imputed
to him or not, or of defending himself by his own body.
But if he has chosen the country, he cannot return, if he
cc2


COM o oMÁMÁn cms m 0o cM i0


404 DE CORONA.


non poterit, sed p patriam negotiu terminabitur, nec e
eotra. Si autem p corp? suum intret in defensionem,
nihil excipiendo: statim vadietur inter eos duellum, si
oía rità concurrant & principalia maximé appellum
facientia, & quz jungunt duellum, & si fort? appellat? -
hoe omiserit, justitiarii ex officio suo debent oia exa-
minare. Inprimis factu & causam appelli, & si factu
& causa suffieiatb, tune in primis examinare debent
secta, si bené facta fuerit, itbà q nulla sit variatio, ut
si appellans unum dixerit in coià & corà coronatorib^, |
& aliud modó dicat cora justitiariis: non enim admit-
titur hic variatio, secüdüm g inferi? dicetur pleniüs.


AL Si autem oia ben? concurrant que jungunt duellü,
Meses tune dat appellat? vadium se defendendi, & appellator
si appella- vadiii disrationàdi, et si appellat? victus fuerit, capi-
fuit ve] 5al6 subibit sententia, cum exhreredatione & omnium
appellans. bonorü suorü amissione, & sicut esse debet in omni

vel quolibet genere felonie. Si aute appellans victus
fuerit, gaole cómittatur, tenquà calüniator puniend?,
sed nec vità amittit, nec membrü, licét secundüm leges
ad taliones! teneretur, si in pbatione deficeret, et ap-
pellat? quiet? recederet de appello illo, nisi forté justi-
tiarii p aliqua alia suspitione, vel recto, duxerit ulteri?
retinendü: quod aliquàdo faciüt ex causa, sicut cotigit
aliquado de Roberto Brodegh in cof Berk. cora M. de
. Pateshull Et hsec vera. sunt, q appellatus p corp? suü ,
Briton, 8e defendere poterit, eàm appellat? fuerit: nisi aliqua
6 4. ch. Y. violenta psumptio faciat cotra ipsum, quse pbatione no
admittit in cotrariu, p quam dedicere vel defendere
possit morté et felonia, sicut esse potest, cüm quis capt? -
fuerit super mortuu eü cultello eruentato, morté dedi-


——


NE talionem; MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. 405


repents, to a defence by his own body ; nor on the con-
trary. But if he enters upon his defence by his own
body, making no exception, let battle forthwith be
waged between them, if all things duly coneur and the
principal things especially, which constitute an appeal, and
a which join battle; and if by chance the appellee has
omitted this, the justices ought officially to examine
all things, first of all the fact and the cause of the
appeal, and if the fact and the cause suffice, then they
ought in the first place to examine the suit, and if it has
been well eondueted, so that there is no variation, as if
the appellor has said one thing in the county and before
the coroners, and shall say another thing subsequently
before the justices, for à variation is not admitted here,
according to what will be said below. |


But if all things well concur, which join battle, then ue ed ix
the appellee gives securibty to defend himself, and the ing oT
appellor gives security to prove, and if the appellee be vise
vanquished, he shall suffer a.capital sentence with dis- pellor or
herison and the loss of all his goods, and as it ought to theappel--
be in all or any kind of felony. But if the appellor be quished,
vanquished, let him be committed to gaol, to be punished
as & calumniator, but he shall not lose his life nor a limb,
although according to the law he is liable to retaliation,
if he should fail in the proof, and the appellee should
retire quietly from that appeal, unless perchance the jus-
lices for some other suspicion or some other accusation
have thought proper that he should be further detained,
which they sometimes do for & cause shown, as hap-
pened onee concerning Robert Brodegh, in the county
of Berks, before Martin de Pateshull. And these things
are true, that the appellee may defend himself by his
body, when he has been appealed ; unless some violent
presumption makes against him, which does not admit of
any proof to the contrary, by which he can disprove or ,
defend the [imputed] death or felony, as can be the case, —
when a person has been captured on a dead body with a


406 DE CORONA.


cere nó poterit, & hse est costitutio antiqua, in quo
easu non est opus alia pbatione In quo easu non .est


f.187 5, necesse pbare p ceorp?, nec p patriam, ubi psumptio


5.
Ne quis
extraneum
hospitetur,
nisi clara


. die.


violeta facit cotra appellatum. liem si quis jacuerit
in domo aliqua de nocte, solus cum aliquo qui fuerit
interfectus, vel si duo ibi fuerint vel plures, & hute-
sium non levaverint, nec plagam à latronibus vel aliis
qui interfecerint in defensione facienda no receperint,
vel nec quis homine interfecerit ostenderint de se vel


de aliis, mortem dedieere non poterunt, ut de termino


Saneti Michaelis aii regni regis H. nono incipiéte de-
cimo in comitat Kanc. de Adam de Burgh. Eodem
modo feré dici poterit (ut videtur) si quis in domum
sua notum vel ignotum receperit hospitandi causa, vel
alia hujusmodi, & qui sanus & vivus visus fuit intrare,
& nunquà posteà nisi mortuus, domin? domus (si tune
domi fuerit) vel alii de familia, qui tune preesentes fue-
runt, poena capitalem non evadent, nisi forté p patriam
fuerint liberati, si justitiarii perspexerint veritatem p
patria debere inquiri.


Et p hac suspitione costitutum est, ne quis exiraneu
hospitetur nisi de clara die, nee pmittat eum recedere
nisi de clara die, & hsc etia psumptio maximé esse
poterit, u& si dominus & homo suus jaeuerint in una


. domo, & dominus inventus fuerit occisus, homo tenebi-


tur, qui nec clamorem levavit, nec plaga recepit, nec
in aliquo se opposuit ad defensionem. Et idem dici
poterit de extraneo, quia vix evadere poterit piculum
p inquisitionem patriz, ppter tam gravem psumptionem
datam de tam occulto facto. Sed cüm patria verita-
iem seire non possit de tam occulto facto, qualiter


OF THE CROWN. 407


bloody knife, he cannot gainsay the death, and this is
an ancient constitution, in which case there 1s no need of
other proof. In which case itis not necessary to prove f. 137 b.
by one's body or by the country, where a violent pre-
sumption makes against the appellee. Likewise where a
person has lain in any house during the night, alone with
some one who has been slain, or two or more have been
therein, and have not raised & hue, nor have received
any wound in defence from robbers or others who have
slain & person, nor have shown of themselves or by
others who has slain the person, they.cannot gainsay
ihe death, as.in the term of St. Michael, in the ninth
and tenth years of the reign of king Henry, in the
county of Kent, concerning one Ádam de Burgh. In the
same manner almost it may be said (as ib seems), if any
one has received into his house a known person ora
Stranger as a guest or for some similar cause, and who
was seen to enter the house well and alive, and never
afterwards but dead, the owner of the house (if he was
then at home), or others of his family, who were then
present, shall not escape capital punishment, unless they
are perchance set free by the country, if the justices
have seen proper that the truth should be nisse into
by the country.

And on account of this suspicion i5 was ordained, that

" no

no one should receive a stranger as & guest except in one receive
broad daylight, nor allow him to go away except in piisep e
broad daylight, and this' presumption may be very aaylight.
strong, as if à master and his man have lain in a house,
and the master has been found slain, the man shall be
detained, who has neither raised a cry, nor received a&
wound, nor in any respect has exposed himself in his
defence. And the same may be said of & stranger, be-
cause he can scarcely escape peril by an inquest of the
couniry on aecount of so grave a presumplion arising
from so secret an act. But when the country cannot know
ihe truth respecling so secret an act,in what manner


!


408 |J. DE CORONA.


liberabitur ille, qui sup patriam se posuerit? Revera
satis liberat, quia expresse. non codemnat, sicut dici
poterit de charta, cüm satis acquietat ex quo specialit
non onerat, ltem poterit factü esse tam occultum,
quód secta sib nulla vel min? rit? facta, tamen calum-
niari non poterit, quia initium facti sciri non poterit,
sicut de veneno dato, & quo casu, non habebit appel-
lat? electione utrum se ponere velit super patria, vel
defendere se p corp? suum: sed oportet quód defendat
Se p corpus suum, quia patria nibil scire poterit de
facto, nisi p psumptionem & p auditum, vel p manda-
tum, quod quidem non sufficit ad probationem p appel-
lante nec p appellato ad liberationem, nisi sit qui
dicat (ut suprà) quód satis liberatur, ex quo non eon-


demnatur. Admittitur tamen ex necessitate, quód ap-


» pellatus habebit electionem ppter inconveniens quod


f. 188.


l.
De quibus
loqui de-
beat ap-
pellans.


2.
De appello
de morte
hominis.


sequeretur, quia si semper teneretur se defendere p
corpus, ita posset quilibet in tali facto alium appellare
per campionem conducetivum, quod non est sustinen-.
dum.


Car. XIX.


In omni veró causa criminali, quee sub se cótinet
feloni&, in appello debet fieri mentio de anno, de loco, '
de die, & hora. Loqui oportet etiam de visu & de
auditu. Ite q appellans.costans sit in dieto suo, & in
omnib? circustantiis, secundüm q inferiàs dicetur de
exceptionib?. "Verba aute appelli sunt hsec.


A. appellat B. p talia verba, de morte fratris sui, &
Si ipse defecerit, tunc p tale, & it& q sunt plures de


OF THE CROWN. 409


shall he be set free, who puts himself upon the country ?
In truth it sets him free enough, because it does not ex-
pressly condemn him, as may be said of à deed, that it
releases sufficiently, if it does not specially charge. Like-
wise an act may be done so secretly, that no suit can be
made or none can be duly made, nevertheless a charge
cannot be brought, because the commencement of the act
cannob be known, as in the case of poison being adminis-
tered, and in which case the appellee shall not have an
election, whether he will put himself on the country, or
defend himself by his own body, but it is incumbent.
that he defend himself by his own body, for the country
can know nothing concerning the act, except upon pre-
sumption or on hearsay, or by a mandate, which does not
suffice for proof for the appellant, nor for the appellee
for his release, unless there is some one who says (as
above), that he is. sufficiently released, since he is not
condemned. It is admitted, however, of necessity, that |
the appealed should have an election on account of the
inconvenience which would follow, because if he was
always bound to defend himself by his body, any one in
such a case would be able to appeal another by a hired
champion, which is not £o be endured.


CHAPTER XIX.


In every criminal cause, however, which comprises in 1.
itself felony, mention ought to be made in the appeal midi
concerning the.year, the place, the day and the hour. It ing what
ought likewise to speak from sight and from hearsay. e.
So that the appellant be consistent in his saying and in RENE to.

all the circumstances, aecording to what will be said Spese
below concerning exceptions. But the words of the


appeal are these.


A. appeals B. in such words concerning the death of / 2.
his brother, and if he should fail, then by such an one eden TR
and so that there are several concerning one and the cerning


8.
Quod pos-
sunt plures


410 DE CORONA. .


uno & eode facto. A. appellat B. de morte C. fratris
sui quód sicut ipse A. & C. frat su? essent in pace
Dei & dni regis apud tale locu, faciendo quoddà& tale,
vel transiendo à tali loco usq, ad talera locu, tali die,
tali anno, & tali hora: venit idem B. cum talib? nomi-
nandis, & nequiter & in felonia & in assultu pmedi-
lato, & cotra pace dni regis ei data, fecit ide B. pdicto
fratri suo C. una plagà mortale in capite quodà gladio,
vel aliquo alio genere armoru molutorü, dum tame
non de baculo nec lapide, vel alio instrumento (secun-
düm quosda) q dici non possit armü molutü, ita qd'
obut infra triduu de plaga illa. Et quód fecit hoc
nequiter, & in felonia, & cotra paese dii regis, offert se
disrationare versus eum ubicunq, p corpus suü: sicut
ille qui praesens fuit, & hoc vidit, & sicut curia .düi
regis cosiderat. Et si de eo malé cotigerit, p corp?
talis fratris sui vel alterius parentis C. qui similiter
hoc offert disrationare p corp? suum, sieut curia cosi-
deraverit: & sic ulteriüs de plurib? aliis, s$i de tali
malé contigerit. Etí qui omnes loquatur de visu suo
sine testimonio, quód plures possut appellare unü de
uno & eode facto, et eode vulneré. Et si appellat?
versus unü ex plurib? se defenderit, vel p judicium
quiet? recesserit, versus omnes alios liberabitur, &
quiet? recedet. Sed si un? appellantiü moriatur, vel
defalta fecerit, nihilominüs. tame integra erunt alioru
appella. Ite si de primo appellante, quocunq, modo,
vel quibusda illorü malé contigerit, illi qui superstites
fuerint ad disratione facienda admittutur. Possunt
etia plures appellari p eosdé de fortia, secüdüm q
inferiüs dicetur.


Ite possunt plures appellari à plurib? de diversis
factis & plagis diversis, & quo casu, vietoria uni? ap-


OF THE CROWN. 411


same act. A. appeals B. concerning the death of his the death
brother, that just as A. himself and C. were in the peace icuLEL
of God and of the lord the king in such a place, whilst
doing a certain thing, or passing from such a place to
such a place, on such à day, in such a year, at such an
hour, the said B. came with such persons to be named
and wickedly and feloniously and with a premeditated
assault and against the peace of the lord the king
granted to him, the said B. inflicted on his said brother
C. à mortal wound in the head with a certain sword or
some other sort of edged weapon, provided 1t be not with
& stick, nor a stone, nor some other instrument according
to some, which cannot be called an edged weapon, so
that he died within the third day of that wound. And
that he did this wickedly and feloniously and contrary
to the peace of the lord the king, he offered to prove
this against him anywhere whatsoever by his body,
according as he, who was present and saw it, and ac-
cording as the court of the lord the king shall adjudge
it. And if it happens ill with him, by the body of so
and so his brother or some other relation of C. who in
like manner offers to prove it by his own body, as the
court shall adjudge, and so further by several others, if
it should happen ill with so and so. And all of whom
speak from their own eyesight without hearsay, so that
several may appeal one person for one and the same act
and the same wound.  Ànd if the appellee has defended
himself against one out of several, or has retired acquitted
by à judgment, he will be set free against all and will
retire acquitted. But if one of the appellants dies or
makes default, nevertheless the appeals of the others
will be undisturbed. Likewise, if concerning the first
appellant in any way or concerning any of them it has
fared ill, those who survive are admitted to prove.
Severalalso may be appealed by the same persons for
being accessories, aecording to what shall be said below.


Likewise several persons may be appealed by several Th d
concerning different acis and different wounds, and in several


412 DE CORONA.


appellari, pellati de una plaga versus unü appellatiü, aliü appel-
deus uPU5 atum de alia plaga versus aliü appellátem non libera-
alterius. — bit, sed nec ali appellati de diversis plagis covincuntur

si un? eoru victus fuerit, sed quilibet eorum defendet
causam $uà ppria, & sunt verba appeli hujusmodi


hzc.


as "" A. appellat B. quód cüm ipse & C. frater su? essent
pelli e in pace Dei & regis, &c. (ut suprà). venit idem B. cum
Orso C. supradicto appellato, & cum alis nominandis, &
, vel ; : ue á
din nequiter & in felonia, &c. (ut suprà) fecit eidé C. una


plaga mortale tali loco, quada bisacuta, & de qua (si


mortuus non esset de prima) mortu?. esset de plaga |


ila secüda, & quód hoc feció nequiter, & in felonia,
offerb se, &c. (ut suprà). Et ita dici poterit de pluri-
bus appellatis & appellatib^ de diversis plagis, sicut
- dietü est de pdietis qui psentes sunt. Si omnes psen-
tes sint tam de fortia quàm de facto, peedatur cotra
omnes p ordiné: dum tame ill de fortia non respo-
deant, antequam factum covincatur. Si aute omnes


tam de fortia quàm de facto absentes sint, tunc pce-


datur cotra eos p ordine, ut suprà pleniüs de require-
dis reis & fugitivis. Si autem quida illorum prezesentes,
& quidam absentes sunt, tune per ordinem pcedatur,
it& tamen quód factum priüs convincatur.


f 13985. ldem A. appellat tale de fortia, q càm ipse & C.
fraí suus essent in tali loco, &e. ut suprà, venit ide


b.
Tim apPel- (lis eum jdieto B. appellato de facto, s. et, cum aliis


]um de e
fortia. ^ nominàdis, et tenuit ipsu C. fratre suii, quadiu ide B.


ipsum intfecit, vel vinxit eum, vel fuit in auxilio vel


cosilio qualieüq, modo, vel peepto, vel mandato quo


Eu quem


" o0F THE CROWN. 418


which case the victory of one of the parties appealed persons,
for one wound in respect of one of the appellants, shall debi


not aequit another party appealed for another wound in Sppeaed
or ihe


respect of another appellant, nor are the others who are acath ofa


appealed for different wounds convicted, if one of them man.
has been vanquished, but each must defend his own
proper cause, and the words of the appeal are of this
kind.


ÀÁ. appeals B., that when he and his brother were in 4.
the peace of God and of the king &c. (as above) the Erde
said B..came with the said C., the appellee, and with pealcon-
others to be named, and wickedly and feloniously &c. abris od
(as above) inflicted on the said C. one mortal wound in brother,.or
such & place, with & certain sharp cutting weapon, and iru
from which, if he had not died of the first, he would
have died of the second blow, and that he did this wickedly
and feloniously, he offers himself &e. (as above) And
so ib may be said concerning several appellees and ap-
pellants concerning different wounds, as has been said
concerning the aforesaid, who are present. If all are
present, the principals and the accessories, let the pro-
ceedings be against all in order, provided the accessories


. are not called upon to answer, before the fact is proved.


But if all are absent, as well accessories as principals,
then let proceedings be taken against them in order, as
has been stated above concerning requisitions of de-
fendants and fugitives. But if some of them are present
and some absent, then let proceedings take place in order,
provided, however, that the fact be first proved.


The same Á. appeals so and so as an accessory, that f. 138 b.


when he and his brother C. were in such a place &c. as L9...
above, the said so and so came with the aforesaid D., an appeal
who is appealed as a principel, and with others named, and PPS tr


held his brother C., until the said B. slew him, or bound
him, and was helping or counselling in some way either


by precept or mandate, so that C. himself was slain.


4


6.
Qualiter
debent ap-
pellati de-
fendere.


414 DE CORONA.


maj? ipse C. fuit intfect?. Et q hoc fuit nequit & in
felonia, offert se, &c. Et ideó dico nequit, quia mul-
totiens illi qui nequit inificiuntur, vel occidütur, tenti
sunt ab amicis bono animo, & no p malitia: et ideó
tutum & honestu est de animo & voluntate diligent
inquirere. ' |


Et B. appellatus de facto similit venit, & defendit
omne felonià & pace diii regis infractam, & quicquid
est coira pace dni regis, & morte & oia quse versus
ipsum pponütur, & totü de verbo in verbü secundüm
q cotra ipsum pponitur, et tune habebit electioné po-
nédi se sup patria, vel defendendi se p corp? suü: sic
dicendo: Et g ide inde culpabilis no sit, ponit se sup
patria de bono & malo (si patria elegerit) vel parat?
est defendere versus eum p corp? suu, sicut curia dni
regis consideraverit. Et in quo casu, eüm se defen-
derit p corp? suum, debet justitiari? inprimis exami-
nare, ad hoc q jungatur duellu inter eos (nisi factum
fuerit manifestü & criminale), quale sit factum, & quse
causa p qua& fit appellu. Poterit enim factu esse ita
leve, quód no jacebit appellu, ut si levis, transgressio
sit, vel si simplex injuria. lté examinare debet p qus
verba factum sit appellum in curia vel in com. Item
qualit respodit ad appellum, et qualit se defendere
voluerit, p corp? vel p patriam. Vel si ita simpliciter
dicat, quód velit se defendere sieut curia dii regis
eonsideraverit, nisi plus dieat, non erit defensus, quia
non ptinet ad curia regis instruere eum, qualiter se
defendere debeat. Si auté sic dicat, parat? sum defen-
dere, vel p corp? meum vel p patriam, sicut curia düi
regis consideraverit, videtur per hoc quód auferat sibi
electionem, quia non debet curia regis ipsum arctare
magis àd unum quàm ad aliud, nec ei necessitatem
imponere quomodo se defendere debeat, cüm habeat
electione. - Igitur ad unum se tenere debet, sed cüm


-


OF THE CROWN. 415


And that this was done wickedly and feloniously, he
offers himself &c. And for this reason I say wickedly,
because on many occasions those who are slain or killed
wickedly, have been held by their friends with good in-
teritions:and not from malice, and therefore it is safe and
honest to inquire concerning the mind and intention.


And B. who is appealed as a principal comes in like — 6€.
manner, and counterpleads all the felony, and the break- dct
ing of the peace of the lord the king, and whatever is pealed
| against the peace of the king, and the death and every iis n ^m

thing which is propounded against him, and the whole defence.
word for word according as it is propounded against
him, and then he shall have an election of putting him-
self on the country or of defending himself by his body,
saying thus, and that the said person is not guilty
thereof, he puts himself upon the country for good or
for evil (if he has chosen the country), or he is ready to
defend himself by his body against the accuser, as the
court of the lord the king shall determine. And in
which case, when he defends himself with his own per-
son, the justice ought first to examine, in order that
battle should be joined betwixt them (unless the act be
manifest and criminal) what is the quality of the act,
and what the cause for which there is the appeal For
the act& may be so slight that an appeal will not lie, as
if the trespass be light, or the injury simple. Likewise
he ought to examine by what words the appeal has been
made in the court or in the county. Likewise in what
. way he answered the appeal, and in what way he wished
to defend himself, by his body or by the country. Or
if he has simply said, that he wishes to defend himself
as the court of the lord the king considers proper, it
seems that through this he takes away from himself the
choice, because the court of the king ought not to con-
fine him more to one than to the other, nor to impose
upon him a necessity as to how he should defend himself,
when he has an election. "Therefore he ought to keep


416. | A DE CORONA.


patriam elegerit, non erit in voluntate sua quam, pa-
tria, sed in voluntate judicis, licet ex certis causis! cer-
tas possit recusare psonas quàcumq, patria elegerit, ut
Si patrià nativitatis, & alibi extra patria sua delique-
rib. Poterit enim esse fidelis in patria nativitatis; &
alibi infidelis.


id T. Item eàm p corp? se defendere elegerit, p hoc qd'
declinare  Urànsiit setate, declinare poterit duellum, sicut infrà
noluerit dicet de exceptionib^: sed càüm semel sic duellu decli-
per hoc, . . . . .

' quod tran- Dàverit, si ex poenitentia recurrere voluerit ad defen-
sit tatém. sjon& p corp?, no audietur, quia non admittitur in hoc


easu variatio.


8. Cüàüm aute elegerit defensione p corpus suum, & oia

Si omne$ (e5eurrant qug) jungunt appellü, statim vadietur duellu,
concur- $ . . :

runt qii & quo casu si à plurib? appellat? fuerit de uno facto

jJumu., «& una plaga, et versus unum se defenderit, recedet
ppellum, . : E

statim va-. quiet? versus omnes alios appellantes, et etia de secta

diea, Tegi$, quia p hoc purgat innocentiam suam versus

omnes, àc si se poneret sup patriam, & patria omnino

ipsum acquietaverit. Si autem neutrum istorum facere


voluerit, quasi convictus & indefensus remanebit.


Jo 9. Item cüm plures sic appellaverint unum de uno facto,
SiPlues & de una plaga, & primus appellans post duelli vadia-


Ej qon tionem, antequam  percutiatur, moriatur, vel sine sui
Eod culpa inutilis ad pugnandum efficiatur, vel si de eo
factis, sicut humanitüs contigerit, ille qui superstes fuerit disratio-
plagis ^" nabit, & ad diem duelli, quo ille primus venire debuit,
f.199. veniat armatus, & eode die duellü peutiat, & ita fiat
de pluribus appellantib? sicut. de isto secundo, si de


1 ** certa causa," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. 417


himself to one, but when he has chosen the country, it
will not be at his option what country, but at the option
of the judge, although he may refuse certain persons for
certain eauses, whatever country he may have chosen, as
if [he has chosen] the country of his birth, and he has
been a delinquent elsewhere than in his own country.
For he may have been faithful in the country of his
birth, and elsewhere unfaithful.


Likewise when he has chosen to defend himself with 7
his own person, he may decline battle, because he has ieri
passed the age, as will be explained below concerning battle, be-
exceptions, but when he has thus once declined battle, if sem
on repentance he wishes to have recourse again to athe age.
defence with his own person, he shall not be listened to,


because a variation is not admitted in this case.


But when he has chosen a defence with his own person,
let battle be at once waged, and in which case, if he shall Ii io
have been appealed by several persons for one act andj ns Eh
one blow, and he defends himself [successfully] against j* TAL acts
one person, he shall retire acquitted against all the other d
appellors, and even upon the suit of the king, because by ^ ^ -
this he purges his innocence against them all, as if he
had put himself upon the country, and the country had
altogether acquitted him. But if he is not willing to do
either of these, he shall remain as it were convicted and
undefended.


Likewise when several have so appealed one person for, 9.
one act, and for one wound, and the first appellant after pAcsons M
the wager of battle dies before he is struck, or with- xs o
out any fault of his own is rendered useless for fighting, de for
or if any human casualty befalls him, he who has sur- ipo
vived shall derayne, and on the day of the battle, on àifferent
which the first of them ought to have come, shall come Vo2"s
armed, and on the same day shall begin the battle, and .
so let it be with several appellors, as with the second of


VOL. il. DD


418 DE CORONA.


alis aliquid contingat humanitüs. Si auté ille prim?
appellans sequi noluerit & defaltà fecerit, vel si psens se
retraxerit, aliud erit.


, 10. Si autem ante duellum percussum omnes mori con-
red tgerit, vel omnes efficiantur inutiles ad pugnandü, sic
pereussum cadit appelluü. Sed tamen appellatus ppter hoe non
vellauteo. defenditur à felonia, licó& defendatur de appello. Et
mori con- jdeó rex sequi possit p pace sua, si voluerit. Si auté
tingat. x . . . .

ante duellum pereussum appellatü mori eontigerit, sic
cadit appellü, & nüquam convincentur de felonia. Si
autem appellat? ab uno ex plurib? sic appellantibus
vict? fuerit, hoc aliis sufficiet, ad victoriam, quia p
unum appellantem convinci poterit unicum factum &
una felonia. Cüm aute primus appellans unum sic
appellaverit de uno facto, & aliu vel plures de forcia,
& de consilio vel peepto, statim ante duellum vadia-
tum appellatus de facto non est p plegios dimittendus,
nisi hoc fuerit de gratia, & tunc p ballium, s. corpus
p corpore, & appellati de forcia sunt replegiabiles,
donec ille de facto convincatur, vel se defenderit: &
pereusso duello, si appellans victus fuerit, illi de forcia
& peepto p judicium recedent quieti de appello, quia
ubi factum nullum, ibi forcia nulla, nee peeptu nocere
debet, càüm injuria nullum habet effectum, & aliis ap-
pellantibus respondere non debet, ut pdictu est, de
uno & eodem facto, de quo semel se defenderit versus
unum.


T u Si autem appellatus de facto victus fuerit, tune
ippellatüó primó tenentur respondere appellati de forcia & pcepto,


OF THE CROWN. 419


them, if any human casualty befalls the others. But if
the first of them has been unwilling to follow i& up and
has made default, or if being present he has retracted, it
will be a different thing.


But if before the battle is begun it should have hap- 5. uu
pened for all [the appellors] to die, or all are rendered refore the
useless for fighting, the appeal so falls to the ground. erect
But nevertheless the party appealed is not on that the appel-
account defended from the felony, although he is de- is AL e
fended from the appeal. And accordingly the king may
prosecute him for his peace, if he so wills. But if before
the battle is commenced the person appealed has hap-
pened to die, the appeal is at an end, and they will never
be convicted of felony. But if the party appealed has
been vanquished by one out of several such appellors,
this will suffice for à victory to the others, for a single
act and a single felony may be proved to conviction by
2 single appellor. But when the first appellor has thus
appealed one person for one aet, and another or several
as accessories in the way of force and of counsel or pre-
cept, the person appealed for the act is not forthwith to
be dismissed upon sureties before the battle is waged,
unless this be done of grace, and then by bail, that is
body for body, and the persons appealed as accessories
are bailable, until the principal has been convicted, or
has defended himself: and after the battle is commenced,
if the appellor has been vanquished, those, who are ap-
pealed as accessories by force or by counsel, shall by the
judgment retire aequitted of the appeal, for where there
is no act, there neither force nor counsel can be accessory,
since the injury has had no effect, and he ought not to
, answer ihe other appellors, as already said, concerning
one and the same act, concerning which he has defended
himself successfully against one appellor.


But if the person appealed for the act has been van- E
quished, then the parties appealed as accessories by force 44. party
DD2


4290 DE CORONA.


vietus — nec ulteriüs erunt replegiabiles, quia cüm faetu con-
facto,tuno Victum sit, tunc primó psumi poterit q subfuit forcia
demum — & Dceeptu, & ideó respondeant eodem die, & eode die
abide ge vadietur duellum inter primum appellantem & appel-
e gie latos de forei& vel peepto, seceundüm q p ordinem po-
CEDO siti sunt in appello, ita quód ille primó de forcia, &
postea ille de peepto, quia forcia quodammodo sub se
continet factum, quod quidem non facit preceptum.
Sed quare non possunt alii appellàtes à primo & prin-
eipali appellante, eo omisso, jungere duellum cum ap-
pellatis de foreia & precepto? Et est ratio (ut vide-
tur) quia forcia & preceptum sunt quasi sequela facti
principalis, & ite sunt conjuneta facto & annexa, q à
facto non separantur, quia vuln?, foreia & prseceptum
generant unicum factum: non esset vulnus fort?, si non
adfuisset forcia, nec vuln? nee forcia nisi preceptum


preecessisset.


, 12. Contingit etiam quandoq, quód plures appellant unum
ebd de morte alicujus, de pluribus factis & diversis plagis
pellaverint mortalibus, & quo casu, plura sunt appella & diversa,
ads propter pluralitatem factorum: & unde quilibet eorum
pluribus poterit de una plaga mortali appellare unum principa-
Phi ^ liter sine aliis per se, & alios plures de foreia & prcw-

cepto. Poterit etiam alius à primo appellare alium de
alia plaga mortali & alio facto, & eodem modo sicut
primus, & ita deinceps de diversis plagis, tertius ter-
tium, & quartus quartum, & sie plures deinceps, &
eodem modo. Et de verbis appelli satis dictum est
suprà, sed tamen appellatus omnibus appellantibus


f.189b. simul & semel respondere no poterit quamvis omnib?


OF THE CROWN. 491


or by counsel are bound for the first time to answer, nor Appeoued
shall they be further bailable, for when the act has been ?9: ihe


as

proved, then for the first time it may be presumed that been van-
there has been force or counsel in support of it, and qu
therefore let them answer on the same day, and on the proceed-
same day let battle be waged between the first appellor Pkt 2
and the appellees for force or for counsel, according to Vni "s
the order in which they are placed in the appeal, so that force or by
| the one first of all for force, and afterwards the other for counsel.

counsel, for foree somehow or other comprises under it

an act, which counsel does not do. But why may not

the other appellors after the first and principal appellor,

if he be omitted, join battle with the appellees for force

and for counsel? And the reason (as it appears) is

because force and counsel are as it were the accompani-

ments of the principal act, and are so conjoined with and

annexed to the act, that they are not separable from the

act, because the wound, the force, and the counsel give

birth to a single act: there would not perhaps be a

wound, if force were not assisting, nor a wound nor force,


unless counsel had preceded.


It happens also sometimes, that several appeal one 12.
person for the death of some one, resulting from several m
acts and divers mortal wounds, and in which case there pealed one
are several and divers appeals, on aecount of the diversity nnd. the
| of acts; and hence each of them may appeal one person death of
concerning one mortal wound principally without others pum
by himself, and others concerning force and counsel, vounds.
Another person from the first may likewise appeal an-
other concerning another mortal wound and another
act, and in the same way as the first, and so in succession
concerning different wounds, à third may appeal a third,
and a fourth a fourth, and so several in succession and
in the same manner. And sufficient has been said above
concerning the words of an appeal, but nevertheless the
party appealed cannot answer at once and together to


all the appellors, although he is bound to answer them f. 139 b.


499 DE CORONA.


prineipaliter respondere teneatur. Oportet igitur quód
uni respondeat primó, & sic deinde aliüs p ordinem
suecessivé.  Respondeat igitur appellatus À. qui prim?
est in ordine appellantium, & ipse excipiat contra ip-
sum, & petat sibi allocationes fieri, & quo casu, si
appellat? appellum declinaverit versus À. primum ap-
pellantem, ppter hoe non cadunt appella. aliorum, sed
eodem die respondeat secundo appellanti, & si eodem
modo appellum ipsius declinaverit, respondeat tertio
eodem die, & sie fiat de pluribus & quamdiu aliquis
remanserit principaliter appellans, non erit recurrendum
ad sectam dni regis, nisi tunc demu cüm omnes appel-
lantes defecerint in appello suo.


13. Si autem unus plures appellaverit de diversis plagis
à unus mortalibus, & de diversis factis in forma supradicta, &
Pellaverit primus appellatus appellum  declinaverit, recedet ille
dediversis quiet? p judicium, & similiter appellati de forcia &
plagis mor- 2
talibus, — precepto de eode facto, quantum ad appellum tale,
non tamen quantum ad sectam regis, si rex sequi vo-
luerit. Si autem appellans appellatum  devicerit p
duellum, vel p patriam, & adhuc tenet appellum ver-
sus alios principaliter appellatos de aliis & diversis
plagis, & etiam versus alios appellatos de forcia &
peepto de prima plaga & primo facto quos quide om-
covincere oportebit, antequà regressum habeat appellans
versus alios principaliter appellatos de facto & alis &
diversis plagis: & omnib? istis ita covietis, p ordine
pcedatur versus alios quousg, omnes se defenderint vel
eovineant, & sic erunt plura & diversa appella ppter
diversa facta. )


OF THE CROWN. 4293


allas principals. It behoves therefore that he answer
one first of all, and so the others successively in order.
Let the party appealed therefore answer À. first of all,
who is the first in the order of the appellors, and let
him except against him, and let him ask for alloca-
tions to be made to him, and in which case, if the party
appealed shall have declined the appeal against À. the
first appellor, the appeal of the others does not fall
to the ground on that account, but let him answer on the
second day the second appellor, and if in the same way
he shall have declined his appeal, let him answer to the
third appellor on the same day, and so let it be done
with several, and as long as any principal appellor re-
mains, recourse is not to be had to the suit of the lord
the king, unless then at length wheu all the appellors
have failed in their appeal.


But if one has appealed several concerning different
mortal wounds and concerning different acts in the form
&bove said, and the first party appealed has declined the
appeal, he shall retire acquitted by the judgment, and in
a similar manner those appealed for force or for counsel
concerning the same acit, as far as regards such appeal,
but not as regards the suit of the king, if the king
wishes to prosecute. But if the appellor has vanquished
the appellee by battle or by the country, and he still
maintains his appeal against others appealed as prin-
cipals concerning other and divers wounds, and likewise
against others appealed concerning force and counsel re-
garding the firs& wound and the first act, all of whom it
will behove to convict, before the appellor has recourse
against others appealed as principals concerning the act
and other and different wounds; and upon all these
being thus convicted, let proceedings be taken in order
against the others until all have defended themselves
or are convieted, and thus there will be several and
divers appeals on account of divers acts.


13.
If one has
appealed
several
concerning
different
mortali
wounds


424 DE CORONA,

1.
Quod ap-
pellatus
det ABS Cap. XX.
um de- '
fendendi, : :
et ipie: Cum autem appellatus fuerit quis p verba appellum
ud. facientia, defensor sive appellat? det vadiu defendendi,
disratio- — & appellator vadiu disrationandi, nisi appellatus excep-
Papers ^ tiones habeat p se, quas pponat ad defensionem suam,
tionibus antequam iniret in responsum.
contra ap-
pellum.

2.
P pud quw» Sunt quida exceptiones quz generales sunt ad om-
exceptiones Dià appella, & sunt speciales & diverse, secundüm
dies, diversitatem appellorum, sieut, de morte hominis, de
ad omnia pace & plagis vel mahemio & roberia. ltem de pace
pepe & plagis & imprisonafüto. Item de roberia p se. ltem
speciales et de cobustione p feloniam cotra pacem. ltem de raptu
i virginum, cotra pacem, & contra quodlibet istoru appel-
diversita- loru speciales sunt exceptiones in suo casu.
tem placi-
deg et
aüppei-
xr. Est quidem ista generalis exceptio & prima in omni
Prima ex- appello, s. si secta non fuerit ben? faeta, quia qui ap-
vdheras pellare voluerit & benà sequi, debet ille, cui injuriatü


inomni erit, statim quàm citó poterit hutesium levare, & cum
appello de JP" . -- " . e, *
secta, s;  hutesio ire ad villas vicinas & propinquiores, & ibi
i m manifestare scelera & injurias perpetratas, & continuó
legemterre &ccedere debet ad servientes domini regis, si inveniri
faeta sit. possint, & deinde &d coronatores, & sic inde sine inter-
f.140. vallo &d proximum cof vel si in crastino felonie
ppetrate, vel secundo die teneatur cof, sufficit p secta,

dum tamen pcesserit hutesium, si ad com venerit, ser-
vientibus & coronat non quzsitis, quia die com tenen-

tur omnes adesse. Ite suffiit p secta, si continuó


ostendatur regi vel justit, si prsesentes fuerint, scelera


MB orn A —— vn


OF THE CROWN. 425


1.
The ap-
CHAPTER XX. Pen co guo
defend
But when & person has been appealed by words con- himself,
stituting an appeal,let the defendant or appellee give uud
bail to defend himself, and the appellor bail to derayne, give


unless the appellee has exceptions for himself, to be risas


erayne.
brought forward for his defence, before he enters upon Likewise
i concerning
his answer. eei


. , : ceptions
There are certain exceptions, which are general to all against an


appeals and there are special and divers exceptions, ?PPeal.

e. e . » 9.
according to the diversity of appeals, as eoncerning ho- p, dere
micide, concerning à breach of the peace and wounds, are certein


or mayhem or robbery. Likewise concerning a breach Qiebhons,
of the peace and wounds and imprisonment. Likewise general to
concerning robbery by itself. Likewise concerning arson am nem
by felony against the peace. Likewise concerning the special and
. P . . vers
ravishment of virgins against the peace, and against according
each of such appeals there are special exceptions in each Pau n
C880. of iin and
There is one general and primary exception in every did
appeal, if the suit has not been well instituted, because The first,
he who could appeal and properly sue, he ought, to kp
whom the injury is done, to raise the hue as quickly as exception
possible and to go with the hue to the neighbouring and vu FA
next vills and there declare the crimes and injuries per- toncerning
petrated, and he ought immediately to go to the serjeants it has becn
of the lord the king, if they can be found, and thence to baden
the coroners, and so thence without any delay to the andac-
neares& county court, or if the county court is held on CPring to
: e law of
the morning after the felony has been perpetrated, or the land.
the second day after, ib suffices for & suit, provided how- f 40.
ever the hue has preceded, if he come to the court,
without having sought out the serjeants or the coroners,
because all are bound to be present on the day of the
county court. Likewise it is sufficient for a suit, if the


crimes perpetrated are shown to the king or to the justices,


426 DE CORONA.


perpetrata, & ibi dicetur ei quód eat ad vic. & coro-
natores. Ad proximum veró & primum com in pre-
sentia vic. & coronatorum, fiat appellum p verba ap-
pellum facientia (& inferi? dicenda) & ipsi vic. &
coronatores omnia verba appelli, seeundàüm quod pro-
posita fuerunt, coram eis irrotulari faciant p ordinem
& modum appelli, illud, s. tantummodo, nec plus nec
minus. Et inprimis ad qué cofá venit appellans post
feloniam perpetratam, utrum, s. ad primum, secundum
vel tertium, & qualiter & quse verba pposuit in appello
de morte hominis. ltem si de pace & plagis, quales
plage fuerunt, recentes vel non recentes, in quo loco,
cujus longitudinis & latitudinis. ltem si de roberia,
de quibus rebus, propriis vel alienis. Et si de pecunia
numerata, exprimere debet numerum, & genus pecuniz.
Si autem massa rudis, exprimere debet valorem, si
&utem formata, qualitatem & peium. Item si vestis,
colorem & precium, si pannis, colorem, precium, &
numerum ulnarum. ltem si animal, tunc genus, pilum
& precium. ltem si de pace & imprisonamento, tunc
inquirendü quale fuerit imprisonamentum, utrum carcer
vel simplex detentio. ltem utrum in vinculis vel sine.
Ite utru in ferro, vel ligno vel utroque. ltem si de
combustione, qua hora facta fuit, & de omnibus cir-
cumstantiis. ltem si de raptu, tunc de scissione vesti-
mentorum, & de sanguinis effusione p corruptionem.
Item oportet mentionem facere in irrotulatione appelli,
de anno quo felonia debuit ppetrari, quia ex hoc dabi- .
tur appellato exceptio, si in rotulis coronatorum aliter


OF THE CROWN. 497


if they be present, and it be there said to him to go to
ihe viscount and the coroners. But at the next and
first county court in the presence of the viscount and
the coroners, let àn appeal be made by words consti-
tuting an appeal (and to be explained below), and let
ihe viscount and the coroners cause all the words of the
appeal, according as they have been set out, to be en-
rolled before them according to the order and method of
an appeal, so much only forsooth and neither more nor
less, And in the first place to what county court the
appellant has come after the perpetration of the felony,
whether to the first or the second or the third, and in
what manner and what words he propounded in the
appeal concerning homicide. Likewise concerning &
breach of the peace and wounds, what sort of wounds
they were, recent or not recent, in what place, of what
length and breadth. Likewise if concerning robbery,
concerning what things, his own or another's. And if of
countable money, he ought to express the number of the
coins and the kind of coins. Butif rude,bullion, he ought
to express its value, and if bullion in ingots, its quality
and price. Likewise if & vestment, its colour and price;
if cloth, its colour and price and the number of ells. 1f
an animal, then its kind, its coat and its price. Likewise
if concerning & breach of the peace and imprisonment,
then an inquiry is to be made what sort of imprison-
ment, whether in a lock-up, or simply detention.  Like-
wise whether with or without chains. Likewise whether
in iron or in wood or in both. Likewise concerning
arson, at what hour it took place, and concerning all the
circumstances. Likewise concerning rape, as well con-
cerning the tearing of vestments and the effusion of
blood by intercourse. Likewise it behoves that mention
should be made in the enrollment of the appeal con-
cerning the year, in which the felony ought to be per-
petrated, for from this an exception shall be granted to
the appellee, if in the rolls of the coroner it is differently


f. 140 b,


498 DE CORONA.


contineatur de anno, & aliter coram justitiariis in nar-
ratione, ut si in rotulis coronatorum fiat mentio de
decem annis, & in narratione coram justitiarüs fiat
mentio de quinque annis, per hoc cadit appellum
propter variationem. tem fit mentio de die, ad quod
eadem ratio poterit assignari & etiam alia, quia si
appellatus docere poterit per certa judicia & proborum
hominum testifieationem, se eadem die fuisse alibi, ita
quód nullo modo presumi posset contra ipsum, quód
interesse posset tali facto, tali die, ppter locum ita
remotum, quód hoc esset impossibile, tunc cadit inten-
tio appellantis. ltem fit mentio aliquado de hora, sed
hoe non est multum de substantia negotii, lieét varia-
tum sit de hora, quia appellans in arcto positus, bené
potuit horam ignorare, cüm metus justam in se con-
tineat ignorantiam, & si variatum sit de hora, ad hoc
quód detur exceptio vel non, diseretioni justitiariorum
relinquatur. ltem fit mentio de loco, predicta ratione
propter variationem. Item de comitatu fit mentio, sed
non propter variationem, quis licbt inter vicec. &
ecoronatorem de comitatu habeatur contentio, ex hoc
non prejudieatur appellanti, nec appellato. Sed si
appellans ad primum comitatum non venerit per se,
cüm commodé venire possit, vel per aliam conjunctam
personam, cüm per se venire non possit: tunc sibi
prejudicat quantum ad appellum & exceptionem ap-
pellato, sicut in casib? supradictis. Et si ita variatum
fuerit in appello, & narratione, quód appellans unum
dicat, & rotuli eoronatorum ptestentur cótrarium vel


OF THE CROWN. 499


contained concerning the year, and differently before the
justices in the narrative, as if mention should be made
of ten years in the rolls of the coroner, and in the nar-
rative before the judges mention should be made of five
years, on this account an appeal falls to the ground
through the variation. Likewise mention is made of
the day, to which the same reason may be assigned and
likewise another, because if the appellee can show by
certain judgments and the testimony of honest men that
he on the same day was elsewhere, so in no manner
could & presumption arise against him, that he could
have taken part in such an act, on such a day, on
aecount of the place being so remote, that this would
be impossible, then the demand of the appellor falls to
the ground. Likewise mention is sometimes made of
the hour, but this is not much of the substance of the
business, although there be a variation in the hour, for
the appellor being under restraint might well be igno-
rant of the hour, since fear contains a just ignorance in
itself, and if there be à variation in the hour, it must be
left to the discretion of the justices, whether an exception
be allowed or not on that ground. Likewise mention is
made of the place for the aforesaid reason, on. account of
& variation. Likewise mention is made of the county
court, but not on aecount of & variation, because although
there may be a dispute concerning the county court be-
Vween the viscount and the coroner, no prejudice is
worked thereby against the appellor or the appellee.
But if the appellor has not come to the first county
court in his own person, when he could have conveni-
ently come, or through a conjoint person, when he could
not come in his own person, then he works a prejudice
against himself as regards his appeal, and an exception
for the appellee, as in the cases above mentioned. And
if there has been such à variation in the appeal and in
the narrative, that the appellor tells one story and the
rolls of the ecoroners bear witness to a contrary or &


f. 140 b.


4.
Si de re-
cordo in-
ter justi-
tiarios
contentio
oriatur,
tunc quid
agendum
sit.


430 DE CORONA.


diversum, ut si appellans unum nominaverit in appello
suo coram justitiariis, & rotuli coronatorum dicant
aliud, vel si ibi unum de facto, & corà justitiariis
eundem de forcia vel & contrario. ltem si in genere
armorum variatum sit, quód ibi de baculo, & hic de
gladio, & generaliter variatum fuerit, cadit appellum
per exceptione.


Est aliquando dissentio in recordo appelli faciendo
inter coroüi & vic. càm uterq, debeat suum habere ro-
tulum, in quibus quandoq, varia contineantur, quandoq,
cocordant & habet recordum, & quandoque coroü p se
sine vic. ub si vic. mortuus fuerit, vel amotus, & rotuli
non inveniantur. Si veró rotulus vic. discordet à rotulo
coronatoris, et rotuli coronatoris conveniant, tunc eorum
stabitur recordo, & quia rotulus vic. nihil operatur nisi
&d testimonium. Et quid si rotulus uni? coronatoris dis-
eordet à rotulis aliorum coronatoru, càüm plures fuerint,
standum erit pluralitati. Si autem non nisi duo corona-
tores & disaccordent, tune stabitur rotulo ipsius, cum
quo concordat rotul? vie. Si autem sint ibi quatuor
coronatores, & duo dissentiant à duob?, nec appareat vic.
qui rotulum habeat ad testifieandü sive ad testimoni,
tune stabitur illis duobus qui p se habent aliquod ad-
miniculum, & qui cum appellante coveniunt. Et ideó
audito appello appellantis, & audita resposione appellati,
iunc primó audiantur rotuli coronatoru, ut sciri possit,
utrum appellas appellum suum, qd' fecit in comitatu,
in aliquo mutaverit coram justitiarüs vel in aliquo
variaverit, vel si sectam bené fecerit vel non. Et scien-
dum, quód in omnib? appellis majoribus vel minoribus


OF THE CROWN. 431


different story, as if the appellor has named one person
in his appeal before the justices, and the rolls of the
eoroner tell another story, or if he has appealed one
person as & principal, and before the justices he appeals
the same person as an accessory or the contrary.  Like-
wise if there be a variation in the kind of arms, as for
example, there he has spoken of a staff, and here of a
sword, and generally there has been a variation, the
appeal falls to the ground, if an exception be taken.


There is sometimes díssension in making the record - He s
of the appeal between the coroner and the viscount, contention
when each ought to have his own roll, in which some- between
times various things are contained, sometimes they agree BL
and have a record, and sometimes the coroher by himself cerning the
without the viscount, if the viscount should be dead, or what is to
removed, and his rolls are not found. But if the roll of be done.
the viscount disagrees with the roll of the coroner, and
the rolls of the coroner are in harmony, then their re-
cord shall prevail, and because the record of the viscount
is only of value as evidence. And what if the roll of
one coroner differs from the rolls of the other coroners,
when there are several, the plurality of rolls shall pre-
vail But if there be only two coroners, and they dis-
agree, then the roll of that one shall prevail, with which
the roll of the viscount agrees. But if there be there
four eoroners, and two differ from two, and no viscount
appears, who has & roll to testify or for testimony, then
those two shall prevail, who have some corroboration on
their behalf, and who agree with the appellor. And
accordingly, after hearing the appeal of the appellor and
after hearing the answer of the appellee, then first let the
rolls of the coroner be heard, that i6 may be known
whether the appellor has changed before the justices in
any respect the appeal which he made in the county
court, or has varied it in any way, or if he has made his
suit fitly or not. And it is to be known that in all
major or minor appeals the appellant may not vary or


5.
Contra
appellum
poterit
excipere
appellatus.
Exceptio-
nes contra
appellum.


f. 141.


432 | DE CORONA.


non potest appellans variare vel in aliquo appellum
suum mutare, adjicere tamen potest, ut si primó dicat
& appellet de plaga sibi facta, sed no dixerit quibus
armis, adjicere potest & arma nominare, s.q gladio vel
bisacuta vel hujusmodi. Ite poterit appellans in judi-
cio actionem sua mutare, maximé de rebus robbatis
vel fortà! ablatis, & de atroci injuria, sed non de
morte hominis, ut si actionem, quce criminalis est, primó
civiliter intentaverit, poterit illam mutare & agere cri-
minaliter, & sic crescere appellum vel augere. Sed si
primó actionem criminalem criminaliter intentaverit,
non poterit eam mutare, & agere civiliter, & sic decres-
cere appellum vel minuere. Auditis igitur verbis ap-
pelli & responsione appellati, & recordo coronatoris, aut
stabit appellum aut cadet, secund q secta sufficienter
facta fuit vel minüs rité, vel secundüm q variatum
fuerit vel non variatum. | Quód si bene omnia con-
currant, tunc pponat appellatus exceptiones, si quas
habeat, copetentes sibi. Nota? g non potest quis in
appello suo variare, nec appellum mutare, poterit ta-
men adjicere & accrescere appellum & non minuere.


Excipere quidem poterit cotra appellum & dicere,
q primó appellatus fuit de eodem facto ab alio, & p
judicium inde recessit quietus, & ad illa pbanda, vo-
care poterit rotulos & recorda justitiariorum. ltem
excipere potest & dicere, quód justitiarii itineraverunt
in comitatu illo postquam factum illud fieri debuit,
et in itinere illo nulla facta fuit inde métio, q secus
esset, si a&ppellum tune esset inceptum, licób nondum
terminatum, & ad hoc cocordat bre de summonitione.
Et q talis exceptio valida est, pbatur de termino
Saneti Mich. anno regis H. nono incipiete decimo in


1 furto? is the reading of MS. | in either MS. Rawl. C. 160 or in
Rawl. C. 160. MS. Rawl. C. 159.
2« Nota." "This note is not found


OF THE CROWN. 433


change in any respect his appeal, he may add however,

as if he shall first say and appeal for a wound caused to

himself, but shall not have said with what arms, he may

add and name the arms, that 1s, with à sword or two-

edged weapon, or such like; Likewise an appellant may
| change his action at the judgment, chiefly concerning
| things robbed or carried off by chance, and concerning
an atrocious injury, but not concerning the death of a
man, as if he shall have first brought in a civil form an
action which is criminal, he may change it and proceed
eriminally, and so increase or amplify the appeal. But
if he has first brought in a criminal form a criminal suit,
he cannot change it and proceed civilly, and so decrease
and diminish the appeal. Upon the words, therefore, of
the appeal being heard and the answer of the appellee,
and the record of the coroner, the appeal shall either
stand or fall, according as the suit has been sufficiently
or ineffectively prosecuted, or according as there has been
a variation or no variation. But if all things properly | ,
concur, then let the appellee propound the exceptions, if
he has any, which are competent for him to propound.
Note.—That a person cannot vary in his appeal, nor
change his appeal; he may add, however, and increase
his appeal and not diminish it.


He may indeed except against the appeal and say, D 2
that in the first place he has been appealed concerning pellee may
the same act by another person, and that by a judgment except

: . Aghinst the
he has gone away acquitted, and he may, to prove this, appeal.
invoke the rolls and records of the justices. Likewise wii
he may excepi and say, that the justices have made appeal.
their eyre in that county after the act must have been
done, and on that eyre no mention has been made of it,
which would be otherwise, if the appeal had been then
commenced, although not yet terminated, and the writ £141.
of summons agrees with this. And that such an excep-
tion is valid, is proved in the term of St. Michael in the
ninth and tenth years of king Henry in the county of

VOL. 1I, EE


494 DE CORONA.


Britton,].i. co. Hertford, de Henrico Romband indictato de morte


chi. xxiv.,
3.


hominis, & quód concelatum fuit in itinere, ita q nulla
mentio inde facta fuit, & in seeundo itinere resusci-
tandum fui& indictamentum, & apposita exceptione
ista, recessit H. inde quietus. Jtem declinat appellum,
apposita exceptione & pbata, q quis alium appellaverit
p odium & atiam & sie non jacet appellum. Item
non jacet appellum inter dominum & tenente suum,
qui ei fecit homagium suu, durante obligatione homagii
nee e eontra. Item nec inter dominum & servü suum,
nisi appellaverit eum de felonia & seditione facta dio
regi, in quo casu quilibet de populo audiri debet ap-
pellans, tam servus quà alius, & sine plegiorum datione,
nisi appellans traditor sit manifestus, & convict? ut
felo, qui veró fidelem vocem non habebit, sicut de
Rieardo Neale & Radulpho de Gray, vicario de Gaine,
& Wilhelmo filio Heliz. Itc cadit appellu coram jus-
titiariis, ubi nullum fuit appellum in com, nec secta
fuit facta ate iter justitiariorum, vel si appellans nun-
quam fuit prosecutus, & hoe verum est, nisi recens
fuerit factum & infra iter justitiariorum evenerit. Ite
cadit appellum, ubi appellans non loquitur de visu &
auditu, quamvis locut? fuerit in cofà & hoc p coi
testatu fuerit, ut de itinere M. de Pateshul in coi
Wigorne anno regis Hen. quinto. Item cadit appel-
lum, s erratu fuerit in nominibus appellatorum, vel
cognominibus, ut si modó vocaverit unum Wilhelmum,
& postea eundem Robertum. ltem si variatum fuerit
in modo appelli qualitereunq, ut si modó appellaverit
unum de facto, & modó de forceia eundem, vel ? con-


OF THE CROWN. 435


Hertford, concerning Henry Romband, indicted for homi-
eide, and whieh was concealed during the eyre, so that
no mention was made thereof, and in the second eyre
the indictment was to be revived, and upon that excep-
tion having been made, H. went away acquitted.  Like-
wise an appeal is declined, upon an exception being pro-
pounded and proved, that some one has appealed another
through hatred and spite, and so an appeal does not lie.
. Likewise an appeal does not lie between the lord and his
tenant, who has done him homage, during the obligation
of the homage, nor the converse. Nor between a lord
. and his serf, unless he has appealed him of felony and
sedition against the lord the king, in which case any one
of the people ought to be heard as an appellor, as well a
serf as any one else, and without finding sureties, unless
the appellor be a manifest traitor, and convicted as a
felon, who indeed shall not have à trustworthy voice, as
in the case of Richard Neale, and Randolph de Gray,
viear of Gaine, and William son of Hely. Likewise an
appeal before the justices falls to the ground, where there
has been no appeal in the county court, nor any suit
instituted before the circuit of the justices, or if the ap-
pellor has never prosecuted, and this is true unless the
act has been recent and it has happened within the cir-
cuit of the justices. Likewise an appeal falls to the
ground, where the appellor does not speak upon eyesight
or hearing, although he has spoken in the county court
and has testified to it in the county court, as in the cir-
cuit of Martin de Pateshul in the county of Worcester in
the fifth year of the reign of King Henry. Likewise an
appeal falls to the ground, if there has been an error in
the names or surnames of the parties appealed, as if he
has some time back called one person William, and after-
wards has called the same person Robert. Likewise, if
there has been a variation in the mode of the appeal in
any way, asif he shall have some time back appealed a
person as a principal, and has afterwards appealed him
E E 2


436 DE CORONA.


trario. Ite cadit appellum, si appellans semel se re-
traxerit & iterum velit appellare, cüm appellatus semel
p judicium quietus recesserit, & hoc dico, quantum ad
illum qui se retraxerit, licet teneat appellu quantum ad
alios appellantes, qui appellaverint de eodem facto, si
non per judicium sed p defaltam recessit appellatus quie-
tus: defalta enim non tollit appellum aliorum, judicium
tamen tollit imperpetuu, de eodem facto. Si autem
diversa fuerint facta, judicium contra unu appellante
de uno facto non tellet appellum aliof de diversis fac-
tis, nec defalta. Eti sic, qui psens se retraxerit, ulte-
riàüs non admittitur ad appellum. Idem erit si, cüm
Dsens fuerit, nihil loquatur versus appellatum, sed si
appellans &d diem suum non fuerit psecutus, sed de-
faltam fecerit, ut. pdictum est, cadit breve, sed non
cadit a&ppellum, cum p aliud breve resuscitarl possit,
nisi it& sib, q judicium subsequatur. Item cadit ap-
pellu propter crimen appellantis, ut si fuerit traditer
manifestus, & de hoe convict? p confessionem, vel ra-
tionib? manifestis. ltem si latro cognoscens, vel seysi-
tus de latrocinio vel utlagatus, qui suu secum portat
judicium. Item si aecusator & appellans de felonia &
seditione facta dio regi, & conscius criminis statim &
sine mora hora congrua, càüm possit, seditione domino
regi non manifestavit, noe suis ministris, cü statim
sequi debeat & recenter antequam se divertat ad alia.
Item cadit appellum, si non fiat métio de pace do-
mini rcgis, sed de pace justitiarii vel vie. Item nul-
lum appellum, nisi fi&t mentio de felonia facta.


OF THE CROWN. 497


as an accessory, or the converse. Likewise an appeal
falls to the ground, if the appellor has once retracted, and
is desirous again to appeal, when the appellee has once
gone away acquitted by a judgment, and this I say, as
far as regards him who has retracted, although an appeal


holds good, as regards other appellors, who have appealed


concerning the same act, if the appellee has gone away
aequitted not by a judgment, but through default; for
default does not estop the appeal of others, but a judg-
ment estops for ever proceedings for the same act. But
if there have been different acts, a judgment against one
appellor eoncerning one act will not estop the appeal of
others concerning different acts, nor will his default do
so, and so he, who being present has retracted, is no
further admitted to make an appeal. The same thing
results if, when he is present, he shall say nothing
against the appellee, but if the appellor on his own
day has not prosecuted, but has made default, as afore-
said, the writ falls to the ground, but the appeal does
not fall to the ground, since it may be revived by another
writ, unless it so bo that a judgment follows. Likewise
an appeal falls to the ground on account of the crime of
the appellor, as if he- should be à manifest traitor, and
has been convieted of this through his confession, or on
manifest grounds. Likewise if he be a confessed high-
wayman or be in seisine of the thing robbed on the
highway, or be outlawed, who carries with him his own
sentence. Likewise if the accuser and appellor in a case
of felony or of sedition against the lord the king, and
being privy to the crime, has not manifested to the lord
the king nor to his ministers the sedition forthwith and
without delay at & suitable hour, when he could have
done so, since he ought to pursue him forthwith and
before he turns aside to other things. Likewise an ap-
pealfalls to the ground, if no mention is made of. the
peace of the king, but of the peace of the justice or of
the viscount. Likewise an appealis null, unless mention


f. 141 b.


1.
De duellt
vadiatione.
Cum nulla
sit excep-
tio, tunc
statim va-
diatur
duellum.


438 DE CORONA.


Item cadit appellum, si appellans nihil loquatur de
visu & auditu! ut de imino S. H. anno regis H.
septimo in cof Norf. de Duràado scissore? & Henrico
de Ver? Item datur exceptio appellato. Ite oritur
exceptio ex psona appellantis ut si clericus sit qui
appellet, ordinatus vel homo religiosus vel regularis,
quia tales relinquant seculum, & qu:e seculi sunt. Ite
quia latro cognosces, de quo supradict est, qui vocem
non habet versus hominem fidele. Item si quis de
rebus alterius q ppriis nisi causa adjecta ut suprà.
Ité si de morte alterius, vel plaga q suorum vel alioru,
nisi sua intersit certa ratione. Item differtur appellum
ad tépus p minori setate, sive minor appellans sit sive
appellatus. | |


CAP. XXI.


Cum aute appellat" nulla ab initio pposuerit excep-
tioné, vel càüm exceptione pposuerit, nulla habeat com-
petente, qua se tueri possit, tune statin vadietur
duellu int eos, & defensor primó det vadiu defendendi,
& posteà appellator det vadiu disrationadi, & postmodu
defensor primó juret p verba negativa negado pcisé
felonià ei imposita, & posteà jurabit appellator p verba
allirmativa, affirmado oia esse vera quee appellato im-
ponit, & est ratio assignata infrà de civilib actionib?
de duello vadiando* p terra? Forma veró sacraÍti
hec est.


Lal


p —————À——————————MPÓáÓ—— —M————


!*de visu ct auditu" abolished ; to « treatise on battle ina plca of
by Stat. Westminst. i, c. 41, as | land, DBracton hts either omitted


leading to perjury. to treat of battle in civil actions for
? « tissore," MS. Rawl. C. 160. land, or the treatise has not come
3 «€ de Vecr,? MS. Rawl, id. downtous. Cf.l. v. c. 13. De War-


5 * yadiendo," MS. Rawl. id. | rantia, S l. "The same observatiori
$* pro terra," Britton, l. i., ch. , applies to the concluding words of
xxii. S 14. has & similar reference | ch. xxv. of this book.


L4
€)


OF THE CROWN. . 489


is made of & felonious act. Likewise an appeal falls to f. 141 b.
the ground, if the appellor cannot speak from eyesight or
hearing, as in the term of St. Hilary in the seventh year
of king Henry, in the county of Norfolk, respecting
Durandus the tailor, and Henry de Ver. Likewise an
exception is granted to the appellee. Likewise an ex-
ception arises from the person of the appellor, as if he
be a clerk who appeals, in holy orders or under religious
vows or a regular, because such persons have renounced
the world and the things of the world. Likewise because
he is a confessed highwayman, as aforesaid, who has no
voice trustworthy towards men. Likewise if à person
appeals concerning things other than his own, unless the
cause is added, as dose said. Likewise concerning the
death of another or the wounds of others than lis. own
relatives, unless his own interest is concerned in some
way. Likewise an appeal is put off for à time on ac-
count of minority, if the appellor or the appellee should
be à minor.


CHAPTER XXI.


But when the appellee has from the commencement j.
propounded no exception, or when he has propounded an Concera-
ing the
exception, and he has brought forward none adequate wager of
to defend himself, then let battle be forthwith waged brin
between, and let the defendant first give wager to defend tliere is no


himself, and next let the appellor give wager to derayne, pA tPtion
and afterwards let the defendant first swear by nega- be NDS
tive words denying precisely the felony imputed to him, 7 waged.
and next the appellor shall swear by aflirmative words,
affirming that all the things arc true which he imputes

to the defendant, and the reason is assigned below in

, weating of civil actions, concerning wager of battle for


- land. The form indeed of the oath 1s this.


NONO nee e RE TRESPREEEUR PETERE ORE SERE RR PEERS RENS IAN


440 DE CORONA.


2. Hac audis homo, que p manü teneo, qui te facis
De formá . * . i: - si
sacra. — &ppellari À. p nome baptisterii q ego patre tuu vel


ment.— fratre vel alium tale non occidi, nec plaga ei feci tali |

riu "genere armorü, p q remotior esse debeat à vita, &

$ 12. morli ppinquior, nec tu hoc vidisti, sic me De? adju-
vet & hsec sancta. Et fiat metio in sacramto de anno,
die & loco secund forma appelli, & posteà juret ap-
pellator eotraf, p hsc verba. Hoc audis homo, que p
manu teneo, qui te facis appellari B. p nome baptist.
q tu est pjur? & ideó perjur?, quia tali an, tali die,
tali hora, tali loco, nequiter & in fel occidisti C. patrü,
filiü, frat vel ahü parent vel düm suü, vel alit, ne-
quiter & in fel & in assultu pmed fecisti tali unà
plaga, tali loco, tali genere armor, de qua obiit infra
triduum, & ego hoc vidi! sic me De? adjuvet & hzc
sancta. Et sic fiet semp sacritum secund forma ap-
pelli, & ita observetur in quolibet genere sacramti ubi-
cung, pstand est sacramitum ex utraq, parte.


3. Facto siquide sacramto in hac forma, statim comit-


» ied a9 Mur defensor duob? mihi vel legalibus hominibus


exutraque aliis, seceund quod appellatus nobilis fuerit persona vel
pore com-ignobilis, & p eos ducatur in cápum a&d duellum fa-
defensor  ciend deputat, & appellans eode modo, & ita debet
d hbus, appellat? & appellans à pdietis custodiri, q nemo post
sacratum faet' cum illis habeat colloquium ante du-

ft.142. olli peussionem, excepto eo, q cüm in campum venerit


jurare debent eorà justitia secundu formam istam.


1 ** ego hoc vidi? These words | been abolished by Stat. of Wost-
do not occur in tho form of oath in | minster i.c. 41. (A.D. 19575.)
Britton, 1, 1, ch. xxiii. S 12, having


^ brother or any other such person, nor have I caused


OF THE CROWN. - 441


Thou hearest this, thou man, whom I hold by the 2.
hand, who makest thyself to be called A. by thy name tonem
of baptism, that I have not slain thy father or form E
him a wound by such kind of arms, through which
he beeame more remote from life and nearer to death,
nor hast thou seen this, so help me God and these
holy things. And let mention be made in the oath of
the year, the day, and the place according to the form
of the appeal, and next let the appellor swear thc
contrary in these words: Thou hearest this, thou man,
whom I hold by the hand, who makest thyself to bc
ealled B. by thy name of baptism, that thou art perjured,
and on this account perjured because in such a year, on
such a day, at such an hour, in such a place thou hast
wiekedly and feloniously slain C. his father, son, brother,
or other his relation, or his lord ; or otherwise, wickedly
and feloniously and with premeditated assault caused
such an one à wound at such a place, with such kind of
arms, from which he died within the third day, and I
have seen this, so may God help me, and these holy
things. And in this manner shall an oath always be
made according to the form of the appeal, and it shall be
thus observed in every kind of oath, wherever an oath


. has to be taken by both parties.


Upon the oath having been thus taken in this form, a.


let the defendant be forthwith committed to the charge O^ the ,
oath having


of two knights or other loyal men, aecording as the been taken
person appealed is a noble or ignoble person, and let E m i
him be conducted by them to the field appointed for the the dcfen-
battle to be held in, and the appellor in like manner, Ug
and so the appellee and the appellor ought to be kept in to the
charge by the aforesaid persons, that no one after the ES
oath has been taken should have any conversation with k»ights.
them before the battle is commenced, excepting this, that f. 142.
when they have come into the field, they ought to swear


before the justices after this form.


4.
De saera-
mento
faciendo
in campo.
Britton,
ib. S 13.

5.
De banno
domini
regis.


6.
Si appel-
Jatus
vietus
fuerit.


442 DE CORONA.


Hoc audite justitiai, q ego non comedi nee bibi nec
aliquis p me nec p me, ppter q lex Dei deprimi de-
beat, & lex diaboli exaltari, sic me Deus adjuvet.


Et facto tali modo sacramto, statim fiat bann? regis
sub voce fpceonia, & facto silentio p hsec verba. Pre-
ceptuü reg. & justit est, q nullus sit ita ausus vel audax,
q quiequid audiat vel videat se moveat, vel verbis
pferat, & si quis cont hoc fecerit, eaptus erit & posit^
in prisonam, & ibi jacebit p annum & die, usq, diis
rex de eo pceperit voluntatem suam, iis igitur taliter
peraetis, eongrediantur campiones, & pugnent. Et si
appellans vict? fuerit, vel si appellans se defenderit
coni ipsum tota die, usq, ad horam qua stelle incipi-
unt apparere, tunc recedet appellat? quiet? de appello,
ex quo se obligavit appellans ad convincendum eum
una hora diei, q quidem non fecit, & non solu quietus
dimittitur appellatus de facto, imó omnes ali qui ap-
pellati sunt de foreia & peepto, nec appellatus de facto
solummodó quietus recedet versus ipsum primu appel-
latem, veriun etia versus omnes appellantes qui ipsum
appellaverunt de eodem facto, secus si de diversis.


Si autem appellat? victus fuerit, ultimo supplieio
punietur, e poena gravi vel graviori, secundüm crimi-
nis qualitatem, cum exhsredatione hzredum suorum
& omnium bonor amissione, secundüm q supradictum
est de utlagatis. Si autem plures unum appellaverint,
vel plures de diversis plagis & factis, si appellatus se
defenderit versus unum, peedant alii appellantes versus


OF THE CROWN. 443


Hear this, ye justices, that I have not eaten nor
| drunken, nor any one for me or through me, wherefore A dk
| the law of God should be abased and the law of the be n
devil exalted, so God me help. ni |


And the oath having been taken in this form, let the — 5.
king's proclamation be made by the crier's voice, and uon
silence having been made, in these words. It is the the king.
order of the king and of the justices, that no one shall be
so daring and bold as to move himself or to utter a word,
whatever he may hear or see, and if any body acts to
the contrary of this, he shall be seized and placed in
prison, and shall lie there for à year and a day, until the
king himself shall announce his pleasure respecting him ;
these things therefore having been thus performed, let
the champions meet and let them fight. And if the
appellor be vanquished, or if the appellee has defended
himself against him the whole day, until the hour when
the stars begin to appear, then the appellee shall go
away acquitted of the appeal, since the appellor has
bound himself to conviet him in some hour of the day,
which he has not done, and not only is the person ap-
pealed as a prineipal aetor aequitted, but all the others
who have been appealed as accessories by force or by
counsel, and the person appealed as a principal retires not
only aequitted as regards the first appellor, but also as
regards all appellors, who have appealed him for the same
act, otherwise, if for different acts.


But if the appellee has been vanquished, he shall be — «.
punished with the last punishment, together with a a ss
heavy or heavier penalty, according to the quality of lias been
the erime, with the disinherison of his heirs and the co2quered.
loss of all his goods, according as has been said above
concerning outlawed persons. But if several persons
have appealed one person, or several concerning different
wounds and acts, if the appellee has defended himself
against one, let the other appellors step forth against the


ei ME Lo REO CM M AT. Yr SEES Ies die lip, ie


pe B. RS omm iren c A


a e ET


444. DE CORONA.


eunde modo suprad quousq, omnes de facto convicti
fuerint, & tune deinde peedatur contra ipsos de forcia
& peepto de eodem facto, quia factum & peeptum ita
connexa sunt, q separari non possunt.


TOUT Si auté appellás in capo se reiraxerii, mittatur

lamsin . £&ole, & ipse & plegii sui de psequendo, quos in ipsa

eunposo vadiatione duelli invenit, erunt in misericordia, quia

retraxerit. -x - ]: . . . .
appellas no disrationavit, seeund q se ad hoc obligavit.
Si autem viet? sit in capo, aliud erit: quia non stat
p ipsum quin fiat disrationatio, & quavis ad gaola
mittend" sit, temen fit ci aliquado gratia de miseri-
cordia, quia pugnat p pace.


: 8. Cüm autem omnes de facto eonvieti fuerint, tunc
de &eto demüm procedatur eontra eos! de foreig & fpeepto, &
rude loquatur conira primü p verba superi? opposita? de-
n " e -

ins pro. fendendo oi& qu; ei imponuntur ab appellate, p verba
adum negativa ut suprà, seilieet q tali die, tali anno, tali
conira eos » - . . .

deforei, hora, tali loco no venit cum tali, qui appellat? est &
et desae- convictus de facto, nec ipsum tale tenuit, nec ligavit,
ramento ab á s $7, : siu :
appellaoo nec aliam forciam ei intuliij dum pdictus talis eum
faciendo. oeidit vel plagavit, per quod mortuus fuit, sie eum


Deus adjuvet, &c.


9. Et appellans juret in contrarium per verba affirma-
PEE tiva, & eodem die, quo ille de facto convictus fuerit, si
faciendo ille de forcia tune presens fuerit, vadietur duellum,
n PH- sod detur alius dies ad pereutiendum, quo die uterque

veniet armatus, nisi forte ipse appellatus de forcia ali-
quam pro se habeat exceptionem, per quam declinare
possit appellum, & peusso inter eos duello, si appella-
tus vietus fuerit eandem poenam sustineat, quam sus-
tinuit ille de facto. Dicitur eni vulgariter, quód satis


S 1 ** ipsos," MS. Rawl. C. 160, | ?*'*exposita," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. 445


same person in the manner aforesaid, until all the prin-
cipals have been convieted, and then let proceedings be
commenced against the accessories by force or by counsel
to the same act, because the act and the counsel are so
connected that they cannot be separated.


But if the appellor has retracted on the field, let him |. 7.
be sent to gaol, and. both himself and his sureties for the SDEIIUÉ


prosecution, whom he produced at the very wager of has re-
battle, shall be amerced, because the appellor has not de- dcin
rayned according as he obliged himself. But if he be
vanquished in the field, it will be different; because it

does not arise from his fault, that there is no deraignment,

and although he is to be sent to gaol, nevertheless grace

is sometimes shown to him through pity, because he


fights in defence of the peace.


But when all the principals have been convicted, then —— &.
let proceedings commence against the accessories by force M oda
or by counsel, and let the first speak in the words above pals have
opposed, defending himself against everything imputed exu mon
to him by the ,appellor, by words of, denial as above, to !et pro-
wit, that on such a day and in such & year, at such an E
hour, in such a place he did come with the said person, against the
who has been appealed and convicted of the act, nor did by uoo
he hold the said person or bind him, or use any force by counsel.
against him, whilst the aforesaid person killed him, or


wounded him, whereby he died, so God him help &c.


And let the appellor swear to the contrary in affirma- 9.
tive words, and on the same day on which the principal E be
has been convicted, if the accessory be then present, let taken by
battle be waged, but let another day be granted for com- vl
mencing it, on which day each shall come armed, unless
by chance the appellee as accessory has some exception
to allege on his behalf, wherefore he may decline the
appeal, and after battle is commenced between them, if the
appellee should be vanquished, let him suffer the same
punishment, as the principal has suffered ? For it isa


10.
Si appel-
lans de
facto vic-
tus füerit,
vel se
retraxerit,
illi de
forcia


liberantur.


f. 143 b.


11.
Si primo
appellans
de facto
mortuus
fuerit vel
defaltam


44.6 DE CORONA.


oecidit qui prreeipit, vel qui malo animo tenet dum
quis occiditur, & ad paria judicantur in utroq, delicto,
quantum ad poenam.


Si veró legittim? se defenderit, ut pdict' est, dum
tame appellans victus non fuerit, p hoc alii de forcia
non liberàtur, quia diversa possunt esse facta & diverse
psone & diverse cause, & ita diversa appella, ut si
un? peipiat & alius teneat, terti? peutiat, & quartus
latronib? pbeat ingressum, & quintus in insidiis: ne
quis superveniat, in oibus istis casib? tenetur quilibet
eof de facto suo pprio respodere. Ite si cüm illi de
facto eovieti fuerint, ille de foreia appellari poterit p
haec verba, p patre vel fratre, vol alium parete inter-
fecti, s. A. appellat B. «q idem B. fuit consentiens
morti talis, & in auxilio, & q ille qui convict? est de
facto exivit de domo talis appellati ad factü illud
facied, & ibidé post facti rediit, & q ipse A. psens
fuit in cof, ubi pd B. minat? fuit eide fratri suo, &
ita in eod cof q petita fuit ab eo pax dhi regis, &
postea in cut regis ei data, & q ita nequiter, offert &c.
& p hse verba cosiderand fuit, q duellum esset inter
eos, ut. de termino P. anno regis H. nono in cof
Essex de Hugone de Godingham & Hugone de Cati-
lupo de morte Johaüà de Godingham.


Si autem ille qui primà appellaverit de facto, mor-
tuus fuerit, vel defalta fecerit, vel psens se retraxerit,
vel càm sequi velit, appellat? p exceptionem appellum
declinaverit, nihilominus tamen subesse poterit felonia,
quie si non convincatur, ita remanebüt maleficia im-


OF THE CROWN. 44'7


common saying that he is as good as a murderer who
eounsels the murder, or who with malice holds à person
whilst he is murdered, and let them be judged alike for
either crime as regards the punishment.


Butif he has lawfully defended himself, as aforesaid, ,, 10.


provided the appellor has not been vanquished, on that bloc pil
aecount the accessories are not liberated, because there eEnenal
may be different acts, and difierent persons, and different has been
causes, and so different, appeals, as if one should direct, Y?!q"ished
another hold, à third strike, and a fourth give entrance retracted,
to the highwaymen, and a fifth lie in ambush lest any- ie (au


body should surprise them, in all of these cases each of cessories,


are liber-


ihem is bound to answer for his own acts. Likewise 41.4.
when the principals have been convicted, the accessory
may be appealed in these words by a father or a brother
or another relative of the person slain, to wit, A. appeals
B. that B. was consenting to the death of such an one,
and assisted at it, and that he who has been convicted of
the act went forth from the house of so-and-so the appel-
lee to do that act, and returned thither after the act was
done, and that A. himself was present in the county
court where the aforesaid B. threatened his brother, and
so in the same county court the peace of our lord the
king was claimed, and afterwards was granted to him in
the court of the king, and so wickedly &c. he offers &c. ;
and by these words it was held that à duel should take
place between them, as in Easter term in the ninth year
of the reign of king Henry, in the county of Essex, re-
speetinyg Hugh de Godingham and Hugh de Cantilupe,
concerning the death of John de Godingham.

If he, who has in the first place appealed a principal, |. !!.
has died or made default, or being present has retracted, "din vum
or when he has wished to prosecute, the appellee has by js appel-

. 1 or against
an exception avoided the appeal, nevertheless there may a principal
still be in substance a felony, which if it be not convicted e
So evil deeds will remain unpunished, which ought not aefault,


fecerit,
dominus
rex potest
procedere
ex officio.
Britton, ch.
xxiii. $ 9.


448 DE CORONA.


 punita, q. esse non debet. Et quonià non solum inju-


riatur ei qui occiditur, immo dfio regi, cuj? pax infrin-
gitur: & quia adhue subesse possit felonia, quàvis
appellatus appellum declinaverit, nee adhue defensus
erit de felonia, sed semper stabit psumptio ppter ap-
pellum, donee pbetur contrarium, nec remanere debent
maleficia impunita. Procedat igitur rex ex officio suo,
& p pace sua, ad inquisitionem ppter psumptionem
appelli, ac si appellat? sine appello esset legittime in-
dietatus, & q ad regem pertinet accusatio & secta p
pace sua. Videtur etia q appellat? non solüm tenetur
appellanti, imó dro regi, sicut videri poterit p verba
appelli, ut si dicat, talis appellat tale, q nequiter & in
felonia contra pacem dfi regis, &e. p q videri poterit
manifest? q appellatus non solàm tenetur appellanti,
imó dio regi. Et quo casu, cüm se defendere obtule-
rib p corpus, non audietur, quia rex non pugnat, nec
alium habet campione q patrià, nec si esset qui diceret
q pugnare deberet, duellum caderet, ex quo secta non
fecit, nec. loqui potest de visu nec auditu. Recurren-
dum est igitur ad patria, ut videtur, q quide si ineul-
patus recusavorit, videtur quód sit indefensus, & p hoc
quasi convictus, & quód cogendus sit ut p patriam se
defendat p defectum alterius pbationis, ut si fcemina
appellü fecerit de morte viri sui, non tenetur duellum
facere ppier sexum.  Cogendus est igitur appellat?
quód se defendat p patriam, quia cadit duelluü ppter
sexum fosmineum, & ita fit in appello de raptu vir-
ginü, ut de itinere ultimo M. de Pateshul in com


£t Fabasccoctanin cat Dr DE oO pd C QUK oC CMM Ur OPE WEM tr, Eo MEME V P MR ELA T S Pa petra. d ri Um
T - , -
: 4 x LI
' .


OF THE CROWN. 449


to be. And since not only an injury is done to him; the king

who is slain, but also to the king himself, whose peace is pas "

broken, and because there may still be the substance of ed of

felony, although the appellee has avoided the appeal, and ?fice:

has not been as yet defended of the felony, but the pre-

sumption shall still stand on account of the appeal, until

the contrary shall be proved, nor ought misdeeds to re-

main unpunished. Let the king therefore proceed of his

office and for his peace, to an inquisition on account of

the presumption of the appeal, as if the appellee without

any appeal had been lawfully indicted, and because there

appertains to the king an accusation and a suit on behalf

of his peace. It seems also that the appellee is not

merely bound to the appellor, but also to the lord the

king, as may be seen from the words of the appeal, as if

it should be said, Such an one appeals such an one,

that wiekedly and feloniously against the peace of the

king &c., by which it can be seen manifestly that the

appellee is not merely bound to the appellor, but to the

king himself. And in which case when he has offered

to defend himself by his body, he shall not be heard,

because the king does not fight, nor has he any champion

but the country, nor if there should be any one tosay

that he ought to fight, would battle ensue, since he has

not made a suit, nor can he speak from sight or hearing.

.Recourse must therefore be had to the country, as it

Seems, which indeed if the person accused has refused,

ib seems that he is without any defence, and through this

as ib were convicted, and that he is to be compelled to

defend himself through the country on account of the

defect of any other proof, as if à woman has appealed on

account of the death of her husband, she is not obliged to

do battle on account of her sex. Theappellee is therefore

to be compelled to defend himself by the country, because

battle fails on account of the feminine sex, and so it 1s in

4 case of ravishment of virgins. s in the last eyre of

Martin de Pateshul in the county of Lincoln in the tenth
VOL. II. | FF


JA Si mulier


450 DE CORONA.


Linc. anno regis H. decimo. Item placito coronz? de
Gilberto filio Aldrendi & Alani Swadi? qui transit
etate.


12. Item defendit se quis de necessitate p patriam, ppter
d defectum corporis appellantis, s. ppter mahemium.
quisab — Item propter ztatem, ut si appellatus zetatem transi-
aad erit, u& sexaginta annorum, sed tamen ibi habet elec-
mahemium, tjonem, utrum se defendere velit p corpus vel patriam..
Ng Igitur in iis casibus ut videtur, tenetur quis se defen-
etatem. — dere p patria, tum propter regiam dignitatem & poce-

f.143. gente psumptione, tum ppter sexum appellantis, tum

ppter mahemiü, tum ppter zeíatem. Sed eüm diis rex
sectam faciat p pace sua de appellato, qui presens fue-
rit, & ipse p inquisitionem, in quà se posuerit gratis
vel invitus, dammnand? & culpabilis inveniat, videndü
qua poena puniri debeat, cüm sint qui dicant q poena
pecuniaria, quidam qg ultimo supplicio.


18. Et si mulier per vim oppressa pucilagiü suum ami-
per vim  Serió, & cüm de appello suo ceciderit, appellatus se
oppressa. posuerit super patrià, p quà culpabilis esse inveniatur,

condemnabitur, ac si appellü pcessisset: ut de termino
Sancti M. anno reg. H. sexto incipiente septimo.


Car. XXII.


l. Ite dictum est suprà, ubi apparet accusator & sequi-


UN ter & appellat, & de secta regis, cüm ceciderit appellü.


fanam .— Nune aute dicend est de indictatis p fama patrise, quz


patrie ex JUPE . . ut $e
suspitione, presumption8 inducit, & cui standu est, donec indic-


l*Inter placita corone." MS. ?*«de filio Adelarde et Alanum
Rawl. C. 160. * Swady." MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. . 451


year of king Henry. Likewise ina plea of the erown
concerning Gilbert the son of Aldrendus, and Alan Swade
who had passed the age.

Likewise à person of necessity defends himself by the — 12.
country, on account of a defect in the person of the ns *
appellor, as on account of mayhem. Likewise on aecount defended
of age, as if the appellee has passed the age, for instance SUDAD OR
of sixby years, but nevertheless he has an option, whether eds of
he will defend himself by battle or by the country. er tg or
Therefore in such cases, as i6 seems, a person is bound to bessnso he
defend himself by the country, as well on account of the the age.
regal dignity and the preceding presumption, as on ae-  f.143.
count of the sex of the appellor, as well on aecount of
mayhem, as well on account of age. But when the king
institutes a suit on account of his peace against the
appellee who is present, and the latter is found by the
inquisition, upon which he has placed himself gratuitously
or unwillingly, to be condemnable and culpable, it is to
be seen with what punishment he ought to be punished,
since there are some, who say that he should be punished
with a pecuniary penalty, and others s&y with the most
extreme penalty.

And if & woman ravished by force has lost her maiden- 13.
hood, and the appellee, when he has fallen from his appeal, us booa
has placed himself upon the country, by which he is found daba
guilty, he shall be condemned, as if the appeal had pro- NERUS
ceeded, as in the term of St. Michael in the sixth and
seventh years of king Henry.


CHAPTER XXII.


It has been above discussed where an aecuser appears, — 1.
and both sues and appeals, and concerning the suit of the E pe tone


king, when the appeal has fallen through. Now we must upon com-
speak: of persons indieted upon common fame, which M9nfame
raises & presumption, and by which we must hold, until picion.


FF


2.
Qualiter
justiciarius


452 DE CORONA.


tat? se à tali suspitione purgaverit. Ex fama quide
oritur suspitio, & ex fama & suspitione gravis pre-
sumptio, tame pbationé admittit in contrariü, sive
purgation&. Suspitio quide multiplex esse poterit. In-
primis, si fama oriatur apud bonos & graves. Item
ex facto peed oritur suspitio, cui etià standü est, do-
nec pbetur eontrariü: ut si quis appellatus fuerit à
probatore, & fugerit ppter appelluü, & mortuo pbatore
redierit. Ite si quis de morte hominis, vel alia felonia
appellat? fuerit, & psens appellu declinaverit, nihilo-
min? suspectus habetur, quia felonig subesse poterit,
de qua appellat? se nondu purgavit, & unde standü
est suspitioni, donee se purgaverit. Sunt etiam alie
presumptiones, de quib? dietum est suprà in parte,
qui)» pbationem non admittunt in cotrariü nec defen-
sione, ut si quis cum cultello sanguinolento captus
fuerit super mortuü, vel à mortuo fugiendo, vel mor-
iem cognoverit coram aliquibus, qui recordü habent, &
hüii tales, etiam si accusator non apparuerit, mortem
dedicere non poterunt. Sed cüm fama suspitioné in-
ducat, vidend erit, quee & qualiter esse debeat talis
fama, & unde oriatur. Et scied q fama, quse suspi-
tione inducit, oriri debet apud bonos & graves, non
quidem à malevolis & maledicis, sed pvidis & fide
dignis psonis non seme] sed ssepius, q clamor innuit
& diffamatio manifestat, tumult? eni fit & clamor po-
puli quandoq, de plurib?, quse in veritate non fundan-
tur, & ideó vans voces populi no sunt audiende.


Justice. igitur si discret? sit, (cu ppter fama & suspi-
lione p patrià debeat veritas inquiri si indietat? de


j OF .THE CROWN. 453


suspicion. From fame indeed suspicion arises, and
from fame and suspicion a grave presumption, never-
theless ib admits of proof to the contrary or of purga-
tion. Suspicion indeed may be manifold. In the first
place, if fame arises amongst the good and the grave.
Likewise suspicion arises from a fact preceding, by which
we must hold, until the contrary is proved, as if any one
has been appealed by an informer, and has fled on account
of the appeal, and upon the death of the informer has
returned. Likewise jf any one has been appealed con-
cerning homicide or another felony, and being present
has avoided the appeal, nevertheless he is held to be sus-
pected, because there may be in substance a felony, con-
cerning which having been appealed he has not yet
purged himself, and wherefore we must hold to the sus-
pieion, until it is purged. There are likewise other pre-
sumptions,concerning which we have spoken above in part,
which do not admit of proof to the contrary nor of defence,
asif & person has been captured with a bloodstained
knife upon a dead man, or in running away from a dead
man, or has confessed the death before certain persons,
who keep & record, and such kind of persons cannot
gainsay the death, even if an accuser should not appear.
But when fame brings on suspicion, we must examine
what and what kind of fame it ought to be, and whence
ib arises, And itis to be known that fame, which gives
rise to suspicion, is à fame amongst good and grave
persons, not originated by malevolent and slanderous
persons, but by provident and trustworthy persons, not
once but repeatedly, which clamour intimates and disse-
mination manifests, for there is sometimes a tumult and
a clamour of the public concerning several things, which :
are not founded on truth, and therefore the vain voices
of the public are not to be heard.


The justice, therefore, if he be discreet, (since on 2


account of publie fame and suspicion the truth ought to Ded Kd


the person indieted has purged himself from the said


454: DE CORONA.


debeatex. Crimine ei imposito culpabilis sit vel no) inprimis de-


aminare.


f. 148 b.


3.
Quod
omnes à
jurata
amovean-
tur, quos
appellatus
sufficienti
habet ra-
tione sus-
pectos.


bet inquirere, si forte dubitaverit, & jurata suspecta
fuerit, à quo vel à quibus illi duodecé didicerunt ea,
quee in veredicto suo pferüt de indictato, & audita
super hoc eorü resposione, de facili perpedere poterit,
si dolus subfuerit, vel iniquitas. Dicet forté aliquis
vel major pars juratorum, g ea qus ipsi pferunt in
veredicto suo didicerüt ab uno ex conjuratorib? suis,
& qui interrogat? forte dicet q illa didicit ab illo tali,
& sie descendere poterit interrogatio & responsio de
psong in psonam usq, ad aliquam vilem & abjectam
psonam, & talem cui non erit fides aliquaten? adhi-
benda. Et ita inquirat justit in hujusmodi q gloria
sua & laudis sus; titulus ecumuletur, & maturé dicetur!
Jesus crucifigitur & PBarabas liberatur, p hujusmodi
enim inquisitiones, si? diligenter & caut? facts fuerint,
multe? inveniri poterunt inconvenientie. Et venit
quidé quandoq, q düs tenentem suum indictat vel in-
dietari facit & ei crimen imponi ob cupiditate terrà
sui habendi in dominico, vel vieinus vicino ppter odium
& hujusmodi.


Cüm igitur procedendum sit de hujusmodi ad inqui-
sitionem, ut ad judicium securi? peedatur, & ut peri-
culü & suspitio tollatur, justitiat dieat indictato q, si
aliquem ex duodecim juratoribus suspectü habeat, illum
juste ratione amoveat. Et illud idem dicatur de vil-
latis, ut si capitales inimiciti? fuerint inter aliquos
ipsorum & indictatum, vel si ob cupiditatem terrz
habende, ut pdictum est, qui omnes amovendi sunt ex


The more correct reading is pro-
bably **et minime dicetur."

?* si^ Suchisthe general read-
ing of the MSS., but * nisi ? seems
to be required by tho context.

3 * multe? omitted, MS. Rawl
C. 160.


1 * mature dicetur. "This isevi-
dently an erroneous reading. MS.
Rawl. C. 160. has ** natura dicetur?
which is also erroneous. Other
MSS., such as Rawl. C. 159. and
Godbolt, have '*et non dicatur."


OF THE CROWN. 455


be inquired into by the country, whether the person in- ought to
dieted of & crime imputed to him is guiléy or not,) 9?X?mume.
ought first to inquire, if by chance he has any doubt and

the jury is suspected, from whom singly or from whom
generally those twelve persons have learnt those things,

whiclí in their verdict they set forth concerning the
person indicted, and after hearing their answer on this
question, he will be able easily to judge, whether there is

any deceit or iniquity behindhand. Some one will
probably say or the greater part of the jurats, that they  f.148 b.
have learnt those things which they set forth in their
verdict from one of their associate jurats, and who upon
interrogation will probably say that he heard them from

such an one, and so the question and the answer may
descend from person to person, until it arrives at some

vile and abject person, and such an one that no faith is

to be given to him. And so let the justice inquire in &
matter of this kind, that his glory and the title of his

praise may be accumulated, and it shall not be said,

Jesus is erucified and Barabas liberated, for by inquisi-

tions of this kind, if they be diligently and cautiously

made, many inconveniences may be discovered. And it
happens sometimes, that a lord indiets or causes to be
indieted his tenant, and imputes a crime to him from a

desire to have his land in his demesne, or a neighbour

[does this] to à neighbour on account of hatred or such

like feeling.


When therefore proceedings are to be had in the 3s
nature of an inquisition of this kind, in order that the That ca:
proceeding to & judgment may be more safe, and that from the
danger and suspicion may be removed, let the justice "T? Dm
say to the person indicted that, if he has reason to sus- pelleó has
pect any one of the twelve jurors, he may remove him ns
for just grounds. And let the same thing be said of suspect.
the townspeople, that, if there have been any capital
enmities between any of them and the person indicted,


or if on account of covetousness to possess his land, as


|
|
|
|
|


456 DE CORONA.


juste suspitione, ut inquisitio absq, omni suspitione
peedat. Presentib? igitur xii. juratoribus, & quatuor
villatis, inprimis jurabit quilibet de villata p se, vel
ones simul erectis sursum manib? singulorü in hzc
verba.


ud vi. Hoc auditis justitiarii, q veritate dicemus de iis,

"en jura- quse à nobis requiretis ex parte dfi regis, & p nihilo
er 8 Ld . . . Ld *

vel ones ' Omittem?, quin veritatem dicemus, sic nos Deus adju-


simul vei, &oe.
erectis


manibus.

5. Et tune unus ex justit ilhs hii verba pponat. Talis,
Medie qui hiec psens est, rectat? de morte talis, vel alio tali
oris pro- crimine, venit & defendit morte & totu, & ponit se
used superlinguas vestras de hoc de bono & malo, vel fort?
sacramen- dicet, de hoc & de aliis malefactis, si forté de aliis
iem f&& — suspectus habeatur, & multüm refert, utrum se posuerit |

super eos taliter vel taliter, quia secundü hoc diversa
sequitur condemnatio vel deliberatio, & ideó vobis
dieim? in fide qua Deo tenemini, & p saeramentu q
fecistis, nobis scire faciatis inde veritatem, nec omitta-
tis timore, amore, vel odio, sed solum Deü pre oculis
habentes, quin dicatis si culpabilis sit de hoe, quod ei
imponitur, vel de aliis maleficiis vel non, & non in-
cumberetis eum, s1 immunis sit vel innocens sit à de-
lieto isto, & posteà secundüm eof veredietum aut sequi-


tur deliberatio vel condénatio.


6 Ista veró formà inquisitionis p patrià servabunt


Generalis " : M . . * $9) . *-
observantia JUS*- generaliter in omnib? inquisitionibus, quae faci&dre
insacra- Sunt p morte hominis, ubi quis se posuerit sup inqui-
mo^nn Sitionem, sive sponte sive p cautelam induct?, sive p
justiciariis necessitatem, in oibus criminibus, majoribus & minori-


faciendis. — 8: possunt tamen justi, si viderint expedire, ex


OF THE CROWN. 457


aforesaid, they are all to be removed upon just suspicion,

so that the inquisition may be free from all suspicion.

Twelve jurors therefore being present and four towns-

people each of the townspeople or all together, each

holding up his hand, shall swear in these words. 2

Hear this, ye justices, that we will spealk the truth anda

concerning those things, which ye shall require from us people

on the part of the lord the king, and for nothing will we miis

omit to speak the truth, so God us help &c. altogether

with hands

And then one of the justices shall propound words "Plifted.

of this kind. So and so, who is here present accused of The woràs,

the death of such an. one or of some other such crime, Missi

comes and defends the death and the whole matter, and from the

puts himself upon your tongues concerning this matter ^ nas

for good or for evil, or he may perhaps say, concerning osth has

this and other misdeeds, if by chance he is suspected of been taken.

other misdeeds, and i6 matters considerably, whether he

has put himself upon them in this manner or in that

manner, because there follows accordingly and differ-

ently his condemnation or delivery, and therefore we say

to you on the faith in which you are bound to God, and

in virtue of the oath, which you have taken, that you

eause us to know the truth thereof, and omit not from

fear, or love, or hatred, but having God only before your

eyes, to declare to us, whether he is guilty of that which

is imputed to him, or of other misdeeds, or not, and not

to oppress him if he be free and innocent of that delict,

and afterwards aecording to their verdict there follows


either his delivery or condemnation.


The justices shall indeed observe that form of in- " 6. i
quisition by the country generally in all inquisitions, ob sevance
which are to be made concerning homicide, where a intheoaths

. . e tio : . tobe taken
person has put himself upon the inquisition, either of his vefore the
own free will, or induced by motives of caution, or by Justiciaries.
necessity, in all crimes, major or minor; the justices


however, if they perceive it to be expedient, from a


458 DE CORONA.


causa necessaria, si prave crimé latens sit, & juratores
forté &more, odio, vel timore celare voluerunt verita-
iem, separare juratores ab invicem, & quemlibet p se,
& separatim examinare, ad veritatem sufficienter decla-
randam. |


f. 144. Car. XXIII.


Lo Dictum est suprà de appello de morte hominis facta

De aPP*llo nequiter & contra pace, nune aute dicend est de pace
e pace á $ s " €

etplagis  & plagis factis contra pace, fit aute appellü p hsec

ip 991- yerba, A, appellat B. q quadà die tali, sicut, fuit in

pacem, : M e

etdeverbis pace düi regis in tali loco, vel sicut ivit in pace dii

aPPeli?b reois in chimino! dii regis inter tale villà & tale, tali

appellandi die, ante tale festü vel post tale festu, anno tali, tali

E hora, venit idé B. cum vi sua, & cont pac8 düi regis

disratio- in felonia & assultu pmeditato, fecit ei insultü, &

nad. ^ Quanda plaga ei fecit in tali loco, tali genere armo-

rum, et q hoc fecit nequiter et in felonia, offert pbare

versus eum p corp? suum sicut curia cosiderat. Et DB.

venit et defendit pace dni regis infracta, in felonia, et

plagà, e& quiequid est cont pacé dni regis (et totum

de verbo in verbum, quicquid ei imponitur, et secun-

dàüm g ei imponitur) p corp? suum, secundüm q curia

regis consideravit. Et A. qu:esitus si levavib elamore

& hutesiü, et, quando venit ad coti cum appello suo?

dicit q statim levavit in facto illo et post factum et

statim cum hutesio illo ivit ad villas ppinquiores, et

^ . ad servientes dii regis et coronatoros, eb ad pximum

com fecit appellü suum, et vie. et coronatores testantur


q secta illa sufficienter et rationabiliter facta fuit, et q


! * chymino," MS. Rawl. C. 160, a Latinised form of the Norman word
* chemin."


-—


OF THE CROWN. 45


necessary cause, if a serious crime is concealed, and the
iurors from love, or hatred, or fear are desirous to con-
ceal the truth, may separate the jurors from one an-
other, and examine each one by himself and separately in '
order to clear up the truth sufficiently


CHAPTER XXIII. f. 144.


We have treated above of an appeal for homicide caused — 1.
wickedly and against the peace, now indeed we must ria
treat of a breach of the peace and of wounds inflicted breach of
against the peace, and the appeal is made in these words, !'6 Peace,
A. appeals B. that on a certain day, as he was in the wounds
peace of the lord the king in such.a place, or as he ea iis
travelled in the peace of the lord the king on the high- peace, and
way of the lord the king between such a vill and such a Ora. ot
vill, on such a day, before such a feast or after such a the appeal,
feast, in such a year, at such an hour, the said B. came de
with his foree and against the peace of the king in appealing
felony and with a premeditated assault, made an attack defending
upon him, and inflieted a certain wound upon him in sndofthe
such a place, with such kind of arms, and that he did aefending,
this wickedly and in felony, he offers to prove against ird
him by his body, as the court thinks fit, And B. comes
and defends himself against having broken the peace of
the king, and against the felony and the wound, and
whatever is against the peace of the lord the king,

(and the whole word for word, whatever is imputed
to him and aeeording to what is imputed to him,) by
. his body according as the court of the king has thought
fi And A having been questioned, if he had raised hue
and cry, and at what time he came with his appeal to
the county court? says that he forthwith raised hue and
ery in the very act and after the act, and forthwith
with the hue went to the nearest vills and to the king's
serjeants and coroners, and made his appeal at the next


ensuing county court, and the viscount and the coroners


460 DE CORONA.


plaga ostensa fuib ad com recens et aperta, et quia
secta rationabiliter facta est, et DB. nihil ostendit p q
debet habere patriam, consideratü est q duellum sit
inter eos. Et B. det vadiü defendendi, et A. det va-
diu disrationandi, et uterq, plegios inveniet, et dabitur
eis dies, ad qué uterq, veniet armatus, et. ad que die
poterit se uterq, essof! vel eorü alter, iià q unicum
habeat esso, et si appellans defaltam fecerit ad tale
diem, vel psens se retraxerit, appellat? quietus recedet,
et appellans et plegii sui de psequendo in misericordia,
si autem appellans venerit, et appellat? non, habeatur
appellatus p indefenso. Si autem uterq, defaltà fecerit,
eti testatum sit qg coneordati fuerunt, uterq, capiatur,
et ipsi et plegii sui in misericordia. Si autem psentes
fuerint, uterq, custodiatur. Cüm autem vic. & corona-
tores testati fuerint conirariü, s. q secta non sit suffi-
cienter facta, eó q nullum hutesium levatum sit, nec
plaga ostensa recens & aperta, nec appellans venit cü
appello suo nisi ad secund cofi vel ad tertiü, cadit
appella. Et quia tunc subesse poterit felonia, inquiret
rex, 8i voluerit, p pace sua. Et cü ita fuerit quis ap-
pellat?, & secta fuerit bene facta, habebit defensor
electione, utrü se defendere velit p corp? vel p patria.
Et si aliquo istorum modorum se defenderit, omnes
appellati de forcia vel peepto quieti recedent. Si au-
tem fuerit condemnat?, tune statim pceedendum erit
versus illos appellatos de forcia & pcepto.


2. Declinatur quandog, appellum de pace & plagis p
Decet P- exceptiones generales, secundüm quod superiüs dicitur
contra hu- de appello de morte hominis. Declinatur etiam p ex-


! * essoniare," MS. Rawl. C. 159.


OF THE CROWN. 461


lestify, that the suit was sufficiently and reasonably
made, and B. shows no grounds why he ought to have
the country, ib was held that there should be battle
between them. And let B. give his wager of defence,
and A. his wager of deraignment, and let each find
sureties, and a day shall be given to them, on which
each shall come armed, and as regards which day both
of them or either of them may have an essoin, so that
there shall be à single essoin, and if the appellor makes
default on that day, or being present retracts, the appellee
shall go away acquitted, and the appellor and his sure-
ties shall be amerced ; but if the appellor has come and
the appellee has not come, the appellee shall be held
io be without defence. But if both of them should
make default and it should be attested that they have
settled the matter by agreement, let both be seized, and
themselves and their sureties amerced. But if they be
present, let both be given into custody. But when the
viscount and the coroners have testified the contrary, to
wit, that the suit has not been sufficiently made, inas-
- much as no hue was raised, nor was any recent and open
wound exhibited, nor did the appellor come with his
appeal until the second or the third county court, the
. appeal falls to the ground. And because there may be
in substance a felony, the king shall inquire, if he wishes,
on behalf of his own peace. And when a person has
been so appealed, and the suit has been well made, the
defendant shall have an election, whether he will defend
himself by his body, or by the country. And if he shall
have defended himself by either of those means, all the
appellees as accessories by force or by precept shall go
away aequitted. But if he be condemned, then forth-
with proceedings shall take place against the appellees
as accessories by force or by precept.


Àn appeal for breach of the peace and for wounds is — 2.


. e : d Of the
avoided sometimes by general exceptions, according as... Gpons


has been said above inan appeal for homicide. It is also against an


462 DE CORONA.


jusmodi — ceptiones speciales, quia declinatur propter parvitatem

appellum. place, unde notandum est, quód in appello de pace &
plagis, designandum erit eujus longitudinis fuerit plaga,
& eujus pfunditatis, & utrum ibi sit plaga, vel rifflura,
ad hoc quód procedat duellum vel non procedat. Ut
sciri possit per factum, utrum sit ibi injuria vel felo-
nia, & exinde quz sequatur poena, poterit enim alius
ab eo qui injuriam passus est sequi appellum p eo, si
ipse coinodé sequi non possit, ut si sit parentela con-

f.144b. junctus vel homagio. Poterit etia sequi ad utlagadu
appellatu, càm fort se subtraxerit, hoe tamé in ap-
pello apposito, q ille principalis sequeretur, si posset,
& sequetur, si possit. Et unde p sectam talis poterit
appellat? utlagari ppter impotentiam principalis. Sed
si ante utlagationé eonvaluerit, statim debet sibi assu-
mere sectà & appellum, quia alterius secta non valebit,
noc erit extuüc (si sequi voluerit) ad utlagatione pce-
dendu, cu ipse sib vivus & san?, ppter verba in prin-
eipio appelli apposita p pcuratorem, q ipse principalis
sequetur ecüm possit. ltem videndu quo loco corporis
in plaga facta sit. Ite quibus armis, utrum molutis
armis, ligno vel lapide, licét ligna vel lapides sub
armorü appellatione non contineantur. Arma veró mo-
luta plagam faciunt, sicut gladius bisacuta & hujus-
modi, ligna veró & lapides faciunt brusuras, orbes, &
letus, qui judieari non possunt ad plagam, ad hoc q
inde pveniri possit &d duellum.


$. Sed quid dicitur, si quis alterius virilia &bsciderit,
Item, quid &; illum libidinis! caus& vel commercii castraverit,


dicetur de
eo qui vi- tenetur, sive hoe volens fecerit sive invitus, & sequitur


1 * eum libidinis? MSS. Rawl. C. 160 and 159.


R—00 c0 o ais c m mm mA me Comm 4s m


OF THE CROWN. 463


avoided by special exceptions, because it is avoided by appeal of
reason of the slightness of the wound, whence it is to "his kind.
be noted, than in an appeal for breach of the peace and
for wounds, a description must be made of the length of
the wound, and of the depth of the wound, and whether
ib be à wound or a graze, in order that battle be allowed
or not. That it may be known from the act, whether
i6 be an injury or a felony, and thereupon what penalty
should follow, for a different person from him who has
suffered an injury may sue an appeal for it, if the
person himself cannot sue, as if he be connected by
relationship or by homage. He may also sue for the f.144b.
outlawry of the appellee, when he by chance has with-
drawn himself, this however being added in the appeal,
that the principal would sue him if he could, and he
shall sue him, if he can. And hence a person may be
outlawed at the suit of such an one, on account of the
inability of the principal. But if he recovers his health
before the outlawry, he ought forthwith to take upon
himself the suit and the appeal, because the suit of an-
other person will not avail, nor shall proceedings there-
upon be taken to outlawry (if he wishes to sue) since he
himself is alive and well,on aecount of the words in-
serted at the commencement of the appeal by the proxy,
that the principal himself will sue, when he can.  Like-
wise it is to be ascertained in what part ,of the body
the wound has been made. Likewise with what arms,
whether with sharpened arms, with wood or with stone,
although wood and stone are not comprised under the
term of arms. But sharpened arms make a cut, like a
sword, two-edged and such like, but wood and stone
make bruises, eireles, and strokes, whieh cannot be ad-
judged to be a wound, such as to give rise to battle.


But what is said, if any one has cut off the private s.
parts of another, &nd has castrated him for the sake cce
either of lust or of commerce ? He is liable, whether he be said of


has done it willingly or unwillingly, and punishment ji? who .,


464 DE CORONA.


ria absei- pcena, aliquado capitalis, aliquádo ppetuum exiliu cum
dit alicu- . S m ine . . M .
jus. omnium bonor adeptione. Item si quis mulieris visce-
rib? vim intulerit, quó partum abegerit, tenetur. Item
si quis furem nocturnü occiderit, iià demum impun?
foret, si parcere ei sine periculo suo non potuit; si
autem potuit, aliter erit. In manu enim! regis sunt
vita & mors hominu, sicut coram rege apud Windsore
de quodam homine de Cocha coram W. de Raleghe
tune justitiario, cui düs rex in tali casu pdonavit
mortem. Item erit si quis Hamsokne, qus dieitur
invasio dom?, contra pacem diii regis in domo sua se
defenderit, & invasor occisus fuerit, impersecutus &
" inult? remanebit? si ille, quem invasit, aliter se defen-
dere non potuit, dicitur enim q no est dignus habere
pacem, qui non vult observare eam. Item Jud:is filios
suos cireumcidere licet, sed non alterius religionis
hominem, q si fecerint, castrati poena irrogatur.


Cap. XXIV.


1. Dietum est suprà de pace & plagis nune autem
Ph e dicendum de plagis & mahemio. "Verba autem appelli
et mahe- sunt hsec, ÀÁ. appellat B. quód cüm esset in pace do-
peius mini régis tali loco, tali die, tali hora, tali anno &c.
ecu ut suprà: venit idem PB. cum vi su& & in felonia &

'assultu przemeditato &c. ut suprà, fecit ei quandam
plagam in capite, vel in brachio, vel in alio loco cor-
poris ita quód mahemiatus est. Et quód hoc fecit
nequiter & in felonia, offert disrationare versus eum,
sicut homo mahemiatus, prout curia domini regis con-


sideraverit. Et B. venit & defendit totum de verbo


! * in manu" down to * mortem? 3 ** ipse solutus remanebit," MSS.
omiited, MS. Rawl. C. 159. Rawl. C. 160 and 159,


dni. uiri cdd cQ ICE LXI d uo cc OE M LES Ni dM EUST :
Li ]


OF THE CROWN. 465


follows, either capital, or perpetual exile with forfeiture ies HERES
of all goods. Likewise if & person has employed force? dd
to the womb of a woman, in order to produce abortion,
heisliable. Likewise if & person has killed a thief in
the night, on this condition he shall have impunity, if
he could not have spared him with safety to himself, but
1f he could have done so, it shall be otherwise. For the-
life and the death of à man are in the king's hand, as
before the king at Windsor concerning a certain man of
Cocham before William de Ralegh, at that time justi-
eiary, when the lord the king in that case pardoned the
death. Likewise if anybody in à case of Hamsoken,
which is the invasion of a house against the peace of
the king, defends himself in his own house, and the
invader is killed, he shall remain unpersecuted and un-
avenged, if he, whom he invaded, could not otherwise
defend himself, for it is said that he is not worthy to
enjoy peace, who is not willing to keep it. Likewise it
is allowable to Jews to cireumceise their sons, but. not a
man of another religion, which if they do, the penalty of
castration is imposed upon them.


CHAPTER XXIV.


We have spoken above of a breach of the peace and of — f. 145.
wounds; we must now speak of wounds and of Weapons. E
But the words of the appeal are these. A. appeals B idu for
that when he was in the peace of the lord the king in wounds
such a place, on such a day, at such an hour, in Such a dp
year, &c. as above, the said B. camo with force and fe- ofthe mode
loniously and with a premeditated assault &e. as above, e sndof
caused him a certain wound in the head or in the arm, defending.
or in another part of his body, so that he was maimed.

And that he did this wickedly and feloniously, he offers

to deraign against him in such manner as à man maimed

can, according as the court of the lord the king thinks

fi And B. comes and defends the whole charge word
VOL. II. Ga


f. 145.


2.
De excep-
tionibus
contra hu .
jasmodi
appellum.


466 DE CORONA.


in verbü &e. ut suprà. Et quo easu videndum erit à
justitiarlis, si ibi sit mahemium vel non. Si autem
adjudicetur mahemium, tune auferetur appellato electio
defendédi se per corpus, vel per patriam: quia in hoc
casu, de necessitate arctabitur appellatus ad defenden-
dum se p patriam. Aufertur etiam quandoq, patria
propter convietionem appellati, ut si forte factum cog-
noverit coram aliquib? qui habent recordum, sicut esse
possit, si aliquis alium eastraverit, & fort cognoverit
se esse seysitii de testiculis, factü ulterius dedicere no
poterit cotra eorü recordu. Si aute mahemiu adjudi-
eatu non fuerit, peedatur cotra appellatu, sicut superiüs
de pace & plagis.


Excipit quando3 contra hujusmodi appellü p gene-
rales exceptiones, ut suprà, ut si appellans non fecerit
secta suffieientem, vel si nunqua fuit pseeut? ante iter
jusütiariorum, vel si nullà plaga ostendit coronatorib?,
vel non nisi rufflurà vel brusuram, orbes, ict? cum
baculo & non, armo moluto. Ite ppter variatione, ut
si primó appellaverit quis de pace dfi regis, & modó
de pace vic. ltem si primó de pace vic. & posteà de
pace dii regis. ltem si primó unu de facto, & posteà
eundem de fortia, & é contrario. ltem si primó unü
de una plaga, & posteà eundem de alia. ltem si de
una plaga uno loco corporis, & posteà de eadem in
alio loco. Item si de plaga primó eum gladio, & pos-
teà eoram justitiariis cum .bisícuta. Item si minori
crimine appellat? sit quis & majori, accipi! poterit in
minori donec majus terminetur, secundüm q excipi
poterit in actione criminali & civili, quia semper ter-
minabitur priüs criminalis, quam civilis. Item non


l*gccipi" omitted MS. Ttawl. | correct reading, and is found in MS.
C.160, ** Excipi" is evidently the | Rawl. C. 159.


OF THE CROWN. 467


for word &e as above. And in which case the justices
must examine if there be à mayhem or not. But if a
mayhem be adjudged, then let there be taken away from
the appellee the election of defending himself by his body
or by the country, forin this case the appellee will of
| nécessity be confined to defend himself by the country.
For the country is sometimes taken away on account of
the convietion of the appellee, as if by chance he has
acknowledged the act before some persons, who have a f.145 b.
record, as may be the case, if some one has castrated
another, and has by chance acknowledged that he is in
seisine of the testicles, he cannot gainsay the act against
their record.


Exception is sometimes made against this kind of — 2.
appeal by general exceptions, as above, as if the appellor boa
has not made a sufficient suit, or has not prosecuted against
before the eyre of the judges, or has not shown a wound Sbapen:
to the coroners, or has shown only a graze or a bruise,

a swelling, blows with a stick and not with a sharp
weapon. Likewise on account of a variation, as if he at
first appeals concerning the peace of the king, and now he
appeals concerning the peace of the viseount. Likewise
if at first concerning the peace of the viscount, and after-
wards concerning the peace of the king. Likewise if he
appealed one as principal, and afterwards the same person
as accessory, and the converse. Likewise if at first one
person for one wound, and afterwards the same person
for & different wound. Likewise if for one wound in
one part of the body, and afterwards for the same wound
in another part of the body. Likewise if at first for a
wound with a sword, and afterwards before the justices
with a two-edged weapon. Likewise if a person is ap-
pealed for a minor and a major charge, an exception may
be made in the minor until the major charge is termi-
nated,in accordance with the exception which may be
taken in & criminal and a civil action, for the criminal
action must always be terminated before the civil action.
aa 2


468 DE CORONA.


omnis plaga facit appellum, quia parvitas plagse, ut
predictum est, declinat appellü, & hoc relinquitur dis-
ceretioni justitiariorü, dum tamen si in capite facta
fuerit, sufficit si attigerit usq, ad os pfunditas, & in
quocunq, alio membro. Et si os frangatur, quod facilé
ppendi poterit p renoduram, vel testa capitis franga-
tur, ità quód extrahantur ossa vel skerda magna
levetur, declinabitur & cadet duellü ppter mahemiü.


3. Mahemium veró dici poterit, ubi aliquis in aliqua
er parto sui eorporis effect? sit inutilis ad pugnandu, &
hemium. maximeé p illu quem appellat, ut si ossa extrahantur à
a pura capite, & skerda magna levetur, ut predictum est.
$1. . ltem si os frágatur, vel pes, vel man?, yel digit?, vel
Flez,58- ocu]? pedis vel man?, vel aliud membrü abscindatur,

vel p plaga faeta cotraeti sunt nervi, & membrum aliq,
vel quód digiti curvi reddatur, vel si ocul? effossus
fuerit, vel aliud fiat in corpore hominis p q min?
habilis & utilis reddatur ad se defendendu. Sed quid
dieetur de eo qui dentes habet fractos? si fractio den-
tium judieari debeat ad mahemium ? Ad q sciendum,
quód est quoddam mahemium, quo quis inutilis efficitur


ad pugnandi, de quo supradictum est.


E Est & aliud, q deformitatem corporis inducit, & non
deca m&hemii, & unde refert utrum fraeti sunt dentes pre-
et non ma- eijsores, molares, sive maxillares, quia si molares sive
hemium.  raxillares, cium latens sib mahemium non multü indu-

cit corporis deformitate, nec inutilitate ad pugnandu.
Si autem prrwcisores, videtur quàd ex hoe inducitur
utrumq, hujusmodi veró dentes multum adjuvant ad
devincendum.  Castratio veró quavis latens sit, adju-
dieatur ad mahemiü. Sunt & alia genera mahemii, p


OF THE CROWN. 469


Likewise not every wound gives ground for an action,
for the slightness of the wound, as aforesaid, avoids the
appeal, and this left to the discretion of the Justices, pro-
vided that if the wound is in the head, it 1s sufficient if
it is deep enough to reach the bone, and in the case of
any other limb. And if the bone is broken, which may
easily be ascertained by & plummet line, or the skull of
the head be fractured, so that either portions of bone are
removed or a great crust is raised, battle shall be avoided
and fall to the ground on account of the mayhem.


But mayhem is so termed when any one is rendered *.
in any part of his body disabled from fighting, and " Mies i5
chiefly by him whom he appeals, as if portions of bone be termed
shall have been extracted from his head, and a great ^
crust is raised .as aforesaid. ^ Likewise if & bone be
broken, or a foot, or à hand, or a finger, or a joint of a
foot or of a hand, or any other member be cut off, or the
nerves or some limb have become contracted by the
wound so made, or the fingers have been rendered
crooked, or if an eye has been scooped out, or anything
else has been done to the body, whereby & man is ren-
dered less able and competent to defend himself. But
what shall be said of him who has his teeth broken ? if
the breakage of teeth is to be adjudged a mayhem ? To
which it is to be answered, that everything whereby
& man is disabled from fighüng, as above said, is à
mayhem.


There is another thing which causes disfigurement of ^ 4.
the body, and not mayhem, and hence it matters whether duce
the teeth so broken aré fore-teeth, molar-teeth, or jaw- ment, and
teeth, because if they are molar-teeth or jaw-teeth, sinco por ay-
the mayhem is latent, it does not cause much disfigure-
ment of the body or disability for fighting. But if: they
are fore-teeth, it seems that both these results follow, for
teeth of this kind assist much to victory. | Castration,


however, although it be latent, is adjudged to be mayhem.


470 : DE CORONA.


Britton, j quib? non remanebit duellü, ut videt, ut si auricula
TR abscindatur vel nasus, hoc enim magis erit ad defor-


mitatem corporis, quàm ad virium defectum.


CApr. XXV.


f145*. , In precedentibus dictum est de pace, plaga & ma-
1l. 1 : $ . .

De appello hemio, nunc autem dicendum est de pace & impriso-

de pace et namento, ubi liber homo s. captus fuerit & nnprisona-

mento ec 08 contra pacem in curia, vel infra libertatem alicujus,
H . e. . Lo . . 3

de ries sive fuerit inelusus domo vel castro, civitate, villa vel

et . . . .
de modo burgo, e& in ferro, vinculis, vel ligno detentus contra
appellandi pacem, donec per servientem domini regis, vel breve


jr in suum fuerit deliberatus, càm fuerit vetitus per plevi-
nam, poterib enim quis in hoc dupliciter delinquere,
uno modo per injustam captionem, et alio modo prop-
ter injustam detentionem, verba autem appelli sunt
hzc. A. appellat B. quód sicut fuit in pace domini
regis (ut suprà) venit idem B. cum vi sua contra pa-
cem &e. ut suprà, e&. duxit eum ad talem curiam, vel
ad talem locum, et ibi eum posuit in vinculis, et in
ferro, et in cippo, et in prisona, ibi eum tenuit per
tantum tempus, et plagas ei fecit & mahemium, donec
deliberatus fuit per ballium domini regis, vel donec
tantum ei dedit pro redemptione sua, & quód hoc
fecit nequiter, & in felonia, offert probare per corpus
suum, vel alio modo sieut. curia domini regis conside-
raret. Idem A. appellat alium de fortia, & alium
talem de precepto. Et B. venit & defendit vim &
injuriam, & pacem domini regis infractam, & captio-
nem & imprisonamentum, & detentionem in prisona,
& redemptionem tot solidorum, plagam, & mahemium,
& quicquid ei imponitur, secundüm quod ei imponitur


OF THE CROWN. 471


There are other kinds of mayhem, for which battle is not
allowed, as it seems, as if an ear or à nose is cut off, for
this contributes more to disfigurement than to disable-
ment.


CHAPTER XXV.


We have spoken in the preceding pages of breaches of f 145 b.
the peaoo, wounds, and mayhem, now indeed we will Us b p
speak of breaches of peace and imprisonment where a peal for a
freeman has been seized and imprisoned against the pique iH
peace in a court, or within somebody's franchise, or has and im-
been shut up in à house or a castle, in a eity, a vill, or a, P'otmsents
borough, and detained in irons, chains, or the stocks words of
against the peace, until he has been liberated by the Se appen
serjeant of the lord the king, or through the king's writ, mode of
when he was forbidden through a plevin, for a person may APTE
in this commit a twofold delict, in one way by an unjust defending.
seizure, and in another way on account of an unjust
detention, but the words of the appeal are these: A. ap-
peals B. that as he was in the peace of the lord the king
(as above), the said B. came with force against the peace
&c. (as above), and led him away to a certain court, or to
a certain place, and there cast him into chains and in
irons, and in the stocks, and in prison, and there kept
him for such a time, and inflicted upon him wounds and
mayhem until he was delivered by the bailiff of the lord
the king, or until he gave him so much for his ransom,
and that he did this wickedly and feloniously, he offers
to prove by his body, or in any other way that the court
of the king thinks fit. The said A. appeals another as
accessory by force, and another as accessory by precept.

And B. comes and defends the force and injury, and the
breach of the lord the king's peace, and the seizure and
the imprisonment, and the detention in prison, and the
ransom for so many pounds sterling, the wound and the


mayhem, and whatever is imputed to him, according to


472 DE CORONA.


p corpus suum, vel alio modo, secundüm quod curia
domini regis considerat. Quo casu, si per corp? se
defenderit, cüm electionem habuerit, fiat ut suprà de
aliis appellis, & hoe nisi defensiones habeat & excep-
tiones, quas statim proponat ad declinandum appellum.


A. Poterit enim (sieut in aliis appellis) petere quód sibi
"ibus. allocetur, quód appellans hutesium non levavit, vel


tionibus
onen Due quód sectam non fecit (ut suprà), vel quód varius est
du nn in appello suo, vel poterit cognoscere quód talem non


imprisonavit ut liberü hominem, sed ut servum & na-
tivum suum, ad quod si appellans dieat se esse liberu,
habeat appellatus incontinenti parentes appellantüis vil-
lanos, qui se eognoseant esse villanos, & secundüm hoc
terminetur negotium, vel per corpus, vel per patriam,
secundüm verba appelli, & sequatur poeng& vel non
sequatur, secundüm qualitatem delicti.


uias - In appello autem de pace & plagis & imprisona-
appello  nento, agi poterit civiliter liebt factum sit criminale,
ra ui siquis dieat quasi conquerendo de injuria, & sine
civiliter,  &djectione felonis, quód talis imprisonavit talem contra
e paeem domini illius curie, vel si querelg fuerit in
eum ad- Civitate, villa, vel burgo, tune cotra pàcem dominorum
jertüene |, pacem ballivorum, si autem in comitatu, tunc contra
non. pacem vicecomitis si autem conira pacem domini re-
gis sine felonia adjecta, tunc nullus inferior se intro-
mittat, vicecomes neo alius, scilicet vicecomes non
nomine suo, sed nomine ipsius regis, eujus pax nomi-
natur. Eb hie non sequitur aliqua poena corporalis,
sed itantüm pecuniaria, ratione damnorü, quod seeüs
esset si felonia esset adjecta, ubi inquisitio solummodó
pertine& ad regem, quisa vertitur periculum vite &


membrorum, & ad nullum alium pertinet judicium nisi


OF THE CROWN. 473


what is imputed to him, by his body, or in any other
way as the court of the lord the king thinks fit. In
which case, if he shall defend himself by his body, when
he has had the choice, let it be done as in the other
appeals, and this unless he has defences and exceptions
which he should propound forthwith to avoid the appeal.


For he may (as in other appeals) claim that he should iur
be allowed, that the appellor has not raised the hue, or ceptions
that he has not made suit (as above), or that he has verd iss
varied in his appeal, or he may acknowledge that he has appeal.
imprisoned the said person not as a freeman, but as his
serf and his naif, to which if the appellor declares that
he is à free man, let the appellee at once produce the
villein parents of the appellor, who should confess them-
selves to be villeins, and accordingly let the business be
terminated either by battle or by the country, according
to the words of the appeal, and let punishment follow or
not according to the quality of the offence.


But in an appeal for breach of the peàce and imprison-

ment, a civil action may be brought, although the act bo Ia vlt.
criminal, as if any one should say as i6 were by complaint this appeal
concerning an injury, and without the addition of felony, Mo H
that such. &n one imprisoned such an one against the puc
peace of the lord of that court, or if the complaint be with the
made in a city, or a vill, or à borough, then against the Dod
peace of the lords or the peace of the bailiffs, but if in a not.
county, then against the peace of the viscount, but if it be
sald against the peace of the king, without the addition

of felony, then let no inferior authority interfere, neither
visecount nor other authority, to wit the viscount not in
his own name, but in the name of the king, whose peace is
mentioned. And here no corporal punishment follows, but
only a pecuniary penalty, by reason of the losses [ineurred],
which would be otherwise if felony were added, when
the inquisition pertains to the king alone, because danger


of life and limb is incurred, and the judgment belongs to


474 DE CORONA.


ad regem, nec etiam imprisonamentum, quia nullus
potest in hoc casu judieare nisi rex, nec habebit ali-

f.146. quis inde curiam suam, nisi speciali gaudeat libertate
per ipsum regem, secundüm, quod inferiüs dicetur!
pleniüs de actionibus personalibus civilibus, que ex
delietis oriuntur.


CAP. XXVI.


Dictum est suprà de actione criminali, quee oritur
De actione . . : :
crimina, de pace & imprisonamento: nune autem ex illa dicen-
sie de pace dum, qua oritur ex pace & roberia. Verbi autem
et roberia , | " 3 m. id
etdeap. &ppeli sunt hee. A. appellat B. quód sieut fuit in
pet pace domini regis tali loco, tali die, &e. (ut suprà),
appellandi Venit idem B. cum vi sua, & nequiter & in felonia,
Fic iE & contra pacem domini regis, & in roberia abstulit ei
s. lii. d. & unum equum talis precii, et unam
robam de viridi talis precii, et sic nominare poterit in
appello suo plures res diversi generis, dum tamen cer-
tum precium apponat, & rem certam designet, qualita-
tem, quantitatem, precium, pondus & numerum, colo-
rem & pilum, secundàüm quod superiüs dietum est in
parte. Et quód hoe fecit nequiter & in felonia, offert
se disrationare versus eum per corpus suum, sicut curia
considerat &e. Adjungitur quandoque in appello isto
plaga, & mahemium, & imprisonamentum, de quibus
supradietum est, vel quaedam illorum, seeundüm diver-
sitatem appellorum. Et B. venit & defendit pacem, &
feloniam, & totum de verbo in verbum, secundüm quod
el imponitur &c. ut suprà. Et petit sibi allocari tale
quid, & tale. Etiam potest exceptiones apponere, quee
generaliter se habent ad omnia appella ad eorum de-


—M M Á—— —À


— M — —— — MA —— M "in P "—MÀ n — -———— ——
- 1


l*quod inferius dicetur." "The | low, fol. 439. This and other
gubjeot matter of this reference does | references are suggestive, that the
not appear to have come down to | work was never completed, as in-
us, if it ever was added by the au- | tended by DBracton, when the trea-
thor, see above, fol. 141 b, and be- | tises werc consolidated.


OF THE CROWN. 475


no one but the king, nor even [in the case of] imprison-

ment, because no one but the king can judge in this case,

nor shall any one hold a court in this case except he  f.146.
enjoys a special franchise from the king himself, which

will be explained below more fully in treating of personal

civil actions, which arise out of offences.


CHAPTER XXVI.


We have treated aboveof a criminalaction whieh arises — 1.
from a breach of the peace and imprisonment, we must cu
now ireat of that which arises from a breach of the peace forabreach
and a robbery. But the words of the appeal are these: ios "—-
À. appeals B. that as he was in the peace of the lord the Roo
king, on such a day, at such a. place &c. (as above), the aUDeAS
said B. came with force and wickedly and feloniously and and of the


against the peace of the lord the king and in robbery iud
took away from him a hundred shillings and three pence, rg x
and a horse of such a price and a green robe of a certain d
priee, and so he may name in his appeal several things

of different kind, provided he puts a certain price upon

them, and describes a certain thing, its quality, quan-

tity, price, weight and number, colour and pile, aecording

to what has been partly said. And that he did this
wiekedly and feloniously he offers to deraign against him

with his body, as the court may think fit, &e. "There is

added sometimes in that appeal the wound, and the may-

hem, and the imprisonment, about which we have spoken

above, or some of them aecording to the diversity of the

appeal And B. comes and defends the peace and the

felony, and the whole word for word, according to what

is imputed to him &c. as above. And he claims that so

and so be allowed him. He may likewise raise excep-

tons, which apply generally to all appeals for their


476 DE CORONA.


elinationem. Si autem nihil sit quod appellum decli-
net, tune defendat se appellatus per corpus suum vel
per patriam, càm in hoc habeat electionem, & secun-
dàüm quod se defenderit vel non, peedatur contra ap-
pellatos de fortia & precepto, secundüm quod, superiüs
tactum est. Appellat quandoq, quis alium de alterius
rebus, quàm de suis ppriis, ut si ab aliquo robbate
fuerint res alique, quas habuerit in custodia sua, de
rebus domini sui vel alterius, & quo casu, oportet eum
docere, quód sua intersit appellare, quia aliàs appellum
non h&bebiti, non magis quàm de morte alicujus ex-
traneze persons, & de quo suprà in parte dictum est,
secundüm quod plagam receperit & hujusmodi. De re
veró aliena docere oportet, quód de custodia sua rob-
bata fuerit simul cum rebus suis propriis, vel sine, &
quód ipse custos appellans intravit in solutione de
tanta pecunia erga dominum suum. Et de hac mate-
ria inveniri poterit de termino Saneti Michaelis anno
regni regis H. quarto incipiente quinto in comitatu
Suffolk de Rogero de Kerken & herede de Ver. Item
ad hoe facit de termino Sancti Michaelis anno regmi
regis H. nono incipiente decimo in comitatu Wigorii
de:Thoma de Rupe. Verba appellati? sunt hsc.


2 A. appellat B. quàd ubi fuit in pace domini regis


ns ied tali loco &e. ut suprà. Venit idem B. cum vi sua, &
et pace — nequiter, et in felonia, et cotra pace domini regis, ot
ME eu rOberia, abstulit ei decem aureos & unum annulum
sppeli et. gureum talis precii, & de denariis domini sui, quos


defendendi p abuit in custodia sua, c. libras sterlingorum, & unde


et respon- : -
ape ipse intravit in solutionem erga dominum suum de
j^ : » p, t&nto, vel aliter. A. appellat B. &c. ut suprà, cüm


esset tali loco in paee domini regis, vel cüm venis-


! fuerit," MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ?*appelli," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. 474


avoidance. But if there be no reason why he should
avoid the appeal, then let the appellee defend himself by
battle or by the country, since he has the choice in this
matter, and aecording as he has defended himself or not,
let proceedings be instituted against those who are appel-
lees as accessories by force or by precept, aceording to
what has been said above. .À person sometimes appeals
another concerning the goods of another, and not his own,
as if a person has been robbed of certain things, which
he had in his charge, being property belonging to his
lord or to another, and in which ease, i&. behoves him to
show that he has an interest to appeal, because otherwise
he will not have an appeal, no more than for the death
of a, strange person, and concerning which we have partly
treated, according as he has received à wound or such
like. But concerning another person's goods i6 behoves
him to show that they have been stolen out of his charge
together with his own things, or without them, and that
the keeper of them and the appellor has entered into the
payment of so much money towards his lord. And on
this subject a case will be found in Michaelmas term in
the fourth and fifth years of the reign of king Henry, in
the county of Suffolk, concerning Roger de Kerken and
the heir of Veer. Likewise a ease bearing upon it occurs
in Michaelmas term in the ninth and tenth years of tho
reign of king Henry, in the county of Worcester, concern-
ing Thomas of the Rock. The words of the appeal are
these.


A. appeals B., that when he was in the peace of the "e
lord the king at such a place &c. as above, the said jr da


B. came vidi foree and wickedly and feloniously and anà n
peace o


against the peace of the king and by robbery took away the king,


from him ten gold coins and one gold ringv of such a nd tue
price, and of the money of his lord, which he had in his ie sippeal


charge à hundred pounds sterling, and of which he has eux usd
entered into the payment of so much to his lord, or anà the
otherwise. A. appeals B. &e. as above, that when he ?nswer of
e defen-
was in such a place in the peace of the lord the king, or dant.


l.

De appello
de iniqua
combus-
tione et
roberia et
modo ap-
pellandi et
defendendi.
Britton,

Ll i. ch. x.


418 DE CORONA.


set à tali loco usque ad talem loeum eum denariis
domini sui, vel eum alis catallis, vel rebus ad va-
lentiam c. s&, venit idem B. cum vi sua, & nequiter
& in felonia &c. (ut suprà) & roberia abstulit ei tan-
tum de catallis suis propriis, & tantum de rebus do-
mini sui, & unde intravit in solutionem &c. ut suprà.
Et B. venit, & defendit roberiam, & pacem, & totum
&c. ut suprà. Et ita fiat ut suprà. Et si plures
appellati sunt de fortia, loquatur idem A. versus eos,
quia ita conjuncti sunt de facto & fortia, quód à
diversis appellari non possunt, nec potest aliquis hie
variare magis quàm suprà, unde si quis primó appel-
laverit per corpus proprium, & posteà per corpus alte-
rius, non valet appellum, ut supradictum est de Thoma
de Rupe. Qu:ze autein poena sequatur ilum qui con-
vietus est, docet qualitas & enormitas delicti. Indici-
tur enim. quandoque ademptio vite, quandoque mem-
brorum truneatio, sieut in itinere M. de Pateshull in
comitatu Lincolü de Thoma de Rasne.


Cap. XXVII.


Dictum est suprà de roberia, nune autem dicendum
est de roberia & iniqua combustione. Si quis autem
turbida seditione incendium fecerit nequiter & in felo-
nia, vel ob inimicitias vel prsedandi causa, capitali
puniatur poena vel sententia. Nequiter dico, quia in-
cendia fortuita, vel per negligentiam facta, & non mala
conscientia, non sie puniuntur, quia civiliter agitur
conira tales. Si quis igitur :zedes alienas nequiter.
combusserit, & fugerit, si sit qui accuset, & appellet,
eb sequatur, procedatur contra ipsum sicut de alia


OF THE CROWN. 479


when he was coming from such a place to such & place f. 146 b.
with the money of his lord, or with other chattels or
things to the value of a hundred shillings, the said B.
came with foree and wiekedly and feloniously &c. (as
&bove) and by robbery took away from him so much of
his own chattels and so much of the things of his lord's,
and of which he has entered into the payment &c. as
&bove. And B. comes and defends the robbery and the
breach of the peace and the whole &e. as above. And
let i& be so done as above. And if several are appealed as
accessories by force, let. the said À. speak against them,
because they are so connected as principals and acces-
sories, that they cannot be appealed by different persons,
nor may any one vary here more than above, whence if
any one shall have at firs& appealed with his own body,
and afterwards with the body of another, the appeal is
not valid, as above said in the ease of Thomas of the
Rock. But what punishment attends him, who is con-
victed, the quality and enormity of the offence points
out. For sometimes loss of life is imposed, sometimes
the mutilation of à limb, as in the eyre of Martin de
Pateshull in the county of Lincoln concerning Thomas de
Rasne.


CHAPTER XXVII.


We have treated above of robbery, we must now 1!.
treat of robbery and of wicked arson. But if any one pesi i
in a tumultuous sedition wickedly and feloniously, or wicked


arson and ,


from private enmity, or for the sake of plunder has caused jopbery,
a, conflagration, let him be punished with capital punish- 22d the
. mode of
ment and a sentence. I say wickedly, because a con- appealing
flagration which is accidental or has been caused by snd of de-
. . Te « 2 fending.
negligence, and not with a malicious design, is not so
punished, but against such [offenders] a civil action lies.
If any one therefore has set fire to another person's house
and has run &way, if there be any one to accuse him,
and to appeal bim, and to sue him, let proceedings be
had against him, as in any other felony : if not, then let


480 — DE CORONA.

felonia : si non, tune inquiratur veritas in a&dventu
justitiariorum, ut. suprà de alis appelliss Si autem
captus fuerit, & sit qui sequatur, tunc irrotuletur ap-
pellum in comitatu in hsc verba. A. appellat B. quód
cüm ipse esset in pace domini regis, in tali loco, tali
die &c. ut suprà, venit idem D. nequiter & in felonia
&ec. ub suprà, ubi ipse AÀ. interfuit & vidit, et ignem
apposuit domibus suis & eas combussit, et de denariis
& catallis suis in roberia contra pacem domini regis
asportavit tales res designatas, e& nominatas, ad valen-
üam tanti, & quód hoe fecit nequiter, et in felonia
offerb/ &c. Et B. venit, et. defendit totum, de verbo
in verbum &e. ut suprà, secundüm quod ei imponitur,
& tune (ut suprà) petat sibi fieri allocationes, & pvo-
ponat exceptiones, si quas habet, vel per legem terre
se defendat &c. ut suprà.


Cap. XXVIII.


£M. Est inter alia appella, quoddam appellum q dieitur
1. de raptu virginum : & est raptus virginis quodda
"É Ed crimen, q fcemina imponit alieui de quo se dicit esse
virginum. violenter oppressam, cótra pacem düi regis, qg quidem
P crimen. si cóvincatur, sequitur poena, s. amissio mem-
Fleta, 53. brorü, u& sib membru p mébro, quia virgo cüm cor-
rumpitur, membrü amittit, et ideó eorruptor puniatur

in eo in quo deliquit, oeulos igitur amittat ppter

aspectü decoris quo virgine cocupivit, amittat & testi-

culos, qui calore stupri induxerunt. Non aute sequitur
hujusmodi poena de qualibet foemina, licót vi opprima-


OF THE CROWN. 481


the truth be inquired into upon the arrival of the justices,
as in other appeals. But if he has been caught, and
there is some one to sue him, then let the appeal be en-
roled in the county court in these words: Á. appeals
B. that when he was in the peace of the lord the king
in such & place, on such a day &c. as above, the said B.
eame wickedly and feloniously &e. as above, where A.
himself was present and saw him, and set fire to his
houses, and burnt them down, and of his money and
chattels by robbery against the peace of the lord the
king carried away such things, as described and named,
of the value of so much, and that he did this wickedly
and feloniously he offers [to prove] &e. And B. comes
and defends himself, word for word, as above, according
to what is imputed to him, and then (as above) let him
ask that certain allowances be made to him, and let
him propound his exceptions, if he has any, and let him
defend himself by the law of the land &c. as above.


CHAPTER XXVIII.


There is amongst other appeals a certain appeal, which f. 147.
is ealled concerning the rape of virgins,! and the rape of q, TR
a virgin is à certain crime, which a woman charges concerning
against a man, by whom she says that she has been vio- DR 9s
lently overpowered against the peace of the lord the king,
which crime if it be proved, there follows a penalty,
namely the loss of members, that there shall be member
for member, because when a virgin is deflowered, she |
loses à member, and therefore the deflowerer should be |
punished in that member with which he has offended, ;
let him therefore lose his eyes, on account of his looking |
ab the beauty, for which he coveted possession of the |
virgin, and let him lose his testicles, which brought on |
the lust of ravishment. But this penalty does not follow
in the case of every female, although she should be over-


; ! Statute of Westminster 2, S 34.
YOL. II. HH


482 DE CORONA.


tur Sequitur tamen alia gravis & gravior, secundüm
qd' fuerit nupta, vel vidua honesté vivens, sanetimo-
nialis, vel alia matrona! Ite cocubina legittima? vel
alia? questü faeiens sine delectu quidé psonarum, quas
quidem omnes debet rex tueri ppter pacem suà, sed
non erit de qualibet par poena. Olim quidem corrup-
tores virginitatis & castitatis suspedebant, & eoru fau-
tores, eüm nec tales ab homicidii erimine vacui essent,
& maximeé eüm virginitas & castitas restitui non pos-
sunt: modernis tamen temporib? aliter observatur, q p
corruplione virginis amittuntur' mebra, ut predictum
est, & de alis sequitur alia gravis poena corporalis,
sed tamen sine amissione vit: & membrorum. Et cüm
virgines & viducz & sanctimoniales Deo sunt dedicato,
corruptio earum non solü ad injuriam hominü, verum
etiam ad ipsius Dei omnipotentis irreverentiam comit-
titur, & sine vindicta talis non coquiescat * insania.
Cüm igitur virgo sic corrupta fuerit, et oppressa cotra
pace düi regis, statim, & dum factum recens fuerit,
cum clamore & hutesio accedere debet ad villas vici-
nas, & ibi injuriam sibi illatam pbis hominib? osten-
dere, sanguine & vestes suas sanguine tinctas, & vestiü
seissiones, & sie ire debet ad prepositum hundredi, &
ad serviente düi regis, & ad coronatores, & ad vic. et
ad primü coi faciet appellu suum, nisi it& sit qd
immediate statim faciat querelà sua dio regi, vel jus-
titiariis suis, ubi dicet ei, qd' sequatur ad com, & in
rotulis coronatorü irrotuletur appellum suum, et omnia
verba appelli, seeundüm qd' illud pposuerit p ordine,
el ann? et dies, quib? fecerit appellum suum, & dabi-
tur dies in adventu justitiariorum, ad quem iteru corà
eis pponat appellu suü, p eade verba, quib? pposuit in
coii, &'à quib? recedere non licet, ne cadat appellum
ppter variationem, sicut in aliis appellis, & cautela est


! ** vel. matrona," MS. Rawl. C. 3 ** ve] una vel alia," ibid.

160. * ** quiescat," MS. Rawl. C. 160.
2 «* Jegittima," omitted MS. Rawl.

C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. 483


powered by violence. Nevertheless, another severe and


Still more severe penalty follows, according as she is a


married woman, or a widow living honestly, a woman of &
saintly character, or some other kind of matron. Likewise
a, lawful concubine, or another making her livelihood with-
out any discrimination of persons, all of whom the king
ought to protect for the sake of his own peace, but there


. will not be in each case a like punishment. Formerly


the deflowerers of virgins and of chastity were hanged,
and their abettors, since such persons were not clear of
ihe erime of homicide, and chiefly since virginity and
chastity cannot be restored; but in modern times it
is differently observed, that for the defilement of a virgin
members are lost, as above said, and concerning others
other grave corporeal punishment follows, but neverthe-
less without the loss of life or of members. And when
virgins and widows and saintly persons are dedicated
to God, their deflowering not only works an injury to
mankind, but also an irreverence towards God, and with-
out an avengement such madness will not be put to
rest. When therefore à virgin has been so deflowered
and overpowered against the peace of the lord the king,
forthwith and whilst the act is fresh, she ought to repair
with hue and cry to the neighbouring vills, and there
display to honest men the injury done to her, the blood
and her dress stained with blood, and the tearing of her
dress, and so she ought to go to the provost of the hun-
dred and to the serjeant of the lord the king, and to the
eoroners and to the viscount, and make her appeal at
the first eounty court, unless it be that she can forthwith
make her complaint immediately to the lord the king or
to his justices, where it shall be told her, that she should
attend the county court and have her appeal enrolled in
the rolls of the coroners and all the words of her appeal,
according as she has propounded it in order, and from
which she is not allowed to recede, lest her appeal should
fall to the ground on account of a variation, as in other
HH 2


f. 147 b.


484 DE CORONA.


in appello isto, & in alis appellis, qd' primó audiatur
appelum ab appellante, & posteà irrotulatio corona-
toru, qualiter appellü illud factum fuit in com, & hoc
ideó, ne si rotula! coronatoris priüs legerentur, possit
appellans p illa? formare suum appellum.  Adelstane?
Raptus mulieris ne fiat, defendit tam lex humana
quàm divina, & sic fuit antiquitüs observatum, q. si
quis obviaverit mulieri, vel alicubi invenerit eam sola,
vel socios habuerit, cum pace dimittat eam, quam si
p inhonestate tetigerit, fragit edictum düi regis, &
emendabit secundüm judicium coín. Si aute contra
voluntate ejus jaetet eam ad terra, forisfaciat gratia
Suam, q si impudic? discooperuit eam, et se super eam
posuerit, omniu possessionuü suarü incurrit dünum, qd'
si cocubuerit cum ea, de vita et membris suis incurrit
damnum. De poena ejusdem secundüm legem Roma-
norum, Francorum, & Anglorum. Si eques esset, equus
suus ad dedecus suum decoriabatur de superiori labro,
& cauda quam propiüs natibus absceindere debuit.
Item canis si secum habeat, leporarius vel alius, eodem
modo dedecorabitur. Si habuerit ancipitrem, perdat
beccum & ungues pedum, & caudam. Terra veró &
omnis pecunia, quam ipse raptor perdidit, p sua mise-
ria dabitur mulieri, warrantizante sibi omnia rege.
Et si meretrix fuit anté, tune non fuit meretrix, cüm
nequitiz ejus reclamando consentire noluit. Quód au-
tem modo fiunt quzdam dispensationes, s. quàd ipsi
raptores aecipiunt violatas in matrimonium, non est de
lege, sed de permissione sanetw ecclesim & regis, &
ila permissio solus regis est in regno. Et prim


1 * rotuli," MS. Rawl. C. 160. * norum, Francorum, et À nglorum,
2 « i]los," bid. * equus ei tamen ad dedecus suum
3 * Adelstane.^ In MS. Rawl. C. | ** dedecorabitur desuper ballenro,
160, this word is transferred to the | ** et cauda quam propius natibus
end of the quotation, und is inserted | ** abscidi poterit." MS. Rawl. C.
after ** dampnum," followed imme- | 159 has a similar reading.
diately by the words Lege Roma-


OF THE CROWN. 485


appeals, and there is à caution to be observed in that
appeal and in other appeals, that the appeal made by the
appellor should be first heard, and then the roll of the
eoroners [be read], in the manner in which that appeal
was first made in the county court, and so for this reason,
lest if the rolls of the coroners should be first read, the
appellor might fashion his appeal after them. .Adelstame.
Both human and divine laws forbid, that & rape should
be committed on a woman, and thus it. was observed in


ancient times, that if any one met à woman, or found her E


anywhere alone, or had companions with him, he should let
her go free in peace, and if he touched her to dishonour,
he has broken the edict of the lord the king, and shall
make amends according to the judgment of the county
eourt. Butif he should throw her down: upon the ground
against her will, he should forfeit his grace, but if he should
uneover her immodestly and place himself upon her,
he should incur the loss of all his possessions ; but if he


should have connection with her, he should ineur the ]


loss of his life and of his members. Concerning the pun-
ishment of the same according to the law of the Romans,
the Franks, and the Anglians. If he should be à knight,
his horse for his disgrace shall be stripped of the skin
of his upper lip, and his tail cut off close to his rump,
and his dog, if he has one with him, & greyhound
or other dog, shall be disgraced in like manner. If he
has a hawk, it shall lose its beak and the claws of
its feet and its tail But his land and all the money,
which the ravisher has lost, shall be given to the woman
for her misery, the king warranting it all to her. And if
she were & harlot before, she was not then a harlot, since
she was unwilling to consent to his wickedness by crying
out against him. But that in modern times certain dis-
pensations are granted, to wit, that the ravishers them-
selves may take the ravished women to matrimony, is not
in virtue of the law, but in virtue of the permission of
holy ehureh and of the king, and the permission of the
king alone is valid in this kingdom. — And it first sprung


f. 147 b.


f


|


|
A


480 DE CORONA.


surrexit in Francia, p quodam comite qui hospitatus
es& quendam joculatorem cum uxore sua ppulchra, quo
mortuo (quali morte non curamus evolvere) ipse qui-
dem comes habuit eam, ipsa nolente. Ipsa autem*
quadam nocte exivit à castello, & fugiens venit Pari-
siis, ubi invenit regem Robertum, & cadens ad pedes
ejus narravit eventum rei Quam ut rex audivit, mi-
sib ppter episcopos & barones, qui tune erant cum eo
ad curiam, & precepit mulieri ut narraret eis omnia
sicut ei fecerat, quod & ipsa fecit. Rex autem con-
silio episcoporum & baronum, misit propter comitem,
ut statuio die veniret ad curiam, ad disrationandum
vel defendendum? se si posset. Comes autem ut audi-
vit verba regis, timens iram regis pro suo maleficio,
respondit quód ad hune terminum non posset ire ad
curiam, sed consilio amicorum suorum mandavit regi,
ad pacificandam iram suam, q daret ei ducentas libras
Beluacensis monete, et x. equos de precio tanto:* jo-
culatriei autem centum libras, et eam daret in conju-
gem diviti burgensi, aut militi o qui eam honesté custo-
diret. omnib? diebus vite / suz. Rex quidem omnia
hec subsannando renuit dicens, quód non esset justus
vicarius Dei, si tantam nequitiam venderet inultam p
argento, & cum magna ira fecit summonere exercitum,
disponens ire super eum, sed barones precati suni re-
gem, ut eis inducias octo dierum donaret, et quód
possent eum adducere ad misericordiam suam: quod
vix concessit, & sic ipse comes consilio baronum venit
ad curiam, & eüm rex comparuit, quód vellet cadere
ad pedes ejus, divertit se dicens, aut pateretur jusü-
tiam aut discederet à curia. Quid plura? omnes baro-
nes clamaverunt & confirmaverunt contra regem, quód


! * pulehra," MS. Rawl. C. 160. i' tanto," omitted MS. Raw.
3 *! ipsa enim," MS. Rawl. C. 160. | C. 160.
**vel defendendum," omitted

MS. Rawl. C. 160. d


OF THE CROWN. 487


up in France for a certain count, who received in his
house a certain juggler with a very beautiful wife, upon


. the death of which juggler (how he died we care not


to elucidate) the count had her against her will. But
she herself on a certain night escaped from the castle and
came as & fugitive to Paris, where she found king Robert,
and falling at his feet narrated to him the circumstances
of the crime. Which when the king had heard, he sent
for the bishops and the barons, who were then with him
at his court, and ordered the woman to narrate to them
the whole story as she had told it to him, which she did.
The king then upon the advice of the bishops and the
barons, sent for the count, that he should come on a
certain day to the court to derayne and defend himself,
if he could. But the count, when he heard the words of
the king, fearing the anger of the king for his misdeed,
answered that he could not at that time attend the court,
but upon the advice of his friends sent word to the king,
io pacify his anger, that he would give the king two
hundred pounds of Beauvais money, and ten horses of
equal value; and that he would give to the juggler's
wife a hundred pounds, and would give her in marriage
to & rich burgher or knight, who would maintain her
honourably all the days,of her life. The king indeed
refused all these proposals with a smile, saying that he
would not be a just vicar of God, if he sold inpunity of
such wickedness for money, and with greatanger ordered
his army to be summoned, determining to march against
him, but the barons begged the king, to allow them a
*(ruce of eight days, and that they could bring him to
submit to the mercy of the king, which he agreed to
with difficulty ; and so the count upon the advice of the
barons came to the court, and when the king appeared,
he wished to fall down at his feet, the king turned aside
saying that he must either submit to justice or depart
from the court. Why more ? all the barons exclaimed and
affirmed against the king, that the king had granted him


2.
De verbis
appelli
mulieris
qucerentis
de raptu
et defen-
sione ap-
pellati.


f. 148.


|... 8.
De excep-
tione con-
tra appel-
lum.


488 | DE CORONA.


ipse rex concesserat ei misericordia suá, quando mise-
runt p eo, tandem rex vix concessit. Episcopi, comi-
tes & barones locuti cum comite, disposuerunt, quód
ipse comes duceret eam in uxorem, quse erat pulchra!
& sapiens, & qus» largita est multas eleemosynas eccle-
siis & pauperibus: quz» tamen de Judeis nata, à à paire
& maire & cunctis parentibus. Hsc dispensatio à
talibus & tantis facta, in tantum excrevit & sublimata
esí, quód jam multis locis quasi consuetudinaria habe-
tur? "Verba autem appell sunt hzc.


À. fcemina talis s. appellat B. quód sieut esset in tali
loco, tali die, tali anno &ce. ut suprà, vel eum iret à
tali loco usq, ad talem locum, vel càm esset tali loco
faciendo tale opus, venit idem B. cum vi sus, & nequi-
ter & cotra pacem domini regis concubuit cum ea, &
abstulit ei pucillagium suum sive virginitatem, & eam
secum detinuit per tot noctes, & sie totum exponat
factum & veritatem, & quód hoc fecit nequiter & in
felonia, offerb pbare versus ipsum, sicut curia domini
regis consideraverit. Et B. venit & defendit feloniam
& pacem, & raptu, et totum, de verbo in verbum, sicut
euria domini regis consideraverit. Eti quo casu opor-
tebit de necessitate se defendere p patriam, ppter de-
fectum alterius pbationis & ppter sexum muliebrem,
nisi exceptiones habeat sibi competentes, per quas de-
clinare possit appellum.


Exeipere enim poterit contra appellum, quàd secta
non est sufficienter facta, secundüm quod dicitur in
alis appellis. ltem excipere poterit & dicere quód non
abstulit ei pucillagium suum, quia adhuc virgo est, et
quo casu, probetur veritas p aspectum corporis, & per


!* nimis pulchra," MS. Rawl. | down to consuetudinaria habetur,
C. 160. inclusive, is traneposed in MS. Rawi.

The entire passage from the | C. 160, and is inserted ina later
eommencement of the Law of | place aftor ** ut membra sua redimat
Athelstane, Zaptus mulieris, &c. | * ex necessitate;


OF THE CROWN. 489


mercy, when they sent for him ; at length the king with
difficulty gave way. The bishops, counts, and barons
having spoken with the count, determined that he should
take the woman to his wife, who was fair and wise, and
who gave much alms to the churches and to the poor;
who however was born of Jews, her father and her mother
and all her relatives. "This dispensation granted by such
personages, grew up into such favour and repute, that in
many places. ibis now held to be customary. But the
words of the appeal are these. ;


A. being such a, woman for instance appeals B. that as c 2:
oncern-
she was in such a place, on such a day, in such a year ing the
&c. as above, or when she was going from such a place ks Ur
to such a place, or when she was in such a place engaged appeal of a
in doing such & work, the said B. came with violence complain-
and wickedly and against the peace of the king hadi x) of rape
connection with her, and took away her pucelage or jin, te


virginity, and kept her with him for so many nights, defence of
and so she explains the entire fact and truth, and that Selen
he did this wickedly and feloniously, she offers to prove  f.148.
against him, as the court of the lord king shall deter-

mine. And B. comes and defends the felony and the
breach of the peace and the rape and the whole story,

word for word, aecording as the court of the lord the

king shall decide. And in which case it is incumbent of
necessity for him to defend himself by the country on
account of the defect of the other's proof and on account

of her feminine sex, unless he shall have competent ex-
ceptions to warrant him in declining the appeal;


For he will be able to except against an appeal, that ^ 8.


the suit has not been sufficiently followed up, as is said ar ihe.


ti |
in other appeals. Likewise he may except and Say that xxr


he did not take away her pucelage, and that she is still appear,
& virgin, and in which ease the truth may be proved by


4.
Si appel-
latus per
patriam
fuerit con-
victus,
qui; pena
sequatur.
Glanville,
^07 o] xiv. c. 6.


490 DE CORONA.


quatuor legales foeminas juratas de dicenda veritate
utrum virgo sit vel corrupta, que quidem si dicant
ipsam esse virginem, recedet appellatus quietus de ap-
pello illo & foemina custodiatur. Si autem invenerint
ipsam esse corruptam, tune inquirendum est; ut vide-
tur à quo? ab appellato vel ab alio, sed non per
foeminas illas, sed p patriam. Et de hac 1nateria in-
veniri poterit de uliimo itinere M. de Pateshull in
comitatu Norff. anno regni regis H. duodecimo de A.
filia Radulphi de Sherings! ltem excipere poterit
conira eam & dicere, quód ante diem & annum coten-
tos in appello, habuit eam ut concubinam & amicam
suam, & inde se ponat super patriam. ltem excipere
poterit, quód eam habuit & decorrupit de voluntate
& non cótra voluntatem, & quód modo eum appellave-
rit, hoc est in odium alterius mulieris, quam ut con-
cubinam habet, vel quam duxit in uxorem, & per in-
stinctum alicujus parentis sui ltem exeipere poterit,
quód anno & die, quo hoc fieri debuit, fuit alibi extra
regnum, vel in provincia in tam remotis partib?, quód
verisimile esse non poterit, quód hoc q ei imponitur
fieri posset per ipsum. te excipere possit de omis-
sione facta in appello, ex eo quód nihil aliud dicit,
nisi quód cóocubuit cum ea, nulla facta mentione de
pucellagio, & mult» alie possunt esse exceptiones, de
quibus ad psens nihil recolo.


Cüm autem nihil sit p « declinari possit appellum,
si appellatus p patriam fuerit condemnatus, sine aliqua
redemptione oeulos amittat & testieulos, supradicta ra-
tione, nisi ita sit quód fosmina sie corrupta eum petat
in virum ante judicium redditum, quia hoc est tan-
tüm in voluntate mulieris & non viri quia si hoc
esset in voluntate viri sic sequeretur istud  incon-
veniens, servum vz. vel ignobile mulierem nobilem &
generosam unius pollutionis occasione ppetuo foedare,


! «de Leviniu filia Radulphi de Seherynges." MS. Rawl. C. 160.


MOL to NONEANAAE ae e CHaRP SEN Era NE IRR S L2 P s SNR
.
*


OF THE CROWN. 491


the inspection of her person, and by four loyal women
sworn to speak the truth whether she is a virgin or has
been deflowered, who indeed if they shall say, that she
is &à virgin, let the appellee retire acquitted of that
appeal, and let the woman be kept in custody. But if
they shall find her to be deflowered, then inquiry is to
be made, as it appears, by whom ? by the appellee or by
another, but not through those women, but through the
country. And on this matter something will be found
in the last iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county of
Norfolk, in the twelfth year of the reign of king Henry,
concerning À. the daughter of Ralph de Sherings. Like-
wise he may except against her, that he had her and
 deflowered her with her will, and not against her will,
and that she has lately appealed him in hatred of another
woman, whom he keeps as a concubine, or whom he has
taken to be his wife, and through the instigation of some
of her relatives. Likewise he may except, that on the
day and year, when this ought to have happened, he
was out of the kingdom, or in a province in such remote
parts, that i6 can not be proveable, that the act, which is
imputed to him ean have been done by him. Likewise
he may except concerning an omission made in the
appeal, upon the fact. that it says nothing, but that he
had connection with her, and no mention is made of her
pucelage, and many other exceptions may be made, which
I do not recollect at present.


But when there is nothing, wherefore the appeal can ——4.
be declined, if the appellee shall be condemned by the Sellse "ut
country, let him without any redemption lose his eyes convicted
and his testicles, for the reason above said, unless it be RE
that the woman so deflowered asks for him to be her what pun-
husband before judgment is rendered, because this is Xue
only in the discretion of the woman, not of the man, for
if this were in the discretion of the man, this incon-
venience might follow, that a serf or ignoble man might
perpetually defile a, noble and gentle woman through the


i


MAL TA MEE AS A, CLE DMSC NT, E


arr dad Loi d


EX IIS ind xri EE SL PIRE DE LCS a


f. 148 b.


5


De appel-
latis de
fortia.


499 DE CORONA.


& in opprobrium generis sui ducere in uxore. Sed
esto quód vir raptor sit nobilis, & foemina quam rapuit
ignobilis, nuquid etiam erit in electione foemins) cor-
rupte, eligendi & mnubedi viro nobii vel non? quia
illud idem (ut videtur) sequeretur inconveniens, ex
parte viri nobilis. Respodeo, q sive vir nobilis sive
ignobilis, foemina nobilis sive ignobilis sit, voluntas
semper erit in foemina & electio, quia q in foemina
est voluntarium, in viro erit necessariu, ut membra
sua redimat ex necessitate. OCüm igitur mulier habeat
electionem, et spreto judicio petat ipsum in virum,
conceditur ei ex gratia regis, ob favorem matrimonii.
Si autem judicium elegerit fcmina, faeta executione
judicii de eorruptore, peedat appellum versus eos, qui
appellatà sunt de fortia. Possunt enim esse plures in
fortia, sed tamen unus tantüm tenebitur de corrup-
tione, licót plures teneri possunt de concubitu. Et
cüm ibi diversa sunt facta, videtur «quód in utroq,
facto sequi non deberet consimilis poena, quia corrum-
pere virginem, & concumbere cum corrupta, non sequi-
tur utrumq, factum eadem poena, quod quidem verum -
es, sed non nisi ppter fortiam, qu: ita convicta! est
primo facto de corruptione, et tune sie fiat appellum
versus appellatos de fortia.


Eadem A. appellat C. quód eodem die, eodem anno
&e. quo predictus B. et eadem hora dum idem B.
abstulit pucellagium suum, fuit idem C. in fortia, ita
quód tenuit eam dum idem B. abstulit ei pucellagium
suum, vel quàd concubuit cum ea postquam &oc, vel
fuit in consilio & auxilio quocung, et quód hoc fecit
nequiter, & in felonia, offert probare versus eum, sicui
euria consideraverit, & quo casu, poterit appellatus per


o ta—— M M — á—— —


1 * conjuncta est," MS. Rawl. C. 160,


OF THE CROWN. . .. 403


oecasion of a single pollution, and make her his wife
to the disgrace of her family. But let it be that the
ravisher is noble and the woman whom he has ravished
is ignoble, shall it be at the choice of the ignoble woman
to elect and to be married to & noble man or not? for
the same inconvenience as it appears would follow on the
part of the noble man. I answer that whether the man |
be noble or ignoble, and the woman noble or ignoble, the |
will and the choice will always rest with the woman, be-
cause what in the woman is voluntary, will bein the man
necessary, that he should redeem his members from ne-
cessity. "When therefore the woman has the choice, and
not valuing a sentence she asks for him asjher husband, it

is conceded to her through the grace of the king and in
favour of matrimony. Butif the woman has claimed a f. 148 b.
sentence, judgment having been executed against the |
deflowerer, let the appeal proceed against those who are
appealed as accessories. l'or there may be several acces-

sories, but only one shall be liable for deflowering her,
although several shall be liable for having connection

with her. And since the acts are different, 16 seems that

the like punishment should not follow each act, because

to deflower à virgin and to have connection with her

after she has been deflowered, the same punishment does

not follow each aet, which is true, but only on account

of one being accessory, for the conviction must first take

place for the deflowering, and then the appeal may be

made against those who are appealed as accessories.

The said À. appeals C. that on the same day, in the | 5.
same year &c. on which the aforesaid B. and at the same jeu un
hour at which the said B. took away her pucelage, the who ere
said C. was an accessory, inasmuch as he held her whilst E ind
the said B. took away her pucelage, and that he had series.
connection with her afterwards &c. and was of counsel
and aid to him in some way or other, and that he did this
wickedly and feloniously, she offers to prove against him,
as the court shall think fit, and in which ease the appellee


l.
In quibus
mulier
habet
appellum.
Magn.


Cart. c. 34.


Britton,


j. ch. xxiv.


S 7.

Fleta, 53.
Glanville,
li. 14. c. 3.


9.
De appello
de morte
viri sni.


494 DE CORONA.


patriam deliberari vel convinci, licbt principalis dam-
natus extiterit.


Car. XXIX.


In quib? casib? fcmina appellum habeat videndü
est, & sciendum quód non nisi in duobus casibus, p
quod ? alicui lex apparens debeat adjudicari, s. non nisi
injuria & violentia corpori suo illata, sicut de raptu,
ut predictum est. Item & de morte viri sui interfecti
inter brachia sua, et non alio modo. De morte viri
sui sic fiat appellum.


À. que fuit uxor B. appellat C. quód càm D. vir
suus esset tali loco, tali hora, tali die, tali anno, venit
idem C. eum vi sua, et nequiter & in felonia &c. ut
suprà, occidit ipsum B. virum suum inter brachia sua, &
quód hoc fecit nequiter et in felonia, offert &c. ut suprà.
Eadem A. appellat E. quód eodem loco, eodem die,
eodem anno &c. venit idem E. cum prswdicto C. et
nequiter, et in felonia, tenuit ipsum B. virum suum,
dum idem C. illum B. occidit inter brachia sua. Et
quód hoc fecit nequiter, et in felonia &e. offert pbare
&e. Et sic eodem modo versus plures et de pluribus
factis. Et si ille de facto captus fuerit super factum
cum cultello eruentato, non erit ulteriüs inquirendum,
dum tamen de hoc constiterit p testimonium pborum
virorum. Sed quid magis operatur appellum mulieris,
licet secta bené facta fuerit, quàm secta regis, si ap-
pellum ceciderit vel suspitio oriatur p indictamentum,
eüm in utroque casu recurratur ad patriam, videtur
quód idem sit quoad utrumq, nisi tantüm in hoc, quàd
secta regis quandoqg, remittitur de gratia, vel cum


—— — — —————  — —— — — —— € —


1 « egsibus," omitted MS. Rawl. ? * per quos," ibid.
C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. 495


may be delivered or convicted by the country, although
the principal party has been condemned.


CHAPTER XXIX.


We must see in what cases a woman has an appeal 1.

and it is to be known that there are only two cases, where- m ". EA
gsa

fore apparent law ought to be adjudieated to any woman, woman has,

namely only in eases of injury and violence inflicted on "^ "PPeal.

her body, as in à case of rape, as aforesaid. Likewise

concerning the death of her husband slain within her

arms, and in no other way. Concerning the death of

her husband let the appeal be thus.

A. who was the wife of B. appeals C. that when D. : 2.
her husband was in such a place, at such an hour, on Deal
such a day, in such a year, the said C. eame with violence RE
and wickedly and feloniously &e. as above slew B. her of her
husband within her arms, and that he did this wickedly husband.
and feloniously she offers &e. as above. The said A. ap-
peals E. that 1n the same place, on the same day, in the
same year &c. the said E. came with the aforesaid C.
and wickedly 2nd feloniously held B. her husband whilst
the said C. slew him within her arms. And that he did
this wickedly and feloniously &e. she offers to prove.

And so in the same way against several, and concerning
several acts. Ànd if the principal shall have been taken
in the act with a blood-stained knife, no further inquiry
need be made, provided that this has been ascertained
by the testimony of honest men. But in what respect
does the appeal of the woman operate more, although her
suit has been well conducted, than the suit of the king,
if the appeal fail or suspicion arise through the indict-
ment, since in either case recourse is had to the country ?
It appears that it is the same as regards both, except .
only in this respect, that the suit of the king is some-
times given up through grace or with cognisance of the


f. 149.
l.
De appel-
latis at-
tachiandis.


2.
Breve de
attachi-
ando.


3


Aliud breve
ad idem de


eadem.


496 DE CORONA.


eauss cognitione, quod quidem non fieret, si mulier
beneé sequeretur.


CAP. XXX.


Contingit quandog, q appellati de morte hominis,
plaga, roberia, vel alia felonia, p negligentiam viceco-
mitis & coron, attachiandi sunt, & ideó ad querelam
appellantium fiat bre dài regis de attachiando eos, quód
sint eora justi in hae forma.


Rex vie. salutem. Si Á. fecerit te securum de cla-
more suo psequendo, tune attachiari facias B. p corpus
suum, q sib coram justit nostris ad primàa assisam, cim
in partes illas venerint, responsur? eidem A. de morte
C. patris, matris, fratris vel sororis, vel alterius paren-
tis, vel domini sui, unde eum appellat. Et habeas ibi
hoe breve. Teste &e. Si veró de pace regis infracta,
sieu& de pace & plagis, pace & mahemio, pace & robe-
ria, pace & raptu virginum. & hujusmodi, tune fiat
breve in hac forma.


Rex vic. salutem. Si À. fecerit te securum &c. tunc
pone p vadium & salvos plegios B. quód sit coram
just. nostris ad primam assisam &c. responsurus eidem
À. de pace nostra infracta, unde eum appellat. Et
habeas ibi nomina plegiorum & hoc breve. Teste &c.
Si autem plaeuerit domino regi, q hujusmodi appella,
quae attachiati! fuerunt in com usq, ad adventum justit,
de morte hominis vel de pace domini regis infracta,
veniant coram seipso vel justitiarüis suis de banco, tune
fiat breve in hae forma de summonendo appellum.


! * attachiata," is the correct reading. The word is contracted in MSS,
Rawl. C. 160 and 159.


M


OF THE CROWN. 407


eause, which indeed would not be, if the woman should
sue properly.


CHAPTER XXX.


It happens sometimes that appellees for the death of à  f.149.
man, or for wounds, or for robbery, or some other felony, ...

; . attach-
through the negligence of the viscount or of the coroner, ing appel-
are to be attached, and therefore upon the complaint of!ee* —
the appellors let à writ from the lord the king issue for
attaching them before the justices in this form.


The king to the viscount greeting. If A. has given | 2.
you security for pursuing his complaint, thereupon cause s; n
B. to be attached by his person, that he be brought before ment.
our justices at the first assise, when they shall come into
. those parts, in order to answer to the said A. concerning
the death of C. his father, mother, brother, or sister, or
other relative, or his lord, wherefore he appeals him.
And have thereat this writ. Witness &c. But if it be
concerning a breach of the peace of the king, as concern-
ing peace and wounds, peace and mayhem, peace and
robbery, peace and the rape of virgins, and such like,
then let & writ issue in this form.


The king to the viseount greeting. If Á.has given 3.

you security &c., then place B. under bail and safe P?ether,.
pledges that he shall appear before our justices at the same con-
first assise &c, in order to answer to the said A. con- CfTPiné the
cerning a breach of our peace, wherefore he appeals him.
And have there the names of the sureties and this writ.
Witness &c. But if i6 shall have pleased the lord the
king, that appellees of this kind, who have been attached
in the county until the arrival of the justices for the
death of a man or for à breach of the king's peace, shall
appear before the king himself, or before his justices of
the bench, then let à writ issue in this form to summon
the appeal.


VOL. II. II


498 DE CORONA.


4. Rex vie. salutem.  Precipimus tibi q venire facias
Pu Lid coram nobis vel just. nostris apud Westüi appellum,
venire ap- quod est in comitatu tuo inter À. appellantem & B.
onu appellatum de morte talis, vel de roberia, vel alia
tiiaris. —felonia, & pace nostra infracta, unde idem B. appellat

ipsum B. & pone p vadium & salvos plegios pdictum
B. quód sit eoram nobis vel justit nostris ad prsdic-
tum terminum, ad respondendum eidem 4A. de pdicto
appello. Et habeas ibi nomina plegiorum, & hoc breve.
Teste &c. Et fiat tale breve, si hoc sit ad instantiam
appellantis, si autem ad instantiam appellati, tunc va-
riatur in hoc, quód ubi dicitur, pone per vadium &
plegios, dicatur, summoneas per bonos summonitores
Ddictum À. appellantem &c. scilicet quód sit &e. ad
sequendum appellum suum versus predictum B. si
voluerit. Si autem vie. mandaverit q appellatus non
sit inventus, sed quód se subtraxerit, tune prwceipiatur
(ut priüs) q attachiet eum, si inveniàtur, si autem nó,
q faciat eum interrogari de comi in com, donec p legem
terree utlagetur, licét nullus sequatur, p tale breve.


5. Rex vic. salutem. Prec. tibi sicut aliàs tibi prece-
denm imus, quàd 'adium & sal legios B
trevead perimus! quód ponas p vadium & salvos plegios B.,
idem de — vel q habeas corpus B. quem A. in curia nostra coram


eodem et Ld . * * "e * La d
nisi inveni DObis vel justitiariis nostris apud Westüi appellat de


atur, quod. roberia & plagis, vel mahemio & pace nostra infracta,


utlagetur D" : .
et dg si inveniatur, ad respondendum eidem A. de appello


dé cdd de illo & si non inveniatur, tunc facias eum interrogari
com. de cofi in com, donec p legem terre, & secundüm
consuetudinem regni nostri utlagetur, eo non obstante
q nullus sequitur. Teste &c. Et sciendum quód in hoc


casu non erit necesse q alius sequatur, quia hse est


! * precepimus." MS. Raw]. C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. 499


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you | 4.

that you cause to appear before us or our justices at de -.
Westminster the appeal, which is in your county between appeal to
À. as appellor and B. as appellee, concerning the death of go «qe -
such an one, or concerning à robbery or another felony Justices.
or & breach of our peace, whereof the said À. appeals the
said B.; and place the aforesaid B. under bail and suffi-
cient sureties, that he shall appear before us or our justices
at the aforesaid term, to answer to the said À. concerning
the aforesaid appeal. And have there the names of the
sureties and this writ. Witness &c. And let such be
the writ, if it be at the instance of a party, but if at the
instance of the appellee, then let it be varied in this
respect, that where 1t is said, place under bail and sure-
ties, it should be said, summon by good summoners the
aforesaid À. the appellor &c. forsooth that he be &c. to
pursue his appeal against the aforesaid B. if he wishes.
But if the viscount shall send that the appellee has not
been found, but that he has withdrawn himself, then let
it be enjoined (as before) that he should attach him, if
he should be found, but if not, that he should cause him
to be sought for from county to county, until he shall be
outlawed by the law of the land, although no one should
sue him, through a writ of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you,as 5.
we abí other times have enjoined you, that you place ied
under bail and sufhcient sureties D., or that you detain the same
the person of B. whom A. appeals in our court before an iu
us or our justices at Westminster concerning robbery unless he
and wounds and mayhem, or a breach of our peace, if he Fi u
should be found, to answer to the said À. concerning that outlawed,
appeal; and if he should not be found, that you cause nie A ar
him to be sought for from county to county, until he be county to
.outlawed according to the law of the land and the cus- dur
tom of our realm, notwithstanding that no one pursues
him. Witness &c. And it is to be known that in this
case i& will not be necessary, that another should pursue


II


f. 149 b.


6


Breve,quod


tradatur
per bal-
lium.


v?
Breve de
summo-
nendo
appellum
coram
damino
rege.


500 DE CORONA.


secta regis p contemptis eg non obstante g nullus
sequatur. Si &utem ante utlagationem venerit & red-
dideriü se prisons domini regis, vel si vic. eum cepe-
rit, detineat eum in prisona, donec rex ei aliud prsece-
perit. Aliquüdo tame, licet prisons, se non reddiderit,
tamen differri poterit utlagaria, si sint aliqui, qui ma-
nuceperint eum de habendo eum coram domino rege
vel justii, dum tamen hoc sit ante quintü com, & tunc
fiat tale breve,


Rex vie. salutem. Si duodecem liberi & legales
homines de cof tuo manuceperint corà te de habendo
coram nobis vel justitiariis nostris tali die B. ad stan-
dum recto de appello, quod À. in eadem curia nostra
&c. fecit versus eum de morte C, avunculi sui, vel
alterius talis, tunc appellum illud venire facias coram
nobis, vel justitiariis nostris &c. ad predictum diem,
& die predicto À. quód tune sit ibi coram &o. appel-
lum suum versus eunde B. psecuturus si voluerit, &
habeas ibi nomina pdietorü duodecem summonitorum
& hoc breve. "Teste &oe. $i autem appellum, secundüm
quod predictum est, fuerit in comitatu, fiat aliud
breve de summonédo appellum coram domino rege in
hac forma. ,


Rex vie. salutem.  Prsec. tibi quód appellum unde
B, attachiatus est in cofi tuo p morte C, unde A,
eum appellat, venire facias coram nobis &e. tali die
&icut attachiatus est veniendi coram justitiariis nostris
àd primam assisam, cüm in partes illas venerint, Et
habeas &e. Teste &e. Si autem appellum factum fuerit
(secundü qued predictum est) immediat? coràm ipso


OF THE CROWN. 501


him, because this is the suit of the king for contempt,
notwithstánding that no one sues him. But if. before
outlawry he should come and surrender himself to the
prison of the lord the king, or if the viscount should
háve taken him, let him detain him in prison, until the
king shall otherwise direct him. Sometimes, however,
although he shall not have surrendered himself to prison,
the outlawry may be deferred, if there be certain persons,
who will be sureties for himi to present him before the f. 149 b.
lord the king or his justices, provided however this
be done before the fifth county court, and then let à writ
of this kind issue.


The king to the viscount greeting. lf twelve free and — c.

loyal men of your county have become sureties before Ta "
you to pr esent before us or our justices on such a day B., to aelivered
answer in court concerning an appeal which A. has made DP y ns
in our said court &c. against him concerning the death
of C. his uncle, or another such relative, then cause that
appeal to come before us or our justices &c. on the
aforesaid day, and say to the aforesaid À. that he should
be present &e. to prosecute, if he wishes, his appeal
against the said D. and have there the names of the
aforesaid twelve summoners and this writ. Witness &c.
But if the appeal, according to what has been said above,
has been in the county, let another writ issue for sum-
moning the appeal before the lord the king in this
form.


The king to the viseount greeting. We enjoin you, 7.
that you cause to come before us an appeal, whereof
has been attached in your county concerning the death ing the
of C. whereof A. appeals him, that you cause him to sppeal dia
come before us &e. on such a day, like as he has been lord the
&ttached to come before our justices at the first assise,
when they shall have come into those parts, and have
&c. Witness &e. But if the appeal has been made as
aforesaid immediately before the king himself or his


8.
Breve, si
appellum
factum
fuerit im-
mediate
coram
rege.


2903 DE CORONA.


rege vel justitiarjis suis de banco, tunc fiat breve de
attachiando appellatum de facto in hae forma.


Rex vic. salutem. Si À. fecerit. te securum de cla-
more suo prosequendo, tune pone p vadium & salvos
plegios B. & C. quód sint coram &c. tali die ad respon-
dendum eidem A. de morte D. patris vel alterius,
unde: eos appellat, vel de pace & plagis, vel aliis felo-
niis superiüs nominatis, & habeas ibi nomina plegio-
rum & hoc breve. Et ad diem illum poterunt attachi-
ali se essoniare, nisi hoc sit pro morte hominis, vel
alio erimine majori. Si autem ad diem no venerint,
nec se essoniaverint, & vic. miserit breve & nomina
plegiorü, tunc appellante se liti offerente, attachientur
p meliores plegios, & tunc in fino q habeat eorum cor-
pora, & observetur ordo attachiamentorum (ut infrà)
de psonalibus actionibus, nisi justitiarii aliud. duxerint
statuendü p qualitate delicti. Et si tunc se subtraxe-
rint, exigatur ut suprà, & plegii omnes ej? in miseri-
eordia, si aute appellatos pduxerint ad dié suum, plegii
quieti erunt de plevina, nisi gratis velint eos sub eadé
plevina retinere, si nihil aliud plegiaverint nisi tantü
habendi eum: non enim sunt plegii q appellati. re-
spondeant vel se defendant misi velint, aliud tamen
esset, si essent plegii de psequendo. Si autem càm
appellum semel fuerit in cofi, & positum coram rege
vel just. & de verbis appelli contentio habeatur, tunc
peipiatur quód fiat recordum in comitatu de verbis
appelli per hoc breve.


OF THE CROWN. 508


justices of the bench, then let a writ issue for attaching
the appellee of the fact'in this form.


The king to the viscount greeting. If A. has given
you security to pursue his complaint, then place B. an


Ut X Re ee Nor Ne E NE TEUER ET ENTRE. CR S TERR. INE SO NRS R  NELRO LA Y 0, T CINES OM HC


d A writ, if
the appeal


C. under bail and sureties, that they should appear before bas been .


&e. on such a day to answer to the said A. concerning


made im-
mediately


the death of D. his father or other relative, whereof Eon the


he appeals them, or concerning peace and wounds, or
other felonies above named, and have there the names
of the sureties and this writ. And on that day. the
attachees may essoin themselves, unless it be for the
death of à man or another great crime. But on that
day,if they should not have come, nor essoined them-
selves, and the viscount has sent the writ and the names
of the sureties, then upon the appellor presenting him-
self to carry on the suit, let them be attached by better
sureties, and then in the end that he should present their
persons, and that the order of attachments be observed
(as below) concerning personal actions, unless the justices
think that something otherwise should be ordered ac-
eording to the quality of the offence. Andif then they
shall have withdrawn themselves, let them be required as
aforesaid, and let all his sureties be amerced, but if they
shall have produced the appellees on their own day, the
sureties shall be acquitted of their obligation, unless they
wish gratuitously to retain them under the same obliga-
tion, if they have undertaken nothing else than solely
to produce him: for they are not sureties that the appel-
lees shall answer or defend themselves, unless they are
willing, i& would, however, be otherwise if they were
sureties for the prosecution. But if, when the appeal
has been once in the county court, and afterwards placed
before the king or his justices, and a contention has
arisen concerning the words of the appeal, then let it be
enjoined, that a record be made in the county court
concerning the words of the appeal, by this writ.


8-


AJ Mücccee n Abo d COLE. pescE


504 DE CORONA.


009. Rex vie. salutem.  Preeipimus tibi, quód coram te
Breve de^" & coram custodibus placitorum coronm nostre in pleno
aiiud com tuo, recordari facias appella, unde A. appellat B.
im comitatg de pace nostra infracta, qualiter & per quz verba.
cba idem A. fecit appella sua, & utrum appella fecit in
' eom vel hundreda, & reeordum illud habeas coram no-
bis vel justitiariüs nostris apud Westm tali die sub
sigillo tuo & sigillis przedietoru custodü placitorü co-
ronze nostre, & per duos ex illis qui recordo illi iriter-
fuerint, & habeas ibi hoe breve. "Teste &e. Item aliud
de eodem si vic. debeat habere recordu & debeat facere
venire duodece & iiij. villatas ad certificandum  justi-

tiariis de morte alicujus.


£15. ^ Bex vie salutem.  Prz;ceipimus tibi, quód omni occa-
.10- ^ sione postposita, sis coram just. nostris apud Westm
Aliud m ""
brevede  &d talem terminu, & ibi habeas recordu de appello q
eodem .. faetum fuit in coii tuo inter À. appellanté & B. ap-
vicecomiti, " Sio. Wescra .
pellati de morte C. fratys ipsius A. & cora eisdem
just. venire facias ad pdictum terminu duodeeé liberos
& legales homines de com tuo de pximo visneto p quos
&e. & qui pdictos À. & B. aliqua affinitate non attin-
gant, & ptereà de quatuor pximis villatis, de qualibet
villata sex homines legales & ppositu, ad certificandu
pfatos just. nostros de morte illa, & habeas ibi nomina
pdietorum duodecem & hoc breve. Teste &c.


CA». XXXI.


i. Eodem modo, quo quis felonià facere possit interfi-
: so: ciendo alium, it& feloni&am facere possit interficiendo
niam de  Seipsum, qure quidem felonia dicitur fieri de seipso.


seiPS. ^ TFelonig quidem facit de seipso, ut si quis reus fuetit


Ni
1
|
!
1
i
:
l


OF THE CROWN. 505


The king to the viscount greetinp. We enjoin you, 9.
that before you and before the keepers of the pleas of Qe
our crown in your full county court, you cause to be count to


recorded the appeal, whereof A. appeals B. concerning a Dess |
breach of our peace, in what manner and by what words the county -
the said A. made his appeal, and whether he made the foie uc :
appeal in the hundred court or in the county court, and FONDO of
have that record before us or our justiées at West-

minster on sueh & day under your seal and the seüls of

the aforesaid keepers of the pleás of our crown, and by

two of those who took part in that record, and have,

there this writ. Witness &e. Likewisé ánother on tle

sàme subjeet, if the viscount ought to have a reéord, and

ought to éause twelve [neighbours] and four townships.

to certify to the justices concerning the death of any

person.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you, £f. so.
that putting aside all excuse, you present yourself before A bos E
our justices at Westminster at such a term, and there writ on
produce the record coneerning the appeal, which was subject to
made in your county court between A. the appellor, and the vis-
B. the appellee, concerning the death of C., the brother *?"?*
of the said À,, and that you cause to come at the said
term twelve free and loyal men of your county from the
immediate neighbourhood, by whom &oc., and who do not
touch the aforesaid À. and B. by any affinity, and besides
from the four nearest townships, from each township six
loyal men and a provost to certify our aforesaid justi-
eiaries concerning that death. And have there the names
of the aforesaid twelve and this writ, Witness &c.


CHAPTER XXXI.


In the same way, in whieh & person may commit à 1.
felony by killing another, so he may commit a felony by If an ons


killing himself, which felony indeed is said to be committed mite a
against himself. He commits a felony against himself, as felony


CQ TP ATEMNONE e TETTE


506 DE CORONA.


alicujus criminis, ità q capt? fuerit p morte hominis,
vel cum furto manifesto, & cüm utlagat? fuerit, vel in
aliquo scelere & maleficio deprehensus, & metu crimi-
nis imminentis, mortem sibi consciverit, heredem non
habebit: quia sic convincitur /felonia priüs facta, sicut
furtum, vel mors hominis, vel hujusmodi. Sed qui
criminis rei postulati non sunt, vel in crimine de-
prehensi manus sibi intulerint, bona eorum fisco non
vendicentur, non enim facti sceleritatem constat - esse
obnoxiam, sed conscientizte met? in reo veluti pro con-
fésso habeat. Et ideó si rei postulati fuerint, vel in
scelere deprehensi, si seipsos interfecerint, bona ipso-
rum confiscentur, scilicet. bong eorum qui reatum mor-
tis sibi consciverint, ut si ejus criminis fuerint, quód
damnarentur morte vel deportatione Qui autem se
submerserint vel przcipitaverit ex alto, vel alio modo,
tales hseredes habebunt, quia non convincitur felonia,
nisi precedat aliquod crimen propter quod periculum
mortis vel mébrorum sustinere deberet. Si quis autem
tedio vite vel impatientia doloris alicujus, seipsum
interfecerit, successorem habere poterit, & talis non
amittit h:reditatem, sed tantüm  bon& ejus mobilia
confiscentur: sed si quis sine causa manus sibi p vim
intulerit, per iram & malam voluntatem, ut cüm alteri
nocere vellet, & adimplere non posset quod voluit, se-
ipsum interfecerit, puniendus est, & successorem non
habebit, quia convincitur & punitur felonia, qua in


, pson& alteri? facere pposuit, quia qui sibi ipsi non


parcit, multo minüs aliis parceret, si facultatem habe-
ret. Sed de furioso quid dicetur qui rationem non
habet? & de mente capto, & frenetico, vel de infan-


OF THE CROWN. 507


if a person should be aecused of any crime, so that he pe
should have been captured for thé death of à man, or with
manifest theft, and when he has been outlawed or detected
in any wickedness and misdeed, and through fear of immi-
nent accusation, has brought death on himself, he shall not
have an heir. For by such means he is convicted of the
felony previously committed, such as theft, or the death
of à man, or such like. But of those whoare not charged
as defendants in a crime, or being detected in a crime
have destroyed themselves, their goods are not to be con-
fiscated to the public treasury, for it is not evident that
the wickedness of the act is established, but the fear of
conseience in the party aecused may be taken as a con-
fession. And therefore if they have been challenged as
defendants, or have been detected in wiekedness, if they
have slain themselves, let their goods be confiscated, that
is the goods of those who have brought upon themselves
the guilt of death, as if they were guilty of a crime for
which they would be condemned to death or banish-
ment. But those who have drowned themselves or
precipitated themselves from on high or in some other
way, such persons shall have heirs, because felony is not
proved in their case, unless some crime precedes, where-
fore he ought to be in peril of his life or of his limbs.
But if any one from weariness of life or impatience of
pain has slain himself, he may have a successor, and such
a person does not lose his inheritance, but let his mov- .
able goods only be confiscated, but if a person has laid
violent hands upon himself without any cause, through
anger or ill-will, as when he wished to hurt another, and
could not fulfil what he wished, he slew himself, he is to
be punished, and shall not have a successor, because the
felony which he purposed to commit against the person
of another, is convicted and punished, because he who
does not spare himself, would much less spare others,
if he had the means. But what shall be said of a mad-
man, who has not reason, and of an insane person and a


f. 150 b.


l.
De actione
furti, ct
quid sit
furtum.


Inst. IV.
t. 1.
Azo in
Cod. Vl
Rubr. 92.


508 DE CORONA.


tulo, vel si ille qui laborat in aéuta infirmitàte seip-
sum submerserit vel interfecerit, quzeritur ati talis felo-
niam faciat de seipso? videtur quód non, nec heredi-
tatem forisfaeiunt nee catalla, eó quód sensu carent et
ratione, & non magis quàm brutum animal injuriam
facere possunt nee feloniam, éüm non multüm distent
à brutis, seeundüt quod videri poterit in minori, qui,
si alium interfecerit in minori setate, judicium don sus-
tinere: & hse vera sunt quàd furiosus non tenetur,
nisi hoc fecerit simulato furore, cümi dilucidis gaudeàt
intervallis: De submersis & oppressis & p infortuniu
mortuis patet suprà. Bed si quis seipsum suspederit,
non ppter hoc exhzredantur hreredes, seeutidüri quosda,
nec uxor dote amittat, nisi in 6asu ut suprà, quid fe-
lonia de seipso faeta éonvinei non poterit.


CAP. XXXII.


Inter alia placita corone non est omittendum de
&clione furti, & de qua oritur appellum, quamvis in
diversis curiis aliquando terminetur, sicut in comitatu


. & in euriis baronu, & aliquando in majori curia ipsius


regis. Inprimis igitur videndum est, quid sit furtuni,
& quob ejus species. Et sceiedum, quód furtum est
secundüm leges contraétatio rei aliene fraudulenta,
cum animo furandi, invito illo düo cujus res illa fue-
rii. Cüàm &nimo dico, quia sine animo furandi mnon
committitur. Est etiam quasi furtum, rapina, que
idem esb quantum ad nos q robberia, & est aliud gen?
contractationis contra voluntatem domini, & similis


OF THE CROWN. 509


frenetia or childish person, orif à person, who is suffering
from an acute infirmity, has drowned himself or slain
himself, ii is asked whether such à person commits
felony against himself? it seems not, nor do they forfeit
their inheritance nor their chattels, by reason that they are
without sense and reason, and no more than a brute
animal ean they do an injury nor a felony, since they do
not differ much from brutes, according to what may be
seen in & minor, who, if he should slay another minor
under age, would not undergo judgment; and these
things are true that à mad man is not liable, unless he
has done this under pretence of madness, when he has f. 150 b.
lucid intervals, Concerning the drowned and the suffo-
eated and those who die from accident it appears above.
Butif à person has hanged himself, his heirs are not
disinherited for that reason according to some, nor does
his wife lose her dower, except in the case above men-'
tioned, because a person eannot be convicted. of felony
committed against himself.


CBAPTER XXXII.


Amongst other pleas of the crown we must not omit 1.
treating of the action for theft, and concerning which an ig the
appeal arises, although i it is sometimes terminated in dif- action for
ferent courts, as in the county court and in the courts of iud. 2
barons, and sometimes in the greater court of the king theft.
himself. We must therefore in the first place see what
is theft, and how many species of it there are. And it
is to be known, that theft is according to the laws the
fraudulent handling of another person's property, with
the intention of stealing, against the will of tho lord
whose property it is. lI say with the intention, for
without the intention of stealing ib is not committed.

There is also à kind of theft, rapine, which is the same
with us as robbery, and it is another kind of handling
against the willof the owner, and a like punishment


2.
Quod
species
furti.


Britton, i.


ch. xxx.


S 6.
Fleta, 54.


510 DE CORONA.


poena sequitur uitrumq, delictum, & unde preedo dicitur
fur improbus: quis enim magis contractat rem aliqua
invito domino, quàm ille qui vi rapit?


Species autem furti sunt dus, quia aliud publieum
aliud privatum. Videlicet manifestum et non mani-
festum. Non manifestum est, ubi quis suspectus est
de latrocinio per famam patrie, p indictamentum et
rectum, et ubi graves presumptiones faciunt contra
ipsum. Sed si seysitus non inveniatur de aliquo latro-
cinio, non habet quis potestatem inquirendi, nec pce-
dendi eontra ipsum ad inquisitiones, nisi ipse düs rex
in curia sua. Sed de hac specie nihil ampliüs ad
psens, quia superiüs p pr:ecedentia perpendi poterit,
quid in hae parte sit agendü. Et si coram ballivis
vel eoronatoribus furtum cognoverit, tamen non tene-
tur ex tali confessione sine seysina, licét cum seysina
recordum haberent. Furtum veró manifestum est, ubi
latro depsehensus est seysitus de aliquo latrocinio, sci-
lieet hondhabende & bacberende! & insecutus fuerit p
aliquem eujus res illa fuerit quz dicitur sakaburth;*
& si sine secta cognoverit se inde esse latronem coram
vie. vel coronatore vel serviente domini regis, cum
testimonio bonorum & pborum hominum, extune fur-
tum dedicere non possit, quia tales in hoc habent
recordum. Et (secundüm quosdam) illud idem erit,
eliam sine seysina. Cüm autem sit qui sequatur, pos-
sib ab initio agere civiliter vel eriminaliter utrum vo-


— MÀ MÀ à —— M €—M — S À M M M ——— À "HÀ e S À À U—


! * hondhabbende et bacberende," | HRawl. C. 160; **qui dicitur secta-
MS. Rawl. C. 160. * tor," MS. Rawl. C. 159; *qui
?*«qui dieitur sachabor, "MS. | *' dicitur sachaber," MS. Godebold.


OF THE CROWN. 511
follows each offence, and hence a robber is called a
hardened thief, for who handles anything more against
the will of the owner, than he who carries off by violence ?


But there are two kinds of theft, because one is public 2.

and the other private, to wit, manifest and not manifest. pcd
Non-manifest theft is where one is suspected of robbery appeal for
by report of the country, by an indictinent and trial, and SURE
where grave presumptions make against him. But if

he be not found seysed of any robbery, no one has the
power to make an inquisition nor to proceed against

him with a view toan inquisition, except the lord the
'king in his own court, But concerning this kind nothing

more at present, because it can be ascertained through

what has preceded, what is to be done in this part.

And if he has acknowledged the theft before the bailiffs

and the coroners, nevertheless he is not bound by such
confession without seysine, although with seysine they
would have a record. But manifest thefü is where the
robber is detected whilst seysed of the thing stolen, to

wit, hand having and back bearing! and he is being
pursued by some person to whom the thing belongs, who

is called sakaburth and if without a secet he has acknow-
ledged himself to be a robber before the viscount ora
coroner or & serjeant of the lord the king, with the testi-

mony of good and honest men thereupon, he may not
gainsay the theft, because such persons have a record in

this matter. And (aecording to some) the same thing

will take place, even without seysine. But if there is

any one who pursues, he may from the commencement
proceed civilly or criminally as he pleases, for he may


— —MÓ o — — —À  — — — — —— —— ——


— —


!*handhabbynde et  backber- | Deutsche Rechts Alterthümer, 783,
* ende.) JDritton, l. i. ch. xxx. | considers the old German * Sachi-
S 3. * baro" to have been a kind o


? 4 sakebere" is the phrase in
Britton, l.i. ch xvi. S 1, and ch,
xxx. $ 8. 'The meaning of the
word is obseure. Grimm, in his


local legal adviser, whose office was
superseded, when a regular judge
came to be appointed.  Bracton


. uses it here in quite another sense.


8.
De appello
de latroci-
nio.


f. 151.


4.
Si defendat,
vadietur
duellum.


5.
Si appel-
latus
patriam
elegerit.


512 DE CORONA.


luerit: poterib enim rem suam petere ut adiratam p
lestimonium proborum hominum, & si eosequi rem
suam quamvis furatam. |


Et si ille, qui seysitus fuerit in hoc ei non obtem-
peraverit, poterib aecrescere & petere eam ut furatam,
sed non & contrario, & dicere quód ille qui tenet latro
est, aut latronem scit nominare, & quód in felonia, &
furtive & in latrocinio, & contra pacem domini regis
cepit rem illam, & furtivé abduxit eam. Et g hoe
fecit furtivó, & in felonia, offert pbare versus eum per
corpus suum, sicut curia regis consideraverit. Et ap-
pellatus tune defendat feloniam, latrocinium, & totum,
vel p patriam vel p corpus, seceundüm electionem suam
prout euria consideraverit.


Si autem elegerit se defendere p corpus, statim va-
dietur inter eos duellum, & appellatus det vadium
defendendi, & appellans det vadium disrationandi, &
sic terminabitur negotium,


Si autem pria elegerit, tune dicere poterit, q res, de
qua agitur, sua sit propria, & rationem ostendere, quare.
Ut si equus fuerit, poterit dieere quód ei pullona tus
fuit, & quód eum nutrivit p tantum tempus. Et si
hoc per patriam testatum fuerit, liberabitur, nisi ille, qui
appellat, docere poterit contrarium, videlieet docere
poterit p patriam, & per visenetum suum, & per alia
judicia eerta, quód ei pullonatus! fuit & g ipsum nu-
trivit à juventute, & cüm ex utrag parte sie produ-
catur secta, pferatur illa, quee major fuerit, & dignior,
& magis veri similior Et non refert utrum res, quie
it& subtracta fuit, extiterit illius appellantis propria
vel alterius, dum tamen de custodia sua. Si autem
pares sint in secta & testimonio, vocentur alii fideles


! * pulenatus," M8. Rawl. C. 160; ** pullonetus," MS. Rawl, C. 159.


OF THE CROWN. 518


elaim his own property as adjudged to him by the testi-
mony of honest men, and so acquire possession of the
thing, although stolen.

And if he who is seysed does not obey him in this, he dms "
may proceed further and claim the thing as stolen, but ing an
not contrariwise, and may say that he who holds the Aeg
thing is à robber, or knows to name the robber, and that
he has taken the thing feloniously and by theft, and by  f.!51.
robbery, and carried it away by stealth. And that ho has
done this by stealth and feloniously he offers to prove by
his body, as the court of the king shall think fit. And
let the appellee thereupon defend the felony, the robbery,
and the whole, either by the country or by his body,
according to his election, according as the court shall
think fit.


But if he shall elect to defend himself by his body, let. 4.
If he de-


battle be waged at once between them, and let the 2." fends, let


pellee give bailto defend himself, and tho appellor give isse
bail to deraign, and so let the business be determined. "5^


Butif he has chosen the country, then he may say,
that the thing, which is in dispute, is his own property, Ide ap-
and show reason wherefore. As if itis à horse, he may chosen the
say that it was foaled to him, and that he had fed it "fry.
up to such time. And if this shall be testified by the
country, he shall be set free, unless he who appeals can
show the contrary, namely can show by the country, and


. by the neighbourhood, and by other certain judgments,


that it was foaled to him, and that he has fed 1t from its
youth, and when a sect of witnesses has been produced on
either side, let that sect be preferred which is the more
numerous and the more dignified, and the more trust-
worthy. And it is not of importance, whether the thing
itself, which has thus been carried away, is the property
of the appellant or of another, provided it was in his
keeping. Butif they are equal in their sects and their
evidence, let other faithful men be ealled from the bor-
VOL. II. K K


514 DE CORONA.


homines de confinio, qui nullam partium attigerint, &
ile obtinebit, eum quibus ipsi concordes fuerint, & sic
lerminabitur negotium. Si autem appellatus dicat rem
ilam esse suam & sibi esse venditam, vel donatam ab
aliquo, tune necesse erit, quód illum vocet ad warran-
ium. Si autem warrantus presens fuerit, vel si habere
possit eum ad certum diem, habeat eum, ut inter eos
procedatur de warrantia; si autem eum habere non

Britton, possit, tune alio modo peedendum erit. Cüm autem

P ""* warrantus presens fuerit, aut statim warrantizat, aut

Fleta,55. defendat q ei warrantizare non debet, & negat. Et quo!
easu, si negaverit, oportet q appellatus, qui in seysina'
fuerit, hoc disrationet versus eum p corpus suum, &
Sic perveniri poterit inter eos ad.duellum. $i aute
warrantizaverit, tunc statim, cüm iragdita res fuerit
warranto, liberabitur ille, qui warrantum vocavit, &
ile qui rem vedieat tunc loquatur versus eum, qui
rem warrantizavib, per verba appelli sicut locutus fuit
primó versus primum seysitum, & sic vocare poterit
warratus de warranto in warrantum, plures sicut unus,
per auxilium curie & per breve. Si quis veró cüm
warrantum vocaverit & habere non possit sine auxilio
curie, tunc fiat breve in hac forma vicecomiti.


6. Rex vieecomiti salutem.  Prscipimus tibi quód tali
ranis hs die, tali anno regni nostri, & tali loco venire facias
venire talem, apud comitatum talem, vel ad curiam talis
Negeri apud talem locum, ad respondendum in eodem coi
ilium. vel in eadem curia tali, de warratizatione unius equi

furati, vel alterius rel quam ei vendidit, ut dicit, &
unde idem talis in eodem comitatu, vel in eadem curia
vocavit ipsum talem ad warrantum versus ipsum talem.


Teste, &c. Siquis autem rem furata emerit, cüm illam


!1« Etquo^ The conjunetive particle * et? is omitted in MS. Rawl.
C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. | 515


dering lands, who have no affinity to the párües, and
he shall prevail with whom these men agree, and so
shall the business be terminated. But if the appellee
shall say, that the thing is his own and has been sold -
io him or has been given to him by a certain person,
then it will be necessary to call him as & warrantor.
But if & warrantor be present, or if he can produce
him on a certain day, let him produce him, that pro-
ceedings may be taken concerning the warranty; but
if he cannot produce him, then proceedings must take
place in another way. But when a waxrrantor is present,
let him forthwith warrant it, or let him defend himself
that he ought not, and refuse to warrant it to him. And
in which case, if he,has refused, it 1s incumbent that the
appellee, who is in seysine, shall deraign this against him
by his body, and so they may arrive at a battle between
them. But if he shall warrant it, then forthwith, when
the thing has been handed over to the warrantor, he who
has called the warrantor, shall be set free, and he who
claims the thing must then plead against him, who has
warranted it, by words of appeal, as he firsb pleaded
against the first seysee, and so the warrantor may call
warrantor after warrantor, several precisely as one by
the aid of the court, and by & writ. But if, when one
has called a warrantor, one cannot produce him without
the aid of the court, then let à writ issue in this form to
the viscount.


The king to the viseount greeting. We enjoin you, , Eo i
that on such a day, in such a year of our reign, and in cause a
such à place, you cause such an one to appear, at such a Micra

county court, or at the court of such an one at such a aid. —
place, to answer in the said county court or in the said

other court to such an one concerning the warranting of

& stolen horse, or of some other thing which, as he says,

he sold to him, and whereof the said so-and-so in the
'same county court, or in the same other court, has called

him as à warrantor towards himself. Witness, &c. But

K K 2


516 DE CORONA.


crederet esse legalem, tune si warrantum non habuerit,
distinguendum erit utrum illam emerit publice, & in
feria, & mereato, & nundinis, & coram ballivis & aliis
probis hominibus, qui de hoc testimoniu phibuerint, &
q tolnetum & consuetudines dederit: liberabitur talis
emptor, cüm rem restituerit vero domino, sed nihil

f.151b. restituetur ei de precio, quod solvit pro eadem re; si
autem nihil horum habuerit, in periculo erit.


7. Intrat quandoq, in defensionem & warrantum aliquis


iiem malitios?, & p fraudem & p mercede, sicut capio &
voeaverit conductitius, q quidem si fuerit cora justitiariis detec-
fiumeurgs, tum, non peedatur ad duellum, sed p patriam inquira-
breve de tur veritas, si talis. mercedem acceperit vel non. Et


Télé, ^ si constiterit q sic, pedem amittat & pugnum, ut coram


faciendo
warran- M. de Pateshul de termino Sancti Hillarii ann regis
Fu , VH. quarto in comitatu Essex de Elya Pigone campione


lii.c.8. conductitio. Est etiam furtü de re magna & re mi-
nima, & ideó habenda erit ratio, qu: vel qualis sit res,
qua furatur. Pro parvo enim latrocinio, vel p parva
re, nullus Christianus morti tradatur, sed alio modo
sic castigetur, ne facilitas venie aliis materigm prebeat
delinquendi, e& ne maleficia remaneant impunita. Et
ideó secundüm qualitatem rei furate et valorem, si
fur convictus fuerit, aut morti tradatur, aut regnum
abjuret vel patriam, comitatum, civitatem, burgum vel
villam, aut fustigetur, et sie castigatus dimittatur.


2.9. Si veró furtum in manu, vel sub potestate alicujus
Sifurtum . : , 2 .
in many  1nveniatur, tunc ille, in cujus domo vel potestate res


OF THE CROWN. 517


if à person has bought a stolen article, when he believed
it to be legally purchasable, then if he cannot produce a
warrantor, a distinction must be made whether he has
bought it publicly and in a fair, or in à market, or in a
booth, and in the presence of the bailiffs and other honest
men, who can give testimony of the fact, and that he
paid toll and customs: such a purchaser shall be set free,
when he has restored the article to the true owner, but
nothing shall be returned to him of the price, which he f. 151 b.
has paid for the same thing ; but if he has none of these
defences, he will be in peril.


Sometimes à person undertakes the defence and the 7.
warranty maliciously and fraudulently and for a pay- ir rm
ment, as & champion and a hireling, which indeed if it NALSUIGE
be detected before the judges, let, matters not proceed MT Te udi
to battle, but let the truth be inquired into through the court, a
country, if such à person has received à payment or not. MEE Xs
And if it be proved in the affirmative, let him lose his Ntc
foot and his fist, as was adjudged before Mártin de^.
Pateshull, in the term of St. Hilary, in the fourth year of
the reign of king Henry, in the county of Essex, con-
cerning Elias Pigo, & hired champion. There is likewise
theft of à great thing and of a small thing, and therefore
vegard must be had, what and of what quality the article
is which is stolen. Since for petty larceny or a petty
article let no Christian be put to death, but let him be
ehastised in some other way, lest a facility of pardon
should afford matter for delinquency, and lest offences
should remain unpunished. And therefore according io
the quality and value of the thing stolen, if a thief be
convicted, let him be put to death, or let him abjure the
realm, or the country, or the county, or the city, or the
borough, or the vill, or let him be flogged and dismissed
after such chastisement.


But if the thing stolen has been found in the hand or 1f "


thing
in the possession of any one, then let him in whose hand 475 ,..


or possession the stolen thing has been found be liable, been found


alicujus


inveniatur.


Britton,


i. ch. xxv.


$ 8.
Fleta, 56.


10.
Si uxor
cum viro
convicta
fuerit.


518 DE CORONA.


furtiva inventa fuerit, tenebitur, nisi warrantum inve-
nerit, qui eum inde defendere possit.


Uxor veró furi desponsata, non tenebitur ex facto
viri, quia virü accusare non debet, nec detegere fur-
ium suu nec felonia, cüm ipsa sui potestatem non
habeat sed vir, consentire tamen non debet feloniz
viri sui, nec coadjutrix esse, sed nequitia & feloniam
viri impedire debet quantü potest. In certis veró
easib? de furto tenebit, si furtu inveniat sub cla-
vibus uxoris, quas quidé claves habere debet uxor sub
custodia, & eura sua. Claves videl dispesm suze,
arch» sus, & scrinii sui . Et si aliquado furtü sub
clavibus istis inveniatur, uxor cum viro culpabilis erit.
Sed quid si res furtiva in manu uxoris inveniatur,
nunquid tenebitur vir ? non, ut videtur, nisi ei expresse
cosenserit, vel cüm rem ei warrantizaverit, cü ipsum


vocaverit ad 'warrantu, & tüc consentisse psumitur,


nisi expresso dissentiat, vel nisi de eo psumatur q
fidelis sit, eÓó q societatem talis uxoris devitavit in
quantü potuit. |

Item quid erit,si uxor cum viro cojuncta fuerit, vel
confessa q viro suo consiliu pstiterib & auxilium, nüu-
quid tenebuntur ambo ? imó, ut videtur, quia vir
potest teneri p se, cü sit mal?, & uxor poterit esse
bona & fidelis & liberari. Item uxor mala p se & vir
fidelis, cüm ergóà uterg, possit esse malus p se & alter
eorü bonus, ita poterit uterq, eorum simul & conjunc-
lim esse malus sicut bonus. Solutio. Non igitur erit
in omni easu uxor deliberanda ppter consilium, auxiliü


OF THE CROWN 519


unless he can find a warrantor, who can defend him in e pend
thereupon. DEM Dor


À. wife however, who is the spouse of & thief, shall not 9. —
be liable for the act of the man, because she ought not to E Pea
accuse her husband, nor to disclose his theft or felony, for the
since she has not any power over herself, but her husband jc; hus.
has; she ought not however to consent to the felony band.
of her husband, nor to be his confederate, but she ought,
as far as she ean, to impede the wickedness and felony of
her husband. But in certain cases of theft she will be
liable, as if the thing stolen is found to be under her
keys, which keys the wife ought to keep under her own
eustody and care, the keys for instance of her store-room,
her chest and her writing desk, and if at any time a
thing stolen be found under those keys, the wife will be
culpable with her husband. But if the stolen articles be.
found in the hand of the wife, will the husband never be
liable ? not, as i6 seems, unless he has expressly consented
to it, but when he has warranted the article:for her,
when she has called him to warrant, he is then presumed
to have consented, unless he has expressly disclaimed it,
or unless there be a strong presumption in his favour
that he is trustworthy, inasmuch as he has avoided as
much as he could the society of his said wife.


Likewise what shall happen, if the wife be an aecom- — 10.
plice with the husband, or has eonfessed that she has RI :
given counsel and aid to her husband, shall they not convicted
both be liable? Yes, as it seems, for the husband may nun
be liable by himself, when he is an evil man, and the
wife may be good and trustworthy and may be set free :
likewise the woman may be an evil woman by herself
and the husband trustworthy ; since therefore either of
them may be evil by themselves, and the other one good,
so each of them may be together and conjointly good or
evil. The answer. It is not thereforein every case that
the woman is to be seb free, on account of her counsel,


5290 DE CORONA.


& consensum, desicut sunt participes in crimine, iia
erunt participes in poena. Et licét obedire debeat
viro, in atrocioribus tamen seu latrociniis eoi non erit
obediendum. Poterit quidem vir ligare & tenere, &
uxor sponte & non coacta occidere, & ita (ut videtur)
tenetur de maleficio uterq. De concubina veró, vel
familia domus, non erit sicut de uxore Ipsi veró
accusare tenentur vel à servitio recedere, alioquin vi-
Britton, dentur consentire. Si veró mulier pro maleficio fuerit
du **** condemnata, differtur aliquando executio judicii, post-
quàm redditum fuerit judicium, si prsegnans fuerit,
donec peperit, sive ante delictum perpetratum conce-
perit sive post.
ninm Ad hoc facit F. de pet L. pregnant, ubi dicitur q
pregnans preegnantis mulieris damnate poena differtur! quoad


a "7" pareat? nec de eo quzestio habeatur, quamdiu preg-
Dig. nans fuerit, & id est, non torqueatur.
XLVIII.
tit. xix.
$3.
Ca». XXXIIT.
l. Cum furto manifesto deprehensus quandog, sine ali-


Defürto qug pbatione cognoscit latrocinium & se esse latronem,
manifesto : e» 3e : .

etproba- vel cognoscit homicidium vel roberiam, vel q aliam

t g. . . . d

MORGPHES feloniam fecerit, vel quód utlagatus fuerit, vel gaolà

fregerit, vel regnum abjuraverit, vel quid tale fecerit

per quod secum suum portat judicium. Et qui sic

convieti secum portant judicium, sicut finaliter con-

demnati, nullum habent appellum versus aliquem fide-

. lem nec infidele: quia omnino frangitur eorum baculus.

Sed non erit ita de pbatore, quia licét crimen confes-


J


! « differatur," MS, Rawl, C. 160. |  ?* pariat," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF TEE CROWN. 521


aid, or consent, according as they have been accomplices
in the crime, they shall be partakers of the punishment.
And although she is bound to obey her husband, in more
alrocious acts however or larcenies she is not to obey
him. For instance & husband may bind and hold a
person, and the woman of her free will and under no
compulsion may slay him, and so each as it appears is
responsible for the offence. But as regards à concubine
or the servants of & house, the case is not the same as
with &.wife, but they are bound to accuse or to with-
draw from the service, otherwise they seem to be con-
senting parties. But if the woman has been condemned
of the crime, the execution of the judgment is sometimes
delayed after the judgment has been given, if she be
pregnant, until she has brought forth, whether she has
conceived before or after the perpetration of the offence.


With this the Digest * de poenis " and the Law begin- £139.
ning * pregnantis 2 accords, where it is said, let thef E
punishment of à pregnant woman be deferred, nor let Civil Law
the question be applied to her whilst she is pregnant, in 7 Pre&nant


other words let her not be tortured. ; ought! to
becon- .
demned,.


CHAPTER XXXIIL


A person detected in a manifest theft sometimes 1.
without any proof acknowledges the larceny, and that d
he is the robber, or acknowledges the homicide or the fest theft,
robbery, or that he has committed some other felony, or Ma ILU
that he has been outlawed, or has broken out of gaol, or who con-
has abjured the realm, or has done something wherefore 55
he carries with him a judgment against himself And
those, who thus convicted carry with them a judgment,
as finally condemned, have no appeal against any one,
loyal or disloyal, for their staff is altogether broken.

But it shall not be so with an approver, because although
he has confessed the crime, nevertheless he is not on


529 DE CORONA.


sus fuerit, tamen propter hoc non est judicatus. Po-
leri dominus rex, si voluerit, ei concedere vitam &
membra, per sic quod patria deliberaret à malefactori-
bus, per eorpus vel per patriam, vel per fugam, secun-
düm quod convenerit de numero & de modo. Appel-
lare poterit quos voluerit de societate & latrocinio vel
alia quacunq, felonia, dum tamen si sit aliquis fidelis
& in franco plegio, & dim habuerit qui ipsum advo-
caverit, & velit se ponere super patriam, si fidelis
appellatus p patriam fuerit deliberatus, probatqr infi-
delis quasi mendax & convictus condemmnabitur. Si
autem in decenna non fuerit, nee dominum Mhàábuerit
qui advocet eum, & patriam recusaverit, fortà tuno,
cüm omnia bona ei deficiant, & p hoc par sit appel-
lanti, pcedat inter eos duellu. Et eodem modo si ad
appellü pbatoris posuerit se quis super piiam de robe-
ria vel latrocinio, vel alia felonia ei imposita à pba-
. tore, & à patria fuerit inde mal? creditus, tunc. cüm
sib par pbatori, pcedat inter eos duellü. Non enim
habet felo vel latro cognosces voc8 versus alique fidele,
qui velit & possij se ponere sup patria de fidelitate.
 Cüm àuteé quis latrociniu vel alia felonia cognoverit,
& pbator devenerit corà aliquib? qui recordu habuerint
de cognitione, aut pseverat in eade voluntate corà just.
aut non pseverai: si aute non pseveraverit, sed se
retraxerit quandocunq, & recordu sit à vie. vel coroi,
vel ab alis qui recordü habent, q cora eis latrocinium
cognovit, extune habebitur pbator p convieto, & p oco-
dénato, ppter cognitione. Si aute in eodé pposito
coram just. pseveraverit, ubi nung se retraxerit, tuc
corà eis suà de novo faciat cognitionem, & obliget se
ad covineendü tot, quot appellaverit, ut. habeat vitam
& mébra, ut pdict. est. Quod quide ei concedere
nemo potest nisi ipse rex, vel justitiarius suus de:
speciali pmissione, viva voce vel p breve suum quod
tale est.


OF THE CROWN. 5993


that account judged. The king may, if he so wills,
grant him life and limbs, on condition that he should
deliver his country from malefactors, by his body or by
the country, or by flight, according as it has been agreed
upon concerning the number or the manner. He may
appeal whom he chooses of conspiracy and lareeny or
. any other felony, provided however he be some one
^ faithful and in frank-pledge, and he has a lord, who will
avow him, and he is willng to put himself upon the
country, if a faithful person so appealed shall be set free
by the country, the faithless approver shall be condemned
as à liar and be convicted. But if he be not in a tithing,
.mor has a lord, who will avow him, and he has refused
to go to the country, by chance then when all his goods
fail him, and thereby he is the peer of the appellor, a duel
may take place between them. For a confessing felon
or robber has not a voice against a faithful man, who is
willing and able to put himself on the country concerning
his fidelity. But when a person has confessed a robbery
or other felony, and the approver has appeared before
certain persons who have a recotd of confessions, ho
either perseveres 1n the same intention before the justices
or he does not persevere: but if he does not persevere,
but has withdrawn his statement, and a record is kept
by the viscount or the coroner, or by others who have a
record, that he confessed the robbery before them, there-
upon the approver is [to be taken to be] convicted and
condemned on aecount of his confession. But if he has
persevered in the same story before the Justices, where
he has not withdrawn at all his statement, then let him
make the confession again in their presence, and bind
himself to convict as many persons, as he has appealed,
that he may have his life and limbs, as aforesaid, which
no one can grant to him except the king, or his justices
with his special permission orally, or by his writ, which
is as follows. |


2.
Breve quod
rex dat
justitiariis
potestatem
concedendi
probatori
vitam et
membra.

f. 152 b.


3.
Quod vice-
comes
attachiet
eos, quos
probator
appel-
laverit.


4. -
De eapien-
do appel-
latum
per pro-
batorem,
qui se
cognoscat
esse latro-
nem.


524 |. DE CORONA.


Rex just. salutem. Sciatis g concedim? vobis potes-
tatem concedendi tali vitam & membra, qui coram
vobis probator devenit, & latrocinium vel aliam felonia
cognovit, per sie, quód faciat duellum, ut convineat!
quing, vel tot, per corpus, vel per patriam, ad quod
se obligavit eoram vobis, & secundüm quod nobis sig-
nificastis, vel cum pluribus, si ad hoc ipsum inducere
possitis. Teste &c. Et quo casu vic. attachiare debet
omnes appellatos, & si in hoc negliges extiterit, fiat
ei hae bie in hac forma.


Rex vic. salutem. Prec. tibi q si alique habes
latrone pbatorem in balliva tua, qui public confessus
fuit latrociniu, vel alia felonia cora serviente nostro
vel ballivo, vel ballivis, vel aliis pbis hominib?, & ali-
quos de societate appellaverit de latrocinio, roberia,
morte hominis, vel alia felonia, tunc ipsos sine aliqua
dilatione attachiari facias, secund consuetud regni nos-
tri; ad habend eos cora nobis vel capitali justit nostro
ad summonitione;nostra, vel ipsi? capitalis justit nostri.
Teste &c. Item aliud de eadé materia de capiedo ap-
pellatos p pbatorem & pducendo coram justitia.


Rex vie. salut. Prwc. tibi, q sine dilatione capias
À. quà B. (qui se cognoscit esse latrone) in curia nia
coram just. &c. appellat de societate & latrocinio, vel
alia tali felonia, & illü captu q citi? poteris ducas,
vel venire fac. cora eisd just. nostris apud tale locu,
ad respondend eidem .B. de societate & de morte ho-
minis, roberia, & latrocinio, vel alia tali felonia, unde
eum appellat &c. vel aliter. Prsc. tibi, q sine dila-
tione capias À. & ipsum captum ducas cora justii &c.


! € ye] convineat," MS. Rawl. C. 160; *et convincat," MS. Rawl. C. 159.


OF THE CROWN. 525


The king to the justices greeting. Know ye, that 2.
we grant to you the power of granting to such an one iid


his life and limbs, who has come before you as an ap- the king
prover, and has made known a larceny or other felony, c qu
on these terms, that he does battle to conviet five or so ticiaries
many by his body, or by the country, to which he has BERE
bound himself in :your presence, and according to what to an ap-

"P . i prover his
you have signified to us, or with several persons, if you iife and
can induce him to this. Witness &c. And in which limbs.
case the viscount ought to attach all the persons accused, LL
and if he should be negligent in this respect, let à writ


issue to him under this form.


The king to the viseount greeting. We enjoin you, 8.
that if you have any robber or approver in your baili- vbi
wick, who has publiely confessed a larceny or other viscount
felony before our serjeant or bailiff or bailiffs, or other viunim
honest men, and has accused any of his confederates of whom the
larceny, robbery, homicide, or other felony, thereupon "cpi
you cause them to be attached without any delay, ac- cused.
cording to the custom of our realm, to produce them
before us or our chief justice at our summons, or at
the summons of our chief justice himself. Witness
&e. Likewise another writ on the same subject matter
concerning the capturing of the persons accused by the


approver, and the producing them before the justices.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you 4.
that without delay you capture A., whom B. (who has ^ NE
acknowledged himself.to be a larcener) accuses before the persons
our court, in the presence of our justices, of confe- xum by
deraey and larceny, or any other such felony, and bring pod
him when captured as soon as you can, and cause him pner
to come before our same Justices ab such a place to bea lar-
answer to the said B. concerning the confederaecy and ^
the homicide, robbery, or lareeny or such other felony,
whereof he aecuses him &c. or otherwise. We enjoin


you, that without delay you capture À., and bring him so


5260 DE CORONA.


ad respondend PB. (cognoscenti se esse latrone) de
societate latrocinii unde eum appellaverat, & tunc ha-
beas ibi corà eisde justitiarüis sufficiente secta de visi-
neto tali, ad facienda inquisitionem de pdicto tali,
secundüm cosuetudinem regni nii. Et habeas ibi hoc
breve. Teste &e. Et posset huie breve bene adjungi,
ut videtur: Et si idem talis ppter appellum se. fort&
subtraxerit, tune facias illum interrogari de com in
coii, donee secundüm lege terre utlagetur. Et hoc
fieri debet tantu ad sectam dii regis sine alia secta,

ppter psumptionem appelli & ppter fugam. Cüm autem
appellatus psens fuerit, pponat pbator appellum suum
in hzc verba.


CAP. XXXIV.


: A. de N. cognoscens se esse latronem, appellat B.
Cumprw- de morte & societate & latrocinio vel roberia, vel
pea. morte hominis scilicet it&: quód ipsi simul furati fue-
Sob: runt talem rem apud talem locum, & ita quàd pree-
DEPO dictus B. habuit ad partem suam tantum, vel sie:
tentionem quód ipsi simul venerunt ad domum talis, loco tali,
iiam vel in via vel alibi, & robbaverüt ei talem rem, &
de modo postquam robbaverint eum, eum interfecerunt, & ita
defen- ^ quàd przdietus B. habuit tantum ad partem suam, &
£153, ldem de receptamento scienter, & alia felonia; & hoe

offerb pbare versus ipsum p corpus suum, sicut curia
consideraverit. Et oportebit pbatorem certam rem ex-
primere, & omnes circumstantias sine variatione &
mutatione aliqua, & quód cognoseat personam appel-


lati cüm fuerit in judicium pductus, quia si eum non


OF THE CROWN. 597


captured before our justices &c. to answer to B. (con-
fessing himself to be a larcener) concerning his confederacy
in & larceny whereof he accuses him, and thereupon
produce there before the same justices a sufficient sect
from the said neighbourhood to make inquest on the
subject aforesaid according to the custom of our realm.
And produce there this writ. Witness &c. And there
may well be added to this writ,as it seems, and if so
and so on account of the accusation has by chance with-
drawn himself, then cause him to be sought for from

. eounty to county, until he be outlawed according to the
law of the land. And this ought to be done only at the
suit of the lord the king without any other suit, on
account of the presumption of the accusation and on
account of the flight. But when the party accused shall
, be present, let the approver state his accusation in these
words.


CHAPTER XXXIV.


À. de N., eonfessing himself to be a larcener, charges
B. with death and ;eonfederacy and larceny or robbery, When the


or homicide, for instance, in this manner: thatí they shall be
stole together such.a thing at such a place, and so that P'zSent ds |
B. aforesaid had so much for his share; or thus: thai the ap-
they eame together to the house of such an one in such a ought to
place, or on the road, or elsewhere, and robbed him of state his
such a thing, and after they had robbed him.they slew f;^78o nd


him, and so that the aforesaid B. had so much for his sation, and
share, and the same concerning the receiving of it know- iu of
ingly, and any other felony, and this he offers to prove defenec.
against him by his own body, aecording as the court Í !9»
shall think fit. And it will be necessary that the ap-
prover should state a certain fact, and all the circum-
stances, without any variation or alteration, and that
he should recognise the person of the accused party, when

. , he shall have been brought in court, because if he shall


2.
Quod ap-
pellatus
primo
juret per
verba
negativa,
et postea
juret ap-
pellans per
verba affir-
mativa.


598 DE CORONA.


cognoverit, pressumetur contra ipsum, quód nunquam
fuerunt socii Idem A. appellat B. de N. de societate
& latrocinio vel felonia przdicta, & ita quód ipse ha-
buit ad partem suam tantum vel de alio latrocinio
alibi facto. Et sic poterit plures appellare eodem
modo de societate & plurib? latrociniis & diversis. Et
B. venit & defendit societatem, & latrociniü, roberia,
& mortem, & receptafütum, & omnem feloniam, ot
quiequid ei imponitur de verbo in verbum, & secundüm
q ei imponitur de verbo in verbum. Et tunc si per
corp? suum sine aliqua allocatione vel exceptione, quo
casu vadietur inter eos duellum, & appellatus det
vadium defendendi & pbator det vadium disrationandi.
Et si appellat? plegios non habuerit, tunc erit gaola
plegium utriusq, et dabitur dies ad quem venient
armati. Et cüm venerint, primó intret defensor &
juret in hse verba.


Hoc audis, homo, quem per manus teneo, qui te
facis appellari Á. per nomen baptisterii, quód ego non
sum latro, nec socius tuus de latrocinio, vel roberia,
vel hujusmodi, nec tecum furatus fui talem rem, tali
loco, nec aliud tale quid fecimus, sicut roberià talem,
nec ego habui ad partem meam tantum, sic me Deus
&c. Et posteà juret appellans p verba affirmativa &
dicet. Hoc audis, homo, quem p manum teneo, qui
B. te facis appellari p nomen baptisteri, quód iu es
pjurus, & ideó perjurus quia tu es latro, et socius
meus de latrocinio, quia tali loco simul furati fuimus
talem rem, vel talem roberiam simul fecimus, vel quid
tale, e& unde tu habuisti ad partem tuam tantum, sic
me Deus &e. Et sie pcutiatur inter eos duellum, or-


OF THE CROWN. 599


not recognise him, it will be presumed against him that
they never were associates. "The same À. accuses B. de
N. of confederacy and larceny, or the felony aforesaid,
and so that he himself had for his share so much, or con-
cerning à lareeny committed elsewhere. And so he may
accuse several persons in the same way of confederacy
and several and different larcenies. And B. comes and
denies the confederacy and the larceny, robbery and
death, and the receiving [of the property] and all the
felony, and whatever is imputed to him word for word,
and according to whatever has been imputed to him
word for word. And then, if by his own body without
any allowance or exception, in which case let battle be
waged between them, and let the accused person give
bail to defend himself, and the approver give bail to
deraign.: And if the accused person has not sureties, let
the gaol be the surety of both, and a& day shall be ap-
pointed, upon which they shall both come armed. ' And
when they have come, let the defendant first enter and
swear in these words.


Hear this, thou man, whom I grasp with my hands, 2.
who callest thyself A. by thy name of baptism, that 7 ode
am not alarcener, nor thy associate in a larceny Or à person
robbery, or any thing of that sort, nor have I together Shall first
with you stolen such a thing at such a place, nor have words of
we done any thing of the kind, as this robbery, nor have X apt
I] had for my part so much. So may God &e. And the accuser
afterwards let the accuser swear in affirmative words, deese
and he shall say: Hear this, thou man, whom I grasp tive words.
with my hand, who causest thyself to be called B. by
thy name of baptism, that thou art perjured, and per-
jured on this ground, that you are a larcener, and my
associate in a larceny, because at such a place we together
stole such a thing, or we together made such a robbery
or such a thing, and whence thou hadst so much for thy
share, so may God &c. And so let the duel proceed
between them, the order aforesaid having been observed.


VOL. II. LL


Suscepent
. in propria


5930 DE CORONA.


dine supradieto observato. Et si appellatus victus


fuerit, eodem die vadiet pbator aliud duellum versus
alium appellatum, sed statuetur alius dies ad pugnan-
dum, ad quem, uterq, veniet armatus, et sie fiat de
plurib? de quolibet post alium, et (secundàum quosdam)
non sufficit quod appellatus cognoscat se fuisse socium
suum, vel latronem, vel aliquid consimile ad recrean-
tiam, nisi dicat illud verbum odiosum, quód recreantus
sit, & similiter quód socius sit, et latro, licàt sufficiat
(secundüm quosdam) quód cognoscat 5e esse socium,
et latronem: quia non refert, utrum quid fiat vel quod
tantundem valeat. Si autem pbator victus fuerit, ap-
pellatus per plegium dimittatur, ppter suspitionem
appelli, nisi justitiarii ppter aliquam aliam suspicatio-


nem providerint illum esse ulteriüs in prisona retinen-


dum, quia forté indictatus est alibi per milites, & alios
fide dignos, ut. de termino Sancti Hillarii & de ter-
mino Pasche anno regni regis H. quinto, in principio
rotuli in eomitatu Eborum, de Roberto filio Johannis.
Ibi eodem die vadiatum fuit duellum inter appellatum
victorem et alium pbatorem de novo appellantem. Si
autem plegium invenire non possit, aut regnum abju-
ret aut remaneat perpetuó in prisona.


08 Cüm autem in propria persong per corporis defen-
rg oni Sionem non intraverunt, poterit excipere contra proba-
nem non torem, & petere sibi allocari, si debeat tali respondere
qui est latro cognoscens, vel talis q voce habere non


LAE debeat versus fidelem hominem. Et cüm ipse sit fide-
etjudicium lis homo, & in assisa domini regis &e. & in franco
pid 81  plegio, & dominü habeat qui ipsum advocat, et tune
talem cog- Sic, Et B. venit & defendit societate, latrociniu, &


noscentem totum (ut suprà) sicut versus eum, qui est latro &


TEE 0089. 52: ME AEST Ov


, | i


OF THE CROWN. 5931


And if the accused be vanquished, let the approver on
ihe same day wage another duel against another ac-
eused person, but a day shall be appointed when they
Shall each come armed, and so let it be done with
several, one after the other, and (aecording to some) it
is not sufficient that the accused should acknowledge
himself to be his associate or & lareener or anything
equivalent to recreancy, unless he says the odious word,
ihat he is a recreant, and in like manner that he is his
associate and a larcener, although it be sufficient (ac-
cording to some) that he should acknowledge himself to
be his associate and a larcener, because i6. does nob mat-
ter whether a certain thing be done, or its equivalent.
But if the approver be vanquished, let the accused per-
son be. released with his surety as regards the suspicion
[arising out]. of the accusation, unless the  justices
on account of some other cause of suspicion order that
he.shall be kept further in prison, because perhaps he
has been indieted elsewhere by knights and others
worihy of credit, as in St. Hilary term and in Easter
term in the fifth year of the reign of king Henry, at the
beginning of the roll in the county of York, concerning
Robert the son of John. "There on the same day battle
was waged between the accused, who had been victorious,
and another approver accusing him afresh. But if he
cannot find a surety, let him either abjure the realm or
remain perpetually in prison.


But when they have not entered in their own person a.


by bodily defence, he may except against the approver, Mn ieie


and petition that it be allowed him, if he ought to an- undertake
swer to à man who has confessed himself to bo a larce- i wis own
ner or such an one as ought not io have a voice against person,


a man of fealty. And since he himself is a man of fealty inim um


and in the assise of the lord the king and in frank pledge, seek jodg-
and has a lord who avows him, and so on. And B. comes rid


and denies the confederacy, larceny and the whole (as dide "
.&bove)as against him, who is a confessed larcener, and kaosledg-


LLZ


h. bé cae Q uA Pillar redit cie 49 de d 7 rra alere RB ETE Tm MEE. Dun T ap UO a npe ar S FII


his defenco


5389 DE CORONA.


se esse cognoscens, et ipse homo fidelis, et in franco plegio,
nun eb in assisa düi regis, & diim habet qui ipsum advo-
" .  . eat. Et quo casu, si hoc p patrii convictü fuerit,
damnabitur pbator appellans & liberabitur appellat?
Si aute sic dicat appellat? simpliciter, q defendit totü
sicut versus latrone cognoscente, et de fidelitate se
ponat super patria, si p patria fuerit malé credit?, cüm
pares sint in culpa appellans & appellat?, statim vadi-
etur inter eos duellum. Et eodem modo cüm fuerit
requisit? appellat?, si fuerit in fráco plegio, et in as-
sisa düi regis, vel si fuerit diis qui ipsum advocet, nec
sit aliquid boni q p se habeat, statim vadietur duellu,
càüm oia bona ei defecerint. ltem si appellatus aliàs
rectat? fuerit de maleficio, vel indietatus p milites, et
villatas, et legales homines, qui psentes fuerint et hoc
lestentur. ltem si aliàs ab alio pbatore appellat? fue-
rib ppter tales suspitiones, vadietur duellu. Et eode
modo, si càüm pbator primü appellatu devicerit, fiat de
alis appellatis onib?, sicut de primo.


4. Cüm autem :pbator fecerit q pmisit, teneatur ei co-
BLproPMO" ventio quod vitam habeat & membra, sed in regno
quod pro- remanere non poterit, etiam si velit plegios invenire.
Dante: Si aute pbator vict? fuerit antequa duella sua pfecerit,
conventio, vel mortu? casu vel morte naturali, ali qui appellati
dca St sunt ab eo & non eovicti, ppter suspitioné appelli pba-
regnum. toris remaneant sub plegio, ad standum recto si quis

versus eos loqui voluerit, et si plegios invenire non
possint, abjurent regnü. $i autem appellati forté p


appellum se retraxerint, et mortuo pbatore redire vo-


OF THE CROWN. 599


he himself is & man of fealty and in frank pledge andi ing himself
in the assise of the lord the king, and has a lord who iod d
avows him. And in which case, if this has been estab- f 153 v.
lished by the country, the approver who accuses will be
.condemned, and the accused will be released. But if the
person accused simply says, that he denies the whole as
against a confessed larcener, and respecting his fealty
places himself upon the country, if he be ill credited by

the country, when they are alike in fauli the accuser

and the accused, let battle be at once waged between

them. And in the same way when the accused should

be required, if he is in frank pledge and in the assise of

the lord the king, or if there is à lord who will avow

him, and there be nothing good which he can show for
himself, let battle be forthwith waged, since he wanis
every element of good. Likewise if the accused person

has been arraigned for a misdemeanor, or has been in-
dicted by knights and townships and loyal men, who

were present and ean bear witness. Likewise if he has

been aecused at. any other time by any other approver, on
aecount of such suspicions let battle be waged. Andin

the same manner, if the approver has vanquished the

first accused, let i& be done with all the other accused
persons, as with the first.


But when the approver has done what he promised, 4.
let the agreement be kept with him, that he have his Ifthe ap-


h
life and limbs, but he may not remain in the realm, even done Wliat
if he be willing to find sureties.. But if the approver be e ai
vanquished before he has completed his duels, or has died the agree-


by a casualty or by à natural death, let the others, who koci
have been accused by him and are not convicted, remain him, and
under sureties, on account of the suspicion from the ac- irre
 eusation of the approver, to stand their trial, if any is him abjure
willing to come forward against them, and if they cannot BOUE
find sureties, let them abjure therealm. But if the parties

accused have withdrawn themselves on account of the


aecusation, and on the death of the approver are willing


4 534 DE CORONA.


luerint, càm ppter appelum & ppter fugam .magis
suspecti habeantur, si redierint, capiantur, nec sint p
plegium dimittedi, nisi ex speciali precepto domini
regis, eb tune fiat de eis, secundüm q superiüs fit de
alis. Si forte contingat quód aliquis in curia sua,
vel com, vel justitiarius, nisi ad hoc fuerit specialiter
datus, appellu tenuerit de pbatore, com, & curia erit
in misericordia, & justitiarius redarguendus. Et si in
| euria baronis hoc factum fuerit, summoneatur recordu
| | , p hoe breve.


o V Rex vic. salutem.  Ostensum est nobis, quód cüm.
Kot e quida talis captus sit in comitatu tuo cum latrocinio,


curi2ali- vel infra libertatem talem, & cognovit latrocinium &
teMis" pbator devenerit, et plures appellaverit de societate &
appellum  ]atrocinio, comitatus, vel ballivi de t&li hundredo, vel


d Dios de tali euria, vel tales milites & liberé tenentes de
ud Min eodem hundredo, vel eadem curia, tenuerunt querelam
adeuriam illam, & appellum de eodem pbatore audiverunt, & ita
doe Per quód p appellum illud, tot homines damnati fuerant
e breve. , . ,
| in prefato hundredo vel curia, sine precepto nostro,
& sine warranto, quod inde haberent. Et ideà tibi
precipimus, quód assumptis tecum pbis hominibus, &
E . eustodibus placitorum coron: nis, sine dilatione con-
: venire facias predictum hundredum, & predictam
EU curiam, & illos coram quibus appellum illud deductum
| fuit & coram vobis fieri faciatis recordum illud, quali-
| ter appellum illud deductum fuit in predicto hundredo
hs f.154, vel curia, & qualiter idem probator predictos homines
x . &ppellaverit, & per qus» verba, & qua occasione pre-
| dieti homines damnati fuerunt, et recordum illud ha-
| beas coram nobis ad. talem terminum, sub sigillo tuo,
| eb sub sigillis predictorum custodum, et per quatuor
| legales homines ex illis, qui recordo illi interfuerunt.
]


OF THE CROWN. 535


io return, when on aecount of the accusation and on
account of their flight they are regarded as more open to
suspicion, if they should return, let them be captured,
nor let them be released upon sureties, unless upon a
Special order from the lord the king, and then let it be
done with them according to what has been above said
respecting others. If by chance it should happen that
any one in his court or in the county, or à justiciary,
except where he has been specially appointed for that
purpose, has entertained an accusation by an approver,
the county and the court shall be amerced, and the
justiclary reprimanded.  Andifthis be done in the court
of a baron, let the record be summoned by this writ.


The king to the viscountgreeting. lt has been shown 5.
to us, that when such an one was captured in your county 19 county
with a larceny, or within such a franchise, and confessed has enter-
the larceny, and became an approver, and accused several paca d
persons of confederacy and larceny, the county court or cies An
the bailiffs of such a hundred or of such a court, or certain on ad
knights and freeholders of the said hundred or the said sPprover's:
court, have entertained that complaint, and have heard jetthe
the accusation of the said approver, and so that through adm
that accusation so many men have been condemned in the the kings
aforesaid hundred or court, without our order, and without du
a warrant that they should hear it. "Therefore we enjoin
you that, having taken! with you honest men and the
keepers of the pleas of the crown, without delay you cause
io meet together the said hundred and the said court, and
those before whom the said aecusation was brought
forward, and cause a record to be made in your presence,
in what manner that accusation was brought before you
in the aforesaid hundred or court, and in what manner
the said approver accused the said men, and in what f 154.
. words, and on what occasion the said men were con-
demned, and produce that record before us in such a term
under your seal and under the seals of the aforesaid keepers


and by four loyal men of those who were present at


536 DE CORONA.


Et statim probatorem illum recipias à ballivis illis, &
salvó custodias, & illum habeas coram nobis vel jus-
titiariis nostris &c. & omnes illos quos de societate
appellaverit & latrocinio, ad respondendum ei in prz-
dicto appello, unde eos appellat. |


6. Sunt nonnulli qui per appellum probatoris se sub-


Ttem bre*? trahunt, & quandoque propter adventum justitiariorum,


quod pro- pro indictamento & malo recto, & eo quód male cre-
e diti sunt in itinere per milites & villatas. Et unde


pus rege cüm propter duplieem suspieationem, scilicet propter
et omnes Tm
quos ipse 2ppellum & sacramentum militum, & fugam, non sunt


B per plegium dimittendi si redierint, sed in prisona
venit áe . . . .
societate, retinendi, donec rex inde przceperit voluntatem suam,


qus pues unde sunt quidem qui finem faciunt cum rege, ante-
Aonellum quam redeant, vel cüm fuerint in prisona. Et ideó


drei. fiat vicecom breve de talibus in hac forma.


hunt.

7 Rex vic. salutem. Scias quód talis finem fecit no-
Si autem : . MMC :
appellati biseum pro tali, vel sie: Scias quód finis factus est


venerint nobiscum pro tali, qui est in prisona nostra, vel aliter:

etfine" — Seias quód finis facetus est nobiscum coram justitiariis
) . . . *. . . . .

quod redire nostris, qui ultimó itineraverunt in comitatu tuo, sicut


peeuar up ipsi justitiarii nostri recordantur, pro À. qui rectatus
plegiis. — fuit coram eis de burglaria & malé creditus à xii.
militibus & villatis, vel qui fugit propter appellum
probatoris: quód redire possit & esse sub plegio, ad
standum recto, si quis versus eum loqui voluerit. Et
ideo tibi precipimus, quód si prwedictus A. redierit, &
tibi plegium invenerit ad standum recto in adventu
justitiariorum de eodem recto, si quis versus eum loqui


voluerit, tunc ei inde pacem habere permittas. ltem


- * Te quU Ur ERN mS VN TTE


OF THE CROWN. 537


that record. And forthwith receive that approver from

those bailiffs, and have him in safe custody, and produce

him before us or our justiciaries &c., and all those whom

he has accused of confederacy and larceny, to answer

him on the aforesaàid charge, with which he charges

ihem.  ' | 206.
3Akewise a '


writ to the
There are some, who on account of the accusation of jiscount


the approver withdraw themselves, and sometimes on ead
LJ . . . * r
account of the coming of the justiciaries, because of an before dió


indictment and a trial for misdemeanor, and because Bd


they have bad credit on the circuit with the knights and aná all


townships. And hence when on account of à double Whom he
hasaccused


cause of suspicion, for instance on account of the accusa- of being
tion and the oath of the knights they have taken flight, libe.
they are not to be dismissed upon bail, if they should because
return, bu& they are to be retained in prison, until the S*"eral

: f ] perchance
king has announced his will, hence there are some who withdraw
make a fine with the king, before they return, or when E


they have been put into prison and accordingly let à writ ofthe |
. . . accusation
go to the viscount in this form. of the


approver.
The king to the viscount greeting. Know that such i 7.
an one has made à fine with us for such a matter; or DIS
thus, Know that a fine has been made with us for such have come
an one, who is in our prison; or otherwise, Know that s oo
a fine has been made with us before our justices, they may
. TP NET return and
who made the last circuit in your county, as our justices pe under
themselves have recorded for A. who was arraigned surety.
before them of burglary, and was in bad credit with the
twelve knights and the townships, or who fled on
account of the accusation of an approver; that he may
return and be under surety, to stand his trial, if any one
willspeak against him. And therefore we enjoin you,
that if the aforesaid A. shall return and find you a surety
to stand his trial at the coming of our justices con-
cerning the said trial, if any one wishes to spealk against


him, you should permit him to have peace thereupon.


538 DE CORONA.


si aliquis rectatus de roberia, vel alio maleficio delibe-
rat? fuerit per pairiam, fiat breve vicecom de delibe-
randis catallis suis in hac forma.


8. Rex vicecom salutem. Scias quód A. quem B. in
pa , curia nostra &e. appellavit de pace, & plagis, & ma-
per patri. hemio, per testimonium visneti sui deliberatus est, &
rupes quietus clamatus, sicut ille qui non fuit inde culpabi-

era-
tus, quod. lis: & ideó tibi precipimus, quód omnia catalla ipsius
habente? A. quae tu cepisti, vel talis ballivus tuus occasione

prsedieti appelli, & eaptionis predicti À. eidem A. sine
dilatione reddi facias, & ei firmam pacem nostram
habere permittas. Est & aliud breve de materia ista,
quod est generale de dimittendo ipsos per plegium, nisi


jn casibus exceptis.


- Rex vicecoí salutem.  Prweipimus tibi quód juste &
Breve de sine dilatione replegiari facias talem, quem talis cepe-
TOPeBI. — rit & captum detinet, nisi captus sit per speciale przw-
ms ceptum nostrum, vel capitalis justitiarii nostri, vel pro
oepit et — morte hominis, vel foresta nostra, vel pro aliquo alio
captum — recto quaré secundüm legem Anglie non sit replegi-
detinet.

andus, ne ampliüs &e. pro defectu justitirje &c. Teste


&c.


f£. 154 b. Cap. XXXV.


1l. Dictum est suprà quód nemo potest habere curiam
me suam de pbatore & latrone cognoscente, videamus igi-
euam ^ tur qusB placita pertineant ad curiam, et qus; ad comi-
es nd tatum. Sunt enim quidam barones & alij, qui liberta-


probatore. tem habent, scilicet sok, sak, tol & team, infangenthef,
vel latrone


. eognos.  Utfangenthef. Isti possunt judicare in curia sua, si


cente. quis inventus fuerit infra libertatem suam seysitus de


OF THE CROWN. 539


Likewise if any one arraigned for robbery or any other
misdemeanor has been acquitted by the country, let a
writ issue to the viscount to release his chattels in this
form.


The king to the viscount greeting Know that A. s.
whom B. in our court &c. has aceused of a breach of the E :
peace, of blows, of mayhem, has been acquitted by the ues
testimony of the neighbourhood, and is quit-claimed, as acted
one who has not been culpable thereof: and thereupon by iru
we enjoin you, that you cause to be restored to the said g "ath dd
À. without delay all the chattels of A. himself, which should,
you have seized, or so and so your bailiff, on occasion of chattels.
ihe charge aforesaid and the seizure of the aforesaid A.,

. and that you allow him to enjoy our peace undisturbed,
There is another writ on the same matter, which is
general, concerning the release of the parties accused


upon bail, unless in excepted cases.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you, 9.
that justly and without delay you cause to be released RAE
on bail such an one, whom so and so has seized and on surety
keeps a prisoner, unless he has been seized through a jj T
special order of ourselves, or of our chief justiciary, or and so has
for homicide, or for our forest,.or for some other ar- sion
raignment, for which he is not bailable aecording to the prisoner.
law of England, lest further &c. for defect of justice &c..-


Witness "s


CHAPTER XXXV.


It has been said above, that no one can hold his court f. 154».
at the instance of an approver and confessed larcener, let 1.
us sce then what pleas pertain to a court, and what to a liat no
county. For there are certain barons and others who hold his
have a franchise, for instance, sok amd. sak, tol amd, team, ec :
infangenthef, utfangenthef. "They may judge in their Stence of


court, if any one has been found within their franchise prises or


Jtem quz
placita per-
tineant ad
curiam, et
que ad
comitatum,
et de liber-
tatibus


singulo-
rum. —
Britton, i.
ch. xvi.

S 1.

Fleta, 54.
Britton, ii.
ch. iii. S 8.
Britton, 1b.
$ 18.


540 DE CORONA.


aliquo latrocinio manifesto, sicut, hondhabend & bac-
berend, & insecutus fuerit per saccabor? quia, nisi
fuerit in seysina, licét aliquis sequatur versus eum
sieut versus latronem, non pertinebit ad curiam, hun-
dreda? vel wapentakia, cognoscere de hujusmodi fur-
tis, nee inde facere inquisitionem per patriam, utrum
talis qui non fuerit seysitus culpabilis sit vel non.
Nec.quód vadietur inter aliquos duellum ante seysi-
nam. De hoc quod dicit infangethef? videndum est,
quid sit. Et dicitur infangethef? latro captus in terra
alicujus, de hominibus suis propriis, seysitus latrocinio.
Utfangethef" veró dieitur latro extraneus, veniens ali-
unde de terra aliena, & qui captus fuit in terra ipsius
qui tales habet libertates. Sed non sequitur, quód ille
posset hominem suum proprium, captum extra liberta-
lem suam, reducere usque infra libertatem suam & ibi
eum judicare ex tali libertate. Debet enim quis juri
subjacere ubi delinquit.  Proprios enim latrones &
alienos, infra libertatem suam captos, judicare possunt.
Item cognoscere possunt de medletis & hominibus ver-
beratis, vulneratis, nisi felonia & pax regis vel? vice-
comitis non apponitur. Poterit tamen apponi pax do-
mini regis & ballivorum. ltem de equis, bobus, &
alis animalibus vulneratis, & mahematis. Talis qui-
dem transgressio emendari poterit per vicinos. tem
cognoscere possunt de debitis quo exiguntur sine brevi
domini regis & etiam de aliis que relaxantur sine
brevi. Ad vicecomites veró pertinent hujusmodi pla-
cita in comitatu. Cognoscere quidem potest de med-
letis, plagis, verberibus, & consimilibus pro defectu
dominorum, nisi querens adjiciat de pace domini regis


—— MÀ —— —— —M —— ———


!«hondehebbende et backeber- 5 *infangenthef," MS. Rawl. C.


« ende," MS. Rawl. C. 160. 160.
? * sa kabor," ib. 5 * infangenthef," ib.
3 * hundredam," i5. 7 ** utfangenthef," ib.


* * wappentakiam," ib. 8 * et, vicecomitis," ib.


OF THE CROWN. 541


seysed of any manifest larceny, as homdhabend and Ponenee |

bacberend, and he has been followed by the saccabor, Tikewise

because, unless he was in seysine, although some one Metis
| was pursuing him as a larcener, it shall not pertain t0 a court,

the court,nor the hundred, nor the wapentake, to take vod

eognisance of such thefts, nor to make an inquest upon county,

them by the country, whether such an one, who was not ur di I

seysed, was culpable or not. Nor that battle shall be franchises

waged between any persons before seysine. Concerning dE

this which is called énfamgethef, let us see what it is.

And a larcener caught upon any person's land by his

own men seysed of the larceny is called ?nfangethef. But

a larcener from without, coming from elsewhere from

another's land, and who has been caught on the land of

such an one who has such franchises, is called «tfange-

thef. But it does not follow, that he can bring back

within his own franchise his own man caught beyond

his franchise, and there judge him in right of such fran-

chise. They may judge their own men and the men of

others for larceny, if caught within their franchise.

Likewise they may take cognisance of medleys, and men

beaten or wounded, if felony or the peace of the king

or of the viscount be not appended. But the peace of

the lord the king and the bailiffs; may be appended.

Likewise concerning horses, oxen, or other animals

wounded or maimed. Such a trespass may be corrected

by neighbours. Likewise they may take cognisance of

debts, which are exaeted without a writ from the crown,

and likewise of other things which are relaxed without

a writ. But to the viscounts pleas of this kind apper-

tain in the county court. He may take cognisanee of

medleys, cuts, blows, and such like, in default of the

lords, unless the complainant add concerning a breach of

the peace of the king, or appends felony, for thereupon even


ER


f. 155.


Britton, i.
ch. xxix.
S 38.


549 DE CORONA.


infracta, vel feloniam apponat, extunc enim se vice
comes non debet intromittere, càm hoc tangat perso-
nam ipsius domini regis & coronam suam. Et ideó
eoronatores querelam illam sive appellum irrotulare
debent, annum & diem & locum, & omnis verba ap-
pelli per ordinem, & omnes circumstantias ut suprà
de appellis usque ad adventum justitiariorum. Sed si
tantüm agatur de pace vicecomitis, non erit ibi amissio
vite vel membrorum, sed sequitur poena pecuniaria de
convictis. Potest quidem vicecofi tenere plura placita,
quae non sunt ex officio vicecoH, sed vice ipsius regis
el ex causa necessaria,! non sieut vicecofi sed sieut
justitiarius regis, si hoc ei specialiter demandetur quód


juratam capiat, & inquisitiones faciat, extensiones &


partitiones, lit, in quibusdam judicium reddere non
possit. ltem habet ex speciali mandato regis, non ex
offieio vicecott ubi mandatum habet quód justitiet


aliquem, & quo casu, videtur quód omnia habere de-


beat ut justitiarius, sine quibus placitum illud termi-
nari non possit. Habet etiam ut justitiarius & non
ex officio vicecom, quód cognoscere potest de averiis
captis, & detentis, contra vadium & plegium, quod
quidem placitum pertinet ad coronam, & quod ei ex
necessitate conceditur ad terminandum ratione infe-
riàs dicenda. Item pertinet ad ipsum cognoscere de
assisis in regno statutis, & juratis per regnum, si fue-


rint servate vel non, sicut panis & cervisie, & falsis


mensuris quie pertinent ad coronam, & de quibus at-
iachiamenta facere potest, simul cum coronatore, usque
ad adventum justitiariorü. ltem pertinet ad vicecoiü
visus franciplegii in turnis suis duobus, singulis an-
nis, per hundreda, wapentakia faciendis, & ideó qua-
liter debent fieri turni videndum est.


1 «Potestquidem vicecomes facere | ** tis, sed vice ipsius regis ex causa
* placita, non ex offieio vicecomi- | ** necessaria." MS. Rawl. C. 160.


toc eat


OF THE CROWN. a43


the visecount ought not to intermeddle with it, since this
. touches the person of the king and his crown.  Ànd ac-
cordingly the coroners ought to enrol that complaint or
accusation, the year and the day and the place, and all
the words of the accusation in order, and all the circum-
Stances as above stated concerning aceusations,to await
the coming of the justices. But if only the peace of the
viscount be at stake, there shall not be the loss of life or
limbs, but à pecuniary penalty follows upon conviction.
The viscount may hold several pleas, which do not belong
to his office, but in the king's place and from a necessary
cause, not as viscount but as the king's justiciary, if. this
be specially deputed to him, that he hold a jury and
make inquests, valuations, and partitions, although in
some cases he cannot render à judgment. Likewise he
has from a special mandate of the king, not from his
office of viscount, when he has a mandate that he should
judge any one, and in which case it seems that he ought
to have as a justiclary all things, without which that
plea cannot be determined. He has likewise as a justi-
ciary, and not from his office of viscount, that he can
hóld eognisance of cattle taken and detained, against
bail and sureties, which plea pertains to the crown, but
which is conceded to him from necessity to determine in
a manner io be explained below. Likewise it pertains
to him to hold cognisance of the assises appointed in the
realm, and of the jwrata throughout the realm, if they
have been observed or not, as of bread and beer, and
false measures, which pertain to the crown, and con-
cerning which he can make attachments, together with
ihe coroner, to await the coming of the justices. The
view of frankpledge pertains to the viscount in making
his two turns, every year, through the hundreds or wa-
pentakes, and therefore we must see how the turns
ought to be made.


f. 155.


- E ML d en i


].
De mino-
ribus et
levioribus
criminibus
quz civili-
ter inten-
tantur.


544 DE CORONA.


Ld


CAP. XXXVI.


Dictum est suprà de majoribus criminibus, & ap-
pelis quz criminaliter intentantur, & aliquando ulti-
mum inducunt supplicium, aliquando membrorum trun-
cationem, aliquando exilium perpetuum, vel ad tempus.
Nune autem dicendum est de minoribus & levioribus
criminibus, quie civiliter intentantur, sicut de actioni-
bus injuriarum personalibus, & pertinent ad coronam,
eó quód aliquando sunt contra pacem domini regis.
Videndum igitur quid sit injuria, & sciendum quód
injuria est, quiequid non jure sit, & unde suprà in
parte dicitur, quód si quis interfectus fuerit, videndum
erit an injuria interfectus sit, vel sit talis qui nullo
jure occiditur. Igitur qui latronem occiderit, non tene-
tur, nocturnum vel diurnum, si aliter periculum eva-
dere non possit, tenetur temen si possit. ltem non
tenetur, si per infortunium, & non animo & voluntate
oecidendi, nec dolus nec culpa ejus inveniatur, de quo
supradictum est, & de gratia prineipis cum eo mitiüs
agitur hoe probato. Non jure occiditur quis, ut si in
assultu preemeditato, & in felonia, et animo occidendi
fuerit quis interfectus, ob iram et cupiditatem. Item
Si quis unum percusserit et occiderit, cüàm alium per-
eutere vellet in felonia, tenetur. ltem si cüm leviüs
credidit pereussisse, graviüs percusserit et occiderit,
tenetur, debet enim quilibe& modum et mensuram ad-
hibere in suo facto. Et est injuria talis, quee inducit
ultimum supplicium, ecüm ceriminaliter agatur. Est &
alia, quee non nisi poenam pecuniariam tantüm, &
quandoque eandem poenam cum carceris inclusione,
secundüm facti qualitatem. — Fit autem injuria non
solüm cüm quis pugno percussus fuerit, verberatus,


OF THE CROWN. 545


CHAPTER XXXVI.


We have spoken above of greater charges and aceusa- 5. T -
L . QAAE . minor
lions, whieh are brought criminally and sometimes lead ana lighter
to the last punishment, sometimes to mutilation of limbs, charges
: ; , : ; which aro
sometimes to exile for life or for a time. Now, however, brought
we may speak of minor and lighter charges, which are "il.
brought .civilly, as concerning actions for personal in-
juries, and they appertain to the crown, for sometimes
they are against the peace of the crown. It is to be seen
therefore what is an injury, and it isto be known that
an injury is whatever is done not rightfully, and it has


.been said above in part, that if any óne be slain, we


must see whether he has been slain injuriously or is .
such an one as is slain with no right. "Therefore he
who kills à larcener by night or by day is not liable,
if he otherwise could not eseape danger, but he is
liable, if he could. Likewise he is not liable, if he kills


him through ill fortune, and not with the intention or


the desire of killing him, and neither deceit nor fault,

of which we have spoken above, is found. in him, and

through the favour of the sovereign he is treated more

mildly, when this is proved. A person is slain with no /


. right, as if. he be slain in à premeditated assault, or in à


felony, and with the intention of killing, from anger and
eupidity. Làükewise if &à person has struck and killed
one person, when he wished to strike another in a felony,
heisliable. Likewise if, when he believed himself to
have struck more lightly, he has struck more severely
and killed him, he is liable, for every one ought to main-
iain moderation and measure in his act. And it is such
an injury as may bring on the last punishment, when
eriminal proceedings are taken. There is also another
injury, which only brings on a pecuniary penalty, and
Sometimes the same penalty accompanied with inclusion
in à prison, according to the quality of the act. Butan
injury is done not only when has been struck with a fist,
VOL. II. | MM


546 DE CORONA.


vulneratus, vel fustibus cessus, verüm cüm ei convi-
lium dietum fuerit, vel de eo faetum earmen famosum
et hujusmodi.


2. Patitur autem injuriam quis, non solüm per seipsum,
midi sed etiam per alios quos habet in potestate, sicut per
turinjuri- liberos suos & uxorem suam. Vir autem agere poterit
Am PIOPT de injuria faeta uxori sus, sed non e contrario. De-.

fendi enim uxorem à viro, non virum ab uxore dignum
est. tem injuriam patitur quis per illos quos in
familia sua habuerit, sicut servientes. suos et servos,
Si pulsati fuerint, et verberati in contumeliam suam,


vel quatenus sua interfuit operibus eorum non caru-


isse.
3. De plagis veró & verberibus sibi factis, habent ipsi
i cn actionem & non dis, habent enim servi psonam standi


easibus — in judicio contra omnes de injuriis sibi factis, contra


m pacem domini regis, & multó fortiüs servientes. Ha-


personam bent etiam servi psonam standi in judicio contra domi-
judicio nos suos, de seditione! domini regis, & alis que fiunt
contr — contra psonam ejus, quia ibi admittitur quilibet de
dominos . ie oe c, "
$008; populo, & contra dominum suum de atroci injuria, ubi
agitur de vita vel membris vel roberia. Poena autem
injuriarum quandoq, erit corporalis, quandoq, pecunia-
ria, & si fuerit pecuniaria, & certa, & in judicium de-
ducta, tunc erit à judice taxanda, cüm sit omne inter-
esse incertum, & quandoq, minuitur, cüm sit in judicium
deducta, secundàüm qualitatem delieti & pson:» cui in-
juriatur, nunquam tamen crescere debet de jure.


4. Est quidem injuria levis, & est atrox, atrocitas veró


bns destimatur ex ipso facto, ut si quis fuerit malà vulne-
sestimatur ratus, verberatus, et malé tractatus contra pacem.


! «seditione. Sic, MS. Rawl. C. 160; **seductione," MS. Rawl. C. 159
and MS. Galeaczo.


"gey uu —-—«——LOo€— ——-— ewe pÓ——Á UMMUNTOS AEn INCUN ENERO e REESE UU UE UE
zi : Tu e ^


OF THE CROWN. 547


or logged, or wounded, or cudgelled, but when words of
insult are applied to him, or libellous verses made con-
cerning him.


À person also suffers an. injury, not only in his person, E
but also in respect of those who are under his authority, person
as in respect of his children or his wife. A husband ud as
also may bring an action for an injury done to his wife, respect of
but not the converse. For itis worthy that a wife should aucune
be defended by her husband, but not a4 husband by his
wife. Likewise & person suffers injury through those
who are members of his family, such as his servants and
his serfs,if they have been beat or flogged in order to
insult him, or inasmueh as it was his interest not to be
without their services.


Serfs also themselves, and not their lords, have an 8.
action for blows and stripes inflicted on themselves, for Ee ia
serfs have a personal right of action in court against all cases serfs
persons for injuries done to themselves, against the peace Betsongllty
of the king, and much more so servants. For serfs have in court to
a personal right to be heard in a eourt:.of law against xir
their lords concerning sedition against the lord the king, their lords.
and other matters which are done against his person,
because there any one of the people is admitted, and
against their lord concerning any atrocious injury, where
life or limbs or robbery is at stake. But the punish-
ment of injuries will be sometimes corporeal, sometimes
pecuniary, and if it be pecuniary and certain and brought
into judgment, it will have to be taxed by the judge,
since all interest is uncertain, and sometimes it is re-
duced, when it is brought into judgment, according to
the quality of the offence and of the person to whom the
injury is done. lt ought not, however, to increase of
right. |


There is indeed a light injury, and there isan atrocious ^ 4.
injury, but the atrocity is estimated from the act itself, iseh nid
as if a person has been badly wounded, beaten, or ill- injury is


MM 2


multis
modis.


De vetito


1.


Namii.


Britton, 1.
ch. xxviii,


82.


156.


548 | DE CORONA.


Item ex loco, si in curia domini regis, vel dominorum,
si coram justitiariüis, vel in comitatu cor&à vicecomite.
ltem si in theatro, in nundinis, vel in foro, vel alibi
cora omni populo. Item locus vulneris, ut si in fronte,
vel in oculo magis quàm in loco secreto. ltem ex
psona sestimatur injuria, ut si magistratib?, vel balli-
vis fiat, parentibus, vel patronis. Item non solüm
tenetur actione injuriarum, qui fecit injuriam (hoc est)
qui peussit, sed ille qui dolo fecit, vel qui dolo peu-
ravit, ut alicui maxilla pugno percuteretur. Hsec au-
tem actio p dissimulationem aboletur. Et ideo si quis
injuriam passus, hoe statim ad animum non revocave-
rit, posteà ex poenitentia remissam injuriam per dissi-
mulationem ad animum recolligpere non poterit.


Car. XXXVII.


Detentio namii pro districtione facienda pertinet ad
coronam domini regis, & vix conceditur alicui termi-
nandum, prceterquàm ipsi domino regi, vel justitiariis
suis. Sed quia placitum istud dilationem non capit,
propter animalia muta, & propter damnum quod eve-
nire posset, si diu detinerentur inclusa, donec placitum
de vetito namii! terminaretur, ideó placitum de vetito
namil vic. conceditur terminandum, hac necessitate,
quod quidem non habet ex officio vicec. sed sicut jus-
titiarius domini regis. Et eodem modo non erit ali-
quis, qui hujusmodi libertatem clamare possit, ut de
jure sibi ipsi competentem, sed ut justitiarius domini
regis, & de speciali concessione regis, et nisi hoe ha-
beat, tueri non poterit aliquo tempore longo. Item


"
1* yetitonamii."—/Vaam signifies | was the refusal to release upon

& seizure in Anglo-Saxon, hence | offer of surety the distress or thing

the thing seized. "The vefitum, or | seized.

vé 88 it was termed in Law-French,


OF THE CROWN. 549


treated contrary to the peace. Likewise aecording io estimated
the place, if in-the court of the lord the king or of lords, T
if before the justices, or in the county before the vis-

eount. Likewise if in the theatre, in the fair, or in the
market, or elsewhere before the publie. Likewise the

place of the wound, as if it be on the forehead, or in the

eye, rather than in à hidden part. Likewise the injury

is estimated according to the persons, as if it be done to
magistrates, or to  bailiffs to parents, or to patrons.
Likewise not merely he, who has done the injury, that is,

who has struek the blow, is liable to an action for injury,

but he who did it by deceit, or who procured it to be

done by deceit, that à person's cheek should be struck

with a fist. But this action is abolished by dissimula-

tion. And therefore if à person who has suffered an
injury, has not recalled i6 to memory at once, he shall

not be able to recall to mind on repentance an injury

once remitted by dissimulation.


CHAPTER XXXVII.


The detention of a thing taken in making a distraint o, HE
appertains to the erown of the lord the king, and is refusal of
scarcely allowed to any one to determine, except to the * distress.
lord the king and his justices. But because that plea
does not admit of delay, on account of dumb animals,
and on account of the loss which may happen if they are
detained too long shut up, until a plea of refusal of the
distress has been determined, therefore the plea of re-
fusal of the distress is allowed to the viscount to deter-
mine from this necessity, as he does not hold the plea
from his office of. viscount, but as justiciary of the king.
And'in the same way there will not be any one who can
claim a franchise of this kind, as belonging to himself of
right, but as the justieiary of the king and of special
grant from the king, and unless he has this, hé cannot
maintain it for any long time. Likewise when a person f 156.


550 DE CORONA.


cüm quis talem habeat libertatem, refert utrü averia
deliberata fuerint p breve dii regis ad querelam fac-
tam regi, vel sine brevi regis ad querelam factam
immediaté vicecomiti ad hoe, quód quis habeat curiam
suam de hujusmodi placito, si curiam petat, cüm in
justitia facienda negligens non extiterit. Omnia veró, .
quie contingere possunt cirea hujusmodi placitum, con-
sistunt & versantur circa duo, vz. cirea captionem &
detentionem cotra vadium & plegium, & est omnis
captio justa vel injusta. Si autem justa sit captio, vz.
p servitio detento ab aliquo qui servitium illud cog-
noscit, tune poterit ille, qui capit, cognoscere captionem
illam, nec in tali captione delinquit. Sed si averia
taliter justé capta contra vadium & plegium fuerint
detenta, cüm petita fuerint p vadium et plegium, prz-
stita securitate de servitio faciendo cum arreragiis, vel
si alia occasione capta fuerint sicut p damno facto,
vel injuriis vel debitis, vel aliis, quce terminari pos-
sunt sine brevi dii regis, justa poterit esse captio, et
injusta detentio, primó agatur de captione, quia nun-
quam forte capta, vel si capta forte juste vel injustó,
nunqua fuerunt petita p vadium & plegios, vel si pe-
tita, non venit ad curiam dni sui ad standum recto,
& ita quód iterum capta. Item si p damno capto,
disputari poterit utrü capta fuerint in damno vel extra.
Tunc de veniendo ad curiam & parendo juri, & hoc
convictum sit in comitatu, tune ille qui cepit erit in
misericordia vicec. et averia sic capta deliberabit vic.
tali modo, quód ille, eujus averia sunt, veniat ad curiam
düi sul ad rationabilem summonitionem, et ad certum
diem responsur? de servitio suo q cognoscit, & de
arreragiis servitii illius. Et in hoe casu, oportet quód


OF THE CROWN. 551


has such a franchise, it is of importance whether the beasts


have been released by & writ from the lord the king
upon a complaint made to the king, or without a writ
from the king upon a complaint made immediately to
the viscount for this purpose, that a person should have his
court upon this plea, if lie seeks a court, when he is not
negligent in applying for justice. But all things, which can
happen about a plea of this kind, consist of and are con-
tained in two matters, namely, the seizure and the deten-
tion against bail and surety, and every seizure is either just
or unjust. But if the seizure is just, that is for à service
kept back by some one who acknowledges the service,
then may he who seizes acknowledge the seizure, nor
does he commit a delict in the seizing. But if the
beasts so seized justly have been detained contrary to
bail and surety, when they have been applied for with
bail and surety, security having been offered for doing
the service with the arrears, or if they have been seized
on another occasion for damage done, or injuries, or
debts, or other matters, which may be determined without
& writ from the lord the king, the seizure may be just
and the detention unjust; let us treat first of the seizure,
because they may by chance have never been seized, or
if seized by chance justly or unjustly, they have never
been applied for with bail and sureties, or if applied
for, he has not come into the court of the lord the king
to stand his trial and so that they have been seized a
second time. Likewise if for damage received, it may be
disputed whether they have been taken in damage or with-


out. "Then eoncerning the coming into court and obey-


ing the law, and if this has been proved in the county,
then he who has seized will be amerciable by the vis-
count, and the viscount shall release the beasts so seized,
in such a manner, that he whose beasts they are, shall
come to the court of his lord upon a reasonable summons
and on & certain day, to answer for the service which he
owes him, and for the arrears of that service. And in


n6 Ti LC T


f. 156 b.


552 | DE CORONA.


düs defendat detentionem vel concedat, si autem con-
cedat detentionem injustam, planum est q ex hoc
sequitur: si autem defenderit detentionem injustam,
et querens sectam habeat statim ad manum, qus exa-
minata in omnib? concors fuerit, & quód omnia facta
fuerunt sub eorum presentia, tunc vadiabit defendens
legem se duodecima manu, in qua si defecerit, incidet
in manum vicecomitis, sicut in primo easu, & restituet
querenti damna sua, quo habuit p illa detentionem.
Si autem legem fecerit dis, tune quiet? recedet, et
querens in misericordia, sed nulla damna recuperabit,
et returnabit dio averia capta. Et querens aut satis-
faciat dio statim de servitio suo, aut replegiare faciat
&veria sua usque ad certum diem, ad quem faciet ei
id q de jure facere debebit. Sed quid si posteà cüm
fuerinb retornata petantur p vadium & plegium, et
tune sit vetita? videtur que deliberari debent ut
priüs.


&i veró captio fuerit injusta sicuti p servitio, quod
tenens non cognoscit, & de quo sine precepto domini
regis respondere noluerit, tune oportet quód ille, qui
averia ceperit, respondeat de injusta captione, sive illa
detinuerit injusté conira vadium & plegium, ut suprà,
sive non. Et hoc, si querens doceat per certa judicia,


ei sectam sufficientem, quód capta fuerit pro servitio


quod non cognoscit, quia cüm quis dedixerit servitium
quod petitum est, sive debitum sit & solutum sive
non, càm in placito illo per breve domini regis per-
venire possit ad duellum vel magnam assisam, mani-
festó patet, quód nullus liber homo de tali servitio
tenetur respondere sine brevi domini regis, non magis


.1 * eum duodecim& mann," MS. Rawl. C. 159.


OF THE CROWN. 553


this ease i6 is requisite that the lord deny or admit the
detention, but if he admits an unjust detention, it is
plain what follows thereupon: but if he denies the un-
just detention, and the plaintiff has his sect fortltwith at


hand, which when examined agrees in all things, and .


that everything was done in their presence, then let the
defendant wage his law with twelve jurors, in which if
he fails he shall fall into the hand of the viscount, as in
the first case, and he shall restore to the complainant his
losses, which he has suffered from that detention. But
if the lord has established his law, then he shall retire
aequitted, and the complainant may be amerced, but he


. Shall recover no damages, and shall return to the lord
the beasts seized. And let the complainant forthwith


satisfy the lord on account of his service, or cause his
beasts to be released on sureties to appear at a certain
day, when he shall perform for him that which he ought
io do. But what if afterwards, when they have been
returned, they are claimed with bail and surety and are


then refused? It seems that they ought to be released -


as before.


But if the seizure has been unjust, as for a service,
which the tenant does not acknowledge, and concerning


Bnt T the


Seizure


which he is unwilling to answer without an order from has been
the lord the king, then it is requisite, that he who has unjust,


iaken the beasts, should answer for their unjust seizure,
whether he has detained them unjustly against bail and
surety, as above, or not. And this, if the complainant
shows by certain Judgments and a sufficient sect, that
this has been seized for & service which he does not
acknowledge, for when a person has denied a service,
which is claimed, whether it be due and has been paid,
or not, since in that plea he can arrive at a duel or &
great assise through a writ of the lord the king, it is
manifestly clear that no freeman is bound to answer
concerning such a service without a writ of the lord the


f, 156 b.


3.
Si querens
queratur
de utraque
8. captione


. et deten-


tione.


554 DE CORONA.


quàm de libero tenemento suo. Sed quid si dominus
recenter fuerit in seysina de servitio de quo cotendi-
tur, nunquid poterit tenens illud dedicere? Bene po-
terit (ub videtur) licet solutum, debitum vel indebitum.
Tu! die, quód si dominus fuerit in seysina servitii, p
quo distringitur p namium querentis & hoc possit
verifieari p patriam, tenens non poterit illud servitium
sic dedicere, quin inde capiatur inquisitio, s. de seysina
recenti p manum tenentis. Si tenens hujusmodi seysi-
nam dedixerit, & inquisitione p domino faciente, que-
rens erit in misericordia, & averia capta returnabit
domino, quia in hujusmodi casu perveniri non potest
ad duellum nec ad magnam assisam, propter seysina
recentem. Si autem cóovictum sit p inquisitionem,
quód dominus non fuerit in seysina servitii p manum
tenentis, p quo recognovit districtionem, tunc dominus
erii in misericordia & querens recuperabit damna sua,
& averia sua deliberata remanebunt, & dominus sibi
pvideat p breve si voluerit, p hujusmodi servitio recu-
perando, ubi pveniri poterit ad duellum vel magnam
assisam. Idem erit dicendum, si tenens moriatur &
dominus fuerit in seysina servitii p quo districtionem
fecit, anno & die quo tenens su? fuit viv? & mortu?,
si heeres tenentis postmodum velit hujusmodi servitium
dedicere, càüm dominus p eodem distrinxerit.!


Si autem tenens conqueratur de injusta captione, &
injusta detentione simul & semel, bené poterit utramq,
injuriam si velit prosequi, & per eosdem testes, & per
eandem sectam, & si fuerint concordes, & idonei, &
suffielentes, ponere poterit eaptorem & detentorem ad
legem si voluerit, & vadiata lege, habebit diem ad


*


l«'Tu die, quod si dominus," | is omitted in MS. Rawl. C. 160, also
down to * pro eodem distrinxerit," | in MS. Rawl. C. 159.


OF THE CROWN. 555


king, any more than concerning his freehold. But what
if the lord has recently been in seysine of the service,
concerning which there is a dispute, can the tenant
possibly deny it? He may well do so, as it seems,
although it has been paid, due or not. Say you, that if
the lord has been in seysine of the service, for which
distraint is made by the seizure of the beasts of the
plaintiff jo and this can be verified by the country, the
tenant cannot so deny that service as to prevent an in-
quest being held thereupon, that is concerning the
recent seizure by the hand of the tenant. If the tenant
has denied a seysine of this kind, and an inquest
makes for the lord, the plaintiff shall be in mercy and he
shall restore the beasts seized to the lord, because in a
case of this kind, one cannot proceed to a duel or a great
assise on account of the recent seysine. But ifithas been
convicted by the inquest, that the lord has not been in
seysine of the service by the hand of the tenant, for
which he has acknowledged the distress, then the lord
shall be in mercy, and the plaintiff shall recover his
losses, and his beasts shall remain released, and the lord
shall provide by a writ, if he pleases, for the recovery of
a service of this kind, where one may proceed to a duel or
a great assise. The same is to be said, if the tenant dies
and the lord was in seysine of the service, for which he
made the distraint, on the year and à day on which the
tenant was living and dead, if the heir of the tenant
shall afterwards wish to deny a service of this kind,
when the lord has distrained for it.


But if the tenant complains of the unjust seizure and
the unjust detention at one and the same time, he may


and by the same sect, and if they in concord and are


having been waged he shall have a day to prove his


If io


plaintiff
well prosecute both injuries, and by the same witnesses, doaiplaín


of both,


that is, the
suitable and sufficient persons, he may put the seizor seizure and


and the detainer to his law, if he wishes, ànd the law uh deten-


556 DE CORONA.


faciendam lepem, usq, ad proximum éofü, ad quem
poterit uterq, se essoniare si voluerit. Et si ad diem
legis faciends :defuerit aliquis -de xii, vel si contra


predietos excipi possit, quód non sunt idonei ad legem


Britton,l. faciendam, eó quód villani sunt, vel aliàs idonei minus,

i.c

xxviig29, tune dominus incidet in misericordiam, & damna resti-
tuet sicut priüs. Et contingit multotiens, quód diüs
potes& salvó defendere detentionem contra vadium &
plegium, sed non injustam captione, & quo casu, uterq,
cadet in misericordiam vicec, tam dns quàm tenens,
domin? ppter injustam captionem, et tenens p falso


clamore de injusta detentione.


4. Si domin? post legem vadiatam defaltim fecerit,

o Iron. distringend? erit quód veniat ad proximum coi, audi-
vadiatam "bur? judicium suum de defalta, ad quem comi sive
e venerit sive non, debet tenens habere averia sua deli-
Briton,i5, berata, eó quód dns defecit in lege sua facienda, &
Fleta,98. post talem districtionem, nullum habebit reus essonium
in odium defalte quam fecit, nee possit dedicere cof

p aliquem. audientem & intelligentem, q ipse legem

non vadiávit, cüm in hoe casu habeat comitatus recor-

dum, sieut in alis pluribus casibus, quia si hoc facere

posset, eadem ratione dedicere posset quilibet contra
recordum comitatus de viso petito, & warranto vocato,

& cognitionibus, & attachiamentis, & hujusmodi, &

inde sequeretur quód nullum placitum terminaretur in


comitatu. Hoe tamen videtur esse contra eos, qui


dicunt quód com non habet recorda, cui contradici
non possit per unum audientem & intelhgentem.


£157. ^ Ad quod notandum, quàd null? potest in comitatu


5. — vel alibi aliquid dedieere, de recordo adversarii sui,


mid nec de recordo illo aliquid sugere vel diminuere, ad


! * jn eodem defülta, quem fecit." MS. Rawl. C. 159.


OF THE CROWN. . 557


law, up to the next eounty court, a& which each may
essoin himself, if he pleases. And.if on the day of prov-
ing the law any one of the twelve be absent, or if an
exception ean be made against any of the aforesaid, that
they are not suitable persons to prove the law by reason
that they are villems, or otherwise unfit, then the lord
shall be in mercy and shall restore the losses as before.
And it happens repeatedly that the lord may safely deny
the detention against bail and surety, but not the unjust
seizure, and in which case each will be in the mercy of
the viscount, as well the lord as the tenant, the lord on
account of his unjust seizure, and the tenant on account
of his false claim for an unjust detention.


If the lord after having waged hislaw has made de-  .4.
fault, he shall be distrained to come at the next county Ifthe lord
court to hear his judgment concerning the default, at wager of
which county court, whether he has come or not, the tenant rud
ought to have his beasts delivered up to him, inasmuch fault.
as the lord has failed in establishing his law, and after
such distraint, the defendant shall have no essoin in
hatred of the default which he has made, nor can he
deny the county court, by some one hearing and under-
standing it, that he did not wage his law, since in this
ease the county court has a record, as in several other
cases ; because if he could do this, by the same reason he
might deny anything against the record of the county
court concerning a petition of view, and a summons to
warrant, and recognitions, and attachments, and such
like, and hence it would follow that no plea would be de-
lermined in the county court. 'This however seems to
be against those, who say that the county court hgs not
$& record, to which contradiction may not be made by a
person hearing and understanding the proceedings.


Upon which it is to be noted, that no one may in the f. 157.
eounty court or elsewhere deny anything in the record n2
of his adversary, nor add to nor detraet from anything in person may


Ly


aliquid
dedicere
de recordo
adversarii.


6.
De officio
vicecomi-
tis.


558 DE CORONA.


damnu ipsius adversari sui: quia si hoc, sic sequere
tur inconveniés, q quiequid boni adversarius suus dice-
ret pro se, amovere posset, & in pej? convertere. Sed
de recordo suo proprio in cof recitato inde augere
poterit vel diminuere, sed totum dedicere non potest,
nec ea qui sunt de substantia negotii, vel principalia
eum captione adversarii, verbi gratia. Sit qui petat
quandam terram, de seysina antecessorum suorum p
verba duellum facientia, & nominaverit tempus regis
Richardi, & q expletia cepit ad valentiam viginti so-
lidof, hoc ad alium comitat dedicere potest, & dicere
q petiit de seysina antecessorum suorum de tempore
regis I. & ita mutare q petiit de tempore regum
Richardi & Johannis simul, & ita addere vel augere,
& quód expletia cepit ad valentiam quinq, solidor &
sic minuere, & statim hoc probare debet p unum au-
dientem & intelligentem, qui incontinenti paratus sit
hoe probare per corpus suum si curia consideraverit.
Et sic poterit quis proprium recordum mutare, au-
gere, & minuere, quia ex hoc nullü damnum habebit
adversarius, quia non sunt multàm de substantia
negotii.


Offieium veró vie. est, si quis conqueratur de in-
justa captione, vel injusta detentione contra vadium
& plegium, quód cüm breve domini regis supervene-
rib & receperit, quód tale est. Rex vic. salutem. Pr:-
eipimus tibi, quód sine dilatione replegiare facias tali
averla sua, quae talis cepit & injusté detinet ut dicit,
& posteà eum inde just? deduci facias, ne ampliüs
inde clamorem audiamus p defectu justitiwe. Teste &c.
vel etiam ad querelam alicujus sine brevi (accepta


OF THE CROWN. 559


the record, to the damage of his adversary, for if this ?o' ied
were allowed, this ineonvenience would follow, that he in the i
might remove everything which his adversary might say deri
which was good for himself, and alter it for the worse. sary.
But concerning his own record recited in the county
court he may add to or diminish from it, but he cannot
deny the whole of it, nor those things which are of the
substance of the affair or the principal things with the
seizure of the adversary. For illustration: Let there. be
some one who claims a certain land from the seysine of

EE . his ancestors by words constituting a duel, and shall have
" named the time king Richard, and that he has taken
. profits of the land to the value of twenty shillings, he.

may deny this at another county court, and say that he

claims it upon the seysine of his ancestors in the time of

king John, and he may thus alter what he claimed from

the time of king Richard and king John together, and

thus add or increase, and that he has taken profits to the

value of twenty-five shillings, and so diminish, and forth-

with prove this by & witness who heard and understood

16, who is ready forth with to prove it by his body, if the

court so directs. And thus a person may alter his own

record, and add to it and take away from it, because his

adversary will incur no loss from it, because they are not

much of the substance of the business.


But the office of the viscount iS$,if any one complains 6.
of an unjust seizure or an unjust detention against bail ed the
and surety, that the writ of the lord the king has super- viscount.
vened and he has received 1t, which 1s of this tenor: The
king to the viscount greeting : We enjoin you that with-
out any delay you eause to be restored to such an one on
surety his beasts which so-and-so has seized and detains
unjustly, as he says, and afterwards cause him to be
justly conducted thence, that we may not hear his clamour
for failure of justice. Witness &c., or likewise at the
complaint of any one without & writ (security having


Britton, i.
ch. xxviii.


$2.


b. S 4.


7.
Dreve de
attachi-
endo,
quare
cepit
averia et
fugavit
extra comi-
tatum.


f. 157 b.


560 DE, CORONA.


priüs ab eo securitate de prosequendo) in ppria psona
Sua, si ad hoc intendere possit, accedat vie. ad locum
ubi averia deteta sunt, ut dicitur, vel si ipse vic. non
possit, mittat serviente suum, & statim cüm venerit,
petat visum de averiis illis ubicung; inclusa fuerint, &
Si sib aliquis contradictor vel qui velit contradicere q
inde visum habere nó possit, vel ppter hoc in eum
man? violentas injecerit, statim levet hutesiu & clamo-
rem, & cum hutesio & clamore capiat delinquentes,
sieut illos qui sunt manifesté cont pacem diüi regis, &
in gaolam projiciat, quousq, dofi rex inde Ppceperit
voluntatem suam, & averia capta deliberet, si inveniàa-
tur: si autem inveniri non possunt, eó q alibi fugata
sunt forte, vel extra com in fraudem, & captor terrà
habuerit in com & catalla, capiat serviens diii regis de
averis illtus in duplum, & illa detineat, donec averia
sie abducta reducantur. Sed quid si captor nullam
terram habuerit in com nec catalla, quid agendum
erit? cüm potestas vic. non extendatur usg, ad alium
cofü, & hoc fiat in fraudem ad impedienda vic. potes-
tatem, tune recurrendum est ad potestatem regis, &
fiat tale breve.


Rex vie. salutem. Quia A. fecit nos securos, vel
aliter. Si A. fecerit te securü de &e. Pone p vadiü
& salvos plegios B. q sit coram justitiarüis &c. apud.
Westii tali die, ostensurus quare cepit averia ipsius
ÁÀ. in com tali, ubi idem B. non habet terras nec
tenementa, licót, habeat feoda, & ipsa fugavit à pre-
dicto com tali, usque ad cof tuum in fraudem extra
potestatem vie. nostri talis, & ibidem ea detinet contra


|


OF THE CROWN. 561


been previously taken from him for the prosecution of
the suit) In his own person, if he can attend to this,
let the viscount go to the place where the beasts are
detained, as it is reported, or if the viscount cannot go
himself, let. him send his own serjeant, and immediately
when he has come to the place, let him request a view of
the beasts, wherever they are shut up, and if there be
any contradictor or person who would oppose his having
& view of them, and such person shall on that account
lay violent hands upon him, let him at once raise the
hue and cry, and with the hue and cry seize the delin-
quents, as persons who are manifestly breaking the peace
of the king, and let him cast them into gaol, until the
lord the king has given directions as to his will in the
matter, and let him release the beasts seized, if they be
found, but if they cannot be found, inasmueh as by
chance they have been driven elsewhere, or even beyond
the county in fraud [of the jurisdiction], and the seizor
has land in the county and chattels, let the serjeant of the
lord the king take of the seizor's cattle double the number,
and detain them until the beasts so driven away are
brought back. But what if the seizor has no land or
chattels in the country, what is to be done? Since the
power of the viscount does not extend to another county,
and this is done in fraud to impede the power of the
viscount, then recourse must be had to the power of the
king, and let such a writ issue.


The king to the viscount greeting: Because À. has


assured us, or otherwise because B. has assured you &c. : ua to
Put under bail and safe pledges R. that he should present t becanse he


himself before our justices &c. at Westminster on such a


day, to show cause why he has taken the beasts of A. in has driven


such à county, where the said B. has no lands nor tene-


ments, although he has feuds, and has driven them from din


such county aforesaid as far as your county in fraud
beyond the power of so-and-so our viscount, and there
VOL. Il. | N N


562 DE CORONA.


pacem nostram, ut dicit. Eodem modo fiat breve, si
hoc fecerit ad gravamen tenentis sui  Cüàm in comi-
tatu, ubi tenens degerit, feodum habuerit & curiam
capitalem, ad qua tenens sectam debuerit, cüm hoc
aciab de voluntate & in fraude, & non de necessitate


p defectu euriz, & tunc sic: ostensurus quare cepit ave-


8.
Cum vice-
comes vel
gerviens
regis vi-
gum babu-
erit de
averiis
captis sine
impedi-
mento.


ria ipsius À. in com tali, ubi idem B. terras habet &
lenementa & curiam capitalem, & ipsa fugavit &c. ut
suprà. Si autem hsc fecerit ex necessitate & pro
defectu curive, non erit hoe ei imputandü.


Cüm autem vicecoii vel serviens regis visum habu-
erit de averiis captis, sine impedimento & contradic-
tione, statim faciat ea deliberari quereéti, & statim det
utrig eorum diem ad proximum com, ut ille qui cepit
averia, quorum captio dedici non poterit eontra recor-
dum vicecomi vel servientis, sive justa fuerit sive in-
juste, ostendet rationem quare illa juste ceperit, &
tune ille, qui petit, doceat, si possit, quód injuste.
Ad quem comitatum nullum de jure competeret cap-
tori essonium, eim injusta eaptio & detentio cont va-
dium & plegium dici poterit qusedam roberia contra
pacem domini regis, etiam plus quàm nova disseysina.
Cüm veró uterq, presens fuerit in com, tune: dicat
eaptor q juste cepit, & p considerationem curis suse,
pro servitio, quod idem querens & tenens suus ei de-
buit & ei injusté detinuit, & inde poterit vocare curiam
suam ad warrantum, si voluerit, & bené defendat, q
ila nunquam detinuit contra vadium & plegium. Ad
quod querens respondere poterit, quód illa injustà cepit
& detinuit, quia cü ad curiam ipsius captoris domini
sui summonitus esset ad respondendu ei de servitiis &


OF THE CROWN. —J .568


detains them, as he says, against our peace. n the same f.157 b.
manner let à writissue, if he shall have done this for the —
aggrievance of his tenant. When in the county, where

. thetenant lived, he has a feud and a chief court, to which

the tenant owes suit, when he shall do this of his own will

. and in fraud, and not of necessity for the want of à court, .
and then 80: in order to show why he seized the beasts

of ÀÁ. in such à county, where the said B. has lands and
tenements and a chief court, and drove them &c. as above.

But if he has done this from necessity and for want of à
court, this will not have to be imputed to him.


But when the viscount or the serjeant of the king has wu is
had a view of the beasts seized without impedimenti or viseount or
contradiction, let him forthwith eause them to be de- enr
livered to the complainant, and let him forth with give has had
to each of them a day at the next county court, that he nn
who has seized the beasts, whose seizure cannot be denied seized
against the record of the viscount or of the serjeant, m
whether it be just or unjust, shall show cause why he.
has seized them justly, and then let him, who claims
them, show, if he can, that he has seized them unjustly.
Át which county court no essoin is allowable to the
seizor of right, since an unjust seizure and detention
against bail and surety may be called a kind.of robbery
against the peace of the king, even more than a novel
disseysine. But when both shall be present in the
county court, then let the seizor say that he has justly
seized, and by direction of his own court, for & service
which the said complainant his tenant owed to him and
unjustly detained from him, and thereon he can .call
his court to warrant him, if he wishes, and he may well
deny that he has ever detained them against bail and
surety. To which the claimant may answer, that he
took the beasts and detained them unjustly, because
when he had been summoned to the court of the seizor
his lord to answer to him concerning the services and -


NN 2


564 DE CORONA.


eonsuetudinibus, ipse respondit q nullum servitium ei
tale debuit, & judicium petiib, si debuit inde respon-
dere sine brevi & precepto dii regis, de sicut! hoc
tetigit liberum tenementü suum. Et super hoc nihilo-
minüs cepib idem diüs suus averia sua, & eum dis-
trinxit p servitio suo, q non cognovit: & cüm averia
sua peteret deliberari quieté, illa noluit deliberare, &
inde pducat sectam suam sufficientem, scilicet probos
homines, qui presentes fuerint in curia, & qui bene
examinati, si concordes inveniantur, tune summoneatur
curia, quae) si, cüm venerit, concordans fuerit cum
secta, tunc referb utrum captor districtione fecerit per
judicium curie, vel propria voluntate. Si autem per
judicium curie, tune erit curia in misericordia pro
falso judicio, & averia remanebunt deliberata. Si au-


.iem de propria voluntate, & curia sua ei defecerit de


 warranto, tune erit ipse in misericordia, & remanebunt


Britton, i.
ch. xxviii.


S 20.
Fleta, 100.


averia deliberata. Sed quid si curi& recordetur, q
querens servitium petitum recognovit in curia ipsa, &
judicium advocet, & quód justa fuit captio propter
eognitionem, tune querens recordum illud dedicere po-
terit, & cognitionem contra recordum eurizm. Esto
quód in curia domini nullum fuit placitum de servitio,
sed immediaté perventa es& querela ad vicecomitem de
injusta captione, & quo casu, si dominus cognoscat q
juste cepit & p servitio suo, ut predictum est, tunc
aut querens omnino dedicit servitium illud, & q illud
nüquà fecit, vel cognoscit q illud aliquado fecit sed
tame injust?, quia charta habet quz ipsum inde aequi-
etat. Si aute omnino dedixef, tunc quia com no habet
potestat ulteriüs cognoscendi, nec judicare poterit utrum
servitium debitum sit vel non, remaneant averia deli-


1 * desicut," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. 565


the customs, he replied, that he owed him no such ser-
vice, and he requested a judgment, if he ought to reply
to him without a writ and order of the lord the king,
inasmuch as this touched his freehold. And upon this,
nevertheless, the said lord seized his beasts, and dis-
irained him for the service, which he did not acknow-
ledge, and when he requested his beasts to be quietly
released to him, he refused to release them, and thereon
he produced his suffieient sect, men of probity, who
were present in court, and who may be well examined,
and if they be found to agree, then let a court be sum-
moned, which after it has come, if it shall be found to
agree with the sect, then it is of importance whether
the seizor has made the distress by the judgment of the
eouri, or of his own will. But if by the judgment of
" the court, then the court shall be in mercy for a false
judgment, and the beasts will remain released. But if


of his own will, and his court has failed to warrant him,
then he himself shall be in mercy, and the beasts will '
remain delivered. But what if the (court should record, :


that the complainant acknowledged the service claimed
in the court itself, and should invoke judgment, and that
the seizure was just on aecount of the acknowledgment,
then the complainant may deny the record and the
acknowledgment against the record of the court. Let it
be, that in the court of the lord there was no plea con-
cerning a service, but a complaint has come immediately
io the viscount concerning an unjust seizure, and in
which case, if the lord acknowledges that he has justly
seized and for his service, as aforesaid, then either the
complainant altogether denies that service, and that he
has never done it, or he acknowledges that he has some-
limes done it, but unjustly, because he has a charter
which acquits him of it. But if he altogether denies it,
then since the county court has no power of further
cognisance, nor can judge whether the service be due or
not, let the cattle remain released, and let the lord re-


f. 158.


Britton, i.
ch. xxviii.


S 25.
Fleta, 101.


566 DE CORONA.


berata, & düs sibi perquirat, g faciat ei servitia"&
eonsuetudines quz ei facere solet, si recenter fuerit in
seysina, propter seysinam recetem. Et quo casu, récu-
perabit ommia'damna sua, quia agit tantàüm de posses-
sione. Si autem de longinqua & remota seysina, tünc
dieatur, quz ei facere' solet, & debet, & utrumq, jus,
tam possessionis quàm proprietatis in judicium dedu-
eatur p breve de recto, ubi nulla damna recuperabit.
Si autem cognoscat querens, g aliquando fecit ei ser-
vitium sed injusté, tunc quia cognoscit seysinam do-
mini, justam vel injustam, retornentur averia, donec
satisfecerit domino de servitio q cognoscit, propter
seysinam, licàt dominus jus non habuerit, & querens
Sibi perquirat breve, quód dominus non exigat ab eo
servitium & consuetudines quse ei facere non debet,
eó quód illa de jure facere non debet, & ideo si sey-
sing illu gravat, liberabit ipsum actio super jure.
Item cognoscere poterit eaptor, q sveria juste cepit,
quia ceàüm habeat fundum suum liberum, ita q nec
ipse querens nec alius communia in eadem habere pós-
sit, nec, alium servitutem, & cüm idem querens im-
misisset averia sua, cüm jus non haberet immittendi,
& pluries esset ei prohibitum ne immitteret, ipse nihil-
ominüs immisit eontra prohibitionem, & ita cepit ave-
ria su& jusié, paratus ei illa restituere si velt ab


. hujusmodi injuria abstinere, q quidem facere penitus


recusavit, nec voluit averia su& iali modo recipere.
Ad quod querens, quód injusté, quia ipse ibi commu-
niam habere debet, & semper habuit, & hoc paratus
est docere, ubi, & quando &c. Et ex quo noluit illa
quiet? sine plegio dimittere, ideó noluit tali modo


OF THE CROWN. 5647


quire for himself that he do to him the services and the
eustoms which he is accustomed to do, if he has recently
been in seysine of them, on accouut of the recent sey-
sine, and in which case he will recover all his losses,
beeguse he proceeds only upon the possession. But if
he proceeds upon a distant and remote seysine, then let
there be said, what he is accustomed and ought to do for
him, that both rights as well that of possession as of pro-
perty may be brought into judgment by a writ of right,
when he shall recover no losses. But if the complainant
acknowledges that he has once done for him a service,
but unjustly, then because he acknowledges the seysine
of the lord, just or unjust, let the cattle be returned,
until he has satisfied the lord for the service which he
acknowledges, on account of his seysine, although the
lord may have no right, and let the complainant require
a writ, that the lord may not exact from him & service
and customs, which he ought not to do for him, inasmuch
as he ought not to do them of right, and therefore, if
the seysine burdens him, the action upon the right shall
release him. Likewise the seizor may acknowledge that
he has taken the cattle justly, because when he has his
own land free, so that neither the complainant nor any
* person else has a right of common in it, nor any other
servitude, and when the said complainant has turned in
his cattle, when he had no right of sending them in, and
he has been several times prohibited to send them in, he
has nevertheless sent them contrary to the prohibition,
and thus he has seized the cattle justly, being ready to
restore them, if he is willing to abstain from this injury,
which he has refused altogether to do, nor has he been
willing to receive back his cattle on these terms. 'To
which the complainant, that he has unjustly seized them,
for he ought to have a right of common, and has always
had the right, and he is prepared to show this, where
and when &c. And since he was unwilling to release
them quietly without a surety, therefore he himself was


9.

De respon-
sione cap-
toris, quod
juste, quia
in damno
Suo.
Britton, i.
ch. xxviii.


8 9.
Fleta, 101.


10.

Si lex
vadiatur ex
utraque
parte ita,
quod que-
TOns dicat,
quod juste.

f. 158 b


568 .. DE CORONA.


plegium invenire. Et quia comitatus non habet potes-
tatem procedendi ulteriüs, remaneant averia deliberata,
& si querens uti voluerit càm jus non habeat, si do-
minus aliter se defendere non poterit, habeat breve
conira ipsum de nova disseysina de libero tenemento
suo, & si querens jus habeat utendi, & dominus eum
non permittat, habeat breve versus dominum de com-
munia pasturz suse.


Dicere etiam poterit captor,q juste cepit averia sua,
quia illa invenit in damno suo, & secundüm legem &
consuetudiné regni imparcavit illa, donec damnum
suum ei esset emendatum, & no alio modo. Et ipse
querens noluit damnum emendare nec securitatem dare,
vel nee illa unquam petiit p vadium nec p plegium,
vel si petiit, oblata fuerunt ei tali modo, ut pdictum
est, & non alio, & inde producat sectam. Et si que-
rens hoc precise negaverit, defendat se p legem suam,
vel si dicat, q si preedieta occasione capta fuerunt &
justé, tamen detenta fuerunt injusté cont vadium &
plegiü, quia ille querens venit ad ipsum captorem cum
pbis hominibus, & coram eis paratus fuit ei emendare
damnü suum p visum eorundem, & ipse hoc recusavit,
& nihilominus averia sua detinuit injuste cotra vadium
& plegium. Et si inde habuerit bona sectam & sufh-
elente, ille captor, si hoe precisó defenderit, contra
vadiet legem, & sic ex utrag parte poterunt leges
vadiari.


Item si queres dicat quód injuste cepit averia sua,
quia nullà damna ei fecerunt, nec cüm obtulisset ei
satisfacere de dánis, aliquod dànum ei ostendit, tune
oportet g eaptor sectam producat sufficientem, g illa
cepit in damno suo, & ideó justé: vel p servitio suo
recognito, & injuste detento. Si autem ad servitium


" respondet querens, cüm illud recognoverit, q averia


OF THE CROWN. 569


unwilling on such terms to find a surety. nd because
the county court has not the power of proceeding
further, let the cattle remain delivered, and if the com-
plainant wishes to use the right, since he has not the
right, if the lord cannot otherwise defend himself, let
him have a writ against him of novel disseysine of his
free tenement, and if the complainant has the right of
use and the lord does not permit him, let him have a
writ of common pasture against the lord.


But the seizor may say, that he has justly seized the . 9.
cattle, because he found them doing him damage, and iud of
according to law and custom impounded them, until his Falc
damage was made good, and not in any other way. And justy


the complainant refused to compensate his damage or to seized,
because he


: give security, or did not seek to have them released upon was suf-


pledge and surety, or if he did so seek, they were offered fring
amage.

to him in such à manner, as above said, and not otherwise,

and thereupon he produces his sect. And if the claimant
precisely denies this, let him defend himself by his law,

or if he say, that if on the aforesaid occasion they were
seized justly, nevertheless they were detained unjustly
against bail and surety, because the complainant came to

the seizor himself with men of probity, and in their
presence was ready to compensate the damage upon
their view of it,and he refused this, and nevertheless
detained his cattle against bail and surety. And if he
thereupon has a good and sufficient sect, let the seizor,

if he precisely denies this, wage his law against it, and

so their laws may be waged on either side.


Likewise if the complainant says, that he has unjustly Y de law
seized the cattle, because they have done him no damage 5 vage
then it is requisite that the seizor produce a sufficient vi Hm
sect, that, he seized them whilst doing him damage, and oom haie
therefore he justly seized them: or for his service ac- 2ntsaythat
knowledged and unjustly kept back. But if the com- mue


plainant answers in regard to the service, when he f.158b.


11.
Item si
captor di-
eat, quod
juste.


570 DE CORONA. .


injustà capta sunt, quia totum fecit servitium, ita q
nihil ei à retro est,si inde habeat sectam sufficientem,
quie sufficiat ad probationem, injusta erit captio, nec


Se defendere poterit eaptor per lege.


Ttem dicere possit captor, g justé cepit, quia quidam .
talis questus fuit de querente de tali injuria, sicut de
verberibus & sanguine effuso, vel de tali debito sine
brevi. Et unde talis summonitus fuit, q esset ad cer-
tum diem in cuf sua inde responsurus, ad quem diem
ipse non venit, nee se essoniavit, & unde p considera-
tionem curie mez districtus fuit, q esset ad alium
diem. Et ad quem diem non venit, & ita q aliàs per
considerationem curie preceptum fuit quód  averia
primó capta retinerentur, & plura caperentur, & ita
per judicium euriz just? eapta fuerunt, & non detenta
injuste contra vadium & plegium, quia nunquà petita
fuerunt, vel sic: Cüm primó post summonitionem capta
essent averia p defalta ipsius querentis, & petita per
plegium, et deliberata essent p sie, q veniret ad alium
diem rationabilem inde responsurus, & nisi veniret, q
averia retornarentur, & ad diem illu no venit, & retor-
nata fuerunt averia per defaltam suam, & ita just?
eapta, Ad qus respondeat querens, quód injuste &
tali ratione (quam dieat si sciat) ^ Et sic justé capi
possunt averia vel injustó, assignata ratione: quia
semper inquirendü erit, qua occasione capta fuer, & si
just? sive injuste eapta fuerunt, tamen eont vadium &
plegium denegari non debent, dum tamen ille, cujus
fuerint, parat? sit facere q de jure facere debebit. Et


. OF THE CROWN. : 571


admits it, that the cattle have been unjustly seized,
because he has performed the entire service, therefore
there is no arrear on his part, if he thereupon has a
sufficient sect, which may suffice for proof, the seizure will
be unjust, nor can the seizor defend himself by his law.


Likewise the seizor may say, that he justly seized . 11.
them, because such an one has complained of the com- Tp
plainant concerning such an injury, as concerning blows seizor say
and bloodshed, or concerning such à debt without a writ. bind
And when such à person has been summoned, that he
Should be at a certain day in his court tio make answer
thereon, on which day he did not come nor essoined
himself, and therefore upon the decision of my court
he was distrained, that he should be there on another
day. And on which day he did not come and so on
another occasion by the decision of the court it was
ordered, that the cattle first seized should be retained,
and more be seized, and so by the judgment of the court
they were justly seized, and not unjustly detained against
bail and surety, because they were never claimed; or
thus: when first after the.summons the cattle were
seized on account of the default of the complainant and
claimed on surety, and were released on these terms,
that he should come on another reasonable day to answer
thereupon, and unless he should come, that the cattle
should be returned, and on that day he did not come,
and the cattle were returned through his default, and so
justly seized. To which the complainant answers, that
they have been seized unjustly and in such a way (which
let him state, if he knows it). And so the cattle may be
seized justly or unjustly, reason having been assigned:
because it will always have to be inquired on what occa-
sion they were seized, andif they were seized justly or
unjustly, nevertheless they ought not to be refused against
bail and. surety, provided always that he, whose property
they were, is prepared to do what he ought to do of right.


12.
Si serviens
alicujus
ceperit
averia ali-
cujus in
absentia
domini sui.


5/2 DE CORONA. -


notandum q injusta captio emendari poterit per vici-
nos, injusta autem detentio non, quia hoc est mani-
festé contra pace dii regis, & contra coronam suam.


Sed quid si serviens alieujus in absentia domini sui.
ceperit averia alicujus tenentis domini sui & ipse
tenens conqueratur de serviente q averia sua injuste
cepit, & contra vadium & plegium detinuerit, & ser-
viens ille euriam domini sui vocaverit ad warrantu, &
euria ei warrantizaverit de servitio q non recognoscit ?
serviens liberabitur, & curia de facto suo respondebit.
Sed nunquid poterit curia sine domino respondere,
cüm servitium tangat ipsum dominum ? immo: iia q
judicium emendetur. Si autem averia capiantur p
servientem sine judicio curis, & posteà petita fuerint
ab ipso domino, càm psens fuerit, & ipse ea vetuerit
p vadium & plegium, uterq, tenebitur, ut videtur, unus
de captione, & alter de vetito namio. Et licét domi-
nus ipse advocaverit captione servietis, servientem non
liberat, sed onerat seipsum, & uterq, tenetur de facto
servientis: serviens, quia cepit, & dominus dupliciter,
quia advocat factum servientis, & quia vetat. ltem
sunt qui dicunt, quód non tenetur quis respondere de
vetito, antequam convineatur captio injusta; ad quod
dico, quamvis captio justa vel injusta, tamen vetitum
semper erit injustum, aliud tamen erit si captio om-
nino nulla, quia ubi nihil omnino captum, nihil erit
ex eo quod sit vetitum. Item etsi captum, tamen
nihil petitum, & si nihil petitum, tunc non erit aliquid
vetitum. Item esto, quód nihil actum sit per curiam,


—  —


1 * dico," omitted, MS. Rawl, C. 160.


OF THE CROWN. 573


And it is to be noted, that an unjust seizure ought to be
amended by the neighbours, but not an unjust detention,
for this is manifestly against the peace of the lord the
king, and against his crown.


But what if the servant of any one, in the absence of
his lord, has seized the cattle of any tenant of his lord


12.


If the
'gervant of


and the tenant himself complains concerning the servant any one


has seized


that he has seized his cattle unjustly and detained them qx. cite
against bail and surety, and that servant has called the of another
court of his lord to warrant, and the court has warranted san of
to him concerning the service? The servant shall be his lord.


released, and the court shall answer for its own act. But
cannot the court answer without the lord, when the
service touches the lord himself? Yes, so that the judg-
ment be amended. But if the cattle be seized by the
servant without a judgment of the court, and have been
claimed by the lord himself when he was present, and he
himself has refused them on bail and surety, each shall
be liable, as it appears, the one for the seizure, and the
other for the refusal of release. And although his lord
himself has avowed the seizure of his servant, he does
not acquit the servant, but he charges himself, and each
is hable for the act of the servant, the servant because he


seized it, and the lord doubly, because he avows the act


of his servant, and because he refuses [the release of the


thing seized]. Likewise there are some who say, that a


person is not obliged to answer concerning the refusal


(the vee) until the seizure is proved to be unjust; to


which I say that, although the seizure be just or unjust,
nevertheless the refusal will always be unjust; it will be
different, however, if the seizure be entirely null, for
where nothing at all has been seized, nothing can arise
upon the fact that it has been refused. Likewise, al-
though it has been seized, nothing however may have
been claimed, and if not claimed, then nothing will have
been refused. Likewise let it be, that nothing has been


574 DE CORONA.

nec per dominum curie, sed tantü p servienté, ut si
serviens sine diio vel sine cuf talliaverit tenetes dni
sui, sicut villanos qui sunt liberi, vel dicat se esse
liberos forte, càüm sint servi, & postea cüm inde auto-
ritate ppria fecerit districtione, & averia ad querelam
tenentium fuerit deliberata p vie. ad vadiü & plegium,
& querela facta sit tantu de serviente sine dijo, quze-
ritur an serviens respondere possit vel debeat sine diio,
& rem judicium deducere sine eo ? quo casu, inquirendu
erit à dio utrum factum servientum suorum advoca-
veri& vel no, si autem non, tune poterit. dns hoc eme-
dare, q si advocaverit, vel non emedaverit, faciat inju-
riam illam suam propriam, si ibi fuerit injuria. Et
cüm advocaverit, poterit descendere ad inquisitionem
de tallagio, utrum justé petatur vel injustà, maximé si
loquela posita fuerit in curia dni regis. Casus de Petro
de Sabaudia, & tenentibus suis coram consilio domini
regis apud Westm ad scaccarium anno regni regis H.
xlvi de termino Pasche pauló ante Ascensione!


f. 159.


13. |  Cüm autem averia semel fuerint per judiciu comi-
ml tat? deliberata, iterum capi non debent p eodem, ante-
semel quam placitum terminetur. Et si iterum capta fuerint,
fusci Der vicecofi ea iterum deliberari faciat cü damno capientis
deliberata p tale breve. Rex vic. salutem, monstravit nobis À.
capta, ^ quàd cüm breve nostrum nuper tibi detulisset de ave-
buds 2S riis suis replegiandis, quee» B. cepit & injuste detinuit
tu. (ut dicit), & tu eadem averia eidem À. replegiasses, &
ei dedisses diem ad proximum comitat tuum, & pree-
dictum B. attachiasses ad respondendum super hoc


1 «* Casus de Petro de Sabaudia,"
down to *ante Ascensionem," is
omitted in MS. Rawl. C. 160, also in


MS. Galeaezo. Petrus de Sabaudia


died A.D.. 1269, Nova Fvoedera, i.
p.482. On the other hand the case
is mentioned in MS. Raw]. C. 159


with another date, viz., ** anno regni
* regis H. xlv.," and with a slight
mark prefixed to the passage at the
commencement, as if it were & note
incorporated into the text. MS.
Godbold has, ** Casus scilicet de
** Petro de Sabaudia, &c.,? with the


mnL--—''ÁÓJÓÓ AM ——X
— — —À —€—


" OF THE CROWN. 575


done by the court, nor by the lord of the court, but only  f.159.
by the servant, as if the servant without the lord or
without the court has levied a tax (talliage) upon the
tenants of his lord as villeins who are free, or who say
that they are free perchance, when they are serfs, and
afterwards when he has of his own authority made
& distress, and the cattle upon the complaint of the
tenant have been released by the viscount upon bail and
surety, and a complaint has been made only respecting
the servant without the lord, it is asked whether the
servant can or ought to answer without the lord, and to
bring the cease to judgment without him? 1n which
case it wil have to be inquired from the lord, whether
he will avow the act of his servants or not, but if not,
ihen the lord may amend it, but if he has avowed or
not amended 'it,he makes the injury his own, if there
has been there any injury. And when he has avowed it,
he may descend to an inquest concerning the talliage,
whether it was justly cleimed or not, more especially
if the argument has been laid in the court of our lord
ihe king. "The case of Peter of Savoy and his tenants,
before the council of ihe lord the king at Westminster
in the exchequer, in the forty-sixth year of the reign of
king Henry, in Easter term, a little after the Ascension.


But when the cattle have been once released by the 18.
judgment of the county, they ought not to be again When the


seized, for the same thing, before the plea is terminated. sip
And if they be again seized, the viscount shall cause them PAY? once
io be again released with damages against the seizor by leased by
à writ of this kind: The king to the viscount greeting. x eder
À. has shown to us, that when he placed before you our seized, a
wriü concerning the releasing his cattle on sureties, ey d
which B. had taken and unjustly, as he says, detained, bereleased.
and you had released to A. his cattle upon sureties, and

had given him a day at your next county court, and


had attached the said B. to answer upon this to the said


576 DE CORONA.


eidem A. przdictus B. post attachiamentum illud
averia ejusdem À. iterum cepit, eadem occasione qua
ea priüs ceperat, vel occasione alicujus talis, quod tan-
git ilud placitum principaliter, & illa detinet sicut
priüs. Et quia hoc est manifesté contra pacem. ntram,
liberari facias, quousq, capitale placitum inde int eos
terminetur. Et si inveneris q przsdicetus B. averia
ipsius Á. iterum cepit ea occasione qua ea prius cepit,
& idem À. fecerit te securum &c., tune habeas coram
justitiariis nostris ad primam assisam &c. corpus ipsius
B. ad respondendum predicto A. de secunda captione,
& habeas ibi hoc breve. Teste &c. Et unde, sive
prima captio justa fuerit sive injusta, secunda omnino
erit injust. vel aliter: Et si inveneris q pdictus B.
averia ipsius Á. iterum cepit ea occasione qua priüs
ea ceperat, tunc corpus ipsius B. habeas coram te,
& coram custodibus placitoru coronz nizv ad pximum
cofi tuum. Et si p ballivos tuos, p quos averia pdicti
À. secundó replegiati fuerunt, & p alios legales homi-
nes convinci poterit de secunda captione & p una
eademq, occasione, tunc pdietum B. ita castiges p gra-
vem misericordiam, ut castigatio illa in casu consimili
alis timorem tribuat delinquendi Teste &e. Et quo
easu, semper oportebit q ineulpatus defendat secunda
captione & detentioné, & damnum & totum, secund
q fuerit inculpatus, cotra querentem  & cotra secta
sua, si sectà pduxerit sufficientem, cum ei no sit cre-
dend ad simpliece voce suà. Et si simplicit ! defendet
p lege se defendat cont secta, poterit tame inculpat?


date * anno regni H. xlvi» "The | Sabaudia in the Public Record
Editor of the printed book of 1569 | Office. |
cites à MS. with the date *anno |  ! *Se defenderit." MS. of the
* regni H.lvi." which is clearly | Middle Temple, which also ignores
&n error of the scribe. 'There is | the case of Petrus de Sabaudia.

no trace of the case of Petrus de


OF THE CROWN. 571


À., the aforesaid B. has after that attachment again seized
the cattle of the said A., on the same grounds upon
which he seized them before, or on grounds of a some-
what like nature, which touch that plea principally, and
he detains them as before. And because this is mani-
festly against our peace, we enjoin you that you cause
. the cattle of the said A. to be released without delay,
until the chief plea thereupon is determined between
ihem. Andif you shall find that the aforesaid B. has
taken the cattle of the said A. on. the same grounds, on
which he seized them before, and the said À. has given
you security &c., have then before our justiciaries at the
first assise the body of the said B. to answer to the
aforesaid À. concerning the second seizure, and have
there this writ. Witness &c. And thereupon, whether
the first seizure has been just or unjust, the second will
be altogether unjust or otherwise: and if you shall find
that the aforesaid B. has again seized. the cattle of the
said ÀÁ., on the same grounds on which he previously
seized them, then have the body of the said B. before you,
and the keepers of the pleas of our crown at your next
county court. And if by your bailiffs, by whom the-
cattle of the aforesaid A. have been a second time released
on security, and by other loyal men it can be proved
concerning the second seizure, and for one and the same
cause, then correct the aforesaid B. by a heavy amerce-
ment, that his correction may cause to others a fear of
offending in à similar case. Witness &c. And in which
case, i& will always be necessary that the culprit should
defend the second seizure and detention, and the damage,
and the whole, aecording to what he has been charged
with, against the complainant and against his sect, if he
has produced a sufheient sect, since he is not to be
believed upon his single voice. And if he shall simply
defend himself by his law, let him defend himself against
the sect, the culprit however may so except and answer
: VOL. II. 0 0


f. 159 b.


578 DE CORONA.


ita excipere & respodere, q uterg, onerabit ad secta
pducendaà, & cü hinc inde fuer secta dilige exami-
nata, p e& judicabit quz  pbabilior & verisitior esse
pbabitur. Et q secta examinare! debeat, pbatur in
itinere? W. de Ralegh in com Leyc. in principio ro-
tuli, de Rogero le Suche: ubi dicitur, q si secta ex
parte querétis produeatur, q averia sua injuste capta
fuerunt eontra vadiü & plegium, & injust? detenta, &
responsum sit ex adverso g juste, & ideo, quia capta
fuerunt in damno, & cont vadium & plegium non


fuerunt detenta, si cü secta fuerit examinata, non con-


cordat nec deponat secundüm intentionem querentis,
quia fort? dicit contrarium vel diversum, vel quia
nihil scit nisi de auditu, vel quia nihil actum fuit
in presentia eorum qui producuntur, tunc ille, de quo
queritur, recedat sine die. Sunt etiam catalla quz
aliquando petuntur nomina? averiorum, eüm quis in
solo alieno opus fecerit manifestü vel manufaetum, ut
si heyaverit vel fossatum fecerit, vel carucam immise-
riti, & hujusmodi utensilia vel catalla capiantur, & per
vadium & plegium denegata cum petantur, & vicecoin
vel ballivus ad querelam ejus cujus fuerint, illa deli-


 beraverit usq, ad eom vel hundredam, ubi càüm captor


dixerit, quód justé capta sunt propter opus manifes-
ium in fundo & solo suo injuste & contra voluntatem
suam, & alius dicat fundum illum esse suum: quia
istud tangit liberum tenementum, nec sciri poterit
quis eorum dominus sit, nec comitat habet potestatem


1 * examinari," MS. Rawl. C. 160. 3 * sub nomino; id.
? « de itinero;" id.


-—53


———— HA


OF THE CROWN. 579


that each shall be bound to produce a sect, and when
the sect on either side has been diligently examined,
judgment shall be given for that which shall be proved
to be more probable and more truthlike. And that the
sect ought to be examined is proved in the iter of Wil-
liam de Ralegh in the county of Leicester at the com-
mencement of the roll, concerning Roger le Suche, where
16 is said that if à sect is produced on the part of the com-
plainant, that his cattle have been seized againsi bail and
surety, and unjustly detained, and it be answered on ihe
opposite side, that they have been justly seized, and for
ihat reason, because they were seizedin doing damage,
and they have not been detained against bail and surety,
if when the sect has been examined, it does not agree
with.nor depose according to the statement of the com-
plainant, because perhaps it says the contrary or some-
thing different, or because it knows nothing except on


. hearsay, or because nothing was done in the presence of


those who are produced, then let him, who is the object
of the complaint, withdraw without a day. There are
also chattels, which are sometimes claimed in the name
of cattle, when a person has made on other's land à work
manifest or made with the hand, as i£ he shall have made
a hedge or a ditch, or has put his plough into the ground,
and.such utensils or chattels are seized, and when they
have been claimed upon bail and surety, they have been
refused, and the viscount or the bailiff; at the complaint
of the person to whom they belonged, has released them
until the next county court or the next court of the
hundred, where when the seizor has said, that they have
been justly seized on àecount of a manifest work on his
land and soil unjustly and against his will, and the other
says that the land is his own: sinee this question touches
a, freehold, and it cannot be known who is the lord, and
the county court has not the power to hold cognisance ol
that question, then the complainant must have recourse
002


f. 159 b.


580 DE CORONA. .
Britton, i. cognoscendi, tunc recurrendum erit ad assisam novae
"n 5. "^" disseysinz per illum qui queritur, & retornentur averia
Kleta, 101. & utensilia sic capta, & ante captionem assise non
deliberentur, & sic fiat de consimilibus!


1 « de similibus," MSS. Rawl. C. 160 & C. 159.


FINIS


TRACTATÜS SECUNDI LIBRI TERTII.


AE E^ - Mua. uar scie. sonic Cap cisci dio dinc. ocio iode 2n dM c De Aer. dlc 25d... fefe i cR c coude! MEE de dara rc E Lu cmi cuit udis dfi alii
un ! jp i . pu
5 L]
LH s z
A E


OF THE CROWN. | 581


io an assise of novel disseysine, and the cattle and
utensils so seized must be returned, and be not released
before the holding of the assise, and so let it be done in
similar cases. ,


HERE ENDS THE


SECOND TREATISE OF THE THIRD BOOK


arab dili Era dla


APPENDIX.


APPENDIX I.


ITEM NOVA CAPITULA DE TEMPORE REGIS EDWARDI,
FILI REGcIs HrNnicI TERTH. MS. Rawl. C. 160,
fol. 63 b. col. 1.!


Inprimis. Quot et que dominica maneria dominus


rex habet in manu sua in singulis comitatibus tam
scilice& de antiquis dominicis corone quam de eschae-


tis et perquisitis. $ Que etiam maneria esse solent


in manibus regum predecessorum regis, et qui ea te-
nent nune, et quo warento, et & quo tempore, et per
quem et quomodo fuerint alienata. $ De feodis eciam
domini regis et tenentibus ejus qui e& modo teneant
de ipso in capite, et quot feoda singuli ipsorum tene-
ant, et que feoda teneri solent de rege in capite et
nunc tenentur per medium, et per quem medium, et
a quo tempore alienata fuerint, et qualiter et per
quos. De terris etiam tentis de antiquo dominico
corone tam liberorum sokammannorum quam bondo-


! These articles of inquiry to be | Lónd., of which the text is printed
administered by the justicesitinerant | at the commencement of the Rotuli


were issued under the great seal,
dated the eleventh day of October,
in the second year of the reign of
king Edward I., shortly. after the
king's arrival in England.. The
version of them which is here
printed is contained in MS. Raw].
C. 160, and it differs somewhat from
tho version contained in the Patent
Roll of 2 Edw. 1, m. 5, in Turri


Hundredorum published by the
Record Commissionersin 1812. See
Introduction. They follow in MS.
Rawl. C. 160, immediately after the
words '*De Thesauris Inventis." 'T'he
three remaining articles, which fol-
low those words in the printed
edition of Bracton,fol. 117 b. and
conclude the 2nd chapter, are not
found in MS. Rawl. C. 160.


. APPENDIX I.


LIKEWISE THE NEW ARTICLES OF THE TIME OF KiNG
EpwARD, SON or Kira HENRY THE THinD!


In the first place, how many and what demesne manors
our lord the king has in his hand in the several counties,


as well, to wit, of the ancient demesnes of the crown, as


of escheats and purchases. $ What manors also used to
be in the hands of the kings the predecessors of the king,
and who now hold them, by what warrant and from
what time, and by whom and in what manner they were
alienated. $ Of the fees also of our lord the king, and of
his tenants, who hold them now of him in chief, and how
many fees each of them hold, and what fees are accus-
tomed to be held of the king in chief, and are now held
through a mesne tenant, and through what mesne tenant,
and from what time they were alienated, and in what
manner, and through whom. Of the lands also held of
the ancient demesne of the crown, as well those of free
sockmen as of bondmen, whether by bailiffs or by the


!'This titleis more explicit than | * placitanda coram justiciariis de
the title of similar articles which are | * itinere, anno regni regis Edwardi
edited in Tottel's Magna Carta, | * filii regis Henrici octavo." "They
1556, in which they are printed as a | begin thus, * De veteribus placitis
continuation of the Vetera Capitula | * corone que alias fuerunt coram
without any date. 'lThereareseveral | ** justiciariis et non sunt terminata.
versions of cognate articles preserved | * De novis placitis corone quse
in various MSS. in the Harleian | * emerserunt post ultimum iter
Collection in the British Museum. | * justitiariorum. De hiis, &c.^"
MS. Harleian 489, for instance, | 'Tottel's printed copy and all the
contains the articles issued at a | manuscripts are more or less con-
later period, namely, in the eighth | fused, and the arrangement of the
year of thereign of King Edw. L, | several parts and clauses of the ar-
and they are thus entitled, * Capitula | ticles varies considerably.


Ww WT HW S coVTR


586 APPENDIX 1.


rum, uirum per ballivos aut per eosdem tenentes, et
per quos ballivos et per quos tenentes, et & quibus
alienata fuerint, qualiter et quo tempore. Simili modo
inquiratur de firmis hundredormm, wappentakiorum, et
tythingorum, civitatum, burgorum,. et aliorum reddi-
iuum quorumcunque, eb a quo tempore. Quot etiam
hundreda, wappentakia, et tythinga sunt nunc in
manu domini regis, eb quot et que in manibus alio-
rum, et à quo tempore, et quo warento, et quantum
valeat quodlibet hundredum per annum. De sectis
antiquis, consuetudinibus, serviciis, et aliis rebus do-
mino regi et antecessoribus suis subtractis, qui ea sub-
iraxerint, et à quo tempore, et qui hujusmodi sectas,
consuetudines, servicia, et alia ad dominum regem per-
linencia et consueta, sibi ipsis appropriaverint, et a
quo tempore, e&. quo warento. Qui eciam alii a rege
clamant habere returnum vel exiractas brevium, et.
qui placita teneant de namio vetito, et qui clament


' habere wreccum navis, et quo warento, et alias liber-


tates regias, ut furcas, assisas panis et cerevisie, et-
alia que ad coronam pertinent, et à quo tempore. De
his eciam, qui habent libertates per reges Anglie con-
cessas, et eis aliter usi fuerint quam facere debuissent,
et & quo tempore et quomodo. ltem de libertatibus
concessis, que . impediunt communem justiciam, et re-
giam potestatem subvertunt, et & quo concesse fuerint,
et a quo tempore. Qui insuper de novo appropriave-
rint sibi liberas ehacias vel warennas sine warento, et
similiter qui ab antiquo hujusmodi ehacias et waren-
nas ex concessione regis habuerint, et fines et metas
earum excesserint, eb à quo tempore. Qui eciam do-
mini, aut eorum senescall vel ballivi quicunque, seu
eciam domini regis ministri non sustinuerint execucio-
nem mandatorum curie domini regis fieri, aut, eciam
facere contempserint, vel aliquo alio modo ea fieri im-


" APPENDIX I. 584


same tenants, and by what bailiffs and by what tenants,
and by whom they have been alienated, in what manner,


. and from what time. In the same manner let inquiry


be made concerning the ferms of hundreds, of wappen-
takes and tythings, cities, boroughs, and other rents
whatsoever, and from what time. Also how many hun-
dreds, wappentakes, and tythings are now in the hand
of our lord the king, and how many and what in the
hands of others, and from what time, and by what war-
rant, and how much each hundred is worth by the year.
Of ancient suits, customs, services, and other things
withheld from the king and his ancestors, who have


: withheld them, and from what time, and who have ap-


propriated to themselves such suits, customs, services,
and other things pertaining to the lord the king, and by
custom due, and from what time, and by what warrant. '
Also what others claim to have from the king the return
or estreats of writs, and who hold pleas of forbidden dis-
iress, and who elaim to have wreck of the sea,and by
what warrant, and other royal franchises, as a gallows,
assises of bread and ale, and other things which pertain
io the crown, and from what time. Of those also who
have franchises granted to them by the kings of Eng-
land, and have exercised them otherwise than they
ought to have done, and from what time and how.
Likewise concerning franchises granted, which impede
common justice, and subvert the royal power, and by
whom they were granted and from what time ; who also
have appropriated to themselves anew free chaces or
warrens without à warrant, and similarly who have had
from ancient time chaces of this kind and warrants from
2 grant of the king, and have exceeded their bounds and
metes, and from what time. Also what lords, or their


Stewards or bailiffs of any kind, or even the officers of


our lord the king, have not upheld the execution of the
mandates of the court of our lord the king, or have
slighted to execute them, and in some other way have


588 APPENDIX I.


pedierint & tempore Constitutionum factarum apud
Marleberidge anno regni domini regis Henrici, patris
domini regis nune, quinquagesimo secundo. Item de
omnibus perpresturis quibuscunque factis super domi-
num regem vel regalem dignitatem, per quos facte
fuerint, qualiter, e& à quo tempore. De feodis milita-
ribus, cujuscunque feodi, et terris vel tenementis datis
vel venditis religiosis vel aliis in prejudicium regis,
et per quos et à quo tempore. De vicecomitibus capi-
entibus munera ut consentiant ad concelandum felonias
factas in ballivis suis, vel qui negligentes extiterint
ad felones hujusmodi attachiandos quocunque favore,
tam infra libertatem quam extra. Similiter modo in-
quirgtur de clericis et aliis ballivis vieecomitum, coro-
natoribus, e& eorum clericis et ballivis quibuscunque,
et qui ita fecerint tempore regis H. post bellum de
Evesham, et qui tempore domini regis nunc. De vice-
comitibus et ballivis quibuscunque capientibus munera
pro recognitoribus amovendis de juratis et assisis, et à
quo tempore. ltem de vicecomitibus et aliis ballivis
quibuscunque, qui. amereiaverint illos qui summoniti
fuerint ad inquisitiones faciendas per preceptum domini
regis pro defaltis, cum per eandem. summonicionem
persone venerunt sufficientes ad inquisitiones hujus-
modi faciendas, eb. quantum ceperint et à quibus cepe-
rint oceasione predicta, et & quo tempore. Item de
vicecomitibus qui tradiderint ballivis extorsoribus, po-
pulum gravantibus supr& modum, hundreda, wappen-
tak, vel tithingg ad altas firmas, ut sic suas firmas
levarent, et qui fuerint illi ballivi, et quibus fuerint
hujusmodi dampna illate, e& à quo tempore. Item
cum vicecomites non debeant facere turnum suum nisi
bis in anno, qui pluries fecerint in anno turnum suum,
et a quo tempore. liem cum fines pro redisseisinis


^ APPENDIX I. 589


hindered their being executed from the time of the Con-
stitutions made at, Marlborough in the fifty-second year
of the reign of the lord king Henry, the father of the
king that now is. Likewise of all purprestures whatso-
ever made against our lord the king or his royal dignity,
by whom they were made, in what manner, and from
what time. Of knights'fees, of whose fee soever they
were, and of lands or tenements given or sold to persons
under religious vows, or to others to the prejudice of the
king, and through whom and from what time. Of vis-
counts taking gifts that they should consent to conceal
felonies committed in their bailrwieks, and who have
been negligent in attaching felons of this kind through
any favour whatsoever, as well within a franchise as
without. In a similar manner let inquiry be made con-
cerning clerks and other bailiffs of viscounts, coroners
and their clerks and bailiffs of any kind, and who have
done so in the time of king Henry after the battle of
Evesham, and who in the time of the king who now is.
Of viscounts and bailiffs of any kind taking gifts for
removing recognitors from the juries and the assises, and
from whattime. Likewise of viscounts and other bailiffs
of any kind who have amerced those who have been
summoned to make inquests by the precept of our lord

the king for defaults, when by the same summons there -
came a sufficient number to make inquests of this kind,
and how much they have taken, and from whom they
have taken it on the aforesaid occasion, and from what
time. Likewise of viscounts who have handed over to
extortionate bailiffs, oppressing the people above measure,
hundreds, wappentakes, or tithings, at high rents, that so
they may levy their own farms, and who those bailiffs
were, and upon whom those damages were inflicted, and
from what time. Likewise when the viscounts ought not.
to make their turns except twice in the year, who have
made their turn oftener in the year, and from what time.
Likewise whereas fines for redisseysines or purprestures


590 APPENDIX I.


aut purpresturis factis per terram vel per aquam, pro
oecultatione thesauri, et alis hujusmodi que ad domi-
num regem pertineant, eb ad vicecomitem hujusmodi
abtachiare, qui ceperint fines hujusmodi, et a quibus et
quantum eta quo tempore. ltem qui potestate officii sui
aliquos maliciose accionaverint et per hoc extorserint ter-
ras, redditus, aut alias prestationes, eb & quo tempore.
Qui receperint mandatum domini regis ut ejus debita sol-
verent, et a creditoribus receperint aliquam portionem,
ut eis residuum solverent, et nihilominus totum sibi
allocari fecerint in scaccario vel alibi, et à quo tempore.
Qui receperint debita regis vel partem debitorum, et
debitores illos non acquietaverint, tam tempore domini
regis H., quam tempore domini regis nunc. Item qui
summonierit aliquos ut fierent milites, et pro respectu
habendo ab eis luera receperint, et quantum et quo
lempore. Et si aliqui magnates vel ali sine precepto
regis aliquos distrinxerint ad arma suscipienda, et quo
tempore. ltem si vicecomites aut ballivi aliqui cujus-
cunque libertatis non fecerint summoneri debito modo
secundum formam brevis domini regis, aut aliter frau-
dulenter seu minus sufficienter executi fuerint pre-
cepta regia prece, precio, vel favore, et quo tempore.
Item de hiis qui habuerint probatores imprisonatos, et
fecerint eos appellare fideles et innocentes eausà lucri,
et quandoque eos impedierint, ne culpabiles appellaren-
tur, et .à quo tempore. ltem qui habuerint felones
imprisonatos, et eos pro pecunia abire et a prisone
evadere permiserint liberos et impune, et qui pecu-
niam extorserint pro prisone dimittenda per plevinam,
cum non sint replegiabiles, et; à quo tempore. ltem
qui dona vel lucra aliqua receperint pro officiis suis
exercendis, vel non exercendis vel exsequendis, vel ex-


APPENDIX I. | 591


made by land or water for the hiding of treasure and other
such things as pertain to the lord the king, and to the vis-
count to attach such like, who have taken fines of this
kind, and from whom, and how much, and from what time.
Likewise who by the power of their office have proceeded
maliciously against certain persons, and by this means have
extorted lands, rents, or other payments, and from what
time. Who have received the mandate of the lord the
king to pay his debts, and have received from creditors
some portion, that they might pay the rest to them, &nd
nevertheless have caused the whole to be allowed to
themselves in the exchequer or elsewhere, and from what
iüime. Who have received the king's debts, or a part of
them, and have not thereof acquitted those debtors, as
wellin the time of the lord king Henry, as in the time
of the king who now is. Likewise who have summoned
certain persons that they should be made knights, and
have received bribes from them for favour shown to
them, and how much and from what time. And if any
magnates or others without the precept of the king have
distrained any to take up arms, and from what time.
Likewise if the viscounts or any bailiffs of any liberty
whatsoever have not caused to be summoned in due .
manner according to the form of the writ of the lord the
king, or otherwise have fraudulently or less sufficiently
executed the royal precepts for entreaty, bribe, or favour,
and from what time. Likewise of those who have had
approvers in prison, and have made them accuse faithful
and innocent persons for the sake of gain, and sometimes
have hindered them so that the guiltiy were not accused,
and from what time. Likewise who have had felons
imprisoned, and have permitted them for money to go
away and to escape from prison free and with impunity,
and who have extorted money for letting out prisoners
on bail when they were nob bailable, and from what
time. Who have received gifts or bribes for exercising
their offices, or for not exercising nor performing them,


592 APPENDIX 1.


secutus fuerit seu excesserit fines mandati regis aliter
quam ad offieaum suum pertinuit, et à quo tempore.
Et omnia ista inquirantur tam de vicecomitibus, coro-
natoribus, eorum clericis, ballivis quibuscunque, quam
de dominis et ballivis libertatum quarumcunque. Item
qui vicecomites vel custodes castrorum vel maneriorum
domini regis quorumcunque, vel eciam qui visores
hujusmodi operacionum ubicunque, factarum per pre-
ceptum regis, magis computaverint in eisdem quam
rationabiliter apposuerint, e& super hoc falsas alloca-
tiones sibi fieri procuraverint. Et similiter qui petra,
maremia, vel alia ad hujusmodi operationes empta seu
provisa ad opus suum retinuerint seu amoverint, et
quid et quantum dampnum dominus rex inde habuit,
et quo tempore. De eschaetoribus et subeschaetoribus
in seisinis domini regis facientibus vastum vel destruc-
eionem in boscis, parcis, vivariis, warennis infra cus-
todias suas commissas per dominum regem, quantum
et de quibus, et quo modo et & quo.tempore. Item
de eisdem, si occasione hujusmodi seisine ceperint bona
defunctorum vel heredum in manum domini regis in-
juste, donec redimerentur ab eisdem, et quid et quan-
tum ita ceperint pro hujusmodi redemptione, et quid
ad opus suum proprium inde retinuerint, e à quo
tempore. ltem de eisdem, qui ceperint munera a qui-
buseunque pro officio suo exequendo vel non exequendo,
quantum et a& quibus, et & quo tempore. Item de, eis-
dem qui minus sufficienter extenderint terras alicujus
in favorem ejusdem vel alterius, cum custodia illarum
terrarum dari, vendi, vel eoneedi debuerit in deceptio-
'nem domini regis, et ubi et quomodo, et si quid. per-
inde ceperint, e&, quantum et & quo tempore! tem de
eisdem qui prece, precio, vel favore consenserint vel


1 Thus far the Articles accord in | identify the year in which they
substance with those in the Hot. | were first issued. "The following
Pat. 2 Edw. L, m. 5., already re- | articles aro wanting inthe Hundred
ferred to, so that we are able to:| Roll of that year.


E» Lx
m rescue


' APPENDIX I. 593


or have executed them or exceeded the limits of. the
king's mandate otherwise than pertained to their office,
and from what time. And let all these things be in-
quired into, as well concerning viscounis, coroners, and
their elerks and bailiffs of any kind, as concerning lords
and bailiffs of franchises of any kind. Likewise what
viscounts or keepers of castles or manors of the lord the
king, or also what overseers of works of this kind, any
where carried on by the precept of the king, have com-
puted more in the same than they could have reasonably
applied, and have proeured to be made to themselves
false allowances. And in like manner, who have retained
for their own use, or carried away, stone or timber or
other things of the kind brought or provided for works
of this kind, and what and how much loss the lord the
king has suffered therefrom, and from what time. Of
escheators and sub-escheators in the seysines of the lord
the king, causing waste or destruction in woods, parks,
vivaries, and warrens within the keeperships committed .
to them by the lord the king, how much, and from whom,
and in what manner, and from what time. Likewise
concerning the same, if on occasion of a seysine of this
kind they have taken the goods of deceased persons or
of their heirs into the hand of the lord the king unjustly,
until they have been redeemed by the same, and what and
how much they have taken for a redemption of this kind,
and what they have retained for their own proper use
therefrom, and from what time. Likewise concerning
the same, who have taken gifts from any one for per-
forming or not performing their office, how much, and
from whom, and. from what time. Likewise concerning
the same, who have insutficiently extended the lands of
any one in favour of the same or of another, when the
custody of those lands ought to be given, sold, or granted,
to the deceiving of the lord the king, and where and
how, and if they have at the same time taken something,
and how much, and from whattime. Likewise concern-


ing the same who for entreaty, reward, or favour have


VOL. II. | PP


594 | APPENDIX I.

consulerint custodias domini regis vendere pro minori
quam vendi debuerant secundum verum valorem, vel
maritagia hseredum tenentium de rege in eapite, vel
maritagia viduarum dominarum maritarum sine licen-
ci& domini regis, et quid propter hoc ceperunt et
quantum, et quandocunque, et &à quo tempore. Item
de eisdem, qui procuraverint et consenserint quod jura-
lores inquisicionum factarum de etate heredum dice-
rent ipsos heredes fuisse plene etatis, cum non essent,
unde dominus rex per hoc amittat maritagium et cus-
todiam hujusmodi heredum. Item de eisdem, qui reser-
vaverint ad ópus suum proprium custodias vel mari-
tagia per leve pretium, vel per concelamentum factum
domino regi, e& cujusmodi dampnum dominus rex inde
percepit, et à quo tempore. Item cujusmodi terras
seisierint e& per quantum tempus eas in manu domini
regis tenuerint. Item de terris captis in manu domini
regis que capi non deberent, et postea restitutus per
preceptum regis cum perceptis, utrum percepta resti-
tuerunt ad mandatum regis vel non.!


l'The text of the Articles de-
livered by the Justices Itinerant,
which is printed in the first volume
of the Statutes at Large published
by the Record Commissioners in
1810, i8 a transcript of a version
contained in the Liber Custumarum
of the city of London, folio 136 b.,
which has not been printed in the


Rolls edition of the Liber Custu-
marum, but is referred to in vol. ii.,
p. 406, of that work. 'They are evi-
dently of a later period of the reign
of Edward I. than these articles, as
they direct the justices to take cog-
nisance of all the aforesaid matters
done or committed within twenty-
five years last past.


595


APPENDIX I


eonsented ! or counselled to sell the wardships of the lord
the king for less than they ought to be sold according to
their true value, or the maritages of widow ladies, married
without the license of the lord the king, and what they
have taken on this account, and how much, and when
and from what time. Likewise concerning the same,
who have procured and consented, that jurors of inquests
made concerning the age of heirs should say that the
heirs themselves were of full age, when they,;were not so,
whereby the lord the king would lose the maritage and
the custody of heirs of this kind. Likewise concerning
those, who have reserved for their own use wardships or
maritages for a low price, or by concealment made against
the lord the king, and what sort of damage the lord the
king has suffered therefrom, and from what time, Like-
wise what sort of lands they have seysed, and during what
length of time they have kept them in the hand of the
lord the king. Likewise concerning the lands taken into
ihe hand of the lord the king, which ought not to have
been so taken, and have afterwards been restored by the
king's precept, with the fruits thereof, whether they have
restored the fruits at the mandate of the lord the king.*


l'These six additional articles
are also found inserted in MSS.
Harleian 667, 1033, 1120.

?The text of a later series of
Articles of Inquiry, which were
delivered by the Justices Itinerant
to each ward of the city of London
in 14 Edward IL, being articles
which excited great resistance and


which were administered at a2 visi-
tütion held after an interval of 44
years,is now readily accessible in
vol. ii. part 1 of the * Liber Custu-
* marum," which forms part of the
* Monumenta Gildhalle Londoni-
* ensis," edited by Mr. Henry
Thomas Riley in 1860 amongst the
Rolls Series.


PP2


APPENDIX 1I.


IrEM CAPITULA TANGENTIA PRIMA STATUTA WESTM. IN
ANNO REGNI REcis EpwaAnDI FILII REGIS HENRICI
TERCIO. MS. Rawl. C. 160, fol.'64, col. 2.!


Imprimis. $ De magnatibus et aliis venientibus
hospitandis ad domos religiosorum, cum non essent
requisiti per gubernatores earundem, ad custum eorun-
dem religiosorum vel ad custum proprium econtra vo-
luntatem eorundem religiosorum, et si qui occasione
eujuscunque affinitatis vel alia ratione quacunque fuga-
verint in parcis vel piscati fuerint, in vivariis aliorum,
vel ingressi fuerint maneria prelatorum religiosorum
vel aliorum ad comedendum vel pernoetandum sine
voluntate et licentia dominorum vel ballivorum eorun-
dem maneriorum, ad eustum eorundem dominorum vel
ad custum proprium, et similiter de hiis qui serruras,
fenestras, et hostia vel consimilia fregerint vel aperu-
erint, vel victualia vel alia bona inventa in eisdem
maneriis ceperint, sub colore emptionis vel aliter. De
hiis qui triturari vel capi fecerunt blada, victualia, vel
alia bona prelatorum religiosorum vel aliorum sub
colore emptionis vel aliter contra voluntatem eorum
quorum ipsa fuerunt, et si de voluntate de hiis qui
non satisfecerunt de conventione inter ipsos facia.


! The title prefixed to these Ar- ,
ticles in MS. Rawl. C. 160 is prob-
ably unique. In Tottell's copy the
corresponding articles are printed
as a continuation of the preceding
articles without any distinction. In.
the Liber Custumarum of the city


of London, they are headed, **In-
* cipiunt Capitula nova de eisdem
* placitis, tempore Regis Edwardi
* facta In several MSS. the
corresponding articles are simply
distinguished by the title of * Novi
* Articuli."


APPENDIX II.


LIKEWISE ÁRTICLES TOUCHING THE FIRST STATUTES OF
WESTMINSTER IN THE THIRD YEAR OF THE REIGN
or EpwAnD THE SON OF Kia HENRY.


In the first place. $ Concerning the magnates and
others coming to be lodged in the houses of religious
persons, when they have not been invited by the go-
vernors thereof, at the cost of the said religious persons
or at their own cost, against the will of the said religious
persons, and if any by occasion of any affinity or for
any other reason have chased in the parks or fished in
the ponds of others, or have entered the manors of reli-
gious prelates or of others to eat or to pass the night,
without the consent or license of the lords or the bailiffs
of the said manors, at the cost of the said lords or at their
own cost; and in like manner, concerning those, who
have broken or opened locks or windows and doors, or
the like, or have taken victuals or other goods found in
the same manors, under colour of purchase or otherwise.
Coneerning those, who have caused to be thrashed or
taken away corn, victuals, or other goods of religious
prelates, or of others, under colour of purchase or other-
wise, against the will of those to whom they belonged,
and if with their consent, concerning such persons who
have not satisfied the agreement made. between them.


a


te er. Ae WHAT a INT 4 rmt t
.


598 APPENDIX IL


Item de hiis qui vindictam fecerint quibuscunque qui
escas vel hospitia eis negarunt; et similiter de hiis qui
vindictam fecerint eo, quod aliqui super predictis grava-
minibus in curia domini regis conquesti fuerint. Item de
hiis qui miserunt ad domos vel maneria religiosorum vel
aliorum homines, equos, vel canes, perhendinantes ad
eustum alienum. ltem de vicecomitibus coronatoribus
hospitantibus in ballivis suis eum pluribus quam quin-
que vel sex equis, vel qui per frequentes adventus
ulirà modum quoscunque oneraverint. Item de hiis
qui levaverint eschampium latronum vel felonum, an-
tequam judieati fuerint per justiciarios itinerantes.
Item de hiis qui sub colore de wrecco maris bona
quorumcunque sibi appropriaverint, cum ea dici wrec-
cum non debeant nec ad ipsos pertineant. Item de
hiis qui amerciati fuerint sine racionabili occasione, et
non secundum quantitatem delicti, e£ non per pares
suos, et per quem amerciati fuerint. ltem de prisis
constabulariorum factis de bonis aliorum, quam eorum
qui sunt de villis ubi castra sita sunt, et si de bonis
eorum qui sunt de eisdem villis, e&. non satisfactum


fuerit infra xl. dies, exceptis antiquis prisis debitis et


consuetis, per quem hujusmodt prise facte fuerint et
quando. ltem de hiis qui ad mandatum vicecomitis
et aliorum ballivorum domini regis, vel ad clamorem
patrie, sequi vel arrestari non fecerint felones, conver-
santes tam infra libertates quam extra. Item de vice-
comitibus, coronatoribus et aliis ballivis qui prece,
precio, vel favore vel quaecunque affinitate concelave-
rint vel concelari procuraverint felonias factas in bal-
livis suis, vel qui se subtraxerint a&d hujusmodi male-
factores eapiendos. Si quis rapuerit domicillas infra
etatem existentes sponte vel invite, seu et alias muli-


APPENDIX Ii. 599


Likewise of those who have taken revenge on any persons
who have denied to them food or lodging; and likewise
concerning those who have taken revenge on the ground,
that some have complained about the aforesaid grievances
in the court of the lord the king. Likewise concerning
those who have sent to the houses or manors of religious
or other persons men, horses, or dogs abiding there at
other people's cost. Likewise concerning viscounts coro-
ners claiming to be lodged in their bailiwicks with more
than five or six horses, or who by frequent visits beyond
moderation burden any persons whatsoever. Likewise
coneerning those who have levied compensation upon
robbers or felons before they have been adjudged by the
justices itinerant. Likewise concerning those who, under
colour of wreck of the sea, have appropriated to them-
selves the goods of any persons, when the same ought
not to be called wreck, nor did they belong to them.
Likewise concerning those who have been amerced with-
out reasonable occasion, and not according to the quantity
of the offence, and not by their peers, and by whom they
have been amerced. Likewise concerning the prises of
the eonstables made of the goods of others than those,
who are of the vills where the castles are situated, and
if of the goods of those who are of the said vills, and
satisfaction has not been made within forty days, ex-
cepting the ancient prises due and accustomed, by whom
these prises have been taken, and when. Likewise con-
cerning those who at the mandate of the viscount or of
others, bailiffs of the lord the king, or at the cry of the
country, have not caused felons to be pursued and ar-
rested, abiding as well within liberties as without.
Likewise concerning viscounts, coroners, or other bailiffs,
who for entreaty, bribe, or favour, or any affinity what-
ever, have concealed or procured to be concealed felonies
committed in their bailiwicks, or have withheld from
capturing such malefactors. If any one has ravished
damsels below age, whether with or against their will,


600 APPENDIX II.


eres plene etatis existentes contra voluntatem earum.
Item de vicecomitibus et aliis ballivis qui replegiave-
rint felones prisones, cum non essent replegiabiles, et
similiter de hiis qui prisones replegiari recusaverint
qui replegiabiles fuerint, et si que receperint pro pre-


dictis replegiacionibus, quid, e& quantum, et a quibus.


Item de hiis qui ceperunt averia aliorum vel capi
fecerint in uno comitatu et ea fugaverint exiíra comi-
tatum illum, et similiter de hiis qui ceperint averia
vel districtiones extra feodum suum. tem de hiis qui
fugaverint averia ad castra vel forcelletta, et ea ibi
detinuerint contra vadium et plegium, cum .per vice-
comitem et ballivos petita fuerit eorum deliberatio.


De vicecomiti et alüs ballivis, qui. receperint debita


regis Henrici vel domini regis nune de summonicione
scaecarij, et debitores inde non acquietaverint, et de
eorum heredibus qui modo sunt superstites, et. quan-
tum receperint et a quibus. ltem de malefactoribus
in parcis et vivariis, et. etiam de hiis qui veniendo,
morando, e& redeundo quamcunque roberiam fecerint,
et de alis rebus quibuscunque. Item de hiis qui


fecerint distrieciones in civitatibus, burgis, nundinis


vel mercatis super homines forinsecos de regno isto
pro debitis alicujus, nisi sint debitores vel plegii.
Item de ministris domini regis, qui per se vel per
alios aliquas loquelas vel negocia in curia domini re-
gis existentia foverint de terris e& tenementis vel aliis
rebus, ut habeant inde partem vel aliquod profectuum
per eonvencionem inde inter eos factam, et similiter


de vicecomiti et aliis ministris domini regis capienti- .


bus munera pro officiis suis exercendis. ltem de cle-
ricis justiciariorum, eschaetorum, vel inquisitorum, ca-


e


APPENDIX II. 601


or other women of full age against their will. Likewise
concerning viscounts and other bailiffs, who have let out
on bail felon prisoners, when they were not bailable;
and in like manner of those who have refused to let out
on bail persons who were bailable, and if they have re-
ceived anything for the aforesaid- bailing, what, and how
much, and from whom. . Likewise concerning those who
have taken or caused to be taken the cattle of others in
one county, and have chased them out of that county,
and in like manner concerning those who have taken
cattle or made distraints beyond their fee. Likewise
concerning those who have chased cattle to castles or .
fortresses, and have detained them there against sureties
and pledges, when their delivery has been claimed by
the viscounts and the bailiffs. ' Concerning the viscounts
and other bailiffs who have received the debts of king
Henry, or of the lord the king who now is, upon the
summons of the: exchequer, and have not acquitted the
debtors thereof, and concerning their heirs who are now
surviving, and how much they have received, and from
whom. Likewise concerning malefactors in parks and
stews, and likewise concerning those who in coming,
tarrying, and returning, have committed any robbery,
and concerning other things whatsoever. Likewise con-
cerning those who have made distraints in cities, boroughs,
fairs or markets, upon men strangers of this realm for
the debts of any one, unless they are debtors or sureties.
Likewise concerning the officers of the lord the king,
who through themselves or through others have main-
tained any pleas or business existing in the court of the
lord the king concerning lands or tenements or other
things, that they may have thence a part, or some profit.
by agreement thereon made between them, and in like
manner concerning the viscount and other officers of the
" lord the king taking gifts for exercising their offices.

: Likewise concerning the clerks of the justices, escheators,


|


602 APPENDIX Il.


pientibus denarios pro capitulis deliberandis nisi fuerint
clerici justiciariorum in itinere. Et de illis, si plus
ceperint quam ii.s. de hundredo vel wappentagio, quod
respondeat per xii. vel per sex. Item de hiis qui ca-
piunt superflua vel indebita theolonia in civitatibus,
burgis, vel alibi, contrà communem usum regni De
civibus et burgensibus capientibus muragia sibi per
dominum regem concessa aliter, quam facere deberent
secundum concessionem 8 domino rege inde factam.
Item de hiis qui ceperint plures equos vel carectas ad
cariagia regis facienda aliter quam necesse fuerit, et
que munera receperint pro eisdem remittendis, quid,
et quantum et & quibus. ltem de magnatibus et eo-
rum ballivis, et similiter de aliis, exceptis ministris
regis, quibus specialis ad hoc datur auctoritas, qui ad
instantiam cujuscumque vel auctoritate propria attachi-
&verunt quoseumque vel eorum bona transeuncia per
eorum potestates, compellendo per hoc ipsos ad respon-
dendum coram eis de contractibus, convencionibus, et
transgressionibus extra posse et jurisdictionem suam
facta, cum nichil teneant de ipsis, nec infra libertates -
suas. De vicecomite et aliis ballivis, qui non permise-
rinb pascere quoscumque de suo proprio averià sua
capta et impareata, et quid receperint pro custodia
eorumdem, cum illi, quorum averia fuerint, hoc facere
fuerint parati, et hoe intelligendum est post captionem
post predictum parleamentum. De distriecionibus fac-
tis, postquam rex inhibuit in dicto parleamento, per
animalia ad wannagium terrarum deputata, vel etiam
per bidentes, pro debito domini regis vel aliorum seu
alia quacunque occasione, vel per quemcumque, cum
alia suffieiens distriecio inventa fuerit. Et similiter
de superfluis distriecionibus factis tam post parleamen-


E.
come mmi n


APPENDIX II. 603


or inquisitors taking money for delivering the articles,
unless they be the clerks of the justices itinerant. And
concerning those who have taken more than two shil-
lings from the hundred or wappentake, that it may
answer by xii or by six. Likewise concerning those who
take superfluous or undue tolls in cities, boroughs, or
elsewhere, against the common use of the realm. Con-
cerning citizens and burgesses taking murages granted
to them by the lord the king, otherwise than they ought
to do according to the grant made thereof by the lord
the king. Likewise concerning those who have taken
more horses and carts to make carriage for the king
otherwise than was necessary, and who have received
gifts for remitting them, what and how much, and from
whom. Likewise concerning magnates and their bailiffs,
and in like manner concerning others, excepting officers
of the king, to whom there is given special authority for
this purpose, who at the instance of any person whatever,
or of their own authority, have attached any persons
whatever or their goods passing through their jurisdic-
tions, compelling them by this means to answer before
them eoneerning contractis, agreements, and trespasses
made beyond their power and jurisdiction, when they
hold nothing of them, nor within their franchises. Con-
cerning the viscount and other bailiffs who have not
permitted any one to feed with their own food their own
cattle taken and impounded, and what they have received
for the keeping of them, when they, whose cattle they
were, have been ready to do this, and this is to be under-
stood after the taking of them since the aforesaid parlia-
ment. Concerning distraints made, after the king has
prohibited them in the said parliament, upon animals em-
ployed for the waynage of the lands, or even upon sheep,
for & debt due to the lord the king or to others, or on any
other occasion, or by any person whatever, when another
sufficient distraint has been found. And in like manner
concerning superfíluous distraints made as well after as


TER-A


604 APPENDIX II.


tum quam ante. ltem de averiüs captis pro debito
domini regis vel alia occasione quaecumque venditis
infra xv. dies post captionem post predictum parlea-
mentum. ltem de hiis qui eapiunt mercedem ab ali-
quibus pro advocaria habenda, cum non sint eorum
lenentes, nec residentes in tenuris eorum. De hiis
qui alienant terras et tenementa in fraudem vel alio
modo contra adventum justiciariorum, ne ponerentur in
assisis Juratis, qui fuerint ili et per quorunmr procura-
tionem talia facta fuerint, et & quo tempore. Et hec
omnia que contingunt predicta statuta distincte et
aperte inquirantur, iià quod cuilibet conquerenti fiat
justitia, eb pene in eisdem statutis contente cuilibet
offendenti adjudicetur, sive ad sectam regis sive alio-
rum, secundum quod in eisdem statutis continetur.
Pene autem in predictis statutis contente adjudicande
sunt factis post festum Sancti Michaelis, anno regni
regis Edwardi secundo, et non ante, tamen de trans-
gressione et offensione prius facta / talis adjudicetur
pena, qualis ante predicta statuta in casibus consimili-
bus adjudieari consueverit.


APPENDIX IL 605


before the parliament. Likewise concerning eattle taken
for & debt due to the lord the king, or on any other
occasion, sold within fifteen days after the taking of
them, since the aforesaid parliament. Likewise concern-
ing those who take reward from any persons for having
their advowry, when they are not their tenants nor are
resident in theirtenures. Concerning those who alienate
lands and tenements through fraud, or in any other way,
against the visit of the justices, lest they should be put
on the sworn assises, who they were and through whose
proeurement such acts were done, and from what time.
And let all these things, which concern the aforesaid
statutes, be distinctly and openly inquired into, so that jus-
lice may be done to every complainant, and the penalties
contained in the said statutes be adjudged to each person
offending, at the suit either of the king or of others, ac-
cording to what is contained in the said statutes. But
the penalties contained in the aforesaid statutes are to be
adjudged upon acts done after the feast of St. Michael,
in the second year of the reign of king Edward, and not
before, nevertheless concerning trespasses and offences
committed before that time, let such a penalty be ad-


. judged, as has been accustomed to be adjudged in similar


cases before the aforesaid statutes.


606


APPENDIX III.


Plaeita apud Westii cora Diio Rege in Oct Sci Michis
aniü regn ejus xviijo.

Die Jovis pxima post festü Sci Diofiis anii reg Henr
fit reg J. xviij cora dno rege "t subsiptis Provisum
fuit t concessu a dio rege '4 à subsiptis omibs 't aliis
qd deceto cü talis bastardia obiciatr alicui in cuf diii
reg qd' nat? fuit aü iürioniu cont?etü int prem suü t
iürem suam mittat loqia ad epum loci ad inquirendü
utt taf nat? fuit aii pdeum matimoniü vl post. Ita qd
in inquisiCcóe illa cesset omis appellacó sicut in sim-
pliei bastardia de qua placitü trasmissu erit ad cuf
xianitatis. Ita qd nulla applla in fiat ex* regnu.
Et io deceto ita teneat* tà de illis de quib; judiciü est
faciendu in cuf dni reg q* de placitis d nodum ineipiuntr
cü talis bastardia obiciatr,

E. Cant archieps.

R. Ciceesti dni reg cancell.
R. Dunelm eps.

Eps Eliens.

Eps Norwic.

Eps Lond.


607


APPENDIX IIl.


Pleas before the Lord the King at Westminster in the
Octaves of St. Michael in the eighteenth year of his
reign.

On Thursday next following the festival of Saint :
Denis in the eighteenth year of king Henry, the son of
John, béfore the lord the king and the undersigned. It
was provided and granted by the lord the king and by
all the undersigned and others, that in future when such
kind of bastardy is objected to any one in the court
of the lord the king that he was born before matrimony
was eontracted between his father and his mother, an
imparlance should be sent to the bishop of the place to
make an inquisition whether he was born before the
aforesald matrimony or after it. So that upon that in-
quisition all appeal shall cease as in simple bastardy,
concerning which a plea shall have ,been transmitted to
the court of christianity. So that no appeal shall be
made thereon out of the kingdom. And accordingly for
the future let it be so held as well concerning those
pleas concerning which judgment has to be made in the
court of the lord the king, as concerning other pleas,
which are not yet begun, when such kind of bastardy is
objected.'

Edmund, Archbishop of Canterbury.
Ralph of Chichester, chancellor of the lord the


king.
Richard, Bishop of Durham.
The Bishop of Ely.
The Bishop of Norwich.
The Bishop of London.


— o -— .*-


608


APPENDIX III.


Eps Bathon.
Eps Exoü.
Eps Karl.
Eps Heref.
Eps Roff.


Comites :


R. eom Cornub £ Piet.
G. eofi marescall.

J. eom Linc.

W. eom Warenn.

J. comes Cesir. ——

W. com de Ferrar.

Th. ecoà de Warrewic.
H. com Kan&.

H.. de Ver com Oxon.
H. cof Hereford.

Sym de Monteforti.
Rad de Thony.
Philipp? de Albiniaco.
Rad fit Nichli.

Herb fil Mathi.

Joh Marescatt.

Galff de Lucy.

Ri6 de Argenteinn.
Hug Dispensator.

Will de Say.

Wil Bardof£. .

Will de Cantilup senior.
Will de Cantilup junior.
Rié Syward.

Godeff de Crawecub.
Almaric? de Séo Amando.
Berts&m de Kuriol.


APPENDIX II. 609


The Bishop of Bath.
The Bishop of Exeter.
The Bishop of Carlisle.
The Bishop of Hereford.
The Bishop of Rochester.
Earls :

Richard, Earl of Cornwall and of Poictou.
Gilbert, Earl Marshall.
John, Earl of Lincoln.
William, Earl of Warrene.
John, Earl of Chester.
William, Earl of Ferrars.
Thomas, Earl of Warwick.
Hubert, Earl of Kent.
Hugh de Ver, Earl of Oxford.
Humphrey, Earl of Hereford.
Symon de Monteforte.!
Ralph de Thony.
Philip de Albini.

"s Ralph Fitz Michael.
Herbert Fitz Matthew.
John Marshall.
Godfrey de Lucy.
Richard de Argentein.
Hugh Dispenser.
William de Say.
William Bardolf.
William de Cantelupe, senior.
William de Cantelupe, junior.
Richard Sy ward.
Godfrey de Crawecumbe.
Almaric de St. Amand.
Bertram de Kuriol.


! Symon de Montefort had been | commencing with Ralph de Thony, '
confirmed in the title of -Earl of | are the names of Barons.
Leicester in 1230. 'The other names,


VOL, II. |... QQ


610 APPENDIX II.


Engelard de Cygoingny.
Rob de Muchegros.
Bald de Pauntoi.
Herb de Lucy.
Rié fif Hug.

Norx.


The above record is contained in the Tower Series of the
Plea Rolls (Placita coram Rege), which have been recently
transferred to the Public Record Office, and have not as yet
been printed. By 8 singular error Selden treats it as à record
of the proceedings of a Parliament held at Tewkesbury in
18 H. IIL, and Sir William Blackstone, on the authority of
Selden, has founded an argument on this record, as if the
bishops had attempted in a Parliament held at Tewkesbury in
18 H. III. to alter the law of England on the subject of
special bastardy, as was attempted in the so-called Parliament
held at Merton in 20 H. III. The editor has thought it
desirable to print the record in full with its heading, as entered
in the Plea Roll of 18 H. III. dors. n. 15, as it has an im-
portant historical bearing on & great controversy, and is pro-
bably the record of the identical plea heard before the king,
to which reference is made in the text of Bracton, fol. 96,
in immediate connection with the provisions of Merton. See
the Introduction, and the text of the present volume, p. 83. -


APPENDIX III.


Engelard de Cygoingny.
Robert de Muchegros.
Baldwin de Paunton.
Herbert de Lucy.
Richard Fitz Hugh.


c oc—— o — —— — —ÓMMMM—— — €


QQ2


611


ii P
" -
cc Dec EcL UL e C TDCDM DINEM TOL ui ee afr.


bi WE Ed 4 2 UT «X.
! 1

i 4 M Pn .

à
. i !
/ *
.
"ERE
! j

D


*l


—


—— ——


2t


.
FL


INDEX.


ÀÁ.


Abjuration of the realm :
how limited, 393.
the oath of, 395.
Abortion:
when it amounts to homicide, 279.
by violent means, punished by death
or exile, 465.
Aeceptilation releases an obligation, 123.
Accessories, liable to be outlawed, as well
as the principals, 333.
Accessory not triable until the principal
party is convicted, 835.
Action :
definition of, 103.
Azo's illustration, 106.
arises out of a contraet or a tort, 107.
division into real, personal, and mixed,
127.
criminal and civil, 129.
civil, may not be brought ina criminal
form, ib.
if instituted civilly, cannot be changed
into a criminal action, 131.
personal, may be brought against the
heir when not penal, ib.
how called native, zb.
sometimes double, when the suit is for
à thing, and for a penalty, 133.
sometimes bifurcated, :b.
real, for an immoveable, 7.
real, for a moveable, 135.
value to be stated, ib.
releasable by an equivalent, 137.


Action—cont.
mixed, for a thing and against a por-
son, 137.
also, when in prosecution of a thing,
and of a penalty, :5.
sometimes perpetual, 139.
preambulary, ib.
Actions :
transitory, which pass to heirs, ib.
prejudicial, 139, 149.
about predial rights, 141.
under thc Aquilian law, 143, 145.
unde vi, 145.
quorum bonorum, 145, 147.
who are entitled to, for a tort, 145.
for an injury, ib.
because of alarm, ib.
on account of deceit, ib.
for violent dispossession, ib.
quod vi aut clam, 147.
for stoppage of right of way, ib.
Action :
* quorum bonorum," ib.
the choice of one excludes recourse to
another, 149.
once extinguished, never revives, 2b.
Actions :
criminal, cognisable in the court of
the king, 151.
civil, when transferable from the court
of the lord to the court of the
county, 159. )
when to the king's court, 75.
Action:
not allowed in a case of freehold, except
upon a writ from the king, 207.
civil, whilst pending against one party,
eannot be brought against other
parties, 213,


——


616


Actions:
civil, an order must be observed, if
the complainant is entitled to bring
several, 213.
civil, against a person and against his
property may proceed at the same
time, 75.
order of ascent, not of descent, allow-
able, 215, 219.
civil, order of propounding them, 221.
prejudicial, 223.
ought to be restrained where one will
suffice, 231.
Action:
several actions to be determined by a
single action, if possible, i5.
indirect, by a lord for damage, by
reason of an assault against his
serfs, 233.
Actions:
for personal injuries, may be brought
by a master on behalf of his servants
or his serfs, 547.
abettors liablo to, 549.
for personal injuries, must be promptly
instituted, ib.
for personal injuries, 545.
may be brought by a husband in d
fence of his wife, but not conversely,
547.
damages taxable by the judge, ib.
Adelstane, king, law of, as to rapo of
women, 485.
Advowson, how assignable as dower, 91.
Advowsons :
pleas about, determinable in the court
of the king, 163.
of the lord the king, 245.
Ago, full, different in military and in sock-
-ago tenure, 4, 9.
Agents can bind by stipulations, 121.
Amerciments:
scale of, according to the moasure of
the dolict, 243.


of counts and barons to be settled


. through their peers, by the barons
of the Exchequer, j5.
Anglie conquestus, 34:


Approver :


INDEX. -


Anglians, the law of the, as to rape of
women, 485.

Animals, stray, without an owner, belong
to the king, 271.

Appeal, formalities to be observed when it '
is made in the presence of the
viscount and the coroners, 427.


may be pardoned by the king, 521.
must do battle in certain cases, 525.
how he ought to maintain his accusa
tion, 527.
exceptions against an, allowed to tho
defendant, 581.
faith to be kept with, 533.
must abjure the realm under any cir-
cumstances, ib.
his accusation can only be entertained
"in a court of the king, 535.
Archbishops summoned before the justices
. 1tinerant, 189, 305.
Armour-bearers, 307.
Arms, wood and stone not comprised under
the term, 473. |
Arson:
crime of, 153.
punishment of, 479.
Articles:
of the barons presented to king John,
345.
of the justices itinerant, temp. H. 3,
240.
of the justices itinerant after Statute
of Westminster tbe First, 3 Edw. 1,
252.
Asia, conditional arrival of a ship from,
115.
Assise:
of novel disseysine, equivalent to an
action * unde vi," 143.
of the death of an ancestor, equivalent
to an action * quorum bonorum,"
ib.
Aula regia, the special court of the king
himself, 160.
Azo:
his criticism of unlearned judges, 180.
variation from, 105.


INDEX.


B.


Bacberende, a thief detected with the stolen
articles on his back, 293, 510, 541.

Banco:

justitiarii in, 160, 182.
justitiarii de, 186, 189, 191.

Bane, la, from the Saxon bana, a murderer,
236.

Barabas liberated, 455.

Barber, the ease of the, copied from the
Digest, 399.

. Baron, court of the, its jurisdiction in civil
actions, 159.

Barons, of Hastngs, 253.

Barony, plea for a, determinable in the
court of the king, 168.

Battle on a plea of land, promised to be
discussed, but omitted, 438.

Beauvais, money of, 487.

Belvacensis, Moneta, 486.

Bench:

justices resident at the, 181, 183.
at Westminster, 187, 201.

Benignant interpretation of a deed permis-
sible in a case of dower, 75.

Bishop :

mandate to a, to admit a clerk, 163.

summoned before the Justices itinerant,
189, 805.

the, his prison for the clergy, 299,

if remitted as an outlaw to the ordi-
nary, may be degraded, 385.

Dlunders, John, case of, an assise of the
death of ancestor in the county of
Middlesex, 79.

Bona vaeantia go to the Crown, 139.

Borghye aeldere, a principal surety in

| frankpledge, 306.

Borough, twelve loyal burghers of each,
summoned to attend on the justices
itinerant, 189.

Brodegh, Robert, case of, in the county of
Berks, 405.

- Bruises, not wounds, 463.

Bullion in ingots, 427. :


617


Burdeth, Idonea, wife of Nicolas, 55.
Burgh, Adam de, case of, in the county of.
Kent, 9 & 10 H. 8,407.
Burglar may be slain, where there is peril
of life, 464.
Burning alive :
2 punishment for greater crimes, 155.
criminals, who are to be burnt alive,
ought notto be tortured beforehand,
ib.
DBusones of the county, 237.


C.


Camerarii, part of each household, 306.
Cantilupe Hugh de, his duel, 9 H. 3, in
the county of Essex, 447.
Canute, king of the Danes, 385.
Capacity, the test of majority in sockage
tenure in the case of a woman, 5.
Castration:
punished by death or exile, as an
offence, 463. |
adjudged to be mayhem, 469.
Cattle:
distrained and driven out of the
county, 561.
unjust seizure and detention, a kind of
robbery against the peace of the
king, 563.
seized for services due and not per-
formed, 565.
seized for trespass, 567.
impounded according to law and cus
tom for doing damago, 569.
Cattle-lifter, 156.
Cerevisia, purchase of, 239.
Cervisia, sold by bailiffs, 250.
Chains, not to be put on to prisoners, 155.
Champion, if a hireling, how punishable,
516. |
Charter of liberties, 283.
Chirograph, in the court of the king, 93.


am veape rwn


618 INDEX,


Christiana, wife of Walter, case of dower,
14 H. 8, in the county of North-
ampton, 59.

Christian not to be put to death for a petty
larceny, 517.

Christianity:

the court of, has cognisance of the
crimes of clergy, 291.
when clergy are delivered up for the
death of a man, 299.
should not protect a felon-clerk, who
has escaped out of prison, 357.
Chronicles, book of, quoted, 167.
Church :
Holy, 485.
presentation to a, by a layman, 75.
Cinque Ports, franchise of the, 257.


. Circumceision, lawful in the ease of the


Jews, 465.
Citizenship, loss of, 153.
Civil aetion may be changed into a crinii-
nal suit, 433.
Chattels of a person accused and acquitted
of & misdemeanor to be released,
539.
Clarendon, assise of, A.D. 1166, as to ab-
juration of the realm, 897.
Clerk: :
apostacy of a, punished by burning by
a lay hand, 301.
aecused of homicide, how to be pro-
ceeded against, 299.
outlawed, liable to degradation, if he
cannot purge himself, 385.
amerciable by tlie king according to
his lay fce, and not aecording to
his ecclesiastical benefice, 243.
Clergy not degradable by the king, 299.
Cloth :
assise of its width, 243.
its measurement by ells, 427.
Code of Justinian cited :
De repetundis, 168.
De hsredibus, 224.
De tributoria actione, 228.
De injuriis, 227.
De iis, qui latrones, 838.
Cokkeslege, land of, 23.


Commodatum :
different from mutuum, 109.
must be gratuitous, 111.
Common fame, persons indicted upon,
437,
Coneubina, legitima, 483.
Coneubine not privileged to refuse evi-
dence, 521.
Condictio indebiti, 1290.
Coin:
falsifiers and elippers of, 245, 247.
clipping of the, a kind of high treason,
267.
Cone and keye, the test of & woman's
capacity in certain boroughs, 5, 9.
Confusion of one mass with another may
extinguish an obligation, 125.
Conspiracies, punishable, 157.

Conspiracy harmless, if no act follows,
337.
Constitution, an ancient, that a person

cannot gainsay the death, if he is
found on the body, 407.
Consuetudo, Anglie, 344, 346.
Contracts, of good faith, not in writing, 119.
Conventions, nude, do not give rise to an
action, 106.
Coqui, part of a household, 306.
Coronation oath of the king, 171.
Coroner :
his office in cases of homicide, 981.
his duty to summon an inquest on the
body, 283.
on persons drowned, 285.
in cases of treasure trovo, 287.
Where there has been a rape of virgins,
289.
Coroners :
in & case of homicide may summon
from six neighbouring townships,
28].
the rell of, superior to that of the vis-
count, 431.
Council :
Common, of the rcalm, 45.
the Lateran, of 1215, in which com-
plaints were made against Simon
de Montfort, 301.


INDEX. | 619.


Council—cont.
of Oxford, 301.
Counts :
summoned before the judges itinerant,
189, 305.
palatine, 291.
County court :
its jurisdiction in civil actions, 159.
over pleas of forbidden distress, ib.
record made under a writ from the
king, 535.
in what cases it has a record, 557.
Court :
a lord's court, amerciable for a false
judgment, 565.
the record of such a court may be
impugned, 568.
Couthutlaghe, a harbourer of outlaws, 337.
Crime ;
founded on noxious intention, 197.
- trial for major precedes trial for minor
211.
Criminal suit :
cannot be changed into a civil action,
433.
cannot be renewed, if once retracted,
and the accused party is acquitted,
437.
falls to the ground, if the appellor is
a manifest traitor, ib.
Criminal fugitive allowed five months to
appear before outlawry, 309.
Crown :
entitled to bona vacantia, 139.
detention of a thing distrained per-
tains to the, 543.
Curia magna of the king, 158.
Customs:
as to fugitives of the county of Herc-
ford, 339.
ofthe county of Gloucester, ib.
of England as to felons' lands, 345,
947.
as to outlawry, 373.
new, not leviable without the licence of
the king, 247.


D.


Dace, Emme, wife of William, case of
dower on lands: acquired after mar-
riage, 7 H. 3, 57. ,

Dapifori, part of a household, 304.

Deacon, apostate in marrying a J eWess,
burnt at the Council of Oxford,


301.

Deaf man may stipulate and promise,
117. à

Death, punishment of, inflieted by cudgels,
155.

Decenna, equivalent to frankpledge, 312,
313.


Deeretum of Gratian, illustrious persons
may proceed by proxy for libel,
227.
Degradation of a clerk, the forfeiture of
his civil rights, 301.
Delict, the obligation resulting from it, as
regards the punishment, dissolved
by the death of either party, 127.
Deuteronomy, book of, quoted, 165, 167.
Deodand:
not in the case of a ship, where a
person is drowned at sea, 389.
for the king, on persons drowned in
fresh water, not in the. sea, 287.
Deposit, entails responsibility on the
ground of dolus, but not on the
ground of culpa, 111.
Dies, dominica, 246, 254.
Digest of Justinian cited :
De vi publica, 217.
Quod metüs causa, 223.
Quorum legatorum, 225.
De tributoria, zb.
Locat, 25.
De privatis delictis, 227.
De actionibus et obligationibus, ib.
De publicanis, ib.
De sicariis, 338.
De requirendis reis, 340.
De panis, 521.


620 INDEX,


Digest, torture forbidden in the caso of a
,  . pregnant woman, 521.
Dignity, a  substtute for frankpledge,
807.
Diligence:
due, in the case of goods lent to be
returned, 109.
in the case of goods pledged, 111.
Disseysor may request the association of
another justice, 210.
JDistress:
plea of refusal, may be entertained by
the viscount from necessity, as jus-
ticiary of the king, 549.
seizure of cattle for distress of services,
$51.
when services are not acknowledged,
553.
when it may lead to battle or 2 great
assise, 555.
unjust detention of cattle taken in,
ib.
Divorce:
' between husband and wife, as distin-
guished from a separation of bed,
52..
fatal to dower, 50.
Donation:
by the husband on account of mar-
riage, 49.
when made at the door of tho church,
53.
is properly dower according to the cus-
tom of England, ib.
of à. church, distinct from that of the
advowson, 93.
Dos:
adventitia, 50.
profectitia, ib.
when identical with a maritage, 51.
parapherna, 58.
Dovecotes, under the cognizance of the
justices itinerant, 247.
Dower:
a donation by the husband to his
spouse at the door of the church,
49, 53.
nature of reasonable, 49.


e,


Dower—cont.


the third part of the husband's lands,
49.

ean be appointed by 2 minor at the
door of the church, 51. |

not valid on death bed, :b.

what is properly so according to the
custom cf England, 53.

reverts to husband in case of dione:
5 H. 8, ib.

in the county of Cambridge, 57.

in the case of & barony not appoint-
able on the capital manor, 59.

in the case of & vavassory, not re-
stricted as in à barony, 61.


restricted, in the case of an earldom,


whether there is a castle or not, ib.

in Ireland, in the case of Walter Earl
Marshall, 63.

may be appointed in money, 65.

in things by weight and measure, 67.

elaóimed by two wives, how deter-
mined, ib.

may be by parole at the door of the
church, 75.

does not extend to parks of live
animals, 97. i

notliable for debts of the husband,
99.

pleas of, terminable in the court of
the king, 163.

divers customs of cities and counties
as to, 53.

may be less than the third part, if the
woman is content, 57.

appointed in gavelkind, ib.

by oral parole before espousals else-
where than at thedoorofthe church,
78.

wife may claim more than her dower
under à testament or an approved

' eustom, 67.

& written instrument of, 75.

of a second wife, 77.

appointable to the wife of a son, not-
withstanding the father's wife is
alive and has an appointment of
dower, 79.


INDEX. 2 B 621


Dower—cont.


of the widow is wariutble by the
heir in his own.court, not in the -


widow's, 99.
Dover, bailiffs of, writ to, 287.
Duel:
cannot be claimed after the accused
has put himself on the country,
408.
the appellor, if vanquished, forfeitsall
his goods, 405.
the appellor is committed to gaol,
ib.


may be declined by a person who has


passed the age, 417.
oath of the, 440.
form of the oath, 441.
the king's proclamation, 443.
punishment of the appellée, if van-
quished, 2).
of the appellor, if he retracts on the
field, 445.
accessories, when liberated from obli-
gation, 447.
not to be enforced against i a de-
fendant of 60 years of age, 451.
the king does not fight, 449.
in a case of blows and wounds, 461.
may not be settled by agreement after
the wager, 25.
between an approver and a defendant,
oath of either party, 529.
Dukes not mentioned in writ of general
summons beforethe Judges itinerant,
189, 3095.
Duket, Richard:
at Walsingham, in Norfolk, 315.
in the county of Kent, 335.
Dumb man cannotstipulate nor promise,
117.
Dunwich, bailiffs of, 257.
Durandus, the tailor, case of, Norfolk Iter,
7 H. 8, 4839.


E.


Earl Marshall, case of dower on his castle
in Ireland, 63.
Eborum, William de, his opinion as to for-


feiture of transverse inheritances in


case of felony, 358.
Ecclesiasticus, the book of, quoted, 167.


Edward, laws of king, as to frankpledge, |


307.
Emma, wife of William Daco, ease of
dower, 15 Henry 3, in tho county
of Cambridge, 57.
England :
the custom of the realm, 345, 373.
conquest of, subsequent feoffment, 35.
Englishery:
how presentable to the Justices, 385,
391.
various customs in counties, 391.
Espousals, dower must precede, 73.
Essex, the county court of, 361.
Essoin not allowed in the fourth county
court by Martin de Pateshull, 335.
Essoin de malo lecti, how dealt with by the
justices itinerant, 193.
Estovers, reasonable, of a prisoner, 403.
Exceptions to a charge of homicide, 427.
Exchange of moneys made without the
authority of the king, 247, 255.
Exchequer, barons of the, the amercers of
counts and barons, 243.
Excommunication for contempt of court,
ns for a mortal sin, 331.
Exile:
perpetual, à punishment for greater
crimes, 129, 153, 155.
to an island, 399.
Eye, the scooping out of an, 469.
Eyesight and hearing:
required on the part of the appellor,
435.
case in the county of Norfolk, 7 H. 3,
439. .
before the Statute of , Westminster the
First, 438, 440.


629 INDEX.


F.


Falsification of money, 156, 259.

Fame, common, indietment upon, 451.

Felon:

hung elsewhere than before the jus-
tices itinerant, 253.

the king may pull down the buildings
and plough up the land of, 342.

his land seizable by the king for a
year and a day, 343.

land not seizable by the crown, where
it cannot be an escheat, 349.

his land not forfeited if he dies before
conviction, 351.

may not make a donation of his land,
if convicted, zb.

a child begotten by a, has no right of
inheritance, ib.

dying in the lifetime of his father,
does affect the inheritance of the
afterborn children, 353.

a clerk, who has escaped from prison
to & church, should not be protected
by the court of Christianity, 359.

when captured, not to be disseysed of

. his lands before conviction, 401.

Felony:

no one can judge but the king, 475.

not cognisable in a baron's court, 541.

Filetale, sale of, by bailiffs, 251.

Finder, the, of à dead body to be attached
till the arrival of the Justices, 287.

Fine can only be interpreted in the king's
court, 163.

Fines with the king, made by fugitives
from justice, 537.

Flanders, lands in, English heirs only owe
reliefs to the king according to
Flemish law, 13.

Flight from justice enhances the penalty,
331.

Flogging, punishment of, 129, 135.

Folgheres, the retainers of a householder,
807.


Forest law, offence against, not bailable,
539.
Forgery, the crime of, in certain cases,
high treason, 259.
Fortune, snares of, 55.
France, king of, his subjects in England,
251.
Frankpledge:
obligation of all persons of twelve
years and upwards to be in, 307.
à person cannot be dismissed from, at
the arbitrary will of his surety, 309.
Franks, the law of the, as to rape of women,
485.
Free-bench of the widow in burgage
tenures, 97.
Freehold:
can only be questioned under a war--
rant from the king, 165.
claim of, cannot be made without &
writ from the king to the justices,
209.
Frenchmen, chattels of, 255.
Fridhburgh, an association of ten men in
frankpledge, 307.
Friendless man, ancient term for an outlaw,
837.
Fugitive :
from justice, how to be pursued, 811.
may be waived, if a woman, 315.
.may surrender himself at the fifth
county court, 317.
from justice, on account of an ap-
prover, 537.
to a church must abjure the realm, 395.
allowed forty days by the assise of
Clarendon, 397.


G.


Gaine, the vicar of, 435.


| Gaol, appointed for custody, not for pu-


nisbment, 289.
Gascony, the king's return from, 9251.
Gavel-kind, dower on lands of, 57.
Gilbert, son of Aldrendus, 451.


INDEX.


Gloucester, county of, custom as to out-
laws, 339.
God, the judgment of, by water or iron,
387. ;
Godingham, Hugh de, his duel, Essex
Iter, 9 H. 3, 447.
Gray, Randulph de, vicar of Gaine, 435.
Guardian :
his obligation to maintain the appur-
tenances of the estate, 11.
punishable for waste, ib.
in sockage tenure, always the nearest
relation, 21.
Guests, only to be received and to go away
in broad daylight, 407.
Gust, a strange visitor on his second night,
307.


H.


Hale's Pleas of the Crown, 151, 259.
Hamsokne, crime of, breaking into a house,
464.
Harlot, not à hnrlot, when ravished against
her will, 485.
Hastings :
bailiffs of, 253.
barons of, ib.
Hely, William, son of, 435.
Heir :
legitimate, as presumed by marriage,
may be disinherited by proof to the
contrary, 10.
if he marries without the consent of
the lord, the lord shall keep the
estate after the heir comes of age,
until he has received the value of
the maritage, 27.
legitimate, whom marriage points out,
19.
of full age, may marry whom he
pleases, 25.
in sockage, not to be disinherited if
he marries without the consent of
his relatives, 45.
abduction of, punishable, ib.


623


Heir—cont.
marriage of, disparagement, under
fourteen years may not be forced
upon them, 47.
under full age, liable to marry at tho
choice of the lord of the fief, ib.
of a traitor against the King hardly
permitted to live, 261.
Henry 3. Itinera of the justices :
third year, 217.
fourth, 61.
fourth and fifth, 477.
fifth, 305, 335, 435.
sixth and seventh, 451.
seventh, 57, 95, 439.
ninth, 447.
ninth and tenth, 243, 407, 477, 479.
tenth, 449.
twelfth, 55, 491.
fourteenth, 59.
fifteenth, 57, 349.
seventeenth, 15.
pleas which follow the King, 18 H. 3,
883.
York roll, 5 H. 3, 531.
Hereford, county of, custom as to outlaws,
339.
High treason, punishment of, 211.
Highway of the king, 395.
Hinfangthefe, 293. See Infangthof.
Hiwisse, the land of, 23.
Hirelings, of a house, 307.
Hoghenehyne, a strange visitor on his
third night, 307.
Homicide :
crime of, accidental or intentional, 153.
ex eventu, 156.
what constitutes the crime, 275.
not punishable, when inevitable, 277.
how it is considered, when committed
by chance or misfortune, ib.
when it becomes murder, 279.
spiritual punishment of, how removed,
ib. .
may be committed with tho tongue, ib.
various accessories to, 25.
by neglecting to save a man from
deatb, 281.


624 INDEX.


Homicide— cont. ]
all persons found in a house, where a
man has been slain, to be bound
over till the coming of the justices
itinerant, 283.
the finders of a dead body to be at-
tached, ib., 287.
the host of tho house, where the dead
man last lodged, to be attached,
285.
relations only entitled to prosecute for,
311.
when strangers may prosccute, ib.
when an attorney may prosecute,
313.
easual, 399.
when it cannot be gainsayed, 407.
appeal against an accessory, 413.
exceptions to the charge, 427.
various presumptions of guilt, 453.
inquisition for, 459.
Hour, variation in the, not a fatal excep-
tion to a writ, 429.
IIlondhabende, a thief captured with the


stolen articles in his hand, 293, 510, :


$40. j
Householder, liable for members of his
family, who are fugitives from jus-
tice, 305.
Ifucham, Robert de, case of, 15.


. Hue and cry, how raised, 237,


Hundred, members 'of the, to bo enrolled
before the judges itinerant, 239.

Hundred, four knights to be chosen from

each, by the serjeants, and to be

presented to the justices itinerant

ib.


| IIusband has a life interest in his deconsed


wife's property by tho law of Eng-
land, 29.
Husbands, plurality of, 67.
Husfastene, householders, 307.
Husting, of London, 343, 373.
Hutfangthefe, 298. Sec Utfangentbhef.
Hythe, bailiffs of, writ to, 257.


I.


Idonea, her claim of dower in the county
of Essex, 6 H. 3, 95.
Idonea, wife of Nicolas Burdeth, her claim
of dower in the county of Lincoln,
12 H. 3,55.
Imprisonment, crime of, 153.
Indictment, by knights or by townships,
583.
Infangenthef, franchise of, in. what it con-
^'  sists, 539, 541. |
Injuries: estimate of damages for personal
injuries varies according to person
and place, 549.
Injury:
what constitutes an, 545. |
Whenit brings on a peeuniary ponalty,


ib.

husband may sue on behalf of his
wife, 547.

Inlawry :

how effected by tho grace of the king,
359. |

to what things it restores a. person,
367.


limited to the king's peace, 371.
a kind of new birth, 377.
when it is completely restorative, 369.
Inlawed persons, & kind of new born in-
fants, 377. AC
Interdict :
to prevent violence, 141.
to recover possession, ib. |
for violent dispossession, 145.
for stoppage of right of way, 147.
* quorum bonorum," ib,
* unde vi? equivalent to action for
theft, 227.


Inquest:


on dead bodies, how to be held, 988.
in respect of a person in gaol, whether
he should bo released on bail, 295.
writ to release him on twelve sureties,

297.


|
!


INDEX.


Ireland : |
dower of the countess of Lincoln in,
63.
fugitive from justice abjuringthe realm,
allowed to go to, 395.


J.


Jews:
chattels of slain, go to the king, 245.
may practise cireumcision, 464.
Jewess :
marriage of a Christian with a, 489.
& deacon, apostate in marrying, de-
graded and burnt, 301.
John, king:
articles of the barons presented to,
345.
land held since the time of, 559.
Judge :
the duty of a, in the appointment of
punishment, 155.
the king, if he could suffice, and no
one else, 171.
has need of coercive power, ib.
Judgment :
what constitutes a, 165.
its requisites according to Holy Serip-
ture, 167.
Jurata throughout the realm, 549.
Jurors :
of an iter may be charged with per-
jury in the next following iter of the
justices, 243.
may be separated from one another,
and examined singly by the justices,
499.
Jury :
suspected persons removable from,
455.
of the vill, 457. :


of four matrons in a case of rape, 491.


Justiciaries :
by delegation from the king, 179.
o&th of, 185.


VOL. II.


625


Justiciaries—cont. .
to judge according to the law and
custom of England, 197.
Justices :
of the bench, 161.
judge upon a warrant from the king,
181, 183.
at Westminster, 187, 195, 201.
by the side of the king, 181.
only for certain assises, ib.
associated in à case of novel dissey-
sine, 201.
itinerant from county to county, 161,
181.
their oath, 183.
itinerant, should commence their as-
sise with: the pleas of the crown,
335.
Justitiarius capitalis, 208.
Jus gentium, 138, 271.


K.


Kerken, Roger de, case of, 4 & 5 H. 8,
476.
Kent, custom of, as to dower, 53.
Keys of the wife, 519.
King, the :
time does not run against, 139.
his mandate to a bishop to admit a
clerk, 163.
is bound by his coronation oath to do
justice, 171.
the vicar of God on earth, 173.
has no peer, i.
if unjust, is the minister of the devil,
175.
so called, from ruling well, i.
cannot be a judge in his own cause,
265.
may be injured in the persons of his
family, 267.
may not imprison a clerk, as he can-
not judge him, 299.
cannot grant a pardon with injury or
damage to others, 371.


R R


L4


6260 INDEX.


King, the—cont. |
may prosecute, if the duel fails by pre-
vious death of a party, 419.
does not fight a duel, 449.
only ean prosecute in cases of non-
manifest theft, 511.
King's :
highway, an outlaw abjuring the realm
must keep to the, 395.
hall, a special court, 161.
Knights : !
inquest of twenty-four, of the county,
to ascertain if the complaint should
proceed, 207.
twelve knights to be chosen from each
hundred, 239.
their oath before the justices itinerant,
241.
need not be in frankpledge, 305.
twelve, associated with four townships,
537.


L.


Lagan, derelict things found on the sea,
273.

Larcener may be killed in self defence,
545.

Lassel, Theobald de, 61. See Theobald.

Laughelesman, ancient term for an out-
]aw, 309.

Law waged with the twelfth hand, 558.

Laws bind the lawgiver, 175.


Law and custom of the realm of England,


197.

Law of England as to refusal of bail,
530.

Law of nations :


things without an owner belong to the .


crown, 138.
treasure trove the property of the lord
the king, 271.
Laymen, the simplicity of, 75, 77.
Letters of outlawry, 361.


Lex Anglie :
husband's life interest in his deceased
wife's estate, 29.
as to restitution of land escheated to
the king for a year and a day, 346.
Lex Aquilia :
action under it, 143.
action on account of men slain or
wounded feloniously, to whom al-
lowed, 145.
Lex Cornelia, de Sicariis, 3839.
Lex Julia:
De repetundis, 169.
De vi publica, 216.
De sicarlis, 338.

Lex Regia, de imperio, 172.

Lex terre, 325, 330, 372.

Libels, false and infamous, punishable, 157.

Libellous verses may cause an injury, 547.

Liberties, charter of, 283.

Limbs :

loss of, for capital crimes, 129.
mutilation of, a punishment for greater
crimes, 155.

Lincoln, countess of, wife of the Earl
Marshall, her dower settled on the
capital manor in Ireland, 63.

Lion, the subject of an action as a move-
able, 135.

London :

custom of, as to dower, 53.

the court of the husting, 327.

may pronounce outlawry, 342.

outlawry null if pronounced outside
the court, 378.


M.


Madman cannot stipulate nor promise,
117.

Magnates need not be in frankpledge, 305.

Malice, crimes of, 127.

Manupastus, includes servitors with food
and wages, and with or without
liveries, 807.


INDEX.


Manu duodecimá :
wager of law with, 553.
failure of any one toattend, fatal, 557.
exception of villenage valid, ib.
Maritage :
the lord may exact it after the heir
comes of age if he marries with-
out his consent, 27.
in the case of sockage, according to
the custom of the place, 43.
right of, 11.
where there are several lords, it be-
longs to the most ancient feoffor,


11.
in the case of a military fief, it belongs
to the chief lord, :5.
Markets not to be set up without leave of
the king, 247.
Marriage :
ought to be free, as regards the por-
son, 27.
ofladies who are in the donation of
the king, 234. :


in the case of rape, only by permission
of holy church and of the king, 485.
Master may flog a scholar with modera-
tion, 277.
Mayhem :
excuses a defendant from a duel, 451.
definition of, 468.
what constitutes, 469.
Medleys, cognisable in the baron's court,
539.
Measures, keepers of, sworn, 243.
Mercy :
only to beshown to the deserving, 177.
of compassion distinguishable from
the mercy of forgiveness, 177.
Merton, provisions of, in favour of a widow's
dower, 83.
Military service, all persons having twenty
pounds' worth of land, subject to,
249.
Minor:
accused of felony, not compellable to
answer until he is of age, 11.
muy appoint dower, 49.
cannot be outlawed, 318, 329.


627


Minor—cont.
cannot be punished for
another minor, 509.
Mint, a, for money not allowed without
the consent of the king or his jus-
tices, 247.
Misadventure:
death by, 887.
custom in some parts varies as to the
punishment, 389.
the barber's case, 399.
Montfort, Simon de, 310.
Munus, various meanings of the word, 167.
Murder :
when homicido is so called, 279.
not in respect of persons slain or
drowned in the sea, 289.
what constitutes, 385.
the vill liable to a fine of sixty-six
marks, 387.


Musard, William, his land in the county
of Kent seized by the king for
felony, 15 H. 8, 349.

Mutuum, contrasted with commodatum,
109,


slaying


N.


Naifty, plea of, determinable before the
justiees of eyre or in the High
Court of the king, 159.

Names, error in, when a fatal exception,
435.

Namii, see Vetitum.

Native actions, so called as born out of
contracts, 131.

Nations, law of, 189, 271.

Neale, Richard, case of, 435.

Norfolk, viscount of, writ to, 257.

Normandy, lands in, English heirs only
owe reliefs to the king according to
Norman law, 18.

Normans, the lands of, in England, escheats
of the crown, 245, 255.

Novation, avoids an obligation by transfer,
123.


628 INDEX.


O.


Oath:
of the king at his coronation, 171.
of the twelve knights before the
justices itinerant, 239.
clause of adjuration, 241.
of abjuration of the realm, 395.
form of the, in the duel, 441.
of jurors of the vill, 457.
Obligation:
the mother of an action, 107.
definition of, 109.
may be contracted in four forms and
under several vestments, ib.
sometimes founded, as it were, on con-
tract, 119.
how got rid of, 121.
by acceptilation, 128.
by a novation, ib.
by transfer to a minor, 125.
invalid,if founded on deceit or fear,
121.
penal, extinguished by death, 123.
founded on a delict, 125.
Office of the judge distinct from a right of
action, 103.
Opinion, without prejudice to a better, 77.
Ordeal of water or of fire, 397.


Outlawry : ;
no proceeding to, without a suit, 817,
327.
flight alone not sufficient, 319, 381,
841.
on account of flight and an indictment,
323.
null,if made against the law of the
land, 325.


how and when to be proclaimed, 338.

cannot be proclaimed before the fifth
county court, 309.

what forfeits it entails, 387.

cannot be maintained for a civil
offence, 831.

forfeits all goods, 341.


Outlawry—cont.


works a forfeit for all heirs, 841.
| may be proclaimed in the king's
court, the county court, and the
husting of London, 343.
if à person absent on a foreign jour-
ney, remitted on his surrender to
the king's prison, 363.
pronounced in ignorance, annulled by
the king with the advice of the
magnates, ib.
rescinded, when the person, supposed
to have been slain, has returned
alive, 368, 369.
where null,373.
not binding upon a clerk, who must
' be remitted to the ordinary, 385.
Outlaw:
returning, before pardon, forfeits
everthing, 341. .
his land seized by the crown for a
year and a day, 343.
returning without warrant, 247.
may not be killed, unless he resists
capture, 383.
Oxford, Council of:
under arcehbishop Stephen Langton,
A.D. 1222, 301.
Oxford, a stipulation made?at, to perform
a thing in London, 115.


E


Paraphernal dower, not shareable, 53.
Pardon:
may not be granted by the king with
injury to others, 371.
of the king limited in its effect, ib.
Pateshull, Martin de:
his words in opening the assise, 235.
his articles of inquiry as a justice
itinerant, ib.
his writ to the barons of Hastings, 11
H. 3, 252.


INDEX. 629


Pateshull, Martin de—cont.
his iter in the county of Hertford,
H. 3, 305.
his answer to Richard Duket at
Walsingham in Norfolk, 315.
his answer to Richard Duket in the
county of Kent, 315, 335.
Worcester Iter, 5 H. 8, 335.
diversity of opinion from Stephen de
Segraveas to the ejectment of a wife
from her own inheritance by reason
ef her husband's felony, 355.
case of Robert Brodegh, in the county
of Berks, 405.
Worcester Iter, 5 H. 3, 435.
last Lincoln iter, 10 H. 8, 451.
Lincoln iter, case of Thomas de Rasne,
478.
last Norfolk Iter, 12 H. 3, 491.
Essex Iter, 4 H. 3, 516.
Perambulation, used to define boundaries,
137.
Peter of Savoy, 575. | See Sabaudia.
Pigo, Elias, a hireling champion, his punish-
ment, 4 H. 3, 516.
Pillory, punishment of the, 129, 155.
Pincerne, members of a household, 306.
Pistores, part of a household, 306.
Pleas:
which follow the king, case of dower,
18 H. 3, 88.
of the crown, their keepers in the
county courts, 505.
keepers of, associated with the viscount
under the king's writ, 535.
Pledge, the creditor not responsible for
loss by & casualty, 111.
Pledges, wrongful release on, 251.
Plummet-line, the test of a broken limb,
469.
Poison, homicide by the administration of,
409.
Pounds sterling, 477.
Preetor, order of the, 117.
Precipe, in capite, 163.
Preambulary actions, 189.
Pregnant woman not to be subjected to
torture, 521.


Preseription of time, how it &voids an
obligation, 123.
Presentation, pleas of last, determinable in
the court of the king, 163.
Priesthood:
the, distinguished from the kingdom,
170.
excluded from this treatise, 171.
ruled by ecclesiastical judges, ib.
Prises of the king, 249.


Prison : ,
& place of confinement, not of punish-
ment, 155.


due committal to, 291.
inclusion in a, as a punishment, 545. '
Prison-breaking, punished more severely
than the original offence, 303.
Prisoners not disseysable of their property
until condemned, 293.
Probi:
homines, 482, 510, 564, 568.
homines patriz, 281.
viri, 494.
Prudhommes of the neighbourhood, 9281.
Pucelage, test of virginity, 489.
Punchardon, William de, case of, 23.
Punishments of crime :
for what object invented, 153.
to be mollified by the judge rather
than exasperated, 155.
vary in consideration of the person
against whom a crime is committed,
157.
by money penalties, ib.
Purprestures on the king's lands, 245,
255.


Q.


Quarantaine of a widow, 81, 85.
Quorum bonorum :
the action equivalent to an assise con-
cerning the death of an ancestor,
143.


630 ^ INDEX.


Quorum bonorum—cont.
when allowed against any kind of pos-
Sessor, 147.
Quod vi aut clam, the interdict or action,
who are entitled to it, i5.


R.


Ralegh, William de :
Middlesex Iter, case of John Blunders,
79.
his judgment &t Windsor, where &
burglar was slain, 465.
his judgment in the county of Loices-
ter, in the case of Roger le Suche,
579.
Rape of a virgin :
punishable more or less gravely, 153.
coroner's office in respect of, 289.
punished with loss of sight and of
testicles, 480.
what constitutes the crime, 481.
penalty for, 483.
Rape may be condoned to the man by the
woman marrying him, 493.
Rasne, Thomas de, case in Lincoln Iter,
479.
Ravishment of a virgin, finding of the
country, 6 & 7 H. 8, 451.
Recognitors fraudulently removed from
juries or assises by corrupt bailiffs,
249.
Recognisors :
of an assise, & writ to summon, whoré
a cause has beeu transferred from
Westminster to a county, 201.
where it has been transferred from
one county to another, 205.


- Rectors may sue in the name of their


churches, 183.
Redemption money, exacted by viscounts
and others, 251.


References not completed by PBracton,


488, 474. .
Religious vows, persons under, may sue in
the name of the corporation, 188.
Renodura, à plummet-line, 468.


Richard, king, title since the time of,
559.

Right, parity of, does not oust seysine, 35.

Robber, meaning of the term, 511.

Robbery from a person who is in custody
of & thing, whether it is his pro-
perty or not, 518.

Robert, the son of John, York Roll,
5 H. 8, retained in' prison, although
the approver was vanquished in
battle, 2b.

Robert, king, of France, his judgment at
Paris, in a case of rape of a Jewess,
487.

Rod, a blow from a, does not cause infamy,
but the cause wherefore, 129.

Romans, the law of the, as to rape, 485.

Rombaud, Henry:

a charge of perjury against the twelve
jurors in the county of Hertford,
9 & 10 H. 3, in the case of, 243.

an exception against the indictment,
434.

indictment for murder, 9 & 10 H. 3,
Hertford Iter, 435.

Romsey, bailiffs of, writ to, 257.

Rupe, Thomas de, Worcester Iter, 9 & 10
H.3; 476.

AXyvaux, abbot of, 225.


S.


Sabaudia, Petrus de:
his suit against the abbot of Ryvaux,
225.
his case in the Exchequer before the
king's Council at Westminster, 46
H. 3; 575.
Saceabor, in pursuit of a larcener, 540.
Saccum cum brochia, 14.
Sack, with a brooch, obligation to provide,
when going with the king's army
into Wales, 15.
Sachibaro, an ancient German law-adviser
ofa vill)511. -
Sakaburth, meaning of the word, 511.


INDEX.


Salt water:
prises of the king in, 249.
& ship in, distinguished from a ship in
fresh water as regards misadven-
ture, 401.

Sandwich, bailiffs of, writ to, 257.

Sarah, wife of William Burnell, case of
dower,9 H.3; 51. .

Savoy, Peter of, his suit against the abbot
of Ryvaux, 225.

Scothale, sale of, by bailiffs, 251.

Scotland, fugitives from justice abjuring
the realm allowed to go to Scotland,
895.

Sea, purprestures on the, 245, 255.

Seal of the king, falsifying it is high trea-
Son, 267.

Secta:

the suit or attendance due to a chief
court, 563.

a sufücient body of compurgators,
suitors of the chief court, 565, 571.

Secular jurisdiction distinguished from
ecclesiastical, 171.

Sedition of the king or of his army, 151,
259, 263.

Seditio, probably an older reading than
seductio as applied to the king and
his army, 258, 262.

Sedition:

against the king, any one may accuse,
except a convicted felon, 438.

against the king must be disclosed
promptly, 437.

Seductor, of the king, 261.

Segrave, Stephen de, his opinion that a
wife forfeits her own inheritance by
reason of her husband's felony, op-
posed by Martin de Pateshull, 355.

Sempronian estate, 222,

Serf :

may bind his lord by a stipulation,
121.

punishable on a different scale from a
Íreeman, 157.

cannot bring an accusation against
his lord, except in a case of felony
and sedition, 435.


631


Serí— cont. :
in what cases he may bring an action
against his lord, 547.
may be a witness against his lord in
cases of sedition against the king,
949.
Serjeants of the king, 471.
Serjeanties of the king, 245.
Serjeanty, great, money test of, 15.
Serjeanty, petty:
various species of, 13.
money test of, 15.
Servant: avowal by the lord of the servant's
act does not release the servant,
whilst it charges the lord, 573.
Servientes, distinguished from servi, 306.
Seysine:
not taken away from a tenant by
parity of right, 35.
of the thing stolen, essential to found
the jurisdiction of the baron's court,
941.


Sherings, Ralph de, Norfolk Iter, 12 H. 8,


491.
Shilling, robbery of a hundred, 475.
Shipway, plea at, 253.
Skerda raised by a cut on the head, 468.
Sight and hearing :
required in a witness, 311.
abolished by Statute Westminster I.,
810, 430, 440.
Sky, condition of touching it with the finger,
115.
Snares of fortune, 55.
Socke and sacke, franchise of, 291, 298,
305, 539.
Solomon, saying of, quoted, 181.

Spiritual causes, in which the secular
judge has no jurisdiction, 17.
Status, personal, questions of, determin-

able before the justices of eyre or
in the king's High Court, 159.
Stipulation:

what constitutes a, 118.

conditional, ib.

useless, where impossible, 115.

judicial, where made by order of the
judge or of the preetor, zb.


632


Stipulation—cont.
conventional, when cognisable in the
court of the king, 117.
ought to be in writing, ib.
S:olen things found in the possession of
any person, how far convicting,
517.
Store-room, the wife's, 519.
Strangers :
not to depart before clear day, 289.
assise against taking|coin for their
entertainment, 245.
under the protection of the justices
itinerant, 247.
Stray animals belong to the king in the
absence of a claimant-owner, 271.
Stripes given by a father or a master for
correction pérmitted, if they do not
exceed moderation, 157.
Sturgeon, belongs to the king, 271, 273.
Suche, Roger le, has case before William
de Ralegh, 579.
Suicide:
of a person accused of felony for-
feits his land, except in cases of
phrensy, 351.
to escape punishment distinguishable
from suicide through  phrensy,
ib.
felony, when committed to escape
punishment for a crime, 507.
when not felony, 509.
Suffolk, viscount of, writ to, 257.
Surety, released by the release of the prin-
cipal party, 123.
Swade, Alan, allowed to decline a duel, as
past the age, 451.


T.


The sword ought to assist the sword, said
of the relations between the priest-
hood and the kingdom, 171, 397.
Teeth: .
front, assist much to victory in fight-
ing, 469.


INDEX.


Teeth—cont.
breakage of, when mayhem, 469.
Templars, a privileged body, 165.
Tercy, Henry de, case of, 23.
Testament, husband may leave to his wife
something beyond her dower by his
will, 67.
'Theobald de Lassel, case of dower, 4 H. 3,
in the county of Northampton, 61.
Theft:
definition of, 509.
manifest, how established, 511.
where there is no seysine of any rob-
bery, no one but the king can pro-
ceed against the party suspected,
511.
punishment should vary according to
the value of the thing stolen, 517.
The Lord's Day, 246.
Titius, condition of, having been made
consul, 113.
Tithing :
amerciable, when a fagitive is in frank-
pledge, 305.
an accused party not enrolled in a,
523.
Toll and theam :
franchise of, 293, 365, 539.
Townspeople :
four, in addition to twelve jurors, 459.
when they may be objected to as
jurors, 455.
Township :
amerciable, if hue and cry is not
raised, 305.
the four nearest, summoned to con-
tribute a jury, 505.
provost of, ib.
associated with the twelve knights,
537.
Torture :
punishment for great crime, 153.
forbidden by the digest in the case of
a pregnant woman, $521.
Transportation to an island, à. punishment
for crime, 399.
Treason, high : |
any one admissible to accuse, 259.


po Cum Cm n


INDEX.


Treason, high—ocont.
accusation must be prompt, 261.
determinable by a duel, exceptions of
the accused, 263, 265.
when the peers of-the accused are to
be associated with the justices, 267.
Treason or sedition must be denounced
forthwith, 437.
Treasure trove:
fraudulent concealment of, 151.
the concealment of it, a theft against
the crown, 269.
& gift of fortune, 271.
the property of the king by the law of
nations, b.
Trespass of cattle, cognisable in the baron's
court, 541.
Twelve men of the county from the im-
mediate neighbourhood summoned,
505.
Tumbril, the punishment of the, 129, 155.
Tycian estate, 222.


Lj


U.


Uneuth, a strange visitor on his first night,
307.

Unde vi, the action equivalent to an assise
of novel disseysine, 143.

Usurers, Christian, 245.

Utfangenthef, franchise of, in what it con-
sists, 539, 541.


V.


Vavassory, privilege of a barony as to
dower, does not apply to a, 61.

, Venpel, Roger de, inheritance of, 28.

Ver de, his case in the county of Suffolk,
4 & 5 H. 3., 476, 478.

Ver, Henry de, his ease, 7 H. 3, Norfolk
Iter, 439.


VOL. II.


—— € —


633


Vetitum namii, when cognisable in the
county court, 159, 2419.
Vestment required for a contract, 107.
Vestments of compaets, six in number,
109.
Villate, townships, 505.
Vill:
four loyal men and the provost of
each vill, summoned to attend the
justices itinerant, 189.
jurors of the, 457.
amerciable, where a fugitive is out of
frankpledge, 302.
Villate :
liable, if hue and cry is not raised,
308.
when liable for a fugitive from justice,
ib.
associated with the twelve milites,
537.
Viscounts :
of past years, summoned to appear
before the justices itinerant, 191.
two-handed, who take bribes from
both parties, 249.
may hold pleas in the king's place
under a deputation, 543.
hold views of frankpledge twice a
year, 2b.
Vis major, when a person is responsible
for losses notwithstanding, 111.


W.


Wager :
of battle, 439.
the form of, 443.
Waggonage of a villein, 243.
Waiving, in the case of à woman, takes
the place of outlawry, 313.
Wales:
. expedition into, 15.
the March of, 339.
Wapentakes to be enrolled before the jus-
tices itinerant, 289.


SS


624 INDEX.


War, just, when in defence of one's
country, 281.
Ward, a, cannot be in his turn the guar-
dian of another, 21.
Wardship :
right of, according to the different
character of tenements, 5, 9.
obligation of the lord in respect of the
land, 11.
remedies for abuse, ib.
maritage, distinguishable from the
custody of the lands, 13.
of sockage tenants belongs to the
next of kin, 17, 21.
not consistent with a right of inherit-
ance, 17.
cannot be exercised by a minor, 21.
Warin de Monte Casino, case of, 15.
Warren, unlawful raising of a, 251.
Water-course, wrongful diversion of, by
digging a foss, 229.
Water, right of drawing, from a neigh-
bour's land, 141.


Waynage, see Waggonage.

Weapon, homicide by an edged, 411,
413.

Westminster, justices at, 187, 195,
201..

Whale :


belongs to the king, 271.
the king has the head and the queen
the tail, 273.
Widow :


chief lord, 19.

her claim to remain forty days in the
chief messuage, 81.

how to be put into seysine of her
dower, 83.

. may make a will of the fruits and

crops, ib.

her quarantaine, 85.

her share of patronage in an adowson,
87.

her assignment of dower in an advow-
son, 91.

her exclusion from the chief messuage
98. E.


free to marry without assent of the


Widow—cont.
her dower not liable for debts of her
husband, 99.
entitled to her own court, ?b.
cannot maintain a plea of right in
virtue of her dower, ib.
how put into seysine of her dower, if
the heir is a minor, 89.
Widower entitled for his life to the in-
heritance of his deceased wife by
the law of England, 29.
Wreck of the sea:
a subject of inquiry before the justices
itinerant, 247.
2 ship, from which no living thing has
escaped, 273.
belongs to the kinz, as having no
owner, 271.
what constitutes wreck, 273.
how 2 live dog may prevent it being
wreck, 2b.
Writ :
of general summons to attend the
justices itinerant, 189.
of gaol delivery, 193.
for an assise oflast presentation, 199.
for the justices to nssume"' others to
assist them, ib.
of exigent, 333.
to restore an outlaw's land to the
chief lord, 345.
to seize a felon's land in the county of
Kent, 15 H. 3, 349.
of right, in respect of the widow's
dower is determinable in the heir's
proper court, 99.
a little writ in certain cases, 218.
Writer,error of the, in an instrument of
dower, subject to a benignant inter-
pretution, 75.
Writing, obligation founded on, cannot be
repudiated, 119.
Wrotham, William of, keeper of the king's
ships, 255.
Wife:
the legitimate, preferred to other
wives, 67.
her domestic duties, 99,


INDEX.


Wife—cont. |

does not forfeit her own inheritance
by reason of her husband's felony ;
diversity of judicial opinions on the
gubject, 855.

liability of a, for the theft of her hus-
band, 519.

her keys, of what things in her house,
ib.

when liable as an accomplice with her
husband, 521.

not obliged to obey her husband in
the commission of a orime, ib.

William, the Seneschal, an assise of the

. death of an ancestor, 3 H. 3, in the
county of York, 217.

Winchester, bishopric of, peculiar custom
as to maritage in the case of a
military fief, 21.

Wines, assise of, in cities and boroughs

: and vills, 245.

Wives, plurality of, 67.

Wolf's head:


a person out of the protection of the


law, 8165.
an outlaw carries it, 339.
Woman:
the full age of a, varies in military
and sockage tenure, 7. |


6035


Woman —cont.

in sockage tenure, may consent to

matrimony in her seventh year, 9.
if an heiress, cannot marry without

the consent of the chief lord, 17,
23.

when otherwise, 19.

when a widow, may marry without
the assent of the chief lord, zb.

is not in frankpledge and cannot be
outlawed, 318.

may be waived, 315.

pregnant, may not be subject to tor-
ture, 521.

when she may bring a criminal charge,
495.

may accuse the slayer of her husband,
ib.

Wounds, death after, through unwilling-

ness to be cured, 321.


b


— Yarmouth, men of, 257.


York, the county court of, 361.


-—


LONDON:


Printed by GEgoRGE B. EYRE and WILLIAM SPOTTISWOODE,
Printers to the Queen's most Excellent Majesty.


For Her Majesty's Stationery Office.
[B 444.—750.—2/79.]


ENGLAND.


rm


CATALOGUE


OF


RECORD PUBLICATIONS


ON SALE


BY


Messrs. Longman & Co., and Messrs. Trübner & Co., London; - |


Messrs. James Parker & Co., Oxford and London;
Messrs. Maemillan & Co., Cambridge and London ;
Messrs. A. & C. Black, and Messrs. Douglas ZNS Foulis,

Edinburgh;
and Mr. A. Thom, Dublin.


H 671. TT


co WeDUXEEE ——— E.A Aoc PRPPLEPR e! 2t


CATALOG U E.


-GONTENTS.

Page
CarnrwpAans or SrATE PAPERS, &c. — - - JERE. - 2

CHRONICLES AND MEMORIALS OF GREAT DRITAIN AND IRELAND. DURING
THE MippLE AGES - - - - - - - Q9
PusLICATIONS OF THE RECORD CoMMISSIONERS, XC.  -- - . 21
Womnks PUBLISHED IN PHOTOZINCOGRAPHY . - - . Ql
Scorcu RECORD PUBLICATIONS - - z 7 x - 98
Imsu REcogD PUBLICATIONS - - - - - - 904


CALENDARS OF STATE PAPERS, &w.


[IwPERIAL 8vo. cloth. Price los. each Volume or Part.]


As far back as the year 1800, a Committee of the House of Commons
recommended that Indexes and Calendars should be made to the Publie
Records, and thirty-six years afterwards another Committee of the House of
Commons reiterated that recommendation in more forcible words; but it
was not until the incorporation of the State Paper Office with the Public
Record Office that the Master of the Rolls found himself in a position to take
the necessary steps for carrying out the wishes of the House of Commons.

On 7 December 1855, he stated to the Lords of the Treasury that although
* the Records, State Papers, and Documents in his charge constitute the most
* complete and perfect series of their kind in the civilized world," and
although «they are of the greatest value in & historical and constitutional
* point of view, yet they are comparatively useless to the public, from the
« want of proper Calendars and Indexes."

Acting upon the recommendations of the Committees of the House of
Commons above referred.to, he suggested to the Lords of the Treasury that
to effect the object he had in view it would be necessary for him to employ a
few Persons fully qualified to perform the work which he contemplated.

Their Lordships assented to the necessity of having Calendars prepared
and printed, and empowered the Master of the Rolls to tako such steps as
might be necessary for this purpose.

The following Works have been already published under the direction of
the Master of the Rolls :—


CALENDARIUM GENEALOGICUM ; for the Reignsof Henry III. and Edward 1I.
Edited by CHARLES RonBxRTS, Esq., Secretary of the Public Record
Office. 2 Vols. 1869.


This is a work of great velue for elucidating the early his
and landed gentry, gr g the early history of our ru


——Àm


3


CALENDAR OF STATE PaAPrns, DoMEsTIG SERIES, OF THE REIGNS or Enp-
WARD VI., Manr, ELIZABETH, and JAMES I., preserved in Her Majesty's
Publie Record Office. Edited by RosERT LzwoN, Esq., F.S.A., (Vols.
I. and II. and Many ANNE EvrnETT GREEN, (Vols. III.-XII.).


1856-1872.
Vol. I.—1547—1580. Vol. VII.—A ddenda, 1566-1579.
Vol. II. —1581—1590. Vol. VIII.—1603—1610.
Vol. III.—1591—1594. Vol. IX.—1611-1618.
Vol. IV.—1595-1597. Vol. X.—1619-1623.
Vol. V.—1598—1601. .| Vol. XI.—1623-1625, with Ad-
Vol. VI.—1601-1603, with denda, 1603-1625.


Addenda, 1547-1565. Vol. XII.—Addenda, 1580-1625.


These Calendars render accessible to investigation a large and important mass

of historical materials. 'The Northern Rebellion of 1566-67 ; the plots of the

. Catholic fugitives in the Low Countries ; the numerous designs against Queen

Elizabeth and in favour of a Catholie succession ; the Gunpowder-plot; the

rise and fall of Somerset; the Overbury murder; the disgrace of Sir Edward

Coke; the rise of the Duke of Buckingham, &e. Numerous other subjects are
illustrated by these Papers, few of which have been previously known.


CALENDAR OF STATE PaPEns, DoMEesTic SERIES, OF THE Rxi1GN OF
CHARLES I., preserved in Her Msjesty's Public Record Office. Edited
by Jouw BnucE, Esq., F.S.A., (Vols. L.-XIL); y Joux BnucE, Esq.,
F.S.A., and WirLraw DovaLAs HawrirTON, Esq. F.S.A., (Vol. XIII),
and óy WirLiAM DovucrLas HawirnroN, Esq. F.S.A., (Vols. XIV.-
XV.) 1858-1877.


Vol. 1.—1625-1626. | Vol. IX.—1635—-1636.
Vol. II.—1627—1628. Vol, X.—1636-1637.
Vol. III.—1628—1629. Vol. X1.—1637.

Vol. IV.—1629—-1631. Vol. XII.—1637-1638.
Vol. V.—1631—-1633. Vol. XIII.—1638-1639.
Vol. VI.—1633—1634. Vol. XIV.—1639.

Vol. VII.—1634-1639. Vol. XV.—1639-1640.


Vo). VIII.—16365.


This Calendar presents notices of a large number of original documents of great
value to all inquirers relative to the history of the period to which it refers.
Many of them have been hitherto unknown.


CALENDAR OF STATE PAPEns, DowxsTIO SERIES, DURING THE COMMONWEALTH,
preserved in Her Majestys Public Record Office. Edited by Man
ANNE EvERETT GREEN. 18765-1878.


Vol. 1.—1649-1650.
Vol. II.—1650.
Vol. IIT.—1651.
"This Calendar is in continuation of those during the reigns from Edward VI. to
Charles I., and contains a mass of new information. |
CALENDAR OF STrATE Parrns, DowxsrTic SERIES, OF THE HEIGN OF
CHARLES IL, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. |.Edited
by MaARx ANNE EvEnETT GREEN. 1860-1866. ,


Vol. IV.—1651-1652.
Vol. V.—1652-1658.


Vol. I.—1660—1661. Vol. V.—1665—-1666.
Vol. II.— 1661-1662. Vol. VI.—1666-1667.
Vol. IIT.—1663—-1664. Vol. VII.—1667.


Vol. IV.—1664-1665.


Seven volumes ofthis Calendar, of the period between 1660 and 1667, have been
published.
| "T$


4


CALENDAR or HoMwE OrrricE PAPERS or THE RxiGN or GxonmGE.III., pre-
served in Her Majesty's Publie Record Office. 1760 (25 Oct.)-17659.
Edited by Josceu RepiNGTON, Esq., 1878. :


''his is the first volume of the modern series of Domestic Papers, commencing
with the accession of George III.


CALENDAR OF STATE PaPzrmns relating to ScoTLAND, preserved in Her
Majesty's Publie Record Office. Edited by MankHAM JonN THORPE,
Esq., of St. Edmund Hall, Oxford. 1858. : |

Vol. L, the Scottish Series, of the Reigns of Henry VIII.,
Edward VI., Mary, and Elizabeth, 1509-1589.

Vol. IL, the Scottish Series, of the Reign of Elizabeth, 1589-1603;
an Appendix to the Scottish Series, 1543-1592 ; and the State
Papers relating to Mary Queen of Scots during her Detention in
England, 1568-1587.

These two volumes of State Papers relate to Scotland, and embraco the
period between 1509 and 1603. In the second volume are notices of the State

Papers relating to Mary Queen of Scots.

CALENDAR OF DocuMENTS relating to IRELAND, preserved in Her Majesty's
Public Record Office, London. Edited by HxNRY SAvAGE SWEETMAN,
1202 B.A., Trinity College, Dublin, Barrister-at-Law (Ireland). 1875-
1877. |

Vol. I.—1171-1251. | Vol. II. 1252-1284.

These volumes contain à Calendar of all documents relating to Ireland,
preserved in the Publie Record Office, London; the work is to be continued
to the end of the reign of Henry VII.

CALENDAR OF STATE PaPrns relating to IRELAND, OF THE KREIGNS OF
HreNnY VIIL, Epwanp VI, Many, AND ELIZABETH, preserved in Her
Majesty's Public Record Office. Edited by HANs CLAUDE HAMILTON,
Esq., F.S.A. 1860-1877.

Vol. I.—1509-1573. Vol. III.—1586-16588.

Vol. II.—1574—1589. |
The above have been published under the editorship of Mr. Hans Claude

Hamilton.

CALENDAR OF STATE PaPrmns relating to IRELAND, OF THE KEIGN OF
JawES Il, preserved in Her Majestys Public Record Office and
elsewhere. JAZdited by the Rev. C. W. RussELL, D.D.,, and Jogw P.
PnaENDERGAST, Esq., Barrister-at-Law. 1872-1877. |

Vol. I.—1603-1606. Vol. II1.—1608-1610.

Vol. 11.—1606-1608. Vol. IV.—1611—1614.

| This series is in continuation of the Irish State Papers commencing with
the reign of Henry VIII.; but, for the reign of James I.,the Papers are not
confined to those in the Public Record Office, London.

CALENDAR OF STATE PAPERS, COLONIAL SERIES, preserved in Her Majesty's
Public Record Office, and elsewhere. Edited by W. Nokgr SA1INSBURY
Esq. 1860-1878.  . í

Vol. I.—America &nd West Indies, 1574-1660.

Vol. II.—East Indies, China, and Japan, 1518-1616.

Vol. III.—East Indies, China, and Japan, 16177-1621.

Vol. f V.—Exnst Indies, China, and Japan, 1622-1624.

These volumes inelude an analysis of early Colonial Papers in the Public

Record Office, the India Office, and the British Museum.

CALENDAR oF LETTERS AND PaPEns, FoREIGN AND DOMESTIC, OF THE
RzigN or Hxwny VIIL, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record


5-


Offce, the British Museum, &e. Edited by J. S. BaEWwER, M.A.,
Professor of English Literature, King's College, London. 1862-1876.


Vol. I.—1509—1514. | Vol. IV.—Introduction.
Vol. II. (in Two Parts)—1515- | Vol, IV., Part 1.—1524-1526.
1518. Vol. IV., Part 2.—1526—1528.


L IIL(i —1519-
ds n Two Parts)—1819- | 3 TV., Part 3.—1529-1530.


These volumes contain summaries of all State Papers and Correspondence
relating to the reign of Henry VIIL, in the Public Record Office, of those
formerly in the State Paper Office, in the British Museum, the Libraries of Oxford
and Cambridge, and other Public Libraries; and of all letters that have appeared
in print in the works of Burnet, Strype, and others. Whatever authentic
original material exists in England relative to the religious, political, parliamen-
tary, or social history of the country during the reign of Henry. VIII., whether
despatches of ambassadors, or proceedings of the army, navy, treasury, or
ordnance, or records of Parliament, appointments of officers, grants from the
"Crown, &oc., will be found calendared in these volumes.


CALENDAR OF STATE PaPEns, FonEgIGN SERIES OF THxEk RExIiGN oF
Epwanp VI, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. 1547—
1553. Edited by W. B. TuRNBULL, Esq.,of Lincoln's Inn, Barrister-
at-Law, and Correspondant du Comité Impérial des Travaux Historiques
et des Sociétés Savantes de France. 1861.


CALENDAR OF STATE PAPERS, FonEIGN SERIES, OF "HE RExIGN OF MARY,
preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. 1553-1558. Edited
6y W. B. TUuURNBULL, Esq. of Lincoln's Inn, Barrister-at-Law and
Correspondant du Comité Impérial des "Travaux Historiques et des
Sociétés Savantes de France. 1861.

The two preceding volumes exhibit the negotiations of the English ambassadors
with the courts of the Emperor Charles V. of Germany, of Henry II. of France,

" and of Philip II. of Spain. "The affairs of several of the minor continental states
also find various incidental illustrations of much interest.

A valuable series of Papers descriptive of the circumstances which attended
the loss of Calais merits a special notice; while the progress of the wars in the
north of France, into which England was dragged by her union with Spain, is
narrated at some length. 'The domestic affairs of England are of course passed
over in these volumes, which treat only of its relations with foreign powers.


CALENDAR OF STATE Parens, FoRkimeN SERIES, OF THE HREIGN or
ELIZABETH, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office, &c.
Edited by the Rev. Joseeu SrTEvENsoN, M.A., of University College,
Durham, (Vols. I.-VII.) and ArrAN JaMEs CmosByr, Esq. M.A,
Barrister-at-Law, (Vols. VIII.-X.) 1863-1876.


Vol. 1.—1558-1559. , Vol. VL—1563.

Vol. IT.—1559-1560. | Vol. VITI.—1564-16565.
Vol. III.—1560—1561. Vol. VIII.—1566-1568.
Vol. IV.—1561-16562, Vol. IX.— 1569-1571.
Vol. V.—16562. Vol. X.—1572-—-1574.

"These volumes contain a Calendar of the Foreign Correspondence during the
early portion of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, deposited in the Public Record
Office, &c. They illustrate not only the external but also the domestic affairs of
Foreign Countries during that period.


CALENDAR OF TREASURY PAPERS, preserved in Hér Majesty's Public Record
Office. Edited by JoseezR ReprmvGTON, Esq. 1868-1879.
Vol. I.—16557—1696. Vol. III.—1702-1707.
Vol. II.—1697-—1702. Vol. IV.—1708—-1714.


The above Papers connected with the affairs of the 'Treasury comprise
petitions, reports, and other documents relating to services rendered to the State,


6


grants of money and pensions, appointments to offices, remissions of fines and
duties, &c. "They illustrate civil and military events, finance, the administration
in Ireland and the Colonies, &c., and afford inform&tion nowhere else recorded.


CALENDAR OF THE CAREW PAPERS, preserved in the Lambeth Library.
Edited by J. S. BREwER, M.A., Professor of English Literature, King's
College, London ; and WiLLiAM BULLEN, Esq. 1867-1873.


Vol. 1.—16515-16574. Vol. V.—Book of Howth; Miscel-
Vol, II.—1575—1588. laneous.
Vol. I11.—1589-—1600. Vol. VI.—1603-1624.


Vol. IV.—1601-—1603.


The Carew Papers relating to Ireland, deposited in the Lambeth Library, are
unique, and of great importance. 'The Calendar (now completed) cannot fail to
be welcome to all students of Irish history.


CaLENDAR OF LETTERS, DESPATCHES, AND STATE PaAPzmns, relating to the
Negotiations between England and Spain, preserved in the Archives at
" Simaneas, and elsewhere. |.Edited by G. A. BERGENROTH. 1862-1868.
Vol. I.—Hen. VII.—1485—-1509.
Vol. IT.—Hen. VIII.—1509-1526.
Supplement to Vol. I. and Vol. II.

Mr. Bergenroth was engaged in compiling a Calendar of the Papers relating
to England preserved in the archives of Simancas in Spain, and the correspond-
ing portion removed from Simancas to Paris. Mr. Bergenroth also visited
Madrid, and examined the Papersthere, bearing on the reign of Henry VIII.
The first volume contains the Spanish Papers of the reign of Henry VII. ; the
second volume, those of the first portion of the reign of Henry VIII. 'The
Supplement contains new information relating to the private life of Queen .
Katharine of England ; and to the projected marriage of Henry VII. with Queen
Juana, tridow of King Philip of Castile, and mother of the Emperor Charles V.


CALENDAR OF LxTTERS, DESPATCHES, AND STATE PaPzms, relating to the
Negotiations between England and Spain, preserved in the Archives at
Simancas, and elsewhere. Edited by Dow PascuaAL px GayvaNGos.
1878-1871. |

| Vol. III., Part 1.—Hóen. VIII.—1525—1526.
*" Vol. III., Part 2.—Hen. VIII.—152'—-1529.


Upon the death of Mr. Bergenroth, Don Pascual de Gayangos was appointed
to continue the Calendar of the Spanish State Papers. He has pursued a
similar plan to that of his predecessor, but has been able to add much valuable
matter from Brussels and Vienna, with which Mr. Bergenroth was unacquainted.


CALENDAR OF STATE PaPERS AND MawuScmiPTS, relating to ENGLISH
AFFAIRS, preserved in the Archives of Venice, &c. Edited by RAwDonN
BnowN, Esq. 1864-1877.


Vol. I.—1202—1509. Vol. IV.—1527—1533.
Vol. II.—1509-1519. Vol. V.—1534—16554.
Vol. IIT.— 1520-1626. Vol. VI., Part 1.—1555—1666.


Mr. Rawdon Browii's researches have brought to light a number of valuable
documents relating to various periods of English history ; his contributions to
historical literature are of the most interesting and important character.


SYLLABUS, IN EmwaLisH, OF RyMwxR'Ss FapxkRA. Jy Sir Tuowas Durrus
HanDr, D.C.L., Deputy Keeper of the Public Records. Vol. I.— Will. I.-


Edw. IIL.; 1066-1877. Vol IJ.— Ric. II. - Chas. II.; 1377-1654.
. 1869-1873.


The ** Federa;," or '*Eymer's Fodera," is a collection of miscellaneous docu-
ments illustrative of the History of Great Britain and Ireland, from the Norman


7


Conquest to the reign of Charles IL. Several editions of the ** Federa? have
been published, and the present Syllabus was undertaken to make the contents
of this great National Work more generally known.
hEgPORT or THE DEPUTY KEEPER or THE PuBLic REcoRps AND THE REY.
J. S. BREWER TO THE MasTER OF THE ROLLs, upon the Carte and
Carew Papers in the Bodleian and Lambeth Libraries. 1864. Price
2s. Gd. :


RrPoRT Or THE DrPUTY KrrPER or THE PusBL10 Recogps TO THE MASTER
or THE lorrs, upon the Documents in the Archives and Public Libraries
of Venice. 1866. Price 2s. 6d.


In the Press.


SYLLABUS, IN ENGLISH, or RwxR's FapxRA. By Sir THoMAS DUFFUS
Hanpr, D.C.L, Deputy Keeper of the Public Records. Vol. IIÉ.—
Appendix and Index.


CALENDAR OF LETTERS. AND PAPzns, FogEIGN AND DoMEsTIC, OF THE REIGN
or HNRY VIII., preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office,
the British Museum, &c. Edited by J. S. BREWxR, M.A., Preacher

. 8t the Rolls, and Rector of Toppesfield. "Vol. V.—16531, &c.


CALENDAR oF SrATE PAPERS, COLONIAL SEmiEs, preserved in Her Majesty's
Publice Record Office, and elsewhere. Edited by W. NoEen SAINSBURY,
Esq. Vol V.—4America and West Indies, 1661-1670.


CALENDAR OF STATE Parzms relating to IgELAND, oF THE REIGN OF
JAMES IL, preserved in Her Majesty's Publice Record Office, and
elsewhere. Edited by the Rev. C. W. RussriüL., D.D., and Jouw P.
PnreNDznGAST, Esq., Barrister-at-Law. Vol. V.—1615—1625.


CALENDAR OF SrATE PAPERS AND MANUSCRIPTS, relating to ENGLISH
AFFAIRS, preserved in the Archives of Venice, &c. — Edited by RAwboN
Bnoww, Esq. Vol. VI., Part 11.—1556-1568.


CALENDAR OF LETTERS, DEsPATOCHES, AND STATE PaPrms, relating to tho
Negotiations between England and Spain, preserved in the Archives at
Simancss, and elsewhere. Edited by Dow PAscuaAL px GaxaANGOS.
Vol. IV., Part I.—Hen. VIII. 1529-1530.


CALENDAR OF DocuwrNrSs relating to IRELAND, preserved in Her Majesty's
Public Record Office, London. Edited by HENRY SAvAGE SwEETMAN,
Esq., B.A., Trinity College, Dublin, Barrister-at-Law (Ireland). Vol. III.
—1285-1292.

CALENDAR OF SrATE PAPzns, DouzsrTIC SERIES, DURING THE COMMONWEALTH,
preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. Edited by Manx
ÁNNE EvEkRETT GREEN. Vol. VI.—1693, &c. |


8


In Progress.


CaLENDAR OF STATE PaPrEms, CoroNiAL SgniEs, preserved in Her Majesty's
Publice Record Office, and elsewhere. Edited by W. Noker SarNsBURY,
Esq. Vol VI.—East Indies, 1625, &c. Vol. VII.—America and West
Indies, 1671, &c.


CALENDAR OF STATE PAPERS, FonEIGN SxnIES, OF THE HkriGN Or ELizA-
BETH, preserved in Her Mzajesty's Public Record Office. Edited by
ALLAN JAMES CnosBy, Esq, M.A., Barrister-at-Law. "Vol XL—
1675, &c.


CaneNDAR or SrATE Papzns, Doxxsric SERIES, OF THE REIGN OF
CuHARLESI.; preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. |. Edited by
WiLLIAM DouaLAs HaMiLTON, Esq. F.S.A. "Vol. XVI.—1640.


CALENDAR OF STATE PaPrns relating to IRELAND, OF THE RkEIGN OF
ELIZABETH, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. Edited
by Haus CLAvDE HauriLTON, Esq., F.S.A. "Vol. IV.— 1588, &c.


CALENDAR OF HoMwE Orrick PapEns or THE REiGN OF GxoncE III. pre-
served in Her Miajesty's Public Record Office. 1766, &c. Edited by
JosePH REDpiNGTON, Esq.


CALENDAR OF TREASURY PAPERS, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record
Office. Edited by Joseer REeprNaTON, Esq. Vol. V.—1714, &c.


y


THE CHRONICLES AND MEMORIALS OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND IRELAND DURING THE MIDDLE AGES.


[RovAL 8vo. half-bound.  Príce 10s. cach Volumo or Part.]


On 25 July 1822, the House of Commous presented an address to the
Crown, stating that the editions of the works of our ancient historians were
inconvenient and defective; that many of their writings still remained in
manuscript, and, in soine cases, in à single copy only. "They added, * that an
* uniform and convenient edition of thé whole, published under His Majesty's
* royal sanction, would be an undertaking honourable to His Majesty's reign,
* and conducive to the advancement of historical and constitutional know-
* ledge ; that the House therefore humbly besought His Majesty, that He
** would be graciously pleased to give such directions as His Majesty, in His
* wisdom, might think fit, for the publication of à complete edition of the
* gnceient historians of this realm, and assured His Majesty that whatever '
* expense might be necessary for this purpose would be made good."

The Master of the Rolls, being very desirous that effect should be given
to the resolution of the House of Commons, submitted to Her Miajesty's
Treasury in 1857 a plan for the publication of the ancient chronicles and
memorials of the United Kingdom, and it was adopted accordingly. In
selecting these works, it was considered right, in the first instance, to
give preference to those of which the manuscripts were unique, or the
materials of which would help to fill up blanks in English history for
which no satisfactory and authentic information hitherto existed in any
accessible form. One great object the Master of the Rolls had in view was
' to form a corpus historicum within reasonable limits, and which should be
as complete as possible. In a subject of so vast a range, it was important
that the historical student should be able to select such volumes as conformed
with his own peculiar tastes and studies, and not be put to the expense of
purchasing the whole, collection ; sn inconvenience inseparable from any
other plan than that which has been in this instance adopted.

Of the Chronicles and Memorials, the following volumes have been pub-
lished. They embrace the period from the ear[est ume of British history
down to the end of the reign of Henry VII.


10


l. TEE CHnoNICLE or ENGLAND, by Jonmw CapanavE. Edited by ihe
Rev. F. C. HiNGEsTON, M.A., of Exeter College, Oxford. 1858.


Capgrave was prior of Lynn, in Norfolk, and provincial of the order of the
Friars Hermits of England shortly before the year 1464. His Chronicle extends
from the creation of the world to the year 1417. As a record of the language
spoken in Norfolk (being written in English), it is of considerable value.


2. CunoNicoN MONASTERH DE ABINGDON. .Vols. I. and II. Edited by
the Rev. JosePH STrEvEsNsoN, M.A., of University College, Durham,
and Vicar of Leighton Buzzard. 1898.


This Chronicle traces the history of the great Benedictine monastery of
Abingdon in Berkshire, from its foundation by King Ina of Wessex, to the
reign of Richard L, shortly after which period the present narrative was drawn
up by an inmate of the establishment. "The author had access to the title-deeds
of the house ; and incorporates into his history various charters of the Saxon
kings, of great importance as illustrating not only the history of the locality
but that of the kingdom. "The work is printed for the first time.


89. Lives or Enwanp THE CowrreSsoR. I.—La Estoire de Seint Aedward
le Rei. Il.—Vita Beati Edvardi Regis et Confessoris. III.— Vita
JEduusrdi Regis qui apud Westmonasterium requiescit. Edited by
HxNnY RicHanDs LuARD, M.A., Fellow and Assistant Tutor of Trinity
College, Cambridge. 1868. |


'The first is à poem in Norman French, containing 4,686 lines, addressed to
Alianor, Queen of Henry IIL, and probably written in the year 1245, on the
occasion of the restoration of the church of Westminster. Nothing is known
of the author. 'The second is an anonymous poem, containing 536 lines, written
between the years 1440 and 1450, by command of Henry VIL, to whom it
is dedicated. It does not throw any new light on the reign of Edward the
Confessor, but is valuable as a specimen of the Latin poetry of the time. The
third, also by an anonymous author, was apparently written for Queen Edith,
between the years 1066 and 1074, during the pressure of the suffering brought
on the Saxons by the Norman conquest. It notices many facts not found in
other writers, and some which differ considerably from the usual accounts.


4. MONUMENTA FRANCISCANA ; scilicet, I.—Thomas de Eccleston de Ad-
ventu Fratrum Minorum in Angliam. II.—4Ade de Marisco Epistole.
IIL— Registrum Fratrum Minorum Londonie. Edited by J. S.
BnEgWER, M.A., Professor of English Literature, King's College,
London. 1868.


'This volume contains original materials for the history of the settlement of
the order of Saint Francis in England, the letters of Adam de Marisco, and
other papers connected with the foundation and diffusion of this great body. It
has been the aim of the editor to collect whatever historical information could be
found in this country, towards illustrating & period of the national history for
which only scanty materials exist. None of these have been before printed.


6. FAscicULI ZizaNIORUM MaocisrRI JoHaNNiS WcLiF CUM. TnriTICO.
Ascribed to THoMAs NxTTER, of WALDEN, Provincial of the Carmelite
Order in England, and Confessor to King Henrf the Fifth. Edited by
ihe Rev. W. W. SurigLEy, M.A,, Tutor and late Fellow of Wadham
College, Oxford. 1868. | | !


This work derives'its principal value from being the only contemporaneous
account of the rise of the Lollards, When written the disputes of the school-


11


men had been extended to the field of theology, and they appear both in the

wriüngs of Wycliff and in those of his adversaries. Wycliff's little bundles

of tares are not less metaphysical tan theological, and the confliet between

Nominalists and Realists rages side by side with the conflict between the different

interpreters of Scripture. 'The work gives a good idea of the controversies at
- the end of the 14th and the beginning of the I5th centuries.


6. TaE Burik or THE CRoNICLIS oF SCOTLAND ; or, À. Metrical Version of
the History of Hector Boece; by WiLLiAM STEWART. Vols. I., II.,
and III. Edited by W. B. TURNBULL, Esq., of Lincoln's Inn, Barrister-
at-Law. 1868.


This is a metrical translation of a Latin Prose Chronicle, and was written in the
first half of the 16th century. "The narrative begins with the earliest legends,
and ends with the death of James I. of Scotland, and the ** evil ending of the
traitors that slew him." Strict aceuracy of statement is not to be looked for in
such a work as this ; but the stories of the colonization of Spain, Ireland, and
Scotland are interesting if not true; and the chronicle is valuable as a reflection
of the manners, sentiments, and character of the age in which it was composed.
The peculiarities of the Scottish dialect are well illustrated in this metrical version,

. and the student of language will find ample materials for comparison with the
English dialects of the same period, and with modern lowland Scotch. -


7. JoHANNIS CaPGRAVE LIBER DE ILLuUsTRIBUS HxNRiCIS. Edited by ihe
Rev. F. C. HiNaEsToN, M.A., of Exeter College, Oxford. 1858.


This work is dedicated to Henry VI. of England, who appears to have been, in
the author's estimation, the greatest ofall the Henries. It is divided into three
distinct parts, each having its own separate dedication. 'The first part relates only
to the history of the Empire, and extends from the election of Henry I., the
Fowler, to the end of the reign of the Emperor Henry VI. "The second part is
devoted to English history, and extends from the accession of Henry I. in the year
1100, to the year 1446, which was the twenty-fourth year of the reign of King
Henry VI. "The third part contains the lives of illustrious men who have borne
the name of Henry in various parts of the world. '

Capgrave was born in 1393, in the reign of Richard IL, and lived during the
Wars of the Roses, for the history of which period his work is of some value.


8. HrsroRiA MoNasTERII S. AuGUsTINI CANTUARIENSIS, by THOMAS OF
ErxHAM, formerly Monk and Treasurer of that Foundation. Edited
by CnmaRLES Hangpwick, M.A., Fellow of St. Catharine's Hall, and
Christian Advocate in the University of Cambridge. 1858.


This history extends from the arrival of St. Augustine in Kent until 1191.
Prefixed.is a chronology as far as 1418, which shows in outline what was to have
been the character of the work when completed. 'The only copy known is in the
possession of Trinity Hall, Cambridge. "The author was connected with Norfolk,
and most probably with Elmham, whence he derived his name.


9. EuLoGiUM (HisroniARUM S1vE TEMPORIS): Chronicon ab Orbe condito
usque ad Ánnum Domini 1366 ; a Monacho quodam Malmesbiriensi
exaratum. Vols. L, IL, and III. Edited by F. S. HAxpou, Esq., B.A.
1858-1863.


"This is a Latin Chronicle extending from the Creation to the latter part of the
reign of Edward IIL, and written by a monk of the Abbey of Malmesbury,in -
Wiltshire, about the year 1367. À continuation, carrying the history of England
down to the year 1413, was added in the former half' of the fifteenth century by
an author whose name is not known. The original Chronicle is divided into
five books, and contains a history of the world generally, but more especially


12


of England to the year 1366. "The continuation extends the history down to
the coronation of Henry V. 'The Eulogium itself is chiefly valuable as contain-
ing a history, by & contemporary, of the period between 1356 and 1366. The
notices of events appear to have been written very soon after their occurrence.
Among other interesting matter, the Chronicle contains a diary of the Poitiers
campaign, evidently furnished by some person who accompanied the army of the
Black Prince. The continuation of the Chronicle is also the work of a contem-
porary, and gives a very interesting account of the reigns of Richard II. and
Henry IV. It is believed to be the earliest authority for the statement that the
latter monarch died in the Jerusalem Chamber at Westminster.


10. MEMoniALS or HxNnY THE SEvENTH: Bernardi Andres 'Tholosatis
Vita Regis Henrici Septimi ; necnon alia quedam ad eundem Regem
spectantia. Edited by JAMES GarRDNER, Esq. 1858.


The contents of this volume are—(1) a life of Henry VIL, by his poet


laureate and historiographer, Bernard André, of Toulouse, with some composi-


tions in verse, of which he is supposed to have been the author; (2) the journals
of Roger Machado during certain embassies on which he was sent by Henry VII.
to Spain and Brittany, the first of which had reference to the marriage of the
King's son, Arthur, with Catharine of Arragon; (3) two curious reports by
envoys sent to Spain in the year 1505 touching the succession to the Crown
of Castile, and a project of marriage between Henry VII. and the Queen of
Naples; and (4) an account of Philip of Castile's reception in England in 1506.
Other documents of interest in connexion with the period are given in an appendix,


11. MeMOoRIALS or HENRY THE FirrH. I.—Vita Henrici Quinti, Roberto
Redmanno auctore. II.—Versus Rhythmici in laudem Regis Henrici
Quinti. IIL.——Elmhami Liber Metricus de Henrico V. Edited by
CHARLES À. Corr, Esq. 1868.


This volume contains three treatises which more or less illustrate the history of
the reign of Henry V., viz.: A Life by Robert Redman ; a Metrical Chronicle by
Thomas Elmham, prior of Lenton, a contemporary author; Versus Rhythmici,
written apparently by a monk of Westminster Abbey, who was also a contempo-
rary of Henry V. "These works are printed for the first time.


129. MuNIMENTA GiLpHALLx LoNwpoNIENSIS; Liber Albus, Liber Cus-
tumarum, et Liber Horn, in archivis Gildhalle asservati. "Vol. I.,
Liber Albus. Vol. II. (in Two Parts), Liber Custumarum. Vol. III.
Translation of the Anglo-Norman Passages in Liber Albus, Glossaries,
Appendices, and Index. Edited by HEgNRY TnRowAs Rirxy, Esq., M.A.,
Barrister-at-Law. 1859-1862. |


The manuscript of the Liber Albus, compiled by John Carpenter, Common
Clerk of the City of London in the year 1419, a large folio volume, is pre-
served in the Record Room of the City of London. It gives an account of
the laws, regulations, and institutions of that City in the twelfth, thirteenth,
fourteenth, and early part of the fifteenth centuries.

The Liber Custumarum was compiled probably by various hands in the early
part of the fourteenth century during the reign of Edward II. The manuscript,
a folio volume, is also preserved in the Record Room of the City of London,
though some portion in its original state, borrowed from the City in the reign
of Queen Elizabeth and never returned, forms part of the Cottonian MS.
Claudius D. II: in the British Museum. It also gives an account of the laws,
regulations, and institutions of the City of London in the twelfth, thirteenth, and
early part of the fourteenth centuries.


183. CuRoNICA JOHANNIS DE OXENEDES. Edited by Sir HxNRY Eris,


K.H. 1859.
Although this Chronicle tells of the arrival of Hengist and IHorsa in England
in the year 449, yet it substantially begins with the reigu of King Alfred, and


TÉ


P"


LL cem t


13


comes down to the year 1292, where it ends abruptly. "The history is particu-
larly valuable for notices of events in the eastern portions of the. kingdom,
which are not to be elsewhere obtained, and some curious facts are mentioned
relative to the floods in that part of England, which are confirmed in the Fries-
land Chronicle of Anthony Heinrich, pastor of the Island of Mohr.


14. A CorrEcrIOoN or PoriTiCAL PokMS AND SONGS RELATING TO ENGLISH
HisrORY, FROM THE ACCESSION OF Epwanp III. To THE RrEIGN or
HENRY VIII. "Vols. I. and II. Edited by 'THowAs WniGHT, Esq.,
M.A. 1859-1861.


These Poems are perhaps the most interesting of allthe historical writings of
the period, though they cannot be relied on for accuracy of statement. "They
are various in character; some are upon religious subjects, some may be called

' satires, and some give no more than a court scandal; but asa whole they pre-
senta very fair picture of society, and of the relations of the different elasses
to one another. The period comprised is in itself interesting, and brings. us,
through the decline of the feudal system, to the beginning of our modern
history. "The songs in old English are of considerable value to the philologist.


15, The * OPvus TERTIUM," ** OPvus MiNUS," &c., of RocER BaAcoN. Edited
by J. S. BnEWER, M.A., Professor of English Literature, King's
College, London. 1869. |

This is the celebrated treatise—never before printed—so frequently referred
to by; the great philosopher in his works. It contains the fullest details we


possess of the life and labours of Roger Bacon : also & fragment by the same
author, supposed to be unique, the * Compendium Studii Theologie."


16. BanrHoLoMAEI DE CorTroN, MowNaAcHi NonwicEkNsis, HisrORiA AN-
GLICANA ; 449-1298: necnon ejusdem Liber de Archiepiscopis et
Episcopis Anglie. Edited by HENRY RicHanps LuAmp, M.A., Fellow
and Assistant Tutor of Trinity College, Cambridge. 1859.

Tbe author, a monk of Norwich, has here given us a Chronicle of England
from the arrival of the Saxons in 449 to the year 1298, in or about which year
it appears that he died. "The latter portion of this history (the whole of the
reign of Edward I. more especially) is of great value, as the writer was con-


temporary with the events which he records. An Appendix contains several
illustrative documents connected with the previous narrative.


17. BnuT x TvwxsocGrioN ; or, The Chronicle of the Princes of Wales.
Edited by the Rev. Jon WirLiAMs AB IrHEL, M.A. 1860.

This work, also known as **'The Chronicle of the Princes of Wales," has
been attributed to Caradoc of Llancarvan, who flourished about the middle of
the twelfth century. Itis written in the ancient Welsh language, begins with
the abdication and death of Caedwala at Rome, in the year 681, and continues
the history down to the subjugation of Wales by Edward I., about the year 1282.


18. A CorLEcrioN or RoxaL AND HisroRICAL LETTERS DURING THE
REieN or HEeNzY IV. 1899-1404. Edited by the Rev. F. C. Hix-
aErsTON, M.A., of Exeter College, Oxford. 1860. .

This volume, like all the others in the series containing a miscellaneous selec-
tion of letters, is valuable on account ofthe light it throws upon biographical
history, and the familiar view it presents of characters, manners, and events.
The period requires much elucidation; to which it will materially contribute.


19. THE REPRESSOR OF OVER MUCH PBLaMwING OF THE CLEenay. By
REcGiNALD PrEcock, sometime Bishop of Chichester. Vols. I. and II.
Edited by CnuRcHILL BaniwcGTON, B.D., Fellow: of St. John's College,
Cambridge. 1860.


The ** Repressor ? may be considered the earliest piece of good theological dis-
quisition of which .our English prose literature can boast. 'The author was born


14.


about the end of the fourteenth century, consecrated Bishop of St. Asaph in
the year 1444, and translated to the see of Chichester in 1450. "While Bighop of
St. Asaph, he zealously defended his brother prelates from the attacks of those
who censured the bishops for their neglect of duty. He maintained that it was no
part of a bishop's functions to appear in the pulpit, and that his time might be
more profitably spent, and his dignity better maintained, in the performance of
works of a higher character. Among those who thought differently were the
Lollards, and against their general doctrines the ** Repressor? is directed. Pecock
took up a position midway between that of the Roman Church and that of the
modern Anglican Church; but his work is interesting chiefly because it gives a
full account of the views ofthe Lollards and of the arguments by which they were
supported, and because it assists us to ascertain the state of feeling which ulti-
mately led to the Reformation. Apart from religious matters, the light thrown upon
eontemporaneous history is very small, but the '* Repressor? has great value
for the philologist, as it tells us what were the characteristics of the language in
use among the cultivated Englishmen of the fifteenth century. Pecock, though
an opponent of the Lollards, showed a certain spirit of toleration, for which he
received, towards the end of his life, the usual medieval reward—persecution.


20. ANNALES CawsRuE, Edited by the Rev. Jon WiLLIAMS AB ITHEL,
M.A. . 1860. | d


These annels, which are in Latin, commence in the year 447, and come down
to the year 1288. CTheearlier portion appears to be taken from an Irish Chronicle,
which was also used by Tigernach, and by the compiler of the Annals of Ulster.
During its first century it contains scarcely anything relating to Britain, the
earliest direct concurrence with English history is relative to the mission of
Augustine. Its notices throughout, though brief, are valusble. The annals
were probably written at St. Davids, by Blegewryd, Archdeacon of Llandaff,
the most learned man in his day in all Cymru.


21. FRE Wonxs or GigALDUS CaAwmsBnENSIS. Vols. L, II., IIL,, and IV.
Edited by J. S. Baewxn, M.A., Professor of English Literature, King's
College, London. — Vols. V., VI.,and VII. Edited by the Rev. JawEs
F. Diwocx, M.A., Rector of Barnburgh, Yorkshire. 1861-1877.


These volumes contain the historical works of Gerald du Barry, who lived
in the reigns of Henry IL, Richard L, and John, and attempted to re-establish
the independence of Wales by restoring the see of St. Davids to its ancient
primacy. His works are of a very miscellaneous nature, both in prose and
verse, and are remarkable chiefly for the racy and original anecdotes which
they contain relating to contemporaries. He is the only Welsh writer of any
importance who has contributed so much to the medismval literature of this
country, or assumed, in consequence of his nationality, so free and independent
atone. His frequent travels in Italy, in France, in Irelahd, and in Wales, gave
him opportunities for observation which did not generally fallto thelot of medimval
writers in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and of these observations Giraldus
has made due use. Only extracts from these treatises have been printed before,
and almost all of them are taken from unique manuscripts.

The Topographia Hibernica (in Vol. V.) is the result of Giraldus? two visits to
Ireland. The first in the year 1188, the second in 1185-6, when he accompanied
Prince John into that country. Curious as this treatise is, Mr. Dimock is of
opinion that it ought not to be accepted as sober truthful history, for Giraldus
himself states that truth was not his main object, and that he compiled the work
for the purpose of sounding the praises of; Henry the Second. Elsewhere, how-
ever, he declares that he had stated nothing in the Topographia of the truth of
which he was not well assured, either by his own eyesight or by the testimony,
with all diligence elicited, of the most trustworthy and authentic men in the
country ; that though he did not put just the same full faith in their reports as
in what he had himself seen, yet, as they only related what they had themselves
seen, he could not but believe such credible witnesses. À very interesting pcrtion
of this treatise is devoted to the animals of Ireland. It shows that he was a
accurate and acute observer, and his descriptions are given in & way that a
scientific naturalist of the present day could hardly improve upon. The Expug-
natio Hibernica was written about the year 1188 and may be regarded rathor


coco a ETÀ pa


13


as & great epic than a sober relation of acts occurring in his own days. No
one can peruse it without coming to the conclusion that it is rather a poetical
fiction than a prosaic truthful history.

Vol. VI. eontains the Itinerarium Kambrim et Descriptio Kambris: and
Vol. VII. the lives of S. Remigius and S. Hugh.


22. LgTTERS AND PAPERS ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE WARS OF THE lÍÉÓNGLISH
IN FRANCE DURING THE REr:GN or HENRY THE SixTH, KiNcG or ENa-
LAND. Vol. I. and Vol. II. (in Two Parts). Edited by the Rev. Joseeu
STEVvENSON, M.A., of University College, Durham, and Vicar of Leighton
Buzzard. 1861-1864.


'The letters and papers contained in these volumes are derived chiefly from
originals or contemporary copies extant in the Bibliothóque Impériale, and tho
Depót des Archives, in Paris. They illustrate the line of policy adopted by
John Duke of Bedford and his successors during their government of Normandy,
and such other provinces of France as had been acquired by Henry V. Wo
may here trace, step by step, the gradual declension of the English power, until
we are prepared to read of its final overthrow.


23. TuHE AwGLOo-SAxoN CHRONICLE, ACCORDING TO THE SEVERAL ORIGINAL
AvTHORITIES. Vol. l., Original Texts. Vol. IL, Translation. .Edited
and translated by BEN3AMIN TnHoRPE, Esq. Member of the Royal
Academy of Sciences at Munich, and of the Society of Netherlandish
Literature at Leyden. 1861.


This Chronicle, extending from the earliest history of Britain to the year

1154, is justly the boast of England ; for no other nation can produce any history,

written in its own vernacular, at all approaching it, either in antiquity, truthful-

ness, or extent, the historical books of the Bible alone excepted. "There are at

present six independent manuscripts of the Saxon Chronicle, ending in different

years, and written in different parts of the country. In this edition, the text

of each manuscript is printed in columns on the same page, so that the student

may see at a glance the varions changes which occur in orthography, whether
arising from locality or age.

24. LreTTERS AND PAPERS ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE REIGNS Or RicHAnp III.

AND Hewny VII. Vols. I. and II. — Edited by JAMES GarnpNEn, Esq.

1861-1863.


The Papers are derived from MSS. in the Public Record Office, the British
Museum, and other repositories. 'The period to which they refer is unusually
destitute of chronicles and other sources of historical information, so that the
light obtained from these documents is of special importance. "The principal
contents of the volumes are some diplomatic Papers of Richard III. ; correspon-
dence between Henry VII. and Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain; documents
relating to Edmund de la Pole, Earl of Suffolk ; and a portion of the corre-
spondence of James IV. of Scotland.


25. LETTERS OF BisHoP GRossETESTE, illustrative of the Social Condition
of his Time. Edited by HeNnx Ricnagps Luanp, M.A., Fellow and
Assistant Tutor of Trinity College, Cambridge. 1861.

The Letters of Robert Grosseteste (131 in number) are here collected from various
sources, and a large portion of them is printed for the first time. "They range in
date from about 1210 to 1253, and relate to various matters connected not only
with the political history of England during the reign of Henry IIL, but with
its ecclesiastical condition.  'They refer especially to the diocese of Lincoln, of
which Grosseteste was bishop. .


26. DEsORIPTIVE CATALOGUE OF MANUSCRIPTS RELATING TO THE HiQisTORY
or GnaEAT BhRrTAIN AND IRELAND. Vol. lI.(in Two Parts); Anterior
to the Norman Invasion. Vol. II.; 1066-1200. "Vol. III.; 1200-1327.
By Sir Tuovas Durrus Hangpr, D.C.L., Deputy Keeper of the Public
Records. 1862-1871.


The object of this work is to publish notices of all known sources of British
history, both printed and unprinted, in one continued sequence. "The materials,
when historical (as distinguished from biographical), are arranged under the
year in which the-latest eventis recorded in the chronicle or history, and not


*


16


under the period in which its author, real or supposed, flourished. Biographies
are enumerated under the year in which the person commemorated died, and not
under the year in which the life was written. This arrangement has two
advantages ; the materials for any given period may be seen at a glance; and
if the reader knows the time when an author wrote, and the number of years
that had elapsed between the date of the events and the time the writer flourished,
he will generally be enabled to form a fair estimate of the comparative value of
the narrative itself. A brief analysis of each work has been added when deserving
it, in which the original portions are distinguished from those which are mere
compilations. "When possible, the sources are indicated from which such com-
pilations have been derived. A biographical sketch of the author of each piece
has been added, and a brief notice has also been given of such British authors as
have written on historical subjects.


21. RoyAL AND OTHER HisroRiCAL LETTERS ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE REIGN
or HrewNnv III. Vol. I, 1216-1235. Vol. II. 1236-1272. Selected
and edited by the Rev. W. W. Smmrzxy, D.D., Regius Professor in
Ecclesiastical History, and Canon of Christ Church, Oxford. 1862-


1866.

The letters contained in these volumes are derived chiefly from the ancient
correspondence formerly in the Tower of London, and now in the Public Record
Office. They illustrate the political history of England during the growth of
its liberties, and throw considerable light upon the personal history of Simon de
Montfort. The affairs of France form the subject of many of them, especially
in regard to the province of Gascouy. "The entire collection consists of nearly
700 documents, the greater portion of which is printed for the first time.


28. CunoNicA MoNasTERII S. ÁALBANI.—1. THoM.& WALSINGHAM HisTORIA
ANGLICANA ; Vol. L, 1272-1881: Vol. IL, 1381-1422. 2. WirrELwr.
RisHANGER CHRONICA ET ANNALES, 1259-1807. 8. JoHANNIS Dk
TaokrLowEe rT HrNRIOGI DE DBLANEFORDE CHRONICA ET ANNALES,
12959-1296 ; 1307—1324 ; 1892-1406. 4. GxsrA ABBATUM MoNAsTERII
S. ALBANI, A 'TluHoMA WALSINGHAM, REGNANTE RicaAgpo SECUNDO,
EJUSDEM ECccLESLE PRZECENTORE, COMPILATA ; Vol. IL, 798-1290 :
Vol. II., 1290-1349 : Vol. IIL., 1349-1411. 5. JOHANNIS AMUNDESHAM,
MoNAcui MoNASTERH S. ALBANI, UT VIDETUR, ÁNNALES; Vols. I.
and II. 6. REGISTRA QUORUNDAM ÁBBATUM MoNasTrERH S. ALBANI,
QUI SJECULO XV0 FLORUERE; Vol. Il. REaisrTRUM AÁBBATLE JOHANNIS
WHETHAMSTEDE, ABBATIS MoNAsTERH SANCTI ALBANI ITERUM
SUSCEPT.E; RoBERTO BLAKENEY, CAPELLANO, QUONDAM ADSCRIPTUM :
Vol. IL, REeaisTRA JOHANNIS WHETHAMSTEDE, WILLELMI ÁLBON, ET
WiLLELMI WALINGFORDE, ÁBBATUM MONASTERMI SANCTI ÁLBANI, CUM
APPENDICE, CONTINENTE QUASDAM EPISTOLAS, A JOHANNE WHETHAM-
STEDE CoNscRIPTAS. 7. YPoDpiGMA NEUSTRLE, A THOMA WALSINGHAM,
QuoNbDAM MowacHuo MoNasrERHU S. ALBANI, CONSCRIPTUM. Edited
by HENRY Tnowas RiLEY, Esq., M.A., Cambridge and Oxford ; and
of the Inner Temple, Barrister-at-Law. 1863-1876.

In the first two volumes is a History of England, from the death of
Henry III. to the death of Henry V., by Thomas Walsingham, Precentor
of St. Albans, from MS. VII. in the Arundel Collection in the Coll
of Arms, London, a manuscript of the fifteenth century, collated with MS.
13 E. IX. in the King's Library in the British Museum, and MS. VIL in the
Parker Collection of Manuscripts at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge.

In the third volume is a Chronicle of English History, attributed to William
Rishanger, who lived in the reign of Edward IL, from the Cotton. MS.
Faustina B. IX. in the British Museum, collated with MS. 14 C. VII.
(fols. 219-231) in the King's Library, British Museum, and the Cotton MS.
Claudius E. IIL, fols. 306—331: an account of transactions attending the
award of the kingdom of Scotland to John Balliol, 1291-1292, from MS.
Cotton. Claudius D. VI. also attributed to William Rishanger, but on
no sufücient ground: a short Chronicle of English History, 1292 to 1300,


Tot — JM — —— —— —


17


by an unknown hand, from MS. Cotton. Claudius D. VI. : a short Chronicle,
Willelmi Rishanger Gesta Edwardi Primi, Regis Anglis, from MS. 14 C. I.
in the Royal Library, and MS. Cotton. Claudius D. VI, with Annales Regum
Anglie, probably by the same hand: and fragments of three Chronicles of
Evglish History, 1285 to 1307. |

In the fourth volume is a Chronicle of English History, 1959 to 1296,
from MS. Cotton. Claudius D. VI.: Annals of Edward 1I., 1307 to 1328, by
John de Trokelowe, à monk of St. Albans, and a continuation of 'Trokelowe's -
Annals, 1323, 1324, by Henry de Blaneforde, both from MS. Cotton. Claudius
D. VI.: a full Chronicle of English History, 1392 to 1406, from MS. VII. in
the Library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge; and an account of tho
Benefactors of St. Albans, written in the early part of the fifteenth century,
from MS. VI. in the same Librery.

The fifth, sixth, and seventh volumes contain a history of the Abbots of
St. Albans, 793 to 1411, mainly compiled by 'Thomas Walsingham, from
MS. Cotton. Claudius E. IV., in the British Museum : with a Con-
tinuation, from the closing pages of Parker MS. VII., in the Library of
Corpus Christi College, Cambridge.

The eighth and ninth volumes, in continuation of the Annals, contain a
Chronicle, probably by John Amundesham, a monk of St. Albans.

The tenth and eleventh volumes relate especially to the acts and proceedings
of Abbots Whethamstede, Albon, and Wallingford, and may be considered as a
memorial of the chief historical and domestic events during those periods.

The twelfth volume contains à compendious History of England to tho reign
of Henry V.,and of Normandy in early times, also by Thomas Walsingham,
and dedicated to Henry V. "The compiler has often substituted other authorities
in place of those consulted in the preparation of his larger work.


29. CHnRoNICON ABBATLE EÉvESHAMENSIS, ÁUCTORIBUS DouiNICO PRIORE


EvEsHAMIZE ET THOMA DE MARLEBERGE ABBATE, A FUNDATIONE AD
ANNUM 1218, UNA CUM CONTINUATIONE AD ÁNNUM 1418. Edited by E
the Rev. W. D. MacnAx, M.A., Bodleian Library, Oxford. 18638.


The Chronicle of Evesham illustrates the history of that important monastery
from its foundation by Egwin, about 690, to the.year 1418. Its chief feature 1s . 3
'an autobiography, which makes us acquainted with the inner daily life of a
great abbey, such as but rarely has been recorded. Interspersed are many
notices of general, personal, and local history which will be read with much
interest. This work exists in a single MS., and is for the first time printed.


30. RicARDI DE CIRENCESTRIA SPECULUM HisTORIALE DE (iksrIS REGUM


AwNcGLLE. Vol. L, 447-871. Vol. IL, 872-1066. Edited by Jonw E. B.
Maxon, M.A., Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge. 1863-1869.


The compiler, Richard of Cirencester, was a monk of Westminster, 1355-
1400. In 1891 he obtamed a licence to make a pilgrimage to Rome. His
history, in four books, extends from 447 to 1066. He announces his intention
of continuing it, but there is no evidence that he completed any more  'This
chronicle gives many charters in favour of Westminster Abbey, and a very full
account of the lives and miracles of the saints, especially of Edward the Con-
fessor, whose reign occupies the fourth book. A treatise on the Coronation, by
William of Sudbury, a monk of Westminster, fills book iii. c.3. It was oh this
author that C. J. Bertram fathered his forgery, De Situ Brittanie, in 1747.


31. Yxan Booxs or rHE REiGN or EpwARD THE FiRsT. Years 20-2],


21-92, 30-31, and 382-383. Edited and translated by ArrmED Jonuw
Honwoop, Esq., of the Middle Temple, Barrister-at-Law. 1868-1878.


'The volumes known as the '* Year Books" contain reports in Norman-French
of cases argued and decided in the Courts of Common Law. "They may be con-
sidered to a great extent as the ** lex non scripta ? of England, and have been held
in the highest veneration by tho uncient sages of the law, and were received by
them as the repositories of the first recorded judgments and dicta of the great
legal luminaries of past ages. . They are also worthy of the attention of the
general reader on account of the historical informatior and the notices of public

: and private persons which they contain, as well as the light which they throw.
on ancient manners and customs.


H 671. UU


18


32. NARRATIVES OF THE EXPULSION OF THE ENGLISH FROM NORMANDY,
1449-1450.—Robertus Blondelli de Reductione Normannie: Le Re-
couvrement de Normendie, par Berry, Hérault du Roy: Conferences
between the Ambassadors of France and England. Edited, from MSS.
in the Imperial Library at Paris, by the Rev. Josken STEvENSON,
M.A., of University College, Durham. 1868.


This volume contains the narrative of an eye-witness who details with con-
siderable power and minuteness the circumstances which attended the final ex-
pulsion of the English from Normandy inthe year 1450. The history commences
with the infringement of the truce by the capture of Fougéres, and ends with
the battle of Formigny and the embarkation of the Duke of Somerset. The
whole period embraced is less than two years.


39. HisroniA kr CaARTULARIUM MoNAsTERII S. PETRI GLovucEsTRLE. Vols.
L,IL, and III. .Edited by W. H. Hanr, Esq., F.S.A., Membre corre-
spondant de la Société des Antiquaires de Normandie. 1863-1867.


This work consists of two parts, the History and the Cartulary of the Monastery
of St. Peter, Gloucester. The history furnishes an account of the monastery
from its foundation, in the year 681, to the early part of the reign of Richard II.,
together with a calendar of donations and benefactions. It treats principally of
the affairs of the monastery, but occasionally matters of general history are
introduced. Its authorship has generally been assigned to Walter Froucester,
the twentieth abbot, but without any foundation.


.94. ALEXANDRI NECKAM pE NaruRIis RERUM LiBRI DUO ; with NECKAM'S


Pozw, DE Lauprsus Drviwa SaPreNTLE. — Edited by 'THoMAs Wnianr,
Esq.,M.A. 1863.


Neckam was à man who devoted himself to science, such as it was in the
twelfth century. Inthe * De Naturis Rerum " are to be found what may be
called the rudiments of many sciences mixed up with much error and ignorance.
Neckam was not thought infallible, even by his contemporaries, for Roger Bacon
remarks of him, * this Alexander in many things wrote what was true and useful ;
** but he neither can nor ought by just title to be reckoned among authorities."
Neckam, however, had sufficient independence of thought to differ from some
of the schoolmen who in his time considered themselves the only judges of litera-
ture, He had his own views in morals, and in giving us a glimpse of them, as
well as of his other opinions, he throws much light upon the manners, customs,
and general tone of thought prevalent in the twelfth century. "The poem entitled
* De Laudibus Divine Sapientie? appears to be a metrical paraphrase or
abridgment of the ' De Naturis Rerum." Jt is written in the elegiac metre ;
and though there are many lines which violate classical rules, it is, as & whole
above the ordinary standard of medismval Latin.


95. LEECHDOMS, WORTCUNNING, AND STAnCRAFT OF EARLY ENGLAND ; being
& Collection of Documents illustrating the History of Science in this
Country before the Norman Conquest. Vols. I, YL, and III. Collected
and edited by the Rev. T. Oswanp CookAxwE, M.A., of St. John's
College, Cambridge. 1864—1866.

This work illustrates not only the history of science, but the history of super-
&tition. In addition to the information bearing directly upon the medical skill
and medical faith of the times, there are many passages which incidentally throw
light upon the general mode of life and ordinary diet. The volumes are interesting
not only in their scientific, but also in their social aspect. The manuscripts from
which they have been printed are valuable to the Anglo-Saxon scholar for the
illustrations they afford of Anglo-Saxon orthography.


36. ÀNNALES MowasTIOL — Vol. L.:—Annales de Margan, 1066-1232;
Annales de Theokesberia, 1066-1263 ; Annales de Burton, 1004—1268.
Vol. II. :—Annales Monasterii de Wintonia, 019-1277; Annales Mo-
masterii de Waverleia, 1-1291. Vol. III.:—Annales Prioratus de
Dunsteplia, 1-1297 ; Annales Monasterii de Bermundeseia, 1042.


E 19


1482. "Vol. IV. :—Annales Monasterii de Oseneia, 1016-1347 ; Chroni-
con vulgo dictum Chronicon Thoms Wykes, 1066-1289 ; Annales
Prioratus de Wigornia, 1-1877. Vol. V. :—l1ndexand Glossary. Edited
by HENRY RicHanRps Luanp, M.A., Fellow and Assistant 'lutor of
Trinity College, and Registravy of the University, Cambridge. 1864-


1869.

The present collection of Monastic Annals embraces all the more important
chronicles compiled in religious houses in England during the thirteenth
century. These distinct works are ten in number. The extreme period
which they embrace ranges from the year 1 to 1432, although they refer more
especially to the reigns of John, Henry III., and Edward I. Some of these narra-
tives have already appeared in print, but others are printed forthe first time.


37. MaaNa ViTA S. HucoNis EPrscoper LiNconNiENSIS. From Manuscripts
in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, and the Imperial Library, Paris. Edited
by ihe Rev. JauES F. Drxocx, M.A., Rector of Barnburgh, Yorkshire.
1864.

This work contains a number of very curious and interesting incidents, and
being the work of a contemporary, is very valuable, not only as a truthful
biography of a celebrated ecclesiastic, but as the work of a man, who, from per-
sonal knowledge, gives notices of passing events, as well as of individuals who
were then taking active part in public affairs. The author, in all probability,
was Adam Abbot of Evesham. He was domestic chaplain and private confessor
of Bishop Hugh, and in these capacities was admitted to the closest intimacy.
Bishop Hugh was Prior of Witham for 11 years before he became Bishop of
Lincoln. His consecration took place on the 21st September 1186 ; he died on
the 16th of November 1200 ; and was canonized in 1220.


38. CHRoNICLES AND MEeMORIALS OF THE REIGN or RicHARD THE FinsT.
Vol. I.:—IrrNERARIUM PrEeREGRINORUM xT GESTA RHRxcGis RicaARDI.
Vol. II.:—ErisroLzx CANTUARIENSES ; the Letters of the Prior and
Convent of Christ Church, Canterbury; 1187 to 1199. Edited by
WiLLiAM STUBBs, M.A., Vicar of Navestock, Essex, and Lambeth


Librarian. 1864-1865.

The authorship of the Chronicle in Vol. L, hitherto ascribed to Geoffrey
Vinesauf, is now more correctly ascribed to Richard, Canon of the Holy Trinity
of London. "The narrative extends from 1187 to 1199; but its chief interest
consists in the minute and authentic narrative which it furnishes of the exploits
of Richard I., from his departure from England in December 1189 to his death
in 1199. "The author states in his prologue that he was an eye-witness of much
that he records ; and various incidental circumstances which occur in the course


of the narrative confirm this assertion.
'lThe letters in Vol. IL, written between 1187 and 1199, are of value as


furnishing authentic materials for the history of the ecclesiastical condition of
England during the reign of Richard I. They had their origin in a dispute which
arose from the attempts of Baldwin and Hubert, archbishops of Canterbury, to
found a college of secular canons, a project which gave great umbrage to the
monks of Canterbury, who saw in it a design to suppláut them in their function
of metropolitan chapter. 'These letters are printed, for the first time, from a MS.
belonging to the archiepiscopal library at Lambeth.


' 89. REcUEIL DES CRONIQUES ET ANCHIENNES ÍSTORIES DE LA GRANT Bnr-
TAIGNE A PRESENT NOMME ENGLETERRE, par JEHAN DE WaAunIN. Vol. I.
Albina to 688. Vol. IT., 1399-1422. Edited by WinL1AM Hanpr, Esq.,


F.S.A. 1864-1868.


40. A CorLECTION OF THE ÜHRONICLES AND ANCIENT HisTORIES OF GREAT
BRtTAIN, NOW CALLED ENGLAND, by JouN pE WavmN.  Albina to 688.
(Translation of the preceding Vol. L) Edited and translated y
WiLLIAM HanDyY, Esq., F.S.ÀA. 1864.

This curious chronicle extends from the fabulous period of history down to tho
return of Edward IV. to England in the year 1471, after the second deposition of


H 671. Xx


20


Henry VI. The manuscript from which the text of the work is taken is pre-
served in the Imperial Library at Paris, and is believed to be the only complete
and nearly contemporary copy in existence. The work, as originally bound,
was comprised in six volumes, since rebound in morocco in 12 volumes, folio
maximo, vellum, and is illustrated with exquisite miniatures, vignettes, and initial
letters. It was written towards the end of the fifteenth century, having been
expressly executed for Louis de Bruges, Seigneur de la Gruthuyse and Earl of
Winchester, from whose cabinet it passed into the library of Louis XII. at Blois.


41. PonvcuHnoNICON RaANULPHI HicGbDEN, with Trevisa's Translation. Vols. I.
and II. Edited by CnmunoninL BaniNGTON, B.D., Senior Fellow of
St. John's College, Cambridge. Vols. IIL., IV., V., and VI. Edited by
ihe Rev. Josee?PH RAwsoN Luws5r, B.D., Viear of St. Edward's, Fellow
of St. Catharine's College, and late Fellow of Magdalene College, Cam-
bridge. 1865-1876.


: This is one of the many medieval chronicles which assume the character of &
history of the world. 1t begins witb the creation, and is brought down to the .
author's own time, the reign of Edward IIL — Prefixed to the historical portion, is
a chapter devoted to geography, in which. is given a description of every known
land. 'l'o say that the Polychronicon was written in the fourteenth century is to
say that it is not free from inaccuracies. It has, however, a value apart from ite
inirinsic merits. It enables us to form a very fair estimate of the knowledge of
history and geography which well-informed readers of the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries possessed, for it was then the standard work on general history.

The two English translations, which are printed with the original Latin, afford
interesting illustrations of the gradual change of our language, for one was made
in the fourteenth century, the other in the fifteenth. "The differences between
'Trevisa's version and that of the unknown writer are often considerable.


49. Lg LiveERE p Reis pk BnRivTTANIE. E LE LivkERE pk RErms pk
ENcLETERE. Edited by Jomw GrovEn, M.A., Vicar of Brading, Isle of
Wight, formerly Librarian of Trinity College, Cambridge. 18668.


These two treatises, though they cannot rank as independent narratives, are
nevertheless valuable as careful abstracts of previous historians, especially ** Le
Livere de Reis de Engletere." Some various readings are given which are
interesting to the philologist as instances of semi-Saxonized French.

It is supposed that Peter of Ickham must have been the author, but no certain
conclusion on that point has been arrived at.


48. CugoNicCA MoNAsTERU DE MELSA, AB ÁNNO 1150 USQUE AD ÁNNUM
1406. Vols. L, IL, and III. Edited by EpwARD AucusTus Bonp, Esq.,
Assistant Keeper of the Manuscripts, and Egerton Librarian, British
Museum. 1866-1868.


The Abbey of Meaux was a Cistercian house, and the work of its abbot is both
curious and valuable. It is a faithful and often minute record of the establishment
of a religious community, of its progress in forming an ample revenue, of its
Struggles to maintain its acquisitions, and of its relations to the governing
institations of the country. In addition to.the private affeirs of the monastery,
some light is thrown upon the public events of the time, which are however kept
distinct, and appear at the end of the history of each abbot's administration. 'The
text has been printed from what is said to be the autograph of the original
compiler, Thomas de Burton, the nineteenth abbot.


44. MATTHJEI PARISIENSIS HISTORIA ÁNGLORUM, SIVE, UT VULGO DICITUR,
HisroniA MiwomR. Vols, L, IL, and III. 1067-1268. Edited by Sir
FnaEpERIO MappEN, K.H., Keeper of the Department of Manuscripts,
British Museum, 1866-1869.


The exact date at which this work was written is, according to the chronicler
| 1250. "The history is of considerable value as an illustration of the period during
which the author lived, and contains a good summary of the events which followed

the Conquest. This minor chronicle 1s, however, based on another work (also


—


Lol o m etat


2]


-written by Matthew. Paris) giving fuller details, which has been called the
* Historia Major." "The chronicle here published, nevertheless, gives some
information not to be found in the greater history.


40. Lise&. MoNaAsTERH DE lHpA: A CHRONICLE AND CHARTULARY OF
HprE AsBE, WiNOHESTER,455-1028. Edited, from a Manuscriptin the
Library of the Earl of Macclesfield, by Enwanp EpwaAnRps, Esq. 1866.


The *Book of Hyde" is a compilation from much earlier sources which are
usually indicated with considerable care and precision. In many cases, however,
the Hyde chronicler appears to correct, to qualify, or to amplify—veither from
tradition or from sources of information not now discoverable—the statements,
which, in substance, he adopts. He also mentions, and frequently quotes from
writers whose works are either entirely lost or at present known only by fragments.

There i8 to be found, in the ** Book of Hyde," much information relating to the
reign of King Alfred which is not known to exist elsewhere. The volume
contains some curious specimens of Anglo-Saxon and Medicval English.


46. CuRoNicoN ScoroguM : A CHRONICLE Or InmisH ArraArngs, from (he
EaARLriEST TiMES to 1135 ; with a SuPPLEMENT, containing the Events
from 1141to 1150 — Edited, with a "Translation, by Wit. 11aM MAUNSELL
HrNNkEssY, Esq., M.R.I.A. 1866. '

There is, in this volume, a legendary account of the peopling of Ireland and of
the adventures which befell the various heroes who are said to have been con-
nected with Irish history. "The details are, however, very meagre both for this
period and for the time when history becomes more authentic. "The plan adopted
in the chronicle gives the appearance of an accuracy to which the earlier portions
of the work cannot have any claim. "The succession of events is marked, year by
year, from A.M. 1599 to A.D. 1150. "The principal events narrated in the later
portion of the work are,the invasions of foreigners, and the wars of the Irish
among themselves. 'The text has been printed from a M8. preserved in the
library of Trinity College, Dublin, written partly in Latin, partly in Irish.


47. THE CHnRoNICLE or PreRRE pE& LaNGTOFT, IN FRENCH VERSE, FROX
THE EARLIEST PERIOD TO THE DreaArH or Epwanp I. Vols. I. and II.


Edited by 'THowAs Wnicnr, Esq., M.A. 1866-1868.

It is probable that Pierre de Langtoft was a canon of Bridlington, in Yorkshire,
and that he lived in the reign of Edward I., and during a portion of the reign of
Edward II. This chronicle is divided into three parts; in the first is an
abridgment of Geoffrey of Monmouth's ** Historia Britonum," in the second, a
history of the Anglo-Saxon and Norman kings, down to the death of Henry III.,
and in the third a history of the reign of Edward I. "The prineipalobject of the
work was apparently to show the justice of Edward's Scottish wars. 'Thoe
language is singularly corrupt, and a curious specimen of the French of Yorkshire.


48, THE WAR or rHE GAEDHIL WITH THE GAILL, or, Tur INvASIONS or
IngELAND BY THE DaNES AND OTHER NOoRnSEMEN. Edited, with a
Translation, by JauEs HxeNTHORN Topp, D.D., Senior Fellow of
'Trinity College, and Regius Professor of Hebrew in the University,


Dublin. 1867.

The work in its present form, in the editor's opinion, isa comparatively modern
version of an undoubtedly ancient original. Chat it was compiled from contem-
porary materials has been proved by curious incidentalevidenee. It is stated in
the account given of the battle of Clontarf that the full tide in Dublin Bay on the
day of the battle (23 April 1014) coincided with sunrise; and that the returning
tide in the evening aided considerably in the defeat of the Danes. , The fact has
been verified by astronomical calculations, and the inference is that the author of
the chronicle, if not himselfan eye-witness, must have derived his information
from those who were eye-witnesses. 'The contents of the work are sufficiently
described in its title. 'The story is told after the manner of the Scandinavian
Sagas, with poems and fragments of poems introduced into the prose narrative.


49. GEesrA REcrs HENRIcI SECUNDI BENEDIOTI ABBATIS. "THE CHRONICLE
or THE REiGNs or HaNnY Il. AND. Rroganp IL, 1169-1192; known
S xx2


22


under the name of BENEDICT or PeTERBOROUGH. Vols. I. and II.
Edited by Wirnriaw STunBs, M.A., Regius Professor of Modern His-
tory, Oxford, and Lambeth Librarian. 1867.

This chronicle of the reignsof Henry II. and Richard LI., known commonly


under the name of Benedict of Peterborough, is one of the best existing speci-
mens of a class of historical compositions of the first importance to the student.


50. MUNIMENTA ÁCADEMICA, On, DOCUMENTS ILLUSTRATIVE OF ÀÁCADEMICAL


LirE AND STrupiES AT Oxronp (in Two Parts). Edited by the Rev.
HENRY ANwsrEY, M.A., Vicar of St. Wendron, Cornwall, and lately
Vice-Principal of St. Mary Hall, Oxford. 1868.


This work will supply materials for a History of Academical Life and Studies
in the University of Oxford during the 13th, 14th, and 15th centuries.


51. CrrnoxicA MaairsrRI RoaoERI DE HouEpxNx, Vols. L, IL, III, and IV.


Edited by Wit LiAM STuBBs, M.A., Regius Professor of Modern History,
and Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. 1868-1871.


This work has long been justly celebrated, but not thoroughly understood until
Mr. Stubbs' edition. "The earlier portion, extending from 732 to 1148, appears
to be a copy of a compilation made in Northumbria about 1161, to which
Hoveden added little. From 1148 to 1169—a very valuable portion of this
work—the matter is derived from another source, to which Hoveden appears to
have supplied little, and not always judicionsly. From 1170 to 1192 is the
portion which corresponds with the Chronicle known under the name of
Benedict of Peterborough (see No. 49) ; but it is not a copy, being sometimes
an abridgment, at others a paraphrase; occasionally the two works entirely
agree; showing that both writers had access to the same materials, but deait
with them differently. From 1192 to 1201 may be said to be wholly Hoveden's,
work : it is extremely valuable, and an authority of the first importance. -


$62. WiLLELMI MarMrEsBIRIENSIS MoNACHI DE GEsTIS PONTIFICUM ANGLO-


nUM LiBni QuiNQue. — Edited, from William of Malmesbury's Auto-
graph MS., by N. E. S. A. HawrLTON, Esq. of the Department of
Manuscripts, British Museum. 1870.


William of Malmesbury's ** Gesta Pontificum " is the principal foundation of
English Eeclesiastical Biography, down to the year 1129. 'The manuscript
which has been followed in this Edition is supposed by Mr. Hamilton to be the
author's autograph, containing his latest additions and amendments.


63. Hisromio ANp MuNiCIPAL DOCUMENTS OF IRELAND, FROM THE ÁRCHIVES


oF THE CiTy or DunLriN, &c, 1172-1820. Edited by Jonuw T. G1LBERT,
Esq., F.S.A., Secretary of the Public Record Office of Ireland. 1870.


. A collection of original documents, elucidating mainly the history and condition
of the municipal, middle, and trading classes under or in relation with the
rule of England in Ireland,—a subject hitherto in almost total obscurity.
Extending over the first hundred and fifty years of the Anglo-Norman
settlement, the series includes cbarters, municipallaws and regulations, rolls of
names of citizens and members of merchant-guilds, lists of commodities with
their rutes, correspondence, illustrations of relations between ecclesiastics and
laity ; together with many documents exhibiting the state of Ireland during the
presence there of the Scots under Robert and Edward Bruce,


64. 'THE ANNALS OF LocH CÉ. A QCuHnoNICLE or InrsH AFFAIRS, FROM


1014 to 1590. Vols. I. and II. Edited, with a Translation, by
WiLLIAM MAUNSELL HENNESSY, Esq, M.R.LA. 1871.


The original of this chronicle has passed under various names. Tho title of
* Annals of Loch Có? was given to it by Professor O'Curry, on the ground that
it was transcribed for Brian Mac Dermot, an Irish chieftain, who resided on the
island in Loch Có, in the county of Roscommon. It adds much to the materials
for the civil and ecclesiastical history of Ireland ; and contains many curious
references to English and foreign affairs, not noticod in any other ehronicle.


MENU LER a n E a


23


65. MoNUMENTA JunrpiCA.  TuHk BrLAcKk Book or THE ÁDMIRALTY, WITH
APPENDICES. Vols. L, lI, IIL, and IV. Edited by Sim "TnAvERS


T wiss, Q.C., D.C.L. 1871-1876.


This book contains the ancient ordinances aud laws relating to the navy,
and was probably compiled for the use of the Lord High Admiral of England.
Selden calls it the * jewel of the Admiralty Itecords."  Prynne ascribes to the
Black Book the same authority in the Admiralty as the Black and Red Books
have in the Court of Exchequer, and most English writers on maritime law
recognize its importance.


06. MEMORIALS or THE REraN or HxwnY VI.:—OrriciAL CORRESPONDENCE
or TnuHowas BxkrNTON, SEORETARY TO HreNnY VI, AND BisHoP
or BaArH AND WzLLs. Edited, from a, MS. in the Archiepiscopal
Library at Lambeth, with an Appendix of Illustrative Documents, by the
Rev. GrogaE WirLiAMs, B.D., Vicar of Ringwood, late Fellow of King's

' College, Cambridge. Vols. I. and II. 1872.

These curious volumes are of à miscellaneous character, and were probably
compiled uuder the immediate direction of Bekynton before he had attained
to the Episcopate. "They contain many of the DBishop's ownletters, and several
written by him in the King's name; also letters to himself while Royal Secre-
tary, and others addressed to the King. "This work elucidates some points in
the history of the nation during the first half of the fifteenth century.


57. MaTrHnI PanmisieNsIS, MoNAcHI SaNOTI ÀÁLBANI CHRONICA MajJoma.
Vol. I. 'The Creation to A.D. 1066. Vol. II. A.D. 1067 to A.D. 1216.
Vol III. A.D. 1216 to A.D. 1289. "Vol. IV. A.D. 1240 to A.D. 1247.
Edited by -HgNRnx Ricnanps Luangp, D.D., Fellow of Trinity College,
Registrary of the University, and Vicar of Great St. Mary's, Cambridge.
1872-1877.

This work contains the * Chronica Majora" of Mattbew Paris, one of the
most valuable and frequently consulted of the ancient English Chronicles. 1t
is published from its commencement,for the first time. "l'he editions by Arch-
bishop Parker, and William Wats, severally begin at the Norman Conquest.


58. MEMORIALE FRATRIS WaLTERI DE CovENTRIA,— THE  HisTORICAL
CorrkorioNs or WALTER OF CovxeNTRY. Vols. l. and II. Edited, from
the MS. in. the Library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, by
WiLLIAM SrUBss, M.A., Regius Professor of Modern History, and Fellow
of Oriel College, Oxford. 1872-1873.

This work, now printed in full for the first time, has long been a desideratum
by Historical Scholars. "The first portion, however, is not of much importance,
being only a compilation from earlier writers. 'The part reloting to the first
quarter of the thirteenth century is the most valuable and interesting.


59. Tug ANcro-LamiN SarmiCAL Porers AND EPIGRAMMATISTS OF THE
TwrrrrH CEeNTURY. Vols. I. and II. Now first collected and edited
by 'THoMASs WnianT, Esq., M.A., Corresponding Member of the National
Institute of France (Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres). 1872.


'T'he Poems contained in these volumes have long been known and appreciated
as the best satires of the age in which their authors flourished, and were deservedly


popular during the 13th and 14th centuries.

60. MarERIALS FOR A Hisrony or THE REr:aN or HxNnzY VII. rRoM
oRIGINAL DocuMENTS PRESERVED IN THE PusBLic REcongD Orrick.
Vols. I. and II. Edited by the Rev. WirLLiAM CAMPBELL, M.AÀ., one
of Her Majesty's Inspectors of Schools. 1873-1877.


"These volumes are valuableas illustrating the acts and proceedings of Henry VII.
on ascending the throne, and shadow out the policy he afterwards adopted.


61.


62.


68.


64.


| 65.


66.


67.


68.


24


HisronrcAL PAPERS AND LETTERS FROM THE NomrnEsRnN REGISTERS.
Edited by JaaEs Rat1NE, M.A., Canon of York, and Secretary of the
Surtees Society. 1873. |


The documents in this volume illustrate, for the most part, the general history
of the north of England, particularly in its relation to Scotland.


RegarisTRUM PALATINUM DUNELMENSE. "Turk REGISTER OF RICHARD DE
KELLAwE, LoRD PaLATINE AND BisHoP or DungHaM; 1311-1316.
Vols. L, IL, IIL, and IV. Edited by Sir 'THowAs Durrus HaARDy,
D.C.L., Deputy Keeper of the Public Records. 1878-1878.


Bishop Kellawe's Register contains the proceedings of his prelacy, both lay
and ecclesiastical, and is the earliest IVegister of the Palatinate of Durham.


MrzMoRIALS OF SaiNT DuNSTAN ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY. Edited,
from various MSS., by Wiriiaw SrUnBS, M.A., Regius Professor of
Modern History, and Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. 1874.
This volume contains several lives of Archbishop Dunstan, one of the most
celebrated Primates of Canterbury. "They open various points of Historical


and Literary interest, without which our knowledge .of the period would be
more incomplete than it is at present.


CmRoN1coN AÁNGLIE, AB ÁNNO DowiNi 1328 usqUE AD ANNUM 1388,
AUCTORE MoNACHO QUODAM SANOTI ALBANI Edited by EpwARD
MauNDE TnuoMPsoN, Esq. Barrister-at-Law, and Assistant-Keeper of
the Manuscripts in the British Museum. 1874.


This chronicle gives a circumstantial history of the close of the reign of
Edward III. which has hitherto been considered lost. :


TuóMas SAGA EnkrIBsYskuPS. À LrrE or AncuBisHOP TuoMAs BECKET,
IN IcEkLANDIC. Vol. I. Edited, with English '"Lranslation, Notes, and
Glossary, by M. Einfkg MagNÜÓssoN, Sub-Librarian of the University
Library, Cambridge. 1876.


This work is derived from the Life of Becket written by Benedict of Peter-
borough, and apparently supplies the missing portions in Benedict's biography.


RapuLPHni DE CoGGESHALL CHRONICON AÁNGLICANUM. Edited by the
Rev. JosePH STEvENSON, M.A. 1876.
This volume contains the * Chronicon Anglicanum," by Ralph of Coggeshall,
the * Libellus de Expugnatione 'Terre Sancte per Saladinum," usually
ascribed to the same author, and other pieces of nn interesting character.


MATERIALS FOR THE Hiüsronx or THoMAs BECKET, ÁRCHBISHOP OF
CANTERBURY. Vols.l,IL, and III. Edited by the Rev. JauEs CnA1GIE
RoBxrRTSON, M.À., Canon of Canterbury. 1875-1877.


This Publication will comprise all contemporary materials for the history of
Archbishop Thomas Becket. 'The first volume contains the life of that cele-
brated man, and the miracles after his death, by William, a monk of Canter-
bury. The second, the life by Benedict of Peterborough ; John of Salisbury ;
Alan of Tewkesbury; and Edward Grim. The third, the life by William
Fitzstephen; and Herbert of Bosham.


RapuLrF: px Dickero Dkcawi LuwpeNiENSIS OPERA HisronRiCcA. — Tux
HisrogicAL Wonks or Masrreg RareH pEÉ Dickro, DEAN or LoNpox.
Vols. L. and II. Edited, from the Original Manuscripts, by WitL11AM
STUBBS, M.A., Regius Professor of Modern History, and Fellow of
Oriel College, Oxford. 1876. S

The Historical Works of Ralph de Diceto are some of the most valuable


materials for British History. The Abbreviationes Chronicorum extend from
the Creation to 1147, and the Ymagines Historiarum to 1201.


—— ARS


i4
NM


*


69. Roin or rHE PnockEDINGS OY THE KiNG's CouNCIL IN IRELAND, FOR
A PoRTrIoN OF THE l6TH YEAR oF THE RxiGN or. RicHanD II. 1392-
98, Edited by the Rev. JawEes GRAvEs, A.B. 1877.
The Roll printed in this volume throws considerable light on the History of
Ireland at a period when little is known of it, and seems to be the only document
of the kind extant. 27
70. HENRICGI DE BRacTON DE LEaGiBUS ET CONSUETUDINIBUS AÀNGLLE.
Lisgr QuiNQuE iN Vanios TRACTATUS DisTrrNCTI. Ap DIvERSORUM ET
VETUSTISSIMORUM ConicuM CoLLATIONEM 'Tvris VurnGaTI. — Vols. I.
and II. — Edited by S1i& TRAvERsS Twiss, Q.C., D.C.L. 1878-1879.


This is a. new edition of Bracton's celebrated work, collated with MSS. in
the British Museum ; the Libraries of Lincoln's Inn, the Middle Temple, and
Gray's Inn ; the Bodleian Library, Oxford ; the Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris ;
&ec. &c.


— — MM M aa €—Ó——À ic


In the Press.


CmHRONICLE or RosERT or BnuNNE. Edited by FREDERICK JAMES FUun-
NIVALL, Esq., M.A., of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, Barrister-at-Law.
ConPus HisrogrcuM EnpoRACENSE. CnumnoNICA PoxTIFICUM EcCrLEsug EnoRACI
AUCTORE THoxA STruBs5s DoMiNICANO ; and other Documents relating to
the Primacy of York. Edited by Jawrs RAiwE, M.A., Canon of York,
and Secretary of the Surtees Society. o.

REGISTER OF MALMESBURY ABBEY: PRESERVED IN THE PuBLIC RECORD .
Orrice. — Edited by J. S. DbREWzn, M.A., Preacher at the Rolls,
and Rector of Toppesfield.

Tur MrETRICAL CHRONICLE OF ROBERT OF GLOUCESTER. Edited by WiLL1AM

. Arpis Wnmianr, Esq.,. M.A.

A. Corrxori0N or SAcAS AND OTHER HisroRiCAL DocuMENTS relating to the

... Rettlements and Descents of the Northmen on the British Isles. Edited
by Sir Geoncz WrssEe Dasrwr, D.C.L, Oxon. sand M. GupBnAND
ViGFUSSON, M.A.

TuówAs SAcA EngxibyskuPS. A LirE or AnonnbisHoP THoMas BECKET, IN
IckLANDIiC. Vol. IL. Edited, with English Translation, Notes, and
Glossary, by M. ErgíkR MagGNÓssoN, M.A, Sub-Librarian of the
University Library, Cambridge.

PorxcmHnaoNgicoN RANvuLPHI HiGDEN, with Trevisa's Translation. Vol. VII.
Edited by the Rev. JosceeH RaAwsow LuMB, D.D., Vicar of St.
Edward's, Fellow of St. Catharie's College, and late Fellow of
Magdalene College, Cambridge.


RECcuxiIL bkSs CRoNIQUES ET ANCHIENNES IsTORIES DE LA GRANT Bnmr-
TAIGNE A PRESENT NOMME ENGLETERRE, par JEHAN DE WAURIN.
Vol. III. .JEdited by WirnLiAM Hanmpr, Esq., F.S.A.

Grznvasu MowACHI DOROBERNENSIS CHRONICA DE TEMPORE REGUM ÁN-
aLLE SrEPHANI, HxNmic: IL, ker RicARgpDi Il. Edited by WivLiAM
SruBss, M.A., Regius Professor of Modern History, and Fellow of
Oriel College, Oxford ; and Canon of St. Paul's, London.

MarrH.: PanmisreNsIS, Mowacui SANCTI ALBANL CHRONICA MAJORA,
Vol. V. | Edited by HgwRx RicHAnps Luan», D.D., Fellow of Trinity
College, Registrary of the University and Vicar of Great St. Mary's,


Cambridge.


26


YraAn Books or THE REiGN or EpwaARD THE FigsT. Years 38, 384, and 365.
Edited and translated by ALFRED JonN HoRwoop, Esq., of the Middle
Temple, Barrister-at-Law.


LesroRIE DES ENGLES SOLUM GErrRE: GarMAR. Edited by Srg TnuoMwaS
Dvurrus Hanpr, D.C.L., Deputy Keeper of the Public Records.


HisroRjA ANGLORUM HNmicG: HuwTENDUNENSIS. — Edited by 'TnHoMwAs
ARNOLD, Esq.


MarmERIALS FOR THE Hisrognxy or THoMaAs BECKkET, ARCHBISHOP OF
CANTERBURY. Vol. IV. Edited by ihe Rev. JAMES CRA1GIE ROBERTSON,
M.A., Canon of Canterbury.


In, Progress.


DrscnierivE CATALOGUE OF MANUSCRIPTS RELATING TO THE HisTORY OF
GnzAT BnrTAIN AND ÍRELAND. Vol.IV.; 1327, &c. By Sir THoMas
Durrus Hanpr; D.C.L., Deputy Keeper of the Public Records.


REeGisSTRUM EPISTOLARUM  FRATRIS JOHANNIS PECKHAM, ARCHIEPISCOPI
CANTUARIENSIS. Edited, from MS. in All Souls College, Oxford, by
CnaRLES TRicE Manmriw, Ese., B.A.


HENniCI DE BRACTON pE LxGiBuUs ET CONSUETUDINIBUS ÁNGLLX. LiBRI

QuiNQUE IN VaRiOos TRACTATUS DisrimCTi. Ap DivERSORUM ET

. VzTUSTISSIMORUM ConpicuM CornATIONEM Tris VunGaTI. — Vol. III.
Edited by S1& 'TRAvEns Twiss, Q.C., D.C.L.


27


PUBLICATIONS


OF


THE RECORD COMMISSIONERS, &e.


RorULoRUM OnRIGINALIUM IN Cun1Á ScAccaRu ABBREVIATIO. Henry lll.
—Edward III. .Edited by HxeNRx PrAxronp, Esq. 2 Vols. folio
(18065—1810). Price 25s. boards, or 12s. 6d. each.


CALENDARIUM INQUISITIONUM POST MORTEM sIVE EsCAETARUM. Henry III.
—hRhichard III. — Edited by Jomw Carex and Jonuw BaxrEr, Esqrs.
Vols. 3 and 4, folio (1821—1828), boards: Vol. 3, price 21s.; Vol. 4,
price 24s.


LiBRoRUM  MaNusconIPTORUM  DBiBLi0THECE  HARLEIANZE — CATALOGUS.
. Vol. 4. Edited by ihe Rev. T. HanrwELL Honwr. Folio (1812),
boards. ice 18s.


ABBREVIATIO PrAcrTORUM. Richard IL.—Edward IIl. Edited by the Right
Hon. GEeogncE Rose and W. IrriNGwoRTH, Esq. 1 Vol. folio (1811),
boards. Price 18$.


LisRr CENsUALIS vocati DowEspAY-Boox, IwDrcEs. Edited by Sir HENRY
Erris. Folio (1816), boards, (Domesday-Book, Vol. 3). Price 21s.


LiBRi CEwxsvALIS vocati DowEsDAY-BOOE, ADDITAMENTA EX (CopiC. AN-
TIQUISS. Edited by Sir HENRY ErL:s. Folio (1816), boards (Domes-
day-Book, Vol. 4). Price 21s. :


STATUTES OF THE REALM. Edited by Sir T. E. TowuriNs, Jouw RAITHBIY,
JoHN CALEY, and WM. ErLroTT, Esqrs. "Vols. 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11,
including 2 Vols. of Indices, large folio (1819—1828). Price 31s. 6d.
each ; except the Indices, price 30s. each.


VALOR EocCLESIASTICUS, temp. Hen. VIII., Auctoritate Regia institutus.
Edited by JonN CarEy, Esq. and the Rev. JoskgPH HuNTER. Vols.
8 to 6, folio (1817-1834), boards. Price 25s. each. .
*,* Ihe Introduction, separately, 8vo., cloth. — Price 2s. 6d.


RoruL: Scorníe iN TuBRRri LoNbiNENSI xT IN Dowo CaPrrULARI WzsT-
MONASTERIENSI ÁssERVATL 19 Edward L—Henry VIIL — Edited by
Davi» MacPnHERSON, JoHN CaLEy, and W. IrnpiNGwORTH, Esqrs., and
the Rev. T. HanrwruL Honwr. Vol. 2, folio (1819), boards.
Price 21s.


Feprna, COoNvENTIONES, LirTEm., &c. ; or, RxwemR's F«prena, New
Edition, folio. Vol. 3, Part 2, 1361—13777 (1830) : Vol. 4, 1377— 1383
(1869). | Edited by Jouw Carrey and Fmxpr. HorsRooxz, Esqrs.
Vol. 8, Part 2, price 21s. ; Vol. 4, price 65.


DucaATus LaNcASTRUE CALENDARIUM INQUISITIONUM POosT MORTEM, &c.
Part 3, Calendar to the Pleadings, &c., Henry VIL—13 Elizabeth.

. Part 4, Calendar to the Pleadings, to end of Elizabeth. (1827—1834.)
Edited by R. J. HAnPER, JonN CALEY, and Ww. MiNcCHIN, Esqrs. Folio,
bcards, Part 3 (or Vol. 2), price 31s. Gd.; Part 4 (or Vol. 3), price 21s.


28


CALENDARS OF THE PnocEEDINGS IN CHANCERY, IN THE RxiGN OF QUEEN
ELIZABETH ; with Examples of earlier Proceedings from Richard II.
Edited by Jon BaxvrEy, Esq. Vols. 2 and 8 (1830— 31882), folio,
boards, price 21s. each.


PARLIAMENTARY WmamiTS AND Wmirs or MinrrAgnY SuMuwoNs, together with
the Records and Muniments relating to the Suit and Service due and
performed to the King's High Court of Parliament and the Councils of
the Realm. Edited by Sir FRANCIS PALGRAvE. (1830—1834.) Folio,
boards, Vol 2, Division 1, Edward IL, price 21s. ; Vol. 2, Division 2,
price 21s. ; Vol. 2, Division 8, price 42s. !


RoTULI LirTERARUM CLAUSARUM IN TuRgRI LONDINENSI ASSERVATI. 2 Vols.
folio (1833, 1844). Vol. 1, 1204—1224. . Vol. 2, 1224—1227.
Edited by 'THowAs Durrus Hanpyx, Esq. rice 81s. cloth; or
separately, Vol. 1, price 63s. ; Vol. 2, price 18s.


PRockEDINGS AND ORbriNANCES OF THE Pnivy CouNOnÜ or ENGLAND.
10 Richard II.—33 Henry VIII. .Edited by Sir NicHoLAs HannRis
NicoLas. 7 Vols, royal 8vo. (1834—1837), cloth. rice 98s.; or
separately, 14s. each.


RoruL.: LirrERARUM ParTrENTIUM IN TunmRi LONDINENSI ASSERVATI. 1201 -
—1216. Edited by 'THoMAs Durrus Hanpy, Esq. 1 Vol.folio (1835),
eloth.  .P»ce 31s. 6d. |

* .* 'The Introduction, separately, 8vo., cloth. Price 9s.


RoruLI Cugne REcis. Rolls and Records of the Court held before the
King's Justiciars or Justices. 6 Richard L.—1 John. Edited by Sir
FRANCIS PALGRAVE. 2 Vols. royal 8vo. (1835), cloth. —.Price 28s.


RorULI NoRMANNLE IN TURRI LONDINENSI ASSERYATI. 1200—.1206 ; also,
1417 to 1418. Edited by 'THowAs Durrus Hanpy, Esq. 1 Vol. royal
8vo. (1885), eloth. Price 12s. 6d.


RoruLI DE OnBLATis eT FrNiBUS IN TuRmi LONDINENSI ASSERVATI, tempore
Regis Johannis. Edited by 'THowaAs Durrvus Hampy, Esq. 1 Vol.
royal 8vo. (1835), cloth. Price 18s.


ExcERPTA E RorUuLIS FiNiUM IN TumRI LONDINENSI ASSERVATIS. Henry
IIL, 1216—1272. Edited by CmamrEs RoBERTS, Esq. 2 Vols. royal
8vo. (1835, 1836), cloth, price 823.; or separately Vol. 1l, price 14s. ;
Vol. 2, price 185.


FiNxs, srVE PEpks FiwiUM ; srvE FrNALES CoNCcoRDLE IN Cumiá Dowrmwi
Rrar. "7 Richard L—16 John, 1195—1214. — Edited by the Rev.
JosEePH HuNTER. In Counties. 2 Vols. royal 8vo. (1885— 1844), cloth,

| price 11s.; or separately, Vol. 1, price 8s. 6d.; Vol. 2, price 2s. 6d.


AwNGCIENT KALENDARS AND ÍNVENTORIES OF THE TnxAsunY or His Ma-
JESTY' ExOHEQUER ; together with Documents illustrating the History
of that Repository. Edited by Sir FRANCIS PALGRAVE. 3 Vols. royal
8vo. (1836), cloth. Price 42s.


DocuxENTS AND REconps illustrating the History of Scotland, and the
Transactions between the Crowns of Scotland and England; pre-
served in the Treasury of Her Majestys Exchequer Edited by Sir
FnANOIs PALGRAvEK. 1 Vol. royal8vo.(1837), cloth. Price 185.


29


RoruLI CHARTARUM IN '"lTugRI LoNDINENSI AsSSERVATI. — 1199—12106.
Edited by 'THowAs Durrus Hanpy, Esq. 1 Vol. folio (1837), cloth.
Príce 30s. :


REPORT OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE RECORD CoMMISSIONERS, 1831—
1887. 1 Vol.folio (1837), boards. Price 8s.


RrersTRUM vulgariter nuncupatum '*The Record of Caernarvon," e codice
MS. Harleiano, 696, descriptum. | Edited by Sir HgNRY Errrs. 1 Vol.
folio (1838), cloth. — Price 31s. 6d.


ANCIENT LAws AND IwsTITUTES OF ENGLAND; comprising Laws enacted
under the Anglo-Saxon Kings, from ZEthelbirht to Cnut, with a
Translation of the Saxon; the Laws called Edward the Confessor's ;
the Laws of William the Conqueror, and those ascribed to Henry the
First ; Monumenta Ecclesiastica Anglicana, from 7th to 10th century ;
and Ancient Latin Version of ihe Anglo-Saxon Laws ; with Glossary,
&c. Edited by BENJAMIN THoRPE, Esq. 1 Vol. folio (1840), cloth.
Price 40s. Or, 2 Vols. royal 8vo. cloth. Price 80s.


ANCIENT LAWS AND INSTITUTES OF WALES ; comprising Laws supposed to be
enacted by Howel the Good ; modified by subsequent Regulations under
the Native Princes, prior to the Conquest by Edward the First; snd
anomalous Laws, consisting principally of Institutions which, by the
Statute of Ruddlan, continued in force. With à Translation of the Welsh.
Also, a few Latin Transcripts, containing Digests of the Welsh Laws,
principally of the Dimetian Code. With Glossary, &c. Edited by
ANEURIN OwEN, Esq. 1 Vol. folio (1841), cloth. Price 44s. Or, 2
Vols. royal 8vo. cloth. Price 36s.


RoruLI DE LIiBERATE AC DE Misis EeT PuuesrITIS, Regnante Johanne.
Edited by 'THowAs Durrus Hanpy, Esq. |] Vol. royal8vo. (1844),
cloth. Price 65.


THE GnaEAT RoLLs or THE PiPr, 2, 8, 4 HxN. IL., 1155—1158. Edited by
the Rev. Jose?H HuNrER. 1 Vol.royal 8vo. (1844), cloth. Price 4s. 6d.


Tur GnrAT Rorrn or THE PreE, ] Ric. I, 1189—1190. — Edited by the Rev.
JosePH HuNTER. 1 Vol. royal 8vo. (1844), cloth. Price 65.

DocuxENTS lInnusTRATIVE OF* ENcLisH Hüsromny in the l8th and 14th
centuries, selected from the Records of the Department of the Queen's
Remembrancer in the Exchequer. Edited by HENRY Core, Esq. 1 Vol.
fep. folio (1844), eloth. — Price 45s. 6d.,


Mopus TENENDI PARLIAMENTUM. An Ancient Treatise on the Mode of
holding the Parliament in England. Edited by 'THowaAs Durrus
Hanpr, Esq. 1 Vol. 8vo. (1846), cloth. — Price 2s. 6d.


REeaisTRUM MagGNI SicrutL1 REGUM ScoToRuUM in Archivis Publicis asser-
vatum. 1306—1424. Edited by THowAs TnHowsoN, Esq. Folio (1814).
Price 10s. 6d.


THE AorS OF THE PARLIAMENTS OF SCOTLAND. Folio (1814— 1875).
Edited by 'THowaAs TmHowsoN and Coswo IwNEs, Esqrs. Vol. 1,
price 42s. Vols. 5 and 6 (in three Parts), price 21s. each Part;
Vols. 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11, price 10s. 6d. each Volume; Vol. 12
(Index), price 63s. Or, complete, 12 Volumes in 18, price 121. 12s.


THE Acrs.or THE LoRps AuniTORS OF CausES AND CoMPLAINTS (ACTA


DowiNoRuM AuDprITORUM). 1466—1494. Edited by 'THoMAs THoMsON,
Esq. Folio (1839).. Price 10s. 6d.


30


Turk AcTs OF THE LoRps or CouNcu 1N Civi, Causks (AcTA DOMINORUM
. CowoiLm) 1478— 1496. Edited by 'THowAs TnowsoN, Esq. Folio
(1839). Price 10s. 6d.


IssuE RoLL or THowas pE DBRANTINGHAM, Bishop of Exeter, Lord High
Treasurer of England, containing Payments out of His Majesty's
Revenue, 44 Edward III., 1370. Edited by FREDERICK DEkvoN, Esq.
1 Vol. 4to. (1885), cloth. Price 35s. Or,royal8vo. cloth. Price 26s.


IssuES or THE ÉXCHEQUER, James I. ; extracted from the Pell Records.
Edited by FREDERICK DrvoN, Esq. 1 Vol. 4to. (1836), cloth. Price
30s. Or, royal8vo. cloth. Price 21s.


Issuks OF THE ExcnuEQuEm, Henry IIT.—Henry VI. ; extracted from the
Pel] Records. Edited by FREDERICK Drvow, Esq. 1 Vol. 4to.
(1837), cloth. Price 40s. Or, royal 8vo. cloth. "rice 30s.


HANDBOOK TO THE PusLic Rxcomps. By F. S. TnHowas, Esq., Secretary
of the Public Record Office. 1 Vol.royal8vo. (1853), cloth. Price 12s.


HisTORICAL NoTES RELATIVE TO THE HisTORY OF ENGLAND. Henry VIII.
—Amnne(1509—1714). Designed as à Book of Reference for ascer-
taining the Dates of Events. By F. S. 'THoMas, Esq. 3 Vols. 8vo.
(1856), cloth. Price 40s.

STATE PAPERS, DURING THE RriGN or HegNnY THE EicHTH: with Indices
of Persons aud Places. 11 Vols. 4to. (1830—18652), cloth. Price
51. 15s. 6d. ; or separately, price 10s. 6d. each.


Vol. I.—Domestic Correspondence.

Vols. II. & III.— Correspondence relating to Ireland.

Vols. IV. & V.—dCorrespondence relating to Scotland.

Vols. VI. to X I.—Correspondence between England and Foreign Courts.


3l


WORKS PUBLISHED IN PHOTOZINCOGRAPHY.


DouEspAY Book, or the GREAT SunvEsY or ENGLAND OF WILLIAM THE
CoNQuEnoOn, 1086 ; fac-simile of the Part relating to each county, sepa-
rately (with à few exceptions of double counties). ^ Photozincographed,
by Her Majesty's Command, at the Ordnance Survey Office, Southampton,
Colonel Sin HrNaY JawEes, R.E., F.R.S., &c., Director. 35 Parts,
imperial quarto and demy quarto (1861-1863) boards. Price 4s. 6d. to
ll. 1s. each Part, aecording to size ; or, bound in 2 Vols., 187. (Te
edition in two volumes is out of print.)


This important and unique survey of the greater portion of England" is the
oldest and most valuable record in the national archives. It was commenced
about the year 1084 and finished in 1086. Its compilation was determined upon
at Gloucester by William the Conqueror, in council, in order that he might
know what was due to him, in the way of tax, from his subjects, and that each
at the same time might know what he had to pay. lt was compiled as much
for their protection as for the benefit of the sovereign. "The nobility and people
had been grievously distressed at the time by the king bringing over large num-
bers of French and Bretons, and quartering them on his subjects, ** each accord-
** ing to the measure of his land," for the purpose of resisting the invasion of
Cnut, King.of Denmark, which was apprehended. 'The commissioners appointed
to make the survey were to inquire the name of each place ; who held it in the
time of King Edward the Confessor; the present possessor; how many hides
were in the manor ; how many ploughs were in demesne ; how many homagers ;
how many villeins ; how many cottars; how many serving men; how many free
tenants ; how many tenants in soccage ; hew much wood, meadow, and pasture;
the number of mills and fish-ponds ; what had been added or taken away from
the place; what was the gross value in the time of Edward the Confessor; the
present value ; and how much each free man or soc-man had, and whether any
advance could be made in the value. 'Thus could be ascertained who held the
estate in the time of King Edward; who then held it ; its value in the time of
the late king; and its value as it stood at the formation of the survey. So
minute was the survey, that the writer of the contemporary portion of the Saxon
Chronicle records, with some asperity—'* So very narrowly he caused it to be
* traced out, that there was not a single hide, nor one virgate of land, nor even,
* jt is shame to tell, though it seemed to him no shameto do, an ox, nor a cow,
* noraswine was left, that was not set down."

Domesday Survey is in two parts or volumes. "The first, in folio, contains the
counties of Bedford, Berks, Bucks, Cambridge, Chester and Lancaster, Corn-
wall, Derby, Devon, Dorset, Gloucester, Hants, Hereford, Herts, Huntingdon,
Kent, Leicester and Rutland, Lincoln, Middlesex, Northampton, Nottingham,
Oxford, Salop, Somerset, Stafford, Surrey, Sussex, Warwick, Wilts, Worcester,
and York. The second volume, in quarto, contains the counties of Essex,
Norfolk, and Suffolk.

Domesday Book was printed verbatim et literatim during the last century, in
consequence of an address of the House of Lords to King George III. in 1767.
It was not, however, commenced until 1773, and was completed early in 17883.
In 1860, Her Majesty's Government, with the concurrence of the Master of the
Rolls, determined to apply the art of photozincography to the production of a
fac-simile of Domesday Book, under the superintendence of ColonelSir Henry
James, R.E., Director of the Ordnance Survey, Southampton. The fac-simile was
completed in 1868.


* For some reason left unexplained, many parts were left unsurveyed ; Northumberland, Cumberland,
Westmorelnud, and Durham, are not described in the survey ; nor does Lancashire appear under its
proper name ; but Furness, and the northern part of Lancashire, as well as the south of Westmoreland,
with a part of Cumberland, are included within the West Riding of Yorkshire. That part of Lancashire
which lies between tho Ribble and Morsey, and which at the time of the survcy comprehended 688
manors, is joinedto Cheshire. Part of Rutland is described iu the counties of Northampton and Lincoln.


FAoO-siMiLES of NATIONAL. MANUSCRIPTS, from WiLLIAM THE CONQUERORn to
QuEEN ANNE,selected under the direction of the Master of the Rolls,
and Photozincographed, by Command of Her Majesty, by Colonel Sr
HENRY JAwxES, R.E., Director of the Ordnance Survey. Price, each
Part, with translations and notes, double foolscap folio, 16s.


Part I. (William the Conqueror to Henry VII.). 1865.
Part II. (Henry VIII. and Edward VI.). 1866.

Part III. (Mary and Elizabeth). 1867..

Part IV. (James I. to Ànne). 1868;


The first Part extends from William the Conqueror to Henry VII., and contains
autographs of the kings of England, as well as of many other illustrious per-
sonages famous in history, and some interesting charters, letters patent, and
state papers. "The second Part, for the reigns of Henry VIII. and Edward VI.,

. consists principally of holograph letters and autographs of kings, princes, states-
men, and other persons of great historical interest, who lived during those
reigns. 'The third Part contains similar documents for the reigns of Mary and
Elizabeth, including à signed bill of Lady Jane Grey. The fourth Part con-
cludes the series, and comprises a number of documents taken from the originals
belonging to the Constable of the Tower of London; also several records illus-
trative of the Gunpowder Plot, and a woodeut containing portraits of Mary Queen
of Scots and James VI., circulated by their adherents in England, 1580-3.


Public Record, Offwe,
March 1879.


SCOTLAND.


CATALOGUE OF SCOTCH RECORD PUBLICATIONS


PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF
THE LORD CLERK REGISTER OF SCOTLAND,


On Sale by—


Mzssas. LONGMAN & Co., AND Mrssns. TRÜBNER & Co., LONDON ;
Mrzssns. JAMES PARKER & Co, OxronD AND LoNDoN;
Mrzssgs. MACMILLAN & Co, CAMBRIDGE AND LONDON;


Mzssns. A. & C. BLACK, AND Mrssgs DOUGLAS & FOULIS,
EDINBURGH ;
AND Mm. A. THOM, Dunurx.


CunoNICLES or THE PIOTS AND SCOTS, AND OTHER EARLY MEMORIALS OF
Scorrrsu  Hisrony. Royal 8vo., half bound (1867). Edited by
WinLiAM F. SkENE, LL.D. Price 10s. —


LrpcER or AÁNpREW HALYBURTON, CONSERVATOR OF THE PRIVILEGES OF
THE ScorcH NaTION IN THE NETHERLANDS (1492-1508); roGETHER
wiITH THE Booxs or CusTOMS AND VALUATION OF MERCHANDISES IN
ScoTLAND.  Royal8vo., half bound (1867). Price 10s.


DOoCcUMENTS ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE HisToRY or ScoTrLAND FROM THE DEATH
or KiNG ALEXANDER THE 'lHrgRD TO THE AccEsSION OF RonBERT
BRUCE, from original and authentic copies in London, Paris, Brussels,
Lille, and Ghent. In 2 Vols, royal 8vo., half bound (1870). Edited by

J Rev. JoseP?H STEvEeNSON. rice 10s. each.


AccouNTS OF THE LoRgp HieH TnEASURER OF SCOTLAND. Vol. 1, A.D.
1473-1498. Edited by 'THowAs DicksoN. 1877. Price lOs.

RecisTER OF THE Pmivy CouwciL or ScorLaNp. Edited and arranged by
J. H. BugroN, LL.D. "Vol. 1, 1545-1569. Vol. 2, 1569-1578. 1877.
Price 15s. each. -

RoruL: ScAccaAgng REcvuM Scoronux. Tur ExcneQuEen Rorrs or Scor-
LAND. Voll, A.D. 1264-1359. Vol,2, A.D. 1359-1879. — Edited by
JouN SruaRT, LL.D., and GrEoReE BunNxrT, Lyon King of Arms:
1878. Price 10s. each. |

Fac-smuLEs or THE NaTIoNAL MSS. or ScorLAND. (Out of print.)

Parts L, IL, and III. rice 21s. each.


Stationery Office,
lsí January 1879.


— Teo s ————————————————" HÉÁÉUPebeen n f
- * ,


IRELAND.


CATALOGUE OF IRISH RECORD PUBLICATIONS.


Qo, Sale by—


Mzssns. LONGMAN & Co,, AND Mzssns. TRÜBNER & Co., LONDON ;
Mressgs. JAMES PARKER & Co, OxronD AND LONDON;
Mrssas. MACMILLAN & Co. CAMBRIDGE AND LONDON;


Mrssns. A. & C. BLACK, AND Mxssns. DOUGLAS & FOULIS,
, | " EDINBURGBH ;


^ AND Mn. A. THOM, Dunn.


CALENDAR OF THE PATENT AND CrosEe RoLLs or CHANCERY IN IRELAND.
HrNny VIIL, Epwagp VI, Manmy, AND ErizanETH. Royal 8vo.
(1861-3). "Vols. 1, 2, and 8. Price 1lls. each.


ANCIENT LaAws or IRELAND.
Seuchus Mor. (1865-1873.) "Vols. 1,2, and 8. Price 10s. each.


FAC-siMILES of NATIONAL MaNvuscniPTS of InkgLAND. — Edited by JonHw
T. GirnBEnT, F.S.A., M.R.LA. Parts IL, IL, III. (in the press),
IV.(in progress). rice, 42s. each.

This work is intended to form a comprehensive Paleographie Series for
Ireland. Jt will furnish characteristic specimens of the documents which
have come down from each of the classes which, in past ages, formed principal
elements in the population of Ireland, or exercised an influence in her affairs.
With these reproductions will be combined fac-similes of writings connected
with eminent personages or transactions of importance in the annals of the
country to the end of the reign of Queen Anne.

The specimens are reproduced as nearly as possible in aecordance with the
originals, in dimensions, colouring, and general appearance. Characteristic

. examples of styles of writing and caligraphie ornamentation are, so far as
practicable, associated with subjects of historic and linguistic interest.
Descriptions of the various manuscripts are given by the Editor in the Intro-
duction. The contents of the specimens are fully elucidated and printed in the
original languages opposite to the Fac-similes—line for line—without contrac-
tions—thus facilitating reference and aiding effectively those interested in

palecographic studies.

Part I. contains upwards of seventy coloured specimens, commencing with
the earliest Irish MSS. extant.

Part II. extends from the Twelfth Century to A.D. 1299, and contains ninety
Specimens in colours.

In Part III.— now in the Press—the Work will be carried down to the end
of the reign of Henry VIII.

(This work is sold also by Letts, Son, & Co., 38, King William Street;
E. Stanford, Charing Cross; J. Wyld, Charing Cross; B. Quaritch, 15, Pic-
cadilly ; W. & A. K. Johnston, Edinburgh ; and Hodges, Foster & Co., Dublin).


Stationery Offvce,
1st Januar 1879.


P
E
^
- 5
x
€ $
1
d E
. .
. 1
H 'u-
ts
T
*
» -
-
"
*
" -
-
*.
lo
] ^
!
/
]
" ^
.
»
"EE
LP
'
1
.
j ,
1
,
i


[Ty


-oweow


Q8
* E
-


*


*


w
"
"ow CN
o D VON
| - , ANUS
"CWwU.P XN NI e rw .
