Bracton's Note Book, Vol. I: Introduction and Apparatus (F. W. Maitland, ed., 1887)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of Maitland's 1887 edition, vol. I (https://archive.org/details/bractonsnoteboo02maitgoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

BRACTON'S NOTE BOOK.


COLLBOTION OF CASES

DECIDED IN THE KING'S COURTS
DURING THE REIGN OF HENRY THE THIRD,

ANNOTATED BY A LAWYER OF THAT TIME,
SEEMINGLY BY

HENRY OF BRATTON.


EDITED BY


F. W. MAITLAND,

OF lincoln's inn, babbisteb at law,

BEADEB OF ENOLI8H LAW IN THE UNIYEBSrrY OF CAMBBIDGE.


VOL. I. APPARATUS.


LONDON: 0. J. OLAY & SONS,

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,

AVE MARU LANE.

1887
[All Rights rese^Ded.]


6


/I^arvardA
universityj

LIBRARY
l JUL 29 1957/


(!(amf)ritlgt :


FBINTSD BT C. J. CLAY, K.A. ASD BONS,
AT TRE UNITEBBITY rBBSS.


-4'^ ?/7


TO THE FOUNDER

OF THE READEliSHIP OF ENGLISH LAW

IN THE IINrTEESITY OF CA^fBRIDGE,

TO

HENRY SIDGWICK,

DOCTOR OF LITERATUEE

AND PEOFESSOR OF MORAL PHILOSOPHT

IN THE UNrVERSlTY AFORESAH),

THIS BOOK
m REVEBENTLT DEDICATEB.


PREFACE.


11 /TY best thanks are due, in the first place, to my
-*-" friend Mr George Barnes of the Inner Temple,
and.when I say that he laboriously made and gener-
ously gave me that index of personal names which
will add much to the value of this book, it will be
seen that I have good cause to be grateful : — also to
Mr J. M. Rigg of Lincoln^s Inn for having copied
(very carefuUy as I afterwards found) some thirty
pages of the manuscript at a time when I was
otherwise engaged : — also to Mr James Greenstreet,
who has long known the manuscript, for some useful
suggestions :— to the gentlemen who have charge
of the Public Record Office, more especially to
Mr Walford Selby, for many courtesies which have
inade my days among the rolls very pleasant : — to
Mr Hampshire the Librarian of Exeter Cathedral
for a copy of a deed relating to Bracton^s place of
burial, which he kindly sent to me : — to Mr Melville
Bigelow of Boston and Professor Thayer of Harvard
for the encouragement given me by friendly letters


Vlll PREFACE.


from a land where Bracton is at least as well known
and at least as highly honoured as he is in
England : — and iastly to my friend Mr Frederick
Pollock who has been ready always to listen to and
generally to answer my questions, and from whom I
first learnt to find an interest in the history of law.
That the idea of connecting this book with Bracton
was due to Professor Vinogradoff of Moscow, I shall
explain below, and indeed this will be plain enough
from the letter of his, which (by the permission of
the editor of the Aihenaeum) is here reprinted : but
I must add that in 1884 and again in 1886 I had
the happiness of talking over his discovery with
him.

When I say that I am not satisfied with the
form in which the Note Book is here made public,
this is no conventional protestation. Down to the
last moment I have found so many faults in my own
work, that I cannot but believe that there are many
yet to be found. Down to the last moment I have
been learning many things about the law of the
thirteenth century which I ought to have known
at the outset. For sins of commission no ex-
cuse shall be offered, for none should be accepted ;
but before I am blamed for having done less than
might have been done in the way of coUating rolls,
giving various readings, making indexes and notes,
it will I hope be remembered that this has been a
private enterprise. I have often had to count the
cost ; also to reflect that another day in the Record
Office or the British Museum would mean another


PRKFACE. IX

hundred miles in the train. So the reader gets no
facsimiles of the manuscripts; he gets an index
where he should have had a digest, perhaps a
translation ; the luxury of cancelling sheets instead
of confessing some stupid blunders, has been denied
me, and I am sure that there must be more to be
learned about Bracton s life than I have been able to
discover : at this eleventh, nay thirteenth, hour I
find what I believe to be his marks on a roll of
King John's reign (Coram Kege RoU, No 18). But
as his treatise had lately been edited at the expense
of the nation, and as there was no learned society
whose business it was to encourage the study of
English legal history (for the Selden Society was
not yet born nor even thought of ), it seemed likely
that the Note Book would remain unprinted for
many years, unless some one would make such an
edition of it as could be made at his own cost and
without giving to it all his time. Perhaps I was not
the man for the work ; but I have liked it well.

F. W. M.

Brookside, Cambridgk.
Sept, 1887.


M. I.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.


VOL. I. APPARATUS.


PAGES

Pbeface vii

Table of Contents xi

ErRATA XV

VinogradofE'8 Letter to the Athenaeum xvii

Note on the Glassification of the Plea BoUs xxiv

List of MS3. of Bracton*s Treatise to which reference has been made xxiv
Introduction

§ 1. Of Bracton, his Times and his Work. Generalities . . 1

§ 2. Of VinogradofiE's Discovery 12

§3. Of Bracton's Life ..... ... 13

§4. Of Bracton's Text 26

§5. Of the Date of Bracton^s Treatise 34

§ 6. Of Bracton's Selection of Anthorities 45

§ 7. Of the Note Book 61

§ 8. Of the Relation between the Note Book and Bracton's

Treatise 71

§8*. OfFifczherberfsUseof theNoteBook .... 117

§ 9. Of the making of this Edition 121

§ 10. Of some noteworthy Cases in the Note Book . . . 128
Table I. Names of the Justices who sat at the Bench during the

Reign of Henry III 139

Table II. Bracton's Citations in Chronological Order . . . 146

Table III. Fitzherberfs Cases from the Reign of Henry III. . . 172

Index of Actions 177

Index of Things 188

Index of Plaoes 202

Index of Persons 243

62


xu


CONTENTS.


VOL. II. TEXT.


Plea^ in the Bench,


2». Trinity, a.b. 2, a.d. 1218

3. Easter and Trinity, a.r. 3, a.d. 1219

4. Michaelmas, a.b. 3 — i, a.d. 1219 .

6. Hilary and Easter, A.n. 4, a.d. 1220
9. Hilary, a.b. 6, a.d. 1222.

10. Easter, a.b. 6, a.d. 1222

11. Trinity, A.R. 6, a.d. 1222
16. Hilary, a.e. 8, a.d. 1224

26. Easter a.b. 11, a.d. 1227

27. Trinity, a.b. 11, a.d. 1227 .

28. Hilary and Easter, a.b. 12, a.d. 1228

29. Michaelmas, a.b. 12—13, a.d. 1228

7. Michaelmas, a.b. 4—5, a.d. 1220 .

80. Hilary, a.b. 18, a.d. 1229

81. Easter, a.b. 18, a.d. 1229

32. Trinity (Middlesex Eyre), a.b. 18, a.d.

33. Michaelmas, a.b. 13—14, a.d. 1229
84. Hilary, a.b. 14, a.d. 1230

35. Easter, a.b. 14, a.d. 1230

36. Trinity, a.b. 14, a.d. 1230 .

37. Michaelmas, a.b. 14—15, a.d. 1230

38. Hilary, a.b. 15, a.d. 1231

39. Easter, a.b. 15, a.d. 1231

40. Tiinity, a.b. 15, A.D. 1231 .

41. Michaehnas, a.b. 15—16, a.d. 1231

42. Easter, a.b. 16, a.d. 1232
22. Trinity, a.b. 9, a.d. 1225

44. Hilary, a.b. 17, a.d. 1233

45. Trinity, a.b. 17, a.d. 1233 .

46. Michaelmas,A.B. 17— 18, a.d. 1233

47. Hilary, a.b. 18, a.d. 1234

48. Easter, a.b. 18, a.d. 1234
48. Michaehnas, a.b. 16—17, a.d. 1232
19. Michaelmas, a.b. 8—9, a.d. 1224
Appkmdix. Case 791 corrected


1229


PAOE
1

14
42
72
109
139
160
175
193
213
219
240
249
260
272
279
288
309
325
334
348
378
403
442
475
515
540
555
582
603
636
652
668
687
720


1 The numbers in thc first column of tbis Tablc show tbe chronological order of the Fleat in
tho Bvucb.


CONTENTS.


Xlll


VOL. IIL TEXT.


Pleas in the Bench


17. Eastei-, a,h. 8* a.d. 1234

18. Trmity, a,ii, 8, a.d. 1224

20. Hilary, A.jt. 9, a.i>, 1225

21. Eafitar, a.b. 0, a.c. rj25


1

416

m


Fleas be/ore the Kuhj.


A,jt, 18— 19, A,D. 1234-5
A.E. 20, A.t>. 12HG— G .
A,R, 21, A.D, 1236—7 .
A.n. 22, A,D. 1237^8 .
A.H. 2a, A.D, 123S— 9 .
A.E, 24, A.D. 1239^-40 .
Miscellaneoiis CfiJ^% and Nqtes


1>
0*
8.

12.

13.

14.

15,

23.

24*

25.


Pleas in ihe Berwk


Michaelmas, a.el 1—2, A.ti. 1217
Trimty, a.ii. 4, a.d. 1220
Hilarj and EaKter, a.r. 5, a.d. 1221
Mieliaelnaas, A.a. 6—7, jld. 1222
Hilar^^ A.11. 7, a.u. 1223.
Enster, a.b. 7, a.p. 1223 .
Micliaelraae, a.b. 7—8, a.d. 1223
Michflelma5, a.r. 9—10, a.d. 122o
Hilflty, A.R. 10, A.D. 1226
Efister, A.B, 10. a.d. 1326


Pleas /rom the Bt/t*es.


Byre m Kent, a.b. 11, a.d. 1227 ,
Ejre in Norfolk, a.b. 6, a.d. 122a .
Ejre in Norfolk, a.jr. 12, a.u. 1227
Eyrein YorkBhire, A.n. 10—11, A.iy, 1226
Ejre in Suffolk, a.b. 12, a.d. 1227 ,
Ejre in Leiceaterdiire^ a,B, 5, a.D. 1231
Eyre m StafTordKhire, a.b. 5, a.d. 1221 ,
Aj^i^ESJDix. A Lost Page Ikstoiijd .


123

lo2
188
231
255
285

m


m

833

407
4X1

453
474

m

512

5dd
m


610
618

642
667
Q9S
712
717


EREATA.


VOL. I.


p. 74, note 1. For 2Qth Jan, 19 read 26«^ Jan, 1219.

p. 93, in the heading. For The Third Argument read The Fourth


Argument.


VOL. IL


p. 22, 1. 6. The nnnnery is that of Sinningthwaite in Torkshire. Monait.
vol. 6, p. 463.

p. 25, 1. 2. The reading was originally per breue Regis 7. (by a writ of
Eing John) ; the annotator turned J into ingressu; seemingly in so doing he
made a mistake.

p. 25, Case 80. I misunderstood this case. Jacob, the deforciant in the
assize, vouches Benedict, but the voucher is not allowed because Simon, the
plaintifF, claims to hold of Jacob. Andrew, Jacob^s father, 'incumbered ' the
tenement by enfeoffing Swanild, Simon's mother ; so Benedict, Jacob's lord,
is not bound to warrant Jacob against a claim arising out of this * incumbra-
mentum *. Bracton, f . 261, deals with just this point.

pp. 89, 40, Case 43. I misunderstood this case. In a mort, d'ancestor
the parol does not demur for the nonage of the defendant, if his ancestor
entered as guardian in chivalry. This seems admitted. The case however
apparently decides that it is otherwise when the land is held in socage ; here
the lord can have no business to enter on his tenant^s death ; if he enters he
is a mere intruder, and there is no fiduciary relationship between him and
the socager; therefore if he enters and then dies seised, the parol shall
demur for his heir's nonage. This provokes from the annotator the exclama-
tion * Nota, mirum propter socagium I * He thinks it strange that in any
case the parol should demur for the nonage of a person who has entered
claiming (though not really entitled to) guardianship. In the marginal note
for quam petit iniu^te read quamuis iniuste.

p. 49, 1. 8. Forfuerunt Te&dfuerint.

p. 52, 1. 18. The MS. has qtiOt but it should be quod.

p. 121, 1. 15. ceperunt uadia sua ; this merely means that the bailiffs
took distresses (gages) from them. I thought that in connection with cloth
uadia might mean woad.

p. 138, 1. 5. The name must be Cruues.

p. 297, 1. 19. For Thome read Thomam.

p. 840, Case 420. The Longueville in question is in Normandy between
Isigny and Bayeux.


XVI EKUATA.

p. 341, L 16. For qui rcad que,

p. 3C9i Case 469. The paruum hreue in question was tlie vicontiel writ of
nuisanoe, as to which see F. N. B. 184.

p. 373, 1. 7. For lleginaldi read Reg\ which probably stands for Eegit ;
see Case 1764.

p. 404, Case 516. Cuwyc is not Southwick, but Cowick near Exeter,
where was a cell of Bec. Monast. toI. 6, p. 1043.

p. 490, 1. 17. By ipse Peter means himself. He asserts that his own son
has better right than WiUiam.

p. 506, note 4. Seemingly I was wrong in supposing that the marriage
was oonsummated before the gift was made.

p. 533, note 4. For defendant read demandant.

p. 534, note 8. The point is this : — A father gives the marriage of his
6on to Z ; X must get the son married during the father*s life, for otherwise
the father's lord will be entitled to the marriage.

p. 656, note 4. This must mean, not ' until the land shall be at peace ',
but * until the land shall haye acquitted itself ', i.e. probablj, until the land
shall have repaid a sum of monej for which it has been made security.

p. 666, 1. 16. nisi iudicium iUum incumbaret {corr. incumbraret), I have
given a very bad ezplanation of this. The king insisted that each of the
rebellious barons should come to the court alone, and should go home alone,
unless the judgment of the court should incumber, impede, him. Of course
in case judgment should go against him there could be no talk of his going
home; he would be *incumbered* by the judgment. Bracton has a similar
passage on f. 119. An accuscd person who is willing to answer the charge
* libore debet recedere, nisi iudicium ei incumberet \

VOL. IIL

p. 16, line 25. The fiist pre in this line should be pro,

p. 33. In the heading, for filius read filii.

p. 132, Case 1115. Selden refers to this case in his Kotes on Fortescue ;
Note 8 ; I owe this remark to Prof. Thajer. In line 9 on page 133 the words
on the roU, which the copjist of the Note Book reads as et verbis, should be
in omnibus,

p. 305, note 1. I withdraw the remark that the name Munegedene seems
a corruption of Muntbegun,

p. 427, note 1. For Alice read Agnes,

p. 450, line 6. For reognoscendum read recognoscendum,

p. 468, line 1. For producati psa read producat ipsa,

p. 566, note 2. More probably this means that if any one gave judgment
iu the wapentake the king would hear of it.


A LETTER OF PAUL VINOGRADOFF PRINTED IN
THE ATHENAEUM FOR 19 JULY, 1884^


It is well known that the chief importance of Bracton^s work
on the laws of England is derived from the fact that it is
based on a most extensive and careful study of the judicial
practice of the thirteenth century. Building on this firm
foundation, Bracton was able to produce a treatise which in
arrangement, connecting theories, and even in many a particular
point, testifies to the influence of Roman jurisprudence and of
its mediseval exponents, but at the same time remains a state-
ment of genuine English law, a statement so detailed and
accurate that there is nothing to match it in the whole legal
literature of the Middle Ages.

The great English judge did not content himself with setting
forth in a general way what he held to be the law of his country ;
he used systematically the rolls of Martin of PateshuU and
William of Raleigh, and gives no fewer tl^an 450 references to
cases decided by his predecessors and teachers. This being so, it
is surely not devoid of interest to inspect rather closely that
groundwork o{ Bracton*s treatise, and to trace as far as possible
his way of selecting and handling his records. Now I think that
a British Museum MS., numbered Add. 12,269, can help us very
materially in this direction. It is a collection of cases written
about the middle of the thirteenth century, with a good many
notes on the margin. The first leaves and the last quires are
missing, and there is no direct evidence as to the person who
compiled and used the book, but the contents make it very

^ The Editor of the Athemeum has very kindly consented to this letter
being here reprinted.


XVIU VINOGRADOFF S LETTER.

probable indeed, if not cei*tain, that it was drawn up for Bracton
and annotated by him or under his dictation.

If we leave aside the comparatively few instances when
Bracton^s treatise gives only general references, and take the
quotations specifying court and year of the trial, we shall see at
once that they may be classed under three heads* : 1. Cases
tried in the King's Bench, ranging from Michaelmas, 2 Henry II t.,
to Easter, 18 Henry III. ; 2. Cases before the King^s Council,
from 1 9 to 24 Henry III. ; 3. Cases tried in the Eyres of
Martin of Pateshull and William of Raleigh during the first half
of Henry III. 's reign. There remains a certain, very small,
number of stray quotations which do not come under this
classi£cation ; as, for instance, casual mentions of trials Coram
Rege in 31, 32, 38 Henry III. They probably did not belong to
the original text of the treatise; but even if they did, their
occurrence does not alter the general arrangement.

Now the Add. MS. contains : 1. Cases tried in the King's
Bench ranging from Michaelmas, 2 Henry III., to Easter, 18
Henry III. ; 2. Cases before the King^s Council, from 19 to 24
Henry III. ; 3. Cases tried in some of the Eyres of Martin of
PateshuU. Unfortunately the MS. breaks off right in the middle
of a Staffordshire Eyre, so that we cannot judge how far the
other circuits of Martin and those of William of Ealeigh had
been used. But even what is left is quite sufficient, as I take it,
to establish a remarkable coincidence between the book and the
Add. MS. (A Patent EoU" of 42 Henry III., quoted by Madox,
* History of the Exchequer,* ii. 257, enjoins Henry of Bracton to
surrender the roUs of M. de PateshuU and W. de Raleigh which
he had been using.)

The extracts, I ought to mention, are made in a very irregular
fashion as regards the order of rolls and terms. The cdmpiler
did not go by strict chronology, probably because he had not the
whole set of records at his disposal at the same time. So we
find that after a series of King's Bench terms of the second,
fourth, sixth, seventh, and ninth years, earlier roUs come on
again. What is more, there are occasions when a roU from which
extracts had been made was taken up again, and some new cases

1 See below, p. 63.

2 Not a Patent Boll, bat a Boll of Ezchequer Memoranda; see below,
p. 25.


VINOGRADOFF S LETTER. XIX

copied out from it^ The last is a very important feature because
it explains a fact which at first sight seems to tell against the
supposed connexion of our MS. with Bracton, i^amely, that not
all the cases mentioned in the treatise are to be found under
their respective years in the note-book. As a considerable part
of this seems to be lost, we cannot expect book and treatise to fit
completely.

Passing from a general survey to a closer examination of the
contents, we must, of course, advert principally to the subject-
matter of the marginal notes in the MS. Are there any striking
analogies between their wording and the text in Bracton's
treatise 1 Most of the notes give only in a few short words the
substance of the transcribed cases or call attention to particular
points in them. But not seldom the annotator criticizes the
decision or supplements it by reflections of his own, and then
the close relation between note-book and treatise becomes ap-
parent.

An instance is afforded by the passage on the right of a widow
to bequeath crops growing on the land she held in dower.
Previous to the statute of Merton, 20 Henry III., such a bequest
would not have been valid. Bracton, *De Legibus,* folio 96 6,

says: "Nova superveniente gracia et prouisione poterit uxor

de fructibus et bladis siue a solo separata fuerint, siue non,
testari et pro uoluntate sua disponere." The Add. MS., folio
209 a, has : " Modo mutatum est de noua gracia quod potest
testamentum facere de blado firmo in terra*."

On 169 b of the note-book we find the foUowing peculiar
illustration : "Terminusterminans set indeterminatus et incertus,
et ideo liberum tenementum sicut ad vitam hominis, quia nihil
certius morte, nihil incertius hora mortis." The same diction
occurs in the treatise, folio 27 6: " Si autem fiat donatio ad
terminum annorum, quamvis longissimum, qui excedat vitas
hominum, tamen et hoc non Iiahebit donatoriua liberum teneineri'
ium, cum tenninus annorum certus sit et determinatus, et terminus
vitflB incertus, et quia licet nihil certius sit morte, nihil tamen
incertius est hora mortis^"

^ This happens but once and only one new case is copied (Case 1293). I
do not think it probable that all the cases cited by Bracton were once in this
book. See below, pp. 77—80.

2 See below, p. 89. ^ See below, p. 89.


XXll VIN^KJRADOFF S LETTER.

MSS. of Bracton's treatise. It maj have struck many students
o£ the author that parallel to the carefully arranged quotations
from early rolls there runs a string of irregular references to
later cases. A trial is mentioned, for instance, to which the
heirs of John of Munmuth were parties. Now the said Jolin
died immediately before 1259* (Roberts, 'Calendarium Genealo-
gicum/ i. 73), and so the casual illustration has been taken from
a case fresh in the remembrance of the author when he composed
the corresponding part of the treatisa The case Roger de
Begni v, Robert de Shute, entered as a heading to one of the
paragraphs in the editions, is nothing but a similar side reference
to a trial which may be still read at the Record Office on an
assize roll of Bracton for 1254 (Coram Rege, Henry III., N. 96,
m. 4). And so in the work itself we have the like marginal
illustrations as in the note-book, and a careful collation of the
MSS. of Bracton would bring them easily out in their original
character of side-notes. Now, one of the most interesting among
the Bracton MSS., Digby 222 in the Bodleian library, of which
that wondrous production called Sir Travers Twiss's edition of
Bracton does not take the slightest notice, gives as marginal
references two of the most conspicuous illustrative instances of
the note-book, the Corbyn case on the subject of warranty and
the Ralph of Arundell case.

Summanzing briefly the evidence in respect of Bracton's
connexion with the note-book in the British Museum, I lay
again stress on the following points : 1. The abstracts from roUs
in the Add. MS. and the roUs which served as material for the
drawing up of the treatise are substantially the same. 2. There
are paesages in the treatise which even in their wording connect
themselves with notes in the Add. MS. 3. The illustrative
references in the Add. MS. can be traced in some instances to
Bracton's own practice, and in two cases are found to recur in
MSS. of Bracton's work.

My paper has grown to such an inordinate length abready
that I do not venture to hint at the importance of the matter
collected in the British Museum MS. It seems sufficient for the
present to say that the note-book gives a copious and careful
selection of cases from the early practice of Henry III.'s time,
and that many of the rolls from which it was compiled have been

1 Corr. 1257. See below, p. 38, note 7.


VINOGRADOFFS LETTER. XXIU

lost since. I intend to discuss some of the material questions
arising from the study of these abstracts in the new quarterly
which the Oxford Law School is going to start next year* ; but
even now I think it may be said without fear of going wrong
that the integral publication of the MS. would afTord the most
fitting sequel to Palgrave's editions of Hichard I.'s and John's
roUs.

I must not omit before concluding to thank Mr W. Selby, of
the Record Office, for the kind and valuable help which I had
f rom him on several occasions during my inquiry.


PAUL VINOGRADOFF.

^ Law Quarterly RevieWy vol. i. p, 189.


NOTE ON THE CLASSIFICATION OF THE EXTANT
PLEA ROLLS.

The yet extant Plea Bolk of Henry the Third*s reign are arranged
at the Public Record Office in three classes, (1) Coram Rege Rolls, (2)
Assize Rolls, (3) Tower Assize Rolls or Tower Coram Rege Rolls. This
arrangement has been determined partly by the fact that in time past
some of the roUs were preserved in the Tower and some at Westminster.
That a roU is now foimd in a particular class, is by no means a sure
'indication of its real nature, for instance, it may happen that one of
two duplicate rolls will be among the Coram Rege Rolls and the other
among the Assize Rolls. Therefore in citing a roU as Coram Rege Roll
No. 91, Assize Roll M. 2, 3, 1, or Tower Roll No. 4, 1 imply nothing as
to the character of the roll, but merely give the reader a name whereby
he may obtain the document to which I refer. In citing a particular
membrane of a roll, I refer to the figures which have been set upon its
membranes by a modem pencil.

MSS. OF BRACTON'S TREATISE.

NoTE : — The following MSS. of Bracton'8 treatise I have occasionally
consulted, and some of them are referred to in my Introduction by
means of the letters here assigned to them. It should be understood
however that the order in which they are here mentioned, is not an
order of merit or of date, also that at least twelve other MSS. are
known to exist, at seven of which, those in Lincohi's Inn, Gray^s Inn,
the Temple and Trinity CoUege, Cambridge, I have glanced.

In tke British Mmeum.

MA = Royal 9 E. xv. MH = Harl. 817.

MB =Add. 11,353. MI «-HarL 1,242.

MC =Add. 21,614. MK = Harl. 3,416.

MD = Add. 24,067. ML =Harl. 3,422.

ME = Harl. 653. M M = Add. 32,340.

MF = Harl. 656. ]\rX = Stowe 722.
MG=Harl. 763.

Jn tJie Bodleian Librm^,

OA=Digby 222.

OB =Rawlin8on C. 160.

OC=RawlinsonC. 159.

In the Camhridge Univeruty Lihrary.

CA = Dd. vii. 6.
CB=Dd. vii. 14.
CC=Ee. iv. 4.


INTRODUCTION.


§ 1. 0/Bracton ku times and his ivorh Gmeralities.

That Bracton's book mi the la\\^s of England is a good nmtnn^n
and a great book very worthy of careful stiidy, is no Dovel fu!d lilaL-Li*
opinion, but rather an old tradition which has stood the test
and received the sauction of modeni scholarship.

In tnith that bo<-jk both marks arid makes a critical
moment in the history of Englkh law, and therefore in the
essential history of the EngHsh poople, About tho middle of
the thirteenth century, the time when Bracton was at worki
oiir common law, the law which was to be common toi^owf^Ai"!

rreodom of

England and vast lands of which he never dreamt, ^vas ['([[Jfjj'^'"*
rapidly and definitely ossuming the shape that it was to keep ^^"''y'^^'
but little changefl for long ages, Yet a little while and
Parliament woidd have come into boing a,s the one proper
organ of all legislation, hampering by its masterfal biit
fragmentary and intennittent statntes any fmther develop-
ment of uaenacted law, joalous of the royal power, jealouR
leat new writSj new forms of procedure^ should mean new
laws made withont its approval At latest before the death
of Edward the First the main ontlines of the common law
would, we may Ray^ be drawn once and for all ; an intrieate
superstrueture might yet be reared, the ground plan could no
longer be changed. But during the first part of tho rcign of
Edward*s father, the king^s judges must have onjoyed such an
opportunity of niouldiiig a pow^erfnl, practical scheme of law
as has rarely been given to men. Past histoiy, the Normaii
oonquest, the vignnr of king after king, llio ill succes.s of

M. L l


2 INTRODUCTION.

every revolt, had deeided that we should have one common
law for the whole of England, that it should be the law of
one great central court and that court the king's. Very
truly had the king become the fountain of justice. Other
springs there had been and were, communal, seignorial,
ecclesiastical, the ancient courts of the shire and the hundred,
the manorial courts, the Courts Christian. These, had our
history been not quite what it was, might have become
effective and independent sources of English law, or of
manifold local customs. As it is, we, accustomed for cen-
turies to our centralized royal justice, are apt to make too
light of these old courts, to think of them only as they were
in the last stage of their decay. In Bracton*s day they yet
flourished. The feudal jurisdictions were dearly prized and
obstinately defended; the Great Charter had but lately
protected them against royal invasion. Attendance at the
county court was a burden, but a burden that knights of the
shire would willingly bear if thereby they could check the
proceedings of the king's professional judges. The tribunals
of the church were zealous and ambitious, eager for work.
Still by bne means and another, by royal writs invented as
circumstances required, the king was getting into his hands
a monopoly of justice, was holding himself out as ready to
intervene at any stage of any action and to draw the matter
into his own court. We can not quite say of him in the well-
known words that he was " over all persons and in all causes
" ecclesiastical as well as civil within his dominions supreme.'*
That was not the theory of the time. The ecclesiastical
courts were not his courts, nor had he power in spiritual
matters. That those courts obtained and retained exclusive
cognizance of such (as they seem to us) purely temporal
affairs as testamentary causes, is enough to show, were other
proof wanting, that royal justice had at least one active rivaL
There were two swords ; the king grasped but one. Still he
had succeeded in setting to the ecclesiastical jurisdiction
definite bounds. These bounds if we think them wide,
were none the less thought far too narrow by the clergy
of the day and were only maintained by the unremitting


BRACTON*S TIMES. 3

vigilance of the royal judges. But, for all this, the king's j ustice
had a large field and behind it was power not to be withstood.

If however history had decided that the English kingship Royai power
should be a very strong kingship and in particular that the la*.
king should have an active control over all the justice in his
realm, still a strong kingship is no absolute monarchy, and
history had decided also that the king must judge according
to law. Whatever danger there may have been that his
court would be merely a machine for enforcing his personal
will and pleasure was at an end, at least for a time. Happily,
as it now may seem to us, the vast power of Henry the
Second had come to the hands of John. Tyranny had pro-
voked revolt and the charter was won. Happily again the
revolt was not too successful, and happily the crown passed
from John to a boy but nine years old. The minority of
Henry the Third made it possible to distinguish between the
impersonal ' Crown ' and the little crowned head. Law could *

not be just what pleased this child. Quod principi placuit
legis habet vigorem: — without much untruth this phrase
might be applied to his mighty grandfather, though rather
perhaps as a statement of plain matter of fact, than as a
theory of the English kingship. Under Henry the Second,
whose will had a way of making itself law, the writer whom
we call Glanvill could at least hint that these famous and to
a mediaeval lawyer almost sacred words were literally true in
England*. Bracton plays with them and tums their edge.
Alongside the king, indeed above the king stands the royal
law that makes him king*. This let the king obey ; so doing
he loses no whit of majesty or power, becomes subject to none
but himself. Our Blessed Lady, even our Blessed Lord were
thus obedient to the law for man'. A constitutional theory
not yet embodied in definite institutions found expression
for a while in the glittering paradox that submission to self-
imposed law is the supreme feat of God's Omnipotence —

Non est inpotentia sed samma potesta»,
Magna Bei gloria, magnaque maiestas^.

1 Glanvill, Prologus. * Wright, Political Songs (Camden

2 Br. f. 107. Society), p. 106.
» Br. f. 5 b.

1—2


4 INTRODUCTIOy.

A little later, perhaps before Bracton had done writing,
something less mystical had become received, or at least
probable, doctrine. The shiftless policy of the self-willed
king set men thinking : — the king has peers and he who has
peers has superiors*. But from the time when John, forced
into a solemn covenant to deny right and justice to none, had
set his will against his word and died aTniserable death, (and
it was just to this moment that Bracton carried back his
search for precedents,) above the king there was evidently
law».
SlV^SS. From the same time it is that we first hear of judges in
the king*s court who are learned, professionally leamed in the
law of the land. It was still the part of all wbo aspired to
be aught in church or state to do a good deal of judging.
Not only in their own manorial courts but as jmtitiarii
Domini Regis assigned to take assizes or hear pleas of the
crown, earls, barons and knights, bishops and abbots decided
causes and passed judgment. But by slow degrees the king*s
court (curia) was becoming distinct from the king'8 council
(concilium); the work of hearing lawsuits was being separated
from the general business of goveming or helping to govem
the country, and it was felt that study and book-Ieaming,
something more special than an ordinary experience of public

^ Br. f. 34. state of his tezt is at present so bad

' The passages in which QlanviU that the loss of a few words may

(Prologus) and Bracton (f. 107) in- perhaps be saspected; but I haye

troduce the Quod principi placuit looked fruitlesslj at many MSS. in

have often been discussed. It has hope of finding a variant. If how-

been supposed that Bracton mis- ever, as seems likelj, he does take

translated the words. They, it wiU cum as a preposition it does not

be remembered, run thus: — sed et necessarily foUow that he is guilty

quod principi placuit, legis habet of a stupendous blunder. It is in-

vigorem, cum lege regia, quae de credible that he should not have

imperio eius lata est, populus ei et in known and been able to construe

eum omne suum imperium et potes- the last words of the passage. I see

tatem concessit (Inst. i. 2. 6). Bracton here rather a playful perversity than

is arguing that the king ought to a mistake. Similar dealings with

rule according to law. This, he the tezt of a book yet more sacred

urges, is not contrary to the famous than the Institutes were not un-

text, quod principi plaouit legis habet common, half-sportive half-serious

vigorem, because that tezt goes on twistings of holy writ. See Selden,

to say, cum lege regia quae de imperio Diss. ad Fletam, cap. 3. sec. 2, and

eius lata est. Here he stops his Hallam, MiddU Ages^ ed. 1837, vol.

citation, and some think that he 2, p. 459.
takes cim to be a prepoRition. The


BRACTON S TIMES. 5

life, were needful for tbose who term after term were to sit
in a certain place, in aliquo loco certo, and declare the law.
Let us indeed remember, that Englishmen have never
admitted in theory or in fact that none but a lawyer is fit to
judge his fellows. Theoretically our highest court of law
is an assembly of lords spiritual and temporal, while very
practicatly at quarter sessions and pctty sessions is much
justice doiie by those whoni lawyers call lay-mcn. Through-
out tbe middle agea tho unprofessional elemcnt in our
judicial constitution was stroiig and healthy, keeping common
law at one with comnion opiuion, preventing any wholesale
ailoption of an aben jurisprudence. But still from the
beginning of Henry the Thirds reign there were in the royal
court learned judges, most of them ecclesiastics, who were
making for themselyea fame merely as great judgos, Fore-
most among them there was Martin Patesbullj 'a mau of
' wondrous wisdom and vcry leamed in the law of the land\'

And ' thegladsome iight of jurisprudence' (to use Coke's wnsuhjMt
fine phrase") had dawned in England as elsewhere, an idea of
law as of a reasonable eystem of connected principlea, pro-
viding in advauce for all possible caseSj a proper subject for
doubt, disputation, proofj— and yet no mere ideai existing
only iii the specuiationg of doctors and schola.rs, biit the veiy
law of tbe land, of wbich ordinances, cbartcrSy writs, decisioas,
ancient custom^ wonted procedure, were authoritative though
{lartial manifestations. Practice and tbeory bad grown sido
by side reacting on each other. Tbe concentration of justice
in the king's courtj tbe evolution of common law, were but
one process. That the development of legal doctriue was
rapid, we may easily see as we pass from that strange dark
Ijook the Leges Henrici Frimi, thmugh GtanviU to Bractoii.
Eut tbeory did not outgrow practice. Much had been and
was being learned froni ci\dlians and caoonists. The caiiou
law was of vital importiance to all Engbshmen, to tbe laity as
well as the clergy. The kings professional judges were, as
already said, ecclesiastics deeply interested in tbo cburcb's

^ Mat. Par, Chron. Maj. (adXuard) ' Cq. Lit. ;jfl5 a-


i


G INTRODUCTION.

law. Appeals to Rome were not uncommon and the English
suitor might have to secure the services of the best Italian
jurists, of Azo himself. But cosmopolitan tendencies were
held in check by practical necessities. The king*8 justice
was conquering and to conquer, but a regard, at least
an outward regard, for ancient tradition, an adherence
to settled forms and precedents, were conditions of its
success; nor could it always succeed without concession
and compromise. Our English lawyers seem from the outset
to treat the Roman law much as our church treats the
Apocrypha ; it is instructive but not authoritative ; in other
countries these leges scriptae prevail; our leges are non
scriptae ; English law is English.
Growthof On the other hand the common law was not yet a

lawnot , . , .

*'rSuri**^ struggling captive netted in the meshes of procedure. What
in after times made it the most elaborate of labyrinths was
the closed cycle of original writs, the catalogue of forms of
action to which naught but statute could make addition.
Now during the earlier part of the thirteenth century the

Newwritg. kings general power to make new writs seems unquestioned,
though protest, armed protest, may be made against a
particular use of that power, specially if it interferes with
the feudal jurisdictions. And many new writs must have
been made. Of some we know the history. This was-made
by William Raleigh*, that by Walter of Merton". But as
the struggle for a parliament drew near, as King Henry
forced on that struggle by attempting to govem without
chancellor, treasurer, or justiciar, complaints of new and
illegal writs became loud and the general principle was
drawn into debate^ Bracton, writing some few years before
the open outbreak, has left us a transitional doctrine. New
original writs can be made as occasion may require, for
wrong must not be without remedy ; in strictness such new

1 Br. f. 438 b. of course. The whole system of

3 The Old Natura Brevium (f. writs of entry was rapidly developed

122 b) ascribes to him the Quare without legislation.

eiecit infra terminum a.B to Yfhich eee ^ Mat. Par. vol. 6, p. 363; Ann.

Br. f. 220. See also the entry in Burton. (Ann. Monast. vol. 1), p.

Kot. Ci. vol. 1, p. 32 b, which makes 448.

the writ of entry sur disseisin a writ


flsx^^


BRACTON*S WORK. 7

writs should be approved by the whole kingdom, that is,
by the magnates; but the consent of the magnates may be
taken for granted; they consent if they do not expressly
dissent, and it behoves the king to give remedy for every
wrong*. A fiction of this kind could not be permanent and
events decided that the requisite consent of the common
council of the realm should be a real consent. Thence-
forward the common law was dammed and forced to flow in
unnatural, artificial channels. The supremacy of Parliament
may have been worth the price paid for it ; none the less the
price was high.

The state of thinsfs at which we have glanced, the Tiie time for

o ^ o ... * great book.

powerful court, the yet flexible law soon to lose its flexibility,
will, if duly considered, seem very worthy to be the theme,
very likely to be the oause, of a great book, one which
in declaring law will make law for ages, which will leave a
distinct mark on national history, which will be read with
interest when six centuries have passed away.

And the man who came to the work was able, very able J}^^]^^
we must say if we compare him with his successors. We
look back at them and hiin and he stands a head and
shoulders taller than them all. Just so long as his influence
was powerful lawyers could produce such fairly readable
books as those which we call Britton and Flefa ; serviceable compared
epitomes, what is good in them is Bracton's. One fact about Bucceasors.
them let us note. Bracton, we may safely say, did not fulfil
the whole of his splendid plan. In the middle of an account
of the writ of right his book stops short and then we have
what looks like a brief fragment on the personal actions.
Britton and Fleta carry their accounts of the writ of right to
the same point, and then they too stop short. No one could
finish that book : there was no one to bend the bow fallen
from the master*s hand. There come things which hardly
may be called books, the Henghams, Fet Assavoir, the Old
Natura Brevium, the Novae Narrationes, useful things in
their day for practitioners, but showing no interest in legal
principle, no grasp of law as a whole, merely a care for the

^ Br. f. 414 b ; compare Fleta, p. 76, 77.


8 INTRODUCTION.

details of practice, for the tithes of mint a&d cummin.

In its last hours the fifteenth century is redeemed by

Littleton's Tenures. Against " the most perfect and absolute

** work that ever was written in any human science* " nothing

shall here be said, for it is a masterpiece ; but still it is a

small thing to set beside the heroic work of Bracton.

Littleton, again, had neither rivals nor imitators. English

lawyers could make abridgements ; write books they could

uot or would not. As to tbe chaos of Coke it is bad chaos as

it stands; what it would have been but for Littleton and

Bracton one does not like to think. It is strictly true what

Lord Campbell says, and Lord Campbell cannot be charged

with mediaevalism: Bracton "was rivalled by no English juri-

"dical writer till Blackstone arose five centuries afberwards*."

Twice in the history of England has an Englishman had the

motive, the courage, the power to write a great readable,

reasonable book about English law, as a whole".

comMriaon Wc may morc easily and more profitably compare English-

JrofiSb?&" man with Englishman, than Englishman with foreigner. In

the thirteenth century the task for the writer on law was

very diflferent in different countries. Bracton was placed in

favourable circumstances. He had to describe the most

vigorous system that Europe could show. As an engine of

masterful justice for the govemment of a large land, the court

of our king had not its equal. Nor was the EngUshman

hampered by dead texts. He had bu€ to describe what was

really being done day by day and done on a large scale.

It is almost useless therefore to attempt a weighing of his

merits against those of his French and German contemporaries,

Philip Beaumanoir, for example, or Eike of Repkow, or against

those of the lialian doctors. Still we may take this fi-om

foreigners, that when we set our legal literature beside that of

continental Europe it is not of Bracton that we need be

ashamed.

^ Goke'B Preface. Braoton^s contemporaries, of Edward

3 Lives of the Chief Justices, vol. tlie First, Simon de Montfort, Bobert

2, p. 62. Grosseteste, Boger Bacon, Matthew

3 If to any one what is here said Paris ; are they not greater than

of Bracton seems extravagance, he their successors ?

may be asked to think of some of


bracton's romanism. 9

If for one moment we set his book beside the Customs
of Beauvais and the Saxon Mirror one fact worthy of note
stares us in the face. The Englishman's work both in its rS^£J*.
general structure and in many details has been influenced by
Roman jurisprudence. Really if we place ourselyes in the •

thirteenth century and look only at the surface of things, it
must seem very likely that England will soon adopt Roman
law as a whole, while into Northem France and Germany it
will make its way but slowly or never. After the event we
can see why such a prediction would be foolish. The
development in England of a centralized royal justice was
rapid, precocious. Before the end of the thirteenth century
the system with its stubbom writs and formulas had become
too osseous to he much modified by new outlandish learning.
And looking closer we see that Bracton had no intention of
supplanting English by Roman law. It is Rationalism
rather than Romanism that he leamt from Azo's book,
and this fact that at an early date English law was ration-
alized by an able man, is not the least among the -causes
which protected us against Romanism in the foUowing cen-
turies.

Trying to state in general terms, (this is no place for iiis debt to
particulars,) what was Bracton's debt to the civilians we may estimated.
put it thus : — First he had leamed certain wide principles of
jurisprudence, had found some of the highest premisses of all
civilized law expressed in neat and accurate phrases. For
these, at least for some of these, the England of his time was
ripe. They are not, he might argue, specifically Roman;
the Romans themselves regarded them as common to all
mankind ; they are dictates of reason implicit in all law.

Justiiuan's Pandects only make precise
What simply sparkled in men's eyes before,
Twitched in their brow, or quivered on their lip,
Waited the speech they called but would not come^.

Then there are instances in which mles that are less
general and more specifically Roman are adopted, or rather
proposed, as solutions for concrete cases. For the more part

1 Browning, The Ring and the Book,


10 INTRODUCTION.

this is done very modestly and by way of suggestion. There
being no English authority in point, why,

ImperiouB Gaesar dead and tumed to day
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.

But his main debt is less palpable, for what he has con-
verted to his use is spirit rather than substance, not these or
those rules, but a method of reasoning about law, of perceiving
the interdependence of rules, of making them take their
places as members of a body. He is at his very worst when
he copies matter from Azo, as he does very freely in those
parts of his book, which, being the first, are unfortunately the
best known. He is there dealing with high generalities about
things and persons; to these Engh*sh law had not yet
ascended, and (even when allowance has beefi made for the
blunders of mediaeval copyists and the negligence of editors)
we are forced to say that his copyings from Azo are not
always very intelligent; he fails to take point after point
made by the Italian master. Only when he comes to more
concrete matters do we see the best that he has leamed from
abroad. There is no more copjdng; he has ample raw material
of home growth ; it is to be found in the rolls of the king's
court; but by means of ideas and distinctions which have come
to him from beyond seas he gets principle out of precedent
and weaves a rational text. A parallel as good as most his-
torical parallels is ready to hand. Within our own century a
great foreign civilian has leffc his mark on some of the very
best of our English text-books, not making them any the less
English, only making them more reasonable by having placed
their writers at a standpoint outside the English system, a
standpoint whence a wood might be seen, not merely a quan-
tity of trees. Azo was the Savigny of the thirteenth century\
Bracton'8 It is to bc regrettcd that no one has yet printed a good

authoriticB. tcxt of Bractou alougsidc a good text of Azo. Only when
this is done, shall we fuUy understand the influence of Boman
upon English law. But it is much more to be regretted that

1 When I wrote the above I had civilians {Roman Law in Englandy
not yet read Mr Scrutton's careful pp. 79 — 121), which seems to me very
estimate of Bractou's debt to the just.


BRACTON*S CASE LAW. 11

no one has printed Bractons English authorities, those
five hundred cases which he cited from the roUs. Many of
those rolls are yet in existence and surely this matter was
worth some pains. Nothing is more remarkable in Bracton's Hisiawis

case law.

book than his profuse references to decisions. His law is
case law. Now this is remarkable. It is very seldom indeed
that any other mediaeval writer, Fleta, Britton, Hengham,
Littletoni ever cites a case, and citations in the Year Books
are out of the common : seldom is there anything more definite
than a vague " It is so in our books." Shall we say that
Bracton foresaw what after the lapse of centuries would
become the most distinctive characteristic of English law?
It would be foUy seriously to attribute to him any such
marvellous power of prediction; but the fact remains, his law
is case law. In dealing with concrete matters he appeals not ^

to Azo, nor to Ulpian, nor again to Reason or Nature, but to
this and that case adjudged by Martin PateshuU or William
Raleigh. The rolls of the king's court, therefore, and in
particular the roUs of PateshuU and Raleigh should have an
interest for us. To say nothing of the light they throw upon
every detail of mediaeval Ufe, they contain the authorities,
and it weU may be, ultimate authorities for many a rule of
the common law which hitherto has been traced no fiirther
than Bracfon*s unverified assertion. However to print these
roUs in fuU would be too large, too costly a task for private
enterprise. We have been embarrassed by our riches, our
untold riches. The nation put its hand to the work and
tumed back fainthearted. Foreigners print their records; we,
it must be supposed, have too many records to be worth
printing ; so there they Ue these invaluable materials for the
history of the EngUsh people, unread, unknown, almost
untouched save by the makers of pedigrees. Now to select
important cases from these roUs would be difficult. The
endeavour, Ukely enough would fail, for so much of our old
law has been utterly forgotten that perhaps there is no one
now competent to say what are the important, the leading
cases. A false jneasure, an unfounded theory might weU
makc the sclection unfair and givc us the anomalous instcad


12 INTRODUCTION.

of the normal. What then would we not give, such of us as
really eare for the history of our law, could we find the selection
EikwMted. ™^® f^'* ^ ^y some thirtoenth-century lawyer, could we find
some note book in which such a lawyer had copied the cases
which were the most interesting to him and the men of his
time, some book in which he jotted down his own remarks on
those cases ? What would we not give could we indulge the
hope that the maker of that book was Bracton ?
Such a book chance has preserved.


§ 2. 0/ Vinogradoff*8 discovery.

In the summer of 1884 Paul Vinogradoff, Professor of
^okfSSid. History in the University of Moscow, was in England seeking
materials for mediaeval history. A study of the English
manor led him to a study of Bracton's text and he went
behind that text to Bracton^s authorities. He then heard, I
believe irom Mr Selby of the Public Record OflSce, of a MS.
at the British Museum known as MS. Additional 12,269.
CarefuUy reading it he came to the conclusion that it was
closely connected with Bractons work and indeed was
probably Bracton*s own note book. This discovery he
published to the world in The Athenaeum for 19 July, 1884 ;
some weeks earlier I had the pleasure of hearing about it
from his own lips. His letter to The Athenaeum is printed
at the beginning of this book. Hereafter I must repeat its
arguments at greater length. But at once I will say that so
far as I am aware though the MS. had been used by others,
the credit of perceiving its value in the history of law was
whoUy due to Vinogradoff. At least it should be understood
that I claim no credit. I have but worked on the lines
indicated by him in the letter which he published.
vaiusbie As I am about to begin an argument, or rather a

brnot * statement of evidence, which must needs be lone: and intri-


Bracton'8.


cate, tending to prove that the MS. in question is what on
my title page it is called, namely Bracton s Note Book, I
should like to say at once that iii my own opinion the vahie


VrNOGRADOFF*S DISCOVEUY. 13

of this book does not depend wholly or even chiefly on the
success of my argument. It seemed to me that Bracton's or
not Bracton's, the Note Book ought certainly to be printed ;
this will hardly be denied by any, and if the version of it now
published be a fairly accurate and useful version, then I have
not failed in what was my main endeavour. If it be Bracton's
80 much the better. The evidenue as to this is all of an
indirect kind, conaisting of niany small dt^taiLa and minuto
coincidences. Before we can weigh it we ought to know
some particulars aboiit Bracton Jiimself, aboiit hii!^ selection of
authoritiea, wg ought to form some idea as to what would
have been iu his note book if a note book he had\


§ 3. Of Bmctons Ufi\
Of the man himaelf there is aeemingly little to be known. utx]^^ kn-iwn


We might iudeed collect a large number of small facts about
him, for his name occurs very frequently during sorae twenty
years on the Fine, Close and Patent Rolk. But with few
exceptions these facts would be all of one not very interesting
kind; he ia commissioned to take this, that arid the other
assize of mort d ancestor or novel dissoisin, He can havc
played no leading part in tlie eseiting history of his time.
It waa a time of great chroaiclei^; the greatest of our
mediaeval lawyers, the greateat of our mediaeval historianSs
were contemporaries ; Matthew Paris died a few years before
Bracton ; yet of Eracton Paris has nothing to tell ; Pari^s was
writing the hifitory of the present, Bracton was making the
hiatory of the future,

1 It will be necessary to deal m way my dabt to DngdaleT SeldeHi.

dfttcB andt &s tke origmal documents Madoi, GiitctbaGk and Foss^ lo thft

aaually refor to the reguid years^ it pnefacses of Sir Travers TvFisfi^ to the

wiil be well to reineinbt^r that Henry article on Bractoo by Mc J. M. Bigj;

m. waa crowTied on ^S Oet. 121G* iu the Dictiouary of Nntional Bio-

Thus Ea&tfir Term A. R, 3 = EaBter ^^ aphy » to the EKcerpts from the Fine

Term 1219, and a ease de Temaino llolls^jditedby MrRobert.?, amiabove

S, MicliaGlls A. R. lO^ incipiente IT^ all to the MS. caleudars of the Patent

is a oaoe from Michaehnaa Term and Close Rolls in the PubUo Beeord

A. D. 13S6. Ufliee, on which 1 have often relied.

' t nmst mclcnowledge in a general


iii \m liTi.^


sliire


14 INTRODUCnOX.

Hj»Mmcnot One tbing is clear. His name was not Bracton but

BniZ^ Henry of Bratton. It is written a very large number of

times upon contemporary RoUs and Feet of Fines and the

only variant for Bratton that is at all common is Bretton.

Certainly most of the MSS. of his treatise that I have seen

give a clear Bracton ; but their readings of proper names are

extremely corrupt; one has, for instance, to recognize the

English villages of Hatfield, Swanscombe and Itteringham

under such monstrosities as Hecfenur, Snanthanis and

Judlibam^ There is no room for doubt that the text writer

was the judge whose name appears on roU after roU, or that

the judge*s name if not Bratton was Bretton. However

Bracton he has been for centuries, and so let him be to the

end.

A Devon- Hc has becn claimed by two Devonshire villages, Bratton

Fleming near Exmoor, Bratton Clovelly near Dartmoor, also

by Bratton Court in the parish of Minehead on the Somerset-

shire side of Exmoor, There is but little evidence in favour

of any of these claims ; there is another Bratton in Somerset-

shire, Bratton Seymour near Wincanton, there are Brattons

in Shropshire and Wiltshire, Brettons in Yorkshire and

Wales ; but there are good reasons for connecting him with

Devonshire. In 1212 a William Raleigh was presented by

the king to the church of Bratton Fleming*; he may have

been the William Raleigh whose judgments Bracton has

made immortal and Bracton may have been his pupil. As

proof of Bracton s connection with Bratton Court, a tomb in

the church of Minehead has been shown as his, but it seems

beyond doubt that he was buried in the nave of Exeter

Cathedral where long afterwards Bratton's altar stood,

Bratton*s bell was rung, and Bratton^s mass was chanted.

We are thus absolved from believing that he had, like the

1 OA and a few other MSS. of own hand, and the corrections on

the treatisegivethenameasBratton. them are very likely in his hand-

I refer to f . 188 b where he takes his writing ; his name throughout is

own name as an illustration. As to Bratton. There was a contemporary

the passage on f. 1, almost all MSS. judge, William le Breton; his name

make him speak of himself simply as however is invariably spelt with a

Ego talis, The Devonshire Assize single t, while Henry always has tt.

RoUs known as Coram Rege Rolls * Rot. Pat. vol. 1, p. 93 b.
90 and 96 must have come under his


^


bracton's life. 15

skeleton in the Minehead tomb, an abnormal number of
teeth\

The best proof of his burial in the Cathedral is given by his piace
two interesting deeds relating to the manor of Thorverton.
That manor lies near the Exe half-way between Exeter and
Tiverton. Henry the Second had given it to the monks of
Marmoutier*. In 1272 they conveyed it to John Wiger,
(probably a member of the family whose name is bome by
Broadwood Wiger a village hard by Bratton Clovelly,) subject
to a charge of six pounds a year for maintaining two chaplains
to celebrate masses in Exeter Cathedral for the soul of Henry
of Bratton late chancellor of that church. Five years after-
wards Wiger conveyed the manor to the Dean and Chapter,
to provide at the altar in the nave of their church before
which Henry of Bratton was buried, masses for the souls of
the kings of England, of Henry of Bratton and of John Wiger
the grantor*. Edward the First seized the manor as an
escheat on Wiger s death, but, the conveyances being proved,
the Chapter recovered possession of it*. The conveyance by
the monks of Marmoutier was made in consideration of a
sum of 392 marks described as paid to the monks out of the
goods of the late chancellor and the goods of John Wiger by
the hands of the said John Wiger. From this it would seem Hia last wui.
very likely that Wiger was the executor of Bracton's will, and
that in pursuance of his will the chantry was endowed*.

It is in the west country, more especially in Devonshire, His woridiy

*f ^ ^ r *f possessions.

that we find him active both as judge and as churchman, and
the little that we can hear about his worldly possessions bears
out the supposition that there was his home. That we should
hear but little is to his credit. His eamest denunciations of
judges who make a profit of their office are not vague gener-
alities®; they have point enough when read in the light of
contemporary history. Some of his fellows became very rich,

1 See the account of Minehead in ^ Bot. Parl. vol. 1, p. 3.

Mnrray's Guide to Somersetshire ; ^ By the kindness of Mr Hamp-

Collinson, History of Somersetshire, shire the Librarian of the Cathedral

vol. 2, p. 31; Notes and QiierieSi I have been allowed a copy of the

3rd Series, vol. 9, p. 298. conveyance. which is still among the

3 Monasticon, voL 6, p. 1097. title deeds of the Chapter*

8 Twiss, vol. 2, p. Ixviii. » Br. f. 2, 106.


His oonnec-
tion with the


16 INTRODUCTION.

scandalously rich if we may trust Matthew Paris; Thomas
Multon* for example and Robert Lexington*. Henry of
Bath, the judge with whom Bracton is most commonly
associated, amassed vast wealth by discreditable means ; one
of his companions, (perhaps it was Bracton,) charged him
openly with taking bribes ; he could afford to pay a fine of
two thousand marks'. Still there are some signs that
Bracton had other means of livelihood besides the judicial
salary of forty pounds, though such signs are of uncertain
value since he may have had a namesake. Thus when in
1254 John of Munedene confesses that he owes eighty-four
marks to Henry of Bratton, apparently the price of crops
grown on land at Clopton in Suffolk, we cannot be quite sure
that the creditor is our Bracton*. On the other hand we
may well see him in the Henry of Bretton to whom in
1261 Walter Raleigh and Isabella his wife grant for life the

Raieigha. manor of Tykenbrede in Comwall*. This manor we may
perhaps identify with a spot called Tuckenbury which lies
between Linkinhome and Liskeard^ Again we may see him
in the Henry of Bratton against whom as tenant of the
manor of Saunton in Devon, William of Punchardon and
Ermengard his wife bring an action in 1253 for the dower
whereof she was endowed by her former husband Thomas of
Saunton^ The manor of Saunton Court lies in the parish of
Braunton, a little south of Morthoe and the wild north coast,
a few miles from the village which still bears the name of
the family of Ermengard^s second husband, the village of
Heanton Punchardon. Will the reader remember this lady s

Kmiengard not verv commou name — Ermenofard wife of William of

orPuncluir- "^ ^

don. Punchardon ? She will be of use to us hereafter.

With many of the Devonshire landowners Bracton must
have been familiar. Year by year for twenty years he went

* Mat. Par. vol. 4, p. 49. example of careful conveyancing.

2 Mat. Par. vol. 6, p. 138. * I owe thifl Buggeation to Mr Leslie

» Mat. Par. vol. 5, pp. 213, 223, Stephen.

240. ^ Coram Rege RoU, No. 93, m. 27.

* Tower Assize Bolls, No. 21, m. I have not been able to trace this
26. The debt is secured elaborately action further, but the manor seems
by Bureties and penalties. to have long remained in the family

* Feet of Fines, Gornwall, A. R. of Saunton. Risdon, Deseription of
46, No. 3. This is a noteworthy Devon^ ed. 1714, vol. 1, p. 111.


H


BRACTON^S ECCLESIASTICAL CAREER. 17

among them as a judge of assize, heard their causes, associated
them with himself as justices. Raleighs and Punchardons,
Traceys and Beaupels sat with him on the bench at Exeter,
Morchard, Moulton, Torrington, Chulmleigh, Bamstaple,
Umberleigh, for assizes were taken at many places^; no
wonder then if some of them were his friends and he had
his home among them. Wife or child he can not have had
for a reason now to be given.

Like most of the great judges of his age he was an
ecclesiastic, though it is only in the last years of his iife that,
to our knowledge, he had any benefice. In the thirteenth
century the chapter of Exeter had amone: its members more his career

J r o ^ aa an eccle-

than one famous lawyer. At one time the great William ^^*»<=-
Ealeigh was its treasurer*, at another Ralph Hengham was
its chancellor^ Bracton became archdeacon of Bamstaple
on 2l8t Jan. 1264* ; after a few months he resigned the arch-
deaconry for the chancellorship of the cathedral which was
conferred upon him on the 18th May 1264*. In the autumn
of 1268 that office was given to another and new appoint-
ments were made to prebends in the cathedral of Exeter and
the coUegiate church of Bosham which are described as those
of Henry of Bratton*. We may conclude from this and some Hisdeatu.
other evidence that he had but lately died. Already in
February 1272 the manor of Thorverton was subject to the
charge for maintaining masses for his soul.

That he studied law at Oxford, was professor, doctor Didhestudy
utriusque juris and what not, has been repeated many times
with much confidence. The sole foundation for the whole
story seems to be the bare assertion of Bishop Bale, a flimsy
foundation indeedl That there was already a flourishing law
school at Oxford is certain®, that Bracton may have been of

^ See Braoton^s two Assize BoUs, ii. — xiii. ; Oliver, Lives of Bishops

known as Ooram Bege RoUs, No. 90 o/ Exeter, p. 281.

and 96. ^ See as to this myth the article

^ Le Neve^s Faati^ ed. Hardy, vol. on Bracton by Mr J. M. Bigg in the

1, p. 414. Dictionary of National Biography

> Ibid. p. 417, 409. and the authorities there cited.

* Ibid. p. 405. B See Ohronicle of Evesham (BoUs

« Ibid. p. 417. Series), p. 267.

« Ibid. p. 417; Twiss, vol. 2, pp.

M. I. 2


18 INTRODUCTION.

it; is not iinlikely but quite unproved ; but he may well have
got his law, as some of his greatest contemporaries got theirs,
namely as a clerk in the king's court or the king's chancery.
To suppose that he made his fame by "practising at the
bar" would probably be an anachronism.

HiOa<uciai For more than twenty years before his death he was a
judge and during at least some part of that time he held
pleas before the king himself The evidence of this matter
can hardly be weighed unless we know something of the
judicial organization of the time. The king, who was now at
Westminster now elsewhere, kept by his side a few professional
judges who heard the pleas which foUowed the king. Other
professional judges sat during term time on *the Bench' at
Westminster and heard the Placita de Banco. We ought
not to think of these two sets of judges as forming two such
distinct coUeges as existed in later days ; a judge who was at
one time with the king would at another be on the Bench at
Westminster ; still the king seems generally to have chosen
as his personal attendants judges of experience, and probably
it was reckoned promotion when a judge was selected to hear
cases, which in theory or fact were litigated coram ipso rege.
At irregular intervals, five, six, seven years an eyre for all
pleas (ad omnia placita) would be instituted in the counties.
For each county two or three of the professional judges
would be commissioned along with some prelate or baron and
knights of the shire. Besides these general commissions,
there were special commissions for the possessory assizes;
generally one of the professional judges was empowered to
hear this, that and the other assize of mort d'ancestor or
novel disseisin, and was trusted to choose his own associates ;
a very large number of these special commissions was issued
every year. The easy work of delivering the gaols was done
annually with more or less regularity, but the professional
judges were seldom troubled with this.

N»tureofthe Now BS to thc uames of the ludffes who cfo on an eyre, or
who are sent to take assizes, there is no lack of mformation ;
they occur on the Patent, Close and Fine Rolls. Also there
is little difficulty in discovering who sat on the Bench at


bracton's judicial career. 19

Westminster in any given term. ' Feet of fines ' exist by the
thousand, and the judges before whom the concord was made
are always named in them. But as to the judges who were
with the king, the task is harder. Whether as yet they were
appointed by any enroUed document seems very doubtful;
the Plea Rolls seldom name them ; and it is very rare to find
the record of a fine levied coram ipso rege. This last fact
will not surprise us, for in after days the Court of Common
Pleas (and this 'the Bench' was coming to be) was the
proper place for real actions and consequently for fines.
Still such records do exist, just in sufficient number to prove,
were other proof wanting, that while certain judges were at
the Bench certain others were holding pleas before the king
himself".

Now the first known fact in Bracton's judicial career is^^JlJJlJ®
that in 1245 he visited the counties of Lincoln, Nottingham *°®y®-
and Derby as a justice in eyre along with Roger Thurkelby,
Gilbert Preston and others; he was at Lincoln on the morrow
of the Ascension, at Nottingham on the 30th of June".
Seetiiingly he was never sent on any other eyre of the
common kind ; but late in 1259 he was sent by the baronial
council then in power on an eyre of a very special character
for the redress of grievancesl In 1248 however there begins
a long series oif entries on the Patent Rolls which shows that
from that time until his death he was constantly commissioned
to take assizes in the south-westem counties, Comwall, Devon, a» justice

' of assize.

Somerset, sometimes Dorset and Wiltshire ; rarely was he
sent elsewhere*. This series goes on with hardly any break
until the end of 1267 ; the last entry that I have found is
dated the 26th of December in that year*; we have seen

^ Out of several thousand fines I H. 3, m. 10 d ; this seems the only

have seen less than a dozen levied one in this year ; in two years time

coram ipso rege. they beoome common. The first

3 Bot. 01. 29 H. 3, m. 8 d; Bot. entry from the Fine Boll in the

01. 30 H. 3, m. 8 d ; Feet of Fines for Excerpta is from 1250 (vol. 2. p. 82).

Derbyshire; Feet of Fines for York- The Ooram Bege Bolls 90 and 96 are

shire, 25 to 30 Hen. 3, No. 251 ; see roUs of assizes taken by him. They

also Tower Assize BoU, No. 10. should be printed.

> Bot. 01. 44 H. 3, m. 18 d. <» Bot. Pat. 52 H. 3, m. 33 d. The

* The first entry that I have seen last entry in the Excerpta e Bot. Fin.

is dated 12 Feb. 1248, Bot. Pat. 32 is from 1267 (vol. 2, p. 458).

2—2


20 INTRODUCTION.

other reason for believing that he died in 1268. Hence
we might infer with certainty that he was one of the regular
permanent judges. But further there is an entry on the
Close RoU under date 7th Aug. 1259*, which declares that
henceforth special justiciaries (specialea jtiMiciarie) are only
to be committed to the foUowing persons, namely, Roger of
Thurkelby, Henry of Bath, Henry of Bretton, Giles of Erding-
ton, Qilbert of fteston, William of Wilton, John of Wyville.
This seems to mean that a commission to take this particular
assize or to hear that particular action is only to be graHted
to one of the judges here named. It looks like an attempt
of the baronial council to limit the king's power of appointing
any one whom he pleases, to act as justice for this occasion
only, an attempt prophetic of future statutes*. Now with the
exception of Bracton all these judges at one time or another
sat on the Bench at Westminster and fines were there levied
before them. But Bracton seems never to have sat on the
Bench. I have examined several hundred feet of fines and
thus constructed the table of justices who sat on the Bench,
which will be found at the end of this Introduction ; my
results agree fairly well with those obtained by Dugdale, and

Notasiustice so it appears certain that Bracton never held the placita de
banco .

Hehoidsthe That at times he held the placita coram ipso recfe there

pleaswhich . , , .

jouow the is evidence, sparse indeed, but yet sufficient. In a cartulary
of Waltham Abbey is found a copy of the chirograph of a fine
levied as early as the autumn of 1248 coram ipso rege; the
justices named in it are Henry of Bath, Jeremiah of Caxton

1 Rot. Cl. 43 H. 3, m. 7 d. Berks, Bucks, Devon, Derby, Tork

^ The justices of assize aotaaUy- and 'Divers Counties* until I ob-

commiBsioned in the next year are tained several coqcurrent authorities

all the above and Peter Percy, John for the judges of each term. An

Cave and Nicholas de la Tour. The examination of the fines for other

numberduringthepreviousyearshad oounties might lead to some modifi-

been considerably larger, fifteen or fication of the list, but the search

yet more, induding some, e.g. Bobert seemed quite sufficient to show that

Walerand, who may have been re- Bracton never was one of the regular

garded as royal partizans. After occupants of the Bench. In Bot.

this the number again increases Hund. vol. 1, p. 14, jurors speak of

slightly, and Walerand among others a case as decided by Henry of Bath

was again commissioned. (MS. Indez and Henry of Bretton justices of the

to Patent BoUs.) bench ; but this is but a verdict and

' I looked at the fines for Bedford, refers to a past time.


bracton's judicial career. 21

and Henry of Bratton*. The foot of another fine levied
between 1246 and 1256 giyes us as the judges who are with
the king, Henry of Bath and Henry of Braston*. In another
from the summer of 1257 Henry of Bath, Henry of Bretton,
and Nicholas de la Tour (de Turri) are the judges*. Just at
this date we find Bracton in receipt of £40 a year from the
Exchequer, the usual judicial salary*. A Plea RoU of 1253
speaks of a past time when Jeremiah of Caxton and Henry
of Bretton held the pleas coram rege*. In 1255 a case is to
be heard by Henry of Bath, Henry of Bratton, Henry de la
Mare and Nicholas de la Tour and others of the king's
council in the king's court*. In 1254 the king provided
Bracton with a house in London^ in 1253 and again in 1256
with royal venison^ Lastly Matthew Paris has preserved
the record of a suit between the Abbot of St Albans and the
Bishop of Durham. It foUowed the king; the writs com-
manded appearance coram uobis ubicunque fuerimus. In
November 1256 it came before Henry of Bretton and
Nicholas de la Tour at ^Winchester ; a judicial writ was
issued and tested at Clarendon by Henry of Bretton; the
next year it came before the same two judges at Westminster
and the judicial writ was again tested by Henry of Bretton®.
At this moment Bracton seems to have been the premier of
those judges whom the king had with him. From all this it
may be inferred that from 1249 to 1259 or thereabouts, he
was a judge constantly employed in hearing pleas before the
king. That he should not either have.been sent on eyre or
have held the placita de banco is rather curious; but the
same is true of Jeremiah Caxton with whom he is more than
once afisociated, and of the more famous or notorious Robert
Walerand ; Nicholas de la Tour again does not appear on the
Bench until many years after he has been holding pleas

1 MS. Harl. 391, f. 71. * Placitorum Abbreviatio, p. 131.

« Feet of Fines, Divers Counties, « Eot. Pat. 39 Hen. 3, m. 3 d ;

No. 208. A hole after the word Foed. vol. 1, p. 320.

tricesimo makes the exact date doabt- ^ Bot. Pat 38 H, 3, m. 2. (MS. Ind.)

ful. 8 Rot. Cl. 37 H. 3, m. 3 ; Rot. Cl.

3 Divers Counties, No. 332. 40 H. 3, m. 6. (MS. Ind.)

* Issue Bolls of the Exchequer ^ Mat. Par. (ed. Luard), vol. 6, pp.

(Record Commission), p. 53. 330, 331, 347, 348.


22


INTEODUCrriON.


Hlalaal
yean.


Statement
tbatbe was
killedat
Lewes
nntrae.


before the king, and Henry de la Mare and William of
Wilton, both distinguished judges, appear there but very
easually. The natural inference is that the king found
Bracton a useful man to have about him.

For the years after 1259 there is less evidence. Bracton
steadily took assizes in the south west, but that he was with
the king I have seen no proof. However when the time of
storm and strife is over he again appears in high place. In
the spnng of 1267 he was appointed member of a commission
of prelates, judges, barons and knights to hear the claims of
* the disinherited,' of those, that is, who had forfeited their
lands by siding with de Montfort *. He and another royal judge,
Richard of Middleton, are named between a bishop and an
abbot and before all others, and he is named before Middleton.
It seems likely then that all along and until his death be
held pleas before the king and some have conjectured that
he may be called chief justice. A thorough search among
existing records would probably reveal a few more facts*.

It must not be dissembled, however, that as to his death
a certain difficulty is created by an entry on the Fine RoII,
which seems to have escaped the notice of his biographers,
though it has long been in print. The roll for A. R. 49
(A.D. 1264 — 5) has several writs which direct that the
interest, fees and penalties due to the Jews in respect of
the debts owed by certain favoured persons shall be forgiven.
One such writ, dated 8th March, 1265, is made in favour of
Adam le Despenser. Then comes the following entry: —


1 Rot. Cl. 61 H. 3, m. 10 d. Isti
assignati Bunt ad querelas ezhere-
datorum audiendas. Bishop of St
Davids, Henry of Bratton, Bichard of
MidcUeton, Abbot of Tintem, Bobert
Neville, Eustace Baliol, Boger Su-
meiy, Alan de la Zouche, William
of S. Adomar, Adam of Gesemuth,
Simon of Crey.

' It has been thought that he may
have bome the title of chief justice
during the interval between the death
of the Barons* Justiciar Hugh le
Despenser at the battle of Evesham,
4 Aug. 1265, and the appointment,
8 March, 1268 (Bot. Pat. 52 H. 3, m.


23), of Bobert Brace as chief justioe
to hold pleas before the king him-
self. This last date must be very
near that of Bracton^s death. But
the daims of Bobert Walerand de-
serve consideration, for it seems that
he pronounced the sentence of Win-
chester, Sept. 1265; such at least
seems the meaning of the following
lines from an ancient poem (Chronicle
of Bishanger, Camd. Soc. p. 145) : —

Exhaeredati proceres sunt rege
jnbente

Et male tractati, Waleran B. dicta
ferente.


BRACTON AND THE BARONS' WAR. 23

'Consimilem literam habet Johanna soror et heres Henrici de
'Brattona qui interfectus fuit in conflictu habito apud Lewes*.'
Less than a year after the battle this entry was made.
However it is absolutely certain that Henry of Bratton the
judge was not slain at Lewes ; many entries on this very roU
and other later rolls set this beyond doubt and debar us from
the interesting question under which banner he was fighting
on the fatal day. We must suppose either that he had a
namesake, or that the clerk who wrote the Fine RoU made a
blunder. The latter altemative seems the more acceptable.
Of a second Henry of Bratton no trace has been found, and
the writ in question would hardly have been made in favour
of a nobody. Two of the king's justices were killed at Lewes,
William of Wilton fell by the sword, Fulk Fitz Warin was
drowned*. It may be that the name of one of them should
have appeared in this writ instead of that of their illustrious
colleague.

But the mention of Lewes must remind us that the ten Greatevento
• last years of Bracton's life were great years in English history,
years of discontent and strife, of dissolution and reformation,
of constitutional growth and civil war. The Mad Parliament,
the Provisions of Oxford, the Provisions of Westminster, the
paper constitutions, the fruitless negotiations and projects
and compromises, the MLse of Amiens, the battle of Lewes,
the Parliament of 1265, the battle of Evesham, the sentence
of disherison, the dictum of Kenilworth — these are still
&mous. The question then is natural, what part did Bracton
play in them? On the answer to this may depend our
opinion as to the authenticity of the most celebrated of
the words attributed to his pen.

The answer must be that he played no prominent, no Hepiayedno

t^ J A^ ' prominent

picturesque, part, did nothing that any chronicler would note. gSJitei.
A little more may be said. He became a judge at a time
when Henry was already provoking the storm, when par-
liaments were already clamorous for reform, when year by
year the complaint went up that despite oaths and confirma-

1 Rot. Fin. 49 H. 3, m. 7. (Ex- « Ribhanger^g Chronicle (RoUs

cerpta, vol. 2, pp. 421—2.) Series), p. 28.


24 INTRODUCTION.

tions the charters were not kept, that writs were issued
contrary to the law of the land. Such complaints, if they
were complaints against the king, were complaints against
his judges also. A royal judge of the time may have felt
Avith the discontented barons, the discontented nation ;
Roger Thurkelby could confide to Matthew Paris his dislike
of the non obstante clause, his dread of the Poitevin
favourites'; but an open attachment to what we are wont
to tbink the patriotic and constitutional party would hardly
have been possible. Bracton however grew in favour with
the king, held the specially royal pleas before the king
himself. Stili when the storm burst he did not lose his
place. On the contrary the entry on the Close Roll dated
7th Aug. 1259, of which we have already spoken, shows that
he was trusted by the then dominant barons. He is one
of seven judges who may be commissioned to take assizea
Again in the same year, directly after the publication of the
Provisions of Westminster, the ruling barons sent out com-
missioners to inquire into and redress the popular grievances,
especially the misdoings of the sherifTs and royal bailiffs.
The work was to be done by the judges associated with
trusted members of the baronial party. Bracton was com-
missioned for Gloucester, Worcester and Hereford along with
Humfrey of Bohun Earl of Hereford. Tliis seems clear proof
that he was not regarded as a royal partizan".

During all that follows Bracton is still commissioned

HewM ^o take the Devonshire assizes; men may come and go,

STp^S constitutions toay be established and annuUed, king or earl

may be victorious, but Bracton takes the Devonshire assizes.

1 Mat. Par. vol. 6, pp. 211, 317. should be read in connection With

^ Bot. Cl. 44 H. 3, m. 18 d. 28th the statement of the WoroeBter.annal-

Nov. This commission is enroUed ist (Ann. Monast. vol. 4, p. 446)

very near the celebrated Provisions. that the justices who came to Wor-

It is for an eyre of a very special cesteron IJuly, 1261,were repulsed,

character and gives valuable infor- because seven years had not elapsed

mation as to the causes of the great since the last e^rre. These state-

crisis. Bishanger (Bolls Series, p. 5) ments do not refer to Bracton'6

reports that in 1260 the justices in journey with the Earl of Hereford ;

eyre were repulsed from Hereford, but they are important illustrations

because, aocording to the great men of the national grievances. The king

of the county, the eyre was contrary oppresses the nation ; the judges are

to the Provisions of Oxford. This the instruments of oppression.


X


^


THE ROLLS IN BRACTON*S HANDS. 25

He is commissioned before and after the day of Lewes, before
and after the day of Evesham. What we say of him might
be said of at least some other of the judges. William of
Wilton, who was layman and knight, fought and died for the
king ; but on the whole the judges seem to be gaining that
position outside party politics which we in this day think
should naturally be theirs. Almost the last that we read of
Bracton is that he is appointed to hear the complaints of the
Disinherited^ It would seem then that he must have been
a moderate, fair-minded man, whom all could trust and
regard as a great lawyer and a righteous judge, that they
could say of him as he wished, Justus es, domine, et rectum
judicium tuum".

One small fact of considerable value was revealed by the
diligence of Madox'. In 1258 the barons of the Exchequer
were ordered to procure that the various plea roUs of Henry's
reign which were in the hands of divers persons should be
restored to the Treasury, the proper place for them ; an The order
order was made that Henry of Bratton should bring in the oftherous.
roUs of Martin of PateshuU and William of Raleigh; a
similar order was made for the restoration of the rolls of
Stephen of Segrave which were in the hands of the Abbot of
Leicester and the Prior of Kenilworth*. The order may have
been a very proper order ; it was only right that the records
of the king*s court should be deposited in the custody of
public officers ; and yet we may be the losers, for who shall
say how much more perfect Bracton's book might not have
been, had he not been deprived of the roUs whence he drew
his law ? At all events here is a fact to be remembered in
the course of our investigation.

^ See above p. 22. 3, m. 12 d. Segrave died in the

^ Br. f. 108. Abbey of Leicester, that is, the Abbey

8 Hist. Exch. vol. 2, p. 267. of S.Mary des Pr6s. Mat. Par. vol.

^ Exchequer Memoranda, Lord 4, p. 169.
Trea8arer's Bemembrancer, 42 Hen.


26 INTBODUCnON.


§ 4. 0/ Bractms Text.

Theeditions We must How tiim from the man to his text. But where
treiuiae. are we to find that text ? In 1569 an edition was published
by Richard Tottell. A reprint of this was published in 1640,
and what in substance was hardly better than another reprint
was lately published under the authority of the ilaster of the
RoUs. The text of 1569 was in its day a not discreditable
product. The most serious fault to be laid to the charge of
its anonymous author ^ T. N.' is that to all seeming (though
in his pre£Ekce he shows himself aware that the manuscripts
teem with interpolations) he wished to give as ample a text
as possible and chose for his guide the manuscripts which
would give the most. About forty variants, many of them
trivial, were all that he found worthy of note ; though he
says that twelve manuscripts were examined. But though
not discreditable in its day, the text of 1569 should satisfy
no one in this more critical age, when the collation of MSS.
The has become a comparatively easy task. I have myself seen

in London, Oxford and Cambridge near thirty MSS.; there
• may well be fifty in existence, some firom the thirteenth,
most fi:om the fourteenth century. The differences between
them are very numerous and very important, and the making
of a good edition will some day demand several years of hard
labour. Not that the true reading of any given sentence is
often seriously doubtful; Bracton's language is simple and
straightforward. AUowance being made for misprints and
for the obvious blunders of copyists, many of which an
intelligent reader can rectify by conjecture, the text of 1569
will generally give each sentence pretty correctly ; the proper
names have sufifered worst and this makes the verification of
Bracton*s citations a somewhat difficult task ; also the passages
of Roman Law unfamiliar to the transcribers have suffered
very badly. But when the question is what sentences should
be in the book and in what order they should come, then
there is often grave cause for doubt; the manuscripts


bracton's text. 27

disagree, and the printed text is a thoroughly bad guide.
Not unfrequently one will find in a MS. a passage which
certainly does not come from Bracton. Two plain instances ^^^^^
may be seen in Totteirs text ; reference is made to a case "** ******
before John of Metingham, a.judge of Edward the First s day,
a case which has been recently printed in one of Mr Horwood'8
YearBooks*; also we read how the period of limitation for
an assize of mort d'ancestor was changed in king Edward's
day by the Statute (1275) of Westminster the First". But
in some manuscripts one will find worse things than these ;
sometimes a large selection from the Edwardian statutes is
incorporated*, or again occasion is taken of Bracton*s mention
of the tree of consanguinity to foist in a whole treatise of this
or that leamed canonist on the subject of consanguinity and
affinity^ ; in one case may be found embedded in the middle
of Bracton's text what openly proclaims itself to be the work
of the Spanish priest Johannes de Deo*.

Against such obvious interpolations it is possible to guard
oneself ; but there are subtler sources of error. A reader of
the.printed book, who reads with the persuasion that his
author was a sensible, orderly-minded man, will note many
passages which seem to be dislocated and some at least of Addidones.
these he will suspect of being marginal notes which in the
process of transcription have forced their way into the text.
Occasionally what has all the appearance of being a note of
this kind has lodged itself in the very middle of a sentence^
A glance, however superficial, at the MSS. will strengthen
the suspicion. It is rare I believe to find a MS. which has
in its margin notes, which are as old or nearly as old as

1 Br. f. 26. This seems olearly ^ ME. I have given some account
the case from 1294 in T. B. 21 and of this in the Law Quarterly Review,
22 Edw. I. p. 449. I have not yet yoI. 2, p. 278.

seen this case in any MS. ' I have given one instance of this

2 Br. f. 263 b. Most of the MSS. in the Law Quarterly Review, vol. 1,
give the new rale and seem to have as p. 340. See general^ as to the state
their common original some MS. into of the MSS. the article in L. Q. J$.
whichthat rnle was interpolated ; MB, vol. 1, p. 189, by Yinogrado£f, who in
MM, OA, OB, however give the old a few weeks learned, as it seems to
law fixing the return of John from me, more abont Bracton*8 text than
Ireland as the period of limitation. any Englishman has known since

3 ME. Selden died.
* ME, OB.


28 INTEODUCnON.

Bracton's day; marginal notes which are clearly of a later
time are not very uncommon and a few of these have become
part of the printed text^; but in most of our MSS. the older
notes or glosses have abeady got themselves out of the
margin. Often enough however their true nature is revealed
by the {act that they are to be found only in some of the
MSS., while in others they appear now at this point now at
that of the text ; having once left their proper home they
have wandered about in search of a convenient resting place.
Then again there are MSS. in the margin of which one
occasionally finds the word Ad-di-cio so written as to stamp
as an addition the passage over against which it is set. This
points to some older MS., the head of the family, which had
these passages not in its text but in its margin. In oue MS.
there are at least nineteen passages thus marked. In more
than one there are traces of these Addidonea having been
numbered, thus Addicio Prima, Addicio Tercia, Addicio
Undedma. In another MS. the word Plus has been used for
the same purpose, and it may be suspected that the word
Notay which is very often found, has sometimes though not
always a similar meaning'.
The Digby Thcre is, again, one MS. in the Bodleian Library * which

is of exceptional importance. Here a large part of what we
have been wont to regard as Bracton s text stands in the
margin. Two scribes at least were employed on the work ;
the parts written by one of them are rich with marginalia in
his handwriting ; the other either left marginalia uncopied or
else incorporated them in the text. Now the matter which
is still in the margin comprises many, if not all, of the
passages which in corresponding parts of other MSS. are
stamped as Addidones and many other passages as well ; in
all they make a large mass, perhaps a thirtieth part of the
printed book. The great majority of them are found as part
of the text in the printed version of the treatise. They

^ The most elaborately annotated one or more may be seen also in

versions that I have seen are the two MB, MC, MD, MI, MM and CB,

Cambridge MSS. CA, CB. while MA has several passages marked

s MH and OC are good speoimenB as Flugy Flus usque huc and the like

of MSS. which show Addiciones; but ^ Digby, 222, my OA. . -^


MS.


mmm


ADDICIONES. 2&

consist mainly of explanations, illustrations, qualifications, of
the text; but sometimes new topics are introduced and
discussed at length. A decided opinion would be premature,
but they look as if they might well have come from Bracton
himself. The MS. has the semblance rather of a book which
is still in the making, than of a book which was written by
one man and afterwards glossed by another. Among the
marginalia are citations of cases from very early years of
Henry's reign, and I have not noticed any citations which
raight not have been made by Bracton. These marginal
matters are not the rough notes of a practising lawyer
made merely for his own behoof; some are elaborate and
leamed disquisitions. The passage for instance in which
the Bracton of the printed Vulgate makes his greatest
parade of Roman law with numerous citations from Code
and Digest, stands in the margin^ But of course it were
dangerous to dogmatize until a real eflfort has been made to
settle the text by a detailed comparison of all existing MSS.

The best example of the problems which lie in wait for variances

, , between

an editor of Bracton is afforded by what is perhaps the most *he mss.
remarkable passage in the whole book. Seldom have more
momentous words been written in a lawyer's text, for this is
the famous passage about the king so often quoted in the
political trials of the seventeenth century, quoted by the
President of a High Court of Justice when an English king
was to be sent to the scaffold', repeated over and over again
by legal theorists and historians as giving the opinion of the
great mediaeval judge. A brief digression about this matter
will serve the purpose of showing how little trust should be
put in the text of the printed book. Other illustrations
might easily be chosen, but this should be of interest to
others besides lawyers and antiquaries^

Bracton^ in his orderly manner has come to speak of

1 The whole of De Actionibus, cap. • See Vinogradoflfs artiole in Law

12, § 6 (f. 114). CB also has this Quarterly Review, vol. 1, p. 189. I*

in the margin and in some other can add a little to what he there

MSS. it is altogether wanting. said, but the discovery, such as it is,

« State TriaUy ed. 1809, vol. 4, is due to him.

col. 1009. ^ Br. f. 34.


30


INTKODUCTION.


ThepaaMge
about the
kingand
hU


Jeremish,
V. 16.


charterSy charters of feoffment and so forth. He distinguishes
royal from other charters. Conceming royal charters and
the deeds of kings, he says, neither the justices nor private
persons can nor ought to dispute, nor can they interpret
them should any doubt arise. If the words are dubious,
obscure or ambiguous, the king's interpretation and the king^s
pleasure must be awaited, for whose it is to grant, his it is to
interpret ; even if the charter be altogether false because of
an erasure or a forged seal, still it is better to proceed to
judgment before the king himself. Thus far the undoubted
Bracton. Then comes the foUowing : —

Item nec factam Begis nee cartam potest qois iadicare, ita qaod fiictam
domini Hegis irritetar^ Sed dicere poterit qais qaod Bex iastioiam feoerity
et bene, et si hoc, eadem ratione qaod male, et ita imponere ei qaod iniariam
emendet, ne incidat Bex et iastioiarii in iadioiam iriventis Dei propter
iniariam. Bez aatem habet saperiorem Deam scilioet. Item legem per
qaam fiactas est Bex. Item oariam saam yidelicet comites, barones, qoia
oomites dicantar qaasi socii Begis^ et qoi habet sociam, habet magistram, et
ideo si Bez faerit sine fraeno, i. e. sine lege, debent ei fraennm ponere.

If, (the book continues,) the king is left unbridled by his
barons, his subjects will cry to Our Lord Jesus Christ to
bridle him ; to whom the Lord will answer, 'Behold I will
' call upon them trom afar a mighty nation and an unknown,
' whose tongue they shall not understand, which shall tear up
' their roots from the earth, and by such shall they be judged
* for they would not judge their subjects justly '; and in the end
bound hand and foot He will send them into the fiery fumace
and outer darkness, there shall be wailing and gnashing of
teeth.

The reader will feel a strange shock as he passes
from these glowing words to the icy calmness of the next
sentence, 'If a private person make a gift of a certain


1 Observe that the jadges are not
to pronoance the king'8 charter void.
Thls' leems directed against the ase
of the non obstante olaase, one of the
great grievances of the time. The
text which hitherto has been veiy
submissiTe to the king, aUowing him
to say that his charter means any-
thing or nothing, now begins to tarn
against him. The follo^ing sentence


is obsoure, and I have not found an
acceptable variant. It seems to mean
this — It is allowable to say that the
king has done justice and right;
this being so, it must be aUowable
also to say, when such is the truth,
tiiat he has done iU, and thus to
impose on him the duty of making
amends.


THE KING AND HIS MASTEKS. 31

* thing for a future consideration it behoves that the things

' which are to be riven in retum be certain.' This contradfcted

o ^ ^ _ by other '

abrupt change of key might not arouse suspicion. But the p""»»»*-
doctrine here delivered is flatly contrary to several other
passages in the book. The writer has abeady had and
taken a good occasion for explaining the nature of the *
kingship, when near the outset he made a classification of
persons. AU are below the king and he is below none save
God. He has no peer in his realm, much less a superior.
He ought to be below no man, but only below God and the
law. He ought indeed, like Christ whose vicar he is, to
obey the law ; but if he do wrong and will not make amends,
it is his sufficient punishment that he must await God's
vengeance. No one may presume to dispute his deeds,
much less to go against his deeds (£ 5 b). Such is the theory
which Bracton has put in the proper place for a theory of
royalty. It does not stand alone. Elsewhere he says inci-
dentally, Rex parem non habet, nec vicinum, nec superiorem
(f. 52), Parem autem habere non debet nec multo fortius
superiorem (f. 107)...erit iniuria ipsius Domini Regis, neo
poterit ei necessitatem aliquis imponere quod illam corrigat
et emendet nisi velit, eum superiorem non habeat nisi Deum,
et satis erit illi pro poena quod Deum expectet ultorem
(£ 368 b), Pares non habet, neque superiores (f. 412).

The contradiction is glaring and it is a contradiction over
the most buming question of contemporary politics. May the
earls and barons force the king to do right and abstain from
wrong ? There is yet however one passage to be noticed ; its
authenticity seems unquestionable^ The king ought, when
petitioned, to make atonement for his misdeeds, quod si non
fecerit, sufficiat ei pro poena quod Dominum expectet ultorem,
qui dicit, *Mihi vindictam et Ego retribuam*, nisi sit qui
dicat quod uniuersitas regni et baronagium suum hoc facere
debeat et possit in curia ipsius Regis (f. 171 b). Now under
this nisi sit qui dicdt, Bracton may well be stating his own
opinion. Most undoubtedly he held that the king waa

^ MA, MB, MG, MD, ME, MF, have I observed anything snspicious
MH, MI, MK, ML, OA. In no MS. abont this passage.


32 INTRODUCTION.

bound by law, that Gkxi would exact of him a very strict
account. The king who does well is God*8 vicar ; the king
who does ill is the devirs vicar (f. 107 b). He is very much
in earDest about this; doubtless he thought that the king
was doing ill ; many sentences in his book can have been no
pleasant reading for Henry. But between this hint that the
baronage and the incorporate realm may perhaps restrain an
erring king and the dogmatic statement that the king is
below his court, that the barons are his equals and his
masters, that if they do not restrain him they will be
damned, there is a vast gult
Thecontra. Thc discrcpancies between these various passages were

dictionsoon ^ 111

perceived. brought to Ught iu the great trials of the seventeenth
century. Every one cited, every one could legitimately cite
Bracton. But long before they had been apparent to at
least oner reader. In the Cambridge library there is a sump-
tuous manuscript comprising Bracton's treatise and divers
other books of law. Bracton's text has been elaborately
glossed by one whom there is some reason for calling John
of Longueville, a justice of the time of Edward II. Against
the passage in which his author expressly treats of the
kingship and says that the king has no peers (f. 5 b), he sets
down an argument drawn from the more questionable passage
(f. 34), and proves with syllogistic parade that the king has
equals, superiors, masters\ But indeed the contradiction
lies on the surface. Conceivably the same man at different
times wrote all these sentences; but he can not have
intended that all of them should appear as parts of one book ;
one of them looks very much as if it had been written witli
the very object of explicitly contradicting the others. Nor
even were there no manuscripts extant, could there be much
doubt as to which passage should be regarded as the after-
thought or interpolatioa The statement that the king has
fellows and masters is contradicted by at least five statements
found in all parts of the book.

1 MS. Dd. vii. 6, folio 4 dors. ac- Mr Nichols in his edition of Britton
cording to a pencil pagination of the and described by him, vol. 1, p. Iz.
Bracton. This is the MS. used by fol.


STATE OF BRACTON'S TEXT.


33


Now in the Digby MS. this passage is not to be found. Jf*2,^*^||*
Unfortunately however it is in a part of the treatise which
was copied by that one of the two scribes who did not copy
marginalia. In six other MSS. I have found no trace of it\
In an eighth it is not to be found but Addicio de Cariis
appears in the margin*. In another good Oxford MS. it is
comprised in an Addi-cio^ Lastly the MSS. which give it
differ among themselves as to where it shall come; very
often it is made to precede the paragraph which in the
printed book it foUows*.

The conclusion then to which we are led is that thisThese

famouB

famous passage is no part of the original text. Certainly it J^J!? Sfthe
is of ancient date ; it is found in the Fleta*, a book which is '''^ ^*^*-
believed to have been written in 1290 or very shortly
afterwards^ Its vehemence savours strongly of the tipae of
revolution which ended with the battle of Evesham. * Bracton
may have written it in the margin of his manuscript, having
learned and unleamed many things since he wrote the body
of the treatise. On the other hand it seems unlikely that
one who steadily acted as judge after the death of de Mont-
fort, who was selected to hear the claims of the Disinherited,
had written what must have been an earnest, almoat violent,
defence of the barons' cause. Of course however this interest-
ing question cannot be solved by a priori speculations^


1 MA (the Boyal MS.), MI, MM,
MN, CC, and the Chohnely MS. at
Lincohi*B Inn.

2 MB.
» 00.

* In MF, MH, MK, OC, CA, and
the Hobhouse at Lincohi'8 Inn the
passage De cartis vero regiU etfactis

regum non debent .procedatur ad

judiciumi comes after Item necfactum
regis stridor dentium,

« Fleta, f. 17.

* Niohols, Britton, vol. 1, p. zxvj.
7 Attention may here be called to


Case 1108. A strong statement of
the principle that the king cannot be
sued is enrolled as part of the jndg-
ment of the conrt; Dominus Bex
non potest summoneri nec preceptmn
sumere ab aliquo cum non habeat
superiorem se in regno suo. This is
verj contrarj to ttie old fable, as
Bacon called it (Works, ed. Spedding,
vol. 7, p. 694), a.ho\iiPraecipeHenrico
Regif in which perhaps some still
believe. See Allen, Royal Preroga-
tivCf Authorities, p. xxxij and Stubbs,
Const, Hist. vol. 2, p. 238.


M. I.


M to^dS" Now I have made no effort to settle Bracton'8 text


34 INTRODUCTION.

§ 5. 0/ the Date of BractorCs Treatise.

;" Now

^SJiriSiuu. this could not be done as a bye work ; some day it will, we
may hope, be the serious task of a competent scholar. It
seemed to me that I should best be furthering that task by
publishing this Note Book. So though I have occasionally
examined such MSS. of the treatise as lay readiest to hand,
I have not gone very far behind the printed text. Enough
has been said however to show that the printed text is very
untrustworthy, that it contains many things which were
better in the margin or in an appendix ; and, this being so,
the problem of assiguing a date to the treatise, is obviously
difficult. In particular we may be induced to fix too late a
date by some few passages which will tum out to be no part
of the original work. Still if this danger be had in miud a
few cautious conclusions may be attained which will be
valuable in the course of our argument. The first conclusion,
as I think, is this that the book is unfinished, and therefore,
in a certain sense, has no precise date.

™J2^ That it is an unfinished book seems most likely. The
last part of it consists of an elaborate treatise on the writ of
right. We naturally expect that this will end with some
account of the trial, the duel and the grand assize. About
this much might have been written which would have been
of great use to practitioners ; it is the consummation of the
whole procedure ; all that has gone before touching the forms
of writ and count, the summonses, defaults, essoins, warran-
ties, exceptions, should be preliminary. But we are dis-
appointed ; instead of that for which we look we get three
brief chapters about the mesne and final process in personal
actions ; and so ends the book. This unsatisfactory ending
is enough to rouse suspicion and the suspicion is confirmed if
we remember that, when dealing with the trial by battle of
criminal cases, Bracton told us that the reason for a certain
rule would be given below when the wager of battle in a


DATE OF BRACT0N'S TREATISE. 35

civil action was described\ This is a distinct case of a
promise never fulfilled ; the wager of battle in a civil action
is never described.

Other cases there are of unfulfiUed promises, though ^nfumiied
these are less distinct. Thus there is a promise to treat of
the action for recovering a villein (placitum de nativisy, of
the action of debt', of the action of trespass*, and of fines*.
Now though the writer does touch these topics incidentally,
still such casual treatment is not what he has led us to
expect. What is more, if we look at the contemporary plea
roUs, or at the cases in this Note Book, we shall see that an
exposition of these matters is just what is required in order
to make the treatise a very complete account of the law
administered in the king's court. Bracton had Glanvills
work before him and Glanvill had devoted a book to the de
nativo habendo, another to the pla^dtum de dehito, another to
the finalis concordia. Fines were matters of daily import-
ance ; the action of debt was becoming common in Bracton s
time and by the end of that time the action of trespass was
by no means rare. The constant mention that he makes of
villein status as a matter which may come into debate in
the course of various actions setS us on hoping, but hoping in
vain, that he will tell us about the one action in which the
question of status can be directly raised and decided. The
promises he gives us are promises which we have a right to
expect and they are unfulfilled.

UnfulfiUed, that is, in the printed book. The supposition
that we have lost something should not be altogether ex-
cluded ; and a diligent examination of all the MSS. might
possibly bring to light some as yet unprinted chapters. But
unfortunately there is much to make us think that we have

^ £r. f. 141 b ; et est ratio assignata agentibus et jus suum prosequentibus

infra de oivilibus actionibus de dueUo in eisdem per breve de debito vel

vadiando pro terra. See also f. 331.; quasi, ideo inferius de debito plenius

sicut infra de dueUis. dicetur.

.2 Br. f. 7 ; infra plus de hac mate- * Br. f. 164 ; ut infra de trans-

ria de placito de nativis et fugitivis, gressionibus ubi plus de ha,o matetia.

qualiter revocantur in servitutem qui ^ Br. f. 33 b ; et de hac materia

Bunt extra potestatem dominorum et inveniri poterit infra, de finali con-

in fuga. cordia.

3 Br. f. 60; sed quia succuritur

3—2


36 INTRODUCTION.

already the whole of what was writteit The fact that Fleta
and Britton break off where Bracton breaks off is an almost
conclusive proof that the trial of the writ of right was never
described ; if Bracton's description of it has been lost, it was
lost within a few years after his death.
scif-contr». That hc at one time intended tb perfect his account of
the great ultimate remedy for the recovery of land seems to
me certain, and I think it probable, though less certain, that
his scheme comprehended some treatment of final concords,
of actions of debt and of trespass and the action for reducing
a fugitive serf into villeinage. Were this not so it would be
rash to regard as evidence of incompleteness the occasional
occurrence of self-contradictions ; even in these days of print
it is not unknown that a very good writer may contradict
himself. When however we scan Bracton s work with the
belief that it is unfimshed, this belief will find fresh sustenance
in many quarters. Passages which we should otherwise
reject as interpolated by a later hand may be admitted as
the author's affcerthoughts though they do not harmonize
with their context. In a few instances we find contradictions
so glaring that we cannot ascribe them to confused thought
or insufiicient analysis. One striking example may be
enough : — the question is three times raised, (surely a very
notable question when regard is had to the " common law " of
later days,) whether land can be made devisable per formam
dmiy that is to say, if there be a feofiment to A and " his
heisB, assigns or devisees '' {Uhi et heredibus tuis, vel cui dare
vel dssignare in vita, vel in morte legare volueris) can A
devise the land? — twice is this question answered in the
affirmative, the devisee can recover from the heir ; once the
form of writ applicable for the purpose is given*; once it is
jsaid that such a writ, though as yet unheard of, may well be
made'; but in a third passage it is denied after argument
that the devise will be valid*. Now were we sure that
Bracton finished his book we should be strongly tempted to
reject one or two of thes^ three passages ; but as it is, they

1 Br.f.412b. ■ Br. f.49.

>Br.f. ISb.


*■" -'^3^


DATE OF BRACT0N'S TREATISE. . 37

may all well be his, representing the fluctuations of his own
opinion or the fluctuations of judicial practice. So again, to
refer once more to the ever famous words*, it is conceivable
that Bracton wrote that the king has as superior to him his
court, to wit his earls and barons, though the same Bracton
repeatedly and emphatically denied that the king has any
superior save God and the law, or even any equal*; just in
his day such theories as these were being rapidly moulded
and remoulded by the course of events.

On the other hand the opinion that we have here a mere The book an

^ orgamc book,

collection of various tracts written at difFerent times andj^^^^f^g^
loosely strung together seems unfounded. It is an organic
book, it has a definit^ intelligible plan, the parts are closely
interdependent, references are made and in general correctly
made to what has gone before and what is coming afterwards;
some parts are more highly finished than others, but the
whole hangs together very tightly and resists any attempt to
cut it up into independent sections.

Findinc: a book left unfinished by one who died in 1268 Mostofthe

o •' ^ cases he cites

it were a natural first guess that he was actively engaged JgLf u!!?
upon it when death stayed his hand. Now it well may be
that to the very end of his life he still from time to time
added here a gloss and there a note to a manuscript which
was yet in his possession ; but the text as a whole must have
an earlier date, indeed the next piece of evidence that we have
to consider would incline us to give it a much earlier date.
This consists of the cases which are cited fi^om the roUs.
His manner of citing will be described more fully below;
here it is enough to say that as a general rule he gives the
date of the case, or else information which enables us easily
to fix the date. A glance at the table printed at the end of
this Introduction will show that at least nine-tenths of his
cases come fi:om the years between 1216 and 1240.

With A.R. 24 (A.D. 1239 — 40) the continuous stream of veryfew
citations ceases. I believe that only nine cases are vouched
as being of later date than this, one from an eyre of A.R. 29

1 Br. f. 34. 2 Br. f. 6 b^ 52, 107, 171 b, 368 b, 412.


38 INTBODUCmON.

or 30*, two (one of which is twice cited) from A.R. 31*, one
from A.R. 32", one from A.R. 32 — 33*, one from A.R. 33*, one
from A.R4 38*, one probably from A.R. 42 (the printed text
gives A.R. 13) lastly one from a.r. 46. Only nine cases from
twenty-two years; one would like very much to say that
these have been interpolated, for it must seem to us vety
strange that a text writer should prefer old cases to new.
But saving only the first and the last two, I have not found
in the MSS. any warrant for treating these citations otherwise
than as part of the original text. The case from A.R. 38 is
given without any mark that arouses suspicion, though A.R. 37
is the date to which it is most commonly assigned. The
citation from A.R. 42 may have been interpolated', and there
is good evidence that the citation from A.R. 46 was inter-
polated®; but I have seen nothing to show that the inter-
polator was not Bracton himself, and so far as MS. authority
goes, these citations stand on the same footing as much that
passes as Bracton's work. There are, again, cases which are
cited without any date being mentioned. Their number is
not very large, about forty if some vague references be
included. Some of these I have been able to trace to the
period from which Bracton has drawn most of his lore, the
first four and twenty years of the reign. Others seem to
belong to a considerably later time ; one of them was tracked

1 Br. f. 413. Some MSS. give a.r. according to the printed text, S.
30, and ascribe it to an eyre of Archbishopof Canterbury, wasparty.
WilliamBaleiKh;thismustbewrong; The year or the initial letter most
many other MSS. cite from the eyre be wrong ; but OA and several other
of Thurkelby in a.b. 29; Bracton MSS. give B., which stands for Boni-
was with him on this eyre. A few, face and is right. There is a case on
in particular OA, have not the cita- the roll for Mich. a.r. 87-38 (Corani
tion. It may be an interpolation. Bege Boll, No. 93, m. 10 d) which

2 Br. f. 414, Abbot of Glastonbury looks like the case in question.

and Bishop of Bath, some MSS. give ^ Br. f. 277 b. The heirs of John

A.R. 30 some 81 ; Br. 114, 414 b, of MonmoutK OA and other MSS.

Peter ofSavoy and Abbot of Rievaulx, have a plain xlijj which would easily

some MSS. give a.b. 30, some 31. be turned into xiij. See as to this

3 Br. f. 234 b, Simon of Vendenge case Boberts, Calendarium Genealo-
and Jordan de Vlsle, This is in gicum, vol. 1, p. 78; I have found
OA. one stage of it in 1258, Coram Bege

4 Br. f. 241. W, Bardolf, This is BoU, No. 106, m. 2.

in OA. 8 Br. f. 159. OA has this in the

^ Br. f. 368. -R. Syward. This is margin ; it is not in MI or CA, or

in OA. (according to Sir T. Twiss) the Pari-

^ Br. f. 339 b. A case to which, sian MS. ; still it is oommonly found.


DATE OF BRACTON^S TKEATISE. 39

7

by VinogradofF to A.R. 1254^; this and a good many others of
its fellows seem not to have formed part of the text as
originally written*. Inferences founded on these imperfect
citations would he hazardous. Of all passages open to the
suspicion of having been marginal notes these are thq most
open. A note of a case which mentions no date might be
very useful to the person making it ; it would in general be
very useless to others. Bracton writing for the world gives
chapter and verse with laborious precision ; Bracton, or any
one else, scribbling in the margin for his own use would have
no occasion to be so particular. On the whole then though
the copious stream of citations ceases with A.R. 24 (A.D. 1239
— 40) I have not found authority for rejecting the few scattered
cases which come from a time as late as A.R. 37 or 38 (A.D.
1252 — 4) or even for supposing that yet later cases were not
cited by Bracton himself. An ordinance made on the occasion
of the dedication of the Abbey of Hayles, which took place
on 5th Nov. 1251 is mentioned and I have seen no reason for
consigning it to the margin.

That some of the interpolations come from Bracton someofthe

, latest cita-

himself seems very probable. The printed .text gives a gJJJ^^JJ® *<*
subtle exposition of the doctrine of possession as applied to a ^^^^^-
case in which a donee obtains physical control of part of the
thing given, while the donor remains in possession of the other
part. There are several good MSS. in which this is not
found*. In the middle of it we read, ' Male actum fuit in
' contrarium inter Rogerum de Reyne et Robertum de Shute
' de terra de Vulverton.' Now this case (it concemed the hun-

1 Reyne v. Shute, Br. f. 49 b ; Oxford. Br. f. 285 b, wbich is in the
Coram Rege RoU, No. 96, m. 3. margin of OA, and comes I believe

2 Thus the case of Godfrey of from Mich. 1253. On the other hand
Crawcombe, Br. f. 29, is omitted in the case of the Abbot of S. Albans
many MSS. ; the case before Lexing- and Geoffry of Childwick, Br. f. 56 b,
ton at Clarendon, Br. f. 45, is not in seems part of the original text and
OA or MI ; Henry Tracv'8 case, Br. must probably be later than 1250 ;
f. 88 b, is in the margin of OA and for compare Mat. Par. vol. 5, p. 129.
OB and is not in MI ; the case of the ^ See f. 49 b. The interpolation
man of Cookham, Br. f. 144 b, is in begins with Item si in carta dona-
the margin of OA and is not in MF tionis and ends in the same folio
or MI ; the case of Thomas de Vipont, with per iLsum suum nihil acquirit.
Br. f. 194 b, is omitted in several It is not in OA, OB, MH, MI.
MSS.; so is the case of S. Mary,


M1254.


40 iNTRODUcrriOK.

dred of Dulverton) may be seen on the preeious roU of assizes
taken by Bracton in the year 1254\ He held that a would-be
donee had not obtained possession either of the land or of
the hundred court which pertained to the land The case
was taken to the court above by the process of certificatio; as
to the land Bracton's decision was affirmed, but as to the
hundred it was reversed ; this appears from a little strip of
parchment annexed to the roU which well may be in Bracton'8
handwriting. " Male actum est in contrarium," then, is most
likely the complaint of a judge over-ruled but not convinced.
On the same roU there is a case between William Montacute
and Andrew Wake'; in the margin of the Digby MS. of the
treatise I have seen without any context the words Wake
wOTk^ilte Munt Agu. That Bracton annotated his own work as late
as 1254 seoms plain, and unless some MS. will enable us to
remove into the margin a yet larger mass of matter than that
on which the Digby MS. casts suspicion, we shall have to hold
that he was at work on his original text up to that date or a
few years earlier.
Srenrofor ^^^ ^^7 surprise us wheu we remember that the yast

deutente. majority of the cases on which he relied were already twonty
years old. Now in this context we should note a passage
which stands at the outset of his book. Stating the scope
and purpose of his work, he tells us that he had given his
mind to ancient judgments of the just*. The judges of
to-day, this seems his opinion, are perverting the law, they
are too. often ignorant and partial ; we must go back to the
wisdom of the men of old time. Now if due weight be given
to this declaration it seems to follow that the judges whom
Bracton revered, PateshuU and Raleigh, already belonged to
a past age; their decisions were vetera judicia, Another
passage may serve to show that by this phrase he did not
necessarily refer to a very remote period ; he tells us how on
a certain point there was a difFerence of opinion among the

1 Coram Bege Boll, No. 96, m. S. f. 1. This is the reading of the

3 Ibid. m. aO. printed text ; but the MSS. generally

3 Ego talis animum erezi ad vetera give peracrutando and require a diffe-

judicia justorum persorutanda dili- rent punctuation of what follows.

genter non sine vigiliis et labore, Br.


BHHK^'


DATE OF BRACTON^S TREATISE. 41

ancients (contentio inter veteres) and solves the questidn by
decisions cited from the fourth and sixteenth years of Henry
the Third\ Still it was to old judgments that he went for
his law. This may seem strange to us brought up in the
belief that the latest decision of a court is of ,more value than
any previous determination. But we have Bracton s word for
it ; he deliberately chose old judgments, judgments of judges
no longer on the bench, as the best authorities.

Thus much as to the earlier of the two limits within work sub-

stantially

which the book must be placed As to the later ; Bracton JJ^/^flJ^gfiQ
did not die until 1268 ; but he cannot have written the main
part of his book or have revised it during the few last years
of his life. In the first place he repeatedly uses a phrase
(donec terrae fueHnt communes) which seems to imply that
England and Normandy ought to be and (please God) will
some day be, under the same ruler^ This phrase must have
lost its meaning when in 1259 Henry resigned his claim to
Normandy. Again it seems fairly certain that Bracton when
he was writing did not know of the Provisions of Westminster,
that he wrote therefore before October 1259. In some cases
he states law inconsistent with those Provisions'; in others
he ought to notice them if they be law. This would be a
more thoroughly convincing argument were it not necessary
to remember that there may have been moments at which
some at least of Henry's judges treated the Provisions as nuU
and void, the outcome of usurped power. Most of them were
incorporated in and reenacted by the Statute of Marlborough
in 1267 ; this would hardly have been done had they then
been regarded as of indisputable authority.' But Bracton
would certainly have liked some of them to be law ; would if
he could have made them law. Thus he says that a murder
fine should not be exacted in case of accidental death, but
that a custom to^the contrary prevails in some places*; the

1 Br. f. 367. peciaUy f. 169 b. Prov. West. c. 15

3 Br. f . 298, 415 b, 427 b, 428 b. declaring that the essoinee need not

^ Thus Prov. West. c. 14, pro- warrant the essoin by oath is con-

hibiting gifts in mortmain withoat trary to what is said on f . 352.

tbelord^sconsent isinconsistentwith ** Br. f. 135.

much that Bracton says; see es-


/


42 INTROnUCTION.

Provisions ordain that in such a case no fine shall be due\
Again it was one of the flagrant grievances of the time that
no damages could be had in the assize of mort d'ancestor ;
this in many cases enabled a lord to keep out the heir for a
considerable while without making compensation ; this grave
abuse was redressed by the Provisions*: Bracton uses strong
language about it, thinks that damages should be given ad
reprimendam malitiam dominorum capitalium, suggests (as it
seems to me) that damages may be given, but confesses that
hitherto (hucusque) they have not been given*. This is
hardly the language of one who knew of the Provisions but
held them invalid*.
No «mskjn But another date can be fixed with greater certainty. I
think it most unlikely that Bracton wrote a certain part of
his book or ever revised the whole of it after the 9th of May
1256. The part in question relates to the essoin de malo
lectL The essoinee is given a period of a year and a day for
his sickness ; at the end of that time he must appear. But
how is the year to be reckoned ; in particular what is to be
done about leap year ? Bracton argues this question at length
in a very curious passage*. The point, he admits, is disputed,
but his own opinion is that in every case a year for this purpose
means 365 days and 6 hours, so that the essoinee will always
have precisely the same space of time no matter whether
a 29th of February occurs or no. A closely similar passage is
found in the Note Book, and there what Bracton regards as
the true doctrine is ascribed to Martin, that is, doubtless, to
Martin of Pateshull®. Now it has long been known that the
law on this point was fixed by an ordinance'. The Record
Commissioners when printing that ordinance in their edition
of the Statutes seem to have thought that the best authority
for it was a copy in the Rcd Book of the Exchequer, where it

^ Prov. West. o. 22. favour of free alienation without the

* Prov. West. c. 9, 10. lord'8 consent; see f. 45 b.

« Br. f. 285. 6 Br. f. 359-60 ; see aUo f. 344 b.

* This is of interest as showing ' Note Book, Case 1291.

some sympathy with the smaller ' The Statutum de Bissextili in

landowners who procured the Pro- the common editions of the Sta-

visions. The same leaning is be- tutes.
trayed by the vigorous argument in


^


DATE OF BRACtON^S TREATISE. 43

is dated 9th May 1256, but that this date was questionable^
There is much higher authority; for the ordinance, as one
would naturally expect from its form, is on the Close RoU
with the date just given*. This fixes that date as certain.
It is a close writ directed to the justices of the bench reciting
that there have been differences of opinion and providing that
for the future the 29th of Feb. shall be reckoned as making
one day with the 28th. This decides the dispute against
Bracton. But this is not all ; Bracton himself was present at
the making of this ordinance. The enrolment ends with
these words, "This writ was provided and framed in the
"presence of the king, Richard Earl of Comwall, Richard
"Earl of Gloucester, Henry of Bath, Henry de la Mare,
"Henry of Bratton, Walter of Merton and others of the
" King s Council." So of course Bracton knew of the writ ;
we may well suppose that he said all that could be said
against the making of it, for it ran counter to what seems to
have been a pet theory of his ; but after this there can have
been no doubt as to what was law.

Another indication of date must be mentioned; much Partnot
has been made of it by Dr Giiterbock and rightly. As an 1266.
example of a gift dependent on a contingency Bracton takes
" I give you this land if Earl Richard shall be made King of
"Germany*." Now Richard was elected king in January
and crowned in May 1257* and it is natural to argue that
he cannot have been elected, at least cannot have been
crowned, when Bracton wrote this passage; it would be
somewhat pointless to take as illustration of a contingency
an afready accomplished fact. But it is further urged that the
words cannot have been written before the death of Richard^s
immediate predecessor, William of HoUand, who did not die
until January 1256. This argument though often repeated
seems unsound. There was at least one earlier time at which
it was probable, or (which is equally to the point) was thought
probable in England, that Richard would be King or Emperor.

1 Statutes of the Realm, vol. 1, ' Br. f. 47.

p. 7. * Mat. Par. vol. 6, p. 601, 640 ;

^ Rot. Cl. 40 H. 3, m. 12 d. vol. 6, p. 341.


writt^n after


/^


44 INTRODUCTION.

Already in 1250 during the lifetime of Frederick the Second
the Pope having entertained Richard with marked honour,
the rumonr got abroad in England that Innocent would make
an Emperor of the Earl*. At the end of the year Frederick
died. In his account of the next year Paris says that tbe
Pope offered the Empire to Richard, and that Richard refused
it, whereupon the Pope tumed to William of HoUand". For
some years however he pressed the kingdom of Sicily upon
the unwilling Earl ; Richard he wished to have as an ally, for
Bichard waa very wealthy*. Of course the kingdom of
the Romans was not the Pope's to give, either de jure or de
facto. Still just at that time to be the papal candidate or
nominee was to have a good chance. It seems certain then
that in 1251 Englishmen were speculating as to Richards
chance, and at any time between 1250 and the coronation
in 1257 wagers may have been laid that the crafty Earl of
Comwall would despite his protestations some day wear the
imperial crown. Still the year 1256 is certainly the year to
which the allusion most naturally points.
conciuaiona To sum up tho wholc mattcr. The bbok seems to be the

as to oate. ^

unfinished book of one who died in 1268, who for anything
we know never published what he had written*, who perhaps
to the hour of his death hoped to resume his task and some-
times jotted down a new note in the margin of his manuscript,
who in 1258 was deprived of the rolls that he had been using,
who never revised his work as a whole after 1266, who was
seriously engaged on it after 1250, who relied for his law
chiefly on cases decided before 1240, who regarded such cases
as vetera judicia. Why he left it unfinished we cannot say;
perhaps the loss of the rolls was irreparable ; perhaps his
duties as a hard-worked judge left him no leisure; perhaps
the voice of law waa silenced by the clash of arms ; perhaps
sweeping innovations, such as the Provisions of Westminster,
demanded changes in his text which he had not the energy

^ Mat. Par. yoI. 5, pp. 111, 112. mass of MS. is descended from fme

^ Ibid. p. 201. into whioh an interpolation had lAeen

8 Ibid. pp. 347, 432, 457. made after 1275. T

* As before noted (p. 27) the great *


fe^'


bracton's authorities. 45

to make ; at present an answer could be no better tban a
hazardous guess.


§ 6. 0/ Bractons Selection of Auihorities.
The later the date to which the book is assicfned the seiection of

,®. authorities

more remarkable is Bracton's selection of authorities ; but very

' ^ remarkable.

any way this is remarkable enough. We are almost justified
in saying that what he writes is a treatise on the law of
England as administered by two judges, Martin PateshuU
and William Raleigh. Stress must be laid on this point, for
it will be of much importance hereafter ; therefore of Pateshull
and Raleigh a little should be said.

Martin PateshuU was from the beffinnins: of Henry's Martin

. , . , Pateshull.

reign the foremost, perhaps m an untechnical sense we may
say the chief, of the king*s professional judges. He was not
chief justiciar ; that title belonged to Hubert de Burgh, who
of course was no lawyer ; the chief justiciarship was not a
post for a lawyer, at all events for a mere lawyer. But in
any list of the regular justices Pateshuirs name so constantly
precedes all others that he must have enjoyed some pre*
eminence, though perhaps not of a very definite kind He
was a churchman, archdeacon of Norfolk, dean of St PauFs^
He seems to have acquired a high reputation for leaming
and industry. It was hard work to go circuit with him, so
strenuous and zealous a judge was hel RoUs extant, and
for the more part in print, enable us to trace his movements
in eyre after eyre ; from other sources we can discover but
very little about him He is nearly the first, if not the very /
first, Englishman, who becomes famous as a leamed in-
dustrious judge and no more. He died on the 14th of Nov.
12291

1 Hardy's Le Neve, vol. 2, pp. 308, Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. Tol. 3, p. 190 ;
482. Annales Monastioi, yol. 1, p. 73

2 Roydl LetUrs, Heniy III. Tol. 1, (Tewkesbury) ; Tol. 3, p. 116 (Dun-
p. 342. staple); yol. 4, p. 421 (Worcester);

^ That he died in 1229 is beyond Annales Londonienses, yol. 1, p. 28.
all doubt. It is a fact attested by Bnt Sir Trayers Twiss (vol. 1, pp.
ieyeral first-rate chronicles. See xiv-xy) has attempted to keep him


46 INTRODUCTION.

wuiiaiu William Raleigh did not die until 1250, but his career as

** ** a judge came to an end some ten years earlier. Of him there
is more to be said, since he becomes for a few years a striking
figure in the history of England He had ah-eady been for
some time a judge in the royal court when the troubles of
1234 raised him to the highest place. In 1232 the king
broke with Hubert de Burgh and in his stead appointed
Stephen Segrave chief justiciar of the realm*. On this
foUowed the rising of the Earl Marshall and the delivery of
Hubert from his prison at Devizea The king was forced to
dismiss his alien councillors and Segrave along with them.
At Ascensiontide in 1234 the reversal of Hubert's outlawry
was pronounced in a great assembly of prelates and barons
by the mouth of William Raleigh. Henry did not fill up the
vacant justiciarship, but it seems plain that during the few
next years Raleigh was the premier judge, travelling about
with the king and hearing those pleas which foUowed the
king. He stood well with the king, was his trusted servant
and councillor. We read how in 1237 the king deputed him
to demand an aid from the barons*, how in the same year he
went on the king's behalf to watch the legatine council at
St Paurs, how he sat there in his surplice and canon*s cope*,
for besides being treasurer of Exeter he was a canon of
St PauFs*. But he did not long enjoy the royal favour. In
1238 the see of Winchester became empty. The king was
bent on obtaining it for his wife^s kinsman William of Savoy,
bishop elect of Valence ; but the monks wished for Raleigh,
objecting to the king s candidate that he was a man of blood.
Henry's angry retort alluded to Raleigh s judicial career —
" He has killed more men with his tongue than the Elect of

aliye until 1232, on the ground that 16, this evidenoe would be absolutely

in Bracton's tezt (f. 60 b) a oase is worthless when compared with the

cited from an eyre of PateshuU in express testimony of the chronicles

A.B. 16. The case is given in the and the silence of the roUs and the

Note Book (Gase 1294) as coming feetoffines.

from the eyre of a.r. 10-11. Of i Mat. Par. vol. 3, p. 220.

sixteen MSS. of Bracton at which I ^ Mat. Par. vol. 3, p. 380.

looked fourteen referred in the plain- ^ Mat. Par. yol. 3, pp. 416, 417.

est figures to a.r. 11 ; only two, * Hardy's Le Neve, vol. 1, p. 414 ;

OB and MN, gave a.b. 16. Finally, vol. 2, p. 403.

if all known MSS. mentioned a.r. . ■ -^


& ■ ^^


BRACTON^S AUTHORITIES. 47

" Valence has with his sword^" The raonks for a tirae gave
up Raleigh and elected Ralph Neville the king s chancellor ;
but the king induced the pope to quash the election. Mean-
while other chapters looked to Raleigh as to one who would
make a good bishop, one to whom the king could not possibly
object. In February 1239 he was elected bishop of Coventry
and Lichfield, in April bishop of Norwich. He chose Norwich
and was consecriated in September. But Winchester was
still vacant ; the monks would not have William of Savoy ;
nor when he died would they have Boniface of Savoy ; in
September 1242 they again chose Raleigh and despite the
king's opposition the pope confirmed their choice.

Henry then set hiraself to persecute Raleigh persistently The kin«'s
and vindictively. No principle, so far as we can see, was Raieigh.
involved in the persecution ; the royal will had been crossed
and the king was obstinate and spiteful. Raleigh would not
give way ; he was driven fi:om the country. Not until 1244
could the king be reduced to reason. In the spring of that
year peace was made and Raleigh retumed to England. All
Englishmen, says Paris, save only some of the king s clerks
who had fomented the discord, were glad at his retum;
Benedictus qui venit in nomine Domini was on their lips, for
they had the highest hopes that good would come to king
and kingdom firom his ability and sound sense^ Very soon
after this we find him ta-king a somewhat leading part in a
parliament which re^isted the king's demands for money and
propounded a large scheme of reforms*. But we do not leam
that he became an active politician, and he seems to haye
lived on fairly good terms with the king*. In 1249 he left
for France to live there frugally ; he was sadly in debt, the
stmggle with Henry having cost him dear. He never
retumed to Engl9,nd and died at Tours in September 1250*.

It has been necessary to notice these things because the JJ^toQ.g
question may for a moment arise whether Bracton in choosing ?"RaiS|i°*
as one of his two highest authorities a judge who became pSrSiship?

1 Mat. Par. vol. 3, p. 494. * Mat. Par. vol. 4, p. 690; vol. 6,

2 Mat. Par. vol. 4, pp. 369, 360. pp. 1, 68, 94.

8 Mat. Par. vol. 4, p. 362 ; Stubbs, » Mat. Par. vol. 6, pp. 96, 117, 179.

Const. Hist. vol. 2, p. 62.


y


48 INTRODUCTION.

famous for his resistance to the king, may not be betraying
some political partizanship. But this seems improbable. It
is true that Baleigh came to be regarded as a champion of
national and ecclesiastical rights; men compared him even
to Becket and to Anselm ; Paris dilates on his wrongs. But
there is no reason to believe that either Henry or Raleigh
was contending for a theory of church or state ; the quarrel
was personal; the bishop had got what the king wanted.
Besides (and this seems decisive) it was Raleigh the bishop,
not Raleigh the judge, who withstood the king. Raleigh
the judge, whose judgments Bracton cites, was the kings
confidential minister. Paris, on the other hand, though he
speaks highly of Raleigh^s legal knowledge, ability and
general character, evidently did not regard his judicial career
as matter for much praise. Raleigh was a Matthew called to
the apostolate from the receipt of custom ; at his consecration
there was joy in the presence of the angels of God over a
repentant sinner^ It can hardly then be a respect for
constitutional government, a wish to curb the king, or indeed
any political thought or feeling, which makes Bracton single
out this judge from among all his fellows to be a father of
law for all generations*.
SSSlTof Now in Bracton*s pages we may count the occurrences of

Moip?¥lte8- the names of these two judges, PateshuU and Raleigh, by the
Kaidgh. dozen ; of any other judges he hardly ever speaks. The sum
total of what he has to say of them is I believe this : — He
mentions one case' or perhaps two cases^ which came before
Simon Pateshull, the great judge of John's reign, possibly a
kinsman of Martin. Certain distinguished persons get named,
because they accompanied Martin in some of his eyres and
being of high rank were named before him in the commission,
e. g. the Bishop of Durham and the Abbot of Reading ; they
however were not professional judges. William of York who


1 Mat. Par. rol. 3, p. 617. * Br. f. 50. Most MSS. have here

'^ For an estimate of Baleigh'8 Simonis or S, bnt if. occaBionaUy

character, see Stubbs, Const» Hist appears and may be the right read-

vol. 2, p. 302. ing.
5 Br. f. 422b.


BRACTON, PATESHULL AKD RALEIGH. 49

became bishop of Salisbury is mentioned thrice\ Roger Thur-
kelby perhaps once*; both of them were among the foremost
judges of their time. Of Robert Lexington whose judicial
career was very long we hear merely that on two occasions
he erred'; of his brother John of Lexington, who at one time
kept the king's seal, we hear that he also erred, and we hear
no more*. The name of Simon of Ropelay, who occasionally
took assizes, occurs once^; and there is notice of an attaint
taken by Engelard of Cigognd and others ; but Engelard the
keeper of Windsor Castle was most certainly no lawyer^
All this is insignificantly little ; or rather significantly little,
for it makes Bracton's selection of authorities an extremely
well marked, distinctive, selection. He is silent about his
own coUeagues, the men who sat with him on the bench, and
of their immediate predecessors, though among them there
were several who became famous as judges, in particular
Gilbert Preston, Roger Thurkelby, Henry of Bath, William of
York, Robert Lexington. But this is not all ; having gone
back to a past time he apparently picks and chooses among
the judges of that time. In particular he says hardly anything
of a judge who was a contemporary of Pateshull and Raleigh,
who rose to a more exalted place than was attained by either
of them, who certainly was an able lawyer if he was an
unscrupulous politician. He hardly mentions Stephen
Segrave, about whom some words are necessary since a
statement directly at variance with that which has just been
made is found in a book of high authority.

From the beginning of the reign Stephen Segrave has a Bracton'8
place among the royal judges second only to that of Pates- segrave.
hull, and before Pateshuirs death he was already high in the
king*s favourl He joined in the plot of those who schemed
for the fall of Hubert de Burgh, and when that fall was

1 Br. f. 130 b, 183, 374. Conse- date is wrong.
crated in 1247. See as to his re- » Br. f. 286 b, 418.
putation as a judge, Mat. Par. vol. 6, * Br. f. 46.

pp. 374, 634, 646. » Br. f . 292 b.

2 Br. f. 413, comp. Twiss, vol. 6, « Br. f. 293 b. As to Engelard'8
p. 268. The MSS. are about equally adventures see Plea^i of the Crown^
divided between Thurkelby and Ba- GlmLcester, 1221, Introduction, p. xiij.
leigh; but if it be Raleigh then the ^ Mat. Par. vol. 3, p. 187.

. M. I. 4


50 INTBODUCTION.

compassed (29 July 1232) he received the justiciarehip and
was associated with Des Roches, Passelew and Rievaulx in
the govemment of the realm\ Within two years (April
1234) the counter revolution threw him from power. He
seems to have made himself veiy detestable to the insurgent
barons and they ravaged his lands*. He fled to the abbey
of St Mary des Prte near Leicester and found it convenient
to revive a tonsure which had been long neglected'. The
king called him to a strict account and for a while he re-
mained in disgrace. He paid a heavy fine and was received
back again into the royal &vour. He once more became
a member of the royal council^ and we find him taking part
in its judicial proceedings; but seemingly he never served
again as one of the regular judges. He died in 1241. Now
certainly he was a great lawyer. A man of what was
reckoned humble birth*, he had made his way to the very
highest station, had been chief justiciar of England. Why
did Bracton neglect him ?

But did Bracton neglect him ? It here b^comes necessary
to join issue humbly and respectfuUy with a great historian,
the highest authority on such a question, except only Bracton
himself. Dr Stubbs has written thus: — "It is a curious

point that Bracton, although himself clearly a constitu-

tional thinker, gives the preference in almost all cases to the
decisions of Stephen Segrave, the justiciar of Henry III, who
supplanted Hubert de Burgh, and was practically a tool of
the foreign party. It is clear that Segrave, though a bad
minister, was a first-rate lawyer V Now the facts are these.
Bracton mentions Segrave but eight times. Only on three
occasions does he notice a difference of opinion between
Segrave and any other judge. Twice the difference is
between Segrave and Raleigh ; Bracton does not state very

^ Mat. Par. vol. 3, p. 220, 240. fordbly that again on p. 294 he says,

2 Ibid. p. 292. " Some of his [Heniy's] bad mini-

3 Ibid. 293. sters were among the best lawyers of

4 Ibid. p. 368, 404, 524. the age. Stephen Segrave, the suo-
^ Mat. Par. vol. 4, p. 169. oessor of Hubert de Borgh, was re-
^ Comt. Hist. vol. 2, p. 190, note garded by Bracton as a judge ef

3. Bracton's respeot for Segrave oonsummate authority."
seems to have struck Dr Stubbs so


^


BRACTON AND SEGRAVE. 51

clearly whose opinion he prefers: but once, as it seems to
me, he agrees with Segrave*, once with Ealeigh*. Once
again Segrave diflfers from PateshuU and Bracton takes
Pateshuirs sidel The 'ahnost all cases' therefore in which
Bracton gives the preference to Segrave resolve themselves
into one case or possibly two cases. This is almost all the
notice that is taken of a famous judge and chief justiciar, one
who imdoubtedly was, as Dr Stubbs calls him, a first-rate
lawyer. On five other occasions his name is barely men-
tioned*. There is no one citation from the roU of any eyxe
on which Segrave was sent without PateshuU, though of such
roUs there can have been no lack. On the other hand
citations from the eyre roUs of PateshuU and Raleigh occur
in great abundance. This point, of infinitesimal importance
in a history of the English constitution, must be of much
importance to any one who professes that he is editing
Bracton's Note-Book and therefore I am constrained to insist
upon it.

Various explanations may be oflfered, though this can be Expianatioiis
but guess-work The apparent preference of PateshuU and J^Ji^^J^g^
Raleigh may really be the result of mere chance ; Bracton
by some means or another got possession of PateshuUs roUs
and Raleigh's roUs; Segrave's he had not got, they were
at Leicester or Kenilworth ; all roUs should by rights have
been in the Treasury; Bracton could only use habitually
such as had come to his hands by happy accident. More
interesting would it be to detect some political inclination ;
Bracton " himself clearly a constitutional thinker " may have
slighted the authority of "the tool of the foreign party".
But Bracton's claim to be counted among those who sought

1 Br. f. 36 b ; about petty serjeanty ; so this is the citation of a De Banco
the passage seems to be an interpo- RoU. On f. 357 Segrave and Ra-
lation, and the anthor's own opinion leigh give a responsum to that in-
is left in much doubt. quisitive person Kichard Ducket. On

2 Br. f. 438 ; curtesy of second f. 369 b it is noticed that a certain
husband. See Oase 1182. case on the De Banco Boll, (it is

* Br. f. 130 b; forfeiture of wife's Case 397 in the note-book,) was

inheritance by husband's felony. decided in the presence of Segrave

^ On f. 16 b a case is cited from and the Chancellor. On f. 293 b and

an eyre of Segrave in Kent, but the 377 b two Coram Rege cases are cited

judgment was given at Westminster, as heard by Segrave.

4—2


52 INTBODUCTION.

to limit the kingly power rests mainly on a passage the
authenticity of which is extremely doubtful, and William
Baleigh whatever he may have become as bishop, was
as judge distinctly a kings friend. More probable does
it seem that the bias was not political, but juristic, that
Bracton regarded Pateshull and Raleigh as the heads of
a school of law and of lawyers. Of rival schools of lawyers
Englishmen know little. For centuries past our scheme
of justice has been so concentrated that rival schools have
been impossible. Every lawyer has belonged to the one
orthodox school of Westminster, or has been simply *no
lawyer '. Blackbum, Mansfield, Hale, Coke, Littleton do not
found sects; Bracton himself, so far as we know, founded
none. But in the first half of the thirteenth century it may
well have been otherwise and it was otherwise abroad. The
rapid influx of civil litigation into the royal court must have
demanded a rapid development of common law : and there
well may have been strong and permanent differences of
opinion among judges and lawyers even about fundamentals.
There may have been Proculians and Sabinians. In particular
the respect to be paid to Roman law may have been a hotly
contested point. We do not know how this was; perhaps
we hear only one side of the case ; the school of PateshuU
and Raleigh still lives and is eloquent ; its rivals, if rivals it
had, perished for they had no spokesman to match against
Bracton. Lastly we may not forget that when Bracton visits
Devonshire, he chooses a Raleigh to sit with him on the
bench, and that he holds land of the Raleighs. Possibly he
was the pupil, the clerk, the friend of Bishop Wilfiam.

At any rate the fact remains — the apparent preference of
two judges of a past tiine above all other judges past or
present. But in order to duly^ weigh this fact we must
descend to particulars, and consider whence it was that
Bracton obtained his lore of cases.
particuiara He cites as I reckou 494 cases ; this includes some vaerue

of hifl cita- « . ^

tion». allusions to matters of uncertain date. The nature of his

citations may be seen from the foUowing table which is
approximately correct.


^


CLASSIFICATION OF PLEA ROLLS.


53


Pleas in the Bench, a.d. 1217—1234 .
Pleas which foUowed the king, a.d. 1234-
Pleas from eyres of PateshuU
Pleas from eyres of Raleigh
Later cases expressly dated
Undated cases .


271

-1240 . 15

117

34

9

48

494

His method of vouching cases, when once it is mastered,
will seem very orderly and intelligible. The citations fall
into three great classes ; a few specimens of each shall be Three ciasses

, ofrollsused

glVen . , byhim.

i. Citations of De Banco RoUs, the rolls of the Bench. DeBanco
A complete citation of this kind will name no judges and no
court, but will mention the names of the parties, the county,
the year, and the term : thus —

Item ad hunc ultimum casum facit expresse de termino S.
Hillarii anno E^egis Henrici sexto in comitatu StaflTordiae de
Kannulfo Comite Cestriae et Priore de Kenelworth de ecclesia
de Stoke. (f. 246 6.)

...probatur de termino Paschae anno Regis Henrici xv**. in
comitatu Essexiae de Geruasio de Aldermanbury. (f. 407 6.)

Ad idem facit quod habetis de termino Paschae anno Regis
Henrici xyj®. in comitatu Suthantoniae de Engelardo de Cygoiny.
(f. 407 6.)

Et ad hoc facit de termino S. Michaelis anno Regis Henrici
xiiij®. incipiente xv®. in comitatibus Suffolkiae et Essexiae de
Emma quae fuit uxor Rogeri filii Swani. (f. 312.)

2. Citations of Coram Rege RoIIs. These are much coramiWge
rarer. Bracton will say of a case vouched from such a roll
that it is among the pleas which follow the king and will give
the year, but no term ; thus —

...ut inter placita quae sequuntur Regem, anno regni Regis
Henrici xix°., assisa ultimae presentacionis inter Priorem de
Wallingford et Rogerum de Quincy et Simonem de Thennore.
(f. 16 6.)


1 It is the more necessary to ez-
plain this matter at length because
the person who made indexes for Sir


Travers Twiss seems to have thooght
that every case belonged to some
eyre.


54 INTRODUCTION.

...ut inter placita quae Bequimtar Regem azmo xx^ assisa
nouae disseisinae de Waltero de Emdene et Alicia filia EmaldL
(£. 195.)

ByreRoiiB. 3. Citations of Eyre Rolls. In making these Bracton
names the county and almost always the judge. Often he
specifies no year, because to do this is needless. Fateshull,
for instance, vigited Yorkshire more than once ; therefore it
will not do to speak merely of his Yorkshire eyre ; one must
be more particular, must say his last eyre, or his eyre of such
a year. On the other hand it is quite sufficient to speak of
Raleigh*s eyre in Bedford, or Leicester, or Buckingham, for
(at least as principal judge) he visited those counties but
once, so there can be no confusion. Here are specimens : —

...ut de Itinere Episcopi Dunhohnensis et M. de P. in com.
Ebor. anno Regis Henrici tertio, assisa nouae disseisinae, Si
Rogerus de Halgheton. (f. 50.)

...in Itinere M. de P. anno Regis Henrici decimo in com.
Ebor. de Emma quae fuit uxor Raymeri le Franoeys. (£. 304 h,)

...ut de ultimo Itinere M. de P. in com. Ebor. anno Regis
Henrici x^ de quadam Juliana. (f. 298.)

Et de hac materia inueniatur in Itinere M. de Pateshulla ad
assisas nouae disseisinae capiendas et gaolas deliberandas in com.
Korth., assisa nouae disseisinae, Si Rogerus de Deneford. (f. 169.)

...ut de Itinere W. de Ralegha in com. Bedf., assisa nouae
disseisinae, Si Milo. (£. 170.)

...ut de Itinere W. de Ralegha in oom. Bedf., de quadom
Emma Bouastra. (f. 312.)

acgMi^OTi That the most important of the plea rolls would fall into
flcation. these three classes is just what we ought to expect if we
have read Bracton's account of the judicial organization of
his time. There are justices travelling about under various
commissions ; sometimes they are sent on a general eyre dd
omnia placita, sometimes their power is more limited, they
are to deliver the gaols and take the assizes, sometimes they
are specially authorized to take just this, that and the other
particular assize. In a classification of plea roUs, the rolls of
cases heard under these special commissions should form a
separate class as Assize RoUs. A few exist, notably two of


BaWW — iilii II II


bracton's choice of rolls. 66

Bracton's and several of Preston's. But Bracton does not
cite rolls of this class ; they would not be first-rate authority,
such assizes being taken by a single professional judge with
lay associates, or sometimes by four laymen. Then there are
justices residentes in banco. Lastly there are others who go
about with the king, who are at the king^s side. The yet
extant roUs at the Public Record Office will fulfil this
expectation; we find roUs of these three great classes.

Now with one exception* Bracton, I believe, cites noj^g^^^/®^^
Eyre RoU that is not a roU of PateshuU or of Ealeigh. On Pateshiii
the other hand he has more than a hundred cases from ^ ^ *
Pateshuirs roUs, more than thirty from Raleigh^s. Perhaps
this fact will not seem so significant to the reader as it does
to the writer of this. Therefore be it said that there must
have been a very large number of other Eyxe RoUs ; many
exist at this day ; many have perished. Thus, for example,
take the first eyre of the reign ; judges were sent into all the
counties of England except eight* ; every county would have
its roU ; Bracton cites but one of these roUs ; from the roU
for Yorkshire, which county was visited by Pateshull and the
Bishop of Durham, he vouches a dozen cases. Again in
1227 commissions were issued for most of the counties';
Pateshuirs joumey in Kent, Essex, Hertford, Norfolk and
Suflfolk supplies Bracton with a profuse crop of cases;
Segrave was sent into six counties, other judges were sent
elsewhere; Bracton culls no one case from their roUs. By
1250 the number of Eyre RoUs of Henry's reign must have
amounted to a hundred and more. Of course the very fact
that there were so many roUs would have obliged a text
writer, even if he had access to them all, to make some .
choice, to study and cite just a few. What I am at present
concemed to urge, is that any other text writer or student
than Bracton, would very possibly have thought it best or
found it convenient, to read and to cite an entirely different
set of rolls; to all seeming there must have been a vast
supply.

1 Br. f. 413 ; as to this oase from « jjot. Cl. vol. 1, p. 380 b.

an eyre of Thurkelby see above p. 49. ^ Rot. 01, vol. 2, p. 206 b, 213.


56 INTRODUCnON.

Hisdioioeof When Bracton cites the De Banco RoUs and the Coram

De Banco

b^^rSS. I^g® RoUs, he does not as a general rule name the judges
who heard the case. This ia very natural for without their
names the reference is complete and verifiable, and but
seldom do their names appear upon the roll. These citations
therefore do not explicitly set before us PateshuU and Raleigh
as the two judges whose decisions are really sound law.
Nevertheless the same principle or partizanship, caprice or
accident, which govemed the citation of Eyre Bolls, seems to
have been at work.

Diflferenti»- Wc are here tempted towards the sliffht anachronism of

tionoftlie ^ . *^

courts. apeaking of a Court of King's Bench and a Court of Common
Pleas. It would be but slight for the diflferentiation of
these two courts was almost accomplished ; still it is best to
adhere to the terminology of the time and we do not yet
read of a Common Bench and a King's Bench. To judge
from the extant plea rolls it would seem that at latest from
the year 1234 onwards the state of affairs was this: —
Regularly every term judges sat on the Bench (m Banco) at
Westminster, and the process which brought suitors before
them was process compelling attendance coram justiciariis
nostris apud Westmonasterium. At the same time the king
was going about the country attended by judges; the
process compelled attendance coram nobis vhicunque fuerimits
in Anglia. What is more, there was an incipient differen-
tiation of business; we find defendants who have been
ordered to foUow the king pleading to the jurisdiction and
relying on the well known words of the Charter about
communia placita^] but as yet the special competence of
each court is only vaguely defined. Again, we find that
errors committed by the justices in the Bench can be
corrected coram ipso rege\ Lastly there are two indepen-
dent sets of rolls and between them there is this difference,
(this will explain Bracton*s method of citation,) that the roUs
of pleas in the Bench are terminal roUs, while the rolls of
pleas which foUow the king are annual roUs' ; it may be that

1 See Oases 1213, 1220. years immediately foUowiiig 1234 ;

2 See Cases 1166, 1189, 1190. I believe that this distinction soon
^ J am here speaking only of a few disappears,


KINtfS BENCH AND COMMON PLEAS. 57

cases might be heard coram rege out of term as well as in
term. In short we may fairly say that there were two
different courts, provided that we do not take this phraseto\
necessarily/lconnote two permanently distinct bodies of
judges\ The judges were the king's own servants dismis-
sible at pleasure, and seemingly he moved them about as
pleased him best. With this explanation, we may say that
a Court of Common Pleas had by this time become a distinct
court. There is more difficulty about saying that the pleas
which followed the king were pleas in the Court of King's
Bench, for the germs of what came to be three distinct
jurisdictions are hardly yet to be distinguished, namely (1)
the jurisdiction of the King's Bench, (2) that of the King in
Council, (3) that of the King in ParUament. . As a rule the
cases found on the roUs oiplacita quae sequv/ntur regem seem
to have been heard by some of the professional judges whom
the king kept by his side, occasionally by the king himself
with, or possibly without, their assistance, for the notion
that the king himself may not act as judge is not of
Bracton's time'*. But sometimes we read that the case was
adjudged coram consilio domini regisy and sometimes the
presence of many prelates and barons, named or unnamed, is
noticed and the court seems a parliament'. As yet however
all these cases are enroUed on the same rolls. Whether by
anticipation we call the adjudicating body Parliament,
Council, or King's Bench, these cases are pladta quae
sequuntur regem. Even distinctly legislative acts are re-
corded among these pleas*.

I have described this as beinsf the state of affairs from two courts

afterl234.

1234 onwards. It seems possible that a definite stage in the
development of the Courts should be assigned to that year.
I believe that the first of the series of roUs of pleas which
foUow the king, is a roU extending from the summer of 1234

1 It may be also that a oase begon 119 (Keut), cases stayed because

before the kiug might be sent before the king was not preseut ; also Gase

the Benoh and vioe versa, see Gases 1182.
1107, 1116. 8 See Gases 1108, 1133, 1172, 1189,

« See espeoiaUy Br. f. 108. Also 1190, 1220, 1221, 1227, 1236, 1273.
Abbrev, Plaoit. p. 107 (Surrey), p. * See Oases 1117, 1216, 1217.


J


68 INTEODUCnON.

to the summer of 1235 (A.a 18 — 19). Thifl I mean is the
first of that series which is now extant On this fact by
itself little stress should be laid, for the series after that date
ia very imperfect. But this is also the earliest roU of ' king-
following pleas' that Bracton cites^ while for cases in the
Bench he goes back as far as 12l7.XFrom the roUs yet
preserved it may be gathered, that from the very beginning
of Henr/s reign there were justices sitting in the Bench
eveiy term, except when an eyre in many counties took
them all away from Westminster. A large number of their
rolls we have, though not a perfect set. Now the court that
they held seems, in Bentham*s phrase, omnicompetent. On
the same roU, on the same membrane, one may find appeals
of felony, writs of right, actions of debt, the peculiar com-
modities of the Eing's Bench and those of the Common
Pleaa Further, especially during the Eing's minority, one
may sometimes find it said about a case on one of these rolls,
that it was adjudged coram consilio domini regis; such a
case is generally one which touches royal rights*. The
Council certainly sat as a judicial body, but seems to have
had no roll of its own ; its judgments are recorded on the
rolls of the BencL So when the minority is over, on these
same rolls one reads of judgments delivered coram ipso rege'.
Doubtless the king when he came of age did justice in
person; the doubt is whether he did it so usually and
systematically that there was a separate and continuous set
of roUs for cases which came before him and such judges as
he might choose to have by his side. Occasionally important
cases were evoked or adjoumed before him, but seemingly
he did not as yet make regular judicial progresses through
the country, or only did so occasionally*.

^ The printed tezt, f. 241 b, has the assizes of mort d'ancestor and

one such case from a. b. 16 ; bnt I novel disseisin for &ve particolar

have seen thirteen MSS. which giye connties shoold be smnmoned befoie

A. B. 18, not one which gives any him, Bot. Gl. yoI. 2, p. 154. I have

other date. seen a fine leyied before him at Leo-

^ See Gases 12, 67, 73, 81, 167, minster on what seems to have boeii

854, 741, 743, 857, 1306. this oocasion. The Justiciar, the

^ See Gases 268, 268, 839, 393, Ghancellor, Bobert Lezington, Wil-

986, 1551. liam Fitz Warin and William of

4 Abready in 1226 he ordered that London were with him.


bracton's choice op rolls. 69

Now here it should be remarked that this roU of A.B.
18 — 19 begins exactly at a memorable date, Whitsuntide
1234. From the begimiing of the reign until 1232 Hubert
de Burgh was the chief justieiar. In that year, as already
said, he fell, was supplanted by Stephen Segrave. The
formidable revolt of the Earl Marshall, the threats and
persuasions of the bishops compelled the king to another
change of mind. Just before Whitsuntide 1234 he turned
against Segrave and the foreigners : Hubert and the in-
surgent barons were inlawed, or rather their outlawiy was
proclaimed a nuUity. No justiciar was appointed ; the king
as it seems intended to be for the future his' own first
minister. Now it is just at this moment that begins the
first yet extant roU of pleas which follow king Henry, and
the first roU of that class which Bracton has cited, a roU fuU
of reminiscences of the recent insurrection, of the misrule of
Segrave and Des Roches. It looks as if the king had de-
termined to get all the highest justice of the realm done
under his own eye by professional judges who would not be
too powerful, whom he could trust, whom at all events he
could watch. It was a recurrence to an old practice ; Henry
would do what his forefathers had done ; but the consequence
was that thenceforth there were what we can not but call
two separate tribunals, each with its own record\

Now Bracton cites the roUs of the Bench for ahnost every The roUs

term fi^om the beginning of the reign up to and including and coram

that for Trinity 1233. I think that he certainly has a case ^^lJ^^oS^f

bom Hilaiy 1234» and one fi-om Easter 1234^ Here he]^^|£3Sgh.

quits this series of rolls, though many later members of it .

there must have been when he wrote and not a few remain

to this day. He tums to the roUs of pleas which foUowed

the king and cites cases firom the rolls for A. R. 19, 20, 21, 22,

1 I find that, without knowing it, bodies of judges with different^titles.

I haye oome to the same oonclusion Bnt from this time at latest there

as Dugdale, who about this time were pleas before the king and pleas

begins to diyide the judges into two in the Bench, judges with the king

classes. Mr Foss (vol. 2, p. 182), and judges at the Benoh, and the

who does not appear to have looked same judge was not in two plaoes at

at any plea rolls, dissents, and rightly onoe.

if he only means to deny that there ^ Note Booh^ Case 836.

were two permanently constituted ^ Br. f. 230 b.


60 INTRODUCnON.

23, 24; in all fifteen cases. Here his continuous chain of
citations is broken. Afber a considerable interval there
come six cases from A.R 29 — 83. If now we look to the
list of judges who sat on ' the Bench ', we find that from the
beginning of the reign until the early part of 1229 PateshuU
was evidently the foremost judge of the court ; he sits below
no one unless it chances that an Earl or the Justiciar
himself, Hubert de Burgh, is present. In 1229 PateshuU
died. Within a year Raleigh is on the Bench, but not
as premier judge. He sits below Thomas Multon and
below Stephen Segrave, but Segrave is very seldom present
and Raleigh generally has the second place; at length
even Multon gives way to him. Kaleigh sits on the
Bench until the summer of 1234, until the exact moment
when Bracton ceases to cite the rolls of the Bench. Ra-
leigh then becomes the principal judge attendant on the
king's person and such he continues to be until he is
made a bishop in 1239. It is almost exactly, if not quite
exactly, from this period that Bracton cites pleas which
followed the king ; records of later date than the time when
Baleigh was consecrated, these Bracton could not obtain or
else he thought them of comparatively little value^

We have been long in coming to the Note BooL The
reason for the delay was this. It was necessary to establish
that Bracton*s selection of rolls was very distinctive, perhaps
determined by accident and necessity (for all roUs should
have been in the Treasury) perhaps determined by political
partizanship, juristic theories, personal friendships, but at
any rate distinctive. His is a treatise on English law as
administered by Pateshull and Raleigh. Not every lawyer s

1 Mr Fo88 (Judges, vol. 2, p. He seems to haye been doing jnstice

449) says that tnere is no evidenoe until yery shortly before his oon-

of &ileigh having acted as a judge secration in Septr. 1239. Bracton

after a. b. 19 (a. d. 1234-5). ThiB oites but a single case from a. b. 24.

is a mistake due I think to the fact Baleigh's consecration took place

that, as Baleigh was going about just before the beginning of that

with the king, he did not usually sit regnal year. But some at least of

on the Bendi or take part in the these Goram Bege BoUs do not

ordinaiy assize work. But see Br. exactly cover a regnal year ; th^

f . 169 b ; a case before Baleigh in begin some months earlier. The

A. B. 23. See also this Note Book roll for a. b. 24 I have not found.
vol. 2, pp. 166, 167, 208, 228, 266.


THE NOTE BOOK. 61

note book would be like his note book ; not every student
would have had access to just the same rolls; there were
many other roUs; there had been and were other great
judges.


§ 7- 0/ tke Note Sooh

And uow to the Note Boak» It is a stout volume, about pf^j^^jJJ
11 inches higb by U broad, wears a handsome bioding and ^^
carries on iti^ b^wik threo labels thus lettered ; — | Placita et
Assisae 1 — 24 HeD. III. | Mus. Brit. Jure Emptionis, ] E*Mrqau
12,269 Plut. CLXXII. a I The two lowest labels have been
placed there since the book was acqiiired for the national
coUection, but the biiiding is of older date and m I am
informed is the legend on the topmost label.

A vellum i3y leaf at the beginning has on its froot in ink — fi^i^,
Purdif of Cochran 12 Feb. 1842 {from Holimss Library of
Emt Retford% On the back of thiB fly-leaf 'm written in
pencil — Tke first two foUos of the first quatemdon are
wanting. Eaah quatermmi co^itains 12 leaves.

This laat statement is not quite true, The book is now NtuBhor
made up of 24 quires or quatcmions of parchraent ; but of '^*""*'
these two are imperfect and one is abnorinally long. Each
perfect quire should consist of sbc pieces of parchment laid
one inside the other aod bound together bj their middles, so
as to present twelve leaves and twenty-four sides, The first lom of a
quire has lost it^ outside sheet, so that, had the pages been
uumbered back and front io the modem fashion, pp, 1, 2, 23, 24
would be wantiDg. Undoubtedlj this sheet once existed
and bore writing. The matter which stood on what, but for
the loss, would have been the twelfth" leaf (pp. 23, 24), I
have been able to supply with some certainty in a maoner
explained below. What oow is the outside sheet of this firat
quire is sadly damaged. Seeraingly thia qaire was at one

1 John Holm&B of Eaat Retford doea not comprJHe M90. His library

pQbliehed at iDtervals betweeii 1B28 wa^, aa I gather fmm his PrefaAe^

atid 1840 a catalogue of his Iftrge the outcome af porchaaea made by

csollGotian of priated b<x»ks ; lnit tina him.


f


oodinwl
longaga


62 INTRODUCTION.

time lying loose from the rest of the book and suffered ill
usage. The rest of the book is well preserved.
otbw loMM At the begimiing of the second quire (top margin of what
now is £ 11), there is an important legend written in what
seems to me a hand of the fifbeenth centuiy. This however,
most unfortunately, has been in part erased. Apparently the
erasure is due to some person who, perhaps in the same
eentury, numbered the first 34 leaves of the book. He
scratched out part of the legend in question in order to make
room for " fo. xj" ". Possibly a skilled palaeographer might
still read the whole. What I can read is this : —


Md quod iste liber oontinet in se yiginti qnataor qoartema et oonstat..

ez dimissione


Nmnberof Thc writcr thereforo seems to have known the book as

containing four and twenty quires ; hence we may infer that
it ended then where it ends now, that nothing has been lost
since his day.

The ninth quire has but eleven leaves. The extracts
from a certain roll come to an end half-way down the fix)nt of
the eleventh leaf ; the rest of the front and the whole of the
back of that leaf are blank ; the tenth quire begins with a
new title and extracts from a new roll. I infer that here
there has been no loss, merely an economizing of parchment.
The tenth quire again is ampler than the rest; it has fourteen
leaves. The leaves have been recently numbered in pencil
from first to last. Altogether there are 287 leaves (first
quire 10 leaves, ninth quire 11 leaves, tenth quire 14 leaves,
twenty-one quires of 12 leaves each, total 287 leaves). The
quires begin with the leaves numbered 1, 11, 23, 35, 47, 59,
71, 83, 95, 106, 120, 132, 144, 156, 168, 180, 192, 204, 216,
228, 240, 252, 264, 276.

Seemingly when the book was originally made the quires
were numbered consecutively, the number being placed in
the bottom margin of the first leaf of each quire and catch-
words were put at the end of each quire. These have suffered
much from the binder*s shears ; but I see no reason to believe
that anything has perished out of the middle of the book save


THE NOTE BOOK. 63

the last leaf of the first quire. In most cases it is plain that
the quires still follow each other in right order.

But the end of the book has in all probability disappeared. Probawy the

mi -i 1 ro 1 1 1. . 1 endofthe

Ihe text now breaks off at the very end ot a quire and at bookisiost.
what may or may not be the end of a case. From the book
itself we eannot leam whether anything has been lost. Some
information on this point I shall presently supply from
aaother quarter. That the loss is not of recent date we may
gather from the already ancient statement that there were
four-and-twenty quires.

The front and back of almost every leaf are covered with
writing. The number of lines on a page varies considerably
decreasing as we go through the book from 53 to 40. This
makes.the end much handsomer and more legible than the
beginning.

The contents may be briefly described as transcripts of The contents

. T . 1 n /» 1 /» n ^howwritten.

entnes on the judicial roUs of the first twenty-four years of
Henry III. These transcripts have been made by several
different scribes. Certainly there were as many as four ; I
think that there were five. I believe that the hand-writing
of all of them may be safely ascribed to the middle of the
thirteenth tjentury or thereabouts. The extracts from the
rolls do not follow each other in strict order of date. The
arrangement, we may say, looks as if chronology had been
tempered by catastrophes. We proceed with some regularity
from earlier to later roUs and then leap back to earlier rolls
which have been omitted. In some cases as we tum over
the MS. we can see reasons for this procedure. A clerk, for
example, has been copying pleas from the sixteenth year, and
brings his work to an end in the middle of a quire ; another
clerk has begun another quire with pleas of the seventeenth
year ; here then there were three or four blank leaves which
would serve for pleas from the ninth year. Having observed
many small indications of this kind, it seems to me that the
coUection was rapidly made by some one who could command
the services of several clerks. He set them to work tran-
scribing from different rolls and pieced the book together as
best he could. And there are signs of haste ; in writing one


64 INTBODUCTION.

part of the book two clerks constantly relieved each other at
very short intervals. The work of these various copyists
could not always be quite neatly fitted together ; hence a few
blank pages. In one case a blank thus lefb was afberwards
utilized. Extracts from a roU for the twenty-fourth year
(the latest roU used) end on £ 195 b ; extracts fix)in a roU of
the second year (the earliest roll used) begin on £ 197. The
interval contains in several different hands (1) the discussion
of a hypothetical case, (2) a disquisition on leap-year, (3) the
a^size of bread, (4) two decided cases, one fi-om the fourth, the
other from the tenth year. The assize of bread is given in
French, (this is the one piece of French that occurs,) and is
written in what seems a later hand than any other employed
upon the book. With the exception of these apparently
interpolated entries, the whole coUection looks as if it had
been made at one time. About the middle of the thirteenth
century some man had this book made for him.
ThenotM That man's writing may yet be seen. The margins are

rich with notes. These notes are due to two difierent
persons. One of them has written but very few. For the
sake of distinction I call him " the occasional annotator ", and
he seems to me to have been one of the cop^dsts. The other
I call " the usual annotator". His handwriting has a strongly
marked character of its own, very upright and in general
very distinct, but I believe that it may be safely described as
a legal hand of the middle of the 13th century. That he was
a contemporary of the copyists and had the note book made
for him there can be Uttle doubt, for in a few instances he
has written pieces of the text. He has written the heading
which announces a new term and also the first word or two
of the first entry under that heading, thus starting the tran-
scriber on his task\ The book then was made for him and
under his eye.

A glance at my printed text will show that the marginal
notes are capriciously distributed. On page after page there
will be nothing in the margin, and then again (or a while

^ See f. 8, 35, 45. I think that he second oase in the book.
also wrote the first few words of the

\


THE NOTE BOOK AND THE ROLLS. 65

almost every entry will have its note. The annotator seems
to have retumed to the work at several different times and
made notes by fits and starts, taking up now one part of the
book and now another. In some instances a case has two
notes apparently made at different times. Again the com-
paratively few notes made by him whom I call the occasional
annotator, occur in batches, chiefly in one batch (f. 50 — 54).
They are of the same kind as the other notes, but rather less
hastily written. I take him to have been an amanuensis of
the usual annotator. Of the import of these notes much
must be said hereafter; at present we are still concemed with
extemala

There are a few hasty marginal scribblings in what I take ^^J^'
to be a hand of the sixteenth or fifteenth century, just single
words such as Corona and the like, showing the title under
which the case would fall in an Abridgement or Digest.
The person who wrote these or some contemporary of his has
numbered some of the quires. About the same time too
some one with the book upside down scrawled a precedent of
a writ of entry on the margin of £ 285 b. At a quite recent
date some one has observed in the middle of f. 145 b, that in
the beginning God made man in his own image. His offence
is venial compared with that of one who must be charged
with having made some wanton and purposeless erasures near
the beginning of the book (f. 2, 2b, 11).

We must now pass for a moment from the British 2?i?ote^'
Museum to the Public Record OflBce. For about half of the Jhe^RoUi.
terms from the roUs for which this book has extracts, there
ate no extant roUs; for about half there are extant roUs.
But fortune has been capricious; in many cases there are
two still extant roUs for the same term ; for one term there
are three. It is, I may observe, a common thing to find what gSfJJJ*^*
we may call duplicate or triplicate roUs. These will be roUs
for the same term, recording the same cases in almost the
same words ; yet it will be plain that one is not a copy of the
other. The same cases will be found on the two, but not in
the same order. In general under each heading denoting
one of the days for the retura of writs, e.g. the Octave

M. I. 5


66 INTRODUCTION.

of S. Hilary, there will be found on both rolls the.same cases;
but not in the same order, and no rearrangement of mem-
branes would bring the cases into the same order. Further,
on a closer examination it will appear, that though the two
records of one case wili agree in substance, still there will
ofben be many small verbal diflferences, variances such as
copyists do not make. And more important difierences are
occasionally found ; in particular when both rolls agree that
the parties pleaded to issue or prayed judgment, one roll will
and the other will not record how at a later day a judgment
was given or a verdict found. Sometimes this judgment
will have been given or this verdict found at a time consider-
ably later than the term with which the roll deals, and it will
be recorded on the roll by way of postscript. In short, to put
the mattertechnically, one of the duplicates will give a Postea
not to be found on the other. The origin of these duplicates
seems this, that besides the principal roll kept by the proto-
notary, each judge had his roll kept for him by a clerk, and
these roUs were used to check each other. Some cases
referring to this practice occur in our Note Book and
Bracton discusses what is to be done when there is discord
between several rolls^ How it comes about that the cases
occur in different, often very diflferent, order, on the diflferent
rolls, I can not here discuss. My present point is that when
there is a roll extant for a certain term, we can not at once
say that this rpll was used by the maker of the Note Book.
Most fortunately however we have other means of telling
very surely which of the rolls now forthcoming were in his
hands.
thfiSlnSn When having copied some pages of the Note Book, I took

TOMlctiSi^ my transcript to the Record OflBce, in the hope of finding the
thS^Nou** original records, I expected that the work of hunting for nay
cases would be tedious. To my surprise and delight on
taking up the first roU I discovered that the work was done
for me. Every case that I wanted had against it a mark of
an obvious, unmistakeable kind In the margin of the roll
down the whole liength of the case someone had drawn a firm
J. Br. f. 352 b ; Gases, 70, 149, 1411, 1465.


THE MARKS ON THE ROLLS. 67

heavy line, in colour a dark rusty brown ; to look at, it wa»
much such a line as might have been drawn by the old
fashioned red-lead pencil. I soon leamt to know that this
* scoring/ as I call it, was the work of the man who had the
Note Book made for him\

Whenever there was a scored roU, the cases in the NotePwofof

' the con-

Book agreed perfectly with the cases on that roU, saving the ^^^^^
immaterial omissions, of which hereafter, and saving mere
clerical blunders. When there was a roll not scored, the
cases in the Note Book did not agree perfectly with the cases
on that roU; the cases did not always occur in the same
order ; the Note Book occasionally gave Posteas which were
not on the roll. I found that the copyists who wrote the
Note Book had very faithfuUy obeyed the direction to copy
implied in the scoring. Very rarely indeed did I find any
case in the Note Book which had not been scored ; so rarely,
that it seemed fair to attribute the few instances to mere
inadvertence or accident. More frequently a scored case had
not been copied. As regards the majority of the roUs this
happened so seldom that one might properly set it down to
the clerk having scamped his work ; only as regards two or
three roUs should I say that the number of cases scored but
not copied, was too considerable to be accounted for by this
supposition ; and about these we may perhaps hold, that the
maker of the Note Book changed his piind after he had
marked out the work for his scribes. In some instances the
copyist has apparently oberyed what he took to be his in-
structions, with a slavish obedience ; he has left out the
important end of a case, because the mark on the roU did not
ga far enough, or has copied just the first lines of the next
case, because the mark. went alittle too fkr*.

The person who scored the roils did not content himself words

* wntten on

with. this. In some instances he has nunibered the raeiribranes J{;| compliej

of the Noto

^ In many cases the middle of the director of a scriptorium. The ^ '

line gprings ont of what seems a marics on the rolls adi», I take it, not

rudely drawn capital N^ standing indelihle, hut of course I have not

perhaps for Nota. Marks of a similar attcmpted to prove this.

kind are, I believe, often found in ^ See my notes to Cases 75, 320,

MSS. from which transcripts- have 710, 711, 935.
been made-, and are the work of the

.0—3


ft8 INTRODUCnON.

at their tops, while at their bottoms he has scrawled the
words Visus est, as much as to say, ' I have examined this
' sheet' Then over against the scored cases he has sometimes
written a word or two. These words are such as to show
that he was coUecting cases and had various categories in his
mind Thus he writes — De recto (A Writ of Right), De dote
(An Action for Dower), Asa no* (An Assize of Novel Disseisin),
Qais aduoc' (An Assize of Darrein Presentment), De sum' et
attach' (Summonses and Attachments, Mesne Process), De
communibus (Common Form). Occasionally he even writes
Error on the rolL A more important note occurs over
against an action between the Prior of Merton and the men
of EwelP. A long particularization of the villein services
demanded by the Prior is on the roIL We find that this has
been omitted in the Note Book where it is merely said that
the Prior claimed 'certain' services. Looking again at the
roll we see scribbled in big letters LoqvxUur m£cum de hoc
capituLo; the meaning seems plain — He must have a talk
with me before he copies this entry and I will tell him what
to leave out*.
TbeeaMsare As a geucral rulc whcn a case is taken from the roll it
is copied into the Note Book word for word; but certain
omissions, which were considered immaterial, are habitually
made. The most common omission is that of the names of
attomeys, jurors and the like ; occasionally too when there
are numerous defendants, the name of the first of them only
will be copied Such omissions are usually indicated by the
use of the words talis and et infra. Thus if an assize of
novel disseisin be brought against ten persons, the Note
Book will say that the assize comes to recognize whether the
Prior of Merton et taies, or whether the Prior of Merton et
infra, disseised William Smith ; et infra means that there is
more upon the roIL Dates again are firequently omitted, the
omission being indicated by taii die; so are the formal parts
of charters and the ends of some common formulas ; but in
general an etc. in the Note Book represents an etc. on the

1 Case 1661. word Volo ; bat I bave not been able

9 9ome QiMmare 9Hff]»cl witb tbe to connect tbie witb tbe Note Book.


■m ulJji^


THE MISSING PAOE. 69

roll. Only in very few instances have I noticed anything
that could be called an abridging or abstracting of the entry
on the roll ; as a rule the entry is copied verbatim with such
omissions as I have just mentioned.

The copyists have done their work fairly well, though, as Thecopying
it seems to me, quite mechanically. They are guilty ofacc«'»t«
omissions and repetitions of the kind usual with those who
are paid to copy what they do not care to understand.
Sometimes they leave blanks to represent words which were
ill written on the roU ; they deal very roughly with proper
names ; occasionally they are guilty of very stupid blunders,
for instance, one of them habitually writes 8ic\ or even sicut
in fuU, when he finds Ric* (Ricardus) ou the roll, to the great
detriment of good sense; they distribute stops in a way
which shows that they do not think about the meaning of
what they write. The writer of the last half of the book
was, I should say, much more careful and intelligent than
his fellows; his work is in general very legible and trust-
worthy.

Having observed the manner in which the roUs had been S^^e^uppUfd
marked, it seemed to me possible to supply the matter which »o™*^eroii.
stood on one of the two lost leaves of the Note Book. As
already said the outside sheet of the first quire has perished.
What stood on the half of this which would have made the
first leaf, I cannot say, for the Note Book now begins with
extracts from a term for which no roU has been found. But
the gap occasioned by the loss of the other half of this sheet,
occurs in the middle of extracts from a term for which there
are two roUs, and one of these is scored. The hiatus in the
Note Book occurs between the middle of Case 67 and the
middle of Case 68* Between these two cases I found on
the scored roU eight cases which were scored. These I have
copied and printed as an Appendix to my third volume.
The mass of matter thus printed is considerably too long to
have stood in the Note Book between Cases 67 and 68.
Something must be allowed for the omissions of immaterial
particulars which the copyist of the Note Book would have
made; but enough cannot be allowed to bring down my


Book might
berestorecL


70 INTEODtJCnOK.

Appendix to the requisite size; perbaps then the copyist
omitted one of the eight cases. That one of them was in the
Note Book is made the more probable by this, that the same
case at a later stage appears in another part of the Note
Booky and the annotator has there written in the margin
alibi aupra, meaning that the same case was to be found
above, which would only be true if it stood on the page now
lost\
part of the Thc mcthod employed for restoring this lost page might,
^^^{f^ I thought, be also used for determining the question, whether
anything and, if anything, what, had been iost from the end
of the Note Book. The process could only be applied in a
one-sided fashion ; it might give positive but could not give
negative results. The fact that a roll was not scored, would
prove nothing, for the maker of the Note Book might have
had a duplicate roll. The fact that a roU was scored, would
go to prove that extracts from it were once in the book ;
though this would not be quite certain, for the direction to copy
might never have been obeyed, or the copy might have been
made in some other book. A scarch, (I dare not say an
exhaustive, but still a diligent search,) through the plea roUs
of the first forty years of Henry's reign, (I must gratefuUy
acknowledge the help given me by Mr W. F. Noble,) resulted
in the discovery of but two rolls, from which there were no
extracts in the Note Book, and which yet were scored in the
to me familiar fashion. This result if small was satisfactory.
One of these two rolls was a roU for the eyre of 1221,
that eyre of Martin Pateshull and the Abbot of Reading in
the mid-westem counties which Bracton has made famous ;
the county was Worcester". Now cases from this eyre,
Leicestershire and Staflfordshire cases, are the last things
now in the Note • Book. The probability therefore seems
very strong that the marks on this Worcester roU were
obeyed; extracts from that roU are just what we might
expect to foUow cases heard in other counties during the
same eyre. This Worcester roll, again, has one inscription

1 Appendix to vol. 3, Case 8 ; - Assize RoUs, M. 6, 81. 1.

€ade 1411.


BB


THE LOST.END OF THE NOTE BOOK. 71

which deserves note. There is a case on it which has been
disordered. by the intrusion of a postscript ; one ought to
read what comes below before what stands above. Against
this he who scored the roU has scribbled (the words are faint
but legible) — primo scribatur ibi postea supra; this is a
direction to the copyist to transpose two sentences. We
may then conclude with some certainty that the Note Book
once had extracts from this roU. The second of the two
roUs now in question, was the record of the eyre of A.R. 3
in Lincolnshire, an eyre in which PateshuU apparently took
part and from which Bracton cites a case\

What else, if anything, may have been lost from the
end of the book we cannot decide; but the fact that no
scored roll has been found for any year from A.R. 22 to A.R. 40
both inchisive, a period from which very many roUs are still
preserved, tends towards proof that there cannot have been
many extracts in the Note Book of later date than the latest
of those which now appear there. Beyond A.R. 40 my search
has not been systematically prosecuted, and it must be
confessed that the discovery of any roUs of considerably later
date, bearing marks of just the kind that has here been
described, would bring some of my inferences to the ground ;
but having compared roU after roU, case by case, with my
transcript of the Note Book, it seems to me quite certain that
the marks on the roUs were put there by the compiler of the
Note Book.


§ 8. 0/ the Relation hetween the Note Book and Bractons

Treatise.

It is now to be considered what reasons there are forwhyBrac

ton*8 Note

supposing the Note Book to be Bracton's. ^^^^"^

The comparison of handwritinffs is not one of the tests no p«>of

JT o . ^ from com-

that can be applied, for we have no manuscript of Bracton's gj™«° «^
treatise, (at least I have seen none,) that can claim to be the "^^^^

' ^ Tawer R611, No'; 1. See Br. f. 298; ihi« cade is ^on the roll. '' '


72 INTBODUCTION.

autograph. On the two roUs which record his labours in
Devonshire as a justice of assize, there are some corrections
and interpolations, which very likely were made by his hand ;
they seem to be just of the kind that would be made by the
judge himself. There does seem to me to be much likeness
between them and the notes in the Note Book ; but they are
too brief to be trustworthy material; the inference that
Bracton made them is but an inference ; I have no skill in
comparimg hands ; therefore no stress whatever is laid upon
the resemblance. As to the few words occasionally written
on the margin of roUs by the person who 'scored' them,
these are hasty scrawls made with some blunt instrument,
and cannot be profitably compared with the notes in the
Note Book. We must look then beneath the extemal form
to the matter which our book contains, and our first argument
will be founded on the choice of roUs whence extracts have
been made.

The First Argument: The Selection of RolU.

TheieiecUon Now spcakiug largcly we may say that the compiler of
the Note Book has used just the set of rolls that Bracton
used. Such is the general result, but the comparison must
descend to details, and the three classes of roUs may be taken
separately.

1. Rolls of the Bench.

"Roiuofthe Some difficulty is occasioned at starting by the loss of
the earliest roUs of this class and the loss of the Note Book's
first page. Henry III. was crowned on the 28th Oct. 1216. •

Detaiicd Almost thc whole of his first year was taken up by the civil
war, which was ended by the treaty of Lambeth on the
llth Sept. 1217. Thereupon a court began to sit at West-
minster, and the first pleas after the war were of Michaelmas
term 1217 (A.R. 1 — 2). Bracton had a roU for this term
and the Note Book has extracts from it. But it is not for
another two years, namely until Michaelmas 1219 (A.R. 3 — 4),
that we find an extant roU. The Note Book has extracts


^ff^


CHOICE OF ROLLS BY BRACTON AND THE ANNOTATOR. 73

from the roU for Easter and Trinity 1219 (a.r. 3). These
are preceded by fifteen cases, the first now in the book ; they
have no heading because what was once the first page has
disappeared. They certainly belong to the interval between
Michaelmas term 1217 (a.r. 1 — 2) and Michaelmas term
1219 (A.R. 3 — 4) and they do not belong to Easter or Trinity
1219 (a.r. 3). The terms left open for them are Hilary,
Easter, Trinity, Michaelmas 1218, and Hilary 1219. Their
date should be fixed.

The adjoumments seem to point to a Trinity term; this TheearUesi
among other reasons led me when I had them printed to
ascribe them to Trinity 1218 (a.r. 2). Bracton cites several
of them ; he cites Case 5 from Trinity A.R. 2 ; Case 8 from
term. 8, Mich, A.R. 2 post guerram, that is probably from
Michaelmas 1217 (A.R. 1 — 2); Case 12 as inter prima pladta
post guerram (a rather vague phrase) ; for what seems to be
a later stage of Case 11, he vouches the roll of Michaelmas
A.R. 2 — 3 (1218), while Case 9 is spoken of as having come
before PateshuU in A.R. 2 but no term is mentioned This
evidence is somewhat perplexing; but we must remember
that the same case offcen appears in different stages on
several different rolls. Bracton cites five cases from Trinity
1218 (A.R. 2) and one from Michaelmas 1218 (a.r. 2—3),
none of which are in the Note Book ; he cites no case, at
least expressly, from either Hilary or Easter 1218 (A.R. 2).
Again on one occasion he cites a case (f. 302) in secundo
rotido post guei^am de termino S. Trinitatis, This led me at
one time to believe that the Court did not sit in Hilary or
Easter 1218 (a.r. 2) ; but on examining the feet of fines I
had to abandon this notion ; the Court sat in all four terms
of 1218. I now think that there was but one roU for the
three first terms of that year. In the early years of the
reign it is not uncommon to find a roll covering more than
one term. This would explain the citation "in the second
" roU after the war, from Trinity term.'' Also it will explain
a note in the margin of the Note Book over against Case 9,
namely, De term, & Trin. ann. eodem if, The annotator has
probably put this somewhere about the place where the


74 INTRODUCnON.

transactions of the Easter term end and those of the Trinity
term begin. If that be its meaning I do not think that it is
quite in the right place, for in Cases 5, (% and 7 we read of
what was done three weeks after S. John's day Le. Mid-
summer. On the whole I still think that the fifteen extracts
in question, or all but the firsti two or three, belong to Trinity
A.D. 1218 (A.R 2), but that they may well have been preceded
in the Note Book by a few ^xtracts from the Hilaiy and
Easter terms.
Detaiied Jn that casc the maker of the^Note Book had the rolls

comparison

continued, f^j. g^jj tcrms from the beginning of the reign down to and
including Trinity 1218. From Michaelmas 1218 (a.k. 2—3)
there are no extracts. The Court sat in that term and
Bracton cites a solitary case. So this we miist account an
instance of Bracton having had a roll which the maker of the
Note Book is not proved to have had. From Hilary 1219
(a.r. 3) we get no extracts ; but Bracton cites no case ; no
fiines have been found ; an eyre on a large scale was going on,
and we may conclude that the Bench at Westminster was
unoccupied\

From the next nine terms the Note Book has extracts
and Bracton has citations. We pass therefore unchecked to
Trinity 1221 (A.R. 5). From this the Note Book has nothing.
Bracton apparently has one case. But I have found no roll
and no fines and think it very doubtful whether the Court
sat. On the morrow of Trinity, Pateshull, Hareng and
Lexington, three of the usual judges of the Bench, began an
eyre in the west which seems to have kept them away
throughout the summer and far into the autumn*.

From the next term again, Michaelmas 1221 (A.R. 5 — 6)
there is nothing in the Note Book. Bracton does not cite any
<5ases distinctly from Mich. A.R. 5 — 6 ; but he cites eight from
Mich. A.R. 6. This seems at first sight ambiguous ; but six
out of the eight are essoin cases which would, I suppose, be
adjudged on the first days of the term, and I infer therefore

1 See the letters of 26th JanJil9 Plecbs of the Crownfor the County of
in Foedera, vol. 1. p. 164. Gloucester, a.d. 1221.

> I havd sp6ken*of this eyre in


CHOICE OF ROLLS BY BRACTON AND THE ANNOTATOR. 7o

that the term.io which they belong is Michaelmas 6 — 1 ; the
essoins of that term would be taken before the coronation
day.

The next term for which the Note Book has nothing is
Trinity 1223 (A.R. 7) and from this Bracton vouches two
cases. No.roU has been found and no fines; but Bractons
citations are perhaps correct.

Term now foUows term in the Note Book until Trinity
A.R. 10 is reached. That and the next two terms are
unrepresented. So they are in the treatise also. No roU is
extant and I have seen no fines. Probably the Court did
not sit ; a great eyre* was taxing the judicial resources. In
the Note Book the pleas for the next term, Easter 1227
(a.r. 11) are described as 'Placita..,post reditum iusticiari'
orum de itinere^ \ On these foUow cases from Trinity term
of the same year, but it seems clear' that after these the
Note Book proceeds to give without any new heading, (the
omission may be due to mere carelessness,) cases from the
Hilary and Easter terms of 1228 (A.R. 12). Thus a leap is
made over Michaelmas 1227 (a.r. 11 — 12). From that term
Bracton (^raws no case ; I have found neither roU nor fine ;
an eyre in many counties was begun in September*; probably
the Bench was without an occupant. Trinity 1228 (A.R. 12)
is unrepresented in the Note Book, the treatise, the roUs, the
fines.

No check now occurs until Hilary 1232 (A.R. 16). Bracton
has one citation ; the Note Book no extract ; no roU is found,
but there were judges taking fines at Westminster and at
times Raleigh was of them. As to the Trinity term of the
same year we are everywhere met by negatives; no extracts;
no citations; no roU; no fines. This was the time when
Raleigh made that tour in the midlands which suppHed
Bracton with many decisions. The Note Book has nothing
from Easter 1233 ; but Bracton has nothing from this term ;
apparently a Court was sitting at Westminster, but Raleigh
was not there. Without any break the Note Book has

1 Rot. Cl. vol. 2, p. 151. » Ibid. p. 219.

' • Note Book, vol. 1, p. 193. * Rot. Cl. vpl. 2, p. 213.


76 INTRODUCTION.

extracts from the four next terms, ending with Easter 1234
(a.d. 18). This is the last roU from which it gives extracts
and with it Bracton*s continuous series of citations from the
roUs of the Bench comes to an end.
summary a« To sum UD theu, thc Noto Book has extracts from all the

totheRoIls f '

oftheBenciL j-olls from which Bractou took his cases, except four viz. that
for Michaelmas 1218 (a.r. 2 — 3) from which one case is
vouched, that for Trinity 1221 (a.r. 5) from which one case
is vouched, that for Trinity 1223 (a.r. 7) from which there
are two citations, that for Hilary 1232 (A.R. 16) which yields
a solitarj' case. This list of exceptions might perhaps be yet
further reduced, for it seems doubtful whether the Court sat
in Trinity 1221 or Trinity 1232, and very possible that the
apparent mention of those terms in the treatise is due to
some mistake of the author, his copyists or editors. But
taking things as they stand, it is plain that if Bracton had
roUs from these four terms he has used them very sparingly.

2. EoUs of pleas which foUowed the King.

foi^Id Ihe ^ regards the roUs of pleas which foUowed the King the
^- case is very simple; Bracton and the maker of the Note

Book had just the same six consecutive roUs.

3. Eyre RoUs.

Eyre RoUa. Thc Eyre RoUs cannot be so briefly dismissed. Bracton
had about twenty eyre roUs of PateshuU and five of Raleigh.
The Note Book gives selections from but eight roUs, aU of
them are roUs of PateshuU, aU save one of them are roUs
used by Bracton. These selections from ejrre roUs are the
last things in the Note Book. We have above seen reason
for beUeving that the end of that book has perished, also for
beUeving that the part that has perished comprised extracts
from the Worcester eyre roU of 1221 and the Lincoln eyre
roU of 1219. To both of these Bracton has appealed for cases.
There is nothing, as it seems to me, to be said against
the supposition that, were the Note Book as complete as
once it was, it would give us extracts from aU the eyre roUs
cited by Bracton. But then there is nothing to^ be said for


mBMBsn


CHOICE OF CASES BY BRACTON AND THE ANNOTATOR. 77

that supposition. Such roUs as are extant give us no aid,
for unforfcunately, with I believe five exceptions, just those
roUs which we would gladly examine are not to be had ; not
one of Raleigh'8 eyre rolls is forthcoming. The exceptions
consist of five roUs from the memorable eyre of 1221, one
from Shropshire, two from Warwick, two from Gloucester.
None of them is scored ; but no inference can be drawn from
this, for as already said, there were often duplicate and tripli-
cate roUs.

But now reviewing our comparison as a whole, the result g,*JJ™J3^
though by no means conclusive must arouse the belief that**°°®^""*-
Bracton and the maker of the Note Book were but one
person. Both begin coUecting cases from the roUs of the
Bench at the same point. Both at the same point cease
taking cases from the roUs of the Bench and begin taking
cases from the roUs of pleas which foUow the king. Of roUs
of the latter kind both use precisely the same six, the six
which just cover the time when William Raleigh held the
placita coram rege. Both, working years after PateshuU
was in his grave, seem either to treat the roUs of his eyres as
the best of aU eyre roUs, or to happen to have those par-
ticular roUs ready to hand. But we must pass to another
argument.


The Second Argument: The Selection of Cases.

If aU or almost aU the cases cited by Bracton were found The«eiectioa
in our manuscript, we might say with some confidence that
this was not the result of chance. It should here be explained
that only a smaU part of the matter which appears on any
roU has been copied into the Note Book; only the cases
which were thought of more than usual interest have been
taken. The proportion borne by the selected cases to the
whole mass of matter on the roUs varies greatly from roU to
roU. It cannot be estimated very accurately, but taking one
roU with another I should say that not more than a tenth
part has been copied. Now that so smaU a selection should


casea.


78 INTRODUCTION.

comprise all Bracton's cases and yet that Bracton should
have had nothing to do with the choice, would be most
unlikely. A calculation of chances is indeed impossible for
some cases were doubtless more interesting than others, and
a certain agreement between different lawyers as to what
cases were of most value might be expected ; still the coinci-
dence would be so remarkable that we might reasonably infer
that it was not fortuitous.
wenSfySJ" But our casc is by no means so strong as that here
supposed. As already explained, the Note Book has no
selections from a considerable number of roUs, mostly eyre
roUs, used by Bracton. But considering only those roUs from
which there are extracts in the Note Book, the result to which
I have come is, that among these extracts there are rather
more than half the cases which Bracton vouches from the
same rolls\ Some allowance must be made for mistakes of
mine. I may well have failed to identify some of Bracton'8
cases. The proper names which occur in his text have been
horribly distorted by copyists, for example an Archdeacon of
Totness (Archidiaconus de Tottona) has become Alfridus der
Cottone and Viel D*Engaine (Vitalis de Engaine) has become
the Vicar of Gaine; this throws difficulties in one's way.
Again a good many cases Bracton cites anonymously, that is
to say, he merely states that a case about this or that matter
will be found on a particular roU, but does not name the '
parties. It is sometimes hard for a modern to be certain
whether he has found such a case ; and if any mistake has
been made by copyist or printer in giving the date, the case
will hardly be found. That such mistakes have oceurred is
certain; still I would not attribute to them any weighty
influence on the general result now under our consideration.,
Certainly not a few of the cases, whieh Bracton has cited and
which yet are not in the Note Book, may be found just
where they ought to be^ on the rolls whence they are cited
by the Bracton of the printed book; others I hav^ not found ;
but on the whole considering how badly proper names have-

1 For details see the Table of Ihtroduction.
Braiiton's citations at the end of this


CHOICE OF CASES BY BRACTON AND THE ANNOTATOR. 79

fared, I have been surprised at the safety with which dates
have passed through the hands of transcribers.

Altogether Bracton cites just about 500 cases and I be- Resuits
lieve that just about 200 of them will be found in this book, parison.
which contains in all just about 2000 cases, so that every
tenth case in it or thereabouts has been cited by Bracton.
This result, though it may not strengthen, will not I think
weaken the argument founded on the selection of roUs made
alike by Bracton and by the owner of the Note Book. Of
course we cannot argue that when writing his treatise Bracton
was whoUy dependent on this book for his authorities. But
we have known all along that this could hardly be true.
Not until 1258 was he bidden to surrender the rolls which
^yere in his possession, while probably he had finished the
main part of his text two or three years before that date.
We may guess perhaps that he had another note book with
other cases in it. At the beginning of one set of extracts in
our MS. there is written in the margin De hoc termino nichil
alibi, and this suggests that the owner had somewhere else
another coUection of authorities.

But the reader may ask, What need had Bracton of any whydid

.„ , ' 11 1 1 • 1 • Bractonwant

transcripts oi cases if the very rolls themselves were in "isaNote^ook
hands? The answer is, that, even with the aid of a note^**"*^
book, his feat of citing some five hundred cases scattered
about in some fifty roUs was a gigantic feat of patience,
industry, memory, and that without some such aid the feat
would have been impossible. Imagine fifty rolls, each com-
posed of twenty or thirty membranes, each membrane as
long as one's arm, as broad as one's span, each membrane
covered back and front with writing, whereon are no head-
notes, no catch-words, nothing to guide the eye save the
names of counties in the margin. Such was the raw material;
to have transplanted five hundred cases directly out of this
disorderly mass into their proper places in a systematic
exposition of the law, would have been beyond the power of
any man. Bracton, we may surely say, though he had the
rolls themselves would have-^wanted a note book or severafj
note books. Of course however we may not leap from this


80 INTRODUCTION.

inference to the assertion that his note book or one of his
note books has come to our hands, and it must be frankly
admitted that had we no other evidence than what has
already come before us, any such assertion would be rash;
we might speak of 'curious coincidences/ say that *not
'impossibly' this book was Bractons, but beyond this we
could not go.
liS^^k^ Still the uniqueness of the treatise, the uniqueness of the
S3<!S^&* Note Book should be had in mind. It is not as though w^e
argued — * Here is a note book containing very many of the
'cases cited in "Sugden on Powers" ; it must have belonged to
* Lord St Leonards.' Bracton*s treatise with its five hundred
citations stands quite alone. He is the one and only man of
his time whom we know to have coUected cases from the
records. His successors, Britton and Fleta, abridging his
work to meet the demands of lawyers, omit the citations.
Of the uniqueness of the Note Book we may not speak quite
so positively; still nothing of the same sort has yet been
made public. We are dealing with rarities ; with an unique
treatise, with a collection of cases which, so far as we know, is
unique ; one in every ten of the cases in the latter is cited in
the former ; this is not an insignificant result.


Tke Third Argument: The Relation between Pdssages in
the Treatise and Marginal Notes in the Note Book.

Mai^nau» Wc pass uow to cvidence of a more interesting kind, that

^^ oflFered by the notes in the margin bf our book, and, leaving
Bracton out of sight for a while, something should first be
said of their nature and their date.

One part of the annotator s work no printed version could
adequately represent. Many of the cases he must have
studied carefuUy, pen in hand. In the manuscript one may
see how he has touched up badly formed letters, corrected
here and there a false concord, and ' expuncted * redundant
words. When he has interpolated anything into the text
attention will be drawn to the fact by a foot-bote. Such


MABGINALIA IN THE NOTE BOOK. 81

interpolations are not very uncommon. Sometimes a word
which obviously was missing, for instance an all-important
Tion, has been supplied ; sOmetimes a proper name is inserted
so as to explain an ambiguous ipse, ille, suum : spmetimes a
link of reasoning is introduced; but generally if there is
much to be said, this is said in the margin.

His marginalia fall into three main classes. The largest Nature
consists of brief statements in general terms of the point Marginaiia.
decided by the case; statements not unlike the head notes
of our modem reports. Occasionally we find mere catch-
words which refer either to the matter of the case or the
names of the parties, thus, * Sastardia,' ' De fine fajcto' * De
Bello Monte,' ' Gorges.* A much smaller but more valuable
class is made up of criticisms and speculations ; thus the
word 'Error* marks the decision as bad law; sometimes a
reason is given for its condemnation, sometimes not ; praise
is bestowed by * Bonum' * Optimum' ' Magnum et honum
recordum' and the like ; it is noted that since the case was
decided the Statute of Merton has altered the law ; or again
the annotator speculates as to what would have been the
judgment had the facts been rather different. In a third
and smallest class we must place what seem to be references
to other cases ; a name is written which is not the name of
any of the parties to the case against which the note is made^
thus 'Nota Whitcherche,* ' Nota Corhyn' *Casus Radulphi de
Arundelle similis isti* * Fere ca^sus ColeJ Such allusions as
these are enigmas to be discussed hereafter. The meaning of
the other notes will in general be plain to a reader who has
first studied the cases, but hardly to one who has not, for the
notes are mere notes, intended for no eye but the annotator s
and ofben have little or no grammatical structure.

The date when the book was compiled we cannot fix with Dateofthe
perfect accuracy ; but we cannot go far wrong. It cannot
have been earlier than the year 1240 ; a plea roU of A.R. 24
is the last of the series of roUs whence excerpts have been
taken. On the other hand it can hardly have been later
than 1256. There are two passages which to all appearance
were copied on a blank page of the book after that book had
M. I.


82 INTRODUCTION.

come into existence. The first of these is a disquisition on
leap year; and this is followed immediately by the second,
which is an assize of bread*. The former is an elaborate
argument in favour of what we know to have been Bracton's
contention as to the true method of reckoning *year and day/
when an essoinee is privileged to keep his bed for that period.
We know also that on the 9th of May 1256, in Bracton*8
presence, the king and couhcil over-ruled this contention,
ordained that a 29th of February should be reckoned as
forming but one day with the 28th'. It is improbable that
after this any lawyer was at pains to set down in writing
a long reasoned statement of a doctrine which had been thus
exploded. The tarifif known as the assize of bread there is
reason for attributing to this same year, 1256; under that
date the Annals of Burton relate that the justices who werfe
sent throughout England to correct the weights and measures,
published this assize*. The Annals give the document in
Latin, the Note Book in French ; but the tariflf is the same.
The appearance of a French document may cause a momen-
tary suspicion as to whether this part of the Note Book was
written so early as 1256 ; but this suspicion will be allayed
when it is remembered that in 1258 the king*8 adhesion
to the Provisions of Oxford was proclaimed in French as well
, as in English and Latin; indeed this ib just the moment
V when French is taking its place beside Latin as a language
for laws. Now the occurrence of these two documents one
after the other, must suggest that they were copied into the
Note Book in 1256 or thereabouts. The assize of bread was
just being published and the problem of the bissextile was a
warmly debated question pressing for an authoritative answer.
The rest of the Note Book's text may have been transcribed
Some years earlier ; but not before 1240.
Dateofthe Thc datc of the marginal notes is of course a different
SStes. matter. They may have been written at intervals durittg
a space of several years ; but they cannot well be of much
later date than the text. In the first place, it seems clear

1 Casee 1291, 1292. ^ Ann. MonaBt. vol. 1, p. 376.

'^ See above p. 42.


^mmmmmmimm


DATE OF THE MARGINALIA. 83

from evidence already mentioned that the annbtator himself
presided over and interfered with the work of the copyists^
In the second place, his writing would I believe be attributed
by any expert much rather to the reign of Henry III. than
to that of any Edward. In the third place, he thrice refers
to changes in the law made by the Statute of Merton (1236)
which once he calls * noua gracia*,' while he never expresaly
refers to any later legislation. To say that he never betrays
knowledge of any more recent statute or ordinance, would
perhaps be an assertion which no man now living is entitled
to maie ; I dare say no more than that such betrayal, if any
there be, has escaped me ; but by means of footnotes referring
to Bracton's text, I have tried to ease the task of any reader
who will be at pains to consider this matter for himself. Now
it seems improbable that any lawyer of a later time would have
written all these notes without alluding, and that clearly, to
such comprehensive enactments as the Statute of Marlborough
(1267) or the Provisions of Westminster (1259), highly im-
probable that a lawyer of Edward's day would not have
noticed thab sweeping code which we know as the Statute
of Westminster the First. Lastly, indications of date should
be given by the names of cases noted in the margin, by such
allusions as 'fere casua Cole ' and the like. Such success aa I
have had in deciphering these indications shall be desmbed
below : nothing has been found inconsistent with the condu^
sion for which I am now arguing. In only two instances ha«
the annotator given us any easy means of settling a date^
Twice and no more he names the judge who decided the case
to which he alludes ; in the one he names William of Wilton
who was slain at Lewes (1264) and who first appears as a
judge in 1247; in the other he names *H. de Bratton,* a
judge of whose history we have already said something, and
to whom we now retum.

Now the resembiances between the notes and pcussaores in coinddence»

r O ofthenote»

Bracton s text are many and striking. But let us not make JJi^.^J'
too much of thia Having come to the conclusion that
Bracton and the annotator are contemporaries we shall
1 See above p. 64. a Cases 1409, 1881, 1975.

C— 2


84 INTRODUCTION.

expect that they will in many instances say much the same
things ; for both are English lawyers, both are dealing with
the same subjects, both are often discussing the very same
decisions. The minds of all lawyers ought, it may be said,
to be very much alike, for there is a strict legal orthodoxy,
from which he who departeth doth surely err ; even verbal
agreement will be frequent for the legal vocabulary is small.
Perhaps there was much less agreement among the good
lawyers of the thirteenth century about elements of the law
than there would be among good lawyers of our own day ;
still coincidences if they are to prove anjrthing must not
consist merely in the statement of the same rules of law
in the same or very similar words. Consequently no attempt
will be made to collect here the numerous instances in which
Bracton and the annotator say the same things ; when this
happens attention is drawn to it by a foot-note ; but a few
examples will now be noticed in which the agreement is of
such a kind, that, when they are taken all together and in
conjunction with the evidence already discussed, they make a
strong case for holding that Bracton and the annotator were
but one man.
Exampiea. (1) Bracton^ trcatiug of the cases in which a donor is

not bound to warrant a donee, says that the terms of the gift
may except certain particular persons from the scope of the
warranty, as e.g. if I say "I and my heirs will warrant
against all the world except so and so.** To prove that such
an exception will be effectual, he cites from the Warwick eyre
Trussert (a. D. 1221) of the Abbot of Reading and Martin PateshuU
}Jli"!S? ^ assize of mort d'ancestor, Si Willelmus TmsselL He
immediately adds that the donor may not be bound to
warranty even though he has received the donee's homage ;
warranty may be excluded by the terms of the gift, as e.g. if
the charter says, that in case the donee be impleaded, the
donor shall not be bound to warrant or give an exchange,
" sicut de Willelmo de Bruere in multis cartis suis." These
last words refer doubtless to the William Briwere, who when
he died an old man in 1226, had for some forty years been a

1 Br. f. 390b.


Briwere.


WILLIAM BRIWERE. 85

trusted royal servant, had amaesed great wealth and liberally
endowed religious houses, especially in the west country*.

Now in the Note Book' we find the assize 8% Willelmtcs
Trussel, not indeed at the stage at which Bracton cites it, but
at a later stage, when it came before the Bench. The case
had nothing to do with William Briwere. The charter then
in question was one granted by Amicia mother of William
Basset to Hugh of Chawcombe with an express saving of
the rights of the heirs of William Trussel. It was decided
that under this deed Basset was not bound to warrant Chaw-
combe against Trussers heirs. The annotator states in the
margin the rule involved in this decision. He then adds,
" It will be the same if homage be taken ' saving the right of
" every one,* or with an express exclusion of wairanty secun-
" dum W. Briwerre."

This connection then of Trussers case with Briwere's
opinion or practice as to the receipt of homage, we find both
in the treatise and in the Note Book, and the coincidence is
of a very striking kind, particularly when we reflect that
Briwere died some twenty years before either book can have
been compiled. With Briwere*s transactions Bracton may
well have been familiar; his son, William Briwere the
younger, was bishop of Exeter from 1224 to 1244, and a
judge who took the Devonshire assizes would often have seen
the charters of the founder of Dunkeswell, Torre and Polslo.
Still the number of lawyers living between 1250 and 1260 to
whom Trussers case would have recalled Briwere*s name
cannot, one would suppose, have been very large, even if
it was a very uncommon thing for a donor to^expressly/stipu-
late that the receipt of homage should imply no warranty.

(2) The formula of novel disseisin inquires of the recog- Justepropter
nitors whether the plaintiff has been disseised iniuste et sine luste propter

... . . iniunam.

jvdido. This might suggest that it is possible to disseise a
person sinejudido and yet not iniuste. Such however is not,
as it seems to me, Bracton s doctrine. Whenever a person is

1 In my note vol. 1, p. 159 I have Brieguerre. See Stubbs' Hoveden,

called him Brewer. I must beg his Vol. 3, p. Ixxij.

pardon. He was of Norman family '^ Case 196.
and the fuU form of his name was


86 INTRODUCTION.

disseised without a judgment, he is disseised unjustly. The
strictly limited cases in which a disseisor may be lawfuUy
ejected by the true owner flagrante diaseisina, are met by
the theory that in such cases the true owner has not yet lost
seisin in law (possessio dvilis), though he has lost seisin in
deed (passessio naturalis); so that here the disseisor is not
even disseised, much less unjustly disseised Suppose then
that the true owner be thoroughly dispossessed, that the
time for self-help is past ; he disseises his disseisor ; shall we
say that he has done this iniuste ? Bracton gives his answer
in these words*, " Juste facie prima propter jus, sed iniuste
propter iniuriam, quia sine judicio" (Justly if we regard
only the right of property, but unjustly because of the injury
to possession). This jingling gloss we find in the Note Book
also and in the same context*: — "Juste propter jus, set
iniuste quia sine judicio." Justices are convicted of false
judgment, jurors of perjury, because they do not observe
the true theory of possessory actions, and think that a
man may be disseised without a judgment and yet not
unjustly.
Montacutev. (3) Careful readers of Bracton's treatise will perhaps
remember his citation of Montacute v. Bestenore^, first
because it brings out clearly the difference between villein
status and villein tenure, secondly because it suggests that
the judges of 1219 considered that a tenant in villeinage
holding by services of the most * villeinous * kind, including
merchet and uncertain tallage, could not lawfuUy be ejected
by the lord so long as he performed the villein services.
This very interesting case is in the Note Book*. The judges
held that Bestenore was a free man though he held in
villeinage. Now both Bracton and the annotator com-
menting on this case find the distinction between villein
tenure and villein status in the &ct that the free man who
holds in villeinage can leave his tenement if he pleases;
"quia potest relinquere tenementum," says the annotator;
"quia poterit relinquere villenagium et ut liber homo

1 Br. f. 206. 3 Br. f. 199 b.

2 Case 630. * Cases 70, 88.


soa


A TENEMENT BOUND BY WARRANTY. 87

recedere," says Bracton. About leaving the land, the record
itself says nothing.

(4) Thia case occurs in the Note Book^: — The Abbot of Ripton».
Bamsey disseises Bichard of Ripton ; Bichard brings an Ramaey.
assize, but before the case is heard has recourse to selthelp

and disseises the Abbot. The Abbot pleads no special plea ;
the assize proceeds and the facts are found. The judgment
is that Richard has recovered his seisin and that the Abbot
be amerced, but that Richard also be amerced for the
usurpation. Commenting on this case the annotator specu-
lates as to what would have happened if the Abbot had
brought an assize: — "I believe," he says, "that the latter
*^8iasiz0 (the Abbofs) shall proceed, and the former aasize
"(Richard's) is extinguished and annuUed as a penalty for
'* having taken the law into his own hands when he should
*'have recovered by judgment." Bracton* cites this case
aod indulges in a similar speculation ; he even thinks that in
Bichards assize it was open to the Abbot to counterclaim
{agere de reemuentione) and so recover seisin. The case
itself, we may notice, does not prove that the Abbot could,
either by cross action or by counterclaim, have reobtained
possession; but it suggested the aame speculation to the
annotator and to Bracton.

(5) Still more to our point is the following. Bracton' a tenement
«ays that the obligation of the donor to warrant the donee warranty.
may not be a merely personal obligation, it may bind some
tenement, that is to say, the burden of the contract may

* run with ' land of the donor and bind that land in the hands
of a purchaser. " A tenement may be thus bound expreasly
or tacitly; expressly, as if it be said in the deed of gift

* I and my heirs will warrant this gift out of such and such

* a tenement into whosesoever hands it may come,' in which
case the thing is expressly bound to warranty, as is shown
by the case conceming R. de Renge, Pasch. A.R. 16 com.
Mid.; tacitly, as if the feoflfor has at the time of the gift
assets for the warranty, in which case, even without express

1 Cafie 360. a Br. f. 382.

2 Br. f. 226, 226 b.


88 INTRODUCTION.

words, what he then has is boiind ; for a personal obligation
is of no avail unless the person bound has property out of
which he ean make the exchange in case of need/' Now
I understand Bracton to mean by this, that on principle
the warranty should always be treated as binding not only
the warrantor's person but also all the lands that he has
when he makes the contract, whether anything be expressly
said on this point or no ; for a warranty would be a useless
thing if the warrantor could for all practical purposes
destroy it by conveying away his property to others. But
Bracton has not got a case that goes nearly this length ; his
authority goes no further than the point that by express
bargain the burden of the warranty may be imposed upon a
specific tenement.

The case that he cites is easily recognizable in the Note
Book*; it shows how a house in London was expressly
bound to warrant land at Stepney. It interested the anno-
tator; on two occasions has he marked it as Optimum;
meditating over it pen in hand he has drawn a helmeted
head. The result of his meditation is a note to the effect
that * from this case it would seem that as the property that
*a donor or vendor has on the day of the sale may be
*expressly bound by the warranty, so it may be tacitly
* bound, for a warranty is of no avail unless the warrantor
*has property whence he can make the warranty and the
*exchange.' Nay, the two writers (if two they were) use
almost the same words : —

Bracton — quia non valet obligatio personae nisi habeat si
opus f uerit unde possit excambium facere.

The Annotator — quia non valet warantia nisi Iiabeat unde
possit warantiam facere et escambium.

Now this piece of reasoning makes what must seem to us
a very rash transition from *This can be done by express
bargain,' to 'This always is done by tacit bargain.' Both
writers give it; both argue in the same way, in the same

1 Case 748. The Alicia de Warr Ailer, The mistake is one easy to
of Bracton^s text should be Alicia le make.


TERMINUS INDETERMINATUS. 89

phrase, that this must be so otherwise warranties will
be of little worth. Further though there are a very
few traces in later books of the rule that speeific land
might by express words be subjected to the burden of
warranty, the much wider doctrine as to the tacit qbligation,
never became, so far as we know, part of the common law\

(6) Next we may note a coincidence which caught xhe statute
VinogradotTs eye. Bracton' says that formerly the doweress

had no power to bequeath the growing crop. The change in
the law made by the Statute or Provisions of Merton he
then states thus : — " sed noua superueniente gratia et proui-

"sione poterit uxor de fructibus et bladis testari et

"pro voluntate sua disponere." Against a case' decided
under the old law the annotator has written thus:— "Modo
"mutatum est de noua gracia quod potest testamentum
"facere de blado firmo in terra." This coincidence in the
use of the phrase noua gracia, which lies a little outside the
lawyer*s everyday stock of words, will seem the more striking
when it is said that both Bracton and the annotator speak of
the Provisions on other occasions without using this or any
similar phrase.

(7) On f. 26 b. Bracton speaks of a particular cla^s of Tennmus

, terminana

gifts, namely gifbs made to the donee until {quomque veZj^deter-
donec) some other provision shall be made for him. He
points out the distinctions which will arise according as the
heirs of the donor, and again the heirs of the donee, are or
are not mentioned. Four cases are possible (1) 'until I
' provide for you,' (2) * until I or my heirs provide for you,'
(3) ' until I provide for you or your heirs,' (4) ' until I or my
' heirs provide for you or your heirs.' He then passes on to
speak about estates pur autre vie, gifts to the donee for the
life of the donor, and then touches on gifts for terms of years.
And here he has this phrase: — "Si autem fiat donatio ad

1 SeeHolmes, CommonLaw, p. 394 "the person of the feoffor is hereby

and the cases there cited, viz. Y. B. ''bound, and not the land, unlesse

20. Ed. i. 360; Y. B. 32 and 33. Ed. "he hath it at the time of the

i. 516. See also Fitz. Voucher, 292 "voucher."

(28 Ed. i.) and Co. Lit. 102 b: "If a ^ Br. f. 96.

"man give Jands in fee and bind ^ Case 1409.
" certaine lands specially to warranty,


00 INTRODUCTION.

"terminum annorum, quamuis longiasimum, qui excedit
"vitas hominum, tamen ex hoc non habebit donatorius
" liberum tenementum, cum terminus annorum certus sit et
" determinatus, et terminus vitae incertus, et quia licet
"nihil certius sit morte, nihil tamen incertius est hora
" mortis." AU the matter here described occurs in the space
of a single page.

In the Note Book there is a case* which interested the
annotator a great deal. It concems Stephen Segrave. The
fisillen favourite was sued by the king for certain manors.
The case seems to have been that King John had given
these manors to David Earl of Huntingdon until {quomque)
King John should make other provision for Earl David,
and that Segrave derived such title as he had from Earl
John heir of Earl David. Judgment, it seems from a note
which the annotator himself has interpolated, was given for
Segrave. The report is not so full as might be wished;
but the annotator suggests that the case tumed on this, that
the king had never made another provision for Earl David
himself and that nothing had been said about any provision
being made for Earl David's heirs ; " prouisio non tetigit ,
" haeredes." He thinks with Bracton that if the clause be
' until I provide for you,' then after your death your heir will
have a fee in the land not to be defeated by my tendering
him other lands. Incidentally too he notices, as Bracton
does, that qmusque and domc are equivalent terms. But he
adds another note which must be quoted in fuU — " Terminus
" terminans set indeterminatus et incertus, et ideo liberum
" tenementum sicut ad vitam hominis (a gift to you until I
" otherwise provide for you, gives you the freehold, for though
" a term is set to your estate, it is an uncertain term, such as
"is set to the estate of every tenant for life), quia nichil
"certius inorte, nichil incertius hora mortis."

These are Bracton's very words, and the coincidence
seems particularly remarkable, for Bracton introduces this
phrase about the certainty of death the uncertainty of the
hour of dcath, immediately after he has bcen discussing,

1 Case 1121.


TH^ DUAL SEISIN. 91

what the annotator thought was the point of Segrave s case,
namely the eifect of such words as * until I otherwise provide
* for you/

(8) The two books contain two very similar disquisitions Yearand
as to the meaning of *a year and a day\' Both writers
maintain that the 'year' is always 365 days and 6 hours;

trhat a leap year makes no difference ; both argue against the
contrary opinion ; it is a mistake caused by the interpolation
of an additional day in every fourth year; that day is
interpolated to prevent the absurdity of keeping Christmas
in the summer and the Nativity of the Baptist in the
winter ; no such absurdity would be caused by holding that
the essoinee*s ' year ' is always the sarae ; both compare the
year of 365 days to a snake without a tail, the year of
365 days and 6 hours to a snake with its tail in its mouth ;
both think it necessary to preface their argument with some
general considerations about the length of years, months,
weeks, days, hours and moments. In short, it is not too
much to say that the two disquisitions are substantially the
same ; both maintain by the same arguments, in the same
phrases, a doctririe, which even if it ever was uncontroverted
law, was abolished in 1256.

(9) In the Note Book the argument about leap year isTHeduai
immediately preceded by the discussion of a hypothetical
case*. I will ask any reader who is familiar with Bracton's
mode of thought and strain of language, and who is also
£Eimiliar with the terminology of the roUs, whether this
discussion is not extremely like Bracton's work. It concems

a matter which seems to have given him a great deal of
trouble, namely the dual possession, or dual seisin, of free-
holder and termor. For each of them has a legally pro-
tected possession or seisin, the one protected by the assize,
the other by the quare ejecit infra terminum. How can one
represent this in theory ; how can one do so in the reason-
able Boman terms that one finds in Azo^s book? The
discussion in the Note Book deals with a problem which

i'Br. f. 359; Case 1291; see also = Case 1290.

Br.f. 344b.


92 INTRODUCTION.

raises this question. The writer introduces the doctrine of
two concurrent possessions

quia simul 8ta/re possurU seisina proprietarii et firmarii, unius
quantum ad liberum tenementum et alterius quantum ad usum-
fructum.

Bracton more than once states this theory

quia bene sese compatiuntur de eadem re duae possessiones,

dum tamen ex diuersis causis quia ususfructus per se stare

potest in persona unius, et liberum tenementum per se in persona
alterius (f. 44 b.).

quia sese compatiuntur terminus et feofiamentum de eadera
terra, quia ibi sunt diuersa jura^ ad feofiatum vero pertinet
proprietas feodi et liberum tenementum, firmarius vero nihil sibi
vendicare poterit nisi usum fructuum (f. 27).

poterit enim quilibet illorum sine praeiudicio alterius in
seisina esse eiusdem tenementi, unus ut de termino et alius ut de
feodo et libero tenemento (f. 220 b.).

Further it will be observed that the writer of the passage
in the Note Book uses the words proprietarius and uaua'
fructus. Now it may, I believe, be denied with much confi-
dence that these were terms of English law. I have copied
near two thousand cases without having once had to write
either of them. The tenant for years never has a tmifruct,
the freeholder never is a proprietor. Such terms belong not
to the language in which lawyers plead, in which justices
deliver judgment, they belong to the language of the
rationalistic jurist who has come under romanesque influence,
who will expound English law according to the best modem
ideas. To say that no man but one could have written this
passage, would be absurd enough ; still we may say that of
the only two passages in the Note Book in which there is
anything that can be called a sustained argument, this one
about the double seisin, states a theory which Bracton held
in the terms which Bracton used, which were not the
technical terms of English law, while the other is the
dissertation on leap-year, the relation of which to a passage
inJfoacton's tcxt is curiousiy intimate.


ERMENGARD OF PUNCHARDON. 93 ^

It will probably be allowed that these nine examples summary.
(which of course have been chosen as being the best) bring
the work of the annotator very near to the work of Bracton.
Still it might be rash to infer that the annotator and Bracton
were one. They may have been two close friends, two
members of the same school, perhaps pupil and master,
interested in just the same problems of jurisprudence, solving
such problenjs in the same way, in the same terms; they
may have discussed together the bearing of Trussers case on
the charters of William Briwere, have talked over the
bindiog of land by warranty, have heard Martin PateshuU
expound the true theory of * year and day,' have leamed from
each other or from their common preceptor the *Juste

* propter jus sed iniuste propter iniuriam,' the * Nihil certius

* morte, nihil incertius hora mortis ;' the theory of the dual
seisin, the terms 'proprietor' and 'usufruct' may have
belonged to a school, a school of speculative lawyers who
strove to reconcile English law with Kome and Reason.
Less theoretic, more purely personal, links must be found
between these two writers, before the connection will have
become so close that we must acknowledge them to be not
two, but one Bracton.

The Wkirdr Argument : The Cases *noted up' in ihe margin
of the Note Book,

We tum now to the most eniffmatical class of notes, those Thecase*

° noted up.

namely which seem to be allusioris to cases which are not in
the Note Book. Often such notes consist of just a proper
name and no more. AU the notea of this class shall here be
coUected, and we will inquire whether there are any reasons
for connecting Bracton with the cases, which have thus been
' noted up.'

(1) Against an action for dower* we find this note : —

Ermeiard et herede de Hokesham.
Now on the 13th December 1255, as we may leam from aS^theheir

^ of Huxham.

1 Case 1843.


94 INTRODUCTION.

an inquest post mortem*, died William of Hockesham or
Hoggesham, that is of Huxham near Exeter, leaving a son
four years old The wardship, however, of this child was
worth nothing, because the father shortly before his death
gave his land at Huxham to William " de Punchard," as the
jurors call one whom we may easily identify with William of
Punchardon. Punchardon lies in the parish of Kentisbere
some ten miles as the crow flies from Huxham". The reader
may possibly remember that William of Punchardon married
Ermengard widow of Thomas of Saunton, and with his wife
brought an action for her dower against one Henry of
Brattonl That Bracton had dealings with Ermengard is
established, that Ermengard had trouble with the heir of
Huxham whose father had enfeoffed her husband, is very
probable. This is how I would explain the note Ermeiard et
herede de Hokesham. It is a note about a case affecting a
lady whom the annotator knew so well that he did not give
her a sumame.

Apart from this very conclusive evidence, it may be
shown that Bracton had cause to know something of both
the families concemed in this case. A case conceming
William of Punchardon, Henry Tracey and the heir of Roger
Beaupel is cited without date in the printed treatise, and the
MSS. prove that this citation was originally a marginal note*.
William of Punchardon sat with Bracton as a justice of
assize'^. In 1257 Bracton was appointed to take an assize
conceming land at Huxham, to which William of Punchardon .
was party*. Ermengard was convicted before Bracton of a
disseisin perpetrated at Cheritonl In 1262 Bracton was
commissioned for an assize between Thomaa Brother and
Emma widow of William of Huxham touching commoa of

1 CaUnd, GefuaX, vol. 1, p. 73. that tbe Hokesham faipily held the

3 See Lysons, Britannia, vol. 6, hundred of Budleigh ; see alfio ibid.

p. 85, where it is said that Bobert de p. 86, 91.

Hokesham oonveyed the manor of ^ See above p. 16.

Wesl Buckiand to Sir William * Br. f. 88 b. It is in the margin

Pnnchardon, whose heiress bronght of OA aud OB.

it to the Baleighs. The entry which * Coram Bege BoU No. 96.

enaUed me to identify Hokesham or ^ Bot. Pat. 42 Hen. 3. m. 17 d.

Hoggesham with Hu^am is in Bot. (MS. Ind.)

Hund. vol. 1, p. 66, which showed ^ Coram Bege Boll No. 90. m. 11 d.


THE PAROL DEMURS. 95

pasture in Huxham\ In 1267 this same Emma paid a half-
mark to have an assize before Bracton*.

(2) No cases seem to have interested the annotator more ^^y°''
than those which concem the demurrer of the parol. Be it
then explained, that very often when an action for land is
brought against an infant, the action will remain in suspense
until the infant is of age; in technical phrase the parol
(loqmla) demurs (remanet) ; or to use another term of art,
the infant habet etatem suam, has or is allowed his age, that
is, he need not answer until he has attained majority'.
Such is the case if the infent has come to the land as the
heir of an ancestor who died seised as of fee. But a^cording
to Bracton stress must be laid on these words as of fee; for
if, e.g. the ancestor came to the land as guardian in chivalry,
then his heif though under age will have to answer at once
to the suit of the ward who is being kept out of his inheri-
tance. Again the parol may demur because a person who
has been vouched to warranty is under aga As may well be
imagined many diflficulties occur in working out this general
principle, for lords are given to dealing in unauthorized
modes with the lands which come to them by way of ward-
ship ; the lord, for example, who has A*s land will enfeoff X,
then X will die and his infant.heir Y will enter, and when A
8ues Y, then Y will assert that the parol should demur. Or
again the feoffee of the lord, or that feoffee's heir, will, when
sued, vouch the lord's heir, who will be an infant.

Cases in the Note Book which raised such points as these
d.re freely annotated, and it seems plain that the annotator
thought that some of them were wrongly decided. Ap-
parently his inclination was to confine the privilege of infant
tenants and vouchees within as narrow bounds as possible.
Now against several of these cases he writes the name
Gorbyn, The foUowing are the instances in whkh this name
occurd.

Gase 30. Assize of mort d'ancestor brought by Simon on

1 Rot» Pat. 46. H6ii. S. m. 5d. nonage waa alK^shed in 1880 by

(MS. Ind.) 11 Geo. 4 and 1 WiU. 4, cap. 47,

*-' Excerpt. Itol. Fin. vol. 2. p. 458. sec. 10.
3 The demuiTer of the parol for


96 INTRODUCTION.

the death of his mother Swanill against Margaret and Jaoob.
Margaret as doweress vouches Jacob who is an infimt. Simon
asserts that Swanill held of Jacob's father who on Swanills
death entered by intrusion (" by intrusion," says the annotator
"for the tenement was held in socage"). Held that the
assize should proceed. Against this case stands the name
Corhyn,

Case 1722. Assize of mort d'ancestor brought by Richard
Montacute on the death of his father William Montacute
against Gilbert of Say, who vouches his own wife, who
vouches Matthew of Clevedon, who vouches the infant heir
of Drogo Montacute. Matthew claims under the deed of
Drogo's father. Richard however alleges that Drogo's father
obtained possession of the land in the character of lord and
guardian on the death of William Montacute, Richard's father.
Held that the assize must proceed without waiting for the
majority of Matthew^s vouchee. Against this the note is,
Corhin de Ricardo de Monte Acuto.

Case 1827. Assize of mort d*ancestor brought by Eudo
Fitz Walter on the death of his father against Randolph
Braham who vouches Roger son of Earl Hugh the Bigod ;
Roger is an infant. Eudo alleges that his father Walter died
seised in fee, and that under an agreement with William of
Tofbes who was Eudo*s guardian, Earl Hugh intruded and
kept the land. Randolph denies that Walter died seised in
fee. Held that the assize must proceed. Against this case
stands the note, Nota pro Corhyn quod etas non expectatur.
AIso the annotator has added this note — ' To the same eflfect
'you have a case in the Suffolk Eyre of Martin PateshuII,
' A.R. 12. Ass. mort. antec. If Roger of Gloucester, There
' the age is not awaited of the heir of a chief lord, who made
' a feoffment while the very heir [of his tenant] was within

* age, but the assize was taken, saving to the feoffee the right
' to recover in exchange when the [Iord's] heir should have

* attained full age. And the same ought of rights (dejure) to
*be observed when an alienation is made after a writ has

* been purchased by the very heir whether the very heir be

* under age or no.' These last words, it will be remarked,


corbyn's case. 97

introduce a somewhat difierent topic, namely the efFect of
alienation pendente lite.

Case 1898. On the margin of a later page the case of
Roger of Gloucester is copied from the Suffolk Eyre Roll.
Assize of mort d'ancestor brought by John son of Roger of
Gloucester against Richard Paide, who vouches William
infant son of William de Ros. John alleges that Roger died
seised and William de Ros the elder entered as guardian.
No reply is made and the action is compromised. It would
seem therefore that the annotator was mistaken when he said
(in commenting on the case of Eudo Fitz Walter) that the
assize was taken. This case is prefaced by the words, Corbyn.
De warrantia ipsius qui est infra etatem.

We have then four allusions to * Corbyn ' and the context
into which this mysterious word is introduced is always much
the same. We tum to the places in which Bracton discusses
the demurrer of the parol. .

On f. 275 he cites the cases of Eudo Fitz Walter and
Roger of Gloucester, and, like the annotator, treats the latter
as an authority against the demurrer of the parol. But also
6n f. 269 b, he gives Eudo's case at length in such a context
as to show that in his mind, as in the annotator's, the rule
that the parol does not demur for the nonage of a vouchee
whose ancestor entered merely as guardian, was closely con-
nected with the rule about alienation pendente lite, the rule
qui dolo desiit possidere pro possessore habebitur, Now in the
Digby MS. the whole of this passage (twenty-four lines of the
printed book^) is in the margin, and has above it the words
Casus Corbin, It would seem therefore that in Bracton*s
mind, as in the annotator's, this topic was connected with
Corbyn*s Case.

On the lOth of April 1260, Bracton was appointed to take
an assize of mort d'ancestor between Richard Corbyn and
Adam le Bel for land in the township of Montacute in the
county of Somerset*, on the 3rd of June in the same year to

^ The passage begins on f. 269 b., *Rogerum de warantiaJ
line 24,with ♦£t ideo cumper talem' ^ Rot. Pat. 44 Hen. 3, m. 12 d.

and ends on f. 270, line 2, with (MS. Ind.)

M. I. 7


98 INTRODUCTION.

take a similar assize for land in the same township between
Richard Corbyn and Ealph le Bel*. Is not this the ex-
planation of the four notes in the Note Book and of the note
in the Digby MS. ? I had hoped to make the answer more
certain by finding Corbyn's case on a plea roll ; in this I have
failed; but it will not escape remark that all the cases in
connection with which we have found Corbyn's name are
assizes of mort d ancestor*.

wwtchureh. (3) Against a case' from 1219 we &nd Nota Whitcherche.
The name which assumes the various forms of de Albo
Monasterio, BlancmoiLstier, Blanchminster, Whitminster and
Whitchurchy was not uncommon in the thirteenth century :
but in that century a family of ' Blanchminster or De Albo
Monasterio in some records called Whitminster ' was seated
in the parish of Stratton in Comwall*, near the Bristol
Channel and near the boundary of Devon. In 1261 Bracton
was appointed to take an assi^e between Kannulf de Albo
Monasterio and the Prior of Launceston for the church of
Stratton*; from the next year we have a fine whereby Rannulf
recognized the Prior's right to the church*.

Raiphof (4) The Note Book has a case^ in which a lord claims

ArundelL ^ ' .

wardship of the heir of a female tenant against the infanfs
father. The father pleads that he is tenant by the curtesy
and that therefore no wardship is due. On this plea a day is
given for judgment. Against this case stands a note : —

Casv.8 Radulphi de Arundelle similis isti in Cornuhia.

That the allusion is to a Comish case needs no proof. A
Ralph Arundell, who is regarded as the founder of the great
Comish house Arundell of Lanheme, was sheri£F of Comwall


^ Ibid. m. 10 d. wbich one Walter Corbyn was plain-

3 This same Bioiiard Corbyn, or tiff. Coram Bege Boll, No 90, m. 16.

perhaps it was another, seems about ^ Case 25.

this time to hold a good deal of land ^ Lysons, vol. 3, p. oxxiii.

in Devonshire, the manors of Lamp- ^ j^q^, -p^X. 45 Hen. 3, m. 9 d.

ford, Uppacot, Parkham and fiel- ' Feet of Fines, Cornwall, 46 Hen.

stone, Feet of Fines, Devon, No. 613. 3, No. 7. In 1259 Bannulf and his

A.R. 54 (MS. Ind.) In 1253 firac- wife were parties to another fine.

ton heard an assize for common of Comwall, 43 Hen. 3, No. 1.

pasture at Litlemore in Somerset in ^ Case 266.


KALPH ARUNDELL. 99

in 1260\ He held the manor of Trembleth in St Ervan
and in 1259 and 1262 was party to real or simulated liti-
gation ending in fines'. Moreover in 1254 and 1257 three
difFerent assizes in which he was engaged, all touehing tene-
ments in Cornwall, were brought before Bracton^.

We tum to that Bodleian treasure, the Digby MS. At
the bottom of one of its pages we find without context the
note Memorandum de casu R, de Arundelle, On this page
there is nothing that we can connect with the case in the
Note Book ; but on the page next before it there occurs a
statement that tenant by the curtesy is seised of the freehold,
and so can bring an assize, though he is not seised as of
fee : possibly then the note in the Digby MS. has wandered
a little way from its proper place*. It seems the general
opinion of Comish antiquaries that Ralph Arundell owed his
esfcates in Comwall to his having married an heiress, the
heiress of Trembleth. At any rate here again we find a link
between the Digby MS. and the Note Book.

But further, at the very bottom of fche first leaf of each of
the five first quires of the Digby MS. may be seei^ the words
Dominus Radulphus (in some cases Randulphus) de ArdelV,
Then at the end of a later quire^ there stands a more
eloquent legend, which I read thus : —

Mittuntur J, de bello prato septem peciae et dimidia suhse-
quentes rubricam istam viz, quod non est capienda conuictio
super conuictionemy et de illis tenetur respondere domino (a
blurred word which may I think be Ead') de ArundelV.

The meaning of this seems plainly to be that the seven
and a half quires foUowing the mbric Quod non est capienda
etc^j are lent to J. de Beaupr^, (probably in order that
he may have them copied,) and that he is bound to answer
for them to Sir Amndell. We may infer then that

this very MS. belonged to a Sir Ralph Amndell. Beaupre

1 Lysons, vol. 3, p. cxix. * MS. Digby, 222, f. 98. This folio

^ Feet of Fines, Gomwall, 44 Hen. begins at talis in the last line of

.3, No. 2 ; 46 Hen. 3, No. 5. f. 206 b. of the printed book, and ends

3 Coram Rege RoU, No. 96, m. 1 ; with liberum in the first line of f. 208.

Rot. Pat. 41 Hen. 3, m. 7 d., 42 » f. 129 b.

Hen. 3, m. 2 d. (MS. Ind.) « Br. f. 295 b.


•"


100 INTRODUCnOX.

again was a good Comish name. In the fourteenth eentury
Arundells and Beaupr^s marry into the same family, their
souls are prayed for in the same ehureh*. What here
concems us is the connection between the Note Book and
this MS. of the treatise ; still it is interesting to guess that
the latter, a MS. which gives us the treatise in what seems
an exceptionally pure form, may be traced to the house of a
man who was sheriff of Comwall when Bracton took the
Cornish assizes ; but this trail must be foUowed by others.
Gorgea. (5) There is an appeal of mayhem'; the appellee did

not appear and the sherifF retumed that he was not to
be found ; thereupon the sherifiF was directed to exact him in
three county courts and inform the justices of the result.
Against this is written

Casm ipsitis qui desponsauerat vxoreni Radulfi de Gorges
antequam dictus Radulfus.

This I believe refers to a case found elsewhere in the
Note Book'. One Thomas of Bayeux carried oflF the kings
ward Ellen daughter of Ivo of Morville and married her : the
king had intended to give her to Ralph Gorges; steps
seem to have been taken to outlaw Thomas and his accom-
plices (this is the point that the annotator takes;) when
Thomas appeared it was adjudged^tbat Ellen being an infant
was not bound by the marriage; they were separated and
she afterwards married Ralph*. This allusion therefore
seems suflSciently explained by the Note Book itself ; but it
may be added that the family of Gorges gave its name to the
manor of Braunton Gorges which lies in the same parish as
that manor of Saunton which was once in the hands of
Henry of Bratton, also that in 1258 and 1262 Bracton was
appointed to hear assizes in which Ralph Gorges was
concemed*.
coic'8 case. (6) Colc was, as it is, a common name, therefore when

we find against a case fere casus Cole^ we leam little.

1 See Maclean, History of Trigg * Excerpta e Rot. Fin. toI. 2,
Minor, vol. 1, p. 189, vol. 2, p. 15«, p. 677.

and the index of that valuable book. ^ Bot. Pat. 42 Hen. 8, m. 15d; 46

2 Case 346. Hen. 3, m. 16 d. (MS. Ind.)

3 Cases 1263, 1267. « Case 269.


^msBi.


bracton's neighbours. 101

However in 1238 a Richard Cole held land in Comwall. A
fine is preserved which was levied between him and the
Prior of Launceston touching the church of St Juliotts;
another levied between him and William atte Hasse\ In
1254 or thereabouts a Eichard Cole was charged before
Bracton with a disseisin done at Kadekeber ' (Cadbury ?) in
Devonshire'; on another occasion a Richard Cole of Sebrit-
tescot' comes before Bracton as a juror along with a Raleigh,
a Tracey and others*. In 1262 one of the assizes which
Bracton was commissioned to hear was brought against
Martin Cole for land at Coombe in Devonshire*.

(7) Gasus de Cornw'^, A family which bore the name ctornu.
De Cornu was seated at Horwood a few miles east of
Bideford^ Ralph de Comu was sherifF of Devon in 1250^

In the same year Roger Le Cornu and Fina his wife paid a
mark for an assize before Henry of Brattonl

(8) Against a case® illustrating the rules of descent, we winscot.
have N^ota Wynescot There is a place called Winscot in the
parish of St Giles in the Wood near Torrington, which gave

its name to a family of landowners*^ A Johannes de Wynes-
cote appears several times on Bracton's two Assize RoUs,
once as engaged in litigation touching common at Morchard
Bishop"; a Walterus de Wynescote is also mentioned**; but
the case to which allusion is made in the Note Book has not
been found.

(9) Against a case^' deciding that an infant is not bound Raidgh.
by his fine, we have Nota ca^sum Hug^ JW Wymundi fte
Ralegha primogenitum et postmatvm qui fuit infra etatem de
comordia inter eos facta coram H, de Brattona, There is no
need here to prove that Bracton was concerned with the case

to which reference is thus made. There is extant the foot of


1 Feet of Fines, Cornwall, 22 Hen. ^ Risdon, Devonshire, vol. 1, p.

3, No. 3 and 7. 117.

^ Coram Rege Roll, No. 96, m. 8. » Excerpt. Rot. Fin. vol. 2, p. 83.

3 Coram Rege RoU, No. 90, m. 6 d. » Case 833.

4 Rot. Pat. 46 Hen. 3, m. 12 d. ^» Lysons, vol. 6, p. 246.

(MS. Ind.) " Coram Rege Roll, No. 96, m. 1 d,

« Case 1904. 6, 10 d, 13 d.

« Polwhele, Deconshire, vol. 2, i^ CoramRegeRoll,No.90,m. lOd.

p. 409 note. i» Case 1884.


y


102 INTBODUCTION.

a fine* levied in A.R. 40, before the justices in eyre at Exeter
between Wjrmund of Raleigh and Warin of Raleigh, whereby,
(this early specimen of elaborate conveyancing is worth notice)
W)nnund recognizes land at Bolleham to be the right of Warin,
to hold of W)nnund and his heirs to Warin and the heirs of his
body, and after his death if he die without issue, to Wymund
younger brother of Warin and the heirs of his body, and
after his death if he die w^ithout issue, to Beginald brother of
W)niiund and the heirs of his body, and after his death if he
die without issue, to Richard brother of Reginald and the
heirs of his body, and if Warin, W)niiund, Reginald and
Richard die without issue, then the land is to revert to
Wymund of Raleigh and his heirs. In 1259 Bracton was
commissioned to take an assize of mort d*ancestor between
Hugh and Warin of Raleigh for land at Belham*. This may
well be the case to which the annotator refers. Again in
1265 Warin of Raleigh and Hawisia his wife pay a half-
mark for an assize before Bracton'. That Bracton himself
held land of a Raleigh has been shown above*.

(10) l^ota de villanis Henrici de Tracy de Tawystocke
qui nunquam fuerunt in manu Domini Regis nec antecessorum
suorum et loquehantur de tempore Regis Eadwardi coravh
W. de Wiltona^. This must allude to a case from Bracton*s
time: William of Wilton was just his contemporary ; Tavi-
stock, it were needless to say, is in Devon ; Henry of Tracey
sat as justice of assize along with Bracton, and was often
appointed to deliver the gaol at Exeter. In 1279, as appears
from a case in the Placitorum Abbreviatio^ the men of
Tavistock were again disputing with their lord as to whether
they were entitled to the protection given to tenants of the
ancient demesne. Two records, as it seems, were produced
against them, the earlier of which was a case before Bruce
and Middleton justices of assize in the 47 th year of King
Henry (1262-3). I should suppose that the case before

1 Feet of Fines, Devon, Hen. 3, 423.

No. 492. * See above p. 16.

3 Eot. Pat. 43 Hen. 3, m. 13 d. « Case 1237.

(MS. Index.) « Plac. Abbrev. p. 270.

3 Excerpt. Kot. Fin. vol. 2, p.


bracton's country. 103

Wilton was yet earlier than this ; much later it cannot have*
been, for Wilton was killed at Lewes on 14th May, 1264.

Even in imarination it is pleasant to walk in Devon. Geo^raphv

of the cases.

We take the train to Bamstaple ; Bracton was archdeacon of
Bamstaple. The next moming we may stroU easily to
Ealeigh, the cradle of the great house, and so on through
Heanton Punchardon and Braunton Gorges to Saunton the
manor which Bracton held : we have left Bratton Fleming
some six miles to our right. Crossing the Braunton Burrows,
we may be ferried over the estuary of the Taw and Torridge
to Appledore ; and so to Bideford ; there will yet be time to
visit Horwood where the Cornus lived. If we would see
Winscot we must go south to Torrington, and then a third
day s walk will take us over the Cornish border to Stratton,
the home of Blanchminsters or Whitchurches : the church
there claims our notice ; Rannulf Blanchminster and the
Prior of Launceston fell out about it and Bracton heard the
cause. Then our way will lie in pleasant places; one day
along the«shore to St Juliotfs, pretending if we can that we
are interested in the Prior of Launceston, for this church
also he acquired from one Richard Cole. We are not far
now from the home of Ralph Arundell. But let us cross the
Bodmin moors ; on their south-eastem verge near the Cheese
Wring we find Tuckenbury, and we remember how the
Raleighs gave Bracton the manor of Tykenbrede for his life.
On to Tavistock, where the villeins of Henry Tracey quar-
relled with their lord and relied in vain on Doomsday Book.
Richard Corbyn s manor of Belstone we can reach next day ;
the way lies straight across Dartmoor ; it is a wild way,
but (teste meipso) there is none pleasanter in England. Of
course we can go round by the high-road, and a detour,
none too long, will take us through Broadwood Wiger and
Bratton Clovelly. To Exeter will be no long walk from
Belstone ; we must enter the cathedral, seek the spot where
they laid the body of Henry Bratton, where they prayed for
his soul and the soul of John Wiger. At his torab our
pilgrimage might end ; but if one day more can be spared, we
will go through Huxham and Thorverton, find Punchardon iu


104 INTEODUCTION.

the paxish of Kentisbere and catch the train at Tiverton.
Montacute we might visit on onr way back through Somer-
setshire, if we cared to see the scene of the ' Casus Corbyn '.
Not far out of our track have lain Ash Reigney, Buckland
Brewer, Bovey Tracey, Newton Tracey, Nymet Tracey,
Colaton Ealeigh, Combe Raleigh, Withycombe Bawleigh.
Many questions are solved by walking; Beati omnes qui
ambulant
Buininary. Thcse teu cascs * notcd up ' in the margin of the Note

Book seem to supply a link of just the kind that was wanted.
Our two writers not only select the same roUs, rolls of
PateshuU and Ealeigh, ponder over the same cases, hold the
same juristic theories, use the same unusual phrases, but also
are interested in the same counties^ in the same set of
people, Arundells, Punchardons, Traceys, Raleighs ; they have
personal as well as professional interests in common. If
more be needed to make them one, perhaps it is that
both should have been guilty of the same astonishing
blunder.

Thefifth Argument The Baronial Nolumus.

Ppedai The last point which can be discussed is of some curiosity,

" ^' for it concerns the legitimation of bastards and that famous
baronial Nolumus of which all have heard ; but we must
proceed cautiously and patiently, for we have to deal with
an intricate question. The reader may be asked to keep two
dates steadily before his mind, the 12th of October 1234, and
the 23rd of January 1236.

Tiiestatute (1) The Statutc of Merton as printed by the Record
Commissioners^ professes to have been made on the 23rd Jan.
1236, the morrow of S. Vincent in A.R. 20. It contains
eleven chapters the subject matters whereof are as foUows : —

cap. 1. Damages in actions for dower.

2. Widows may bequeath the crop on their dower

lands.

3. Procedure and punishment in case of redisseisin.

^ Statutes of the RealvHy vol. 1, p. 1.


KSBsa


SPECIAL BASTARDY. 105

4. Approvejnent of common

5. Usury shall not run against infant heirs.

6. and 7. Ravishment of ward ; valor maritagiL

8. Periods of limitation for divers writs,

9. Special bastardy. ,

10. Suit of Court by attomey.

11. Imprisonment of those who trespass in parks.

(2) There is no doubt that a parliament was held atHowmuch
Merton on the day just mentioned and that it enacted laws. Merton?*
On the other hand the evidence for the fuU form of the
statute printed by the Record Commissioners is not first rate.

This fuU form has not been found on any extant roU.
Whether there was at this time or for many years afterwards
a Statute RoU, is very doubtful. Legislative acts are often
found on the Patent, Close, and Coram Rege Rollsw Thus
the Provisions of Westminster are on the Close RoU ; the '
ordinance touching leap year is on the Close RoU ; instances
of legislative acts found on Coram Rege RoUs will be given
hereafter. The best evidence for the full form of the Statute
is *a comparatively modem MS. which professes to be a copy
of a Statute RoU not now forthcoming ; but substantially the
same form is found in other old private MSS.

(3) The evidence against this fuU form is briefly this : — oniypart
(a) Writs directed to the sheriffs announcing the laws Merton.

made at the Parliament of Merton are enroUed on the Close
Roll under date 30th Jan. 1236 \ They mention chapters
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, but not the other chapters.

(6) Matthew Paris under the year 1236 gives chapters
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 11, but not the other chaptersl

(c) The excellent Annals of Burton give as the laws
made at Merton on the 23rd Jan. 1236, chapters 1, 2, 3,
4, 5 and 11, but not the other chapters'. Since chapter 11
does but report an abortive discussion about the right to
imprison those found trespassing in parks, and declare that


1 Statutes of the Realm, vol. 1, 2 Mat. Par. vol. 3, p. 341.

p. 4, from Rot. Cl. 20 Hen. 3, m. 8 Ann. Mon. vol. 1, p. 249.

18 d.


106 INTRODUCTION.

for the present there is to be no change in the law, the
omission of this in the writ to the sheriflFs is explicable.

(d) Almost certainly chapter 8 changing the periods of
limitation was not enacted at Merton. It is not mentioned
in the writ of 30th Jan. 1236. On the other hand a writ
announcing this change to the people of Ireland is enroUed on
the Patent RoU under date 20th March, 12:i7\ Also the
Annak of Burton give it as having been made on 5th Feb.
1237*. Lastly our Note Book gives it among extracts from
the Coram Rege RoU of A.E. 21 (A.D. 1237-8), which roll is
not now forthcoming, and describes it as having been made
at a general council held at Westminster in that year'.
Thestory (4) Thc chaptcr (cap. 9) then with which we are con-

Noiumus. cemed, the celebrated chapter about the legitimation of
bastards, stands in suspicious company so far as regards its
date. But let us note the substance of it : — the bishops said
that they would not answer the inquiry whether a person
was bom before or after the marriage of his parents, for this
would be against the common order (contra communem
formam) of the church ; they then in their tum asked the
barons to consent that children bom before marriage should
inherit; this request the barons met with the Nolumus,
The discussion therefore was sterile ; no law was made ;
therefore there was nothing to be published to and by the
sheriffs ; therefore the silence of the Close Roll, of Paris,
of the Burton Annalist is not unnatural. For the sake
of brevity I shall speak of the transaction described in this
chapter as ' the Nolumus.'
The ordi- (5) It is au iudubitable fact that about bastardv there

Dance of 1234. , . •'

had been legislation some fifteen months before the parlia-
ment of Merton. This is proved by the Coram Rege RoU for
A.R. 18-19, a roU still extant and extremely well dated.
XJnder the heading Die Jovis proadma post featum 8, Dionisii
anno Regis Hen. fiL Reg, J, ooviij, (St Denis is Oct. 9, a
Monday in 1234, so this date is 12 Oct., 1234,) stands a
provision made by the king, Archbishop Edmund, ten named

1 Statutes of the Realm, vol. 1, p. » p. 262.

4, fiom Rot. Pat. 21 Hen. 3, m. 10. » Case 1217.


NOLUMUS LEGES ANGLIAE MUTARE. 107

bishops, eleven named earls, and many barons named and
unnamed. It is to this efFect — ^When in the king s court it
is objected to any that he is a bastard because bom before
the marriage of his parents, the plea is to be sent to the
bishop to inquire whether he was bom before marriage,
or no. This in substance is all that is said; the terms
in which the bishop must make his retum to the writ are
not expressly prescribed ; there foUows a provision against
appeals, and a clause making the mle applicable to suits
already pending as well as to suits not yet begun. I shall
refer to this as * the ordinance of 1234 '.

(6) Supposinff for a moment that the date of the Reiation of

^ ^ ^*^ " , , , the Nolumus

Nolumns is uncertain, what we may ask is its relation to the ^^J ^«*»-
ordinance of 1234? Now had we nothing but intemal
evidence to guide us, we might for a moment be inclined to
regard the ordinance as a settlement of the dispute disclosed
by the story about the Nolumus ; the bishops gave way and
consented to retum a direct answer to the king*s writ. But
this doctrine would leave inexplicable the later practice of
the king's courts, which did not send the issue of special
bastardy to the ordinary ; it could hardly be squared with
certain letters which Eobert Grosseteste bishop of Lincoln
wrote to William Raleigh; it is flatly contradicted by an
unquestionable authority. A few months after the Parlia-
ment at Merton an entry dated 9th May, 1236, was made on
the Close RoU. This entry has been printed by Blackstone*.
It consists of a writ addressed to the Archbishop of Dublin
and the Justiciar of Ireland. They have asked how to
proceed in case of special bastardy. They are told that there
was a question as to where such an issue should be decided ;
that in the year past {anno preterito) it had been ordained
that the issue should be sent to the Court Christian ; that
afterwards however (postea vero processu temporis) the bishops
finding that they were required to state specifically whether
the person was bom before or after marriage, (and not
generally whether he was legitimate or no,) had protested
that they could not do this ; that consequently the issue was
1 The Great Charter, Introduction, p. Ivii., from Bot. Cl. 20 Hen. 3, m. 13 d.


letter.


108 INTRODUCTION.

for the future to be tried in the king'8 Court ; but that
whether it was to be tried by jury or by other proof was not
yet determined. This seems to settle decisively the sequence
of events. The ordinance of 1234 said that the question was
to be sent to the ordinary ; the bishops perhaps had hoped
that they would be allowed to say merely 'This man is
legitimate ' ; the king's Court would not be put ofF by this,
would press the question * Bom in wedlock or no ? * ; then
(almost certainly at the Merton Parliament) the bishops made
an attempt to get the law altered ; in this they &iled ; still
they succeeded in establishing their refusal to answer the
obnoxious question.
orMsetesto't All this agrccs with the later practice and with Grosse-
teste*s letters to Raleigh and to Archbishop Edmund. In
one of his letters to the Archbishop there is a passage to the
foUowing effect : — * The king and his council are attempting
' to compel me to answer the question, whether a person was
' bom before the marriage of his parents or no ; I have

* refused to do this and have been cited before the counciL
' Also the king and his council say that you along with the

* bishops, earls and barons of England, have consented to this
'form of question and answer. I beg of, you to tell me

* whether you did so consent. If you did, then what am I to
' do ? If I answer the question, I fear to fall into the hands
' of the living God ; if on the other hand I refuse to answer
' and you have consented to the form in which the question
*is put, I shall hardly escape from falling into the hands

* of men.' This letter was written after Grosseteste had been
consecrated bishop of Lincoln, that is, after the 3rd of June,
1235 ; Dr Luard has assigned it to the year 1236 but it can
not well have been written after the Nolumus, From it we
may gather that the question had lately been debated and
that, according to the contention of the royal judges, the
bishops had then consented to answer the king's writ word
for word, but that whether, in their own opinion, they had
really consented to this, was not very clear, was at all events
not well known to the newly consecrated bishop of Lincohi*.

^ See Grosseteste^s Letters^ (ed. Luard), pp. xxzvii. ciii. civ. 76 — 97, 104.


INVERTED DATES. 109

(7) Hitherto we have left Braeton out of account ; when Bracton

^ , ... . invert» tlio

we tum to him our real difBculties begin. What he does is dat*»-
this : — In the first place he tells the story of the Nolumus.
His version is an expanded version of that which is in the
Statute Book. He agrees with the Statute Book as to
place and date. The debate took place at Merton on the
morrow of S. Vincent in A.K 20, that is 23rd Jan. 1236. So
far all is well; but he immediately proqeeds to say that
afterwards on the Thursday next after S. Denis in the same
year a provision was made by the king, archbishop, bishops,
earls and barons. This provision we find to be an expanded
version of the ordinance of 12th Oct. 1234. The day is rightly
described as the Thursday next after S. Denis : but the year
is wrong, wrong by two years. There can be no doubt that it
is the ordinance of 1234 to which he refers ; he gives a long
list of the prelates and magnates who assisted at its making ;
this agrees with the list on the Coram Rege RoU; and
though Bracton has handled his text very freely, still it is
plain beyond doubt that the provision the substance of
which he professes to give, is the ordinance of 1234.

(8) Clearly then as Selden pointed out there is aThemistake
bhinder in Bracton s text\ The suggestion is ready to hand

that this is a blunder of copyists or editors, and, though I
have looked at many MSS. for a variant and none has
appeared, one would be very willing to make a small con-
jectural emendation if this would mend the matter. But
no little change would sufl&ce, nothing short of the rewriting
of a chapter. The text distinctly represents the ordinance as
a settlement of the debate which had provoked the Nolumus,
To make this the clearer the words of the ordinance have
been tampered with, (as I shall show hereaffcer), so as to
represent the bishops as definitely and expressly consenting
to answer the question, 'Bom before marriage or no?' Then,
says Bracton's text, by reason of this common consent it is in
the kirig*s election whether to address this inquiry to the
ordinary or to determine it in his own court. According to
the authentic text of the ordinance the bishops did not
1 Selden, Titles of Honour, Part. 2, chap. 5, § 23.


110 ' INTBODUCTION.

consent definitely and expressly to answer word by word
an inquiry so firamed. Bracton'8 text is wrong and seemingly
no small verbal change will set it right.

One other fact will however suggest that his memory (or
his note book) had served him some trick about the proceed-
ings of the parliament at Merton. One of the changes in the
law made then and there was the change which enabled a
dowager to bequeath the growing crop ; this clause of the
Statute is beyond suspicion. Bracton alludes to it but cites
the Coram Rege RoU for A.K. 18 — sicut patet de prouisioni'
hu8 apud Merton inter placita quae sequuntur Regem Henri-
cum anno regni sui dedmo octauo \ At times, then, he may
have thought that the Merton Parliament took place in Jan.
1234, and therefore before the making of the ordinance about
special bastardy.
TheNote (9) Havinfif seen what Bracton did, let us now see how

Book inverts ^ '^ ^ . .

thedates. thc makcr of our Note Book dealt with this same matter.
He had the Coram Rege RoU for A.R. 18 — 19 in his hands.
His marks may be seen upon it at this moment. He ex-
tracted many cases from it. We have in the Note Book a
legislative provision touching the assize of darrein present-
ment which is taken from the front of one of its membranes.
On the back of that membrane stands the ordinance of
12th Oct. 1234. This also is copied into the Note Book
though in an expanded form. But before this stands the
story of the Nolumus in almost precisely the expanded form
in which Bracton gives it. For this the roU whence extracts
are being made gives no warrant whatever. In the Note
Book no date is assigned to the story, but the transaction
is described as having taken place at Merton. Then the
ordinance is introduced with Postea vero alio die. The
maker of the Note Book therefore believed as Bracton
believed that the ordinance came after the Nolumus; he
ascribed both to 1234 ; Bracton ascribes both to 1236. This
matter of bastardy finished, we have then in the Note Book


^ Br. f. 96. I have not found the and I have examined eleven ; some
right date a.r. 20 in any single MS., give 15, some 18, some '15 alias 18*.


COMMUNITY IN ERROB. 111

more extracts from the same roll ; the cases which are scored
on the roU are duly copied.

(10) Let us now suppose that Bracton and the maker of conjecturai

^ ' ^ ^ , account of

the Note Book were but one person. That person believed, ^^^ miBtake.
for some reason or another, that the famous discussion be-
tween bishops and barons took place before the publication
pf the ordinance. When his clerk under his eye was copying
from the roll of 1234 and had come to the entry about bas-
tardy, then to make matters clearer, he from some other
source furnished that clerk with an accQunt of the Nolumus.
This w£is inserted to explain the ordinance which was then
to be copied, and which was copied though not (as we shall
see) without interpolations. At a later time this same
person was using the materials that he had coUected, was
writing a treatise on the laws of England; his own Note
Book puzzled him; he remembered that the parliament of
Merton, at which the barons said NolumuSy was held on
23rd Jan. A.R. 20 ; how then could the subsequent ordinance
have been made in A.R. 18 ? There was nothing for it but
to change the latter date and to give the ordinance to A.R.
20. Unfortunately however A.R. 18 was the right date.

This of course is conjecture, the conjectural history of a
muddle ; the man who antedated the parliament of Merton,
had afterwards to postdate the ordinance. He was persuaded
erroneously, that the ordinance came after the fruitless de-
bate at Merton ; this being so, he could not get the dates
straight though he tried first one expedient and then another.

(11) But the matter does not rest here. I have said xhe docu-

•iT-k . 11/» o 1 T Bients tam-

that Bracton gives an expanded form of the ordmance and pered witii.
an expanded form of the story told in the Statute Book
about the Nolumus, So does the Note Book, and in each
case the version in the Note Book seems intermediate be-
tween Bracton^s version and the original text. This may
best be manifested by printing in each case the three
versions in such a manner that comparison may be easy.

Here then are the three versions of the ordinance;
(A) the genuine text of the Coram Rege Roll, (B) the text
in the Note Book, (C) Bracton's text.


112 INTBODUCnON.

A Proviflom fait et conoesBnm quod de caetero cnin talis bastardia

B ProTisnm fmt et concessmn quod de caetero cvan talis bastardia

C ProTismn fuit et conceesnm qaod de caetero cmn bastardia

A objiciatm: alicni in ouria domini Begis qnod

B objecta fnerit alicni in cnria domini Begis qnod

G objecta fnerit alicni de tali cansa in cnria domini Begis qnod

A natns fnit ante

B bastardns sit et ideo bastardus qnia natns ante sponsalia sive

G bastardns sit et ideo bastardus qnia natns ante sponsalia vel

A matrimoninm oontractnm inter patrem snum et matrem snam mittatnr

B matrimonium oontracfum inter patrem sunm et matrem snam mittatnr

G matrimonium contractum inter patrem suum et matrem snam mittatur

A loqnela ad episoopnm loci ad inquirendnm ntmm

B loquela ad episcopnm loci nt inquiratnr per haec verba utmm

C loqnela ad ordinarium loci et fiat inqnisitio per haeo verba ntmm

A talis natns fuit ante predictum matrimoninm vel

B talis natns fnerit ante sponsalia vel matrimonium vel

C videlioet talis natus fuerit ante sponsalia sive matrimonium vel

A post ita

B post ita

G post et rescribat ordinarius per eadem verba domino Begi sine aliqua ca-

vellatione. Et

A qnod in inqnisitione illa cesset omnis appellatio sicut in

B quod in inquisitione illa cesset onmis appellatio sicut in

C in illa inqnisitione facienda cesset omnis appellatio sicnt in

A simplici bastardia de qua placitnm

B omni alia inqnisitione de bastardia de qna inqnisitio

G omni alia inquisitione de bastardia de qna inquisitio demandanda

A transmissnm erit ad cnriam cristianitatis

B fuerit transmissa ad cnriam cristianitatis episcopo vel ordinario

C fuerit alicui ordinario

A ita qnod nnlla appellatio inde fiat extra regnnm.

B facienda et ita maxime quod nulla fiat appellatio extra regnum

G facienda et maxime quod nulla fiat appellatio extra regnnm

A Et ideo

B si de necessitate contingat appellari. Et ideo tunc preceptnm fuit qnod

G sidenecessitatecontingatappellari. Et tnnc preceptnm f uit quod

A decaetero ita teneatnr tamdeillis deqnibns

B ita teneretnr et observaretur in f ntnro tam de illis de qnibus

G ita teneretnr et observetnr in futuro tam de illis quam de qnibus


mmtm^mss^


THE THREE VERSIONS. 118

A jndioinm est faciendum in cnria domini Begis quam d'e

B judioinm ex tunc faciendum esset in curia domini Regis tam de

G jndicium ex tuno faoiendum esset in cnria domini Regis ." tam de

A placitisquaenondum incipiunturcumtalis bastardia

B placitis inceptisquamincipiendis cum hujusmodibastardia

G placitis inceptisquamincipiendiscum hnjusmodibastardia

A objiciatur.
B objiciatur.
G objiciatur ex tali causa.

It seems to me fairly evident that the second of these
versions matks a stage in the prbcess whereby the third was
evolved from the first ; it agrees now with the one and now
with the other. It agrees, for example, with the third
in giving some important words about appeals from the
ordinary which are not in the original document, introducing
maodme and si de necessitate contingat appellari. It agrees
again with the third as to the last clause, and the form
in which they give it is not very intelligible. On the other
hand it agrees with the first and not with the third in
wanting the very material words which bind the ordinary to
answer precisely the question * Bom before wedlock or no ? '
This is a serious. interpolation.. Did the bishops in 1234
distinctly bind themselves to answer this question ? Their
conduct in 1236 and Grosseteste's letters make it improbable
that they did so. It seems much more likely that they did
not fiilly understand what would be expected of them, that
when they were pressed to answer the precise terms of
the writ they refused and successfuUy maintained their
refiisal. One can not help for a moment charging Bracton
with dishonesty in having tampered with the text of an
important document ; but the manner in which he inverts
the dates of the two transactions shows, as it seems to me,
that he had gone utterly wrong about this piece of history.
Such a mistake made by a royal judge about events but
twenty years old, may be very wonderful ; but the mistake is
there.

And now let us compare the three versions ot the story
about the Nolumm, (A) that printed in the Statute Book,
(B) that giveri by the Note Book, (C) Bracton's.

M. I. 8


114 INTRODUCnON.

A Ad brsnaBegis da bastardia

Qtnim aUqnia natua

B interalia traetatnm fnit de obieotione battardiae

atrom videlicet aliqnis natns

C inter alia tractatnm fuit de bninsmodi obiectione bastardiae

ntmm videlicet qnis natna

A ante matrimoninm habere poterit

hereditatem
B ante matrimoninm anccedere possit antecessoribne snis in

hereditate et haberi pro

ante sponsalia et matrimoninm

haberi possit pro

A sicnt ille qni natns est postt

B legitimo sicnt ille qni post matrimoninm natns Init. Et ad (hoc]

Archiepiscopi et
legitimo sicut ille qui post matrimonium natus fuit. Ad quod

A respondemnt onmes Spisoopi

B omnes Episoopi respondemnt quod cnm illi qni nati

snnt ante
C omnes Episoopi respondemnt quod omnes illi qui nati

fuerunt ante sponsalia yel

A

B matrimoninm ita legitimi snnt sicut illi qui post

matrimonium nati sunt, quoad

C matrimoninm ita emnt legitimi siont illi qni nati erant poet

matrimonium, qnoad

A qnod nolunt nec possnnt

B deum et quoad eocleslam noluemnt neque potuerunt

sine praeiudido ecoleeiastieae
C dominnm denm et qnoad ecolesiam neo Toluemnt neo potuerqnt

sine praeindioiQ eodesiastioaa

A ad istud respondere,

B dignitaiis respondere adbrenede inquisitione

facienda de bastardia
dignitatis respondere ad breue super hniusmodi inquisitione

facienda de bastardia

A

B sic obiecta, rescribere domino regi in forma eis demandata per brene suum

videlioet ntmm ipse

C sic obieeta, rescribere domino regi

Yidelicet ntrum


THE THREE VERSIONS. 113

A quia

B oui huiasmodi bastardia obiecta esset natus esset ante sponsalia sive

matrimonium vel post, et cum
ante

vel post, quia

A hoe esset contra oommunem formam ecdeBiae.

Ao
B hoc esset in praeiudicium ecclesiasticae dignitatis

G hoc esset in praeiudicium sanctae ecclesiae ut dice-

bant, sed

A rogauerunt omnes Episcopi Magnates, ut consentirent

B rogabant Magnates, ut ad hoc consentirent

O rogabant regem et Magnates, quod ad hoc oonsensum

A quodnatiantematrimoniumessent legitimi

B quod nati ante matrimonium ita legitimi essent

G praeberent quod nati ante matrimonium quoad omnia legitimi esse possent

A sicut illi qui nati sunt post matrimonium quantum ad

B siont ei iUi qui post sponsalia vel matrimonium quoad

G siout illi qui post,

A successionem hereditariam quia ecclesia tales habet

B suooessiones parentum et eorum hereditates quia ecclesia tales habet
G

A pro legitimis, et omnes Gomites et Barones una voce

B pro legitimis, et omnes Gomites et Barones quotquot fuerunt una voce
G et omnes Gomites et Barones quotquot fuerunt

A xesponderunt quod nolunt leges Angliae mutare quae

B responderunt quod noluerunt leges Angliae mutare quae

G responderunt una voce quod noluerunt leges Angliae mutare quae

A usitatae sunt et approbatae. [Statute Book.]

B usque ad tempus illud usitatae fuerunt et approbatae. [Note Book, Gase

1117.]
G usque ad tempus iQud usitatae fuerunt et approbatae. [Bracton, f. 416 b.]

Here again the version given in the Note Book seems
intennediate between what we may regard as the original
document and Bracton s text ; the mean agrees now with the
one extreme, now with the other.

On the whole then, though it is very difficult to get tosummanra
the bottom of this curious matter, it brings the Note Book bastardy.
into close connection with Bracton's treatise. Both give
similarly interpolated versions of two records ; both invert

8—2


116 INTRODUCnON.

the true dates of those two records; the mistake (for de-
liberate misrepresentation seems out of the question) is a
very strange one ; that two independent persons should have
committed it, would be stranger still.
Adjudidnni, Aud uow tho questiou whether this Note Book was really
Bracton*s or no, must be left to the judgment of the leamed
world. An effort has here been made to state the evidence
impartially ; but of course I was happy in believing that his
work was in my hands, and my eyes may have been shut to
facts which made against this pleasant belief What is now
to be wished is that some one will go through the book with
the design of showing that it is not entitled to the name
under which it is here published. Some one fect established
by him, might make worthless every argument drawn from
the manifold coincidences : for instance, he might prove that
the annotator has referred to events which happened after
Bracton's death. But meanwhile and on the evidence here
adduced, Bracton seems fairly entitled to a judgment, a
revocable judgmefit. The treatise is absolutely unique ; the
Note Book, so far as we know, is unique ; these two unique
books seem to have been put together within a very few
years of each other, while yet the Statute of Merton was
noua grada ; Bracton's choice of authorities is peculiar, dis-
tinctive ; the compiler of the Note Book made a very similar
choice; he had, for instance, just six consecutive roUs of
pleas coram rege ; Bracton had just the same six ; two fifths
of Bracton s five hundred cases are in this book ; every tenth
case in this book is cited by Bracton ; some of Bracton*s
most out-of-the-way arguments are found in the margin
of this book, in particular that about the binding of land by
warranty, that about the ejectment of a disseisor ; the same
phrases appear in the same contexts, Jiiste propter jtis sed
iniuste propter iniuriam, Nihil certius morte, nihil incertius
hora mx)rtis ; Corbyn's case, Ralph Arundeirs case are * noted
up ' in the Note Book ; they are ' noted up ' also in the Digby
MS. of the treatise ; with hardly an exception all the cases
thus * noted up ' seem plainly to belong to Bracton's country,
to affect persons whom Bracton must have known, Raleighs,


BRACTON RECOVERS HIS SEISIN. Il7

Traceys, Gorges, Blanchminsters, Winscots, Arundells, Punch-
ardons; lastly we find a strangely intimate agreement in
error;/ the history of the ordinance about special bastardy
and the Nolumus of Merton, is confused and perverted in the
same way in the two books. Must we not say then that,
until evidence be produced on the other side, Bracton is
entitled to a judgment, a possessory judgment ?

Et ideo consideratvm est quod Henricus recuperauit sei-
sinam suam, saluo jure cuiuslibet.


§ 8f 0/ Fitzherberfs use of the Note Book.

Whether this book was oriffinally Bracton's or no, there The Note
can 1)0 but little doubt that some two hundred and fifty years ^kL?*"'**
after its making it came to the hands of another very famous *>«'^'*-
lawyer,of Chief Justice Sir Anthony Fitzherbert,who published
his Grand Abridgement in 1514 \ Here again the evidence is
the indirect evidence of numerous coincidences : but it is very
convincing and should be briefly stated. If Bracton intro-
duces, Fitzherbert closes one great period of English law, the
age of the Year Books. A modern reader will probably tum
the pages of this book with deeper interest, if he knows that
from it Fitzherbert leamed all, or almost all, that he knew of
any law older than the days of Edward the First.

When already a great part of my work was done, I Evidence
remembered having seen in the Abridgement a few cases
from the reign of Henry the Third. It occurred to me
to ask, Whence did Fitzherbert get these very ancient cases ;
did he really read the plea rolls, and if so what plea roUs ; or
had he Year Books earlier than any that have come down to
us ? I went through the Abridgement, took out all the
cases of Henry^s time and arranged them in chronological
order*. The result was very remarkable. Henry reigned

* Printed, it is said, by Pynson in else had long ago done exactly the

1514, then by Wynkyn de Worde (?) same piece of work ; he made a table

in 1616, then by Tottell in 1666. I which is found in a MS. in the Cam-

have used the edition of 1566. bridge Library, Dd. vi. 39. I have

^ I afterwards found that some one used his results to correct my own.


118 INTRODUCTION.

for 56 years; Fitzherbert had 207 cases from the first 24
years of the reign ; only 7 from the last 32, aud these 7 all
fix)m a single eyre, the Devon and Comwall eyre of A.R. 47.
Moreover the 207 cases fell into three groups, (1) cases for
which Fitzherbert gave year and term, (2) cases for wbich he
gave the year but no term, (3) cases for which he gave year
and ejrre. The first group ranged over the period beginning
Michaelmas A.B. 2 and ending Easter A.R. 18. The second
covered the regnal years 19 to 24 inclusive. It seemed then
that Fitzherbert had consulted just the very De Banco RoUs,
and just the very Coram Rege RoUs, which had furnished
matter for the Note Book; for as ahready explained* the
De Banco RoUs were terminal roUs, the Coram Rege Rolls
were annual roUs. As to the Ejrre RoUs, the case was not so
clear; Fitzherbert seemed to have had a roU, or two rolls,
from which the Note Book had no extracts. But at any rate
here were facts which demanded further investigation ; it
remained to see how many of the 207 cases could be found
in the Note Book.

I believe that every single one of them may be found
there. In a table printed at the end of this Introduction I
have endeavoured to show how this may be done. It will I
think be allowed that in the vast majority of instances the
case in the Note Book is certainly the case to which Fitz-
herbert referred ; in a few instances this is more doubtful ;
sometimes the note in the Abridgement is very brief indeed
and it would be impossible to say positively that one had
found the corresponding record ; but on the whole I have no
doubt that all the 207 cases are in the Note Book.

It has been necessary indeed to suppose that Fitzherbert
or his printer made some mistakes, not very many, in their
references to years, terms and eyres ; such matters are very
apt to go wrong. But some of these mistakes are very
instructive ; they make it the more certain that the author
of the Grand Abridgement was the possessor of the Note
Book. The best example is this: — Scattered about in his
book Fitzherbcrt has 8 cases professedly from Trinity term
^ See above p. 56.


SIR ANTHONY FITZHERBERT. 119

A.R. 9 ; out of these 8, only 3 are to be found in the Note
Book as of Trinity term A.R. 9 ; the other 5 are there, but as
of Hilary term A.R. 17. This five times repeated mistake
seems very odd, until one has seen that in the Note Book's
capridous arrangement, Trinity A.R. 9 is foUowed imme-
diately by Hilary A.R. 17 ; when this is observed the mistake
is no longer odd, but the most natural thing in the world.
There are several other errors of a similar kind due rather to
the Chief Justice than to his illustrioiis printers. Some
doubts were at one time raised in my mind by the apparent
£eu;t that he had three cases from a Stafford eyre of A.R. 12
and one from a Leicester eyre of A.B. 15, from which eyres,
(if any such eyres there were,) the Note Book had nothing ;
but the last mentioned case is found in the Leicester eyre of
A.R. 5, and the three others in the Suffolk eyre of A.R. 12 ; 5 has
been changed into 15 and Saff. into Staff. One case we can
easily see fi^om the names of counsel concemed in it, belongs
ftot to the reign of Henry, but to that of Edward the Third\

This is not alL Under the title Prohibicion, Fitzherbert
hss a continuous string of eighteen cases from Henry the
Third's reign. The order in which they occur is the foUow-
ing: — ^A.R. 2; Mich. A.R. 4; Mich. A.R. 4; Hil. A.R. 6; Hil.
A.R. 6 ; Trin. A.R. 6 ; Hil. A.R. 8 ; Mich. A.R. 13 ; Trin. A.R. 13 ;
Mich. A.R. 15 ; Pasch. A.R. 15 ; Mich. A.R. 16 ; Trin. A.R. 9 ;
Hil. A.R. 17 ; Mich. A.R. 18 ; Trin. A.R. 4 ; Hil. A.R. 5 ; Hil.
A.R. 7. It is a curious order, with its interpolation of A.R. 9
between A.R. 16 and A.R. 18 and its leap backwards £rom
A.R. 18 to A.R. 4. A curious order; but the order of the
Note Book. There are several other instances of the influence
exercised by the arrangement of the Note Book over the
arrangement of the Abridgement; but this is the most
perfect'*

After weighing this evidence the reader will hardly doubt
that our MS. came to Fit2herbert's possession, that he relied
on it, studied it, used it largely. His 200 cases are found in

^ The writer of the Gambridge MS. from the record and not &om a Tear

Bd. vi. 89 has observed this. In the Book.

cases from Henry's reign no counsel ^ g^e e.g. the titles Dower^ Lroyt^

are named because the cases come Essotie,


120 INTRODUCnON.

this coUection of 2000. That this should be the result of
chance is beyond measure improbable ; there were hundreds
of thousands of cases on the rolls of Henry the Third. And
then why stop citing placita de banco exactly at Easter A.R.
18 ; why cite placita coram rege just firom the years 19
to24?

The last 32 years of the reign, as ah-eady said, are
represented in the Abridgement by 7 cases all from the
Devon and Comwall eyre of A.R 47. Of these I have
nothing to say. It is plain that they were taken, not from
a Year Book, but directly or indirectly from the record.
Possibly Fitzherbert had come by a stray rolL There seems
no reason for supposing that the lost end of the Note Book
had cases from this eyre, an eyre of Bruce and Middleton
which took place near the end of Bracton s life ; the other
207 cases can be so satisfactorily accounted for, that the loss
would seem to have happened before Fitzherbert*s day. The
appearance of these 7 lonely cases should not, as I think,
detract from the force of the evidence stated above. They
serve only to make the surrounding darkness visible, these 7
cases from 32 years, foUowing 207 cases fit)m 24 years. The
author of the Abridgement would have gladly given more if
he could have got them without much trouble ; but the days
when lawyers habitually studied the plea rolls, if such days
there ever were, were long since past; the Year Books
themselves were becoming an unmanageable mass ; good luck
and the splendid industry of the thirteenth century supplied
Fitzherbert with a coUection of cases from Henry the Third's
reign ; he used them. We may guess that the few French
words scribbled here and there in the margin of the Note
Book in a hand which seems to be a hand of Fitzherberfs
day\ were written by him ; they are of no value, but just
catch-words, showing under what title the case against which
they are written might be arranged in an abridgement.
influence of For a sccond time therefore our Note Book entered into

tlie Note

Bookupon ^i^g history of English Law. Mediately through Fitzherbert
it became one of Coke's main authorities, (the treatises
^ See above pr 65.


COKE AND THE NOTE BOOK. 121

of Glanvill and Bracton are the bthers,) for what was law
before the days of Edward the First, his only authority
for the case law of those days. One does not tum over very
many folios of the Commentary upon Littleton without
seeing a stray referenee to some case of Henry the Third s
reign.. That is a reference through the Abridgement to this
Note Book. To take one example — "A man" says Coke*
"shall be tenant by the curtesie of a house that is Cajmb
** Baroniae or ComitatAa : but it appeareth by 4 H. 3. Dower,
180, that a woman shall not be endowed of it." If the
reader now cares to verify this citation he can easily do so.
Turning to the table at the end of this Introduction he will
find Fitzherbert*s ' Dower 180 ' under A.R. 4, and will then be
directed to Case 96 in the Note Book, where he will find the
ultimate warrant for what Coke says. That Coke had studied
at first hand the roUs^ of the thirteenth century, there are
very few signs indeed ; he was dependent on Fitzherbert and
Fitzherbert was dependent on this Note Book. And so the
labours of the copying clerks, the generous love for leaming
of him who set them their task and paid them their wages,
bore finiit again and again ; will bear firuit yet once more, for
the history of English law will some day be written.


§ 9. Of the mahing of this editioru

It remains to describe the relation of the text hereschemeof
printed to the MS. at the British Museum. In the MS. the
usual stenog^aphic signs have been very fi-eely used: I
should guess that at least a quarter of all the words in the
Note Book are in some way or another abbreviated. Many
of these signs have a perfectly distinct meaning and give
very little trouble to any one who has once leamed their
significance. But besides these the indiscriminating dash is
largely employed to represent every kind of termination,
more especially when the words are part of some common
formula. Thus, Assisa venit recognitura is hardly ever

1 Co. Lit. f. 30b. . ..


122 INTRODUCriON.

written in fuU ; instead of it one finds Asi veh rw; I belieye
that I have never but once seeu the whole word reoognitufu.
The one syllable rec is made to do duty for eveiy voice,
mood, tense, number, person, case of the extremely conmion
words recognmcere, recoffnitor, recognitio, recuperare*

^SSS^t^ N^^ i* "^y ^®^^ ^ urged that the £ure8t way in which
to print the matter thus written is to use what is called
record type, type imitating as closely as possible the various
marks of abbreviation. Certainly that is the &irest way;
but then it requires of every reader that he shall be in-
structed in an art which, though it is not really difficult, still
can not be mastered without some trouble and practica It
might be wished that there was a large class of students so
much interested in the history of law as to be able to read
the original records readily and rapidly. But who ¥dll say
that such a class ezists? The fact is patent that for two
centuries past extremely little use has been made of the
invaluable plea roUs ; also that extremely little use has been
made, at least in this country^ of those rolls of Bichard's
reign and John's, which Sir Francis Palgrave printed in
record tjrpe\ The old fables and fallacies are repeated;
tenth-hand hearsay is preferred to first-hand evidence ; it is
80 much easier to copy down as gospel truth what Coke said,
than to face what one is like to call a repulsive mass of
pothooks and hangers. An appetite for abbreviated docu-
ments may come in time ; even record type may be pro-
nounced unsatisfjring ; readers will not be content until they
can see the very upstrokes and downstrokes reproduced by
photography ; but to suppose that such an appetite exists at
the present day, would be a foolish dream ; to provide food
for it, would be waste of money.

soun» of Again, mistakes of the worst and most dangerous kind,

no type however ingenious can prevent. The very common-
est source of misreadings is the likeness between u and ti,
and between ui, ni, iu, in and m ; sueh a word as minimum, if

^ Blackstone bdlieved that pleas proof that he neyer saw a piea loU
were enrolled in French until the of earlier date there could not be.
reign of Edward the Third. Clearer Bl Com. vol. 3, pp. 317, 319.


error.


THIS EDmoN. 123

at all badly written, becomes a sore puzzle. The fesemblance
again between c and t is very fatal ; in some hands and some
combinations they are practically indistinguishable. An
editor meets with a word which may be indidis or may be
iudidis, which may be amita or may be amica. Here the
type-founder can not help him ; the context must tell him
which word it is, and if there is any real doubt, he should
state this in a foot-note. What is more, the stenographic
signs are in general the very easiest things to read and
to understand, and if one can not be trusted to expand them
correctly one can .not be trusted to copy them correctly.
Take the common abbreviation of persona ; one meets a p
surmounted by a little a and with a line drawn through its
tail, p; the man who does not happen to know what this
means, will probably think that the p is not a p, My belief
is that the use of record type saves but few blunders of
serious importance at the cost of deterring many readers.

Therefore in this edition an attempt has been made ^ ^aming to

^ readen.

to write out the words in fuU, except when so to do seemed
really dangerous. I can not but suppose that I have made
mistakes and therefore ought to wam the reader of the
perils which he may run if he puts too much faith in what is
here printed. Some instances shall be given.

Tenses and moods are often doubtful especially when the DiBicuity m
verb occurs m some common formula. Thus when a deman- **<»"»•
dant is successful, it is adjudged quod rec' seisinam suam,
Now in this context, when (which is seldom the case,) the
word is written in fuU, I have seen recuperet and recuperat,
but far more commonly recuperauit ; it is adjudged, not that
the demandant do recover his seisin, but that he has re-
covered his seisin ; the judgment seems to recognize an
already accomplished fact ; therefore I have used the perfect
indicative as the proper expansion of the ambiguous rec\
Tenses and moods in the common formulas the reader must
therefore be asked to regard with some suspicion; I have
attempted to find out from the best evidence, what the
phrases really were, but the terminations may sometimes
express a hasty inferonce from an insufficient induction.


124 INTEODUCTION.

Difficaityu In some instances it is very hard to find what wsus

toworda. •' i t i

the exact form of some very common word. Just because it
was so very common, it was never written in fuU. The word
which stands for our substantive common (in such phrases as
^common of pasture', *he claims common',) is a good illus-
tration. One does not often see it in fuU ; the form cowi-
munia seems to have been used at a later time and is found
in the printed law books; but it seems plain to me firom
clear examples that in Bracton's day the word was communay
and therefore communa I have printed. There is a similar
difficulty about the word which our esplees translates ; hardly
ever will one find more than ea^V. I have occasionally seen
expletia or earplecia, and this form seems ultimately to have
prevailed in our Law Latin ; but much more often have
I seen ewpleta, and this I suppose to be the better and
the older form. Having come across the word exheredita/yio
written in full, I fear that I may have used this form too
offcen, and that in some instances it would have been better
to print exheredado. These are specimens of the doubts
that have occurred to me.
to JSlUii?. Grammar too has been troublesome. In our Law Latin,
for example, people are always coming to do this, that and
the other, they come to make suit, to view the wound, to
coUect apples, to certify the justices, veniunt ad faciend*
sectam, ad vidend* plagam, ad colligend! poma, ad certificand'
justic\ I have been persuaded by numerous instances that
in such cases the gerund was used, not the gerundive ; that
one ought to read, adfaciendum sectam, ad videndum plagam
etc. ; but except in my first few sheets, I have left the word
abbreviated when I found it abbreviated, and if I use the
gerund it is because in the MS. the gerund is written in fulL
As another illustration of the verbal difficulties that have
occurred, notice may be drawn to a curious use of the word
perquirere. It begins by meaning ' to acquire ', ' to purchase ';
then it is specially used of purchasing an original writ,
the first step in an action ; A perquirit sibi hreue de recto
versus B ; then this phrase is twisted and we find such forms
as A perquirit sibi per breue de recto, and A perquint se.


THIS EDITION, 125

versus B ; in short, the terms perquir&re sibi, perquirere se
become part of a technical slang, and they mean ' to bring an
action*. It is sometimes diflBcult to expand the signs iri
which such slang is expressed. I have tried to be careful of
small things. I have not said with the immortal Bartolus,
'De verbibus non curat jurisconsultus^'; still I have felt
with a yet more famous lawyer, that

*Law is the pork, sabstratum of the fry,
• Gpose-foot and cocks-comb are Latinity.' •

Some blunders in mediaeval etymology and grammar
should be forgiven if the legal sum and substance of these
two thousand cases are rendered with fair correctness.

Contractions being expanded, my endeavour has been to ms. printed
reproduce what was m the Mb. word for word, never aitenng ^»^-
what was there in favour of something which might be better
grammar or better sense. Even glaring false concords and
obvious clerical errors 1 have kept in the text suggesting
a better reading in a foot-note, when of this there seemed any
need. On the very few occasions on which for the reader's
convenience an opposite policy has been adopted, express
waming of this is given in a foot-note. When a word in the
text is printed in itah'cs this means that in the MS. it
is indistinct or very doubtfdl. The first page of the MS. is
sadly defaced ; in my representation of it the words printed
in italics and within brackets, stand for words which are
almost illegible. When the first page is past, all goes pretty
smoothly.

Again I have tried to preserve the spelling. Conse- speiiingr
quently, for example, I have never used the diphthong ae but
have left the simple e of the original. On the other hand I
have not preserved the capricious use of capital letters,
for this has no grammatical significance, but xs a matter
of mere convenience. So both u and v which are very
indiscriminately interchanged are here represented by w ;
it seemed to me that greater fidelity would simply make

^ See th9 questionable story in in Browning, The Ring and theBook,
Hallam, Hist, Lit. vol. 1, ch. 1, § 75. lines 152—3.
^ Dom. Hyacinthus de Archangelis, ...


126 INTRODUCnON.

unnecesaary puzzles ; but perhaps in this I was wrong. In
expanding contractions I have sought to maintain the strain
of spelling, but in some respects this varies from clerk
to clerk and I may not always have succeeded in catching it.
One may easily see, for example^ that they usually wrote
umquam instead of unquam ; but whether they wrote num-
quam instead of nunquam is more donbtful, for this word is
almost always abbreviated. But the most difficult problem
is caused by the great similarity between the characters
c and t, and the tendency of t in particular combinations
to become c. For some clerks, one is inclined to lay down
the rule, that whenever in a Latin word t is foUowed by i and
then by another vowel, the t has become c ; thus not only
does one find as matter of course such forms as aduocacio,
tnquisicio^ conuicdo, contradiccio, but the genitive plural
of pars is clearly parcium and the perfect of peto is pecii,
But this rule does not hold good for all writers ; for example,
the annotator of the Note Book seems generally to use t
where we should use it. Perhaps in the text here printed
the c has been rather too freely used; but sometimes it
is almost impossible to say whether a clerk has written peciit
or petiit

Locftiiuimei. Agaiu thc tcrminations of the names of places are so
commonly abbreviated, (e.g. Ditton\ Trumpinton\ Hatfeld*,
HatfeuiT, WinterhurrC, WatforS, WokindoifC) that often it is
hard to decide whether what is omitted is a latinized termi-
nation, or a final indeclinable e. I doubt whether any
universal rule could be laid down. Many of the larger towns
certainly had declinable names, e.g. events take place apud
Ohucestriam or apud Oloverniam ; on the other hand it
seems to me that some names were treated as indeclinable,
e.g, those ending in ham; but about many of them I
am doubtful and the reader should know of this doubt.

Punctuatioii. As regards punctuation. Both the Note Book and the
RoIIs are punctuated ; the dread of stops had not yet taken
possession of lawyers; and the Note Book is often very
stupidly punctuated, for the copyists did not care to under-
stand what they wrote. For a while I thought that fidelity


THIS EDITION. 127

obliged me to reproduce their vagaries and I did not grow
wiser until some sheets were beyond my control. After this
I placed a few commas and fuU stops where I thought that
they would be useful and called attention in foot-notes
to any departure from the original which seemed of any
importance. In general a legal record is quite unambiguous
when all stops are omitted, and punctuation should be
treated as of no authoritative value whatever.

The notea found in the margin of the MS. are printed in Maiginai
the margin of this book. It should be understood that
all matters in the margin, except the 'marginal venues',
were written by him whom I have called ' the usual anno-
tator', unless something to the contrary is said in a foot-
note.

When thia waa possible I have coUated my transcript cona^n of
of the Note Book with the rolls. What roUs are extant
the reader may discover from a table at the end of this
introduction. To indicate roUs which have been 'scored',
and which therefore, as I infer, were used by the maker
of the Note Book, I have employed the letter A : other rolls
are referred to as B and G. A foot-note to the beginning of
a case refera to the membrane of the roU on which it is
found. The object of the coUation was merely to discover
whether the casea were on the rollfi, whether they were
copied with substantxal accuracy, whether the roU would
explain what the Note Book lefb unexplained. This is an
edition of the Note Book not of the rolls; therefore I
have not as a rule supplied what the maker of the Note
Book systematically omitted, e.g. the namea of unimportant
persons, nor have I thought it expedient to notice variances
except when these were of real legal importance. He was a
lawyer and his book, whatever interest it may have for
others, must in the main be a book foir lawyers.


128 INTKODUCTION.


§ 10. Of 8ome noteworthy cases in the Note Booh

Notabie By a few last paragraphs attention may be begged for

some of the matters in the Note Book which seem the most
noteworthy.

oues of The reeord which shows how the outlawry of Hubert de

historic im-

portanoe. Burgh aud of the barons who took his part was reversed*,
may be welcome even to those who are not lawyers; and
there are some other records which illustrate the struggle of
1233". A statement by the king's court in 1237 that Gualo
the papal legate had been ' quasi tutor domini regis et custos
regni' deserves remark'. There is a similar statement that
Hubert de Burgh 'habuit regnum Angliae in manu sua'*.
The latter occurs in a case touching the feudal relations
between the king of Scotland and the king of England,
a case which contains an emphatic statement of the doctrine
of prerogative wardship. Four valuable entries concem the
partition and therefore destruction of the most formidable
outcome of English feudalism, the palatinate of Chester*;
the diflBculty of making a palatine earl answer out of his own
palatinate, the ascription of palatine rights to the Earl
Marshall, the demand for a jvdicium parium, the doubts of
the assembled magnates over this unprecedented case, the
rejection of foreign, presumably French, precedents, the
reference to Roman or Canon law as a possible supplement
for English jurisprudence, the aflForcement of the court, the
elaborately reasoned judgment, will not go unheeded ; clearly
these were important suita One of these entries and
another record* here printed are Coke's oldest authorities,
(he had them from Fitzherbert,) for the law as to the
abeyance of titles of honour^. There is a claim by William
Longsword to the earldom of Salisbury, or perhaps to a

1 Gase 857. * Case 1221.

« Cases 741, 760, 770. 1108, 1111, » CaBes 1127, 1213. 1227, 1273.

1118, 1124, 1136, 1141. « Case 12.

> Case 1219: compare Stabbs, ' Co. Lit. 165 a.
Corut. Hist, vol. 2, p. 31, note 1.


SOME NOTEWORTHY CASES. 129

hereditary shrievalty of Wiltshire*, and there are several
eases which tum on the doings of Henry Fitz Count who had
asserted a right to the county of Comwall and issued writs
in his own name'. Traces of that great disseisor Fawkes of
Breaut^, are not far to seek ; William Marshall the younger
oflFers a thousand marks for the privilege of fighting him'.
The court suspends its sittings in order that William of
Albemarle may be besieged and suppressed*. Law has to
recognize that a tempus guerrae is not uncommon.

That a large mass of material for the history of many Famiiy
famous families is here printed for the first time, will ****'^'
perhaps in the eyes of some be th« best point of this book.
Title is often pleaded from the days of Henry the First,
and the Norman Conquest is still the period of prescription.

Some of the pleas which foUowed the king are of special constitu-
interest as showing the action of the royal court where royal
rights are concemed. Whether the king can be compelled to
warrant his gifts seems a moot point, or rather a political
question of grave moment*. It seems probable that he does
justice in person and decides debated problems. If the second
husband is tenant by the curtesy, it is because the king does
not wish to change the ancient custom of England®, though
Segrave held that this custom wa^ unreasonable'. If the
king's rights are concemed, his pleasure must be taken ; he
has no superior, he cannot be summoned, none may give him
orders ; therefore no action will lie against him*. His council,
which is now becoming a definite body, supervises the ad-
ministration of the law. Justices in eyre are summoned before
the king's council and the justices of the bench, and are
amerced for having hanged a man unlawfuUy*; the justices
of the bench themselves have to come before the council and
answer for their mistakes of law ; they plead that they knew
no better***. The open sale of justice is becoming a thing

^ Case 1235 ; see Mat. Par. vol. 4, * See Index, King disseisin hy^ King

p. 630. A striking applioation of cls warrantor, etc. Br. f. 381 b.

the mle, that without words of in- ^ Case 1182.

heritance no fee can be created. ^ Br. f. 438.

a Cases 85, 1512, 1666. « Case 1108.

» Case 102. » Case 67.

* Cases 1492—3—6 etc. ^» Case 1166.

M. I. 9


Courtaw


130 INTRODUCTION.

of the past ; but there are sundry procedural advantages for
the grant of which a mark or demi-mark is expected» and
occasionally heavy sums are offered and accepted, even a
thousand pounds\

coarts The relations between the spiritual and the temporal

jurisdictions are brought out by a copious supply of * pro-
hibitions'. The lay court seems to have spent a very large
part of its time in preventing the Courts Christian from
doing business, in watching jealously their interferences in
case of breach of faith {laesio fidei), their efforts to sanction
wills of land". One may see here in detail the grievances of
which Grosseteste and churchmen of the straiter sort com-
plained — not real grievances according to Bracton; but
BractoH, if an ecclesiastic, was first and foremost a royal
judge*. More valuable yet are the glimpses we get of
the feudal and communal courts, especially of the latter»

Gommuiiai Thc couuty courts are busy, largely attended by the free-
holders of the shire, who have to sit there as judges and
make the judgments. The work is burdensome, but judg-
ments cannot be made by the sheriff ; the work is hazardous»
for disappointed litigants are apt to complain to the royal
court, and then four knights must repeat the record of the
county court, and if it be contradicted, then the county will
have to fight for it by the body of the county champion*.
For all manner of purposes four knights of the shire are
employed, they must ride to see whether a sick man has
appointed an attomey, whether an essoinee is actually in bed
without his breeches ; the day seems, (and of course really is,)
near at hand, when knights of the shire will represent the
shire in a parliament. Nor will it escape us that all sorts of
private men had to labour much and joumey far in the work
of justice. Kotwithstanding the Oreat Charter*, notwith-
standing an occasional use of the nm prws\ four knights,
twelve jurors, are constantly wanted at Westminster, and
come they must from the furthest comers of the kingdom. It

^ Case 1106. dred, eto.

a Index of Actiona, Prohibition. * Charterg 6f 1216, Bec 18; 1216,

5 Br. t 401 b, 416 b. sec. 13; 1217, sec. 13, 14, 15.

* Index, Court County^ Court Hun- ' Index, Nisi Prius,


■l^llL L .


SOME NOTEWORTHY CASES. 131

is of men thus drilled to do justiee that parliaments can
be made*.

A little can be leamt even of the procedure in the local Procedore.
courts, procedure by suit and compurgation and battle,
a procedure which knows nothing of that new-fangled royal
institution, the jury. ' Who shall go to the proof ?', and not
* Who has proved his case ? ' was the question which per-
plexed the hundred court of Sonning*. When Edith of
Wackford vindicated stolen swine in the manor court at
Windsor, she held one of the pigs in her hand'. But in the
king s court itself trial by juiy was still struggling with trial
by battle and with compurgation. Wager of law was still
permissible within a large, though always narrowing, sphere*.
Many records bring home to us the reality of that production
of suit, which even in our oldest Year Books is fast becoming
an unreality'» One cannot as a general rule put oneself
upon one*s country to prove an assertion without first (as we
should say) ' making a prima facie case ' by the testimony of
sectatores. Especially in cases relating to dower, it is
so common for the judges to decide disputed questions of
fact upon the testimony thus produced, and without the use
of a jury, that the Note Book may leave us wondering at the
very complete victory that trial by jury gained over ' trial by
witnesses*'. The many cases about suit and wager of law
will help towards the understanding of several passages in
our later legal history, and so will the many cases which
place suit alongside charter or writing (carta, scriptum)
as the known modes of evidence, and contrast them with
nude parol (dmplex dictum, simplex loquela, simplex voa?). ^
We may be led to doubt whether the judges of this age
regarded a seal as having any mysterious virtue ; on the

^ It is plain that for one reason Blackstone, Com. vol. 3, p. 336, and

and anotber, many asaizefi of novel the valaable remarkB in Brunner,

disseisin and mort d^anoestor were Entstehung der Schwurgeriehte^ pp.

taken at Westmindter, despite the 432 — 3.

charter; see Case 1478. ^ Index, Paroly Nude. The oaaes,

^ Case 1115. as it seems to me, go far to support

' Case 824. the theory of Mr Justice Holmes as

^ Index, Law, Wager of, to the origin of the doctrine of *con-

' Index, Suit. sideration'. The Common LaWj p.

• As to *trial by witnesses' see 257 fol.

9—2


132 INTRODUCTION.

other hand the practice of coUating seals may help ns to
understand how a rule of evidence became a rule of sub-
stantive law\ The judges can tell the date of documents by
the appearance of the wax; one who was bold enough to
forge an original writ without first mastering the style of the
Chancery is detected and hanged out of hand in a singularly
summary &shion'. Forgery, and the fraudulent use of seals
are, one observes, not uncommon, and the religious houses
profit by death-bed giffcs of questionable validity.

SStSL"**'' "^^^ court's habit of interrogating the parties or their
attomies, of thus eliciting fatal admissions and saving the
trouble and cost of trial, may seem very rational to us and
perhaps very strange, though Coke has noticed it* ; and we
may be surprised at the ease with which third parties inter-
vene of their own accord or are summoned to declare whether
they claim any right. It will perhaps be doubted whether
the history of legal procedure has been the history of an
unbroken progress, whether the necessary growth of a class
of professional lawyers if it did much good, did not also some
harm.

Ar^^ A few curious archaisms appear firom time to time. Of

certain tenants in Eent it is written, " if one of them has
a child bom in fomication he shall pay childwjrte, and if any
married man has a son bom in adultery he Bhall be in
the king's mercy for all his movables, and if one of them
sheds blood he shall pay blodwyte***. In Herefordshire, it
seems, they still pay and receive the wergild of the murdered
man and hold this ancient custom dear^ All this while
Bracton is speculating about the animvs possidendi and
writing his enlightened sentences. On the whole, however,
we hear less of local customs than might be wished; they
were rapidly disappearing before the common law of the
king's court. The attachment of the men of Kent to their
traditional usages is well marked and is very interesting.

cuBtoms. There is question whether a Kentish widow loses her dower

^ Index, SealSt Collation of, ^ Case 753.

3 Case 1847. ^ Oase 1474.

» Co. Lit. 304 a.


SOME NOTEWORTHY CASES. 133

by a second marriage ; knights of the shire intervene to pray
that the liberties and customs of the county may be res-
pected*. There is question whether Kentish land escheats
for felony; the parties put themselves on the judgment
of the justices and eight knights of the shire: the knights
declare that they had never known a case of any Kentish
knight being hanged, but that undoubtedly in gavelkind
there was no escheat for felony secundum legem Kantiae^.
For some cause or another the county spirit seems to have
been stronger in Kent than elsewhere^

Land law, which feudalism would make the foundation Land law.
of all law, naturally fiUs a large space. The actual working
of the military tenures will be much better seen in these
records than in the Year Booksi for feudalism is on the wane
before the Year Books begin. Much that is quite new is not
to be expected, for the land law was so vastly important that
the main outlines of its history were carefuUy preserved in
legal tradition ; but numberless points are here set in clear
light ; thus the lord's right of marriage as it was before the
Statute of Merton is well ilhistrated. Subinfeudation was
going on apace and giving rise to intricate problems; es-
pecial notice may be taken of those arising out of the rule
that the same person cannot be both lord and heir. -A series
of records which goes far behind the Quia Emptores should
be valued by all who wish to understand the practical
meaning of that statute. We might wish to read more
of that forerunner of the estate tail * the fee conditional
at common law ', for much that is written in later books
about it seems hardly better than guesswork*. Certainly it
was a quite common thing that land should be given to
a man and the heirs of his body, still commoner that land
should be given in maritagium^ Several points may be

^ Case 1838. said aboat conditional fees older than

3 Case 1644. the statute which changed them into

' &ee J>T Keony^B EsBay on PrijnO' *e&tates tail', except only the case-

geniture, p. 28 fol. whioh I here print as 61 and which

^ So far as I can disoover Coke he had from Fitzherbert, Formedon,

(and when one has said Coke one 64.

need not mention later lawyers), had ^ Index Marnage portion^ Estates,

no authority for anything that he Fee conditional. 1 do not speak of


134? INTRODUCTION.

raade clear by this book, but the exact extent of the tenant*s
power of alienation does not come out very plainly. It
should be remembered the whole leaming and even the very
conception of ' estates * belongs to a later time : Bracton had
not the word 'estate', nor any equivalent for it. Also
it should be remerabered that but a short time back the
man who held land to him and his heirs could by no means
always disappoint his heir apparent*. Just a trace or two
of this we may find , but on the whole it belongs to the
past; the heir apparent may be disinherited. As against
the lord freedom of alienation, (in favour whereof Bracton
argues with unusual eamestness',) seems very perfect, and
we look in vain for cases to show that the restrictive clause
in the charter of 1217 had any considerable effect : we may
well doubt whether the king'8 justices thought well of that
clause or of some other clauses in the charter*. Primo-
geniture is extending itself rapidly, but there does not seem
to be any very definite presumption against the partibility of
socage land, and much of it is still partible*. The so-called
' Borough English ' custom is regarded as a mark, though not
a complete proof, of villein tenure*.
PMBession The operation of the possessory assizes may be seen in

property. abuudant examples. Probably we shall think well of the
novel disseisin, a true po8$e88orium, which worked speedily
and efFectively. The notion of seisin is firmly grasped ; the
parties, the jurors, are pinned down to the question whether
there has been seisin and disseisin, and, if so, there must
be no talk of proprietary right. Taking up at this point the

frank>marriage because not evexy the restraint on alienation. Gifts in

maritagium is liberum^ This term mortmain were freely made as one

frank-marriage has been nsed so as may see from almost everj page of

to confuse (as we should now say) the book. The Statute de Yiris Beli-

the nature of a tenure with the giosis begins with a reference to an

nature of an estate. As to grammar, earlier provision ; this is not, as often

tenere in marita-giumj in dotem etc, supposed, a reference to the charter

are far more oommon than tenere in of 1217 ; it is a citation of the Pro-

maritagiOt in dote ete. visions of Westminster of 1259 eap.

1 GlanviU, Lib. 7. c. 1. 14.

3 Case 1064. * Index, Descent, Partible Inkeri-

> Br. f. 45 b. tance.

* Charter of 1217, sec. 89. See • Indez, Descent, ViUeinage,
Case 1248, the only case which shows


nBaemmmBmmmmmmmmmmasmsm^^


SOME N011EW0RTHY CASES. 135

history of the so-called^ 'real actions* we find them no such
inextricable tangle as they afterwards became, On the one
hand there stands the proprietary action, the writ of right,
which ought nonnally to be tried in the lord s court, which
must at any rate be begun tbere. It leads to battle or the
grand assize and is a very slow and solemn affair. On the
other hand there are the rapid royal remedies whereby
Henry the Second cast his kingly protection over the seisin
of every freeholder, very summary remedies indeed. The
interval between these extremes is being fiUed up gradually,
by writs of entry devised to meet cases in which the assizes
will not lie, but in which some definite flaw of recent date
can be found in the tenant*s title, e.g. though no disseisor,
he has come to the land through or under a disseisor, or he
is a tenant holding over after his term has expired, or he
acquired his seisin from a dowager, from a husband who
alienated his wife*s inheritance, or again his feoffor was
a guardian, an infant, or of unsound memory. In theory, it
may bc, there is here an extension of the royal protection of
possession, Feudal principle, the words of the Great Char-
ter", forbade the king's court to make itself a court of first
instance for the trial of proprietary right, save when the
tenant held immediately of the kinff. Hence the elaboration History of

^ ** . thereal

of these writs of entry ; hence also the fetters which confine actions.
them ; they can only be used when the flaw in the title is
recent, and when there have not been more than two sub-
sequent alienations or transmissions. When William Baleigh
invented the writ of cosinage' as a supplement for the mort
d*ancestor, there was ' contencio inter magnates ' over it ; for
some held that it was against the Charter ; Bracton had to
argue that they were wrong*. A gradual process by which
the king*s court makes itself (practically, not theoretically,
no not until 1833*,) the one court of first instance even for

^ The notion that an action ia personal, Br. f. 284 b.

*rear simply because land can be ^ Charters of 1216, sec. 34; 1216,

obtained by it, is not of Bracton's sec. 27 ; 1217, sec. 30.

day. He calls the novei disseisin a '^ Case 1215.

personal action: Br. f. 161 b; ao too * Br. f. 281.

tlie qiwd permittat for common, is * 3 & 4 Will. IV. c. 27, sec. 36.


■«e.


136 INTRODUCTION.

proprietary causes — this seems the main clue to the history
of the real actions. In this book we may pick up the threaA
It is hopeless to attack the matter in tl\e Year Books without
a training in earlier law ; the material has become much too
complex ; a beginning must be found when as yet the writs
of entry were novelties and the proprietary writ of right was
still sharply opposed to the possessory assizes^ This sharp
contrast is emphasized by the large mass of litigation about
advowsons and presentations which is here published. It
may be repulsive to the modem reader, but if he is in
eamest with legal history he may be asked not to shirk
it, for in studying it he may acquire a tight hold of the idea
of seisin. The intrusion of that all pervading idea even into
the region of marriage will not escape him*.
umm, oom- In the eyes of a few connoisseurs the gems of this collec-

mon, viUeia- ^ . ®

tion may be two cases which seem to show that feofifments to
uses are as old as the days of Henry the Third*. Perhaps
the cases which will find most readers (if indeed any of them
be read at all) will be those about common rights and those
about villeinage. As to common rights, the typical stniggle
of the time is not a struggle between lord and commoners, but a
stmggle between the men or the lords of two diflFerent town-
ships. The social and economic position of the villein we are
beginning to understand from the monastic cartularies, but
to fix his legal position we must have litigation in the king's
court, and this desirable end some of the many cases here
printed should certainly serve.
HopeB. Lastly there are two tasks which should be undertaken

without much delay. In the first place Bracton's treatise
ought to be carefully and lovingly edited. If this be not
done by an Englishman, it will be done by a foreigner, as it
is written, Vocabo super eos gentem robustam et Imginquam
et ignotam cuius linguam ignorabunt\ In the second place

1 The whole history of the real « Br. f. 306, 306 b. Cases 642, 1142,

actions must be utterly unintelligible 1597, 1703.

to any one who believes with Black- * Cases 1683, 1861. See the Ar-

Btone (Comm. vol. 3, p. 184) that the tide on Early English Equity by

writs of entry were older than the Mr Justice Holmes in L. Q, R., vol.

assizes. See Brunner, pp. 405—7. 1, p. 162.

Also the Placitorum Abbreviatio. * Br. f. 34.


POSTSCRIPT. 137

the history of English law, at least frora the thirteenth

century downwards, should be thoroughly well written. That

both these great works will be made easier by the Note

Book, I make no doubt ; that this edition of it may not be
too bad to be useful, has been and yet is my hope*.

^ In the snmmer of 1885 the case accuracy of the eztracts in the Note

of Bidder y. Bridges came before Mr Book and as to the marks on the

Justioe Eay. It was an action f or rolls ; of oourse I was not ai^ed any-

common rights over land at Mitcham thing about Bracton. Eay J. decided

in Surrey. Mr B. E. G. Kirk, the that the copy could not be received

record agent of the plaintiff com- as evidence and the action was dis-

moner, in the course of a long and missed. The plaintiff appealed, but

laborioussearchfordocamentSffound unsuccessfully; I was not present in

in a cartulary of Merton Priory a copy the Gourt of Appeal ; I believe that

of theassizehereprintedasCa8el284. there was some talk about the book

He then found the same case in the and that the Lords Justices looked

Note Book. The roU being lost, it at it ; but whether the question of

was desired to put these copies in its admissibility was determined, I

evidence. Mr Eirk found that I was do not know. The decision of Eay

engagedintranscribingtheNoteBook J. is reported, 54 L. T. 529; 34 W.

andcoUatingmytranscriptwithsuch B. 514; but I have not been able to

roUs as were extant. I was theref ore find any report of the prooeedings in

subpoenaed as a witness and stated the Court of Appeal.
what I then knew as to the general


END OF INTRODUCTION.


Postscript

I HAVE said on p. 7 that Britton and Fleta carry their
accounts of the writ of right to the point at which Bracton
stops short. This is true of Fleta, but not of Britton ; he
does not get so far. As to the incompleteness of his book
and of Bracton's also, see Nichols, Britton, voL 1. p. xlv. It
is very remarkable that we have no account of the duel and
the grand assize later than that given us by Glanvill.

As regards the manor of Tykenbrede which Bracton held
for his life (p. 16) see Case 1151 in which a Ralph of
Tykambreche is mentioned. I cannot find any place in
Ciomwall with which to identify it other than Tuckenbury,


138 POSTSCRIPT TO INTRODUCTION.

the termination of which name may, as it seems to me, be a
rationalistic perversion by English mouths 6f something
Celtic.

On pp. 50, 51 I have said that there are but three
occasions on which Bracton notices a difference of opinion
between Segrave and any other judge, that once the diflfe-
rence is between Segrave and PateshuU, twice between
Segrave and Raleigh. I now see that on f. 438 where
Bracton speaks of Segrave*s doctrine about the second
husband 8 curtesy, he does not say that the opposite opinion
was held by Baleigh. My statement therefore would be
more correct if it ran thus : — " Once the diflFerence is
between Segrave and Pateshull, once between Segrave and
Baleigh, and once Segrave is represented as holding that the
law has been migunderstood and perverted." It seems clear
that Segrave*s opinion as to curtesy did not become law.
See Case 1182, also the Statute de Dmis and Cokes
comment thereon, 2 Inst. 336, 8 Bep. 35 b.

On p. 76 I have said that Bracton apparently had three
De Banco roUs from which there are no excerpts in the
Note Book, but that this number might perhaps be reduced
were the manuscripts examined, I believe that I can reduce
it by one. In the first four manuscripts at which I look
(MA, MB, MC, MI) the case which the printed book
(f. 342 b) cites from Hilary A.R. 16, is cited from Hilary A.R.
18. I have not however been able to get rid of the citations
from Trinity A.R. 5 and Trinity A.R. 7.

As regards Cole's case (p. 100), it may be observed that
one Roger Cole was a canon of Exeter in 1224, see Case
920.

END Or POSTSCRIPT.


TABLE THE FIRST.


TABLE SHOWING THE NAMES OF THE JUSTICES WHO SAT
AT THE BENCH DURING THE BEIGN OF HENRY THE
THIRD.


NoTE : — This Table is the result of a comparison of many, but not nearly all,
of the Feet of Fines jet eztant. When a justice ia mentioned in some
but not all the fineEf of a term his name U enclosed in [ ].


M. Pateshull, R. Hareng, S. Segrave, S. de L'Isle^
Pateshull, Hareng, Segrave, de Llsle, [J. Gest-

ling], [Enstace of Falconberg, tbe Treasurer].
Pateshull, Hareng, Segrave, Gestling, de L'Isle.
William Earl of Arundel, Pateshull, Alan Basset,

Hareng» Segrave, Gestling, de Llsle.


PateshuU, Hareng, Segrave, de L'Isle.

[Hubert de Burgh], Pateshull, Hareng, Segrave,

GestUng, de L'Is]e.
Pateshull, Hareng, Segrave, Gestling, de L'Isle.
[Hubert de Burgh], [Robert Earl of Oxford],
Pateshull, Hareng, Segrave.
Trin. Earl of Oxford, Pateshull, Hareng, [Segrave],
Thos Heydon.
4—6 Mich. Earl of Oxford, PataahuU, Hareng, Segrave, Hey-

don, Rob. Lexington.
1221 6 Hil. Earl of Oxford, Pateshull, Hareng, Segrave,

Heydon.


A.D.


A.B.


Tbrm.


1217


1—2


Mich.


1218


2


Hil.
East.

Trin.


2—3


Mich.


1219


S


Hil.
East.
Trin.


3—4


Mich.


1220


4


Hil.
East.


140 TABLE L

AJ>. A.B. TeBM.

East. Earl of Ozford, [John of Monmonth], Pateshnll,
Hareng, Segrave, Heydon, B. Lexington.

Trin.
5—6 Mioh. [Pateflhnll], [Segrave], Haieng, Heydon, [B. Lex-
ington].

1222 6 HiL [H. de Bnrgh], [John of Monmonth], Pateshull,

Hareng, Segrave, Heydon, B. Lezington.
East. Pateshnll, Hareng, Segrave, Heydon, B. Lex-

ington.
Trin. The same.
6 — 7 Mieh. The same.

1223 7 Hil. Pateshnll, Hareng, Segrave, Heydon, B. Lexing-

ton, G. le Savage.
East. [H. de Bnrgh and] the same.
Trin.
7 — 8 Mioh. PateBholl, Hareng, Segrave, Hejdon, B. Lexing-

ton, Savage.

1224 8 Hil. Thesame.

East. PateBhull, Thos. Mnlton, Segrave, Heydon, B.

Lexington, Savage.
Trin. The same.
8 — ^9 Mich. The same.

1225 9 Hil. Pateshull, Multon, Heydon, B. Lexington, Savage.

East. The same.

Trin. The same.

9—10 Mich. The same.

1226 10 Hil. Pate8hull,Multon,Heydon,B. Lexington, Savage,

Warin Fitz Joel.
East. The same.
Trin.
10—11 Mich.

1227 11 HU.

East.

Trin. Pateshull, Multon, Heydon, B. Lexington.
11—12 Mich.

1228 12 Hil. Pateshull, Camvill, William de Llsle, Bichard

Dncket.
East. Pateshull, Segrave, William Fitz Warin, William

de L'l8le, [H. de Buigh], [John MarshaU].
Trin.
12 — 18 Mioh. Pateshull, Multon, Segrave, B. Lexington, Gam-
vill, William of London.

1229 13 Hil. [Pateshull], Multon, Segrave, B. Lexington,

GamvilL
East. Multon, Segrave, [W. Baleigh], B, Lexington,

Camvill.
Trin.


NAMKS OF JUSTICES.


141


A.D.


A.R.


Tebm.


13—14


Mioh.


1230


14


Hil.

East.

Trin.


14-15


Mich.


1231


15


Hil.
East.
Trin.


16-16


Mich.


1232


16


Hil.
East.
Trin.


16—17


Mich.


1233


17


Hil.

East.
Trin.


17—18


Mich.


1234


18


Hil.
East.
Trin.


18-19


Mich.


1235

1


19


Hil.
East.
Trin.


19—20


Mich.


1236


20


Hil.
East.
Trin.


20—21


Mich.


1237


21


Hil.


Multon, Segraye, Baleigh, B. Lezington, W. de

L^Isle, London, Bob. Shardelowe.
Mnlton, Segrave, Baleigh, B. Lexington, London,

W. de L'Isle, Shardelowe, Bic. Beinger.
Mnlton, Segrave, Baleigh, B. Lezington, London,

W. de Llsle, Shardelowe.
Molton, Baleigh, B. LexingtOn, London, Sharde-

lowe, Balph of Norwich.
Molton, Baleigh, B. Lexington, W. de Llsle,

London, Shardelowe, Beinger, Norwich.
The same.

The same [with William of York].
Multon, Baleigh, York, Norwich, [Beinger].
Miilton, Baleigh, B. Lexington, York, Shardelowe,

Norwich.
[Multon], [Segrave], [Baleigh], B. Lezington,

York, Shardelowe, Norwich, Adam Fitz William.
Mnlton, Baleigh, B. Lezington, York, Shardelowe,

Norwich, Fitz William.

Molton, Baleigh, B. Lezington, York, Norwich,

W. de L'Isle, Fitz William.
Miilton, [Baleigh], B. Lezington, York, Norwich,

Fitz William.
Multon, B. Lezington, York, Norwich.
[Mnlton], [Baleigh], B. Lezington, York, Norwich,

Fitz William, WiU. of St Edmunds.
Baleigh, [Mnlton], B. Lezington, York, Norwich,

W. de Llsle, Fitz William, St Edmunds.
Baleigh, Multon, B. Lezington, York, Norwich,

W. de Llsle, Fitz William, St Edmunds.
[Baleigh], B. Lezington, York, Norwich, W. de

Llsle, Fitz William, St Edmunds.
B. Lezington, York, Norwich, W. de L^Isle, Fitz

WiUiam.


Multon, William of Cnleworth, John of Eirkby.

Multon, Fitz WiUiam, Culeworth, Eirkby.

The same.

B. Lezington, Fitz William, Culeworth, St Ed-

munds.
B. Lezington, [York], Norwich, Fitz William,

Culeworth, [Kirkby], St Edmunds.


142


TABLE I.


A.D. A.R.


21—22
1238 22


22—23
1239 28


23—24
1240 2i


24—26
1241 25


26—26
1M« 26


26—27
1243 27


27—28
1244 38


28—29
1246 29

29—30
1246 30

30—81


Tbbm.
Eagt.
Trin.
Mich.
HiL
East.
Trin.

MLoh.

HiL
Eftftt.
Trin.
Mieh.

HU.
Eait.
Trin.
Mich.

HiL
East
Trin.
Mich.

HiL

East.
Trin.

Mioh.

Hil.
East
Trin»
Mich.

HU.
East.
Trin.
Mioh.

Hil.

East.

Trin.

Mich.

Hil.

East.
Trift.
Mieh.


B. Xdexington, York, Fitz William, Guleworth.

TheBame.

Thesame.

The same.

Theaame.

B. Lezington, Coleworth, Hngh Giffard, Henry

of Bath.
B. Lezington, York, Culeworth, Bath.
Thesame.
The eame.
The same.
The same.


B. Lexington, Coleworth, Gilbert Preston, [ JoUan

NeviUe, B. Beanchamp].
B. Lezington, Cnleworth, Preston, NeviUe.
B. Lezington, [Culeworth], [Boger Thurkelby],

NeviUe.
NeviUe, B. Lezington, Thorkelby, Preston.
B. Lezington, NeriUe, Bob. Essebum.
B. Lezington, Thurkelby, NeviUe, Preston.
The eame.
The aame.

B. LezingtOD, York, Thurkelby, NeviUe, Preston.
Thurkelby, NeyiUe, John of Cobham.
[B. Lezington], N6viUe, J. Cobham.
[B. Lezington], Thurkelby, NeviUe, Preston,

Bobert of Notingham, J. Cobham.
Bath, Thurkelby, Notingham, NeviUe, Preston,

J. Cobham.
Notingham, J. Cobham, WUl. of St Edmunds,

Bob. Shardelowe.
Theeame.
Bath, Thurkelby, Notingham, NeviUe, Prefiton,

Shardelowe, J. Cobham.
[Bath], Thurkelby, Notingham, NevUle, Preston,

J. Cobham.
Bath, Notingham, NevUle, [Alan of Watsand].
Bath, NevUle, Watsand.
Bath, Watsand.


NAMES OF JUSTICES.


143


A.D.


A.R.


Term.


1247


31


Hil.

East.
Trin.


31—32


Mich.


1248


32


Hil.
East.
Trin.


32—33


Mich.


1249


33


Hil.
East.
Trin.


38—34


Mich.


1260


34


Hil.

East.
Trm.


34—35


Mich.


1251


35


Hil.
East.
Trin.


35—36


Mioh.


1252


36


HiL
Easi
Trin.


36--37


Mioh.


1253


37


Hil.
East.
Trin.


37—88


Mitdi.


1254


38


Hil.


•


East.
Trin.


38—39


Mich.


1255


39


Hil.
East.

Tria


39—40


Mich.


1256


40


Hil.
East.
Trin.


40—41


Mich.


1257


41


Hil.


The same.
The same.
Bath, Watsftnd, William of Wilton.


[Bath], Thnrkelby, [Preston], Cobham, Watftand,

Wilton.
Tfatirkelby, John of Gatedden, Preston, Cobham

Watsand, Wilton.
Thurkelby, Cobham» Watsond, Bob«rt Bmce.
Thnrkelbj, Brnoe, Cobham, Watsand.
Thorkelby, Cobham, Watsand.
The same.

Thnrkelby, Watsand, Cobham.
Thurkelby, Watsand.
[Henry de la Mare], Simon of Walton, Watsand,

[Giles of Erdington].
Walton, Watsand, Erdington.
The same.
The same.

Tharkdby, Watsand, Erdington, l^liam Tmssel.
The same.
The same.
The same.
Thnrkelby, Preston, Walton, Watsand, Erdington.

Trussel.
The same.
The same.
The same.
Thurkelby, [Preston], [Waiton], Watsand, Erding-

ton, [Tm&seL], [Boger 6f Whitchebter].
Tharkelby, Watsand, Erdmgton.
Thurkelby, Preftton, Watsand, Whitchester,

[TraBsel].
Thurkelby, Watsand,
The same.

Thurkelby, John of Wyville.
Walton, Bobert of Shotingdon.
[Ba^], Walton, Bhotingdoa, John o! Cokefield.
Bath, Walton, Shotingdon, Cokefield.
The same.


144


1258


1259


1260


1261


1262


1263


1264


1265


1266


1267


1268


TABLE r.


A.R.


Term.


East.


Bath, Walton, Shotingdon, Bmoe.


Tiin.


Thesame.


41—42


Mloh.


Bath, Brnoo.


42


Hil.


Bath, Braoe, Kioholas de Handlo.


East.


Bmce, Handlo.


Trin.


The same.


42—43


Mich.


Thurkelby, Preeton, Handlo.


43


Hil.


Thurkelby, Preston, Wyville.


East.


Trin.


The same.


43—44


Mich.


The same.


44


Hil.


Thorkelby, Preston, Wyville, John de Cave.


Eagt.


The same.


Trin.


[Thurkelby], Preeton, Wyville, Cave:


44—45


Mich.


Preston, WyviUe, Cave.


45


Hil.


WyviUe, Cave.


East.


The same.


Trin.


Thesame.


46-46


Mich.


Preston, Wyville.


46


Hil.
East.


The aame.


Trin.


Theflame.


46—47


Mirii.


The same.


47


Ha.


The same.


East.


The flame.


Trin.


Thesame.


47-48


Mioh.


Preston, [WyviUe], [Nichohw de Turri].


48


Hil.
East.
Trin.


48-49


Mich.


Preston, de Turri, Hervey of Borham, WUliam
Bonquer.


49


Hil.


The sama


East.


The same.


Trin.


Thesame.


49—50


Mich.


Preston, Bonquer.


50


Hil.


Preston, Walter Berstead.


East.


Preston, John de la Lynde, Walter Berstead.


Trin.


Preston, de la Lynde, [Berstead].


50—51


Mich.


Preston, Bonquer, de la Lynde.


51


Hil.
East.


Preston, Adam de GreinviU.


Trin.


Preston, Boger Messenden.


51—52


Mich.


The same.


52


Hil.


Martin Littlebury, Roger Seyton, John of Cobham


East.


(the younger).


NAMES OF JUSTICES.


145


1269


1270


1271


1272


A.B.


Tbrm.


Trin.


The same.


52—53


Mich.


The same.


53


Hil.


The same.


East.


The same.


Trin.


The Rame.


53-54


Mich.


The same.


54


HQ.


The same.


East.


Thti same.


Trin.


The same.


54—55


Mich.


Littlebury, Seyton.


55


Hil.


Littlebury, Seyton, Cobham.


East.


Littlebury, Stephen Heym, Robert Fulcon.


Trin.


The same.


65—56


Mich.


The same.


56


Hil.


The same.


East.


The same.


Trin.


The same.


56-67


Mich.


The same.


M. I.


10


TABLE THE SECOND.


TABLE SHOWING BRACTON*S CITATIONS IN CHRONOLOGICAL

ORDER.

NoTE : The object of the following table is to show (1) what cases Bracton
cites, (2) whether they are in the Note Book, (3) whether there is any
extant roU on whioh they are or oaght to be fonnd. The citations are
arranged in four classes,

A. Pleas in the Bench.

B. Pleas which followed the King.
G. Pleas in the Eyres.

D. Undated or otherwise imperfeotly cited cases.
The nambers in the flrst oolamn refer to the folios of Bracton's
Treatise ; those in the last oolumn to the Cases in the Note Book.


PLEAS IN THE BENCH.

1217, A.R. 1 — 2, Michaelmas Term to 1219, A.R. 3, Hilary
Term inclus^tve^.

Cases in Note Book 1295—1859 (which are from Mich. a.r. 1—2) and
1—15 (which are of uncertain date but probably from Trinity A.R. 2).
No RoUs extant.

f. 77. Essex. H. de Abecot.

in rotulo de primis placitis post guerram.
f. 376 b. Buoks. Wilhelmus de Abruncis et Matilda uxor eius. 12

inter prima placita post guerram.
f. 239. Anon. Essoins.

de term. S. Mich. a.b. 2.

1 AU cases from this period are placed in one class as, owing to the loss of Rolls and of the
Note Book*8 first page, it is in some mstances difficult to fix the exact date, see abovc p. 73.


f. 302.


Sassex.


f. 3Ub.


Dors.


f. 378.


Kent.


f. 378b.


Eent.


f. 380.


Wilt.


f . 239.


Somers.


BRACTON^S CITATIONS. 147

f. 313. Kent. Anon. Dower in gavelkind. 9 and 1338

de term. S. Mich. a.b. 2 post guerram.
f. 308 b. Isabella de Gravenel, Thomas de Wederhal. 9 and 1338

coram Martino in banco a.r. 2.
f . 376 b. Essex. Matilda de Say, Wilhelmus de Maundevill. 8

de term. S. Mich, a.r. 2 post guerram.
Maria de Cromesham. \

Hamo de Hahnodoston. Trinitj a.r. 2

Abbas de Nutlegh. l the second roll

Magister Militiae Templi. after the war.

Galfridus de Chessewicke. /

Wilhelm Bukker, Prior S. Nicholai Exon. 5

de term. S. Trin. a.r. 2.
f. 409. Eent. Matilda filia Simonis. See 11

de term. S. Mich. a.r. 2 incip. 3.
f. 27 b* Magister Militiae Templi.

f. 219. Glouc. Richardus Curpet, W. Comes

Marshal junior. I Cases of a.r. 3, re-

^- f J^^, Dors. Hamelinus filius Radulphii. \ Bervedfromtheeyre

0'T^a421. ^ I forjudgment.

f. 433. Eent. W. Comes Marescallus, Falca-

sius de Brejaute.

1219, A.R. 3. Easter and Trinity Terras.

Cases in Note Book 16 — 44.
No roU extant.

f. 65. Sussex. si Radulphus de la Roche. 44

si Wilhehnus le Seneschal. 37

si Radulphus de Rupe, Gilebertus de Aquila. 44

Alicia quae fait uxor Symonis de Stentenham.
Gylbertus de Albyngeworth, Reginaldus de Brewese. 40
Anon. circa finem rotnli. Count begins with one
who was never seised.

f. 442 b. Anon. Bailiff of franchise amerced. 20 and 28

1219, A.R. 3 — 4. Michaelmas Term.

Cases in Note Book 46 — 79, and Appendix to voL iii.
Two RoUs extant. A=Coram Rege RoJl No. 2.
B = Coram Rege RoU No. 1.

f. 23. Bedf. Riohardus le Hare. 61

f. 50. Anon. Donor and donee in possession together.

f . 199 b. Sussex. Johannes de Monte Acuto, Martinus de Beste-

nouere. 70

1 See Case 1411 and Appendix to vol. 3, Case 8.

10—2


f. 113.


Ebor.


f. 280.


Sussex.


f. 301b.


Buoks.


f. 330.


Surrey.


f. 375 b.


t 243 b.


Norf.


f. 248b— 9.


Oxf.


f. 268b.


Essex.


f. 310.


Snrrey.


f. 316.


Norl


f. 336.


Surrey.


f. 372.


f. 424 b.


Snssex.


f. 437.


SnBsex.


f. 440b.


148 TABLE II.

Thomas Baidolf . 49

Bobertas de Harpdene, Beginaldas de Albo Mo-

nasterio. 68

si Brianns pater Henrici. 47

Margeria de Bellanallie.

Thomas de le Enueyse. 56

Bobertus de Basings. 10

Anon. Default by both demandant and tenant.
Johannes de Bruse, Beginaldus de Bruse. 46

si Matilda amita Bogeri de Barlegh.
Anon. Mesne process in personal

action. Appendix to vol. m., case 2

1220, A.R. 4. Hilary and Easter Tenfns.

Cases in Note Book 80—124.
Two BoUs extant. A=Coram Bege Boll No. 3.
B=:Coram Bege Boll No. 5.

f. 151 b. Essex. Elyas Pigon.

f. 199 b. Sussex. Johannes de Monte Acuto, Martinus de Bestenouere. 88

f. 200. Sussex. Martinus de Bestenouere (warranty by a Yillein).

f. 393. Anon. (circa finem). Doweress can not sue or be

sued without her warrantor. 109

f. 433. W. Comes Marescallus. 102

1220, A.R. 4. Trinity Term.

Cases in Note Book 1360—1474.
Two Bolls extant. A=:Coram Bege Boll No. 6.
B = Coram Rege BoU No. 7.

f . 53 and 53 b. Lincoln. Ecclesia de Wichine, Prior de Markeby. 1418

f. 93. Northam. Theobaldus de Lassel. 96

f. 200. Dorset. Hamelinus fiHus Badulphi. 1411

f. 241 b. Worc. Ecclesia de Eldersen, Bobertus de Bradelegh. 1428

f. 305 b. Sufl. Alexandria. 1392

f. 312. Norf. Isolda quae fuit uxor W. 83

f. 319. Tork. Petrus de Malo Lacu, Prior de S. Oswaldo.

f. 376. Wilts. W. de Lusteshille, W. de Coneleflend. 1360

f . 377 b. Anon. View after default. 1436

f. 387. Isaac Judeus de Northwico. 1376

f . 414. Midd. Hamond le Brood.

f. 430 b. Somers. Anon. Coparceners to be joined. Bastardy.

f. 430 b. Hants. Johannes de Brywes.

f. 433. Bedf. W. Comes Marescallus. See 102

f. 433 b. Bucks. Hugo de Gurnay. 1465

f. 436 b. Glouc. Bobertus Cusin. 1427

f . 437 b. Midd. si Bobertus Cocus.


bracton's citations. 149


1220, A.R. 4 — 5. Michaelmas Tenn.

Cases in Note Book 300—325.
Two Bolls eztant. A=Coram Rege Roll No. 9.
B = Coram Rege RoU No. 8.

f. 63 b. Linooln. Bartholomeus filias Riohardi. 303

f. 65 b. Lincohi. Ozbertus filius Richardi. 303

f. 146. Suff. de Rogero de Keiken et haerede de Ver.

f. 367. Bucks. Johannes filius Rolandi. 307

f. 387. Anon. Default by tenant who has vouched.

f . 413 b. Radulphus Harang.

f. 432 b. Anon. Alienation by tenant after sunmions.

1221, A.R. 5. Hilary and Easter Terms.

Cases in Note Book 1475 — 1554.
Two RoUs extant. A = Coram Rege Roll No. 14.
B = Coram Rege RoU No. 11.

f. 69. Norf. Petrus Constabularius de Manton. 1503

f. 153. York. Robertus filius Johannis (in principio rotuli). See 1517

f. 375 b. Anon. Omission to name in count a person having

equal or greater right.
f. 433. York. Petrus de Malo Lacu.

1221, A.R. 5. Trinity Term\

No cases in Note Book.
No roll extant.

f. 286. Gerardus de Huwell, Richardus rector de ClaypolL

1221, A.R. 5 — 6. Michaelmas Term.

No cases in Note Book.

Roll extant. Coram Rege Roll No. 12.

Bracton cites no cases.

1221 or 1222, A.R. 6. Michaelmas Term.

Bracton cites from Mich. a.b. 6 the following, leaving it uncertain whether
he means Mich. a.b. 5 — 6, or Mich. a.r. 6 — 7^

f. 245. Herford. Prior de Lantony, Walterus Byseche.
f. 245 b. Anon. Ass. dar. pres. Gift of advowson by tenant by

curtesy.

1 I have not observed any fines for this term ; PateshuII began an eyre in the westem counties
on the morrow of Trinity.


150


TABLE II


f. 350.


Devon.


Matilda de Cortney.


f. 360.


Sussex.


Galfiridns de Lncy.


f. 360.


SuBsex.


Prior de BHbing.


f. 350.


Glouc.


Robertus Toniguy.


f. 360.


Sussex.


Philippus de Redham.


f. 360b.


NotinR.


Emma de Bella Fago.


^ Cases among the essoins.


1221 — 2, A.R. 6. No term mentioned,
f. 351. Gilbertus Marescallus, Alanus de Hyda. 1611

1222, A.B. 6. Hikiry Term.

Cases in Note Book 125—171.
No RoU extant.

f. 53 b. Staff. RauL Comes Cestriae, Prior de Eenelwyde. See 199

f. 83. Dors. Alanus de S. Georgio. 168

f. 246 b. Staff. Rayn. Comes Cestriae, Prior de Kenelworth. See 199

f. 269 b. Midd. si Aluricus Huse. MatiJda de Albo Monas-

terio. See 59 and 1559

f. 364. Bucks. Alicia de larpmille, Petrus de Imnere.

f. 407. Warw. Precentor Lincohiiae. 152

f. 407 b. North. Radulphus persona de Irclinbourghe. 162

1222, A.R. 6. Easter Term,

Cases in Note Book 172—184.

No RoU extant.

Bracton cites no cases.

1222, A.R. 6. Trinity Term.

Cases in Note Book 185—214.

RoU extant. B = Coram Rege RoU No. 15.

Bracton cites no cases.

1222, A.R. 6 — 7. Michaelmas Term.

Cases in Note Book 1555—1570.
No RoU extant.

f. 143. Anon. Appeal of rape.

f . 259 b. si Aluricus Huse, MatiUis de Albo Monas- .

terio. 1559, see also 59

f . 420 b. Anon. Inquest as to YiUein tenure after death of tenant.

1222 — 3, A.R. 7. No term mentUmed.

f. 306 b. Gunora nxor Johannis fiUi Hugonis, MatUda de Bemeres. 1673
f. 351 b. Anon. Essoins of barons. 1637


BRACTON S CITATIONS.


151


f. 141 b.
f. 349.
f. 376 b.
f. 376.
f. 407.
f. 437.
f. 437 b.


f . 65 b.
f. 82.
f. 93.
f. 244.
f. 320 b.
f . 320 b.
f. 392 b.


Norf.


Camb.
Bedf.
Linc.
Linc.


1223, A.B. 7. Hilary Term.

Cases in Note Book 1671—1606.
RoU extant. B = Coram Rege RoU No. 16.

Durandns Scissor, Henricus de Yer.

YitaUs Engayne, Ecclesia de Ho.

Anon. Anoestor entering religion.

Alanus de Bassingborne, Robertus de Insula.

Gylbertus persona de Denham.

W. de Fountygne.

Simon de Hale.

1223, A.R. 7. Easter Term.

Cases in Note Book 1607—1618.
No RoU extant.


Bedf. Falkz de Briante, Prior de Nywenham.

Heref . WiUielmus fiUus Benedicti, Galfridus de Lnci.

Somers. Emma uzor WiUiehni Daoi.

Bedf. Falcanus de Briante, Piior de Neueham.

Buck. Guido de Wyndeslore.

Kent. Alicia uxor Richardi.

Devon. Wylhelmus Paynel, Abbas de DonecksweU.


1697


1678


f. 433 b. Sussex. Nioholaa uxor Thomae de Casteneys.

1223, A.R. 7. Trinity Term.

No cases in Note Book.
No RoU extant.


1607


1607


1609


f. 97 b. Essex. Idonea.

f. 432 b. Oxf. Jocetus de Plungenay.

1223, A,R. 7 — 8. Michaelmag Term,

Cases in Note Book 1619—1662.
RoU extant. A= Coram Bege RoU No. 17.

Anon. A leper cannot grant. 1648

Anon. No reUef, marriage, or wardship in socage land.
Anon. Quo Jure. Common ; right to enclose. 1624


f. 12.


f. 85b.


York.


f. 230b.


f.dlL


f. 349.


f. 349b.


Sussex.


f. 350b.


North.


f.360b.


Devon.


f. 360b.


Buck.


f. 350 b.


Lanc.


Thomas de Nassendene.

VitaUs Engayne.

Alanus de S. Georgio.

Henry de Gayton.

AUcia Malet.

Hugo de Broke.

AUcia de Lanc, W. de Taham.


1644
1634


- Essoin Cases.


152


TARLE II.


1223 — 4, A.R. 8. No term mentioned.
f. 306 b. Agnes nxor Boberti de Hactone.

1224, A.R. 8. Hilary Term,

Cases in Note Book 214- 240.
No Boll extant.


f. 76.
f. 246.


WUt.
Kent.


1564


f.29.


Noting.


Bobertus de Walingh.


224


f . 326 b.


Linc.


Thomas de Estotengni.


234


f. 387.


Berks.


Henry de Qneynt.


235


f. 390 b.


Anon. Departure in pleading.


1627


f. 398.


Norf.


Badulphus de Lerlinge, Prior de Thefford.


222


f. 414.


Heref.


Bichardus filius Godfrey.


227


f. 298. Berks.


1224, A.B. 8. Easter Term,

Cases in Note Book 944—985.
No Boll extant.

Thomas de Gymeges.

Prior de Suthworth, Warin de Monte Kas.

Ecclesia de Snanthaniu. 983

Gunora uxor J. filii H., Matilda de B. See 1120, 1176, 1573


1224, A,R. 8. Trtnity Term.

Cases in Note Book 986—1031.
No BoU extant.

f. 392 b. Anon. Voucher of heir.

f. 392 b. Hugo de ^aUol.


1224, A,R. 8 — 9. Michaelmus Term.

Cases in Note Book 889—943.
Two BoUs extant. A = Tower BoU No. 2.

B = Coram Bege BoU No. 18.

Bedf. Johannes de TrahiUz, Prior de Niwenham.

York. si Bogerus Clericns.

Bedf. Johannes de TrayUe, Prior de Neueham.

Warw. Johannes de Marr, W. de Cantulupo.

Hertf. AUcia uxor Bogeri de Camera.

1225, A.B. 9. Hilary Term.


f. 54 b.
f. 212.
f. 246.
f. 298.
f. 304.


f. 53 b.
f. 244.


Cases in Note Book 1032—1067.
BoU extant. B = Coram Bege BoU No. 22.

Norf. Abbas de Messendene, Hubertus de Burgo.
Linc. Prior de Osneby, Conanus de Weleton.


432


907

904
891


1064
1035


BRACTON S CITATIONS.


153


f. 246. Norf. Walteras Abbas de Messendene, Hubertus de Burgo. 1064


f. 304 b.


Devon.


f . 304 b.


North.


f. 374.


Berks.


f. 434.


Derby.


f.434.


Warw.


Alicia uxor W. de Thornton.
WilhelmuB de Dauentre.
Beginaldus Morin.
Bogerus de Drayton.
Bobertus de Cherleton.


1066
1067
1034
1055


f. 53b.


Com.


f. 142b.


Essex.


f. 244.


Norf.


f. 246b.


Cumb.


f. 316.


Norf.


f. 332b.


Hunt.


f. 364.


Buoks.


f. 390.


Midd.


1225, A.B. 9. Easter Term.

Cases in Note Book 1069—1105.
No Boll extant.

Bichardus de Wyks, Prior de Triwardray. 1070

Hugo de Godingham, Hugo de Cantilupo. See 943

Matilda de Bochesford, Bobertus de Tunston. 1072

Bichardus Wyke, Prior de Trywardray. 1070

Margeria de Baylie.

Wilhelmus Hatechrist. 1079

Henry de S. Warerico.

Juliana, Henricus, W. filius Herewardi.


1225, A.R. 9. Tiinity Term,

Cases in Note Book 703—724.
Two Bollfl extant. A=Coram Bege Roll No. 20.
B=Coram Bege BoU No. 21.


f. 436. Midd. Henry de Haquebut.


f. 54b.


f.83.


Eent.


f. 85.


Staff.


f. 116b.


Hertf.


f. 137.


Kent,


i. 141.


Hertf.


f. 146.


Worc.


f. 160b.


Norf . Suff.


f.246b.


York.


f. 296b.


f . 301 b.


Essex.


f. 304.


Oxf.


f. 312.


Northam.


716


1225, A.B. 9—10. MichaeUnas Term,

Cases in Note Book 1663—1691.
Three BoUs extant. A=Coram Bege Boll No. 19.
B=Coram B^e Boll No. 23.
C = TowerBollNo. 3.


Prior de Lewes, Adam de Novo Mercato.

Isabella de Hotot.

Margareta Baggod, Bogerus la Zusche. S

Henricus de Bomband.

Adam de Burgh.

Henricus de Bomband.

Thomas de Bupe.

Simon de Bakfeld.

Prior de Lewes, Adam de Novo Mercato.

Alexander de Walpole, Johannes fiUus Boberti.

Asselina uxor Alani.

Alicia uxor Jacobi de Cardevile.

Margeria uxor Henry de Northon.


1685

a043
1691

1691
1664

1685
1668

1669


f. 344.


Gamb.


f. 346.


Snff.


f. 365.


Warw.


f. 388b.


Kent


f. 407.


York.


154 TABLE II.

Abbas de Haynsham. 1672

Salomon de S. Edmundo, Oliya filia Andreae.

Bogerns de Leualande, Bichardus de Gloc.

Bosia uxor Boberti de Ooldingford.

Bichardufl persona de Mapeldon. 1671

1226 — 7, A.B. 10. No term mentioned,

f. 306. Juliana uxor Thomae Fnghelstone. 1703


1226, A.B. 10. Hilary Term.

Cases in Note Book 1692—1730.
BoU extant. B= Coram Bege Boll No. 24.

f. 423 b. Eent. Prior de Merton, Nigellus de Mumbrey.

f. 423 b. Tork. W. de Carleton, B. de Percy.

f. 430. York. Linc. Adam Tusset.

f . 433 b. Bedf. Bichardus de Bavadum.

f. 440. York. Nicholaus de Statevil.

1226, A.B. 10. Easter Term.

Cases in Note Book 1731—1763.
Boll extant. B = Coram Bege Boll No. 26.

f. 54 b. Leic. Walterus de Bideware, Prior de Undeleigh. 1758

f. 246. Norf. Simon de Nodarum, Ecdesia de Judlibam. 1762

f . 246 b. Leic. Walterus de Eedware, Prior de Sudleghe. 1758

1226, A.B. 10. Trinity TermK

No cases in Note Book.

No Boll extant.
Bracton oites no oases.

1226, a.b; 10—11. Michaelmas Term\

No cases in Note Book.

No BoU extant.
Bracton cites no cases.

1227, A.B. 11. Hilary Term\

No cases in Note Book.

No Boll extant.
Bracton cites no oases.

^ I have found no fines in the Bench of these terma. A great eyre wa« goiqg ob.


L


bracton's citations. 155


1227, A.R. 11. Easter Term.

Cases in Note Book 241—258.
Roll extant. B = Coram Rege Roll No. 27.

f. 63 b. Sussex. Johannes de Monte Acuto. 247

1227, A.R. 11. Trinity Term,

Cases in Note Book 25&— 268.
Roll extant. B = Coram Rege Roll No. 27.

f. 421. Heref. Agnes uxor Johannis de Westwickham.

1227, A.R. 11—12. Michaelmas Term.

No cases in Note Book.

No Roll extant.
Bracton cites no cases.

1228, A.R. 12. Hilary and Easter Terms.

Cases in Note Book 269 — 287.
No RoU extant.

Idonea uxor Nicholai Burdeth. 279

Wilhelmus de Bissopeston. 281

Anon. Assisa utrum duae virgatae. 285

Egidius de Merck. 286
Henricus de Siccario.

Robertus Hachard. 287

1228, A.R. 12. Trinity Term.

No cases in Note Book.

No Roll extant.
Bracton cites no cases^.


1228, A.R. 12—13. Michaelmas Term.

Cases in Note Book 288—299.
Two Rolls extant. B = Coram Rege RoU No. 29.
C = Coram Rege Roll No. 36.

f. 260. Hants. si Robertus fiUus Cihul.

1 The cau on f. 226 apparently pf tluB term belongs to Trin. a.b. 13.


f.92b.


Linc.


f. 200.


Warw.


f. 288.


f. 398.


Hunt.


f. 413.


Berks.


f. 418.


Berks.


156 TABLE 11.


1229, A.R. 13. HilaTy Term.

Cases in Note Book 311—325.
BoU extant. A= Coram Bege Boll No. 34.

f. 346. Devon. Thoxnas de Tyndland.

1229, A.R. 13. Easter Term,

Cases in Note Book 326—333.
Two Bolls extant. B=Coram Bege Boll No. 31.
C = Coram Bege Boll No. 32.

f . 225 b. Noting. Badnlphns filius Petri.

1229, A.R. 13. Trinity Term and Middlesex Eyre of
William Raleigh.

Cases in Note Book 334—347.
No Boll extant.

f. 95 b. Midd. si Johannes Blnndns.

f. 177 b. Midd. si Johannes Calbus. 339

f. 200. Midd. Anon. YariouB classes of tenants distinguished.

f . 200. Midd. si Godefridus. 343

f. 226. Midd. si Stephanus Archiep. Cantuar. 336

f. 348. Midd. Anon. Writ not retumed.

1229, A.R. 13—14. Michaelmas Term.

Cases in Note Book 348—374.
No BoU extant.

f. 27 b. Anon. Gift first to one, then to another; warranty.

f. 226 b. Abbas de Bamseghe. 360

f . 315. Anon. Admeasurement of dower. 365

f. 388 b. Hertf. B. uxor B. Bussel.

1230, A.R. 14. Hilary Term.

Cases in Note Book 375—394.
BoUextant. A=Coram Bege BoU No. 33.

f. 93. Northamp. Christiana uxor Walteri. 377

f. 243 b. SufF. Maria de Walenus, Herbertus de Alezini. 380

f. 391. si Galfridus pater Gilberti. 387

f. 398. Bogerus de Danudeser et Matilda uxor eius. 375

f. 418. Midd. Abbas S. Albani, WiUehnus filius Badulphl 394


f. 319.


Wilts.


f. 320.


Dors.


f. 350.


f. 356 b.


f. 366 b.


Noting. Linc.


f. 369b.


f. 376.


Hunt.


f. 384.


BRACTON*S CITATIONS. 157


1230, A.R. 14. Easter Term,

Cases in Note Book 395—408.
No BoU extant.

Badulphus de Moigne. 402

Matilda uxor Stephani de Bosco.
Anon. Essoin in action on a fine.
Anon. Essoin; view; lioence to rise. 404

W. Thesaurarius Eborum, Wilhehnus de Camera. 405
Paulinus de Wychelesse, Stephanus de Fredewylle. 397
W. Archidiaconus Wellensis. 411

Anon. Warranty; value of land, how ascertained.

1230, A.R. 14. Trimty Term.

Cases in Note Book 409—429.
Boll extant. A=Coram Bege BoU No. 36.

f. 301. Norf. Letitia de Eggefend.

f. 339 b. Suff. Ecclesia de Trillaw. 427

f. 356. Norf. Prior de Longa Villa. 420

f. 415. Surrey. Prior de Novo Loco. 416

f. 437. Norf. Richard Angod.

1230, A.R. 14 — 15. Michaelmas Term.

Cases in Note Book 430—480.
Boll extant. A = Coram Bege Boll No. 37.

Wilhehnus Musard. 462

Ecclesia de Eltdene. 480

Johannes filius Elfridi.
Ernaldus de Camerin.
Emma uxor Bogeri filii Swani.
Anon. Dispute as to how much land put in view. 456
Hugo de Monte Causo. 442

Fulco filius W.

Assisa utrum, J. persona de Messe, Badnlphus de
Ardem.

1231, A.R. 15. Hilary Term.

Cases in Note Book 481—614.
No Boll extant.

f. 302. Derby. Agnes uxor Nicholai.

f. 374. Bucks. Walterus de Bosco.

f. 391 b. Berks. Prior de Bradley, Wilhelmus de Cyfrewast. 612

f. 423. North. W. de Lungesper et Idonea uxor eius. 603


f. 130.


Kent.


f . 250.


Derby.


f.297b.


Warw.


f. 297b.


Eent.


f. 312.


Su£f. Essex.


f. 379 b.


f.407b.


Suff.


f. 421.


Salop.


f. 430.


Essex.


158 TABLE II.

1231, A.R. 15. Easter Term.


Cases in Note Book 515^68.


No BoU eztant.


f. 93.


Gamb.


Anon. Dower in socage.


623


f. 230b.


Buck.


Anon. Gommon pnr canse de vicinage.


561


f. 286b.


Snssex.


Prior de Lewes, Gylbertus de Aquila.


539


f. 302.


Surrey.


Joetta de la Strode.


f. 407.


Somers.


Bichardus persona de Hideford.


547


f.407b.


Essez.


Gervasius de Aldermanbury.
1231, A.R. 15. Trinity Term.


560


Cases in Note Book 569—623.
Roll extant. B = Coram Rege Roll No. 38.

f. 316 b. Bedf. Petrus de Peyiure. 607

f. 351 b. Woro. Adam de ThommartoD. 609

f. 407 b. Oxford. Prior de Bemcestre. 570

f . 436. Hunt. Guldeburga.

1231, A.R. 15—16. Michaelmas Term.

Cases in Note Book 624—666.
No Roll extant.


f. 15.


Berks.


Robertus de Burneby.


635


f. 22.


Salop.


Rogerus de la Suche, Petronilla de Wyneslogh.


664


f. 29.


Linc.


si Helewisa.


659


f. 303.


Hants.


Aldithia.


647


f. 343.


Camb.


Osbertus.


663


f. 346.


Midd.


Gylbertus de Hendon.


f . 361 b.


Salop.


Anon. Knights sent to essoinee.


651


f.422b.


Suff.


Alicia uxor Lucae Brokenhed.

1232, A.R. 16. Hilary Term.

No Cases in Note Book.
No RoU extant.


f. 342 b. Johannes de Karum.

1232, A.R. 16. East&r Term.

Cases in Note Book 667—702.
No RoU extant.

f. 346. Norf. Galfridus fiUus Baldwini.

f. 367. Oxf. Fray Pinchard. 688


bracton's citations. 159

f. 382. Midd. Alicia de Warr, R. de Renge. 748

f. 392 b. Kent. Alicia de Bendenges.

f. 392 b. Linc. Richardus de Elings.

f. 407 b. Hants. Engelardus de Cygoiny. 684

f. 408. Devon. Thomas de Buttyler, Alfridus de Cottone. 678

1232, A.R. 16. Trinity Term\

No cases in Note Book.

No Roll extant.
Bracton cites no cases.


1232, A.R. 16—17. Michaelmas Term.

Cases in Note Book 858—888.
RoU extant. B = Coram Rege Roll No. 39.


f. 60.


Suff.


Wilhehnus de Fraxino.


871


f. 305 b.


Salop.


Emma.


737


f. 341.


Essex.


Etho filius Wilhehni.


887


f. 342b.


J. Bathoniensis Episcopus.


866


f. 387.


Midd.


W. de Raleigh, Johannes Pigon.


886


f. 422 b.


Sufif.


Juliana uxor Alani de Gyseham.


884


f. 433.


Anon. Plea of non-tenure ; coparceners.


1233, A.R. 17. Hilary Term,

Casea in Note Book 725—759.
No Roli extant.

f. 87 b. Eent. Warinns de Monte Caniso, Robertus de Hucham. 743

f. 298. Linc. Eudo de Calethorpe. 730

1233, A.R. 17. Easter Term,

No Cases in Note Book.

No Roll extant.
Bracton cites no cases.

1233, A.R. 17. Trinity Term,

Cases in Note Book 760—783.
No Roll extant.

f. 29. Norf. Petronilla uxor Wilhelmi de S. Martino. 777

f. 260. Bucks. si Rogerus de Estwicham.

1 I have seen no ftnes of this tem.


160 TABLE II.

1233, A.R. 17—18. Michaelmas Term.

Cases in Note Book 784—825.
Boll extant. A = Goram Bege Boll No. 40.

1234, A.R. 18. Hilary Term,

Cases in Note Book 826—843.
No BoU extant.

1234, A.R. 18. Easter T&rm,

Cases in Note Book 844—857.
No BoU extant.

f . 230 b. Sussex. Simon de la Pynd, Johannes de Eynelworth.

Later Case. a.r. 38.

f . 339 b. Kent. Archiep. Cantuar, Robertus de S. Johanne.

B.

PLEAS WHICH FOLLOWED THE KING*.

1234—5, A.R. 18—19.

Cases in Note Book 1106—1132.
RoU extant. A = Tower RoU No. 6.

f. 16. Prior de Wallingford, Rogerus de Quincy. 112

1235—6, A.R. 19—20.

Cases in Note Book 1133—1171.
No Roll extant.

f. 195. Buck. Walterus de Emdene, Alicia filia Ernaldi. 1139

f. 317. Linc. Johannes de Daco, Filia Johannis de Bray. See 1201

f . 433 b. Bedf. Johannes de Traylie, Walterus de Godardville. 1133

i The case concernlnff John of Monmouth on f. 277 b (see also f. 43A b) Is in the printed book
cited from a.r. xi^, but In some MS8 from a.b. xlij. The citation on f. 241b as to prebendal*
churches is in the printed book from a.b. xvj, but in all MS8 that I have seen ftom a.k. xt^j.


J


bbacton's citations. 161

1236—7, A.R. 20—21.

OaseB in Note Book 1172—1218.
No BoU extant.
f. 31 b. gi Simon filius Wydonis. 1203

f. 195. York. si Wilhelmus de Stocbrige.

f. 272. York. si Stephanus de Pulthorp. 1195

f. 292b. Lino. Lambertus filius Lamberti. 1209

1237—8, A.R. 21—22.

Cases in Note Book 1219—1288.
Roll extant. A = Coram Rege Roll No. 45.

f . 54 b. Salop. Godefridus de Gamages. 1224

1238—9, A.R. 22—23.

Cases in Note Book 1239—1274.
No Roll eztant.

^- 169 b. Robertus de Toteshall, Prior de Bricksete. 1248

f. 195 and 200. gi Robertus Bieard (Byrd).

f. 195 and 200, si Richardus de Merlay.

f. 195. Suff. si Radulphus filius Roberti.

f. 200. Norf. si Robertus de Rikinghale.

1239— 40, A.R. 23— 24.

Cases in Note Book 1275—1288.
No Roll extant.

f. 373. Hants. Dom. Rez., W. de S. Johanne.

Later Cases. A.R. 31.

f. 414. Michael Abbas Glastoniensis, Rogerus Episoopus

Bathoniensis.
f. 414 b. PetruB de Solandia, Abbas de Rivall.

A.R 32.

f. 234 b. Hants. Simon de Vendenge, Jordanus de Insula.

A.R. 32—33.
f. 241. Norf. W. Bardolf, et heres de Meanton, Eoclesia de Suterlege.

A.R. 33.
f. 368. Riohard Syward.

A.R. 46.
f. 159. Petms de Sabaudia.

M. I, 11


162 TABLE IT.


0.

Pleas from the Etre Rolls.

Beign ofJohn (?). Eyre of PateshuU in Leicester.
f. 364. Anon. Essoin. Becord of fonr knights.

1218 — 9, A.R. 3. Eyre ofPateshull and (ke Bishop ofDurham

in Torkshire,

CommiBsion Bot. 01. vol. i. p. 380 b.

f. 50. si Rogeras de Halgheton.

f. 200 b. si Jacobns filius Siwardi.

f. 272. si Rogerus de Mannde^ille.

f. 277. si Rogems de Amnndevil.

f. 297. Alicia nxor Adae filii Petri.

f. 297. Alicia nxor Hngonis de Alencester.

f . 298. Matylda nxor Roberti de Haywarde.

f. 303 b. Mnriella nzor Hugonis de Hanerton.

f . 320. Aghevilda Mnrdao.

f. 320. Reginaldns Murdaker.

f. 322. Anon. Entiy snr oni in vita.

f. 394 b. . Anon. Warranty.

f. 395. Wilhelmns de Vayasonr.

1219 — 20, A.R. 4. Eyre ofPateshvll in Lincoln.
Roll extant. Tower Roll No. 1.
f. 298. Demia nxor Roberti Bryton.

1220,. AR. 5. Eyre of Pateshull and R, de Vere, Earl of

Oxfcyrd in Hertford.

Commission, Rot. 01. vol. i. p. 473 b.

f. 200b. Anon. Attaint. Yilleinage.

f . 430 b, si W. de Lndwich.

f. 430 b. Matilda filia Godwini.

1220, A.R. 5. Eyre of Pateshull and the Abbot of Reading in

Worcester.

Oommission, Rot. 01. vol. i. p. 476.
RoU eztant. Assize Roll M. 6, 31. 1.

f . 54 b and 246 b. Anon. Gif t of advowson by one who has not presented.
f, 128, Anon. Outlawiy.


bracton's citations. 163

f. 141. Anon. Appellani mnst be eye-mtness.

f. 244 b. Ecclesia S. Mariae de Wichio.

f. 285 b. Anon. Layman brings a Jnris Utmm.

f. 332 b. Anon. Privilege of Templars and Hospitallers.

1220, A.R. 5. Eyre of PateshuU and the Abbot of Reading
in Gloucester.

Commission, Bot. Cl. vol. i. p. 476.
Bolls. Coram Bege Boll No. 13.
Assize BoU M. 2, 14. 1.

f . 166. si Philippns le Biche.

f. 288. Anon. Assisa utmm ana hyda terrae.

f. 307 b. Clementia de Dodewell.

f. 390, 390 b. Badidphus Chandos.

1220, A.R. 5 — ^6. Eyre ofPateshuU and the Abbot ofReading
in Hereford,

Commission, Bot. Cl. vol. i. p. 476.

f. 13. Anon. Gift to conoubine and children.

f. 124 b. Anon. Manupast. [The name Hertford in the printed

book should be Hereford.]
f. 273. si Laurentius Galant.

f. 311. Ascehna Pickednese. [Wrongly cited from Hertford.]

1220, A.R. 6. Eyre of PateshuLl and the Abbot ofReading in

Warwick.

Commission, Rot. Cl. vol. i. p. 476.
Bolls. Assize Boll M. 6, 16. 1.
Assize Boll M. 6, 16. 2.


f. 83b.


Bobertus de Halgeford.


f. 180.


si Will. de Ludington.


f. 199.


si W. de Ardem.


f. 266b.


Anon. Ass. mor. ant. against lord who pleads partial


non-tenure.


f. 269b.


Anon. As& mor. ant. against lord who pleads partial


non-tenure.


f.270b.


si Fredericus.


f. 272.


si Will. Turpin.


f. 275b.


Anon. Gift of sooage land by infant.


f. 340b.


Anon. Full age of tenant in socage.


f. 381b.


Egidius de Erdington, W. de Norf.


t390b.


Will. TrusseU. Ass.mor.ant. See 196,


11—2


164 TABLE II.

1220, A.R. 6. Eyre ofPateshuU and the Ahbot of Reading in

Leicester,

Gases in Note Book 1942—1971.
Commission, Bot. Cl. voL i. p. 476.

f. 23. si Bobertns mias Martini. 1965

f. 272. si Gilbertus.

f . 275 b. si Walterus filius Wilhelmi. 1957

f . 370 b. Hugo filius Wilhelmi.

1220, A.R. 6. Eyre of Pateshull and ihe Abbot ofReading in

Stafford.

Cases in Note Book 1972—1982.
Commission, Bot. Cl. vol. i. p. 476.

1220, A.R. 6. Eyre of Pateshvll and the Abbot ofBeading in

Shropshire,

Commission, Bot. Cl. vol. i. p. 476.
Assize Boll M. 5, 8. 1.

f. 278. Anon. Assize tumed into jury by oonsent. Bastardy.

f. 280 b. Anon. Probably same case as last.

f. 340 b. si Yinoentius. [Date doubtful.]

1222, A.R. 6. Eyre ofde Burgh and Pateshvll in Norfolk,

Cases in Note Book 1791—1807.

No oommission found. Braoton oites two of the cases whioh are in the
Note Book (1798 and 1803) as from Pateshull's eyre in Norfolk a.b. 10, of
which eyre no other trace has been found. De Burgh was at Norwich from
13 to 23 Sept. 1222 (Rot. Cl. vol. i. p. 510—1).

1226, A.R. 9. Eyre (general commission of assize and gaol
delivery) ofPateshull in Hampshire.

Commission, Bot. Cl. vol. n. p. 76.

f. 167. si Badulphus de la Haye.

f . 170 b. si Adam Gerun.

1225, A.R. 9. Eyre {general commission of assize and ga^l
delivery) ofPateshull in Northamptm.

See Bot. Cl. vol. ii. p. 76 and 78 b (last entry).

f, 169, si Bogerus de Denefgrd,


BRACTON*S CITATIONS. 165

1225, A.R. 9. Eyre {general commission of dssize and gaol

ddivery) ofPateshull in Norfolk^
f. 398. Anon. Witnesses to deed not present at its making.

1225—6, A.R. 10. Eyre ofPateshuU in Norfolk

See above under Norfolk Eyre of a.b. 6.

f . 212 b. Anon. Two ooparoeners bring assize ; hnsband of

one is oatlaw. 1798

f. 239. si Bartholomens de Waterdene. 1803

1225 — 6, A.R. 10. Eyre of Pateshull in Sussex.

No trace has been fomid of any such eyre. One of Bracton^s two citations
has been tracked to Suffolk, which probably is the right coonty for both.

f. 238 b. siAdamdeN.

f. 238b. si Thomas de Coloile. 1909

1226, A.R. 10. Last Eyre ofPateshull in Lincoln.

Commission, Rot. Cl. vol. n. p. 151.

f. 142 b. Gilbertus filius Aldrendi, Alanus Swadi.

f . 146 b. Thomas de Rasne.

f. 271 b and 277. si Agnes filia Evae (Eliae) de Benyngworth.

f . 277 b. si Leonata.

f. 296. si Petrus filius Wymund.

f. 297 b. Helewiza uxor Wasae.

f. 309. Basilia nxor Henrici filii Wareni.

f. 309. Robertus de Arundel et Eaterina.

f . 310. Alicia uxor Ricardi filii Divae.

f. 314 b. Anon. Admeasurement of dower.

f . 426 b. Thomas de Rasue.

f. 430b. HugodeHuU.

f. 438^. Walterus de Lync, Terra de Grimesby.

1226, A.R. 10 — 11. Last Eyre of PateshuU in Yorkshire.

Cases in Note Book 1844—1890.
Commission, Rot. Cl. vol. ii. p. 151.

f. 28. Anon. Gift shortly before death. 1876

f . 260 b. si Walterus Chamlenger. Assize taken on default of

warrantor.

1 The case is dted without aoT :^ear being mentioned. I can not find that Pateshull visited
Norfolk in a.b. 9, but the commlssions of that year are the unl^'gencral commissions of assize
and gaol deliverv that I can find. Bracton'8 mode of dting imphes that the case iq not from an
eyre ad omnia placita.

2 Cited from Leicester, but tliis must be a mistake.


166 TABLE II.

f. 277\ si Odo filiua Thorgin. 1878

f. 280. Anon. Bastardy.

f. 298. Juliana. 1873

f. 304 b. Emma nxor Baymeri le Franceys. 1848

f. 381. Petrofl de Malo Laou, Johannes de Besacre. 1869

f. 414. Bogems de Fanbome. 1847

f. 418. si BadulphuB de BuUy. 1859

1226, A.B. 10 — 11. Last Eyre of Pateshull in Lancashire.

Gase in Note Book 1294.
Commission, Bot. Cl. vol. n. p. 151.

f. 50b^. Bogerus de Monte Vegonis. 1294

1227, A.B. 11—12. Eyre of Pdteshull in Kent

Gases in Note Book 1764—1790.
Boll. A=Coram Bege Boll No. 28.
Commission, Bot. Cl. vol. n. p. 213.

f . 205 b. Anon. Lord seizing land for arrears of rent. 1767

f. 239. Anon. No resummons in the eyre. 1778

f. 244 b. Prior de Lewes, Wilhehnus de Arbervil.

f. 261. si Bobertus de Wylington. 1766

f. 274. si Manasserus de Hastings.

f. 275. si Emma mater Bogeri. 1783

f. 276 b. si Henricus filius Yaonis.

f. 280 b. si Wilhehnus de Herst. 1775

f. 280 b. si Henricus Paynefore. 1780

f. 371. Ingerianus de Shoford.

f. 417 and 418 b. si Henricus Pamsore (Pamfurere). 1780

f. 418 b. si WilhehnuB de Herst. 1775

f. 430 b». W. filius Boberti.

f. 433 b. Gode&idus de Besiton.

1227, A.B. 12. Last Eyre ofPateshull in SuffoUc.

Cases in Note Book 1890—1938.

BoU. A = Tower BoU No. 14.

Commission, Bot. Cl. vol. u. p. 213.

f. 50. si Ansehnus. 1919

f. 50. Johannes fiUus Hugonis. 1921

f. 205 b. si Jooeanus de Hesture. See 1913

f. 226 b. si Johannes de Stantone.

f. 239. si Badulphus de Wadleyham.

1 Wrongly attributed to A.B. 11
« Wrongly attributed to A.E. 16.
* Attributed to A.B. 18.


BRACTON^S CITATIONS. 167


f. 271.


Mabilia et Johanna.


1906


f. 273 b and 277.


si Wilhelmus de Carleton.


f. 274.


si Rogerus Battayl.


f. 276.


si Rogerus de Gloc.


1898


f. 278.


si Philippa de Cockfend.


f . 278.


si Walterus Curteys.


1924


f . 286 b.


Robertus de Bedentone.


1920


f. 286.


Anon. Assisa utrum.


f. 286.


Thomas persona de Framesdon.


f. 297.


Agneta uxor Rufi.


1936


f. 304bi.


Comitissa de Oxonia, Wilhehnus Blundus.


1916


f. 320.


Wilhehnus de Wanham,


f.340bi.


. Anon. Majority of socager.


f. 388.


Matilda uxor Mathiae de Thurfenne.


f . 398.


si Mabilla.


1891


1227, A.R.


12. Eyre of Pateshull in


Norfolh


Cases m Note Book 1808—1843.
Commission, Rot. Cl. vol. ii. p. 213.

f . 148. Radulphus de Sherings.

f. 212. si Gylbertus filius Gilberti.

f. 269 b and 275. si Eudo pater Walteri. 1827

f. 420. si HenricuB de la Stoke. 1810

1229, A.R. 13. Eyre of Raleigh in Middiesex.
See above Pleas in the Bench of Trinity Term a.b. 13.

1232, A.R. 16 — 17. Eyres of Raleigh in Warmck, Leicester,
Northampton^ Bedfordy Buchingham,

Commission, Rot. Pat. 16 Hen. 3, m. 11 d.

Warwick.

f. 188. si Q^ardus filius Wilhehni.

f. 226. si Augustinus.

f. 260 b. Anon. Ass. mor. ant. Death of one co-plaintifF.

f. 320 b. Hugo de Cayel Marestorp.

f. 330 b. Anon. Record of summons by sergeant of the hundred.

f. 381. Anon. Warranty of tenanfs assignee.

f. 381. Sibilla. Dower.

f. 393 b. Will. fil. Robert.

f. 417 b. si Will. de Munworth. Ass. mor. ant.

1 Attributed to a.b. 10.


168


TABLE U.


Leicester.

f. 159 b. Bogeras le Snohe.

f. 199 b. si Bob. Freeman.

f. 266 b. Hmnfredas de Leyo*. et Jaliana ux. ejas.

f. 286. Anon. Asedsa atrmn.

f. 811. Anon. Dower. Land assigned io another woman.


f. 266band27db.
f. 274.
f. 319.


Northcmpton,

Wilhelmns de Gamera.

Badulphas Basset, Thomas Pictesle.

Petrus de Galdington.


f. 170.
f. 247b.
f . 312.
f. 430b.
f. 438.


Bedford.


si Milo.

Hubertas de Vallibas.
Emma Bovastra.
Jaliana de Kodariis.
Anon. Curtesy.


f.20O.

f.200b.

f.260b.

f. 271.

f. 271band277b.

f. 272band277b.

f. 274.

f. 304.

f. 390.


Buckingham.

si Walteras le Gardner.

si Lnda.

si Simon de Hokedes.

si Alicia.

si Henricas Bassell.

si Bic. Faber.

si Bic. Avenel.

Alicia ax. Baldwyn.

Alicia de Bapella.


Date vmertain, Eyres o/Raleigh in Lincoln and Kent.

f. 435 b. Linc^. W. de Bemingeharst.

f . 276 b. Eent. si Adhelolphas.

f. 280 b. Eent. si Adam le Gardener.


f. 413.


Later Case.

Anonjmous case cited from eyre of Baleigh in Notting-
ham in a.b. 30 bat according to many MSS and in
all probability from the eyre of Tharkelby (with
whom was Bracton) in a.b. 29.


1 Probably Leicester.


bracton's citations. 169

D.

Undated Cases.


f. 26. Case before John of Metingham. An interpolation ;

not in any MS. that I have seen.
f. 27. Cecilia de Stradesete. From a Hilary term in an un-

specified year. See Note Book, Case 836.
f. 29. Godfrey of Crewcombe, Bobert of Muscegros. In bnt

few MSS; sometimes in margin; marked as Plus

inMA.
f. 32. Eeclesia in Hebland. Lincohishire.

f. 35 b. Abbess of Barking. See Case 758.

f. 45. Case before John of Lezington. In some MSS this is

not foand.
f. 49 b. Boger de Beyne, Bobert de Shute. A case of 1254

heard by Bracton. See above p. 39.
f. 50. Case from an eyre of Simon Pateshnll (a judge of

John's reign) in Leicester and Saffolk. The MSS

generally read S or Simonis; bat this may be a

mistake.
f . 56 b. Abbot of St Albans and Geoffrey of Childwiok. Pro-

bably after 1250. See Mat. Par. vol. 5, p. 129.
f. 65. William Mandeville, Earl of Essex and Maad, Coantess

of Hereford. An early oase for the Earl died in

1227. SeeCa8e297.
f. 88 b. Henry de Teroy (corr. Tracy), William of Punchardon,

Boger Yenpel (corr. Beaupel). An addition relating

to Bracton^s Devonshire neighbours. In margin of

OA, OB and not in some other MSS.
f. 93 b. Coantess of Linoohi widow of Walter Earl Marshall.

He died in 1245.
f. 114. Abbot of Bievaalz and Peter of Savoy. Part of a long

passage which is marginal in OA and not in somje

other MSS. It is again cited Br. f . 414 b and from

A.R. 31 (1246—7).
f. 125 b and 128. **Besponsa" given to Bichard Dacket by Martin Pates-

hall, who died in 1229.
f. 141. Bichardas Neale, Badulphas de Gray (corr. de Bray),

vicarius de Gaine (corr. Yitalis Engayne). This

oomes from 1225; see Case 1673. Citation mar-

ginalin OA.
f . 144 b. A man of Cookham. From Baleigh'8 time. Marginal

in OA ; not in several other MSS.


170 TABLB II.

f. 183. An opinion of William of Tork. Before 1246 when he

became Bishop.
f. 183. Case of Walter de L^Isle and Prior of Eenilworth, or

perhaps (Br. t 433 b) of Wenlock. A marginal

note, not in all MSS.
f. 194 b. Thomas of Yipont. Probably a marginal note.

f. 207 b. Opinion of PateshnU as to disseisin.

f. 212. A perambulation between the king and Bichard Percy.

f. 261. Ass. mort. ant. si Brianns. Case 47.

f. 270. Case of Bobert de la Zuche.

f. 275. Ass. mort. ant. si Eudo pater Walteri. Case 1875 ;

from A.D. 1228.
f. 285. Johannes de Daco. Case 1201.

f. 285 b. Assisa atmm. Churoh of S. Mary, Ozford. From

Michaehnas 1253 ; see Coram Bege Boll No. 93, m.

32. In bnt very few MSS.
f. 290 b. Henxy de Movewedene. Case 1294.

f. 292. de Alberto Comite Somers'. No snoh person as Albert

Earl of Somerset.
f. 293 b. GeofErey of Mandeyille. Attaint before the king at

Woodstock in presence of Simon (oorr. Stephen)

Segrave, who died in 1241.
f. 302 b. Consoltation of Patesholl by Peter des Boches, bishop

of Winohester.
f. 307. Consultation of Pateshnll by bishop of Woroester.

f. 309. Cnstom as to dower in Tork. Case 1889.

f. 310 b. John of Braose, William of Braose.

f. 311 b. Johannes de Herlezim de London. A case of 1221.

See Liber de Antiqois Legibns (Camden Soc.) p. 5.
f . 312. A Lincohi oase. Alicia, T. de S. Licjo.

f . 330. A Lancashire cnstom approved bj Pateshnll.

f. 350. Hogo de Brock. An essoin case.

f. 377 b. Thomas de Dunhohu. Plea which followed the king ;

before Segrave.
f . 382 b. Ordinance made on the occasion of the dedioation of

the Abbey of Hailes, 5th Noy. 1251. See Mat. Par.

vol. 5, p. 262.
f. 403 b. Vacancj of bishopric of Bochester. This occorred

Feb. 1235— Nov. 1238.
f. 403. Archbishop Edmmid called Saint. He died 16 Nov.

1240 ; was banonized 16 Dec. 1246.
f. 405. Walter Moschet. Bastardj. See Case 299.

f . 406. Consultation of PateshuU.

f. 418. Adam of Aston. Judgment of Bobert Lexington re-

versed bj Pateshull.
f. 420 b. Case before the king as to the heir of Herbert Fitz

Peter.
f. 421 b. W. Burdon de Deseburgh, who married a nun.


BRACTON^S CITATIONS. l71

f. 422 b. ^ William Longsword, Earl of Salisbnry. See Case 1235.

f. 424. Countess de L^Isle, W, de Crecure, W. de Honywell.

f. 427 b. W. Earl Marshall and M. (corr. Ingelram) de Feynes

owe allegianoe to kings of France and England.

The last person who can be described as W. Earl

Marshall is Walter who died in 1245.
f. 430. Conntess of Oxford and W. Blnnd. Case 1916.

f. 433 b. Marginal note. Case of W. de Llsle and Prior of

Wenlook, or of (see Br. f. 182) Eenilworth.
f. 438. Opinion of Segrave as to ourtesy.

f. 438 b. Baleigh deyises a writ for Balph of Dadescomb.


TABLE THE THIRD.

TABLE OF FITZHERBERT'S CASES FROM THE REIGN OF

HENRY THE THIRD, ARRANGED IN CHRONOLOGICAL

ORDER AND IDENTIFIED WITH CASES IN THE

NOTE BOOK.


GBaetinthe
NoteBook.
A.B. 2.

Mioh. Agel49 1306

Graunt 89 1338

Presoription 59 1349

Yoaoher 283 1306

Hil.

Pasoh.

Trin.

No term speoified.

Dower 199 1335

Prohibioion 13 11

Yiew 144 12

A.R. 3.
Mioh.

Hil.

Pasoh.


EsBone 186


Trin.


No term speoified.

Prescription 56


23


12


A.R. 4.
Mich.


Darren Present-
ment 22 100 (Hil.)


A.R. 4.


Casesinthe
NoteBook.

Dower 179 110 (Hil.)

Dower 180 96 (Hil.)
E8trepementl2 115 (Hil.)

Formedon 64 61

Prohibicion 14 48

Prohibicion 15 50

Waste 129 56

Yiew 145 56


Hil.

Pasoh.

Trin.


Devise 26


1409


Prohibicion 28


1409


Waste 140


1371


Briefe 766


1361


A.R. 5.


Mich.


Essone 187


309


Ha


Essone 196


1591


(Hil.


A.R. 7)


Prohibicion 29


1585


(Hil.


A.R. 7)


Pasoh.


Trin.


Mordanncestor 53 1478


FITZHEBBFJtT S CASES.


173


CaBes in the


CaseB in the


Note Book.


Note Book,


A.R. 6.


,


A.R. 8.


Mich.


Trin.


Briefe 879


1010


Hil.


Dower 194


1007


Admeasurement 18 160


Dower 196


1008


Attaint 72


161


Prescription 68


990


Dower 181


169


Dower 182


160


A.R. 9.


Prohibicion 16


162


Mioh.


Prohibicion 17


162


Ley78


897


Quare impedit 182 142


Hil.


Voucher 273


141


Dower 196


1042


Pasch.


Pasch.


Attaint 73


m


Dower 197
Dower 202


1098
1071


Trin.


Agel48


207


Trin.


Waste 137


1075


Avowrie 242


202


Droyt 66
Prohibicion 18


207
210


Dower 190
Dower 191


721
736


Proses 209


206 (?)


Garde 146


(Hil.


A.R. 17)
742


A.R. 7.


(Hil.


A.R. 17)


Mich.


Prescription 63


703


Hn.


Prerogative


25


743


Prohibicion 29


1686


(Hil.
Prohibicion 26


A.R. 17)
719


Prohibicion 30


1699


Waste 136


738


Trespas 244


1697 (?)


(Hil.


A.R. 17)


Pasch.


Vouoher 277


734


Waste 141


1617


A.R. 10.


(Hil.


A.R. 17)


Trin.


Mich.


A.R. 8.


-


Dower 200


1669


Mich.


Presoiiption 64


1663


Droyt 63


1630


Hil,


Prescription 60


1644


Corone 434


1725


Hil


,


Dower 201


1718


Deyise 26


221


Garde 160


1698


Garde 139


236


Pasch.


Prohibicion 19


221


Gessavit 60


1767


Proses 210


222


(Eent Eyre


A.R. 11)


Pasoh.


Briefe 880 1018 (Trin.)


Droyt 64 1782

(Kent Eyre A.R. 11)

Waste 142 1743


Dower 193


972


Essonel96 1028 (Trm.)


Trin,


174


TABLE IIL


GBMsfaitlie


Gasesfaithe


NoteBook.


NoteBook.


A.R. 11.


A.R. 14.


Mich.


Mich.


Hil


Admeasnrement 10


366


Dower 189


374


Pasch.


Presentement al


Droyt66


249


EBgli8el6


380


Oardel49


266


Qnare impedit 183


360


Trin.


mi.


Dower 186


266


Droyt69


392


Dowerl87


279 (AJL 12)


Dower 188


266


Paaoh.


Droyt67


259


EBSone 188


404


Droyt68


274 (A.R. 12)


Esflone 189


406


Mesne 76


276 (A Jfc. 12)


Trin.


A^12.


Brief e 877


413


Mich.


Essone 190


420


Hil.


Qoare impedit 184
Vouoher 276


423
418


Pasoh.


A.R 16.


Trin.


Mich.


No term specified.


Droyt60


441


Gardel61


1840


Dure8sl62


(Norfolk Eyre, A.R. 12)


Prohibicion 22


442


Mordaoncestor 64 1867


WastelSO


443


(Yorkflhire Eyre, A.R. 10—11)


Hil.


TiUenage 42 1814


(Norfolk Eyre, A.R. 12)


Attaint 74 1
Essone 191


524 (?)
483


A.K. 13.


Essone 192


609


Mioh.


Fanx jugement 20


611


Garde 141


288


Gardel43


606


Garde 142


296


Garraunt de


Prohibioion 20 293


Ghartres 26


486


Hil.


Waste 181
Viewl78


486
634


Pasoh.


View 174


610


Trin.


Pasch.


Prohibicion 21 341


Briefe 878


617


No term speoified.


Droyt 61


636


Dower 188*


1182


Mesne76


646


(A.R. 21) (?)


Prohibioion 28


644


Garde 147


1267


Waste 132


640


(A.R. 23)


Vouoher 276


634


1 The second of tho two ca


ses thus numb


ered.


> Plahily a case from the i


eign of Edward fbe Third.


FITZHERBERTfS CASES.


175


Cases in the


Gases in the


Note Book.


Note Rook.


A.R.16.


A.R. 18.


Trin.


Hil.


EsBone 193


608


Mesne 77


834


Prescription 67


622


Voucher 281


832


Waste 133


573


Waste 134


606


Pasch.


View 176


589


Mesne 78


844


Recovere en


value26 847


A.R. 16.


Mich.


Trin.


Avowrie 243


666


A.R. 19.


Feffements 117


668


No term specified.


Garde 144


660


Darren present-


Prohibicion 24


646


ment23


1117


*


Waste 135


631


Juris utrum 16


1117


Hil.


A.R. 20.


Pasoh.


No term specified.


Assize 430


700


Assize 431


1133


Nuper obiit 17


701


Assize 432


1203
(A.R. 20)


Trin.


Assize 433


1206


Voucher 274


942 (?)


Bastardy 29


(A


.R. 21) (?)
1160


A.R. 17.


Discontinuance 62 1206


Mioh.


(A.R.21)(?)


Dower 192


878


Waste 138


1144


Garde 146


860 (?)


Waste 139


1166


Hil.


A.R. 21.


-


Garde 146i


752


No term specified.


Prohibicion 26


766


Briefe 881


1213


Recovere en value 26 748


Briefe882 1220(A.R.22)


Vouoher 278


736


N^ Cosinage 13
Dower 198


1215
1182


Pasch.


Prerogative i


26


1221


Trin.


A.R. 22.


(A.R. 22)


A.R. 18.


Mich.


A.R. 23.


Covenant 30


799


No term specified.


Droyt 62


804


Assize 434


1239


Essone 194


800


Assize 435


1246


Prohibicion 27


803


Assize 436


1248


Voucher 279


782


Assize 437


1263


Voucher 280


790


Assize 438


1265


^ The second of the two cases thus numberecl.


176


TABLE III.


GMeiintlM


CMesinthe


NoteBook.


NoteBook.


A3. 23.


A.R. 12.


Dower 203


1246


SaffoUc Eyre.


Garde 147


1267


Bastardy 30


1909


Gardel48


1270


Dower 183


1908


Garrauntde


Mordaonoestor 52


1912


Charti«8 26


1268


Mordauncestor 55


1903


Particion 18


1273


Forfayture 33


1908


ToU5


1250


ToUlO


1246


A.R. 12.

Norfolk Eyre.


A.K. 24.


Vouoher282 1930 (Suff.)


No term specified.


ABsize439


1276


A.R. 12.


Garde 149


1286


Yorkshire Eyre.


Partidon 19


1279


Gomen 25


1881


Prerogative 27


1278


Droyt65


1871


Gardel52


1872


A.R. 6.


Garraunt de


Leioester Eyre.


Ohartres27


1880


Assize 426


1953


Prescription 61


1888


lAttaint 76


1965


Prescription 62


1889


Dro3rt66


1944


*YiUenage 43


1887


Mordaonoestor 51 1954


Becoyereenyalae27 1964


A.R. 47.


Tane28


1958


Deyon Eyre.


A.R. 6.


Dower 174


Stafford Eyre.


ViUenage 39


Aflsize 425


1979


Voucher 270


Gomen 26


1975


A.R. 47.


A.R. 12.


GomwaU Eyre.


Staflford» Eyre.


Ayd 175


Assize 427


1915


Droyt 52


Aflsize 428


1911


Garraunt 99^


Aflsize 429


1910


Vouoher 271


1 A.R 16 in Fits. Abr. * C!orr. S^follc ' > A.R 18 in Fits. Abr.

« Ascribed to 47 Eduford III. ; but probably from thii eyre.


idih


INDEX OF ACTIONS.


NoTE : — ^lt is difficult to classify the English forms of action according to any
one principle, because the traditional classification has nndergone many
gradual changes, e.g. an action which one age called *real*, another
called 'personal* or *mixed\ In making tbis Index I have thought
more of the convenience of modem readers than of the legal logic of
Bracton's day. Proceedings are here arranged under twelve heads : —
(i) Writs of Bight, (ii) Dower, (iii) Writs of Entry, (iv) Assizes of Novel
Disseisin and of Nuisance, (v) Assizes of Mort D'Ancestor, Nuper Obiit,
Cosinage, (vi) Assizes Utrum, (vii) Assizes of Darrein Presentment,
Quare impedit etc, (viii) Miscellaneous Proceedings, most of which are
reckoned in later days as real or mixed actions, but some of which are
closely allied to trespass, (ix) Personal Actions, including actions on
Fines and Warrantia Cartae, (x) Criminal Proceedings, (xi) Prooeedings
of an Appellate Character, including Attaint, Error, False Judgment, etc.,
(xii) Prohibition.


I.

Wbits of Bioht.

Good examples. 10, 17, 40, 86, 102, 141, 185, 212, 243,
393, 400, 488, 551, 671, 851, 867, 895, 950, 980, 1004,
1105, 1220, 1436, 1675, 1935.

Praecipe in capite. 10.

Little writ of r^ght dose. 834.

De rationabili parte. 8, 332, 508, 510, 635, 653, 702, 795,
934, 959, 1009, 1023, 1074, 1127, 1213, 1565, 1566,
1663, 1707, 1708, 1748.

For customs and services. 107, 190, 197, 207, 242, 273,
441, 468, 482, 497, 586, 608, 624, 655, 664, 666, 727,
747, 753, 772, 784, 789, 869, 895, 960, 1005, 1045,
1053, 1063, 1214, 1225, 1230, 1279, 1615, 1616, 1632,
1687, 1704, 1738, 1747, 1765, 1782, 1966.

M. I. 12


178 INDEX OF ACnONS.

The numben refer to the casei not to the paget.

Wbits or BioHT.

Of advowson. 89, 111, 114, 199, 248, 262, 272, 329, 416,
488, 551, 569, 690, 693, 769, 853, 915, 1064, 1336, 1365,
1367, 1509, 1558, 1634, 1813.
Writ of right of ward. 33, 236, 266, 288, 349, 505, 643,
661, 681, 695, 708, 731, 742, 758, 763, 812, 845, 860,
868, 873, 906. 908, 990, 1076, 1183, 1231, 1606, 1608,
1682, 1872.
Writ de rationabilibos divisis. 249, 445, 509, 534, 535, 590,

1485, 1521, 1547.
Prooedore in the lord*B ooort. 26, 40, 212, 1436, 1847.
Procedore in the county coort. 40, 212, 243, 955, 1360,

1436, 1513, 1672.
Pone. 445, 542, 556, 823, 1079, 1638, 1776.
Sommons etc. 10, 39, 924, 1458, 1547, 1667.
Essoins. 20, 28, 54, 69, 118, 166, 175, 212, 288, 309, 353,
397, 404, 406, 418, 421, 441, 509. 579, 587, 609, 618,
621, 662, 735, 745, 746, 760, 858, 886, 896, 922, 923,
926, 945, 954, 967, 958, 1019, 1039, 1050, 1052, 1059,
1086, 1116, 1291, 1369, 1385, 1450, 1481, 1484, 1513,
1575, 1577, 1591, 1611, 1637, 1642, 1901.
View. 8, 39, 119, 235, 315, 510, 534, 590, 695, 603, 936,

1055, 1318, 1323, 1414, 1509, 1646.
Default. 40, 54, 69, 117, 212, 235, 307, 430, 468, 522, 542,
604, 614, 688, 735, 886, 924, 945, 958, 1003, 1082, 1266,
1301, 1318, 1385, 1399, 1538, 1587, 1602, 1612, 1626,
1634, 1672, 1710, 1737, 1901.
Warranty. 117, 141, 185, 413, 534, 562, 614, 615, 624, 634,
671, 689, 708, 889, 945, 1087, 1220, 1234, 1268, 1373,
1399, 1410, 1414, 1444, 1696, 1717.
Coont, ezamples of. 86, 90, 181, 199, 209, 213, 224, 233,
298, 411, 476, 488, 703, 855, 892, 947, 949, 1040, 1055,
1336, 1360, 1365, 1395, 1578.
Pleas.

Non-tennre. 8, 102, 227, 322, 827, 364, 403, 452,
557, 656, 662, 681, 694, 846, 1067, 1164, 1220,
1229.
Non-joinder. 181, 227, 676, 726, 800, 1010, 1034,
1044, 1057, 1351, 1437, 1684, 1663, 1708, 1748,
1764, 1933.
Infancy. 46, 1442.
Ancient demesne. 652.
Einship. 230, 315, 358, 554, 637, 980, 982, 1048,

1360, 1630, 1678.
Fine. 147, 302, 403, 715, 716, 831, 849. 853, 991,

1095, 1427, 1558, 1621.
Feoflment. 224, 250, 272, 393, 467, 671, 848.


INDEX OF ACTIONS. 179

The nunibers refer to the ecues not to the page».

Wbits or BiOHT.

Pleas.

Qait-olaim. 386.

Jas tertii. 61, 227, 243, 662, 676, 1004.
Bastardy. 228, 257, 303, 1229.
Limitation. 280.
« Long possession. 607.

Various. 114, 226, 232, 283, 416, 680, 702, 807»
905,1233,1400.
Mise, examples of. 112, 170, 180, 197, 209, 242, 329, 379,

476, 809, 1004, 1628.
Grand assize. 17, 53, 84, 112, 114, 118, 120, 180, 197, 248,
251, 262, 329, 411, 635, 564, 669, 616, 671, 715, 769,
772, 789, 809, 831, 846, 950, 960, 1048, 1089, 1225,
1336, 1486, 1658, 1569, 1625, 1630, 1681, 1694, 1701,
1705, 1715, 1738, 1754, 1759, 1764, 1800, 1819, 1865,
1866, 1905, 1938, 1943, 1944.
Battle. 26, 63, 102, 180, 185, 243, 328, 400, 551, 554, 634,
896, 980, 1082, 1360, 1427, 1668. 1672, 1676, 1678,
1717, 1754, 1764.
Trial by Jury. 17, 33, 170, 242, 278, 292, 608, 634, 772,
895, 1004, 1225, 1668, 1678» 1694, 1716, 1717, 1738,
1779, 1819.


DOWEB.


II.


Ezamples. 4, 18, 154, 191, 253, 767, 941, 968, 1919.

Pro dote nominata. 106, 156, 377, 467, 944, 1027, 1083,

1625, 1603, 1824, 1963.
Unde nihil habet. 83, 101, 108.
Against hnsband^s feofifee. 166, 671, 633, 877, 944, 1083,

1102, 1413, 1525, 1683, 1736, 1824, 1963.
Procedore.

Summons. 7, 738, 1313, 1580.
Essoin. 267,437.

Default. 7, 124, 267, 560, 673, 738, 938, 972,
1094, 1320, 1372, 1466, 1649, 1741, 1751.
View. 129, 1092, 1093, 1306, 1375, 1466.
Warranty. 191, 284, 436, 491, 658, 560, 571. 573, 605, 633,
668, 712, 714, 738, 767, 862, 968, 1024, 1083, 1576,
1680. 1603, 1668, 1683, 1700, 1728, 1736, 1741, 1749,
1824.
Pleas.

Misnomer. 888.
Non-tenure. 98, 470.
Non-joinder. 611, 1939.

12—2


180 INDEX OF ACnONS.

The numben refer to the casei not to the pagee,

DOWEB.

Pleas.

Husband aUve. 163, 356, 374, 455, 502, 545, 898,

1307, 1586, 1595.
Never married. 98, 324, 642, 647, 944, 1142, 1669.
Another claimant. 1142, 1703.
No warrantor. 71, 195, 730, 882, 904, 938, 1314,

1321, 1341.
Dhrorce. 1027, 1564.
Dower already assigned. 66, 83, 108.
Husband not seised. 814, 970, 994, 1002, 1098,

1970.
Not 80 endowed. 91, 192, 204, 220, 265, 345, 377,

457, 518. 721, 953, 1065, 1434, 1919.
Not endowed at church door. 1669, 1718, 1875.
Gapital messuage. 1007, 1042.
Gaput baronie. 96.
ViUeinage. 591,794,1531.
Estoppel. 861, 1011, 1459.
ExcessiYe dower. 1355.
Various. 160, 184, 279, 459, 466, 714, 931, 937, 965,

1008, 1396, 1573.
Jury. 154, 192, 721, 794, 953, 1335, 1603, 1919.
Admeasnrement of dower. 150, 365, 632, 1107.

III.

Writs or Entrt. >^

Sur disseisin. 76, 131, 372, 383, 434, 493, 872, 993, 1133,

1405, 1883.
Sur intrusion. 140, 208, 774, 1222.
Ad temdnum qni praeteriit. 57, 133, 171, 183, 186, 188,
234, 313, 323, 359, 425, 451, 499, 575, 641, 650, 663,
669, 686, 751, 761, 787, 790, 1419, 1488, 1490, 1619,
1750, 1868, 1869.
Gui in vita. 203, 233, 290, 294, 863, 389, 483, 525, 528,
572, 679, 736, 816, 1550, 1756, 1769, 1863, 1888, 1889,
1929, 1981.
Sur cui in vita. 22, 60.
Gui ante divortium. 836.

Ad communem legem. 146, 385, 487, 601, 682, 733, 822,
918, 996, 1073.
on alienation by a villein, 713.

on alienation by a bastard who dies without issue, 402.
on alienation by one to whom.king has granted jear
day and waste, 462, 597.
Dum fuit infra etatem. 342, 440, 517, 596, 893, 977,
1099, 1936.


INDEX OF ACTIONS. 181

The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages,

Wbits op Entby.

Dum non fuit compos mentis. 354.
Sine assensa capitnli. 866.
Sine assensu conventos. 1727.
Procedure.

Summons. 1869.

Essoin. 140, 208, 483, 663, 1222, 1550.
Default. 483, 663, 1222.
View. 140, 517, 572, 663, 1550.
Warranty. 203, 290, 342, 525, 528, 663, 679, 893, 918,

1302, 1405,
Pleas.

Non-tenure. 389, 483, 499, 597, 641, 686, 1133.
Title. 188, 234, 359, 363, 425, 451, 493, 528, 575,
641, 663, 669, 679, 774, 787, 790, 918, 1133,
1488, 1490, 1619.
Limitation. 186, 234, 402, 499, 1889.
Estoppel. 872.
Proof of entry. 57, 188, 233, 234, 425, 451, 575, 751, 761,

790, 816, 1868.
Trial by battle. 234,893.
Grand assize. 323, 363, 402, 499, 787, 918, 1488, 1490,

1750, 1756.
Jury. 131, 146, 188, 369, 669, 686, 751, 893, 1769.

IV.

ASSIZE OF NOVXL DlSSXISIK,

for Common. 80, 336, 360, 1194, 1197, 1208,

1274, 1284, 1820, 1975.
for Bent. 338, 1205, 1239, 1844, 1890.
for a Fishery. 1915.
for suit to a Mill. 1979.
Prooedure.

Attachment, etc. 1778, 1815.
View by Jurors. 1192.
Default. 1033, 1204, 1223, 1239, 1247, 1252,
1778, 1791, 1795, 1802, 1890.
Warranty. 371, 1153, 1950.
Pleas.

Non-tenure. 1826, 1864, 1874.
Non-joinder. 1798.

Death of a defendant. 336, 1808, 1826, 1890.
Ancient demesne. 1973.

No seisin of free tenement. 270, 291, 428, 429, 617,
780, 1191, 1240,. 1241, 1731, 1801, 1838, 1978,
1979.


182 INDEX OF ACTI0K3.

Tke mmbert refer to tke eaees not to the pagee.

ASSIZB OF NOYEL DI8SBIBIN.

Pleas.

Entry onder jodgment. 1195, 1297, 1667, 1793,

1836.
„ „ king'8 writ. 1825, 1950.

„ „ fine. 1012,1223.

„ feoftment. 1251, 1256, 1840.
„ on condition broken. 1200.
„ „ gift in mortmain. 1248.
„ „ death of particular tenant, etc. 1470,

1921, 1924.
„ to distrain. 1207.
„ for default of Bervioe. 1908.
„ nnder «astom. 1662.
No assize by lord against tenant. 1861.
YiUeinage. 281, 1030, 1203, 1242, 1812, 1885,
1887, 1914.
Trial by jury. 825, 1150, 1251, 1256, 1290; 1793, 1885,

1887, 1891, 1894, 1899, 1924.
Aflsize tomed into perambnlation. 907.
Assize proceedfl. 318, 339, 360, 428, 471, 617, 779, 781,
885, 985, 1032, 1033, 1147, 1149, 1193, 1194, 1239, 1241,
1242, 1245, 1246, 1247, 1258, 1259, 1260, 1261, 1284,
1470, 1471, 1791, 1792, 1794, 1796, 1797, 1809, 1814,
1815, 1816, 1836, 1837, 1838, 1840, 1841, 1842, 1861.
1886, 1890, 1892, 1893, 1895, 1904, 1906, 1907, 1910,
1911, 1922, 1926, 1946, 1949, 1965, 1974, 1975, 1976.
Vicontiel writ. 469.

A88IZB OT NUISANCB.

InBtances. 701, 806, 1081, 1196, 1253, 1785, 1804, 1953.


V.


AS3IZB or MoBT D'Ancestob.


Procedure.


On death of father. 47, 59, 77, 225, etc.

„ mother. 1476, 1773, 1849, 1877, etc.
„ „ brother. 196, 271, 299, 370, etc.

„ sister. 659, 1128, 1475, 1857, eto.
„ „ uncle. 44, 93, 123, 144, etc.
On death in pilgrimage. 196, 271, 306, 1148,

1397, 1787.
On entering religlon. 1850.

Summons, etc. 1311, 1803, 1832, 1856, 1879,

1956, 1959.
Essoin. 24, 370, 1799.
Default. 870, 878, 1293, 1306, 1311, 1348,

1807, 1832, 1855, 1866, 1879, 1909, 1956


INDEX OF ACTIONS.


183


The numbers refer to the easea not to the paget.

Absize op Mobt D'Ancbstor.

Warranty. 30, 42, 43, 47, 77, 196, 331, 387, 734, 833, 1167,
1293, 1806, 1394, 1476, 1508, 1529, 1557, 1722, 1803,
1827, 1949, 1870, 1876, 1898, 1917, 1927, 1931, 1948,
1954.
Parol demurring. 30, 43, 331, 336, 421, 1287, 1508, 1567,
1722, 1774, 1775, 1783, 1827, 1849, 1870, 1898, 1948,
1961, 1954, 1967, 1958.
Pleas.

Non-tenure. 37, 292, 326, 421, 729, 870, 986, 987,

1466, 1479, 1781, 1787, 1955, 1963, 1977.
Non-joinder. 1571.
I am next heir. 1475, 1829, 1962.
He is not dead. 1805.
He did not die seised. 1462, 1487, 1770, 1818, 1823,

1851, 1863, 1912, 1971.
Yon have been seised. 1397, 1773.
Kinship. 44, 299, 326, 833, 1128, 1161, 1480, 1784,

1830, 1858, 1884, 1927, 1954.
Bastardy. 1780, 1859, 1917, 1927, 1962.
Fine. 93,123,729,1884.
Peoffment. 250,331,1487.
Limitation. 340, 1877.
Other litigation is prooeeding. 1789, 1967.
Yilleinage. 343, 1833.

Jus tertii. 1311, 1821, 1852, 1878, 1881, 1903.
Various. 37, 45, 282, 1176, 1766, 1822.
Assize proceeds. 45, 144, 225, 250, 306, 870, 879, 984, 1348,
1477, 1770, 1821, 1853, 1855, 1876, 1877, 1879, 1909,
1912, 1931, 1948, 1969, 1963.
Trial by jury. 87, 260, 282, 1672, 1722, 1833, 1951.


NupBB Obht.


COSINAOE.


Instanoes. 12, 1357.


Instance. 1215.


AssizB Utbum.


VI.

Instances. 21, 65, 179, 285, 308, 368, 539, 841, 887, 1020,
1026, 1166, 1359, 1430, 1656, 1790, 1846, 1924, 1980.


VII.

AssizE OF Dabbbin Pbbsbntment.

Examples. 49, 61, 69, 172, 260, 310, 516, 798, 820, 983,
1035, 1070, 1238, 1312, 1416, 1452, 1542, 1607.


184 IKDEX OF ACTIONS.

The numben refer to the caue not to the pages,

Aasam of Dabbbin PBBSBiniaNT.
Prooedare.

Beflimimons. 5, 6, 155, 427, 759, 1190, 1319,

1491, 1536.
Essoin. 5, 6, 427, 1028.
Default. 139, 165, 261, 427, 759, 765, 1028,
1172, 1190, 1391, 1454, 1469, 1491, 1556,
1685, 1686, 1755.
Warranty. 310, 516, 648, 1295, 1685.
Pleas.

Plenarty. 1, 51, 68, 173, 187, 300, 304, 306, 310,
636, 864, 928, 983, 1300, 1312, 1339, 1352, 1354,
1415, 1545, 1684.
Fine. 344, 481, 1618, 1686.
Charters. 1, 61, 72, 97, 100, 172, 173, 211, 243,
260, 306, 406, 480, 616, 523, 648, 820, 928, 1196,
1296, 1379, 1387, 1636, 1685, 1686, 1697, 1731,
1758.
Plaintiff never seised. 49, 94.
Estoppel. 912.
Yarioos. 519,798,1469.
Intervention of third party. 6, 6, 1072, 1196, 1238.
Assize proceeds. 72, 97, 187, 305, 319, 376, 516, 636, 765,
813, 983, 1028, 1072, 1163, 1339, 1364, 1469, 1670,
1653, 1684, 1685, 1697, 1744, 1765, 1762, 1928.
Trial by jury. 206, 243, 1070.
Trial by charters. 1, 412.

QUABX XHPEDIT, QUARB NON PBBMISIT, QuABB NON ADMISIT.

Instances. 34, 74, 111, 142, 182, 256, 276, 350, 365, 357,
395, 423, 426, 438, 474, 625, 644, 692, 724, 782, 786,
793, 797, 1006, 1166, 1219, 1418, 1594, 1726, 1760, 1831.


vin.

De NAXrDO HABENDO, De LIBEBTATB PBOBANDA.

Instances. 70,1005,1167,1828,1934. See also 1041, 1162.
Ejectment of wabd, Bavishmbnt of wabd, etc.

Instances. 178, 196, 266, 687, 1232, 1263, 1278, 1280, 1283,
1286, 1620, 1660, 1709.
Mesne.

Instances. 276, 362, 390, 506, 674, 811, 838, 849. 1043,
1211.
Monstbauebunt.

Instances. 1230, 1237.
Per quae sebuicia.

Instances. 236, 369, 593, 698, 627, 773, 948, 1622.


INDEX OF ACTIONS. 185

The numhers refer to the cases not to the pages.

QUABE CAPIT THOLOMEUM.

Instanoes. 16, 145, 1123, 1188, 1260, 1720.

QUABE CBPIT EXCAMBIUM.

Instances. 512, 612.

QUABE DEFOBCIAT.

Instanoes. 82, 321, 394, 559, 583, 666, 916, 1151, 1381,
1406, 1417, 1740, 1742.

QUABE DISTBIMGIT.

Instanoes. 660, 773, 791, 1049, 1110, 1277.

QUABE DUXIT IN UXOBEM.

Instanoes. 1090, 1278, 1596.

QUABE EJECIT.

Instance. 1140.

QUABE EXIOIT.

Instance. 1679.

QUABE FIMEM FECIT.

Instanoes. 584, 1363, 1589, 1706.

QUABE INTBUSIT.

Instanoes. 312, 566, 639, 697, 1104, 1174, 1439, 1441, 1554,
1629, 1746.

QUABE LEUAUIT FUBCAB.

Instanoe. 1114.

QUABE MABITAUIT.

Instance. 1280.

QUABB PEBMISIT SE MABITABI.

' Instance. 1286.

QUABE SE FACIT IMPBEGMATAM.

Instanoes, 137, 198, 1503, 1605.

QUABE TEMET MEBCATUM.

Instanoes. 494, 578, 786, 1283.

QUABE TBAHIT IN PLACITUM.

Instances. 374, 384, 498, 1650.

QUABE TULIT ASSISAM.

Instanoe. 1411.

Qun> JUBIS CLAMAT.

Instances. 121, 126, 295, 581, 713, 727, 929, 967, 1034,
1182, 1581, 1583, 1729, 1747.


QUO JUBE.


QUO WABBAMTO.


Instanoes. 193, 223, 274, 330, 392, 433, 561, 606, 628, 673,
709, 720, 803, 818, 909, 914, 942, 971, 974, 1588, 1624,
1628, 1721.

Brought by the king. 241, 268, 391, 422, 440, 578, 581, 750,
840, 862, 930, 1066, 1111, 1119, 1162, 1224, 1271, 1272,
1274, 1275, 1288, 1666.

Brought by a subjeot. 35, 95, 219, 253, 501, 1013, 1014,
1108, 1136, 1141, 1175, 1181, 1296, 1358, 1390, 1512, 1846.


186


INDEX OF ACTIONS.


The numbers refer to the eatee not to the paget.

QUOD CAPUT HOMAOIUM.

Instanoes. 41, 53, 168, 967, 1374, 1438, 1620.

QUOD PBBMITTAT.

Instances. 685, 1930.

SbCTA AD MOIiENDINUM.

Instanoes. 161, 504.
Wastb.

Instanoes. 27, 56, 115, 388, 443, 461, 485, 527, 540, 574,

580, 607, 632, 640, 691, 717, 718, 739, 880, 1075, 1131,

1165, 1304, 1371, 1617, 1743.

IX.

Wabbamtu cabtab.

Instances. 116, 237, 297, 419, 486, 495, 503, 526, 531, 538,
594, 620, 657, 749, 804, 837, 964, 966, 969, 979, 1000,
1001, 1097, 1398, 1401, 1566, 1589, 1633, 1648, 1659,
1665, 1771, 1811, 1835, 1880, 1881, 1900.


Db finb facto.


covbnamt.

Account.
Dbbt.

Dbtimue.
Beplbtin.

Tbbspabs.


Instances. 2, 125, 158, 169, 200, 254, 296, 311, 361, 396,
417, 438, 446, 447, 454, 463, 478, 496, 520, 546, 563,
672, 700, 973, 992, 1015, 1101, 1186, 1386, 1433, 1443,
1457, 1511, 1514, 1526, 1579, 1631, 1647, 1652, 1690,
1777, 1834, 1867.

Instances. 36, 167, 581, 613, 638, 792, 804, 805, 890, 1058,
1129, 1378^ 1549, 1656, 1702, 1739.

Instancea 796, 859.

Instances. 52, 177, 825, 852, 381, 568, 645, 732, 776, 801,
830, 897, 900, 901, 924, 936, 946, 963, 1324, 1421, 1422,
1543, 1574, 1610, 1693, 1969.

Instances. 194, 202, 832, 936, 1366. See also 1115.

Instanoes. 78, 157, 333, 477, 616, 677, 773, 842, 883, 1049,
1062, 1146, 1407.

Instanoefl. 85, 287, 314, 378, 465, 567, 616, 821, 835, 839,

843, 1041, 1121, 1232, 1520, 1735.
Conspiraoy (?) 479.


Cbivinal pbocbbdimos.
Appeal.


Of homicide. 138, 490, 918, 1137, 1460, 1548,
1600, 1711.


INDEX OF ACTIONS.


187


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.

GbIMINAL PROCEEDINaS.

AppeaL

Of wounds. 134, 269, 611, 548, 592, 943, 1697.

Of mayhem. 346, 1084.

Of laroeny. 135, 824, 1169, 1431, 1436, 1447,

1617, 1639, 1597, 1692.
Of robbery. 484, 699, 723, 1368, 1424, 1466,

1664.
Of coining. 1533.
Indictanent. 67, 136, 588, 705, 1031, 1453, 1472, 1473, 1474,
1517. See also 1723, 1725.


Certificate.


Attaint.


Becobdabi facias.


Ebbob.


False Judoment.


XI.


Instances. 63, 371, 382, 431, 771, 856, 1144, 1209, 1265,
1281, 1928.

Instances. 161, 174, 262, 286, 301, 613, 524, 530, 778, 899,
917, 933, 1046, 1209, 1266, 1294.

Instances. 16, 26, 40, 186, 213, 243, 281, 318, 612, 530,
664, 692, 824, 871, 917, 976, 1069, 1077, 1115, 1138,
1146, 1159, 1286, 1393, 1406, 1436, 1441, 1513, 1539.

Instances. 564, 1166.

Instonces. 40, 445, 511, 692, 824, 834, 955, 1019, 1122,
1342, 1412, 1436, 1672.


XII.

Pbohibition to Coubt Christian.

Lay fee. 11, 50, 73, 79, 132, 221, 407, 442, 444, 464, 547,

552, 676, 610, 626, 629, 666, 722, 756, 762, 788, 802,

817, 866, 910, 1073, 1143, 1402, 1403, 1404, 1409, 1420,

1464, 1661, 1680.
Advowson. 62, 64, 143, 860, 463, 536, 537, 725, 799, 874,

918, 1388.
Chattels. 48, 130, 162, 210, 293, 341, 351, 423, 544, 555,

570, 599, 646, 649, 670, 678, 683, 684, 756, 762, 766,

768, 808, 810, 847, 875, 877, 1361, 1370, 1423, 1467,

1685, 1599.
Fidei laesio. 50, 599, 670, 792, 1361, 1464.
Debts. 152, 162, 660, 719, 810.
Matrimonial causes. 341, 442, 650, 570, 629, 646, 683.
Testamentary canses. 550, 756, 810, 847, 1409.
Indicauit. 799, 874.


INDEX OF THINGS.


The numbers refer to the casee not to the pcLgee,


Abandonment of action, 131, 643,

765, 790, 798, 820, 823
Abatement, Bee Intrusion.
Abatement of action bj death, 432,

440, 663, 689, 894, 1426, 1437,

1499
Abatement of nuisance, 700, 1081
Abbot and Monk, 341
Abdaction of wife, 1597
Abeyance, 12
Abjuration, 67, 938, 1137, 1179, 1180,

1266, 1431, 1723
Absence beyond Beas, 93, 123, 302,

403, 716, 1779
Absolution ordered, 670, 766, 817,

1143, 1388, 1671
AcceBsories, 1460, 1548, 1600, 1711
Acquiescence, 154, 182, 200, 205,

379, 558, 959, 1126, 1434. 1913
Action, wrong form of, 1656
Actions, classification of as real and

personal, 803
Actions, order of, 31, 37, 94, 99, 122,

157, 240, 416, 462, 692, 829, 846,

1000, 1077, 1091, 1176, 1233,1519,

1573, 1601, 1789, 1836, 1945, 1967
Admeasurement of pasture, 1130
Adultery punished, 753
Advancement, 1018
Advocate of a priory, 248, 525
Advowson, 49, 94, 97, 114, 305, 322,

395, 423, 426, 515, 536, 644, 797,

820, 1016, 1064, 1240, 1396, 1509,

1578, 1618, 1726, 1731


Age, for fighting, 1648

Age, fuU in socage, 1847, 1899, 1957

Age, proof of fuU, 46, 687, 1131, 1362

Agency, 873

Aid, granted by tenants, 1146

Aid, feudal, 606, 792, 1146

Alien, 110, 730, 760, 1220, 1396

Alienation, covenant against, 18, 36,

419, 643, 680
Alienation, power of, 105, 386, 401,

666, 617, 631, 930, 944, 1054, 1102,

1248, 1289, 1666
AUenation, by tenant for Ufe, 1470
AUenation by a bastard, 402, 1289,

1706
AUenation, lord's consent to, or con-

firmation of, 428, 627, 660, 947,

1070, 1248, 1607, 1616, 1666
AUenation, fraudulent, to avoid

action, 483, 846, 1024
Amends, tender of, 1199
Amercement generaUy, 28, 64, 79,
213, 214, 360, 391, 427, 489,
770, 798,1149, 1169, 1170, 1191,
1239, 1249, 1623, 1794, 1890

of franchise court, 824, 834

of county, 40, 168, 186, 1130, 1412,
1436

of sheriff, 10, 40

of justices, 67, 630, 664

of pleader, 298
Ancient demesne, 292, 652, 834, 907,

961, 1099, 1122, 1230, 1284, 1237,

1400, 1624, 1973


INDEX OF THINGS.


189


The numhers refer to the cases not to the pages.


*Anefang», 824

Anglo-Saxon charters pleaded, 1628,

1716
Annuity, 52, 438
Appeal by woman, 1600
Appellant must have seen the crime,

723, 1697
Appellant mnst be one injured, 857,

1664
Appraisement, 365
Approvement of common, 1261, 1881,

1976
Approver, 136, 821, 1159, 1431, 1447,

1472, 1617, 1692, 1723, 1763
Appurtenances, 322, 396, 403, 426,

464, 604, 681, 1016, 1064, 1236,

1433, 1726
Arbitration, 649, 732, 983
Archbishop, appeal to, 647
Archdeacon, 256, 324, 366, 644, 547,

1312
Arrest, see Imprisonment.
Assets, 526, 663, 671, 633, 638, 748,

852, 944, 961, 1024, 1234, 1625,

1662, 1683, 1736
Assignment of contract, 804
Assigns, 106, 332, 617, 804, 867,

1289, 1906
Assize must be taken in county, 1478
Assize, justices of, 213, 214, 281, 318,

367, 428, 430, 431, 512, 630, 564,

777, 829, 871, 894, 917, 976, 1061,

1232, 1286, 1478, 1716
Assize of bread and beer, 842, 1110,

1292
Astrarius, 230, 892, 961, 982, 988,

1830
Attomey, 41, 113, 118, 120, 173,231,

395, 492, 532, 661, 661, 764, 788,

866, 932, 941, 963, 1047, 1088,

1266, 1306, 1310, 1537, 1546, 1566,

1676, 1691, 1642, 1668
Attomey, infanfs, 1387
Attomment, 126, 338, 398, 624, 633,

641, 586, 627, 866, 1087, 1136,

1148, 1169, 1277, 1344, 1616, 1796,

1940, 1966


Bail, none for homioide, 1716

Baron, essoin of, 1637

Barony, 96, 601, 1182, 1276, 1284,

1390
Bastardizing the dead, 1160, 1181
Bastardy, 31, 121, 180, 227,228, 243,

257, 287, 299, 316, 358, 394, 619,

662, 984, 1175, 1229, 1475, 1554,

1620, 1706, 1811, 1839, 1879, 1909,

1927, 1962
Bastardy, ordinance touching, 1117
Battle, trial by, 2, 26, 40, 47, 53, 66,

102, 243, 259, 316, 634, 893, 895,

914, 980, 1006, 1019, 1082, 1095,

1226, 1360, 1393, 1412, 1427, 1436,

1548, 1619, 1672, 1717, 1754, 1764,

1936, 1961
BattleactuaUy fought, 147, 164, 186,

328, 363, 400, 551, 815, 1159, 1336,

1436, 1447, 1469, 1675
BedeU, 1230
Bench, the, 92, 208, 243, 268, 318,

364, 367, 382, 439, 530, 680, 736,

1079, 1107, 1116, 1166, 1189, 1190,

1269, 1412, 1681, 1846
Bezants, rent reserved in, 350, 990
Bishop, appeal to, 644, 766
Bishop, certificate of legitimacy, 243,

299
Bishop, certificate of marriage, 324,

642, 647, 944, 1142
Bishop, certificate of plenarty, 111,

139, 173, 296, 300, 304, 516, 625,

675, 864, 928, 1312
Bishop, consultation with, 1389
Bishop must produce clerk, 276, 407,

438, 637, 676, 722, 801, 802, 865,

1368, 1463
Bishop, process against, 1402
Blanch ferm, 66
Bloodwite, 753
Boar, free, 881
Boon works, 916, 960, 1006, 1103,

1661
Borsholder, 821

Borough, see Municipal Bodies.
Boundaries, disputed, 249,, 446, 509,


190


INDEX OF THINGS.


The numben refer to the

634, 6S5, 590, 781, 1021, 1257,

1521
Botes, 56, 254, 811, 032, 672, 685,

749
Biead, agsize of, 842, 1110, 1292
Bread, prohibition againBt eale of,

827, 1282
Bread, tax on sale ot, 666
BaU, free, 881
Burgage, devisable, 11, 73

Cambridge, chanoellor o( 722
Canoellation of forged or fraudnlent

deeds, 250, 286, 342, 412, 934, 976,

1589, 1706
Capital meBsnage, 1007, 1042, 1390
Capons, rent resenred in, 1665
Carto, Magna, 513, 1213, 1215, 1220,

1227, 1248, 1478, 1730
Castle-gnard, 275
Cell of monastery, 5, 6, 1715
Challenge of jorors, 806
Champion, 2, 39, 65, 116, 164, 185,

234, 243, 328, 400, 551, 554, 634,

856, 893, 895, 955, 980, 1019, 1038,

1082, 1095, 1360, 1412, 1416, 1427,

1436, 1672, 1675, 1687, 1754, 1764,

1935
ChanceUor, 397, 1545, 1847
Chancery, 76, 1173
Chantry, 1200
Chapel, 112, 187, 300, 329, 350, 357,

376, 625, 693, 769, 874, 1006, 1312,

1377
Charter, see Carta.
Chase, 806
Chattel real, 73, 559
Chester, county of, 505, 876, 1127,

1213, 1227, 1273
ChUdwite, 753
Chirograph, 344, 448, 586, 619, 831,

976, 1380, 1690
Chirograph amended, 417
•Church», grant of a, 1418
Chnrch, Mother-, 625, 693, 769, 1006
Church and State, relation between,

351, 356, 391, 741, 770


case» not to the pages,

Churchyard, 755

Civil death, 455, 1057, 1139, 1686,

1594, 1920
Clergy, benefit of, 355, 490, 548, 588,

1453
Clerk, assanlt on, 444, 766
Clerks of the Bench, 382, 1577
Clerks, actions between, 719, 808,

1583
Clerks, marriage of, 1245, 1917
Clerk, process against, 143, 276, 338,

407, 576, 801, 802, 865, 1368
Cognizance, claim of, 314, 548, 577,

589, 622, 952, 1205, 1381, 1598,

1678
Coining, 1533
Common, 80, 174, 193, 223,254, 274,

330, 336, 392, 433, 469, 547, 561,

628, 673, 709, 720, 749, 817, 818,

839, 909, 914, 962, 971, 1078, 1097,

1155, 1194, 1196, 1197, 1198, 1218.

1253, 1274, 1284, 1417, 1582, 1588,

1624, 1628, 1721, 1804, 1881, 1885,

1915, 1975
Common Pleas, 1213, 1220
Common, tenants in, 1939, 1947
Condition, 172, 270, 964, 1200, 1607,

1965
Conditional gif is, see Fee conditionaL
Confession of viUeinage, 1411
Confirmation, 199, 250, 467, 660,

1268, 1274, 1655
Conqnest, Norman, title from plead-

ed, 906, 1237
Conquest, Norman, as period of pre-

scription, 34, 223, 274, 392, 422,

582, 628, 818, 835, 843, 909, 971.

1271, 1272, 1624
Conspiracy, 479
Contempt of Conrt, 464
Contract confirmed by oath, 1671,

1893
Contract, how proved, 68, 86, 177,

287, 646, 663, 732, 830, 890, 897,

1129, 1368, 1643, 1649, 1846, 1935
Contract, principles of, 18, 60, 167,

482, 681, 613, 663, 749, 792, 804.


INDEX OF THINGS.


191


The numbers refer to tke caaes not to the pages.


873, 890, 937, 1129, 1223, 1378,

1426, 1526, 1656, 1806, 1846
Contribution, 447
Comage, 1270, 1715
Comwall, oounty of, daim to hold in

fee, 1512, 1666
Coroner, 138, 514, 842, 1016, 1019,

1623
Corruption of blood, 862
CoBts, 439, 544, 1430
Council, common of the reahn, 1171,

1215, 1217, 1273
Council, king's, 12, 67, 73, 81, 110,

167, 354, 741, 743, 867, 1108, 1117,

1133, 1172, 1189, 1190, 1220, 1221,

1235, 1273, 1306, 1309, 1396, 1585,

1593, 1639
Count countant, 1383
County, see Court, County.
Court Baron, 2, 26, 39, 277, 384, 531,

773, 824, 1030, 1115, 1297, 1436,

1616, 1619, 1681, 1767, 1847, 1916
Court, County, 40, 67, 136, 168, 185,

191, 212, 234, 243, 445, 497, 513,

654, 585, 911, 955, 1019, 1077,

1130, 1146, 1189, 1269, 1360, 1383,

1406, 1412, 1436, 1471, 1672, 1681,

1711, 1730, 1766, 1776
Court, Hundred, 78, 197, 242, 249,

445, 700, 775, 842, 1110, 1115.

1159, 1187, 1711, 1713, 1730
Coyerture, see Husband and Wife.
Crops, bequeathed, 221, 847, 1409
Crops, distrained, 1207
Crown, see King.
Crown, descent of, pleaded, 199
Cmsaders, mortgages by, 183, 1770
Crasaders, privileges of, 59, 942,

1377
Curia claudenda, 1661
Curtesy, 266, 291, 319, 413, 487, 566,

779, 917, 1071, 1182, 1425, 1686,

1771, 1774, 1801, 1921
Customarycourse of agriculture, 1662
Customary tenants, 995
Customs, looal, 9, 11, 233, 263, 278,

282, 294, 589, 623, 666, 779, 834,


951, 988, 990, 1023, 1338, 1436,
1441, 1473, 1644, 1662, 1888, 1889,
1899, 1902, 1981

Damage essential to nuisance, 494

Damage feasant, 1680

Damages, 165, 285, 318, 348, 352,

390, 401, 477, 506, 781, 917, 1104,

1129, 1145, 1187, 1281, 1283, 1423,

1512, 1867, 1896
Deaf-mute, 413
Dean and Chapter, 866
Death-bed gift, 104, 109, 142, 144,

211, 1187, 1818, 1850, 1865, 1866,

1876, 1971
Debt, 152, 162, 326, 381, 568, 756,

810, 1361, 1543, 1574, 1610, 1693
Debts cannot be bequeathed, 550, 684,

810
Debts, payment of, out of lands,

1554
Deceit, 10, 107, 168, 208, 296, 500,

645, 1173, 1184, 1629. 1690, 1747,

1924, 1931, 1946
Deed, see Seal and Writing.
Deed, enrolled, 1171
Deed, lost, 323
Defamation, 629
Demesne, 370, 379, 671, 704, 836,

838, 841, 1025, 1436. 1465, 1717,

1790
Departure in pleading, 3, 86, 105, 152,

471, 851, 921, 1627
Descent, Canons of

Whole and half blood, 32, 44, 797,
833, 834, 855, 955, 1128

Bepresentation of dead parents, 90,
230, 892, 968, 982, 1186, 1830

Nephew and uncle of dead man,
1297

Gavelkind rale, 154, 499, 703, 704,
795, 959, 1009, 1023, 1048, 1074,
1666, 1663, 1770

Borough-English rale, 794, 1005,
1062

Other customary rales, 961, 988

Possessio fratris, 866, 1128


192


INDEX OF THINGa


The nufttben refer to the cases not to the pages.


Bescent, Ganons of
Lord and heir, 61, 564, 637, 774,
869, 949, 1105, 1244, 1694, 1857

Deyise, 11, 79, 867, 1206, 1906

Diligenoe in litigation, 883

Disayowal of tenore, 1063, 1277, 1687

Disdaimer of seignorj, 563, 674, 838

Discretion of the Conrt (consiliam
cnriae), 273, 785, 786, 900, 940,
1376

Disseiflin, what, 338, 371, 469, 781,
856, 1021, 1032, 1199, 1204, 1205,
1208, 1239, 1242, 1246, 1257, 1261,
1297, 1794, 1840, 1864, 1891, 1904,
1925, 1965

Disseiain by justioeB, 1445

Disseisin ox, 277

Disseisor, who, 367, 617, 854, 1191,
1243, 1258, 1890, 1897

Disseisor disseised, 360, 1731, 1801

Distress, 2, 78, 202, 270, 273, 333,
390, 477, 513, 1049, 1199, 1207,
1623

Distress, power of, 126, 439

Distress, sale of, 1623

DiYorce, 341, 550, 574, 690, 830, 931,
1027, 1565

Dower, generally, 4, 18, 96, 148, 150,
191, 204, 279, 346, 365, 377, 571,
632, 749, 794, 814, 878, 891, 941,
944, 953, 965, 970, 1007, 1008, 1026,
1083, 1098, 1193, 1246, 1334, 1390,
1413, 1525, 1589, 1824, 1919, 1963

Dower of after aoquired lands, 970,
977, 1531

Dower ez assensu, 4, 91, 220, 265,
502, 518, 721, 737, 972, 1335

Dower, ezcessiye, 1355

Dower of a moiety, 7, 124, 253, 459,
475, 500, 577, 591, 622, 623, 642,
721, 758, 767, 1080, 1668, 1843

Dower of the whole, 1902

Dower in gavelkind, 9, 1338, 1644

Dower of advowson, 109, 261, 380,
1592

Dower of wardshipa etc, 695

Dower forfeited, 1873


Dower, appraisement of, 148, 203, 632
Dower out of dower, 1008, 1017
Dower, lands of church, 547, 841
Doweress, fine of, 1516
Duress, 182, 200, 229, 243, 342, 750.

1126, 1643, 1913
Dorham, palatinate of, 1096, 1213

Earl, third penny of connty, 633,

1036
Earl, how enfeoffed of county, 1036
Easement, 720, 843
Eels, rent reserved in, 624
Election between actions, 347, 1233
Emblements, 1193, and see Botes.
Enfranchisement of land, 1245, 1771
Enfranchisement of villein, 343, 1749,

1814
English language, 1582, 1644
Escheat, 402, 422, 462, 487, 503, 519,

566, 597, 750, 840, 862, 1175, 1184,

1220, 1275, 1334, 1510, 1644, 1794
Esplees, 780, 1256, 1816, 1865, 1866
Esplees of a church, 1928
Estates, limitation of, 77, 86, 151,

250, 331, 375, 429, 487, 631, 778,

779, 855, 948, 968, 1074, 1851,

1912, 1921, 1960
Estoppel, 74, 243, 291, 307, 316, 350,

394, 409, 460, 669, 680, 704, 747,

829, 861, 1011, 1181, 1195, 1235,

1273, 1436, 1620, 1667
Estray, 1115
Eyidence pleaded (et hoc bene patet

quia), 612, 669, 679, 959, 979, 1011,

1224, 1565, 1616, 1663
Eyre, justices in, 20, 21, 67, 92, 201,

281, 1069, 1280, 1412, 1413, 1620,

1681
Eyre, summons of, 1856
Examination of secta, 424, 1115,

1693
Exchange, 169, 528, 633, 634, 780,

852, 1214, 1268, 1616, 1845
Exchequer, 33, 503, 519, 1095, 1554,

1665
Exchequer, barons of, 25, 1554, 1665


INDEX OF THINGS.


193


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.
Ezcommnnioation, 48, 444, 544, 552,


646, 670, 766, 817, 1143, 1361,

1388, 1403, 1680
Executor, 52, 162, 381, 412, 550, 559,

756, 810, 1409, 1441
Ezhumation of dead body, 514

False imprisonment, 465

False oath, 500, 917, 1209, 1510, 1895

False suggestion, 1184

Fama patriae, 705, 857

*Father to the bough,' 1644

Fealty, 441, 524, 924, 1205

Fee conditional, 77, 86, 105, 151,

250, 331, 375, 429, 487, 566, 631,

948, 968, 1124, 1200, 1244, 1260,

1569, 1851, 1921, 1960
*Fee' implies inheritance, 411
Felony, 1184, 1275, 1334, 1599, 1644,

1687
Feme covert, see Husband and Wife.
FeofEment, 45, 144, 224, 250, 323, 375,

754, 825, 870, 1169, 1258, 1505,

1843, 1872. See Seisin.
Feoftment of lord by tenant, 354
Feoffment to hold of chief lord, 627,

779, 947, 984, 1616, 1924
Fidei laesio, 50, 351, 670, 683, 1361,

1464, 1671, 1893
Fieri facias, 352, 506, 613, 732, 837,

900, 925, 1187
Finality of proceedings, 374, 384,

498, 583, 1235
Fine (as means of conveyance), 125,

127, 189, 254, 403, 446, 448, 546,

627, 672, 715, 778, 948, 1095. 1223,

1589
Fine and non-daim, 18, 93, 123, 147,

302, 316, 403, 566, 716, 831, 863,

991, 1011, 1427, 1558, 1618, 1621,

1779, 1800, 1821
Fine by disseisor, 1012
Fine by inf ant, 171, 183, 189, 200, 1884
Fine by married woman, 419, 566,

1171, 1650, 1690
Fine made in county court, 147, 168,

180, 316

M. I.


Fine made in court baron, 26, 992,

1223, 1616, 1619
Fine, fraudulent, 107, 168, 584, 976,

1186, 1589, 1629, 1706, 1747
Finis dueUi, 147, 168, 316, 363, 815,

851, 1035, 1619
Firma Burgi, 1640
Fishery, 616, 666, 700, 835, 839,

1265, 1915
Flemings, lands of, 1220
Flight, forfeiture for, 1216
Forest, 80, 254, 440
Forester, appointed to prevent waste,

56, 672
Forfeiture, 67, 107, 398, 401, 1173,

1216, 1644
Forgery, 102, 187, 222, 412, 934, 1105,

1847
*Fork and flail,' tenure by, 1419
Fornication punished, 763, 1179
Franchise

BailifE of, 20, 28, 435, 1218, 1406,
1436, 1443

Courts, 277, 513, 592, 655, 1164.
1406, 1436, 1551, 1598, 1676,
1716

Betum of writs, 20, 38, 277, 436,
520, 722, 1218, 1436, 1443

ToU, 16, 145, 1188, 1250, 1720
Frankalmoign, 21, 594, 660, 755, 758,

808, 1079, 1143, 1248, 1430
Frankmarriage, see Marriage portion.
Frankpledge, 242, 513, 655, 1110,

1214, 1431, 1723, 1752
Fraud, see Deceit.
Fraudulent recovery, 1544, 1793,

1946
Freebench, 1338, 1774
Freehold, what is, 281, 1124, 1210,

1768, 1979
French language, 1292

GaUows, private, 1114, 1661

Gaol deUveiy, 430, 472, 473, 474, 1716

Gavelkind, 9, 499, 666, 1644, 1769,

1770, 1779
Gift, see Feoffment.

13


194


INDEX OF THINGS.


The numbers refer to the eases not to the pagee.


Gloves, rent reseryed of, 778

Goitre, 354

Grant, see Feoffment.

Guardian, action by ward against,

486, 1056, 1075, 1840
Goardian forfeits seignory, 1840
Goardian forfeits wardship, 1743,

1746, 1840
Goardianrepresentingward, 437, 480,

571, 845, 968, 1083, 1366, 1367,

1442, 1712, 1783, 1820, 1958
Gaardian, waste by, 485, 739, 1056,

1075, 1144, 1165, 1201, 1743, 1746

Hearsay, 663, 723
Heir, see Descent.

Heir, liability for debts, 52, 550, 756,
1543, 1693, 1969

liability for daniages, 165

saes for debts, 325, 810

disinherited, 1054
• Heirs,* mention of , 964, 968, 1235,

1811
Herrings, rent reserved in, 1076
High-way, 1907
Homage, 41, 53, 168, 196, 428, 441,

600, 654, 671, 747, 1100, 1944
Homicide, 196, 355, 462, 490, 514,

918, 1137, 1216, 1460, 1473, 1474,

1548, 1600, 1711, 1878, 1908
*Hom onder hom,* 818
Hors de son fee, 1049
Hotohpot, 934

Hue and ciy, 662, 1474, 1697, 1711
Hundred, see Court, Handred.
Hundred in private hands, 78, 141,

157, 197, 242, 463, 513, 531, 655,

775, 821, 842, 1110, 1115, 1279,

1614, 1713, 1716
Hundred Penny, 141, 242, 531
Husband and wife

Gifts between, 224, 659, 777, 1107,
1851, 1888, 1960

Wife's disabilities, 294, 419, 561,
674, 611, 800, 1004, 1171, 1340,
1361, 1379, 1427, 1650, 1685, 1798,
1916


Wife^s freehold, 146, 233, 290, 294,
317, 419, 566, 629, 679, 1089,
1097, 1171, 1355, 1477, 1688, 1704,
1729, 1754, 1755, 1771, 1929,
1981

Husband vouches wife, 124, 1302,
1466, 1508, 1610

WiU of wife, 550

Seal of wife, 939, 1171

Wife as husband'8 attomey, 342,
1361, 1507

Wife'8 contraots and debts, 568, 830

Wife'sccimesandtort8, 1138, 1755,
1890

Waste by husband, 574, 1617

Wife ia • sub virga ', 1685

Ignoranoe as ezcose, 496

Impossible condition, 172

Imprisonment, summary, 10, 17, 79,
174, 187, 208, 256, 286, 312, 342,
351, 384, 496, 498, 566, 583, 584,
586, 588, 788, 933, 980, 1052, 1105,
1187, 1443, 1633, 1946

Improyements, allowance for, 365,
574, 878, 917, 1145, 1281, 1896

Infangthief, 821, 1651

Infant, condition of, 42, 46, 100, 142,
171, 183, 189, 191, 206, 250, 319,
406, 436, 446, 566, 716, 998, 1098,
1176, 1226, 1235, 1267, 1379, 1477,
1621, 1780, 1799, 1800, 1820, 1821,
1828, 1848, 1884, 1909, 1912, 1948,
1956

Infant, how enfeoffed, 754

Infant, parol demnrring for non-age
of, 30, 43, 159, 164, 200, 335, 421,
440, 503, 523, 1287, 1382, 1506,
1543, 1722, 1775, 1783, 1827, 1840,
1898, 1943, 1951, 1958

Inheritance, see Descent.

Inquest by sheriff directed, 83, 130,
327, 359, 388, 414, 443, 475, 478,
497, 580, 632, 640, 718, 795, 973,
1136, 1510

Inquest, irregular, 585, 1173

Interdict, 361


INDEX OF THIlfGS.


195


The numbers refer to the eases not to the pages.


Intrusion, 30, 43, 140, 666, 697, 774,

813, 1174, 1794, 1904
Inundation, 557
Italian dergy, 1108

Jeopardy, 327, 389, 391, 456, 475,

595, 1055
Jews, 169, 301, 581, 918, 1140, 1179,

1376, 1445, 1554, 1825
Jews, Exchequer of, 169, 1445
Jews, justices of, 581, 1445, 1825
Jews, trial of, 918
Judicium parium, 857, 1213
Jurisdiction in private hands, 277,

391, 511, 513, 592, 655, 821, 870,

1110, 1114, 1127, 1154, 1512, 1698.

1651, 1716
Jurors,

unanimity of , 376, 524

ignorance of, 21, 34, 306, 524, 771,
887, 1163, 1207, 1653, 1762

too poor, 6, 883, 1279, 1322

removed, 278, 798, 806, 883

coerced by justices, 286

questioned, 306, 316, 524, 530, 758,
887, 960, 978, 1189, 1197, 1209,
1251, 1685
Jury, noteworthj oases, 67, 116, 134,

771, 798, 887, 1187, 1189, 1226.

1294, 1929, 1963
Jnry with deed-witnesses, 51, 188,

205, 220, 222, 250, 269, 286, 332,

412, 495, 634, 825, 1189, 1831, 1891,

1896, 1929
Jurj with transaction-witnesses, 91,

154, 631, 1603, 1707
Jury with kinsfolk, 1041, 1167
Jury, payment for, 86, 90, 102, 134,

145, 180, 230, 233, 241, 316, 363,

393, 554, 567, 641, 685, 786, 809,

893, 895, 1226, 1436, 1548, 1558,

1694, 1929, 1935
Jury refused, 123, 136, 489, 660, 918,

959, 1539, 1723
Jury of matrons, 198
Juryofnine, 373, 1392
Jury of thirty-six, 1294


Jury of forty, 1279
Jury in franchise court, 511, 592
Justice, sale of, 1106
Justices amerced, 67, 530, 564
Justices as arbitrators, 983
Justices, illegal acts of, 1445
Justiciar, the, 66, 127, 214, 262, 354,
376, 403, 530, 563, 750, 778, 786,
885, 956, 1221, 1334, 1546, 1593

Eent, customs of, 1338, 1644

Eing as fountain of justice, 503, 743,

857, 895, 1063, 1084, 1106, 1182,

1500, 1639, 1717
Eing, consulted by judges, 262, 1154,

1163, 1236, 1766
Eing, disseisin by, 76, 401, 769, 857,

1069, 1106, 1111, 1133, 1136, 1593
Eing, as warrantor, 164, 254, 272,

393, 750, 1036, 1108, 1136, 1141,

1163, 1162, 1183, 1306, 1365
Eing, actions by, 187, 199, 241, 433,

440, 519, 578, 582, 628, 750, 786,

862, 908, 929, 930, 1111, 1113, 1114,

1124, 1219, 1220, 1224, 1234, 1260,

1267, 1274, 1300, 1364, 1545, 1731
Eing, proceedings against, 391, 566,

867, 1106, 1108, 1136, 1141, 1153,

1221, 1235
Eing, chartera of, 226, 239, 272, 760,

867, 1111, 1236, 1274, 1429, 1639,

1688
Eing, pleas which follow, 258, 268,

339, 393, 741, 743, 986, 1106, 1166,

1176, 1183, 1189, 1190, 1201, 1213,

1220, 1227, 1228, 1264, 1661
Enight service, 33, 202, 288, 361, 768,

1226, 1493
Enights, recognitors should be, 586,

1062, 1322
Enight'8 fee. 227, 772, 1182, 1612

Laohes, 560, 1643, 1681, 1697, 1918
Lapse, presentation on, 187, 205, 308,

357, 438, 515, 883, 1238, 1389, 1670,

1697
Larceny, 67, 1138, 1169, 1180, 1436,

13—2


196


INDEX OF THINGS,


The numbers refer to the caset not to the ptiges.


1456, 1461, 1639, 1692, 1723, 1725,

1763
Law, wager of, 7, 143, 184, 195, 325,

890, 396, 477, 531, 537, 580, 629,

645, 700, 731, 741, 742, 763, 770,

786, 788, 799, 811, 812, 874, 875,
-897, 936, 1079, 1097, 1101, 1126,

1151, 1404, 1436, 1467, 1467, 1543,

1549, 1566, 1574, 1579
Lawdays, 197, 1587, 1606, 1641, 1647
Leap year, 1291

Legacy, 162, 381, 684, 756, 847, 1441
Legate, papal, 412, 1219, 1235, 1238,

1273, 1388
Legate, Gaalo, cnstos regni, 1219
Legislative acts, 1117, 1215, 1217
Lent, no battle in, 1675
Lent, no oaths in, 387
Leper, incapacity of, 807, 841, 1648
Liability for aots of others, 779, 781,

969, 1199, 1243, 1746
Liege poustie, 265, 495, 671, 1148,

1277, 1289, 1572
Life, tenant for, alienation by, 540,

828
Life, tenant for, waste by, 443, 540
Limitation of actions, 186, 234, 280,

340, 428, 429, 499, 560, 617, 700,

884, 1688, 1877, 1889
Limitations, a Statute of, 1217
Litigation, protracted, 302, 666, 960,

991, 1424, 1486
Litigation more speedy in Gonrt

Ghristian, 351
Lord and Heir, see Desoent.
Lord representing tenants, 666, 1582
Lunatic, see Non compos mentis.
Lnnatic, homicide by, 1878, 1908

Magnates, the, 277, 354, 857, 1108,
1117, 1189, 1217, 1227, 1235, 1273,
1396, 1593, 1730

Mainour, 136, 138, 821, 1461, 1473,
1474, 1539

Malicia, 687

Manor and member, 1669

Manor, parcel of , 695, 1064, 1078, 1449


Market, 494, 678, 786, 826, 1037,

1162, 1282, 1720
Maritagium, see Maniage portion.
Marriage, validity of, 291, 324, 570,

642, 944, 953, 1142, 1176, 1267,

1895
Marriageon death-bedgives no dower,

1669, 1718, 1875, 1895
Marriage of infants, 349, 696, 965,

1098, 1267
Marriage, lord*s right, 12, 178, 270,

696, 776, 850, 966, 1090, 1098.

1112, 1131, 1267, 1278, 1280, 1283,

1286, 1596
Marriage portion (maritagium), 61,

86, 105, 207, 241, 295, 315, 361,

487, 550, 566, 629, 664, 751, 752,

778, 779, 811, 856, 948, 1008, 1018,

1071, 1685, 1912, 1921, 1958, 1960,

1981
Marriage settlement, 151, 442, 646,

683, 1107, 1392, 1683, 1960
Marriage, breach of promise of, 570,

659
Maniage, promise in consideration

of, 646, 683
Marriage, suit to establish, 1677
Marshall, Earl, palatine rights of,

1213
Mayhem, 346

Measnre, customary of land, 778
Merchet, 63, 70, 88, 281, 395, 466,

763, 794, 896, 916, 1005, 1030,

1041, 1062, 1103, 1210, 1225, 1230,

1374, 1661, 1812
Merton, Statute of, 1117, 1217, 1409,

1881, 1975
Mesne process, 626, 527, 796, 801,

802, 900, 925, 1232, 1286, 1296,

1308, 1324, 1370, 1376, 1384, 1398,

1407, 1408, 1420, 1421, 1422, 1446
Mesne tenure, 158, 202, 209, 273,

275, 333, 362, 390, 606, 546, 563,

624, 657, 660, 674, 698, 837, 849,

1043, 1146, 1184, 1207, 1211, 1401,

1622, 1652, 1687
Metayer tenure, 1471, 1736


INDEX OF THINGS.


197


T?ie numhen refer to the

MiU, suit to, 161, 479, 482, 604, 700,
895, 1979

Mortgage, 60, 169, 186, 301, 370, 468,
669, 581, 612, 641, 889, 901, 1140,
1441, 1446, 1464, 1736, 1770, 1856,
1971

Mortmain, 1248

Munioipal bodies and franchises, 16,
146, 278, 294, 314, 361, 489, 520,
677, 689, 622, 962, 1123, 1188, 1205,
1228, 1393, 1421, 1429, 1441, 1640

Murder fine, 1713

Mutilation, as punishment, 1661,
1726

New Trial, 63

Next friend of infant, 717, 1066, 1743,

1840
Nisi prius, 634, 637, 538, 641, 694,

721, 760, 1583, 1618
Non compos mentis, 104, 211, 265,

364, 635, 716, 825, 929, 1102, 1189,

1262, 1878, 1908
Non est factum, 1, 61, 90, 102, 188,

237, 671, 675, 849, 1659
Non obstante, 1388
Normandy, loss of, 603, 666, 1172
Normandy, recovery of, 1172
Normans, lands of, 97, 503, 619,

566, 760
Nuisance, 469, 494, 678, 701, 786, 1037,

1081, 1162, 1263, 1266, 1282, 1963

Oath, testimony of jurors without,

870, 1287, 1397, 1774, 1787, 1956,

1963, 1977
Oath by attomey on principars soul,

1124, 1404
Odium et atia, 134, 1648
Official, Archdeacon^s, 544, 766, 1416
Official, Bishop^s, 647, 722, 766
Onerous tenure, 1768, 1762
Ordeal, 692

Ousting the jurisdiction, 679, 808
Outlawry, 82, 86, 135, 346, 422, 483,

840, 857, 943, 1132, 1154, 1232,

1266, 1548, 1798, 1822


cases not to the pages.

Palatinate, see Chester and Dnrham.
Palatine, partition of a county, 1127,

1213, 1227, 1273
Pannage, 274, 963, 998, 1230, 1561,

1661
Paralysis, 636, 932
Parceners, 441, 608, 521, 579, 603, 639,

648, 676, 800, 924, 934, 1040, 1134,

1227, 1437, 1571, 1684, 1708, 1748,

1767, 1782, 1919
Parceners and lord, 677, 869, 1046,

1053, 1273, 1279, 1596, 1765
Pardon, prerogative of, 840, 1216
Parol, nude (simplex dictum), 79,

260, 261, 426, 461, 494, 499, 607,

528, 655, 576, 6Q0, 613, 660, 816,

851, 890, 1065, 1068, 1129, 1358,

1665, 1672, 1863, 1868, 1936
Parson, alienation by, 1033
Parson as corporation sole, 610, 841,

887, 1627, 1826
Parsons, hereditary succession of, 887
Partible inheritance, 703, 704, 959,

1009, 1023, 1074, 1262, 1666, 1663,

1769, 1779, 1933
Peers, judgment of, 867
Pensions payable from churches, 305,

306, 310, 350, 357, 366, 453, 615,

636
Pepper, rent reserved in, 317, 446,

694, 1000
Perambulation, 249, 264, 907, 1165,

1197, 1582, 1871
Peter's penoe, 1661
Petty serjeanty, 743, 758
Pleader, 131, 298, 1106
Ploughing as evidence of seisin, 870,

1749, 1792, 1794, 1797, 1922
Ploughshares, rent in, 1767
Pledges for various purposes, 326, 384,

490, 606, 770, 779, 792, 876, 1075,

1308, 1637
Pledges as bail, 256, 1600
Pledges to prosecute, 214, 274, 642,

790, 798, 1637, 1802
Pledges for amercements, 215, 777,

783


198


INDEX OF THINGS.


The numhen refer to the eaees not to tTie pages.


Pope, charters of , 805

Pope, writ from, 62, 490, 636, 1387,

1388, 1928
*Pos8e8sio*, 187, 240, 356, 427, 474,

1354, 1684
Possession, theory of, 1290
Posfiessorimn, 536, 1388
PoBsessory and proprietary aotions,

34, 37, 39, 240, 416, 530, 564, 998,

1122, 1184, 1195, 1203, 1206, 1238,

1274, 1387, 1452, 1470, 1660, 1582,

1762, 1804, 1828
Posthmnoos heir, 137, 1013, 1746,

1816
Praecipe, breve qaod Yooatmr, 1215
Prebend, 114, 171, 357, 1555
Preearious exercise of right, 685, 843
Precedent, 834, 1227, 1273
Pre-emption, right of, 543
Pregnancy, 128, 137, 198, 1503, 1605
Prerogative, royal, 12, 226, 239, 840,

895, 907, 908, 1221, 1278, 1294,

1500, 1665, 1705; see also King.
Prescription, 223, 274, 392, 628, 818,

•835, 843, 909, 971, 1271, 1272,

1624
Priority of feofFment, 661, 868, 906,


Prison, goardian of, 1315

Prison, private, 229. 277, 773, 821,

1716
Priyilege of not being impleaded in

any conrt but the king's, 911
Production of deeds ordered, 229, 237,

747, 997
Prohibition of sale, 1920
Proof ofn>bvious faots, 194
Proof of facts, instances of, 227, 243,

256, 291, 303, 455, 586, 588, 595,

727, 824, 1224, 1226, 1362, 1539,

1659, 1680, 1690
Proof, burden of, 460, 507, 528, 613,

660, 663, 761, 782, 826, 851, 890,

1068, 1713, 1735, 1758
Protection, 530, 1500
Public advantage, plea of, 1785
Purpresture, 1032, 1081


Questions asked of parties and others
by the Court, 234, 296, 303, 349,
478, 550, 558, 734, 797, 814, 851,
902, 955, 1004, 1139, 1149, 1240,
1620. 1627, 1661

Qnit-claim, 386, 634, 653, 845, 902,
1102, 1758, 1929

Qaousque, seizore, 291, 363, 394,
1149, 1554

Batification, 317, 1243

Beady to perform oontract, plea of,

668
Becord, coart of, 471
Becord of county court, written,

243
Beoord, trial by, 70, 74, 88, 307, 384.

519, 583
Becreancy, 511, 592, 1460
Be-entry, for default of service, 2,

348, 370, 792, 1767
Beeve, 989, 1005, 1230
Begent, William Marshall, 10, 1306,

1309
Belief, feudal, 506, 546, 758, 1053
Beligion (monastio profession), 31,

104, 455, 931, 1057, 1139, 1189,

1572, 1586, 1594, 1608
Beligious Houses — change of head,

415, 448, 654, 981, 1356, 1395,

1523, 1714
Bemainder, 86, 429
Bent, 236, 338, 410, 470, 583, 779,

946, 1205, 1239, 1259
Bepairs, liability of tenant, 485
Besponsalis, 118, 120, 651, 667, 764,

844, 1575, 1642
Beversal of judgment, 374, 1166,

1445
Beversion, 487, 779, 948, 1085, 1186,

1706
Bevocation of judgment, 397
BoUs of court, 70, 149, 583, 829,

1224, 1411, 1456
Bolls of Exchequer, 603, 519
Boman Law, 1227, 1290
Bunnymede, charter of, 513


INDEX OF THINGS.


199


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Sacrilege, 48, 130, 755, 1585, 1595
Sale, 318, 645, 873, 1358, 1671, 1832
Sanctuaiy, 1137, 1180
Satisfaction, 66, 83, 749
Scot and lot, 1640
Scot-ales, 666
Scotland, king of, 1221
Scutage, 190, 202, 288, 338, 361, 390,
447, 664, 727, 789, 796, 1049, 1214,
1226, 1674, 1687
Seals,
unsealed document, 1095, 1846
collation of, 1, 51, 102, 234, 237,

671, 744. 849, 1659, 1831
fraudnlent use of, 182, 211, 250,
255, 336, 1000, 1189, 1847, 1921
forged, 187, 584, 934, 1105
Seignory, disclaimer of, 563, 674
Seignory, grant of, 236
Security against waste, 1144, 1165
Seisin generaUy, 219, 422, 428, 624,
780, 871, 985, 998, 1033, 1104,
1133, 1149, 1240, 1241, 1247, 1266,
1258, 1294, 1470, 1560, 1715, 1731,
1792, 1816, 1860, 1910, 1911, 1922,
1940, 1941, 1969, 1965, 1975, 1976,
1978
Seisin, colourable, 1209, 1243, 1838
Seisin as of fee, 151, 889, 1975
Seisin of advowson, 84, 39, 49, 75,
114, 182, 260, 426, 488, 644, 813,
1035, 1064, 1070, 1072, 1219, 1275,
1452, 1678, im, 1684, 1685, 1686,
1760
Seisin of chattels, 67, 136, 194, 824,

1138, 1474, 1539, 1597
Seisin of common, 1208
Seisin of franchise, 16, 146, 391, 821,

842, 1123, 1651, 1716, 1720
Seisin of services, 608, 747, 753, 860,

895, 1076, 1205, 1687, 1738, 1966
Seisin, by husband of wife, by wife
of husband, 642. 1142, 1597, 1703
Seisin, Uvery of, 45, 144, 376, 428,
524, 755, 777, 947, 1147, 1209,
1258, 1838, 1866, 1922
Self defence, 1084, 1216


Serjeanty, 283, 401, 743, 862, 915,

1183, 1231, 1270, 1280, 1665, 1670
Service, default of, 2, 270, 348, 370,

477, 792, 1767
Service, forinsec, 236, 275, 288, 361,

660, 664, 698, 703, 978, 1076, 1631
Service, liability for arrears incurred

in time of former tenant, 477
Services, noteworthy, 70, 524, 608,

753, 758, 879, 896, 916, 960, 1006,

1041, 1062, 1103, 1230, 1419, 1661.

1716, 1819
Set-off, 572
Sewers, duty of maintaining, 263,

1785
Sheep-gavel, 753

Sheriff, action against, 1269, 1623
Sheriff, aid of, 417
Sheriff, duties and liabilities of. 10,

40. 256, 408, 465, 468. 513. 530,

706, 775, 802, 1016, 1110, 1175,

1623, 1730
Shenff. hereditary. 1235, 1512
Simple seisin. 348, 779, 1149, 1290
Socage, full age in, 1847
Socage, guardian in, 643, 752, 758,

908, 1109, 1683
Socage, holden in capite, 1109
Socage tenure, 30, 33. 43. 282, 288,

623, 643. 703. 752, 758. 796. 990.

1076, 1231, 1848
Sokemanni, 1338
Spiritual discipline, 766
SpoUation, action for in Court Christ-

ian, 626, 765, 817, 877, 910, 1143
Spurs, reserved as rent, 458, 154&
Stallage, 666. 1720
Statu Uber. 1837. 1894. 1934
Statutes. read in oourt. 842
Stolen goods, 67, 588, 824, 1138, 1461
Stolen goods, search for, 1539
Street-gavel, 666
Subinfeudation, effects of, 158, 275.

333. 362, 390, 657, 838, 1043. 1146
Subinfeudation, elaborate, 126, 288,

627, 657. 698, 849, 1374
Suicide, 1114


200


INDEX OF THINOS.


The numben refer to the ea$e$ not to the pagei.


Sait (witnesBes), 47, 57, 68, 102, 115,
116, 123, 177, 194, 197, 204, 233,
247, 265, 279, 293, 313, 325, 345,
356, 374, 377, 385, 396, 424, 451,
457, 479, 494, 499, 518, 545, 555,
574, 588, 600, 613, 645, 649, 663,
666, 739, 758, 761, 762, 768, 773,
790, 882, 890, 897, 898, 910, 941,
946, 953, 1002, 1065, 1102, 1115,
1129, 1131, 1146, 1307, 1311, 1390,
1433, 1586, 1595, 1603, 1604, 1693,
1713, 1848, 1863, 1867, 1868, 1894,
1919, 1936

Suit of Conrt, 78, 141, 157, 197, 242,
275, 463, 531, 665, 677, 727, 728,
837, 842, 1214, 1230, 1279, 1567,
1614, 1713

Summerhouae, obligatioD to baild,
1661

Sunday, Coort sits on, 242, 248, 261

Supposititioas ohild, 247, 303, 1229,
1761

Sureties, 1643, 1574, 1641, 1671, 1969

Swinkage, 1034, 1245, 1654, 1669,
1816

TaUage, 784, 792, 794, 895, 1006,

1041, 1062, 1167, 1210, 1225, 1230
TaUy, 177, 325, 668, 646, 830, 897,

1693
Tazation, local, 263, 666, 1640
Tenure, change of, 1663
Term of years, assignment of, 804
Term of years, recovery of, 1739
Term of years, tenant for, 106, 269,

396, 607, 638, 641, 658, 767, 783,

847, 970, 1140, 1290, 1304, 1371,

1768
Third heir in coparcenery, 441, 1045
Third heir in firankmarriage, 207, 241,

296, 664, 811
Third party intervenes, 6, 6, 23, 483,

526, 568, 642, 760, 797, 798, 807,

816, 821, 1004, 1072, 1126, 1238,

1781, 1813
Third party summoned, 229, 236, 237,

253, 256, 273, 581, 586, 638, 687,


713, 727, 747, 748, 773, 812, 967,

1034, 1046, 1249, 1300, 1479, 1813
Third parfy puts in daim, 260, 261,

688
Third penny of ooonty, 633
Time made essence of the issue, 686,

960,1668
Tithes, 210, 293, 463, 636, 693, 726,

799, 874, 877, 918, 1661, 1671,

1680
Title deeds, deposit of, 1169, 1201
Title deeds, suit for production of,

997
Toll, 16, 145, 1123, 1246, 1250, 1720
Toom, sherifirs, 613, 773, 776, 1110
Township, common within, 661
Township, represented in County

Court, 613, 1029, 1981
Townships, the four, in criminal

cases, 136, 592, 824, 1474, 1617,

1600
Township, misnomer of, 1030, 1177,

1788
Township, how amerced, 1170
Transfer of mortgage, 1140
Treason, 867, 1673
Treasurer, the, 376
Trespass, 86, 378, 666, 667, 616, 839,

1121, 1232, 1620
Tumbrell, 1661
Turbary, 1194

Underwood, 632

Uncertainty in pleading, 190, 390,

481
Uses (ad opus), 641, 764, 999, 1244,

1683, 1861
Usufruct, 1290

Yenae, 192, 332, 359, 375, 608, 612,
636, 641, 779, 817, 1424, 1441, 1600,
1720, 1919

Verdicts, remarkable, 144, 161, 174,
196, 375, 376, 624, 771, 824, 978,
1026, 1041, 1103, 1169, 1189

Verdicts of grand assize, 251, 262,
769, 960, 1701, 1865, 1920


INDEX OF THINGS.


201


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Vicarage, 72, 173, 296, 306, 310, 350,
357, 366, 515, 636, 676, 928, 1317,
1349, 1416

Villeinage, Btatns and tenore, 31, 63,
70, 88, 226, 281, 334, 343, 466, 476,
624, 691, 652, 702, 713, 784, 794,
879, 916, 1005, 1010, 1026, 1029,
1030, 1041, 1062, 1103, 1167, 1203,

1210, 1226, 1228, 1230, 1237, 1242,
1266, 1411, 1419, 1650, 1661, 1681,
1701, 1715, 1749, 1812, 1814, 1819,
1828, 1833, 1834, 1837, 1839, 1885,
1887, 1894, 1902, 1905, 1914, 1918,
1934

Villeins, destruction of, 485, 674,

632, 691
Villein, marriage with, 702, 1010,

1139
Villeins of villeins, 1716

Waif, 1266

Wapentake, 1730

War, time of , 61, 62, 130, 261,412, 798,

867, 1036, 1126, 1304, 1642, 1543
War of 1215-7, allusions to, 39, 48,

51, 62, 200, 798, 1057, 1163, 1303
War in 1233 between the Mng and

barons, 857
War, sitting of oonrts suspended,

1492, 1493, 1495, 1496, 1627, 1628
Ward by right of ward, 708
Ward placed in a nunnery, 1608
Wardship, 33, 236, 247, 256, 266, 279,

282, 288, 349, 486, 643, 661, 681,

717, 743, 752, 758, 812, 846, 860,

868, 906, 908, 990, 1131, 1221, 1608,
1698, 1838, 1840

Ward penny, 417, 656

Warranty, principles of, 116, 164,
196, 199, 284, 290, 387, 495, 512,
535, 663, 600, 612, 633, 638, 714,
734, 804, 836, 852, 944, 945, 966,

1211, 1268, 1669, 1589, 1662, 1665,
1683, 1717, 1744, 1752, 1900, 1920,
1937


Warranty, tenement bound by, 638,

748, 1024
Waste, 27, 56, 116, 388, 443, 461, 485,

540, 574, 580, 607, 632, 640, 691,

717, 718, 880, 1057, 1075, 1165,

1201, 1304, 1371, 1617
Waste, permissiye, 739
Watch and Ward, 655
Watercourse, diversion of, 701, 1264
Way, right of, 414, 843
Wergild, 1474
Widow, king*s, 1278
WiU, last, 52, 73, 79, 221, 381, 684,

810, 847, 867, 1206, 1409
Will, tenant at, 102, 323, 337, 656,

669, 1230, 1841
Withemam, 333
Witnesses to deeds, 1, 47, 51, 102,

114, 188, 206, 220, 222, 266, 269,

286, 332, 342, 375, 412, 634, 825,
975, 1189, 1891, 1929

Witnesses to transactions, 91, 154,

266, 447, 456, 613, 778, 973, 1116,

1603, 1707
Witnesses of death, 163, 366, 546
Witnesses before a jury, 1187
Wolves, tenure by catching, 1670
Wreck, 1271, 1272
Writ, iUegal, 76
Writ, inappropriate, 65, 392, 691, 791,

823, 914, 1097, 1415, 1776
Writ, invention of new, 1216, 1930
Writ, loss of , 29, 434, 1562, 1653
Writ, necessity for, 372, 489, 609,

1298, 1313
Writing when necessary, 68, 86, 260,

287, 426, 489, 851, 890, 1224, 1268,
1565, 1693, 1736, 1843

*Year,* meaning of, 1291

Year, day and waste, 462, 597, 840,

1798
Year, to year, tenancy from, 337, 462,

666, 1080


INDEX OF PLACES'


T?te number$ refer to the eases not to the pagee.


Abbedestona


Adbaston


Staf. 1082


Abefeldia


Ox. 1276


Abselegha, see Aspele


Acholt


Occold


Suf. 256


Adande


Suf. 1223


Acle


Akeley


Buck. 1546


Acle


Aole, Norf. (?)


Ess. 1404


Aole


Oakley


Suf. 1893


Acleya


Akeley


Buck. 1303


Aco'


Accomb (?)


York. 1887


Actona


Aoton


Mid. 1564


Adelingtona


Norf. 1831


Adingtona


Addington


Northamp. 820


Agmodesham


Buck. 8


Ailesbiria


Aylesbury


Buck. 652, 1487


Akene


Hackney


Mid. 335, 1029


Akum


Acklam (?)


York, 171


Aldebiria


Albury


Sur. 928


Aldeburgum


Aldborough


Norf . 384


Aldegate


Aldgate


Mid. 383


Aldemannestona


Aldermaston


Berk. 842


Aldestrate


Old Street


Mid. 1311


Aldewicus


Old Street


Mid. 564, 686


Aldrestuna


Alderton


War. 281


Aldungtona


Hants. 317


Aleinesmora


Allensmore


Heref. 304


Alesbiria


Aylesbury


Buck. 29


Alesfordia


War. 941


Alfinctona


Alphington


Dev. 616


Alflentona


Alpheton


Suf. 110


Ahnchechurche


Alvechurch


War. 1234


1 The county named is Uiat of the marginal venue. In consulting this Tndex it should be re-
membered tliat the boundaries of counties fiave in many cases been changed. I have attempted
to give in the second column the modern names when this could be done without much rislc.


INDEX OF PLACES.


203


The mmbers refer to the eases not to the pages.


Alingtona


Allington


Lmo. 279


AUestorpe


Althorp


But. 488


Alinundebiria


Aloonbury


Hunt. 1134


Alnestowe


Elstow


Bed. 1608


Alre


AUer (?)


Som. 667


Aluesteyn


Allerston (?)


York. 1878


Alurestona


Alvestone


Staf. 1974


Aluringtona


Alvington


Dev. 1121


Ambresbiria


Amesbury


Wilt. 1139, 1228


Andebiria


Handborough (?)


Ox. 70


Andevere


Andover


Hants. 496


Andrintona


Anecastrum


Ancaster


Lino. 1730


Anemere


Anmer


Norf:844


Anestay


York. 1848


Anesty


Anstey


Wilt. 1401


Appelby


Apperley (?)


York. 220


Appeltona


Appleton


York. 24, 37


Ardientona


Hants. 1013


Arewe


Arrow


War. 392


Arlegha


Arley


Staf. 1233


Amediue


Amcliffe


York. 166


Amhale


York. 1879


Amhol


Amold


Not. 1366


Artindona


Artingdon


Sur. 1171


Aselbaoh


Derb. 316


York. 697


Aspele


Aspley Guise


Bed. 180,385,829,1108,
1377, 1607. 1626


Assele


Dev. 290


Atford


Dors. 36


Aucrintona


Alkerton


Ox. 1167


Audeby


Alby(?)


Norf . 632


Audrintona


Alderton


Wilt. 1388


Auena


Avon


Wilt. 773


Auilers


Aveley (?)


Ess. 833


Aumbresburia


Amesbury


Wilt. 663


Aune


Abbotfs Ann


Hants. 326


Aure


Som. 922


Aylefordia


Aylesford


Eent, 1306


Ayknartona


Ayhnerton


Norf.937


Ayndona


Eydon


Northamp. 72


Axstede


Ashtead


Sur. 1376


Bacheswrthe


Batchworth Heath


Herts. 1480


Baculf


Kent, 1786


Badialtona


Bathealton


Som. 1008


204


INDEX OF PLAGKa


The numben refer to the eaees not to the page$.


Baggesheo'


Bagshot


Sur. 10


Baggetorr'


BeY.85


Bagingedena


Badgington


Glouo. 365


Banham


Banham


Norf. 473


Bardestaplja


Barstaple


Es8. 1279


Bartona


Barton


Gamb. 1045


Bartona


Barton


Hants. 19


Barwella


BarweU


Leio. 1953


Bastlestiina


Basildon


Ess. 551


Batefordia


Battisford


Suf. 1248


Batheemnba


Batcombe


Som. 828


Baadona (oorr. Bandona)


Bandon


Sur. 1284


Beann'


Kent, 1638


Becham


Beckham


Norf. 1806


Bedefeuldia


Bedfield


Nort 1926


Bedefordia


Bedford


Bed. 307, 354, 519,611,
664, 829, 1030, 1377,
1640, 1720


Bedel


Hants. 92


Bedingeham


Bodingham


Norf. 785, 799, 874


Beddingham


Sus. 643


Bedintona


Beddington


Sur. 1284


Begeleby


Bellerby


York. 1200


Beinflet


Benfleet


Ess. 892


Beintona


Bainton


York. 1339, 1458


Bekenefeldia


Beaoonsfield


Buck. 1600


Belagha


York. 1444


Belestede


Belstead


Suf. 1507


Beletona


Belton


Suf. 564


Benetham


Bentham


York. 1866


Beneringtona


Sus. 44


Beningewrthe


Benniworth


Linc. 1092, 1102


Bensingtona


Bensington


Ox.434


Bentlegha


Bentley


Suf. 1918


Bera


Bere Forest


Hants. 1689


Berchamstede


Berkhampstead


Herts. 8, 179, 608, 1406


Berdefeldia


Bardfield


Ess. 1037


Bere


Beer


Som. 1150


Berefordia


Barford


Norf. 369


Berefordia


Barforth


York. 220, 1873


Berenio


Barwick


York. 1847


Berewe


Barrow


Sal. 1225


Bergedona


Barrowden


But. 1399


Bergtona


Barkston (?)


Lmc. 747


Beriche


Norf. 1926


Berkinges


Barking


Ess. 758, 1694


Berlawe


Northumb. 482


INDEX OF PLACES.


205


The nunibers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Berlay


Bierley


York. 1867


Berlega


Birley


Herts. 153, 1611


Berlesdona


BasUdon (?)


Ess. 551


Bermandeseia


Bermondsey


Sar. 1118


Bemete, la


Bamet


Herts. 435


Bemingeham


Bamingham


Norf. 365, 1928


Bertherest


Sar. 807


Bertona


Barton


Camb. 34, 1363


Bertona


Barton


Saf. 1434


Bertona


Barton


York. 97


Besacra


Bessacre


York. 1869


Beuerlacas


Beverley


York. 145, 1083


Bewious


Bewick


Northumb. 226


Bicham


Sar. 126


Bichamstede


Hant. 558


Biham


Bytham


Tiinc. 1208, 1538


Bikebroo


Begbroke


Ox. 815


BikehoUe


BiokenhaU


Som. 853


Biker'


Bicker


Saf . 28


BiUebroc


BiUbrook


Som. 956, 1657


BiUetorpe


Bilsthorpe


Not. 1440


BiUingeburgam


BiUingboroagh


Linc. 441


BiUingeheie


BiUinghay


Tnnc. 174, 1092, 1417


Binetre


Bintry


Norf. 1076


Bingham


Kent, 1784


Biricholt


Bircholt


Kent, 1777


Birketorpe


Biscathorpe (?)


Linc. 211


BirUngeham


BarUngham


Norf. 1801


Birstaadeby


BirstaU


Leic. 1026


Bissopestre


Bishopstrow


WUts. 463, 1177


Blackam


Blackenham


Saf. 66


Blakeberke


Not. 433


Blakegraae


Worc. 1234


Blanefordia


Sar. 1447


Bledelawe


Bledlow


Ox. 274


Bleroc


Com. 1015


BUbargam


Blythbargh


Saf. 1639


BUthinge


Blything


Saf. 1271


Blockesham


Bloxham


Ox. 436


BlamhiUa


BlymhiU


Staf. 1043, 1980


Blandesdana


Blandsdon


WUt. 789


Bockele


Eent, 169


Boclonde


Backland


Berk. 12, 837


Bocstede


Boxted


Ess. 778


Bocstede


Boxted


Suf. 1542


Bodehale


Sar. 868


Bodekesham


Bottisham


Camb. 1582


206


INDEX OF PLACEa


The numben refer to the eases not to the page$.


Bodmine


Bodmin


Com. 213, 1639


Bokelintona


BooUfiton


Wore. 1362


Boldntona


Stat 187


Bolehnrst


Bohihorst


Bed. 980


Bolendena


Bollingdon


Ox. 613


Bontal


BorstaU


Eent. 496


BoBewicas


York. 1083


Boteffoidia


Bottesford


Linc. 1364


Bothorpe


Leia 1943


Bonelegba


Bowley


Heref . 882


Bonltona


Bolton


Lanc. 130


Boutona


Bonghton


Kent, 743


Boytona


Boyton


Saf. 1896


Brabnrne


Braboame


Eent, 102


Braddena


Bradeford


Bradford Abbas


Dor8.927


Bradeham


Bradenham


Back. 266


Bradeham


Bradenham


Norf. 672


Bradelega


Bradley


York. 1870


Bradelegha


Bradley


Saf. 692


Bradeshalla


BradweU(?)


Back. 601


Bradewater


Norf. Saf. 369


Bradewella


Bradwell


Back. m


Bramlegha


Bromley


Mid. 1657


Briunwicas


Kirk Bramwith (?)


York. 1193


Braondefeoldia


Bramfield


Saf . 642


Bray


Bray


Berk. 961, 988, 1400


Braybrok


Braybrooke


Northamp. 1613


Braytoft


Bratoft


Lino. 1663


Braytona


Leic. 1467


Breintoft, see Braytoft


Brelay


York. 869.


Brembre


Bramber


Sas. 46, 1362


Bremele


Bremhill


Wilt. 773


Bremle


Bramber


Sas.709


Brethenham


Brettenham


Norf. 809


Brethenham


Brettenham


Sall3


Brethoc


Com. 966


Bridelestir


Back. 610


Bringhorst


Leio. 1467


Brimingham


Briningham


Norf. 1829


Brimtona


Brinton


Norf . 1423


Brimstona


Branstone (?)


Staf. 1976


Bringham


Briningham


Norf. 637


Brinkele


Brinkley


Camb. 663


Brinton


Brington


Northamp. 42


Brisele


Brisley


Norf. 993


INDEX OF FLACES.


207


Thenu


mbers refer to the eases not to the pages.


Bristolliam


Bristol


Glouc. 1179


Briweme


Glouc. 969


Broo


Dev. 1676, 1642


Broobergum


Bed. 1182


Brootona


Broughton


Ox. 772


Broctona


Broughton Hackett


Worc. 680


Broowde


Brookwood


Sur. 1129


Brohurst


Sus. 774


Broken'


Camb. 236


Bromfeldia


Northamp. 1033


Bromlegha


Bramley


Sur. 653, 679


Bromwious


Bromwich


Staf. 388, 1024, 1094


Brmnlegha


Bromley


Ess. 682


Brumlegha


Bramley


Sur. 1118


Brunesthorpe


Bruntingthorpe


Leic. 1962


Bnmwardestana


Brownstone


Dev. 624


Buggeslawe


Suf. 1903


Bukeham


Buckenham


Norf. 839


BukereUe


Buckerell


Dev. 1148


Bukesworthe


Boxworth


Camb. 1620


Bukeswrthe


Buckworth


Hunt. 1668


Bnleha


Boulney


Ox. 68


Bulewicus


Bulwick


Northamp. 96


Bulkintona


Bulkington


Leic. 132


Buningtona


Bonnington


Eent, 263


Burcota


Burcot


Buck. 1293


Burendishe


Brundish


Suf. 1247


Burgesse


Burgess HUl


Sus. 1010


Burgum


Borrough Green (?)


Camb. 623


Burgum


Burgh


Norf. 456, 1842


Burgum


Peterborough


Northamp. 888


Burgum


Burgh


Suf. 210


Burgum


York. 1497


Buringeham


Burringham


Linc. 783


Burlega


War. 1


Bum*


Suf. 846


Bumham


Norf. 1836


Burrethe


Tiinc. 634, 535


Burstal


Burstall


Suf. 1241


Burstede


Burstead


Ess. 270, 374


Burstowe


Herts. 485


Burtona


Buri^m


Lanc. 448


Burtona


Burton


Leic. 921


Burtona


Burton Latimer


Northamp. 1113


Burtona


Burton


Not. 433


Burtona


Burton


Wilt. 621, 1177


Byrlawe


Northumb. 1096


208


INDEX OF PLACES.


The numben refer to the case» not to the pages.


Gadeswnrthe


Sar. 1661


GadeweUe


CadweU


Linc. 303


Galdioote


Caldeoote


War. 919, 1106


Staf. 260


Calthome


Gawthome


York. 1169


Caltwayt


York. 264


Cantebrigia


Gambridge


Gamb. 103, 307, 623,
761, 1393, 1620


Cantnaria


Canterbory


Eent, 623


Gapetona


Saf. 664


Castre


Caister


Norf. 1791, 1796


Cates


Goates


Linc. 261


Catesthorpe


Saf. 1932


Cateshilla


Saf. 700


Gattesholla


CatahiU


Sur. 1171


Cattone


Catton


Norf. 186


Caimdeaere


Candover


Hants. 882


CaoBtona


Cawston


Norf. 1046 ,


Ceningeswnrthe


Theddingworth (?)


Leic. 146, 208


Certeselegha


Chartley


Staf. (?) 1127


Certesey


Chertsey


Sar. 282


Cesterfordia


Chesterford


Kss. 497


Cesterhnnt


Gheshant


Herts. 476


Cestietona


Chesterton


Hont. 269, 286


Chadenwik


WUt. 906, 1691


Chadewilla


Ox. 1326


Chadhangre


Berk. 1178.


Chafifont


Chalfont


Back. 368, 624


Chagingeford


Chingford


EsB. 78


Chalhistre


Sas. 626


Chamfunt'


Chalfont


Back. 307


Chaiunelega


Chalmleigh


Dev. 170, 1669


Ghaatona


Chaolton


Bed. 1611


Chedena


Cheddon Fitzpaine


Som. 863


CheggeweUa


ChigweU


ES8.684


Chelewella


ChilweU


Not. 379, 604


Chelewrthe


Chilworth


Sar. 928


Chelewade


Chelsworth


Saf. 66


Chelewarthe


Chelworth


WUts. 359


Chehnerefordia


Ghehnsford


Ess. 427, 1681


Ghenelfealdia


Chesfield


Herts. 864


Chepemanescomba


ChaflfcoTnbe (?)


Som. 462


Chepham


Som. 1762


Cherlewode


Charlwood


Sor. 1650


Cherringe


Gharing


Mid.337


Cheeele


Norf. 1534


Cheaeleswelle


Chieyeley


Berks. 229


INDEX OF PLACES.


209


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Chidingeham


Chiddingstone (?)


Eent, 1605


ChUderst


Chithurst (?)


Sus. 525


ChiUewlla


Chilwell


Derb. 315


Chinkeford


Chingford


Ess. 78


Chinnouere


Chinnor


Ox. 1126


Chippeham


Cippenham


Buck. 1571


Chippeham


Chippenham


WUt. 219


Chiriel


Sur. 375


Chiselhamtona


Chiselhampton


Ox. 1669


Chiaelefifordia


Ess. 1665


Chiueslegha


Chieveley


Berk. 1616


Cimayc


Lanc. (?) 234


Cipham


Buck. 491


Cirencestria


Cirencester


Glouc. 1427, 1499


Claipol


Claypole


Lino. 1430


Clakelase


Clackclose


Norf. 1159, 1716


Clare


Clare


Suf. 1162


Clareburgum


Clarborough


Nots. 329


Clarendona


Clarendon


WUts. 1228


aaxeby


Claxby


Linc. 345


Claxtona


Clawson


Leic. 1000


Clauerlega


Claverley


Staff. 187


Clauertona


Claverton


Som. 866


Clayheye


Clayhythe


Camb. 299. 1582


Clemestona


Com. 1591


Clenefeudia


Clanfield


Hantfl. 276


Clere


Hants. 470


Cleyore


Clare


Ox.666


Cliftona


Clifton


Bed. 581


Cliftona


Cliffton


Bucks. 406


Clifliona


Clifton Campville


Staf. 94, 602


Clinctona


Ox.630


Clipesby


Clippesby


Norf. 48, 1843


Clipstona


Northamp. 725


Cliuedena


Cliefden


Buck. 298


Cliuelanda


Cleveland


York. 254


Clypesby, see Clipesby


Cnapetona


Enapton


York. 129


Cneshale


Eneesall


Nots. 522


Cnodishale


EnettishaU


Suf. 1907


Cnotinges


Enotting


Bed. 1028


Cnouldena


Enowlton


Eent, 704


EnodishaU


Staf. 1627


Cocham


Cookham


Berk. 988


Codeffordia


Codford


Ox. 1004


Codenham


Coddenham


Suf. 428, 1746


Colecestria


Colchester


Ess. 778, 779


H. I.


14


210


IKDEX OF PLACES,


Th€ numberi re/er to the eaees not to the pages.


Golehnm


Mid. 336


Colstewrthe


Northamp. 1289


Colingeham


Collingham


Nots. 330


Colintona


Colyton


Dev. 100


Colmn


Colne Engaine


Ess. 1639


Copedac


Copdook


Bal 1906


Coplande


Coupland


Camb. 1154


Corby


Corby


Linc. 1042


ComhnllA


Eent, 1047


Comlegha


Corley


War. 1416


Corteseye


Chertsey


Sar. 36


Cote


Coat


Ox. 787


Cotes


Coates


Camb. 999, 1634


Cotes


Coates


Gloac. 687


Cotes


Cotes Deval


Leic. 1956


Cotea


Coates


Lino. 1093


Cotesmora


Cotesmore


Bat. 1059


Cotingeham


Cottingham


York. 1106


CotingwicaB


Cottingwith


York. 1871


Cottona


Coton


War. 1686


Conentria


Coventry


•War. 801, 989. X127,
1690, 1810


Coaesgrane


CosgroTe


Northamp. 811


Coalegha


Cowley


Staf. 1679


Crakemarsh


Staf. 1979


Cramfordia


Cranford


Mid. 1350


Cranefordia


Cranford


Northamp. 1466


Craneswrthe


Cranworth


Norf. 1009


Crawemerse


Crowmarsh


Ox.827


Crawenho


Ess. 691


Crawestoke


Sar. 465


Craye


Cray


Kent,90


Creo


Crick


Northamp. 1586


Creok


Creake


Norf. 506, 754» 1489


Creitona


Creighton


Staf. 1979


Cretinge


Creeting


Saf. 478, 1891, 1931


Cretona


Creaton


Northamp. 514, 1726


Crikeoot


Saf . 1920


Cristehale


Chrisholl


Ess. 550, 1001


Cristemelefordia


Christian Malford


Wilt. 157


Cristesham


Buck. 1621


Croftona


Cronghton


Northamp. 32


Croherst


Crowharst


Kent, 477


Crokestona


Croxton


Norf . 64


Croperie


Cropredy


Ox. 1142


Croptona


Camb. 736


Cruk


Dev. 1098


INDEX OF PLACES.


211


The numbers refer to the ea$e$ not to the pages.


Crumbeoliae


Northumb. 432, 1096


Crundella


Crondall


Hants. 1237


Coddenham


Suf. 1246


Culewrthe


Culworth


Northamp. 1066 •


Culintona


Colyton


Dev. 1584, 1601


Culkertona


Cuokerton


Glouc. 961


Cumba


Coombe


Dev. 1143


Cnmbe


Glouc. 140


Cumbresdale


Cummersdale


Cumb. 1040


Cumquintin


Cumwhinton


Cumb. 1040


Cumptona


Compton


Som. 190


Cumptona


Compton


War. 8


Cuneleffeldia


Wilt. 1670


Cunningeburgum


Conisborough


York. 26, 1685


Cunningeby


Conlngsby


Lino. 986


Cuntebiria


Countesbury


Dev. 197


Cunytorpe


Coneythorpe, York (?)


Lino. 1739


Cuserigge


Courage


Berks. 1078


Cuueleflfeldia


Cowsfield


Wilt. 1360


Cycestria


Chichester


Sus. 1753


Cyle


Chelvey


Som. 5


Cyrencestria, see Cireneestria


Dachet


Datchet


Bucks. 868


Dakeham


Dagenham


Ess, 758


Daletona


Dalston


Cumb. 1155


Dallinge


Field DalliDg


Norf. 614


Dalwode


Dalwood


Dors. 1312


Danecastum


Doncaster


York. 1329


Dauby


Dalby


Leio. 1295


Dauintona


Davington


Kent, 17, 767


Dauintre


Daventry


Northamp. 31


Dautona


Dalton


York. 772, 1016


Debbeham


Debenham


Suf. 917


Dedenham


Dedham


Ess. 746


Dedhamptona


Hants. 764


Denohewrthe


Denchworth


Berks. 1537


Denemere


Norf. 672


Dentorp


Danthorpe


York, 1874


Deon'


Deane


Hants. 206


Depedena


Sur. 376


Derefeld


Darfield


York. 1853


Deretemuwe


Dartmouth


Dev. 786


Derlintona


Darhngton, Dur. (?)


York. 1463


Dersingtona


Dersington


Norf. 1128


Deseburgum


Desborough


Northamp. 671


Deuerel Lungpont


Longbridge Deverill


Wilt. 1281

14—2


212


INDEX OF PLACES.


The numberi refer to the cagei not to the pages.


Dicbingham

Dictona

Didenham

Dikeleswnrthe

Dilintona

Dimescherche

Dingelby

Dingehnareis

Dinham

Ditenbesbale

Dittona

Dittona

Dittona

DiniBae

Dockinge

Dodene

Dodingtona

Dorcestria

Dorcet'

Dorkinge

Dorsingtona

Donera

Drastesete

Draatona

Draytona

Drengo

Dreycota

Dndingtona

Dadingtona

Dnldeoota

Donelmam

Dnnewioas

Donesslanda

Dangemareys

Danham

Danham

Doningtona

Danmawe

Dannestaplia

Donstaplia

Dantona

Dontona

Dantrope

Danwicas

Danyaetona

Dastona

Daae, aqaa de


Ditchingham
Deighton

Dickleborongb (?)

Dillington

Dancharch

Dengemarsh
Downham

Fen Ditton
Ditton

Thames Ditton
DcTizes
Docking


Dorchester

Dorking

Dorsington

Dover

Stradsett (?)

Draaghton

Drayton Beaachamp

Dringhoe

Draycot Ceme

Toddington

Daddington

Dalcot

Darham

Danwich

Dengemarsh

Danham

Denham

Donnington

Danmow

Danstaple

Dunstaple

Danton

Downton

Danthorpe

Dunwich

Dennington (?)

Daston

Dove


Norf . 695

York. 1883

Wilt. 1277

Norf. 865

Hants. 1261

War. 1606

York. 660

Eent, 1667

Ess. 1485

York. 1470

Camb. 299, 1582

Eent, 481

Sar. 375, 1524, 1594

Wilts. 857, 862

Norf. 1797

Som. 667

Back. 106

Dors. 831

War. 941

Sar. 545

Gloac. 840

Eent, 269, 1137

Norf. 1159

Northamp. 625

Back. 1055

York. 1097

Wilt. 1494

Bed. 296

Northamp. 503, 565

Som. 1413

Dar. 1873

Sof. 1421, 1429, 1899

Dev. 290

Eent, 253

Norf. 1255

Saf. 1915

Heref. 507

Ess. 139, 1037

Bed. 889

Bed. 933

Ess. 237, 575

Heref. 882

Ox. 1527

Suf. 1123

Suf. 1706, 1937

Northamp. 994

York. 254


INDEX OF PLACES.


213


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Eatona


Nuneaton


War. 1260


Eboraoum


York


York. 16, 537, 1083,
1468, 1671, 1867,
1888, 1889


Eckeles


Ecdes


Norf. 378


Edeleintona


Edmonton (?)


Mid. 340


Edelinebrugge


Edenbridge (?)


Kent, 666


Edenewrthe


Edingworth


Som. 1391, 1469, 1491


Edinetorpe


Edingthorpe


Norf. 1243, 1818


Edmerse


Berk. 1176


Edredstona


Earsdon (?)


Northumb. 1385


Eggewere


Edgware


Mid. 1068


Eggestomia


Eythom


Eent, 1699


Egingtona


Egginton


Derb. 762


Eglesago


Corn. 1666


Eklesbumia


Ebbesborae (?)


WUt. 1019


Eldefordmelne


Old Ford Mill


Mid. 419


Eldrefeldia


Eldersfield


Worc. 1428


Elenedena


Ehndon


Ess. 1007


Elingeham


EUingham


Norf. 1631


Elinham


Ehnham


Norf. 1804


Elkeduna


Derb. 480


EUefordia


Aylesford


Kent, 1274


Ellefordia


Elford


Staf. 260


EUerige


Dev. 53


EUintona


1192


Elmedona


Ehndon


War. 1319


Ehnigham


Hehningham, Suf.


Norf. 724


Elteham


Eltham


Kent. 1788


Eluertona


Woro. 1664


Elwyesham


Eynsham (?)


Ox. 397


Emmesby


Ormesby (?)


York. 1862


Enefeud


Enfield


Mid. 8, 343, 1397


Enemede


Emneth


Norf. 1516


Engleffeuldia


Englefield, Berk.


Buok. 390


Erdele


Yardley


Herts. 366


Erdintona


Ardington, Berks. (?)


Sur. 1410


Erdlegha


Eardleigh, Staf. (?)


SaL 1136


Erdletorpe


Eddlethorpe, York (?)


Lino. 1135


Ere


Kent, 1638


Eringtona


Harrington (?)


Northamp. 1045


Erlega


Arley


Staf. 1684


ErUde


Arley(?)


Staf. 1622


Ermingtona


Dors. 447


Ernebergum


Kent, 1638


Ersham


HorshAm (?)


SuB. 661


Eseby


Easby


York. 1880


214


INDEX OF PLACES.


The number$ refer to the ecues not to the pages.


Essewant


Kent, 1782


Esingtona


Easington


York. 1061


Esse


A^h Beigney


Dev. 976


Esselega


Dev. 290


Essenedona


Hants. 1645


Essingeham


Effingham (7)


Sur. 574


Estanostige


Dev. 826


Estanetona


Staverton (?)


Northamp. 1707


Estaunfordia


Stamford


Lmo. 538


Estberdesheles


Northumb. 432


Estbrent


E. Brent


Som. 1491


Estehattona


E. Hatley(?)


Camb. 736


Esterbnrgham


Norf. 1827


Estenetona


Hants. 150


Estenetona


Steventon


Berk. 393


Esthenlegha


Buok. 1130


Estillebiria


E. Tilbury


Ess. 690, 797


Estkeles


E. Eeal


Lino. 1093


Estona


Easton


Berk. 302


Estona


Exton


Hants. 438


Estona


Easton


Norf. 1652


Estona


Easton


Northamp. 205, 976


Estona


Easington (?)


Ox. 787


Estona


Easton


Som. 252


Estona


Easton


War. 412


Estrndham


E. Bndham


Norf. 1624


Estnna


Easton


Northamp. 514


Estuingtona


Steventon


Berk. 271


Estweinz


E. Winoh


Norf. 669


Estwio


Northamp. 1522


Estwode


Ox. 1276


Etona


Eton


Buck. 331, 1431


Etona


Eaton


Not. 1510


Ettona


Eton


Buck. 1750


Ettona


Easton (?)


Bom. (?) 172


Euenle


Evenley


Northamp. 1522


Euertona


Everton


Bed, 899, 933


Eukintorpe


Lino. 1102


Eure


Iver(?)


Buok. 75


Eure


Oare (?)


Kent, 1770


EweUe


EweU


Sur. 1661


Eyllesbyry


AUesbury


Buck. 285


Eylnathestona


Aylton(?)


Heref. 227


Eyltona


Sus. 44


Eytona


Eaton


Leic. 949


Eye


Quy


Camb. 1682


Eywenthe


Eyworth


Bed. 1086


INDEX OF PLACES.


215


Exonia


The Mjmberi refer to tJie caiei not to the pagee.

Exeter Dev. 67, 170, 1172


Farenbergum


Famborough


Hants. 453


Farendale


Famdale


York. 264


Farenduna


Faringdon


Berks. 728. 817


Faringefordia


Fringford


Ox. 798


Farlegha


Sus.44


Famham


Famham


Ess. 225


Fauconham


Fakenham


Suf. 693


Febbinges


Fobbing


Ess. 929


Felebrigge


Felbrigg


Norl 261, 937


FelBtede


Felstead


Ess. 413


Fenddraytona


Fen-Drayton


Camb. 80


Fendraitona


Fen-Drayton


Camb. 291


Feningeham


Finningham


York. 1223


Ferebrigge


Felbrigg


Norf. 261


Ferendnna


Faringdon


Berk. 665


Feringea


Ferring


Sus. 112


Ferlegha


Farley


Wilt, 1277


Femle


Farnley


York. 1851


Fifhida


Sur. 1661


Fileby


Filby


Norf. 1808


Finemere


Finmere


Ox. 1618


Fineslegha


Filey


York. 494


Finingham


Finningham


Suf. 396


Fisinges


Bising(?)


Norf. 1663


Fissebumia


Kent, 1783


Flaifordia


Playford(?)


Suf. 698


Fleohe


Fletchampstead (?)


War. 209


Fleckeneye


Fleckney


Leic. 1967


Fleg


Flegg


Norl 595


Flemingtona


Flempton (?)


Suf . 1930


Flete


Fleet


Dev. 979


Flete


Fleet


Dors. 467


Flete


Fleet


Lino. 978


Flinfordia


Som. 454


Flore


Flore


Northamp. 1455


Folesham


Bucks. 1220


Fohnodefttona


Fuhnodeston


Norf. 64


Forde


Ford


Som. 866


Dev. 290


Fordham


Fordham


Ess. 885


Forho


Fortho


Northamp. 63


Fomham


Fornham


Suf. 700, 1917


Foterhohn


York. 1858


Frackeham


Freckenham


Suf. 616


Frammesdena


Framsden


Suf. 1911, 1940, 1941


216


INDEX OF PLACES.


The numhfn refer to the ea$et not to the paget.


FrAxnptona


Frampton


Glono. 1152


Fransham


Franaham


Nort 1006


Fresentona


Freston


8uf. 1426


Freskeneye


Friskney


Linc. 733, 822, 1093,
1211


FroBkorie, see Freskeneye


Frefltona


Freston


Suf. 1520


Fretham


Norf. 49


Fretona


Fritton


Norf. 642, 1800


Frilingestrete


Som. 454


Frimareis


York.771


Frome


Frome


Dors. 702, 1008


Frome


Frome


Som. 454


Froume


Heref. 1471


Fmmthorpe


York. 660


Fngheldona


Foulden (?)


Norf. 1531. 1703


Fulebroc


Fulbrook


War. 203, 1355


Fulefordia


Fulford


Staf. 1972


Foletorpe


York. 1882


Falmodestona


Fnlmodeston


Norf. 111


Funtel


Fonthill-


WUt. 941


Gaham


Gotham


Not. 818


Gaifie


Gazeley


Suf. 487


Gaislegha


Gazeley


Suf. 1921


Garefordia


Garford


Berk. 229, 794, 1616


Garsintona


Garston


Berk. 967


Gattele


Gately


Norf. 124. 942. 1804


Gattesdena


Gaddesden


Herts. 443. 540


Gedham


ES8.45


Gerbodesham


Norf. 1175, 1181


Gemesmue


Yarmouth


Suf. 314, 762, 1895,
1897


Gersindona


Garsington


Ox. 1528


Gersith*


Sur. 375


Gertona


Norf. 1456


Gestlingestorpe


Gestlingthorpe


Ess. 887


Geudefordia


Guildford


Sur. 10. 1347. 1348


Geytintona


Geddington


Northamp. 1053


GiUingeham


Gillingham


Kent, 1604


Gimundeham


Goodmanham (?)


York. 601


Ginges Laundri


Ginge Laundri


Ess. 674


Giselham


Gisleham


Suf. 884


Glastonia


Glastonbury


Som. 1180


Glentham


Glentham


Linc. 251


Glosene


Kent, 1374


Gloucestria


Gloucester


Glouc. 1514


INDEX OF PLACES.


217


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Godhelminges


Godahning


Sur. 242, 800


Godinestre


Good Easter


Ess. 1099


Godmareshani


Godmersham


Kent, 1776


Godwinestona


Goodnestone


Eent, 1048


Gogeshale


Goggeshall


Ess. 1478


Goldore


Golder


Ox. 566


Gorkeby


Gautby(?)


Linc. 572


Gorlestona


Gorleston


Suf. 582


Gosenhale


Kent, 462, 597


Gosseby


Gautby(?)


Linc. 572


Gottele


Gately


Norf. 942


Graueleya


Graveley


Herts. 706, 864


Gremseuilla


Grimstone (?)


Norf. 917


Grenche


Kent, 1604, 1789


Grenwey


Tnnc. 1049


Gressingeham


Gressingham


Norf. 1822


Gretingeham


Cretingham


Suf. 1558, 1626


Grettona


Groton


Suf. 33


Grimesby


Grimsby


Linc. 1205


Grimstona


1153


Griptorpe


Gristhorpe (?)


York. 1184


Griseroft


York. 771


Grossns Mons


Grossmont, Mon.


Heref. 1330


Grotingtuna


Crudgington (?)


Sal.664


Gryseby


York. 1223


Gunetorpe


Rut. 1663


Gunthorpe


Gunthorp


Nots. 403


Gyluertoft


Northamp. 147


Gypewicus


Ipswich


Suf. 396, 578, 1023,
1618, 1908, 1940,
1941


Gyuele


Som. 198


Hackintona


Hackington


Kent, 1774


Haffordeby


Leic. 1682


Hakedena


Staf. 1051


Hakene


Hackney


Mid. 662


Hakene


Hackness (?)


York. 1676


Hakethorne


Hackthom


Linc. 1366


Haketorpe


Hackthorpe, Westm.


, (?) Lanc. 1187


Haldeneby


Haldenby


York. 1852


Haldestana


Dev. 1285


Hales


Hailes


Salop. 292


Halestowe


Halstow


Kent, 1163


Halingedona


Hangleton (?)


Sus. 1320


Halleblund


Norf. 1832


Halsewicus


Herts. 1560


218


INDSX OF PLACES.


The fmmbert refer to the ecuet not to the paget.


Halletona


AUerton (?)


York. 1875


Hamele


Hamble


Suf . 1123


Hamertona


Hamerton


Hunt. 681, 767


Hamme


Dev. 1576


Sus. 806


Hamontona


Hampton


War. 973


Hamptona


Bath Hampton


Som. 866


Hamptona


Hampton


Eent, 1769


Hamptona in Arderae


Hampton in Arden


War. 1352


Hamstede


Hamstead


Berks. 512, 612


Hamtona


Herts. 1346


Hanestie


Anstey


Wilt. (?) 1599


Hantona


Hatton(?)


Lino. 204


Hanworthe


Hanworth


Norf. 695


Haregrane


Hargrave


Northamp. 819


Haremede


Hardmead


Buck. 1576


Haresham


Hamham (?)


Wilt. 1003 •


Harletona


Garlton (?)


Leic. 1336


Harpedena


Harpsden


Ox. 68


Haspele, see Aspele


Hatfend


Hatfield


York. 248


Hathfeldia BegiB


Hatfield Broadoak


Ess. 1624


Hathfeldia


Hatfield


Herts. 144. 1476


Hattona


Hatton


Mid. 123, 716


Haunewode


Som. 1710


Hauekescherohe


Hawkchuroh


Dors. 131


Haueriete


Halvexgate


Norf. 1036


Haaeringe


Havering


Ess. 641, 884, 1018,
1119


Haufordia


Hatford (?)


Berks. 837


Hantona


Halton


Lino. 1102


Hecche


Kent, 697


Hecham


Ickham


Kent, 1781


Hecham


Heaoham


Norf. 668, 1074. 1100


Hecham


Higham (?)


Suf. 1906


Hechardis


Kent, 1787


Hechhulla


Hethel (?)


Norf. 1766


Hedesse


Eccles


Norf.(?) 1933


Hedingtona


Heddington


Wilt. 463


Hedona


Hedon


York. 1469


Hegham


Higham Feners


Northamp. 1286


Helkesle


ElkRley


Not. 224


Helmlay


Heknsley


York. 264


Helperthorpe


Buck. 1066


Hembyria


Dev. 808


Hemduna


Hendon


Mid. 334


Hemeldena


Hehndon


Northamp. 203


INDEX OF PLACES.


219


The numben refer to the eases not to the pagee.


Hemelingtona


Hemblington


Norf. 185


Hemmingtona


Hemington


Leic. 1961


Henegetona


Haunton


Staf. 602


Henle


Henley


Ox. 1084


Hentona


Hinton


Hants. 647, 1689


Henred


Hendred


Berk. 469


Herdewio


£ed. 580


Herdewio


Hardwick


Norf. 642, 644


Herdingtona


Harlington (?)


Mid. 792


Herefordia


Hereford


Heref. 1473


Heregraue


Sus. 626


Herlawe


Harlow


Ess. 727


Herletona


Harlington


York. 1871


Herlingedona


Harh'ngton


Bed. 1672


HerniiTigesheye


Homingsea


Camb. 1582


Hermingtona


Hemington


Som. 170


Hersham


Ess. 468


Hersthecote


Com. 367


Hertefordia


Hertford


Herts. 640. 870, 1126


Hertesheuede


Hartshead


York. 1846


Hertherst


Suf. 1239


HerthuUa


HarthiU


York. 1686


Hertona


Horton (?)


Dors. 1686


Herts*


Hurst


Kent, 263


Hesel


Heref. 946


Heselbec


Not. 604


Hessebumia


Hurstboume


Hants. 1237


Hethfeldia


Hatfield


York. 1686


Hethfeuldia


Hatfield


Heref. 871


HethiUa


Hethel


Norf. 27, 56


Heutona


York. 264


Hiche


Heref. 1608


Hiclingeham


Higham(?)


Suf. 1620


Hikenham


Ickenham


Mid. 1669


Hildestuna


HiUesdon


Buck. 683


Hillingtona


Hillington


Norf. 1462


Hinetle


Ox. 1493


Hingelescomba


EngHshcombe


Som. 347


Hintelesham


Hintlesham


Suf. 418, 1902


Hiperun


Hipperholme


York. 244


Hirst


Not. 662


Hiseuelestona


Suf. 1914


Hispedena


Ipsden


Ox. 1688


Histona


Histon


Camb. 291


Ho


Hoo


Kent, 1163


Ho


Hoe


Norf. 1821


Hobrige


Hoborough


Ox. 1374


220


INDEX OF PLiiCES.


The numben


refer to the caees


not to the paget.


Hoehechota


Holcot(?)


Northamp. 1592


Hodintona


Northamp. 938


Hoosike


Not.433


Hoctona


Honghton


York. 1547


Hokefeld or Otheehelae


OxhilM?)


War. 1546


Hokeiinge


Hookering


Eent, 17


Hokesore


Hants. 1039


Hokyntona


Oakington


Camb. 175


Holebeck


Holbeach


Linc. 301


Holesle


HoUesley


Suf. 1241


Holeweie


HoUoway


Derb. 486


Holkham


Norf. 55


Homodona


Northamp. 1173


Hoptona


Hopion


Staf. 1978


Horebnmia


Harbome(?)


Staf. 362


Horewicos


Horwich


Lanc. 1547


Horfordia


York. 849


Horingefeldia


Hanningfield


Ess. 1760


Hormodona


Homdon


Ess. 275


Homecastmm


Homcastle


Linc 741


Homigefeudia


Homing (?)


Norf. 1838


Homingesheye


Homingsea


Camb. 299


Homingetona


Homington


York. 1081


Horsendona


Horsendon


Buck. 1677


Horsie


Sus. 160


Horspathe


Horsepath


Ox. 815


Hortona


Horton


Buck. 161


Hortona


Horton


Dors. 168


Hortona


Sus. 709


Hortona


Horton


Wnt. 1183


Hothoft


Huttoft


Linc. 689


Hookegarth


Howarth(?)


York. 1884


TTftnlflghA


Norf. 1927


Hontona


Holton


Suf.788


Hontona


Houghton


York. 1754, 1854


Howee


Camb. 57


Hucham


Hougham


Eent, 811


Hughele


Hugheley


Sal. 1741


Hnkelay


But.80


HuUe


HiU


Worc. 1222


Hulm'


Hulme


Staf. 707, 1747


Linc. 1676


Hulmum


Hohn


Norf. 1792


Hulrecumba


Worc. 680


Humbrestona


Humberstone


Leic. 1301, 1966


Humestuna


Hunston


Sus. 410


Hundemauncby


Hunmanby


York. 494


INDEX OF PLACES.


221


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Hundingdona

Hanestanestnna

Hanestnna

Hangerhnlla

Hanstanestuna

Huntewde

Huntingefeuld

Hapetona

Huphaaene see Uphauene

Hurdesduna

Hustona

Husum

Hwerelesduna

Hyfordia

Hyrteby

Hywis

lakele

Icham

Ichintona

lerdele

lerdelegha

lememue see Gemesmue

Ikelegha

Ikelesham

Ikenham

Hlefordia

Blegha

Ilpene

Ingelesham

Ingewrthe

Ingham

Inglescumba

Inglestona

Ingoldeby

Intewode

Iroestria

Imham

Irtlingeburgum

Iselhamstede

Islepe

Ispedena

Itringeham

ludham


Hunston

Hunstanton
Hunworth (?)
Huntingfield
XJpton


Histon

Whorwelsdown
Iford

Huish Episcopi

Yaxley
Ickenham
Itchington
Yardley
Yardley Gobion


Ickleshall
Ickenham
Hford
Monks' Eleigh


Inglesham

Ingworth

Ingham

Englishcombe

Ingleton

Ingoldsby

Intwood

Irchester

Imham

Irthlingborough

Ashampstead (?)

Islip

Ipsden

Itteringham

Lowdham


Ox. 613

War. 467
Sus. 421
Herts. 200
Norf. 691
Norf. 1376, 1446
Suf. 1900
Wilt. 1698

Buck. 633
Camb. 1672
York. 685
Wilt. 1110
Sus. 1656
Hants. 241
Som. 1436

Suf. 416
Mid. 59
Glouc. 1449
Woro. 1387
Northamp. 485

Northamp. 1186

Sus. 872

Mid. 339

Ess. 1694

Suf. 442, 703, 1023,

1922
Northamp. 1565
Berks. 655
Norf. 1359
Linc. 251
Som. 1379
York. 1846
York. 638
Norf. 1825
Northamp. 483
Linc. 414
Northamp. 162
Bucks. 656
Northamp. 625, 693
Ox. 1717
Norf. 1762
Not. 403


Eailmers


Kelmarsh


Northamp. 725


222


INDEX OF PLACES.


Ths iittiii5«n re/er to the eaeet not to the pages.


Eambes


Camp8ey(?)


Suf. 1924 1


Eanefordia


Canford


Dors. 532 i


Eanetona


Eenton


8uf. 1913 1


Kanewedena


Canewdon


Ess. 1275 1


Eantertona


Worc. 1402


Earletona


Carlton


Camb. 663


Earletona


Carlton


Leic. 1305


Earletona


Carlton


Norf. 1225


Karletona


Carlton


Northamp. 344


Earletona


Carlton


Not. 330


Earletona


Carlton


Buf. 1901


EamarV


Com. 596, 991


Earswelle


CarsweU


Berks. 235


Earwala


Com. 596, 991


Eatelestona


Eettlestone, Norf. (?)


Lino. 1073


Eaterholme


York. 1083


Eaaereffold


Caversfield


Buok. 803


Eaustona


Cawston


Norf. 1064, 1069


Eantona see Eaustona


Eayham


Leio. 1960


Eeborgnm


lokborongh


Norf. 839


Eedingdona


Eedingdon


Suf . 1923


Eemeseia


Eempsey


Worc. 1588


Eemeshey


Eemsing


Eent, 102


Een


Eenn


Som. 170, 1436


Eenigtona


Eennington


Sur. 1108, 1183


Eensingtona


Eensington


Mid. 790. 1919


Eentissetona


Eentishtown


Mid. 825, 826


Eerebroo


Carbrook


Norf . 1009


Eerkeherie


EirkHarle


Northumb. 1191


Eersintona


Cassington (?)


Ox. 1373


Eetelbemestona


Eettlebaston


Suf. 38, 353


Eetelburgom


Eettlebnrgh


Buf. 1066


Eetona


Eetton


Rut. 1310, 1327


Eenele


Eeevil


WUt. 173


Eeystorpe


Caythorpe


Linc. 747


Eideministmm


Eidderminster


Worc. 1580


Eickel'


CockhiU(?)


York. 849


EiUeburi


Eilbum


York. 1197


Eima


Eyme


Linc. 174


Einebantona


Eimbolton


Hunt. 893, 1261


Einemnndecota


Leic. 1602


Eingesbiria


Eingsbury, Mid. (7)


Herts. 1479


Eingeshale


WUt. 1183


Kingestona


Eingston


Sur. 84, 1122, 1138.
1705


Eingestona


Eingston


Sus. 112


INDEX OF PLACES.


223


The nunibers refer to the eaeei not to the pagee.


Kippingescota


Dev. 1145


Kirkeby


Kirkby


Linc. 1341


Eiuelestuna


WUt. 463


Kniuetona


Kniyeton


Derb. 1712


Knolle


Lanc. 1677


Kokermue


Gookermouth


Cumb. 926


Kotteringham


Ketteringham,Norf.(?)


Suf.1919


Kulinge


KeUing (?)


Suf. 805


Kuluingtona


Kilvington


York. 769


Kunnetona


Kniveton (?)


Derb. 1712


Kyhauene


Hants. 866


Kyneburle


Kimberley


Norf. 39


Kyrkeby


Kirby


Norf . 423


Kyrteby.


York. 905


Kyrkestuna


York. 244


Lachefordia


Latchford


Ox. 657


Lafham


Lavenham (?)


Suf . 1936


Laghefar


Lawford (?)


Ess. 184


Langcarse


Tiandcross (?)


Dev. 977


Langeblirgum


Longborough


Glouo. 1325


Langedona


Langdon Hills


Ess. 68, 89


Langedona


Langton


Leio. 1970


Langefordia


Langford


Bed. 1182


Langefordia


Dors. 1414


Langefordia


Langford


Norf. 839


Langehale


Langhale


Norf. 600


Langeherste


Longhirst


Northumb. 361


Langeho


Langenhoe


Ess. 1372


Langelegha


Langley


Herts. 429, 471


Langestrede


Langstroth


York. 1881


Langtree


Lanc. 1386


Lantilio


Heref. 1330


Lassendona


Lassington


Glouc. 1231


Latebyrift


Lathbury


Buck. 1613


Latfordia


Suf. 1680


Latheun


Latham


York. 82


TtathTiiTi


Lathom


Lanc. 1677


Lauintona


Lavington


Sus. 81


Lauintona


Lavington


Wilt. 1687


Layintona
Laxintona


Tiaxton


Northamp. 148


Lechtona


Letton


Norf. 1009


Lectona


Leyton


Ess. 586


Lectona


Leighton


Hunt. 411


Ledecumba


Letcombe Bassett


Berks. 287, 579


Ledetuna


Letcombe Bassett (?)


Berks. 636


224


INDEX OF PLACES.


The numberi refer to the eases not to the pages.


Ledlinges


HantB. 116


Lee


York. 1680


Leggesby


Legaby


Tiinc. 720


Legha


Com. 348


Legha


Bed. 246, 838


Legha


Leigh


Ebs. 1738


Legha


Lea


Derb. 486


Leiicestria


Leioester


Leic. 989, 1188, 1946,
1952, 1964


Leistuna


Leiston


Suf. 739


Leitona


Leyton


Ebb. 640


Leke


Leake


Not. 818


Lelbrage


Olouc. 1265


LeUesheya


Suf. 703


Lenne


Lynn


Norf. 669, 722, 1254


Lerdingdona


SuB. 350


Lertona


Leyton (?)


Ebs. 738


Lesnes


Lessnesa


Kent. 1044, 1764


Leningtona


Cumb. 249


LeweB


N. Lew


Dev. 920


Lewes


Lew


Ox. 1107


Lewes


Lewes


Sus. 646, 643, 1343


Lexendene


Lezden


Ebb. (?) 779


Leybnme


Leybnm


York. 1198


Lichfeld


Lichfield


Staf. 1981


Lidefordia


Lydford


Som. 265, 407, 547, 610


Lidiard


Lydeard


Som. 172


Linoolnia


Lincohi *


Linc. 20, 145, 278, 529,
661, 768, 962, 1087,
1206, 1209, 1280


Linonmba


Lyncombe


Som. 866


Lindwde


liinwood


Linc. 720, 909


Linfordia


Linford


Buok.940


Lingestana


Lillingstone (?)


Ox. 619


Lintona


Lynton


Dev. 197, 1732


Lipstona


Lympston


Dev. 1759


Lifldana


Leysdown


Kent, 605


Litletona


LitUeton


Wilt. 1420


Liutona


Lnton


Bed. 102, 1012


Lodnes


Loddon


Norf. 1729, 1814


Londonia


London


Mid. 11, 73, 312, 314,
376, 489. 668, 588,
692, 748, 912. 1068,
1227. 1429, 1435,
1461, 1498, 1503,
1564, 1723, 1726


Longwathe


Langworth


Linc. 1579


INDEX OF PLACES.


225


T/


te numbers refer to the cases not


to the pages.


Lonwath'


Landwade (?)


Camb. 848


Loppene


Lopen


Som. 1358


Loures


Ess. 47


Luddeduna


Luddesdown


Kent, 671


Ladeford


Ludford


Heref. 7


Lne


Lonth


Linc. 1460


Lnnd


Lund


York. 661


Lundr'


Lound


Suf. 1609


Lutona


Loughton(?)


Ess. 284


Lutona


Luton


Bed. 854


Luttona


Lutton


Lino. 541, 627


Luyha


River Lea


Mid. 419


Maidingtuna


Maddington


Wilts. 402


Maiford


Mayford


Surr. 401


Makertona


Markeaton


Derb. 974


Mahnesbiria


Malmesbury


Wilts. 141, 1615


Mamele


Mamble


Worc. 675


Mamstede


Berk. 431


Maningfordia


Manningford


Wilts. 463


Mapeltona


Mappleton


York. 1671


Mapertishale


Meppershall


Bed. 915


Marchewrthe, see Merkwrthe


Marham


Marham


Norf . 1298


Marlefordia


Marlesford


Suf. 1909


Martona


Marton


York. 22. 60. 118


Maulinges


Suf. 871


Mazstuna


Maidstone (?)


Kent, 811


Meaudona


Maldon


Sur. 1077


Meautona


Manton (?)


Wilt. 732


Medbumia


Medboume


Leic. 1219


Medham


Medham


Sus. 119


Medefeldia


Metfieid


Suf. 945


Medingeham


Mettingham


Suf. (?) 781


Melbumia


Melboum


Gamb. 1619


Meldreie


Meldreth


Camb. 1619


Meleoumba


Melcombe


Dors. 77, 223


Melecumba


Miloomb, Ox.(?)


War. 1757


Melefordia


Melford


Suf. 1162


Meleham


Mileham


Norf. 1390


Melgeresbiria


Glouc. 386


Melkeleia


Herts. 200


Melkesham


Melkflhara


Wilts. 319


Mellinges


MeHing


Lanc. 1294


Mendham


Mendham


Suf. 639


Merckham


Buck. 1139


Mere


Kent, 169


H. I.


15


226


INDEX OP PLACES.


The nunibers refer to the easee not to the pages.


Mereflet


Maifleet


York. 859


Merel


Kent, 1047


Merelente


Moorlinch


Som. 454 -


Merewella


Merevale


Leic. (?) 1172


Merkedicha


Mark Ditch


Som. 1170


Merlebnrgam


Marlboroogh


Wilt. 992, 1109, 1282


Merlefordia


Northamp. 972


Merse


Marsh


Buck. 818, 354


Merse


Ox. 1189


Merstona


Marston


Buck, 734


Merstona


Marston


Leic. 1462


Merstona


Marston


T.inc. 232


Merstona


Marston Maisey


Wilt. 1749


Mertherthiseny


Mevagi88ey(?)


Corn. 426


Mertona


Marton


War. 196


Mertona


Metton


Norf. 695


Mertona


Merton


Sur. 1117


Micham


Mitcham


Sur. 126. 1284


Michefeldia


Mickfield


Suf. 1502


Middellande


Com. 867


Middeltona


Milton K^es (?)


Buck. 729


Middeltona


Milton


Kent, 753


Middeltona


Middleton


Suf. 91, 1392


Mideltona


Milton


Som. 93


Mikelfeld


Micklefield


York. 1868


Milfordia


Milford


York. 1857


Miurines


Heref. 358


Mor


Norf. 181


More, la


Ox. 1089, 1646, 1701


Mordiina


Morden


Sur. 620


Leic. 814


Mortona


Moreton Hampstead


Dev. 1190


Mortona


Leic. 1963


Mortona


Norf. 937


Mortona


Morton Pinkney


Northamp. 938


Mortona


Moreton


Staf. 1334


Macheldoora


Micheldever


Hants. 1727


MokeHntona


Mickleton


Glouc. 1383


Muluertona


Milverton


War. 669


Mmnby


Mumby


Linc. 409


Mundham


Mundham


Norf. 1618


Mmiketona


Monkton


York. 309, 515


Musebiria


Musbuiy


Dev. 170


Naburne


Nabum


York. 772


Naketona


Nacton


Snf . 258, 268


Naringe


Norf. 1815


INDEX OF PLACES.


227


The numhera refer to the cases not to the pages.


Necham


Hants. 1268


Nerefordia


Narford


Norf. 193, 1091


Nererock


Sus. 44.


Netelstede


Nettlestead


Kent, 765, 960, 1767


Neterlestede, see Netelstede


Neuport Paynelle


Newport Pagnell


Buck. 1448


Neutona


Newton


Cumb. 280


Neutona


Newington (?)


Kent, 753


Neutona


Neuton Purcell


Ox. 1131


Neutona


Newton


Wilts. 463


Neutona


Newton


York. 735


Newebrigge


York. 1083


Neweudona


Nevendon


Ess. 176


Newentona


Newtown


Berks. 837


Newetona


Newington (?)


Kent, 1593


Newetona


Newton


Leic. 1944


Newetona


Newton


Suf. 1935


Newetona


Newton


York. 1886


Niwetona


Newington


Ox. 772


Norfeudia


Linc. 1721


Norhilada


Som. 1170


Norhamptona


Northampton


Northamp. 351, 372,
618, 857, 916, 930,
1031, 1213, 1266,
1273, 1483


Norhulla


Norf. 1321


Norigge


Wilt. 1486


Normanton


Normanton


Leic. 1965


Norselegha


Northumb. 517


Northcraye


N. Cray


Kent, 1776


Northicote


Stat 388


Northkyme


N. Kyme


Linc. 1417


Northluffenham


N. Luffenham


But. 80


Northona


Norton


Kent, 1780


Northona


Leic. 1945


Northona


Norton


Worc. 982


Northona


Norton


York. 1223


Nortona


Norton


Bucks. 1220


Nortona


Bishop's Norton


Linc. (?) 1204


Nortona


Norton Disney


Linc. 182


Norwicus


Norwich


Norf. 1441, 1597, 1834


Norwicus


Northwick


Worc. 542


Notingeham


Nottingham


Not. 406, 459, 1188


Nouesle


Leic. 430


NouaVilla


Newton


Heref. 877


Nouum Castellum


Newcastle


Northumb. 361, 895


Nuntona


Nunton


Northamp. 1736
15 2


228 INDEX OF PLACES.

Th€ numbers refer to the cates not to the pages.


Kntelegha


Nutiey


Hants. 1433


Nyweland


Kent, 1338


NTwetona


Newton


Hunt. 948


Newnham


Northamp. 1076


Njwentona


Newton


Northamp. 924, 1053


Obintinges


Oving


Sus. 44


Ocamptona


Okehampton


Dev. 170


0£Fele


Offley


Herts. 1475


Ofham


0£Eham


Sus. 189, 1595


Ofspringe


Ospringe


Kent, 437, 964


Olbemeby


Osboomby


Linc. 1093


Oleby


Oadby(?)


Leic. 1057


Olestorp


UUesthorpe


War. 313


Olstorpe


Ullesthorpe


Leic. 498


Opilande


Kent, 1638


Orohertona


Dev. 965


Ordeshales


OrdsaU


Lanc. 449


Ore


Oare


Berks. 1078


Oreby


Orby


Linc. 638


Omeby


Homby


Lanc. 1294


Ortona


Horton


Ox. 283


Oselegha


Oxley


Staf. 888


Oselewrthe


Ozleworth


Glouc. 1438


Ostallinges


York. 771


Oswaldeskyrk


Oswaldkirk


York. 1199


Otheshelae, see Hokfield


Onerkudingtona


Cuddington


Ox. 688


Ouertona


Overton


Leic. 739


Onertona


Overton


WUt. 1114


Oure


Mickleover


Derb. 914, 974


Onstona


Owston


York. 1194


Oweltona


Oulton


Norf. 1064


Oxecnmba


Oxcombe


Linc. 1751


Oxne


Hoxne


Suf. 1934


Oxonia


Oxford


Ox. 577, 589, 939, 1034,
1160, 1603


Oxon*


Oxney


Kent. 1785


Packesdena


Bed. 385


Padedene


Sur. 40


Pakeham


Pakenham


Suf. 461, 527


Pftllinge


PaUing


Norf. 1813, 1820


Pallintona


PaUton


War. 1355


Pancwrthe


Panxworth


Norf. 1041


Pangebnrnia


Pangboume


Berk. 1176


Parham


Parham


Suf. 1381


INDEX OF PLACES.


229


Ti


not to the pages.


Paston


Paston


Northamp. 398


Pateringtona


York. 771


Pauntebiria


Pant{?)


Sal. 651


Pausella


Dors. 1008


Pecham


Peckham


Kent, 1144


Peoham


Peckham


Sur. 306


Pendemore


Northumb. 361


Penfentein


Com. 867


Penne


Penn


Bucks. 203


Persore


Pershore


Worc. 1628


Pery


Potterspury (?)


Northamp. 1214


Pesehale


Peasenhall


Suf. 633, 693, 698


Penenesse


Perensey


Sus. 160


Pidele


Piddle


Dors. 1696


Pikewilla


PickweU


Leic. 712. 1700, 1744


Pilardintona


PiUerton


War. 989


Piltona


Pilton


Rut. 916, 1030, 1103


Pincebek


Pinchbeck


Linc. 1209


Pinpre


Pimpeme


Dors. 1411


Piperhargh'


Pepperharrow


Hants. 116


Pirho


Pimhow


Norf. 695


Pleseley


Pleasley


Not. 62


Plessetum


Pleshey


Ess. 8, 797


Plmnstede


Plumstead


Norf. 1823


Plnnstede


Plumstead


Kent, 376, 474


PokehuUa


PoughiU


Dev. 6


Pokeste


Northamp. 311


Polstede


Polstead


Suf. 295


Pons Burgi


Boroughbridge


York. 1468


Portesheued


Portishead


Som. 992


Porteslope


PostUp


Glouc. 1439


Portesmue


Portsmouth


Hants. 931


Poyntona


Ponton


Linc. 1049


Prestespidele


Piddle


Dors. Som. 1534


Prestona


Preston


Kent, 1771


Prestona


Preston


Sut 639, 1916


Prestona


Preston


Sus. 1609


Prestona


Preston


York. 658


Prikewella


PickweU


Leic. 1700


Pudingtona


Puddington


Bed. 246


Pukering


Pickering


York. 254


Puketorpe


Pockthorpe


York, 1194


Pultona


War. 109


Pnnninges


Norf. 672


Putta, la


Staf. 1425


Puttelega


Putiey


Heref. 227


230 INDEX OF PLACES.

The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Qaappelode


Linc. 780


Qaedich'


Com. 1015


Qaentona


Quinton


Glouc. 988


Qaerendooa


Quarrendon


Bucks. 8


Qaerendona


Quarrington


Linc. 1073


Baddona


Com. 143


Badecline


Batcliffe Galey


Leic. 1305, 1335


Badecliue


Badcliffe


T.anc.(?)273


Badefordia


Badford


War. 594


BadeweUa


Ox. 1326


Badinges


Beading


Berks. 201, 842, 1363


Baghtona


Baughton


Cumb. 1155


Bameseia


Bamsey


Hunt. 1716


Bamfidena «


Bamsden


Ess. 1485


Bandes


Baonds


Northamp; 1236


Baneshokn


York. 1859


Basne


MarketBaaen


T.ino. 638


Batfordia


Badford


Not. 329


Bauenestendale


Bavenstoiiedale


Westm. 995


Bauenestorpe


Bavensthorpe


Northamp. 1662


Baueningeham


BaYeningham


Norf. 968


Baytulphags


Norf. 1839


Bed


Beed


Herts. 448


Beddenhale


Bedenhall


Norf. 1805


Beimerstona


Beymerstone


Norf. 1256


Bekesdona


Boxton (?)


Bed.41


Bemmeshiria


Bamsbury


WUt. 1282


Bainham


£s8. 834


Beples'


• Bipple


Kent, 237


Bethesheye


Botherhithe


Sor. 802


Bideware


Mavesyn Bidware


Staf. 1976


Biggeby


Wragsby


Linc. 909


Bindham


Bendham


Suf. 1240, 1912


Biple


Bipple


Kent, 237, 1333, 1659


Bippelegha


Bipple


Worc. 536


Biptona


Bipton Abbott


Hunt. 360


Bisebroe


Bushbrook


Suf. 417


Bisele


Biseley


Bed. 1741


Biseuilla


Bisboro*


Buck. 1734


Bisinge


Castle Bising


Norf. 1257. 1663


Bistona


Biston


Norf. 672


Bochamstede


Herts. or Heref. 653,
676


Boctona


Boughton (?)


Kent, 1773


Bodlinge


Bidlington (?)


But. 665


Boffa


Bochester


Kent, 1763


INDEX OF PLACES.


231


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Roinges, see Roynges


RoUeby


RoUesby


Norf. 374


Romerstona


Reymerston


Norf. 1925


Rongeham


Roagham (?)


Norf. 531


Roppes


Repps


Norf. 186


Ronceby


Roxby


T.inc. 1728


Ronllestona


RoUeston


Not. 1454


Roynges


Roding


Ess. 727, 1025, 1748


Rucham


Roagham


Norf. 100


Rucherheye


Rotherhithe


Sur. 878


Rachtona


Rashton


Norf. 1378


Ruchtona


Rushton


Northamp. 1053


Ructona


Rozton


Bed. 581


Radham


Roudham


Norf. 1252


Rageleslegha


Rugeley


Staf. 1678, 1973


Rambaldeswicas


Rumboldswyke


Sus. 1058


Romenal


Romney


Kent, 1778


Rameseia


Romsey


Hants. 460


Rassewrthe


Rushton (?)


Northamp. 222


Rassoc


Rushock


Worc. 250, 1266


Raswrthe


Norf. 1826


Rye


Rye


Sus. 132


Ryse


Rise


York. 1551


Sabrictewrthe


Sawbridgeworth


Hert. 1643


Sacristona


Shackerstone


Leic. 1955


Sadbergam


Sedbergh


York. 1865


Sakelesfordia


Shackleford


Hants. 116


Saldena


Salden


Buck. 1014


Salhurst


Sus. 1745


SaUe


Sall


Norf. 1798


Salopesbiria


Shrewsbury


Sal. 1472, 1629


Sanctus Austellas


St AusteU


Com. 596, 991


Sanctas Edmandas


Buiy St Edmunds


Suf. 1692, 1905


Sanctus lao


St Ives


Hunt. 145, 291


Sanctas Neotas


St Neots


Hunt. 1720


Sanctas Sithainus


St Stithians


Corn. 408


Sandestede


Sanderstead


Sur. 113


Sandewalle


Ox. 156, 1519


Sanrigge


SandUng (?)


Eent, 1274


Santerdona


Saunderton


Buck. 1389


Sapertona


Sapperton


Tiinc. 538


Sarchecroft


Seacroft(?)


York. 1856


Sardesleya


Ess. 1639


Sarisbiria


SaUsbury


WUt. 1235


Satcote


York. 266


Saandfordia


Sampford Courtenay


Dev. 170


232


INDEX OF PLACE8.


The numben refer to tke ca$e$ not to the pagee.


Sanndres


Sanderstead (?)


Sor. 151


Sazlingham


Nort 793


Saxtona


Sawston


Gamb. 1260


Scales


Gamb. 249


Scandefordia


Leic. 79


Ltnc.d08


Seardebargnm


Scarboroogh


York. 16, 907


Soandefordia


ShaUord


Sar. 913


Sebiirgham


Sebergham


Comb. 1153


Sechefordia


Sedgeford


Norf. 721


Sefeldia


Shefford(?)


Berk. 1176


Seffordia


Shelford


Camb. 1264


Segebroc


Sedgebrook


Linc. 213


Sekehale


Sykehoase


Tork. 1194


Semare


Seamer


York. 907


Serleby


Serlbj


Not. 1708


Seyle


OTer or Nether Seal


Leic. 1758


Shaghe


Shaw


Berk. 636


Shaghebiria


Rhawbory


Sal. 1226


Shamele


Shamwell


Kent, 821


Sharentona


Sharrington


Norf. 1811


Shamefordia


Shamford


Leic. 1968


Sharpetoft


York. 1865


Sharpham


Shropham


Norf. 1704


Shaadewella


ShoweU(?)


Ox.880


Shaustona


SlawBton(?)


Leio. 1946


Sheftlinge


SweflUng


Saf. 1212


Shelford


Lane.449


Sheltona


Earahilton


Leic 1953


Sheltona


Norf. 1807


Sheltona


Northamp. 648


Shdwude


Sor. 1661


Sheneleffeldia


Shenfield


E88. 1742


Shepe


Sheepy


Leic. 1958


Shepedena


Shipdham


Norf. 1802


Sheperigge


Wilt. 1277


Shepertona


Shepperton


Mid.400


Sheppelegha


Dev. 422


Shiptona


Shipton


Gloac. 1101, 1651


Shirednna


Bed. 761


Shiringtona


Sherington


Berk. 867


ShitUndana


Shitlington


Bed.385


Hhomes


Shome


Kent, 821, 1419


Shottona


Shotton


SaL737


Shakedena


1192


Shyrewilla


SherwiU


Dev. 977


Sibbefordia


Sibford Gower


Ox. 212


INDEX OF PLACES.


The numbere refer to the cases not to the pages.


SioheBgehale


Sicklinghall


Ess. (York.?) 158


Sikelingehale


Sioklinghall


Ess. (York.?)158


Silkestona


Silkstone


York. 1169


Silneho


Silpho


York. 1885


Simgham


Shingham


Norf. 562


Simplinges


Shimpling


Norf. 1795


Sipeham


Buck. 12


Sinena, aqua de


Seven


York. 254


Siwefordia


Swerford


Ox. 1022


Skeclinge


Sheckling


York. 964


Skelednna


Sheldon


Dev. 862


Skenefrith


Skenfrith, Mon


Heref. 1330


Skerringe'


Norf. Suf. 369


Skynannt


Skinnand


Lino. 538


Skyrebe


Skirbeck


Linc. 659


Slalegha


Sloley(?)


Norf. 1378


Slifeld


Sur. 1348


Smalebere


Norf. 154


Smalebroke


Wilt. 530


Smethwicus


Smethwick


Staf. 362


Smitham


Dev. 290


Smiiheneoota


Dev. 1575, 1642


Snitefeld


Snitterfield


War. 714


Sockebroo


Corn. 143


Sotisdona


Soddington, Worc. (?)


Sal. 1288


Soukudinton


S. Cuddington


Ox. 634


Spandlinge


Spalding


Linc. 1209


Spaontona


Spaunton


York. 254


Speingtorpe


Spennithorne (?)


York. 1200


Spitelgate


Spittiegate


Tiinc. 1210


Spronltona


Sproughton


Suf. 310


Sproatona


Sproughton


Suf. 508, 795


Sproztona


Sprozton


York. 749


Staffordia


StafFord


Staf. 479


Standiche


Standish


Lanc. 1386


Stanefend


Stanfield


Suf. 66


Stanes


Staines


Buck. 18


Stanewella


Stanwell


Mid. 342


Stanfordia, see Staondfordia


Stanfordia


Stanford


Norf. 194


Stanhale


Stonnall


Staf. 823


Stanhale


Wilt. 382


Stanlegha


Stoneleigh


War. 1063


Stanmere


Stanmore


Mid. 394, 716, 936,
1554


Stanstedia


Stanstead


Ess. 1488


Stantona


York. 1223


234


INDEX OF PLACES.


The numben refer to the easee not to the pages.


StanweUa


StanweU


Mid. 528


StanwioQs


Stanwick


Northamp. 971


Stapelfordia


Stapleford


Leio. im


Staples


Staple Fitzpaine


Som. 853


Stanertona


Stayerton


Northamp. 31


Stanertona


Staverton


Snf . 1443


Stanertona


Staverton


Wilt. 463


Stanndfordia


Stamford


Northamp. 332, 612,
1214


Stanntona


Long Stanton (?)


Hnnt. 316


Stanntona


Dey. 521, 603


Stanntona


Norf. 937


Stanwella


StanweU


Mid. 1287


Stebbeye, see Stibbeheye


Stepinges


Steeping


Lino. 944, 1102


Sterstona


Stnrstona


Norf. 1674


Stibbeheye


Stepney


Mid. 150, 383, 748, 1029


Stinekeya oorr. Stinekeya


StifFkey


Norf. 188, 1830


Stiuele


Stewkley(?)


Buok. 1318


Stiuingtona


Steventon


Berk. 272, 393


Stock


Stoke


Eent, 1302


Stoclande


Stockland


Dors. 1312


Stockingeford


Stockingford


War. 583


Stoctona


Stanghton


Hunt. 629


Stoctona


Stonghton


Sus. 350


Stodfoldia


Stotfold


Bed. 1607


Stodhale


Stedham(?)


Sus. 1396


Stoke


Stoke-Pogis


Buok. 1011


Stoke


Stoke St Milburgh


Sal.590


Stokeby


Stokesby


Norf . 1794, 1841


Stokes


Stoke


Hants. 396


Stokingtham


Sur. 44


Stortfordia


Bishop^s Stortford


Herts. 275


Stottesdona


Stottesdon


SaL 1224


Stowe


Suf. 1929


Straby


Stmbby


Lino. 1092


Stratfordia


Stony Stratford


Bnck. 619


Stratfordia


Rnt. 1501


Stratfordia


Stratford


Suf. 125


Stratle


Streatley


Berks. 8


Strattona


Sturton (?)


Not. 433, 628


Strattona


Stretton


But. 926


Strattona


Stretton


War. 813


Strediate


Stradsett


Norf. 1169


Stredlegha


Streatley


Bed. 518


Strestuna


Sturston


Norf. 642


Strete


Kent, 1772


INDEX OF PLACES.


235


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Strettona

Strode

Strodes

Stnlbe

Sturemnwe

Sturminstre

Stnrstona

Stnrstuna

Sturtona

Stybeney

Styrston

Suafham

Suanescampus

Snbertona

Snchgmere

Suckethom

Sndbiri

Sudcylne

Sndecota

Snhamtona

Suinesle

Suinuertona

Sumerfordia

Sumerlande

Sumertona

Sumertona

Sumertona

Snnninges

Snnthetona

Sutfellonde

Suthbrent

Suthingtona

Suthlenn

Suthluffenham

Suthpikeham

Suthstedia

Suthwerk

Suthefeldia

Suttona

Snttona

Suttona

Snttona

Suttona

Suttona

Suttona

Suttona


Stretton

Strood

Stourmonth

Sturminster Marshall

Sturston

Stnston

Stratton (?)

Stepney

Sturston

Swaffham

Swanscombe


Dethick(?)
Sudbury

Southcot
Sonthampton

Swinley

Swinnerton

Somerford


Somerton
Somerton
Sonning


S. Brent
Siddington (?)
South Lynn
S. Luffenham
S. Pickenham
Sustead
Sonthwark

Sutton Courtney

Sutton

Sutton

Sutton

Sntton

Sutton

Sntton Montis

Sutton Mandeville


War. 813

Sus. 525

Eent, 821

Hants. 87

Eent, 178, 1696, 1768

Dors. 71, 1349

Norf. 1673

Suf . 642

Glonc. 840

Mid. 701

Norf. 968

Norf. 1837

Eent, 983

Hants. 468

Bed. 1133

Derb. 486

Suf. 1162

Not. 959

Berk. 1637

Hants. 67, 267, 324,

1123, 1406, 1680
Berks. 998
Staf. 1300
WUt. 1437
Som. 446
Norf. 1816
Oxf.450
Suf . 1095
Berks. 1115
York. 1861
York. 771
Som. 1170
Glouc. 1134
Norf. 83
But. 1020
Norf. 188
Norf. 937
Sur. 1027, 1461
War. 904
Berk. 164
Ess. 1566
Eent, 102, 1581
Leic. 1964
Mid. 493
Salop. 504
Som. 1635, 1722
Wilts. 941


236


INDEX OF PLACES.


The numbert refer to the eaut not to the pagei.


Satwalesiuun


S. Walsham


Nort 1817


Sntwick


Southwick


Northamp. 1206


Buwelle


Sonthwell


Nots. 324


Suwere, see Snthwerk


Suwic


Southwick


Hants. 1556


Swanitona


Swannington


Leic. 1947


Swin


Swine


York. 256


Syelmeston


Sehneston


Sus. 114


Tainlande


Kent, 1218


TaUewurth


Talworth


Sur. 115


Tamlande


Eent, 1140


Tasaelegha


Tasley


Salop. 1590


Tatecastmm


Tadcaster


York. 1081


Tatestona


Tattingstone


Suf.207


Tatintona


Tattingstone


Suf. 984, 1892


Tattesete


Tattersett


Norf. 1809


Taystede


Thaxted


Ess. 1526


Techeswella


TitchweU


Norf.500


Teffordia


Thetford


Norf . 650


Tendemgge


Tendring


Ess. 559


Tendringe


Tendring


Ess. 996


Terling


Terling


E88.563


Tettewrthe


Tetsworth


Ox. 1142, 1158


Tenelby


Lanc.(?)234


Thama


Thame


Ox. 1142, 1711


Thamhurst


Kent, 1756


Tidmarsh


Berk. 1573, 1649


Theit


Thwaite


Norfl 159, 1525


Thekene


Northamp. 1550


Thetelthorp


Theddlethorpe


Linc. 689


Thetenduna


ThitenhaU (?)


Buck. 633


Thibertoft


Theberton(7)


Suf. 749


Thichibrom


Suf.698


Thishon


Tysoe


War.854


Thopesfeld


Toppesfield


Ess. 45


Thorendona


Thomdon


Suf . 1904


Thoresby


Thomby


Northamp. 730


Thoringe


Tarring


Sus. 142


Thorlega


Ess. 1021


Thome


Som.(?)1722


Thomebiria


Thombury


Dev. 902


Thomeham, see Turaeham


Thorpe


Thorp Langton


Leic. 955, 1957


Thorpe


Thorpe


Northamp. 116,
1548


Thotintona


Tottington


Norf. 21


377,


INDEX OF PLACES.


237


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Thudingdana


Toddington


Bed. 399


ThurlokeBope


Heref. 1314


Thnrmedestona


Thurmaston


Leic. 1971


Thumeby


Thornby


Northamp. 76


Thykeham


Twickenham (?)


Mid. 966


Tiderintona


Titherington


Glouc. 1449


Tikenhulla


TickhUl


York. 127, 1206


Tilioota


Herts. 1017


TiUebiria


TUbury


Ess.2


Tinemue


Tynemouth


Northumb. 226


Tittona


Linc. 659


Tiuersoumba


Twiscomb (?)


Dev. 755


Toftes


Tofts


Norf. 784


Tokwic


Todwick


York. 1877


Tolleslund )
ToUestona )


ToUeshunt


Ess. 1304, 1371, li


Tong


Tong


Sal. 305


Toppeoroft


Toporoft


Norl 799, 874


Toppefeld


Toppesfield, E88.(?)


Suf. 1898


Tostoke


Tostock


Suf. 312


Totenesse


Totnes


Dev. 786, 1147


Tottenham


Mid. 451


Totingtona


Tuttington


Norf. 1824


TouUeshuthe, seeToUeslund


Trebemed'


Gom. 1054


Tredeiset'


Com. 1054


Treeng'


Tring


Hert. 192


Tregar


Com. 894


Tregenegethwio*


Com. 596, 991


Treisac'


Heref. 1474


TreUey


Com. 1054


Trenches, Paraa


Herts. 1614


Trengestona


Thringstone


Leic. 1942


Treuelgan


Trevalgan


Com. 165, 1512


TriUawe


Thurlow (?)


Suf. 427


Trowbragge


Trowbridge


WUt. 463


Trowlegha


Throwleigh


Dev. 1172


Trampingtona


Trumpington


Camb. 288


Trykeby


Thrigby


Norf . 968


Tudenham


Tuddenham


Norf. 1840


Tudenham


Tuddenham


Suf. 312, 478, 698


Tuderle


Tytherley


Hants. 15


Tudingtona


Toddington


Bed.607


Tukartona


Tuckerton


Som. 1718


TuUingtona


TUUngton


Heref . 802


Tumbestona


TanstaU(?)


Norf. 1072


Tumby


Tumby


Linc. 1579


238


INDEX OF PLACES.


The numbers refer to tke ecues not to tlie pages.


Tanbragge


Glouc. 667


Tunethorpe


Linc. 867


Tunge


Tong


Sal. 306


Tungerlande


York. 1876


Tuppebolm


Tuphohne


Linc. 445


Turkeleby


Thirkleby


York. 1197


Turleby


Thurleby-


T.inc. 1203


Tumeham


Thomham (?)


Kent. 679, 1171, 1765


Tutingdona


Buck. 1398


Twinstede


Twinstead


Ess. 1317


Twyfordia


Worc, 970


Tyhieye


Tilney


Norf. 1799


Tyrintona


Linc. 1460


Upfordia


Hunt. 1201


Uphauene


Upavon


Wilt. 750


Upministre


Upminster


Ess. 148, 1322


Upsiteling


Dors. 328


Uptona


Upton


Worc. 536


Uptona


Upton


T.ino. 1045


Urchinefeldia


Archinfield


Heref. 1474


Useby


Usselby


Linc. 1049


Utcistona


Eent, 163


Uttefordia


Dors. 831


VetuB Vious


Old Street


Mid. 686


Wachefordia


Washford


Som. 956


Wackinge


Woking


Sur. 416


Wadbergum


Wadborough


Worc. 1588


Waddona


Whaddon


Gamb.4


Wadefordia


Som. 466


Waderingfeuldia


Suf . 698


Wafifeldia


Washfield


Dev. 1367


Waffordia


Watford


Herts. 1630


Wainfleit


Wainfleet


Linc. 733, 822


Wakebrigia


Derb. 486


Wakerlega


Wakerley


Northamp. 43


Waleby


Walesby


Linc. 947


Waledena


Walden


Ess. 1007


Walemere


Walmer


Kent, 1606


Waleshale


Walflall


Staf. 1683, 1733


Waletona


Wallington


Sur. 843, 1284


Waletona


Walton


York. 1849


Walewardia


War. 1052


Walewrthe


Walworth


Sur. 1670


Wallingfordia


Wallingford


Ox. 620, 827


^Bri


INDEX OF PLACES.


239


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Walsingeham

Waltlintona

Wanetinge

Wanrugge

Wappinges

Wargeby

Wassingelegha

Waskerle

Watele

Watercroft

Wathamstede

Wathfordia

Wauertona

Wauteby

Wautham

Waybrigia

Waxtunesham

Wdestoke

Webrugge

Weohefordia

Wedmora

Weduna

Welintona

WeU'

Welletona

Wehietham

Wendesle

Wendouere

Wengham

Wepstede

Werckwrthe

Weresdona

Werministrum

Westanostige

Westbretona

Westdereby

Westecota

Westerham

Westerlinna

Westhale

Westham

Westhamme

Westharpetre

Westmonasterium

Westona

Westona


Walsingham

Watlington

Wantage

Windridge

Wapping

Wragsby

Washingley

Waskerley

Wheatley

Wheatorof t (?)

Walthamstead

Watford

Waverton, War.(?)

Waltham, Great

Weybridge

Waxham

Woodstock

Weybridge

Washford

Wedmore

Weedon

Wellington

WeUs

Welton

Whehietham

Wensley

Wendover

Wingham


Warkworth

Whorwelsdown

Warminster

W. Bretton
West Derby
Wescott
Westerham
West Lynn

Westham
West Ham
West Harptree
Westminster
Weston Turville
Alconbury Weston


Norf. 1238, 1840

Ox. 1363, 1689

Berk. 1164, 1220

Herts. 870

Mid. 482

Linc. 472

Hunt. 1079

Northumb. 323

Not. 1111

Derb. 486

Herts. 228, 891, 953

Herts. 713

Leic. 1305, 1335

Sus. 546

Ess. 617, 663, 870

Sur. 99

Norf. 557, 1793

Ox. 1163

Norf. 835

Som. 1667

Som. 1170

Bucks. 610, 679

Sal. 1226

Norf. 883. 1835

Lino. 1035

Suf. 851

York. 1156

Bucks. 576, 626, 646,

1466
Eent, 1790
Suf. 1647
Northumb. 896
Wilts. 775
Wilt. 1364
Dev. 826
York. 1844
Lanc. 449
Buck. 1396
Kent, 262
Norf. 1261
Sur. 1141
Sus. 160, 639
Ess. 701, 1477
Som. 992
Mid. 726, 1668
Bucks. 879
Hunt. 1124


240


INDEX OF PLACES.


The numberi refer to the eases not to the pages.


Westona

WeBtona

Westona

Westona

Westona

Westradham

Westtrasene

Wetherefenld

Wethulla

Wettesdena

Whytestona

Wibbebyria

Wicham

Wieham

Wicham

Wichehulla

Wickefordia

Wicline

Wicnmba

Widehaye

Widekesho

Wigehale

Wigintona

Wigomia

Wika

Wike

Wikes

Wileby

Wilingham

Willingtona

Willintona

Wihie

Wiltingeham

Wimbeldona

Winchendon

Windecarefflet

Windefordia

Windesore

Windlesham

Wineferling

Winellega

Winestona

Winestnna

Winewio

Winterbnmia

Winterbumia Fercles


Weston Longyille
Weston
Weston
Edith Weston

W. Bndham
W. Basen
Wethersfield
Wheathill

Whitestone
Wembnry (?)


Wiokham

Wickford

WyoHffe, York.(?)

Wyoombe

Woodhay

Whixoe(?)

Wiggenhall

Wigginton

Woroeater

Wick


WUby
Willingham
Wiknington (?)

WiUie

Wimbledon
Winchendon


Windsor

Windlesham

Winfarthing


Winwick


Korf. 420, 1833

Northamp. 202

Ox. 105

Bni 962

Mid. 1544

Norf. 1624

Lino. 1415

Ess. 887

Sal. 590

Berks. 164

Dev. 755

Dey. 1149

Hert. 1702

Kent, 893

Sns. 709

But. 80

Ess. 364

Linc. 1418

Bnck. 1167

HantB.92

Snf. 1244

Norf. 836

Herts. 1336

Woro. 233, 1080, 1189,

1227
Gloao. 1229
Norf. 1834
Dev. 1121
Norf. 1382
Camb. 663
Eent, 1766
Not. 901
Not. 25
Dors. 1540
Sor. 73
Bnck. 1500
Linc. 174
Lino. 174
Berks. 684, 1431
Snrr. 416, 769
Norf. 890
Mid. 338
Heref. 990
Tork. 685
Northamp. 1297
Ox. 372
Dors. 363


INDEX OP PLACES.


241


The numhen refer to tke cases not to the pages.


Wintonia


Winchester


Hants.50,201,294,324,
376, 454, 1170, 1315


Wintonia


Winstone(?)


Glouc. 1166


Witelegha


Whitley


Northumb. 1715


Witenhoo


Com. 1015


Witham


Wytham


Berks. 183


Witheringeskate


Wetheringsett


Suf. 1890


Withfendia


Ess. 221


Withintona


Whittington


Northumb. 895


Withona


Wotton Abbas (?)


Dors. 1731


Witnesae


Whitnash


War. 1629


Wittingeshete


Whissonsett


Nort 1812


Wittona


Witton


York. 1680


Winelingeham


Lino. 1629


Wlenhale


War. 1683


Wlfhus


But. 230


WUretona


Heref. 1232


Wlingresty


Lmc. 1093


Wilingeham


Willingham


Suf. (?) 782


Wlsintona


Woolston


Glouc. 1002


Wltrope


Woolsthorpe


Tiinc. 1092, 1093


Wlwardia


War. 1613


Wockinges


Woking


Sur. 769


Wodefordia


Woodford


Ess. 1681


Wokindona


Ess. 370


Wolaoigtona


Wormleighton (?)


War. 934


Wottesdona


Wotton (?)


Buck. 1396


Wrengle


Wrangle


Linc. 107, 122


Wretmges


Wratting


Suf. 1668


Writele


Writtle


Ess. 1099


Wrochinge


Wratting


Camb. 1258


Wrokeshale


WraxaU


Som. (?) 560, 673


Wrotham


Wortham


Suf. 1245


Wrthe


Berks. 1034


Wnbnmia


Wobum


Bucks. 845


Wadecroft


Northamp. 440


Wndehus


Woodhouse


York (?) 1196


Wndetona


Heref. 365


Wulfrestuna


Woolston (?)


Tiano. 613


Wultertona


Wolterton


Norf. Suf. 369


Wultona


Wilt. 382


Wuluelegha


WooUey(?)


York. 1863


Wunhers


Wonersh


Sur. 913


Wurle


.Worle


Som. 86, 1641


Wuttona


Wootton


Northamp. 648


Wuuelestede


Wyverstone


Suf. (?) 782


Wycham


Wiokham, West


Camb. 881


M. L


16


242


INDEX OF PLACE&


The numben refer to the ca$es not to the pages.


Wycnmba


Wycombe


Bucks. 286, 520


Wygomia, sea Wigornia


Wyka


Week(?)


Com. 1070, 1696


Wyk


Wyke BegiB


Dors. 1495


Wyletona


WiUington


Derb. 51


WyUdega


Mid. 338


WyUg


WiUey


Heref. 271


Wylingdana


WiUingdon


Sus. 639


Wyllinghale


WiUingale


Ess. 841


Wymbisse


Wimbish


Ess. 243


Wymondeham


Wymondham


Leic. 1960, 1959


Wymnndesham


Wymondham


Norf. 321


Wyndesores


Windsor


Berks. 295, 824


Wyndlesham


Windlesham


Sur. 769


Wynemnndele


Wymondley


Herts. 816


Wynepol


Wimpole


Camb. 1578


Wynterburnia


Winterboum


Berk. 1649


Wynterbnmia


Winterboume


WUts. 1174


Wyntonia, see Wintonia


Wyrham


Wereham


Norf. 986


Wythechurche


Whitchuroh


Hants. 1237


Wyuelestede


Wyverstone (?)


Suf. 782


Teoham


Ickham


Eent, 499


YeUestede


Ehnsted(?)


Eent, 476


Yrnam


Lino. 1737


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Abbe, Beatricia uxor Galfridi le, 1467

GalMdas le, 1457

Oliuerus le, 1367

Bobertus le, 1457

WiUelmus le, 1367
Abbedestona, Willelmus de, 1082

Willelmus filius Willelmi de, 1082
AbbedUna, Abbas de, 794
Abbendona, Petrus de, 1020
Abbendonia vide Abingdonia.
Abbetot, Osbertus de, 250
Abbetota, Galfridus de, 1262
Abel, Magister, 1221
Abetoft, Johannes de, 904, 1757

Margeria uxor Johannes de, 1757
Abingdonia^ Abbendonia, Abbas de,

229, 967, 1078, 1139, 1185, 1537
Achard', Bobertus, 302
Acholt, Thomas de, 255
Acra,- Prior del, 64
Aora, WiUebnus del, 1243
Acre, Walterus del, 1838
Acstede, Bolandus de, 262, 546, 477
Actona, Agnes uxor Boberti de, 1564
. Bobertus de, 1564
Advocatus, Alicia uxor Baldewini,
, 1220

Baldewinus, 1220

Bobertus, 1220
Aeinourt, Oliuerus de, 1045
Aete, Ayete, Willelmus de, 758
Aeyncanc vide Aeyncurt.
Aeyncurt, Aeynoanc, Johannes de, 62


Affrica, Bannulfus de, 763

Bobertus fiilius Bannulfi de, 763
Agathe, S., Abbas, 1865
Age, Willelmus de, 1820
Agnes, Hugo, 20

Aguillun, Agwillun, Johanna uxor
WiUehni, 1302

Beginaldus, 189

Bicardus, 189

WiUehnus, 1302

WiUehnus fiHus Bicardi, 189
AgwiUun vide AguiUun.
Aignaus, Bobertus de, 255
AUer, AHcia uxor Johannis le, 748

IsabeUa fiUa Johannis le, 748

Johannes le, 748
Aimers, Bobertus de, 431
Aisho vide Ayssa.
Akelegha, Henricus de, 1145
Alason, Herbertus de, 1921
AlbamarUa vide AlbemarUa.
Alba MarUa, Bobertus de, 755
Albani, S., Abbas, 102, 226, 394,

485, 561, 713, 997, 1554, 1715
Albaniaco, Albiniaco, Alboniaco,
Henricus de, 532

Hugo de, 1127

WiUehnus de, 102, 307, 772
Albano, S., Nicholaus de, 177
Albe, Elias, 31
Albemar*, Bannulfus de, 958
Albemarl', Bandulfus de, 624
Albemarla, Beginaldus de, 54

16—2


244


INDEX OF PERSONa


The numhen refer to tke eases not to the pages.


Albemarlia, Albamarlia, Abbas de,
1061, 1874

Willelmiis de, 1367
Albemarlie, Ck>me8, 926, 964, 1060,
1061, 1273, 1637, 1671

Engeb:* de, 964
Albeniaco, Philippas de, 1117
Albetoft, Jobannes, 714
Albenilla vide Anlenilla.
Albingeswnrtbe, Gilebertns de, 40,

126
Albiniaoo vide Albaniaco.
Albo Monasterio, Alicia nxor Begi-
naldi de, 1549, App. 5

Matillis de, 59, 1559

Beginaldns de, 68, 1239, 1549,
App. 5

Thomas de, 1482

WiHehnns de, 1559
Alboniaco vide Albaniaco.
Albricns, Gomes, 848, 881, 1488
Albyniaco, Hugo de, 1213
Aldeford, Alrefordia, Bartholomens

de, 484
Aldegate, Terricns de, 383, 482
Aldemanebyria vide Aldermanne-

biria.
Aldemannestona, Bobertus de, 842
Aldermannebiria, Aldemanebjria,
Andemanebiria, Alanus de, 692

Jemasius de, 550, 692

Willebnus de, 692
Aldham, Adam de, 465

Johanna de, 465

Johannes filius Ade de, 465
Aldilegha vide Aldithelegha.
Aldithelega, Henricus de, 94, 95, 1024
Aldithelegha, Aldilegha, Henricus de,

1059, 1225
Aldreby, Alanus de, 689
Aldremanebiria, Agnes uxor (^emasii
de, 1001

Geruasius de, 1001
Aldrethe, S., Godefridus balliuns, 20

Godefridus senescallns, 28
Aleman, Johannes le, 309
Alemannie, Imperator, 1095


Alencestria, Abbas de, 1387
Alencon, Alenton', Herbertus de, 968
Alencun, Ahien*, Herbertus de, 644,

731, 1212, 1706
Alenton* vide Alencon.
Alenzun, Herbertus de, 1240

Bicardusde, 1187
Alexander, Papa, 1095
Alicia, Comitissa, 1658, 1745
Alionaia, Comitissa, 1164
Alis, Bogerus, 1013
Alkeby, Bobertus de, 783
Alkereby vide Ascheby.
Allegate, Edricus de, 584

Willehnus de, 584
Almchechurche, Emma de, 1234
Ahien' vide Alencun.
Alnestowe, Abbatissa de, 1608
Ahieto, Auney, Henrions de, 965

Jordanus de, 922, 1050

Simon de, 45
Alre, Badulfus de, 667, 1537
Alrefordia vide Aldeford.
Alta Bipa, Adam de, 338, 1286
Alto BoBco, Petnis de, 102
Aluertona, Bobertus de, 1153
Aluitelegha, Laurencius de, 1233
Amando, S., Almaricos de, 1117,
1157, 1161, 1580

Isolda nxor Almarici de, 1580
Ambrebiria, Willelmus de, 1228
Ambresbiria, Prior de, 1561

Priorissa de, 1139
Amundauilla vide Amundenilla.
Amundeuilla, Amundauilhi, Elia de,
615

NigaUus de, 269, 658

Bobertus de, 251
Andemanebiria vide Aldermanne-

biria.
Andrea, S. , Matillis nxor Saheri de^
818

Nicholaus de, 945

Saherus de, 818
Andree, S., Prior, 1033
Anes, Sarra de, 1452
Anestay, Willelmus de, 1848


itoEX OF PERSONS.


245


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Aneuilla, Jordanns de, 344
Anglicus, Gilebertus, 225

Stephanus, 40, 1360
Anguill', Beginaldus, 776
Angnillun, Johannes, 1118

Bobertus, 1182
Anguilyn, WiUelmus, 1120
Anhope, Johannes de, 243
Antrenon, Nicholaa uxor Bogeri de,
426

Bogerus de, 426
Anuilers, Bobertus de, 486
Apelfordia, Johannes de, 229
Apostoles, Philippus des, 278
Appeldreffeud, WiUehnus de, 262
Appelgar, Bicardus de, 404
Aquila, Gilebertus de, 44, 242, 539,

661, 1429
Araz, Margeria uxor Willehni de, 701

WiUehnus de, 701
Arceueske, Dionisia uxor Phillippi le,
324

Isemania uxor Philippi le, 324

PhiUippus le, 324
Archer, Alditha ux. Johannis le, 1112

Johannes le, 1112

Bicardus le, 760

Sarra fUia Johonnis le, 1112

Simeon le, 119
Arches, Badulfus de, 370
Archidiaconus, Bobertus, 287, 1842

Wniehnus, 287, 983
Ardem* vide Ardeme.
Ardema, PhiUppus de, 1680

Thomas de, 1609, 1613
Arderne, Ardem', AUna uxor Badulfi
de, 1372

Eustachia de, 801

Eustachia uxor Thome de, 581

Lucia uxor Thome de, 738

Badulfus de, 738, 1372

Bogems de, 1352

Thomas de, 284, 531, 738

WUlehnus de, 1352
Ardulph, WUlelmus, 1686
Argenteinn vide Argentham.
Argenten, Johannes de, 290


Argenten, Bicardus de, 1117
Argentham, Argenteinn, Agnes uxor
Bogeri de, 1090

Bicardus de, 295

Bogeras de, 1090
Arsic, Arsjc, Annauxor Osberti, 638

Osbertus, 251, 638, 935

Badulfus, 638

Bobertus, 605, 935

SibiUa uxor Boberti, 605
Arsit', Bobertus de, 1373
Arsyc vide Arsic.
Arthele, WiUehnus de, 155
Arandel, Johannes fiUus Nicholai de,
908

Nicholaus de, 908

Thomas de, 908

WUlelmus de, 893, 1054
Arander vide Arundele.
Arundele, Arunder, Comes, 384, 893,

997, 1273
Ascheby, Askereby, Alkereby, Bo-

bertus de, 1509
Asegareby, Beatricia uxor Henrici
de, 1843

Henricus de, 1843
Askereby vide Ascheby.
Aslakestan, Ansehnus fiUus Petri de,
1399

Petrus de, 1399
Aspele, AUcia uxor Johannis de, 317

Johannes de, 317
Attebetrgh', Dulcia uxor WUlehni, 767

Michael fiUus WiUehni, 767

WiUehnus, 767

WUlehnus fiUus WUlehni, 767
Attegate, AUcia uxor WiUehni, 768

WiUehnus, 768
Attehasse, Margareta fiUa Boberti,
1822

Bobertus, 1822

Umfridus fiUus Boberti, 1822
Atteponde, Ademundus, 340
AttewaUe, Ilwinus, 1489

PhUippus fiUus Hwini, 1489

WUlehnus fiUus Ilwini, 1489
AtteweU*, Emma uxor WiUehni, 491


246


INDEX OF PEfiSONa


The numbert refer to the easei not to the pages.


Attewell*, WiUelmag, 491
Aabernilla, Hugo de, 1506
Bobertus de, 11
WillelmuB de, 338, 631, 1606
Auder*, Eogerus de, App. 2
Audingtoua, MatilliB uxor Stephani
de, 1768
StephanuB de, 1768
Auen', Eogerufl le, 897
Auenant, JohanneB, 1312
Auencurt, Oliuerus de, 845
Auenel, Nicholaus, 1354

Oliuerus, 54
Auenestowe vide Auunestowe.
Auerintona, Dauid filius Thome de,
1167, 1161
Thomas de, 1157, 1161
Auerenches, Auerenges, Ceoilia de,
1566
Hawisia filia MatillidiB de, 170,

1669
MatilHs de, 170, 1669
Matillis uxor Willehni de, 12
WiUehnus de, 12, 333, 1571
Auerenges vide Auerenches.
Auge vide Augy.
Auges, Willehnus de, 1813
Augo vide Augy.
Augustini, S., Bristollii, Abbas, 1166

Gantuarie, Abbas, 474
Augy, Auge, Augo, Oomitissa de, 127,
403, 649, 1110, 1658, 1746
WiUehnus de, 841
Aula, WiEelmua de, 777
AulemUa, AlbeuiUa, Bicardus de, 314
Aultona, WiUehnus de, 923
Aumari, Bobertus de, 318
Aumbelj, Eudo de, 460
Aumbresbiria, Priorissa de, 563
Auners, Ada de, 489
Bobertus de, 612
Auney vide Ahieto.
AunfeUlus, AunfeiU, FuiUus, Was-

saUus de, 1501
Aungele, Edwardus le, 1421
Aunnestowe, Auenestowe, Abbatissa
de, 816, 948


Auntrenon, NichoUa uxor Bogeri de;
408

Bogerus de, 408
Aurabel vide Mirabel.
Aure, Aurre, Johannes fiUns Petri de,
67

Petrus de, 67

Badulfus de, 67, 922, 1050
Aurifaber, Alexander, 686

Bartholomeus, 1480

Eborardus, 451

Euerardus, App. 6

GalfriduB, 10

Henrious, 84, 1533

IsabeUa uxor Eborardi, 451

Johannes, 895

Johannes fiUus WiUehni, 341

Bobertus, 652

SeUda uxor Walteri, 359

Walterus, 359

WUlehnus, 341
Aurre vide Aure.
Auteyn, TheobalduB, 1730
Auuertona, Bobertua de, 1155
AuuiUa, AmabiUs uxor GUeberti de,
1507

GUebertus de, 1507
Axstede, BoUmdus de, 1375
Ayete vide Aete.
Ayffede, BoUandus de, 40
Ayncurt, Nicholaa uxor OUueri de,
603

OUuerus de, 503
Ayssa, Aisho, AUenora uxor WiUelmi .
de, 948

WUlehnus de, 948
AyuilUt, Bobertus de, 439

Baalun, JolUnus de, 731
Baoheler, Bogerus le, 1735
Bacheawurthe, Agnes fiUa Hugonis
de, 1480

Hugo de, 1480
Backeham, Hugo de, 473
Bacne, Johannes fiUus Simonis, 237

Shnon, 237

Thomas fiUus Simonis, 237


INDKX OF PERSONS;


247


The numbert refer to the casee not to the pages.


^acoii) Badulphas, 1641

Rogerus, 1721
Baddelegha, Angustinas de, 240

Galfridus de, 240
Badelegba, Galfridus de, 1426

BobertuB mius Galfridi de, 1426
Badelekin, Serlo de, 1749
Badelesmara, Egidius de, 1333
?adhegh, Emaldas, 1912

Gunnilda uxor Emaldi, 1912

Hugo filius Emaldi, 1912
Badialtona, Agnes uxor Alezandri de,
1008

Alexander de, 1008

Margeiia uzor Beginaldi de, 1008

Beginaldus de, 1008
Bagetor*, Bogeras de, 920
Baggesh* vide Baggeshec.
Baggeshec, Baggesh', Bicardus de, 10
Baggetorr', Bicardns de, 85
Baghot, Johannes, 95
Bagingedena, Alicia uxor Bicardi de,
365

Bicardus de, 365
Bagod, Dagod, 1975, 1980
Bagot,.Heruicus, 1043

Margareta, 1043
Bagshote, Galfridus filius Henrici de,
998

Henricus de, 998
Baillas, Galfridus de, 127
Baillol, Hugo de, 432

Johannes de, 432
Baillor Henricus de, 1128

Lora uxor Henrici de, 1128
Bailul, Joscelinus de, 636
Bainnard', Fulco, 303
Bainnard, Bobertus, 1380
Baintona, Waltems de, 1040
Baiocis, Adam de, 720, 909

Agnes filia Johannis de, 761

Auicia uxor Willekni de, 455

Elena uxor Thome de, 1267

Emma filia Johannis de, 761

Johannes de, 720, 761, 909, 1263

Bobertus filius Johannis de, 1263

Thomas de, 1267


Baiocis, Willelmus de, 455, 720, 909

Balam, Walterus, 1613

Baldresby, Hugo de, 735

Balun, Johannes de, 1450

Balde, Henricus filius Walteri, 1670

Walterus, 1670
Baldewinus, Comes, 102
Balistona, Baldewinus de, 976
Balistarius, Margeria nxor Simonis,
541, 627

Semannus, 1514, 1969

Simon, 541, 627
Balk, Wymundus, 1361
Balle, Adam, 40

Balliolo, Deuorguilla uxor Johannis
de, 1227

Henricus de, 1221

Johannes de, 1227, 1273
Banham, Badulphus de, 473
Baningewrthe, Gilbertus de, 1657

Willelmus filius Gilberti de, 1657
Bannebiria, Walterus de, 1265
Barbara, S., Bobertus de, 1170
Barbere, Bicardus filius Siwardi le,
993

Siwardus le, 993
Bardenaj, Abbas de, 445, 534, 535
Bardolf, Bobertus, 1163

Willehnus, 1117
Bardulf, Thomas, 44
Bardulphe, Thomas, 1819
Bares, Beginaldus de, 1234
Baret, Agnes uxor Galfridi, 1041

Aluredus, 961

Galfridus, 1041

GunuUa uxor Aluredi, 961

Bogems, 961
Baiibus, Bannulfus de, 13
Baringtona, Galfridus de, 603
Barneby, Alicia uxor Bogeri de, 98

Johannes de, 1847

Juliana uxor Bogeri de, 98

Bicardus filius Bogeri de, 98

Bogerus de, 98
Barre, Gerardus, 455
Barringtona, Galfridus de, 521
Bars, Beatricia uzor Boberti de, 1956


248


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


The fittiii6tfn refer to the easee not to the pctgee.


Ban, BriamiB de, 1716

BobertUB de, 1956
Bart, Alezander. 1910
Barihiogtona, Waltems de, 1850
Bartona, Emma uxor Willelmi de,
1199

Bicardns de, 1613

WillelmuB de, 1199
Basoot, Thomas, 1640
Basinge, Basingh, BobertoB de, 10,

1467
Basingeham, Johannee de, 1182
Basingh vide Basinge.
Baskereoilla, S. Georgii de, Abbas,
80,962

Waltenis de, 1622
Baskerailla, Thomas de, 732
Basset, Agnes uxor Beginaldi, 1109,
1493

Alanns, 520, 1129

Danid, 1263

Folco, 1551
. Gena, 388, 1094

Gilebertus, 750, 857, 1129, 1167,
1273

Johanna filia Thnrstani, 635

Johannes, 1688

Eaterina uxor Warini, 354

Osemundas, 1688

Philippus, 857

Badulfus, 781

Beginaldus, 1109, 1493, 1944

Bicardus, 72

Bobertus, 439

Thomas, 101, 230, 513

Thurstanus,' 635

Warinus, 354

WiUehnus, 165, 196, 234, 751, 1109,
1303, 1512, 1688
Bassingbumia, Alanus de, 1578

Alexander de, 1678, 1817

Johannes de, 696

Warinus de, 731

Warinus filius Warini de, 731
Bassingebumia, Albreda uxor Warini
de, 1831

Nicholaus de, 948


BaBsingebumia, Warinus de, 1693,

1831
Bastard, Bobertus, 764, 987
Bastlestuna, Galfridus de, 551

Idonea nxor Gktlfridi de, 551
Bat, Alexander, 1940
BattaiU*, Bobertus, 18
Bath', Hngo de, 512
Bathonia, Hugo de, 179, 612, 1310,
1406, 1623

Osbertus de, 5

Petrns de, 1036

Willeknus de, 1410, 1544
Bathonie, ArchidiacoDus, 1200
Bathoniensis Prior, 866
Bathonienses Episcopi, 67, 141, 252,

407, 853, 866, 1117, 1170, 1354,

1379, 1436, 1615, 1752
Bauelingeham, Johannes de, 800

Mabilia uxor Thome de, 1410, 1765

Thomas de, 1410, 1765
Bauent, Michael de, 564, 1271
Bautesy, Matillis uxor Bogeri de, 364

Bogeras de, 364
Bauzan, Johannes, 319
Beauchamp vide Bello Campo.
Beaunes, Michael de, 1254

Willelmus de, 305
Beaupelle, Biaupelle, Beginaldus de,
1147

Bicardns de, 1147
Beautoft, Byautoft, Petronilla nxor
Bogeri de, 1510

Bogeras de, 1510
Bec, Bobertus de, 1978

Yincensius de, 799
Beccles, Willehnus de, 1729
Becco, Abbas de, 1004, 1164, 1220
Becco, Bum\ Eustachius de, 704

WiUelmus de, 704
Becham, Thomas de, 1806
Beche vide Pecche.
Beck, WiUebnus, 1429
Beckerwella, Herinerus de, 1298
Beckles, Yincensius de, 874
Becunte, Henricus, 1697
Bedeford, Auicia fiUa WiUebni de, 611


INDEX OF PERSONS.


249


The numbers refer to the ca$e» not to the pagei.


Bedeford, Willelmos de, 611
Bedefordie, ArehidiaoonuB, 722
Bedel, Bedellus, Alanus, 1230 •

Gilebertus le, 1209

Bicardus, 85

WiUelmus, 86
Bedellus vide BedeL
Bedingefeuld, Adam de, 428
Bedingfeuld, Adam de, 1913

Ck)nstancia uxor Ade de, 1913
Begeleby, Elyas de, 1200
Beggeham, Abbas de, 525, 1274
Beieudehe, Galfridus, 1025
Beienflet, Brianus de, 47
Beingewrthe vide Benigwrd.
Beingtona, Decanus de, 847
Bekeneffeldia, Benedictus de, 1167
Belegraue, Bicardus de, 1301
Belet, Johannes, 1107

Margeria, 920

Robertus, 1107

Walterus filius Willekni, 1427

WiUehnus, 1427
Beletona, Elias de, 1947
Belewe, Alioia de, 734
Belhus, Bicardus de, 1485
Belinhar, Hugo de, 305
Bella Fago, Enmia de, 245, 261, 493

Gyla uxor Martini de, 917

Martinus de, 917
BeUo, Abbas de, 5, 253, 427, 1005,

1598, 1667
Bello Campo, Beauchamp, Elias de,
86, 1391, 1469, 1491, 1515

Eudo de, 350, 680

Gunnora uxor Willehni de, 681,
682, 757

Isabella de, 1071

Johannes de, 681, 691, 757

Matillis uxor Willehni de, 1764

Oto fiUus Wnielmi de, 681

PhiUppus de, 458

Bicardus de, 648

Bobertus de, 400

Barra uxor Bicardi de, 648

Simon de, 1607

W. de, 1553


BeUo Campo, Walterus de, 250, 1328

Wmehnus de, 250, 681, 682, 757,
1055, 1071, 1133, 1448, 1612,
1764
BeUo Loco, Abbas de, 468, 655, 728,

817
BeUo Monte, AUcia de, 977

PhiUppus de, 197, 566, 977

Boesia uxor Thome de, 197

Thomas de, 197, 566
BeUo, Pontis de, Abbas, 6
BeUo Quercu, Henricus de, 1670
Beltof t, PetroniUa uxor Bogeri de, 959
Bendenge vide Bendenges.
Bendenges, Bendenge, Badinges,
Adam de, 1410

AUcia de, 156, 800, 880, 1519

Alicia uxor Ade de, 1410

Gunnora de, 1120, 1176, 1649

JuUana fiUa Gunnore de, 1176

Petrus fiUus AUcia de, 156

Stephanus de, 241
BendeuiUa, AUcia de, 77

Aluredos de, 93
Benedicti, S., de Hohna, Abbas, 1451
Beneit, WiUelmus, 878
Benette, MatUUs de, 15
Benham, Bartholomeus de, 1813
Benigwrd, Beingewrthe, Gilebertus
de, 1546

Sarra uxor Gileberti de, 1546
Benigewrthe, WiUelmus de, 1093
Benigwrthe vide Beningworthe.
Beningeburgo, Walterus de, 22
Beningesworthe, WiUehnus de, 956
Beningworthe, Benigwrthe, GUeber*
tus de, 944, 1102, 1211

Sarra uxor Gileberti de, 1102

WiUelmus de, 1211

WiUehnus fiUus GUeberti de, 944,
1102
Bentlega, WiUehnus de, 51
Bercamstede, Hugo de Bathonia de»

179
Berchamstede, Henricus de, 1389
Berchanestona, AUcia fiUa Auicie de,

1958


250


INDEX OF FERSONS.


The numhen refer to the eaees not to the pages.


BerdiAneBtonft, Anicia de, 1958
Berchestona, Adam de, 1897

Bicardae de, 212

Simon de, 212, 1022
Berdefeald, Galfridas Capellanas de,

617
Berdealia, Abbas de, 1024
Bere, Alicia axor Johannis de la, 1019

Alicia nxor Bicardi de la, 1438

Andreas filins Bicardi de la, 1438

Benedictae de, 831

Johannes de la, 1019

Bicardas de la, 288, 1438
Berefordia, Beatricia oxor Johannis
de, 1824

Elia3 de, 1873

Johannes de, 1824

Jaliana nxor Boberti de, 1873

Badolphas de, 1278

BlcardoB de, 1873

Bicardos filias Boberti de, 220

Bobertos de, 220, 1873

Sireda axor Bicardi de, 1873
Berefraj, Willelmas, 206
Belrencestria, Prior de, 570, 1396
Bereailla, Adam de, 76, 729

Claricia de, 385

Ela filia Johannis de, 729

Johannes de, 729

Bicardas de, 76
Bergh', Nicholaas de, 1832
Bergham, Hago de la, 1436
Berham vide Berham.
Beriche, Elena de, 1925
Berk', Nicholans de, 275
Berkel* vide Berkele.
Berkelay, Bobertas de, 1574

Thomas de, 1574
Berkele, Berker, Berl', Bobertas de,
1428

Willehnas de, 553
Berkelegha, Thomas de, 1166
^erkeley, Breckel, Breckr, Thomas

de, 850, 860
Berkinge, Abbatissa de, 758

Bicardas de, 929
Berkinges, Aloredus de, 1564


Berkinges, Oilebertas de, 222

Isabella oxor Alaredi de, 1564

Badolfas de, 222

Bicardas de, 1516
Berl* vide Berkele.
Berlaj, Henricas de, 1867

Nicholaas de, 1867
Berlingeham, Adam de, 1652
Bermicoste, Gerardas, 310
Bermondseia, Prior de, 863, 1379
Bemage, Johannes filias Badnlfi, 831

BadoUas, 831
Bemake, Bicardas de, 514
Bemard vide Bnmard.
Bemardoote, Bobertus de, 51
Beme, Enmia nxor Eastaohii de,
1650

Eastachias de, 1650
Bemeres, Galfridas filius MatiUidis
de, 1176

Johannes de, 1719

Juliana filia Matillidis de, 1176

MatUUs de, 1176, 1573

Badalfas de, 1719
Bemers, Isabella de, 327

MatiUis de, 1120

Bogeras de, 1937
Bemenal, Helewisa axor Hagonis de,
526

Hago de, 526
Bemeailla, Prior de, 999
Bemewella, Prior de, 103, 104
Bemham, AUcia axor Walteri de, 110

Walteros de, 110
Berningeham, Barlingeham, Easta-
chins de, 355, 1928

Bogerus de, 355, 1928
Bemingham, Eustachius de, 1932

Sarra de, 1932
Bemobas, WiUehnas, 539
Bertona, Alanns de, 34, 1353

Petras de, 1961

Boesia uxor Alani de, 34
Bertram, Adam, 895

OUua axor Philippi, 1313

Philippus, 1313

Bicardus, 361


INDEX OF PERSONS.


251


The numhers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Berwe, Henricus de, 1226
Besacra, Johannes de, 1869

Petras de, 1869
Besebro, Johanna axor Walteri de,
924

Waltems de, 924
Besewilla, Kicardus de, 248
BesUr, Mathias, 1136
Besilla, Mathias, 1141
Bestener*, Bestenor', vide Bestenora.
Bestenora, Bestener*, Bestenor', Mar-

tinus de, 70, 88
Bestfordia, Walterus de, 250
Besuilla vide BosuiUa.
Bethona, Baldewinus de, 1220
Bethuna, Comes de, 302
Bethune, Baldewinus de, 102
Beuercote, Fuloo de, 224

Bogerus filius Fulconis de, 224

Simon filius Fulconis de, 224
Beuerlaco, Helewisa uxor Bicardi de,
1097

BicarduB de, 1097
Beuerlegha, Precentor de, 722
Beuilla vide Bouilla.
Beynin, Thomas, 221
Bejthorp, Matheus de, 212
Bezil, Matheus, 1109
Biaupelle vide Beaupelle.
Bicunt vide Bnchoint.
Bidesdale, Bideshale, Bildesdale,

Willehnus de, 1199
Bideshale vide Bidesdale.
Bidona, Amabilis de, 1612
Bidun, Amicabilis filia Johannis de,
648

Amicia filia Johannis de, 648

Ermiceda de, 648

Johannes de, 648, 1072

Sarra de, 1072

Sarra filia Johannis de, 648

Walterus de, 648
Bigod, Gomes, 1674, 1765, 1813, 1827,
1828

Hugo le, 696, 1036, 1827, 1828

Isabella uxor Bogeri le, 633, 698

Margeria la, 1279


Bigod, Bogerus, 1242, 1271, 1828

Bogerus filius Hugonis le, 1827

Bogerus le, 303, 533, 698, 694, 695,
754, 835, 1426, 1620, 1755, 1813

Simon le, 373, 1813

Thomas le, 1766

Willehnus le, 89, 1279
Bigot, Isabella uxor Bogeri le, 698

Bogerus, 22

Bogerus le, 698
Bikelegha, Huwardus de, 1638

Orgoillnsa uxor Huwardi de, 1638 .
Bikestorpe, Matheus de, 651, 1130
Bikestrope, Matheus de, 764
Bil, Bobertus, 373, 696

Bogerus, 373

Willehnus, 373
Bildesdale vide Bidesdale.
Billingeburgo, Johannes de, 441
Billingeh', Henricus de, 1092

Willehnus de, 1092
Bihieya, Bobertus de, 762
Binetr', Bobertus de, 1076, 1709

Thomas de, 1709
Bingham, Johannes de, 1784
Binham, Dinham, Prior de, 1238
Bintewrthe, Willelmufl, 913
Biricholt, Alexander de, 1777

Johannes de, 1777

Bogerus de, 1777
Birketorpe, Walterus de, 211
Birkin, Birkyn, Agnes nxor Johannia
le, 22, 60

Johannes le, 22, 60
Birkyn vide Birkin.
Birlawe, Adan^ de, 432

Albreda uxor Ade de, 432
Birlingham, Bobertus filius Willehnl
de, 1801

Willelmus de, 1801
Birstona, Johannes de, 1423
Biscoyne, Byscoyne, Galfridus, 402
Biseche, Bisiche, Gilebertug de, 965
Biset, Auicia uxor Willebni, 1650

Henrious, .1831

Isolda, 1320

Isolda uxor Willelmi, 1680


252


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The numbers refer to the eaees not to the pages.


Biflet, Johannes, 1580

WiUelmns, 1550, 1580
Bisiohe vide Biseohe.
BiBseye, Gkdfridas de, 713
Bisshete, Tharstantia de, 498
BisBopegate, Prior de, 1523
BiBsopesgate, hospitaliB extra, Prior,
875

novi hofipitalis de, Prior, 1594
BiBBOpestona, Frarious de, 1229
BiBBopestnna, WilleUnas de, 281
Bisteehe, ThnrBtanus de, 313
Bitaller, Bicardus le, 100
Blaoarfot, Alicia nzor Badolfi, 726

Badolfas, 726
Blaobarfot, Alicia azor Badolfi, 575

Badolfus, 575
Bladeworthe, Elyas de, 1193

WiUehnas de, 1193
Bladewrthe, Adam de, 1196
Blake, Editha azor Willehni de, 1080

Willehnas de, 1080
Blakedona, Nidholans de, 678
Blakeham, Thomas de, 700, 875
Blakebkke, Henricas de, 1368
Blakeman, Walterus, 1254
Blaketoft, PhillippaB de, 1852
Blakeuilla, Thomas filius Willehni
de, 1014

WiUehnas de, 1014
BhikeweUa, Herbertus de, 780

Johannes fiUas Thome de, 789

Bannulfas de, 780

Thomas de, 780
Blancard, Bioardus, 251
Bleoche, Lucas le, 1533
Blecchesdena, Bicardus de, 1168
Bler', Agnes fiUa Boberti de, 955

Alicia fiUa Boberti de, 955

Galfridus filius Boberti de, 955

MatilUs fiUa Boberti de, 955

Bobertus de, 955
Bloohesduna, Bioardas de, 567
Bloiheu vide Bloyn.
BloinuiU' vide BlumuiU*.
Blom, Michael le, 1583
Bloyeu vide Bloyn.


Bloyil, Bloihea, Bloyen, Greraasias,

894
BlumenhiUa, Herbertus de, 1980
BlomuUr, BloinuiU', Thomas, 376
Blund, Blundus, Adam, 1539

Agnes uzor NichoUi, 951, 1400

Andreas, 1679

Baldewinus, 1095

GeoiUa ozor WUIehni, 1919

Heremannas fiUus Bicardi, 61

Hugo, 1961

luetta uzor Badulfi, 1383

Johannes, 339, 340, 1967

Johannes fiUus Johannis, 1967

Lecia azor WiUelmi le, 419

MatiUis uzor Bioardi, 61

Niohohkus, 951, 987, 1400

Odo fiUus Baldewini, 1095

Badulfus, 1383

Beginaldas, 270

Bioardus, 61

Bobertas, 1041

Simon, 674, 1029

Thomas, 1277

Wmehnus, 210, 285, 419, 1687,
1919
Blandus vide Blund.
Bluntesduna, Walerandus de, 789
BlunuiUa, Thomas de, 1238
Bookemere, Bogerus de, 285
Bocklonde, Henricus de, 812
Boclande, Galfridus de, 1069, 1445,
1821, 1825, 1908

Matmis de, 1570

Wmehnus de, 1571
Boolonde, Wmehnus de, 12
Boolondo, Galfridus de, 243
Bootona, AueUna fiUa Boberid de,
1760

Henricus de, 1760

IsabeUa fiUa Boberti de, 1760

BobertuB de, 1760
Bodeham, Phmppus de, 1489

Wmelmus de, 1489
Bodekelham, Galfridus de, 805
Bodekesham, Henrious de, 1259
Bodenho, Alicia fiUa Bioardi de, 256


INDEX OF PERSONS.


253


The numhen refer to the cases not to the pages.


Bodenho, Margeria filia Bicardi de,
256

Bicardns de, 256
Bodewe, Walterus de, 1404
Bodmine, Andreas de, 214

Prior de, 214
Boeles, Bicardas de, 1261
Boeseoilla, Elias de, 1686
Bograne, Prior de, 421
Bohun, Bon\ Sanaricus de, 247
Boistard, Warinus, 229
Bokerel, Andreas, 825
Bolebec, Cristina de, 233

Walterus de, 233, 633
Bolescota, Ascelina uxor Willelmi
de, 934

WillelmuB de, 934
Bolestrode, Nicholaus de, 410
Bomine, Prior de, 894, 1539
Bon' vide Bohun.

Bonastre, Emma uxor Willelmi,
737

Willehnus, 737
Bonorestien, Stephanus, 19
Bonde, GalMdus le, 898

Bicardus le, 898

SibDla uzor Bicardi le, 898
Bonet, Johannes, 301
Boneueye, Buueneye, Willehnus de,

1750
BoneuilU, Anicia uxor Nicholai de,
1285

Nicholaus de, 1285

Badulfus de, 997
Boningeswurthe, Gilebertus de, 309

Sarra uzor Gileberti de, 309
Bononia, Beatricia uxor Stephani de,


Faramns de, 452

Juliana filia Walteri de, 1931

Mabilia filia Walteri de, 1931

Stephanus de, 1929

WalteruB de, 1931
Bononie, Comes, 262
Bonpas, Clemens, 1313

Boana nxor Clementis, 1313
Boqueynt, Henricns, 235


Bor, Bogerus le, 1904
Borard, Simon de, 406
Bordlega, Abbas de, 1
Borlega, Hngo de, 1242
Borray, Berengerus de, 1578

Gerardus filius Berengeri de, 1578
Bortona, Edwardus de, 20
Bosant, Bicardus, 701
Boscard, Johannes, 1028
Bosco, Alicia uxor Willebni de, 487,
968, 1921

Beatricia uxor Unfridi de, 347

Claricia uxor Bogeri de, 1802

Gilebertus filius Boberti de, 1673

Johanna de, 487

Johanna fiUa Willehni de, 968

Mabilia uxor Boberti de, 1673

Matillis de, 968, 1673, 1674

Philippus de, 176.

Bobertus de, 968, 1673, 1674

Bogerus de, 1802

Boysia uxor Willehni de, 795

S. Trinitatis de, Prior, 1319

Thomas de, 10, 250

Unfridus de, 347

Willehnus de, 487, 795, 968, 1673,
1921

WiUehnus filins Bobertus de, 1673,
1674
Bose, Willehnus filius Whneri, 1041

Whnerus, 1041
Bosebroc, Johanna uxor Walteri,
1053

Walterus, 1053
Boseuilla, Thomas de, 975
Bostar' vide Bostard.
Bostard, Bostar', Bostarde, Galfridus,
873

Mabilia uxor Gtalfridi, 873

Warmus, 1616
Bostarde vide Bostard.
BosuiUa, BesuiUa, Johanna uxor
Bicardi de, 1662

Bicardus de, 1513, 1662

Thomas de, 205
BotereUe, Albreda uxor WiUelmi,
1793


254


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


The ntunbert refer to the eaeee not to the pagee.


Boterelle, Willelmiu, 1798
Boterfeoldia, Philippos de, 524

BioardnB de, 524
Bothorp, Bobertas filias WiUelmi de,
1943

Willelmas de, 1943
Botindona, Bicardafl de, 147
Boael, Willelmas, 269
Boaen*, Agnes axor Willelmi de,
App. 5

WiUelmas de, App. 5
Boailla, Beailla, Alexander de, 1653

Hawissia azor Johannis de, 12

Henricas de, 1653

Johannes de, 12, 1055, 1571
Boallers, Balers, Baldewinas de, 109

Bobertas de, 109

Wenteliena de, 109
Boaltona, HenriQas de, 180, 1547

Prior de, 1862
Boan, Matillis de, 855

Unfridas de, 463, 1168
Boatona, Henricas de, 20
Boxe, Petras de la, 1714
Boxle, Abbas de, 1409
Boye, Emma filia Beginaldi, 1959

Jordanas, 1959

Beginaldas, 1959

WilleUnas, 1959
B^oytona, WiUehnas de, 1509
Bozan, WiUehnas, 976
Braoebrogg', Amicia oxor WiUehni
de, 480

WiUehnas de, 430
Bracker, Bobertas de, 1012
Bracar, Osmaras le, 281
Braoey, Braey, Bobertas de, 318
Braddena, Walteras de, 366
Bradebroc, Dionisia fiUa Beginaldi
de, 794

Emma axor Beginaldi de, 794

Beginaldas de, 794
Bradefeoldia, AUcia axor Geroasii
de, 369

Geroasias de, 369
Bradefordia, WUlehnus, 1424
Bradehas, Joelanns de, 1209


Bradekere, WiUehnas de, 1704
Bradele, Badalfas de, 1870
Bradelegha, Bradeleia, Prior de, 512,

612
Bradeleia vide Bradelegha.
Brademere, Johanna uxor WiUehni
de, 1523

WiUehnus de, 1523
Bradenestoke, Prior de, 219, 585
BradeshuUa, Andreas de, 601
Braey vide Bracj.

Braham, Agnes axor WiUehni de,
1520

AUcia nxor WiUehni de, 1520

IsabeUa fiUa WUlehni de, 1892

Bandulphus de, 694

Bannulfus de, 1827

Wmehnus de, 1426, 1520, 1892
Brake vide Lake.

Bramfoidia, Alicia oxor GeroasU de,
493

Geruasius de, 493

Johannes fiUus WiUehni de, 508

Bobertus fiUus WiUehni de, 508

WiUehnus de, 508
Bramhop, AUcia fiUa Boberti de, 1851

Bobertus de, 1851
Brampdona, GUebertus de, 1778

WUlehnas de, 1778
Bramptona, Bramton', Diamanda
axor GUeberti de, 1048

Gilebertus de, 1048
Bramton' vide Bramptona.
Brancestria, Bobertus de, 1321
Branche, Johanna oxor Johannis,
800

Johannes, 800
Branctona, Gilebertns de, 1505
Brantestona, Adam fiUus laonis de^
1602

luode, 1602
BraunceweU', WiUelmus de, 293
Bray, Agnes fiUa Milonis de, 1608

AUoia axor Badulphi de, 968, 1673,
1921

MatUUs de, 1201

MatilUs nxor Theobaldi de, 1592


INDEX OF PERSONS.


255


The numhers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Bnqr, Milo de, 1608

Philippas de, 1684

Badulphus de, 137, 487, 968, 1012,
1201, 1673, 1736, 1931

Theobaldus de, 1592

Yiuianas de, 513
Braybroc, Braybroke, Gristina uxor
Henrici de, 1675

Henricus de, 427, 829, 1394, 1522,.
1529, 1675, 1677, 1826, App. 1

Jobannes de, 1513

Robertus de, 1677
Braybrok, Clemencia uxor Henrici de,
116

Henricus de, 116, 1293
Braybroke vide Braybroc.
Braytona vide Draitona.
Braz de Fer, Ricardus, 1773
Breause vide Breusa.
Breaute; Colinus de, 1219

Falco de, 1872

Falkesius de, 102, 513, 854, 1108,
1131, 1133, 1607, 1623, 1643

Fulco de, 1012

Johannes de, 1131

Margeria uxor Falkesii de, 1643

Ricardus de, 1391

Willehnus de, 1171
Breckel, Breckl' vide Berkeley.
Breitoft, Johannes de, 445
Breiusa vidtf Brensa.
Bremele, Abbas de, 773
Brentungeherste, Reginaldus de, 306
Bret, Martinus le, 72

Simon le, 107, 122

Thoraldus le, 1863

Willehnus le^ 320
Bretel, Johannes, 1772
Brethenham, Alexander de, 809
Bretona, Johannes de, 1738
Bretone, Juliana uxor Willehni le,
1245

Martinus le, 1245

Willehnus le, 1245
Bretun, Custaneia uzor Hugonis le,
129

Hugo le, 129


Breusa, Breause, Breiusa, Eua de»
786

Johannes de, 46, 167, 390, 1362

Reginaldus de, 40, 46, 167, 195,
250, 1328, 1330, 1362

Rogerus de, 46

Willehnus de, 46, 250, 709, 786,
1362
Breute, Ricardus de, 1469
Brewere vide Briwerre.
Brewerre vide Briwerre.
Brejles, Isabella uxor Jordani de,
934

Jordanus de, 934
Brian, Gilebertus, 584
Briann*, Willehnus de, 1164
Briche, Basilia fiUa Johannis de, 617

Johannes de, 617
Brichworthe, Reginaldus de, 1890
Brickeseta, Prior de, 1248
Brid, Robertus, 1830

WiUehnus, 371, 930
Bridlingtona, Prior de, 480
Briffeldia, Philippus de, 72
Brigida, S., Adam de, 205
Brikeuilla, WiUehnus de, 760
Brimhurst, Robertus de, 1457
Brimtona, Brimstona, Henricas de,
1423

Johannes de, 1975, 1980
Brimstona vide Brimtona.
Bringwurthe, Gilebertua de, 516

Sarra uxor GUeberti de, 515
Brintona, Gunnora de, 42

Ricardus de, 42
BristoU*, Abbas, 425
BristoUii, Judeus, 1179

S. Augustini, Abbas, 1166
Britannie, Comes, 108, 623, 731
BriteweUa, Prior de, 1275
Brithasche, Johannes, 447
Brito vide Briton.
Briton, Brito, Alanus, 813

Hugo, 1299

Radulfus, 813

Ranulfus, 368, 437, 519, 524, 870

Ricardus, 215


256


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The numben refer to the eaees not to the pagee.


Briton, BobfirtuB, 584

Wmelmas, 823, 503, 598, 778, 1323,
1550
Briwere vide Briwerre.
Briwerre, Brewere, Brewerre,Briwere,
Bmwere, Alanas le, 1311

WiUelinas, 5, 6, 202, 363, 367, 680,
796, 894, 1593, 1687
Briwes, Johannes de, 67, 858, 1436

Bobertnfl de, 853
Broc, Adam del, 821

Clemencia filia Edeline de, 116

Edelina de, 116, 1847, 1410

Ena del, 1336

Prior del, 1366

Bannnlfus de, 1847
Brochamtona, Alicia de, 196

Matillis de, 196
Brok, Dauid del, 1167

EnBtacbias del, 1223
Brokebrod, Galfridas, 837
Brokedis*, Gerardas, 424
Brokeleia, Bobertas de, 1757
Brom, Anketillas de, 1984

Maria de, 1893

Bicardas de, 770, 1808

Bicardas filias Marie de, 1893
Bromlegba, Bromlegha, Willehnas

de, 888
Bromwico, Willehnas de, 1094
Bronfordia, Bobertas filias Willehni
de, 795

WiUehnas de, 795
Broad, MabiUa axor Willehni, 1248

WiUehnus, 1243
Brad, Michael del, 1543
Braera, Abbas de, 1613

JaUana axor Walteri de hi, 1011

Badalphas de U, 1675

Walterus de U, 1011

Willehnus de la, 976
Bruere, Abbas de la, 1527

WUlehnus, 1098
Bruges, Decanus de, 187
Brugfeldia, Hugo de, 1982
Brumartona, WiUehnas de, 970
Bramlegha vide Bromlegha.


Bron, AUna axor Johannis le, 685

Johannes le, 397, 579, 635

Martinns, 825

Badulphus, 1041

Bicardus le, 1260

WUlelmus, 21, 77, 451, 1129
Bnmfordia, Bogeros fiUus WiUehni
de, 795

Boysia de, 615

WiUehnas de, 795
Bnmger, Bicherus, 1833
Bruning, Simon, 825
Brus, Petrus de, 1199
Bruwere vide Briwerre.
Bnbbe, Petros, 168
Buchard, Emulfus, 1791
Bndhoint, Bicont, Henricos de, 394,

716
BuckeuiUa, Emaldas de, 615
Buckingeham, Archidiaconi de, 576,
626, 646

WiUehnus de, 619
Bucministre, Bogerus de, 441
Bucuinte, Henricus, 1554
Bucunt, Henricus, 936
Budenho, Bicardus de, 61
Bnelers, Henricus de, 41
Bueles, MatiUis uxor NichoUi de,
1497

Nicholaus de, 1497
Bugle, Margeria oxor Walteri, 1695

Walterus, 1695
Buhard, Thomas, 1812
Bukerel, Andreas, 477
Bukesworthe, Henricus de, 1620
Bule, Adam le, 1247
Buleha vide Buleheya.
Buleheya,Buleha, AUcia fiUaNichohu
de, 68

Mainfel de, 68

Nicholaus de, 68

NiohoUus fiUus Mainfel de, 68
Boleheje, Agnes uxor Nichohii de,
1340, App. 5

AUcia filia Nichokd de, App. 5

Margeria filia Nichohti de, App. 5

NichoUas de, 1340, App. 5


INDEX OF PERSONS.


257


The numhers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Balers vide BouUers.
Bulintona, Prior de, 1356
Bulkintona, Isabella uxor Nicholai
de, 133

Nicholaus de, 133
Bullingtona, Prior de, 472
Bulloo, Begioaldus, 1799
BuUj, Badulfus de, 1859

WiUelmus de, 1859
Bulwino, WiUelmus, 870
Buntindona, WiUehnus de, 976
Bardeleis, WiUehnus de, 175
Burdeles, Bogerus de, 1932
Burdet, Idonea uxor Nicholai, 279

Nioholaus, 279

WUlelmus, 279
Burdun, Bachardus, 91, 1392

Egelina uxor Bioardi, 579, 635

Beginaldus, 1392

Beginaldus fiUus Buchardi, 91

Eicardus, 579, 635, 713, 1405
Burel, Galfridus, 270
Burgate, Bobertus de, 1245
Burgeis, Petrus le, 1152
Burgestede, Benedictus de, 374
Burgham, Nicholaus de, 1368
Burgho, Johannes de, 1784

Sabina uxor Johannis le, 1784
BurghuUa, Johannes de, 802

Decanus de, 802
Burginlun, WiUelmus le, 1815
Burgo, Abbas de, 117, 514, 971

AUcia de, 888

AUcia uxor PhiUppi de, 623

Bartholomeus de, 754

Beatricia uxor Huberti de, 1686

Berleta uxor Boberti de, 1468

Galfridus de, 722, 1716

Hawisia uxor Johannis de, 681,
682, 757

Hubertus de, 43, 66, 213, 354, 376,
403, 663, 750, 827, 857, 885, 956,
1046, 1064, 1108, 1111, 1136,
1141, 1221, 1233, 1330, 1686

Hugo de, 1657

Johannes de, 384, 681, 682, 757,
779

M. I.


Burgo, PhiUppus de, 623

Keinerus de, 456, 595

Bobertus de, 162, 1468

Bogerus de, 1296

Sunon de, 1842

Thomas de, 210, 1684

Walterus de, 1716
Burlega, Johannes de, 1

WUlehnus de, 1

WiUehnus fiUus WiUelmi de, 1
Bum* tnde Becco.
Bumard, Bumarde, Bernard, Bo-

gerus de, 899, 933
Bumarde vide Bumard.
Bume, Beatricia uxor Johannis de la,
1218

Johannes de la, 1218
Bumebn, Johanna uxor Boberti de
la, 579, 636

Johannes de la, 579

Bobertus de la, 579, 635
Bumeham, Bumham, PhUippus de,
1836

Kadulfus de, 1836

Bobertus de, 75
Bamel, Burnelle, Alicia uxor Dauid,
99

Dauid, 99

Margeria uxor Boberti, 1150

Robertus, 1098, 1150

Sarra uxor WiUelmi, 1098

WUlelmus, 1098
BumeUe vide Bumel.
Burnham vide Bumeham.
Buro, H. de, 1762
Burs, Bogerus de, 917
Burstal, Gilebertus de, 1971
Burton*, WUlehnus, 932
Burtona, Abbas de, 914, 974

Johannes de, 652

Laurencius de, 789

MatUUs de, 621

Petrus de, 621

Badulfus de, 628

Robertus de, 231, 926, 1637

Rogerus de, 628
Burwimman, MabUia le, 1852

17


258


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The numhers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Busey vide Btissj.
Bassel, Herbertus, 617
Bussez, Thomas de, 279
Bussey, Bartholomeus filius Willelmi
de, 1085
Johanna filia Matillidis de, 1085
Lambertus de, 1093
MatilUs de, 1085
Willehnus de, 1085
Bussy, Busej, Oliuerus, 759

Bobertus de, 546
Bustard, Adam, 1474
Busun, Willehnus, 977
Buterwioo, Bobertus de, 1676
Buteuileyn, Agnes uxor Boberti, 1471

Bobertus, 1471
Buteuilla, Oliuerus de, 1950
Butiller, Buttiller, Butyller, Adam le,
645, 1131, 1702
Hugo le, 1407
Johannes le, 729
Matillis uxor Bicardi le, 1212
Nigellus, 309
Petnis le, 1713
Bicardus le, 875, 1212
Bobertus le, 79, 214, 808, 848, 926,

949
WiUelmus le, 949, 972, 1702
Buttelegha, Prior de, 740, 788
Butter*, Lucia uxor Willelmi de, 66

WiUehnus de, 66
Buttiller vide ButiUer.
Buttyler, Thomas de, 679
ButyUer vide ButiUer.
Buueneye vide Boneueye.
Buzun, Margeria uxor WiUelmi, 798

WUlehnus, 798
Byantoft vide Beautoft.
Byrlawe, Adam de, 1096

Albreda uxor Ade de, 1096
Byscoyne vide Biscoyne.
Byset, AUcia uxor Johannis, 1584
Johannes, 1584

Caamu vide Gaynes.
Cabaum vide Cahaum.
Cabbus, Johannes, 1182


Cabus, Hamon, 87

Johannes, 339

Beginaldus, 87
Cadamo, Maria uxor Walteri de, 423

MatUUs de, 1502

Walterus de, 423, 559
Cahannes, Kahanneys, Bicardus de,
1580

Sarra uxor Bicardi do, 1580
Cahaum, Cabaum, Cahaun, Cha-
baum*, Chaun', Eabaum, Hugo
fiUus Badulfi de, 34

Johannes^ 262

Osmundus fiUus Bicardi de, 114

Badulfus de, 34

Bicardus de, 114

WUlelmus de, 34, 114

Wmehnus fiUus Badulfi de, 34
Cahaun vide Cahaum.
Calceto, Bogerus de, 302
Caldicot', Bicardus de, 1105
Caldicote, Alicia uxor MauricU de, 919

Mauricius de, 919

Bicardus de, 919
CaUon, Jordanus de, 45

MabiUa uxor Jordani de, 45
Caluus, le Cauf, WiUelmus, 296
Cam, Galfridus de, 1112
Camberlanus, Adam, 1034

CeciUa fiUa Ade, 1034
Camera, Lecia uxor WUlelmi de, 405

Bobertus de, 346, 1051

WiUehnus de, 405
Camerarius, Badulfus, 750

Bicardus, 462, 597, 1477

WiUelmus, 850, 860
Camerlan*, Bobertus, 232
Cammeys, Eammeys, Badulfus de,

158
Campedena, EstrUda uxor WiUelmi
de, 1613

WiUelmus de, 1613
Campeny, Johannes de, 206
Campese, Priorissa de, 21
Campeseia, Priorissa de, 745, 746
Campesse, Priorissa de, 1381
Campo Emulfi, WiUehnus de, 979


INDEX OF PERSONS.


259


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Campnilla, Bertram de, 1466
Gamuilla, Caamailla, Eamailla,
Eaumailla, Eaanailla, Cristina
uxor Hagonis de, 262

Egelina nxor Ricardi de, 338

Eustachia axor Ricardi de, 601

Galfridas de, 94, 95

Gerardus de, 503, 665

Hago de, 262

Leuca de, 602

Nicholaa axor Gerardi de, 603, 565

Ricardus de, 338, 601, 602

Thomas de, 1742

Willelmus de, 392
Canard, Hugo, 1791
Canauac vide Caneuaz.
Cancellis, Andreas de, 318
Candel vide Caandel.
Caneuac vide Caneuaz.
Caneaaz, Canauac, Caneaac, Henri-
cas, 1434

Robertus, 1434
Cant', Cristiana uxor Gregorii de,
1784

Gregorius de, 1784
Cantebrigia, S. Marie Magdalene de,

leprosi, 67
Cantebrigie, Cancellarius, 722
Cantele, WiUelmas de, 135
Cantelupo, Cantilupo, Mazilia uxor
Willelmi de, 86

Petrus de, 903, 943

Rogeras de, 839

WUlelmas de, 86, 96, 208, 714,
1117, 1273, 1366, 1541
CantUey, Adam de, 1791

Rogeras de, 1791
Cantilapo vide Cantelupo.
Cantuaria, Radulfas de, 1723

S. Augustini de, Abbas, 14, 376, 474
Cantuarie, Prior, 703
Cantuarienses, Archiepiscopi, 81, 178,

263, 277, 336, 391, 462, 697, 622,

636, 647, 666, 798, 857, 1070, 1108,

1117, 1218, 1238, 1273, 1387, 1415,

1596, 1664, 1677, 1699, 1785, 1928,

App. 7


Capel, Johannes, 1771

JaUana fiUa Johannis, 1771
CapeUa, Galfridus de, 1916
CapeUanas, Adam, 1300, 1977

Fabianas, 828

Galfridus, 617

Gregorius, 910

Henricus, 132

Hugo, 74, 634

Johannes, 338

Jordanus, 1357

Matheus, 1791

Osbertus, App. 7

Petrus, 1762

Ricardus, 1143

Simon, 237
Capelonde, Sampson, 251
Carbonel, CarboneUe, Carbunel,
Nicholaus fiUus Warini, 90

Radulfus, 194, 865

Badulfus fiUus Warini, 90

Sabina, 90

Thomas, 110, 873

Warinus, 90

Warinus fiUus Sabine, 90

WiUelmus fiUus Warini, 90
CarboneUe vide Carbonel.
Carbunel vide Carbonel.
Cardun, Petrus, 1297

Radulfus, 1297

WUlelmus, 1297
Cardunuilla, Alicia uxor Jacobi de,
1669

Jacobus de, 1669
Carectarius, Alanus, 1517

Aluredus, 460

Clemencia uxor Aluredi, 460

Willehnus, 1311
Caretarius, WiUelmus, 219
Carleolo, Robertus de, 1754

Rogerus de, 51
Carpentarius, Galfridus, 1832

Reginaldus, 119

Simon, 1913

WiUelmus filius Galfridi, 1832

Willelmus fiUus Simonis, 1913
Carsuilla. Craswell', Prior de, 877

17—2


260


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The nUtnbert refer to the cases not to the pages.


Cartoxpe, Alicia nzor Willelini de,
1744

Willelmas de, 1744
Cacdiigtona vide CnBingtona.
Castelacra, Prior de, 111
Castellioms, S. Petri, monadhi, 1
Castello, Osmimdas de, 1180
Castre, Bobertus de, 1796
Caterham, Godardas de, 1490
Cateriz, Bicardas de, 1156
Cato, Adam, 270
Catter vide Cattelegh*.
Cattele, Prior de, 173
Cattelegh\ Cattel', Gattel', Prior de,

1417
Cattona, Adam de, 185

Bicardas de, 185
Caaerelingewarthe, Willehnas de, 813
Caaereswella, Kaaeres, Kaaereswella,

Bobertas de, 1978
Caaf , le, vide Calaas.
Caomailla vide Camuilla.
Caandel, Caadel, Mariel de, 923,

927
Caase, Willelmas, 952, 1087
Caaston*, Kaastr', Hago de, 1454
Caaz, Alesia azor Jami de, 432

Alina ozor Johannis de, 432

Jamus de, 432

Johannes de, 432

Bogeras de, 231

Willehnas de, 519
Caztona, Galfridus de, 1672
Cayllard, Badalfas, 1103

Bobertus, 285
Caynes,Caama, Leticia azor Willelmi
de, 198

Willehnus de, 198
Ceoilia, Comitissa, 671, 983
Celario, Juliana de, 1062
Cementarius, Bicardus, 1348
Ceresi vide Cresey.
Cerhulla, Thomas de, 250
Ceringtona, Willehnus de, 333
Ceme, Abbas de, 131, 1495

Henricus de, 206, 223
Certeseia vide Certesey.


Certesey, Certeseia, Abbas de, 201,
282, 1562

Henricus filius Johannis de, 282

Johannes de, 282
Cesterhunt^ Philippas de, 475
Cestrensis Episcopus, 544
Cestreton, Bardulfus de, 1052
Cestria, Galfridus de, 204

Johannes de, 739

Matillis uzor Galfridi de, 204
Cestrie, Archidiaconus, 544

Comes, 95, 167, 199, 247, 272, 393,
449, 505, 708, 944, 1102, 1117,
1127, 1213, 1224, 1227, 1273,
1309, 1558, 1721, 1730

Constabularius, 869, 1847
Chabaum* vide Cahaum.
Chabbewour', Margeria de, 1590
Chacumba, Chaucumba, Hugo de,
196, 205, 976, 1950

Prior de, 196, 205, 975, 1950

Bobertus de, 196, 566, 1592
Chaggefordia, Hugo de, 1121, 1285

Isabella uzor Hugonis de, 1285
Cham, Johannes le, 846

Eaterina uzor Johannis le, 846

Badulfus de, 1800
Chamberlane vide Chamberleyn.
Chamberlein, Willelmus le, 1553
Chamberleyn, Chamberlane, Wal-

terus le, 1870
Chambres, Nicholaus de, 51
Champenas vide Champenays.
Champenays, Champenas, Bogerus
le, 1675

WiUehnus le, 400, 1436

Willehnus filius Bogeri le, 1675
Champeneis, Bicardus de, 173
Champiun, Hugo le, 524

Beginaldus, 1955

Simon filius Beginaldl, 1955
Chancy, Alicia uzor Simonis de, 947

Simon.de, 947
Chandos, Badulfus de, 1432
Chansy, Nicholaus de, 612
Chantemerle, Bobertus, 1312
Chapeleyn, Bobertus le, 890


INDEX OF PERSONS.


261


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Gharefeuld, Badolfas de, 1S92
Gharentin, Willelmus de, 853
Gharteray, Simoti de, 976
Ghartray, Bicardus de, 1146
Ghastelein, Joscelinns le, 1395
Ghaucumba vide Ghacumba.
Ghaucy, Bogerus, 501
Ghauel, Bogerus, 821
Ghauelegha, Badulfus de, 1259
Ghaun' vide Gahaum.
Ghaundos, Bicardus de, 349

Bobertus filius Bicardi de, 349
Ghaunge, Hugo de la, 593
Ghaunterel, Johannes de, 821
Ghaur* vide Ghaure.
Ghaure, Ghaur', Alicia uxor Bogeri
de, 891, 953

Bogerus de, 891, 953
Ghautona, Willelmus de, 1369
Ghauuin, Ghauuyn, Hugo, 814

Matillis uxor Hugonis, 814

Bobertus, 814
Ghauuyn vide Ghauuin.
Ghauwen vide Ghebenhoure.
Ghawrtes vide Ghawrtesteford'.
Ghawrtesteford', Ghawrtes, Paganus
de, 3

Patricius de, 3

Sibilla filia Patricii de, 3
Ghebenhoure, Ghauwen, Margeria de,

1740
Gheddewrthe, Emma de, 1265
Ghednay, Glemencia filia Willelmi de,
1639

Margeria de, 1585

Margeria filia Willehni de, 1639

Sarra filia Willehni de, 1639

WiUehnus de, 1639
Gheggewella, Ghiggeweir, Willehnus

de, 584, 598
Gheindedut, Gheyndedut, Matillis de,
429

Badulfus de, 429, 471

Boysa filia Badulfi de, 429

Ylianus de, 429
Gheldefordia, Alicia uxor Arnulfi de
1746


Gheldefordia, Amulfus de, 1746

Sauia filia Amulfi de, 1746
Ghelefeuldia, Simon de, 649
Gheles, Bobertus, 1976

Bogerus, 1976
Gheleseya, Warinus de, 36
Ghelewurthe, Jacobus de, 359
Ghelleslegh', Ghesel', Hamon de, 1535
Ghehnerefordia, Decanus de, 1453
Ghelues', Bobertus de, 1300
Gheluestona, Gheuestona, Joscens de,
971

Bogerus de, 1460
Ghennouere, Simon de, 1126
Gherc, Eadmundus de, 237
Ghereburgo, Johannes de, 1019
Gherlecota, Matillis uxor Willehni de,
1757

Willehnus de, 1757
Gherlescote, Galfridus de, 283
Gherletona, Gecilia uxor Boberti de,
510

Bobertus de, 510
Ghese, Agnes uxor Johannis, 589

Glemens, 1479

Johannes, 589
Ghesel' vide Ghelleslegh.
Ghesewic vide Gheswico.
Ghesneto, Glemencia filia Willelmi
de, 181

Eua uxor Walteri de, 1336

Margeria filia Willehni de, 181

Sarra filia Willelmi de, 181

Walterus de, 1336

WillehnuB de, 181
Ghessebech', Beginaldus, 285
Gheswico, Ghesewic, Elyas de, 1825
Ghetwnde, Bobertus de, 318
Ghetwude, Bobertus de, App. 7
Gheueleslegha, Willehnus de, 1616
Gheueleswella, Willehnus de, 1616
Gheueleswelle, Leticia de, 229

Willelmus filius Leticie de, 229
Gheuere, Hamon, 1244

Jordanus, 1244

Bobertus, 1244

Thomas, 1244


262


IKDEX OF PERSONS.


Tlie number$ refer to the eases Tiot to the pages.


Cheaereailla, Bogerns de, 5G2, 858

Walteras de, 1191
Cheaestona vide Chelaestona.
Cheare, Agnes filia Boberti, 1743
Asoelina oxor Boberti, 1743
Hamon, 1743, 1812
llabilia filia Boberti, 1743
Bobertas, 1743
Cheyndedat vide Cheindedat.
Chichesaont, Elias de, 1125
Sunon filias Elie de, 1125
Chielaeleslegha, Leticia axor Bicardi
de, 1616
Bicardas de, 1616
Willelmas filius Bicardi de, 1616
Chiggewell' vide Cheggewella.
Child, Alicia filia Galfridi, 1167
Galfridus, 1167
Lucia filia Gal&idi, 1167
Thomas, 1343
Chileham, Bobertas de, 259
Chiltona, Bartholomeus de, 1038
Chimineye, Albinas de, 262
Chiptona, Willehnas de, 450
Chiualer, Bobertas le, 813
Choanre, Hugo de, 274

Bobertus filius Hagonis de, 274
Chuere, Hamon, 788
Chonise, Willehnus, 265
Cioestrenses Episcopi, 112, 114, 350,

438, 1117, 1273
Cicestria, Jacobus de, 421
Cigoingny, Engelardus de, 684
Cirisy, Willehnus de, 415
Claipol, Laurencius de, 1430

Bicardus de, 1430
Clamuilla vide Glaunuilla.
ClanulUa vide Glaunuilla.
Clara, Comes de, 45, 52, 303

Bicardus de, 52
Clare, Alicia uxor Bogeri de, 574
Comes de, 1238
G. de, 1567, 1582
Gilebertus de, 1734
Bicardus de, 1162, 1238
Bobertus de, 1668
Bogerus de, 574


Claris Yallibus, Claus Yallibus, Bi-
cardus de, 237
Willehnus de, 938
Chiriuallibas, Willehnus de, 125D
Claro Beoco, Henricus de, 33

Ida uxor Henrici de, 33
Churo, S., Cristina de, 18
Gilebertas de, 18, 302
Hago de, 18
Johannes de, 18
Willehnus de, 896
Clauer, Henricos le, 642, 723
Johanna nxor Henrici le, 642
Walterus le, 1727
Willehnus le, 417
Claus Yallibus vide Claris Yallibus.
Clausy, Nicholaus de, 763
Clautona, Hugo de, 1142

Leticia uxor Hugonis de, 1142
Clemdona, Clendona, Galfridus de,
29, 1487
Bicardus de, 1513
Clement, Henricus, 1132
Clendona vide Clemdona.
Clenehewatona, Johannes de, 1251
Clerc, Thomas le, 1190
Clere, Johanna ux^r Martini de, 470
Martinus de, 470
Matillis axor Bogeri de, 525, 679
Badulfus de, 468
Bogerus de, 525, 679
ClericuB, Adam, 834, 879
Auicia uxor Laurencii, 1850
Bartholomeus, 1825
Basilia uxor Bicardi, 1374
Benedictus, 1436, 1785
Galfridus, 387, 1029
Henricus filius Ade, 879
HerbertuB, 253
Isabella uxor Badulfi, 1741
Johannes, 619
Laurencius, 1850
Lescelina filia Laurencii, 1850
Milo, 798
Badulfus, 1741
Bicardus, 215, 1374
Bobertus, 597, 842


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


263


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Clericus, Rogerus, 907

Thomas, 1945

Walteras, 1191

WiUelmus,^216, 1948
Clerkenwilla, Priorissa de, 1311
Clifford, ClifEordia, Ricardus de, 1152

Rogerus de, 102, 172, 352

WaJteras de, 349
Cliffordia vid^ Clifford.
Cliftona, Adam de, 252

Agnes filia Elie de, 252

Elias de, 252

Rogeras de, 252
Clinctona, Galfridus de, 322
Clingtona, Amicia de, 648
Clintona, Amicia de, 202

Amicia uxor Henrici de, 1318

Henricus de, 1318, 1493

Hugo de, 1158

Isabella de, 1373

Leticia uxor Hugonis de, 1158

Willelmus de, 283, 1373
Clipesby vide Clippesby.
Clippesby, Clipesby, Hugo de, 48

Ricardus de, 186
Clipstona, Robertus de, 725
Clipstun, Clpton*, Margeria filia
Roberti de, 819

Robertus de, 819
Cliue, Hugo de, 677

Robertus de, 1664
Cliuedena, Cliuedona, Johannes de,
1436

Matheus de, 121, 1436, 1635, 1722

Matillis filia Mathei de, 1635, 1722

Stephanus de, 298

Willebnus de, 1436

Willelmus filius Mathei de, 1722
Cliuedona vide Cliuedena.
Cliuo, Hugo de, 1505

Matillis uxor Hugonis de, 1505
Clokes, Ricardus de, 1726
Cloptona, Robertus de, 40, 164, 1436

Stephanus de, 736
Clpton* vide Clipstun.
Cluny, Abbas de, 1164, 1395
CnoUe, Ricardus de la, 828


Cnoushale, Johannes de, 1627
Cnoweshale, Johannes de, 1977
Cnud, Galfridus, 484
Cobbeham, Henricus de, 821, 1593

Johannes de, 821
Cobham, Henricus de, 262
Coburg, Anxellus de, 1118
Goc, Johannes, 1790

Osbertus, 1041

Walterus, 1790
Cocham, Cokham, Willehnus de, 185,

298
Coche, Henricus, 291
Cockefeldia, Cokefeldia, Adam de,
1100, 1393

Robertus de, 1100
Cokefeuldia, Isabella uxor Simonis
de, 494

Simon de, 494
Coeus, Coqus, Agnes uxor Hugonis,
311

Alicia uxor Nicholai, 1463

Editha filia Rogeri, 678

Emma filia Willehni, 1650

Hugo, 311

Juliana uxor Rogeri, 1464

Matillis uxor Roberti, 656

Nicholaus, 1463

Ricardus, 331

Robertus, 123, 656

Rogerus, 678, 1464

WiUelmus, 1650
Codeham, Coteham, Johannes de,

1246
Codenham, Arnulphus filius Ricardi
de, 1746

Ricardus de, 1746
Codham, Decanus de, 424
Codintona, Henricus de, 51
Codray, Ricardus de, 243
Coges, Prior de, 798
Cogeshal, Gogeshale, Radulfus de,
1478

Robertus filius Radulfi de, 1478
Coggeshal', Ooggeshale, Abbas de,

255, 448
Coham, Henricus de, 314


26i


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


The numberi re/er to the eoies not to the pages.


Coher, Goher, laabella, 212

Thomas» 212
Coigne, Thomas, 707, 1747

Walterus, 707, 1747
Goigners vide Goianers.
Goisneres vide Goianers.
Coisners, GoignerB, Goisneres, Cos-
neres, Coomers, Galfridns de,
1470

MatilliB de, 1470
Gokefeldia vide Gockefeldia.
Gokham vide Gocham.
Gokin, HenricuB, 47
Gole, Alanus, 484

Bogeras, 920
Goleoestrensis, Archidiaconas, 766
Goleoestria, Abbas de, 778, 1404
Coleham, Hugo de, 336
Golekyn, Hamon, 1782
Golestrode, Golestrode, Mauricius de,

40
Golet, Adam, 1652

Willehnus, 1652
Goleuile, Bogerus de, 514
Goleuilla, Agnes nxor Am* de, 1558

Agnes uxor Luce de, 972

Am* de, 1558

Gilebertus de, 1212, 1381

Henricus de, 217

Isabella de, 1949

Lucas de, 972

Mabilia de, 972

Bicardus de, 1736

Bobertus de, 564, 1626, 1733, 1901

Bogerus de, 1208

WiUehnus de, 15, 414, 1208, 1637
Golewrthe, Willehnus de, 72
Golingeham, Badulfus de, 330
Golre, Philippus de, 241
Goltona, Gerardus de, 1082
Golum, Prior de, 1488
Golumbariis, Philippus de, 255, 636
Golumbeyn, Thomas, 357
Gombbamptona, Adam de, 113
Conhulla, Henricus de, 1021
GonBtabularius, Petrus, 637
Gonstanciis, Walterus de, 357


Gonstantin, Bogems, 319

WiHehnuB filius Bogeri, 319
Gonuentrenses Episoopi vide Couen-

trenses EpiseopL
Goplande, Willehnus de, 1436
Gop^, Bobertus, 1946
Goqus vide Cocus.
Gorbet, Emma nxor Bicardi, 1449

Bicardus, 1449

Bogeras, 1449

Thomas, 444, 651, 882
Gorbicu* vide Corbicun.
Gorbicun, Gorbicu', Beatricia, 586

Beatrida uxor Bicardi, 284

Galfridus, 586

Bicardus, 284
Gorcumba, GaUridus de, 553
Gorduanarius, Aikicus, 294

Gristiana uxor Aikici, 294

Galfridus filius Aihici, 294
Gormailles, Alicia nxor Thome de,
1486

Thomas de, 1486
Gomchurch, Gomers, Angodus de,

1526
Gomdebof, Hubertus, 1907

Jordanus, 1903
Gomeres vide Goisners.
Comers vide Cornchurch.
Comeuilla, Comilla, Bicardus de, 620

Bobertus de, 1304, 1371, 1555

Bobertus filius Boberti de, 1555
GomhuUa, Josceus de, 829

Beginaldus de, 16, 704, 1048

WiUelmus de, 412
Gomilla vide ComeuiUa.
Gomub', Odo, 328

Gomubie, Gomes, 883, 1117, 1121,
1172

IsabeUa uxor Comitis, 883
Gorpe, Aluredus, 1839

Editha uxor Aluredi, 1839
Cortenay vide Curtenay.
Cortes, Eadulfus, 1122
Cortona vide Curtona.
Cosyn, Badulfus, 279
Cotele, Leticia uxor Bicardi, 140


INDEX OF PERSONS.


265


The numbers refer to the casea not to the paget.


Cotele, BiearduB, 140

Bobertus, 140
Coteham vide Codeham.
Cotes, Johannes de, 687

Walterus de, 1004, 1216

Wydo de, 999
Cotinges, Agnes uxor Simonis de,
1784

Simon de, 1784
Coudray, Mathias de, 1157, 1161
Couele, Johannes de, 123

Walterus de, 123
Couelegha, Johannes de, 867

Scolastica uxor Johannis de, 867
Couelindena, Gilebertus de, 1661
Couentre, Badulfus Molendinarius

de, 681
Couentrenses, Conuentrenses Epis-

copi, 305, 362, 412, 444, 552, 671,

944, 1051, 1286, 1300, 1352, 1810
Couintria, Adam de, 1690

Archidiaconus de, 1416

Mabilia uxor Ade de, 1690

Petrus de, 1416
Couling, Kobertus de, 592
Coumers vide Coisners.
Coweham, Willehnus de, 1165
Coyners, Basilia uxor Bogeri de, 1223

Johannes de, 1223

Mabilia uxor Boberti de, 1223

Bobertus de, 1223

Bogerus de, 1223
Crabbedena, Alicia uxor Petri de,
1682

Petrus de, 1682
Craffte, Cecilia uxor Bogeri de, 879

Bogerus de, 879
Crakemere, Henricus de, 1979
Cramfordia, Gilebertus de, 1350

BogeruB de, 1350
Crampe, Willehnus, 589
Crane, Adam, 783

Brianus filius Jordani, 47

Henricus, 47

Jordanus, 47
Crassus, Willehnus, 108
Craswell' vide Carsuilla.


Crauwecumba, GodefridUs de, 624
Crawcumba, Godefridus de, 1117
Crawestoke, Elias de, 465

WillehnuB de, 465

WillehnuB filius Elie de, 465
Crec, Creck, Crek, Creke, Agnes uxor
Boberti de, 724

Bartholomeus de, 303, 724, 754

Isabella filia Boberti de, 1378

Petrus de, 764

Bobertus de, 303, 724, 754, 1378
Creck vide Creo.
Crede, Osbertus, 411
Crediho, Philippus de, 15
Crek vide Crec.
Creke vide Crec.
Crempesham, Bogerus de, 985

Theodorus de, 986
Crescy, Ceresi, Cressi, Cyresi, Hugo
de, 1639

Margeria de, 1639

Willehnus de, 1931
Crespin, Thomas, 1208

WiUehnuB, 605, 1144
Crespinges, Alanus de, 1631

Walterus de, 1631
Cressi vide Crescy.
Cressone, Gregorius de, 308
Cressy, Isabella uxor Bogeri de, 204

Margeria de, 181, 193

Bogerus de, 110, 177, 204
Cretinges, Johannes de, 1931
Creiling', Adam, 552
Cretona, Eua de, 1726

Bicardus de, 514

Sarra filia WiUehni de, 1726

Willelmus de, 1726
Creuequeor, Hamon de, 178

Bobertus de, 1019, 1687, 1897
Creuequer, Nicholaus, 607
Creultona, Petronilla uxor Simonis
de, 203

Simon de, 203
Crewe vide Crowe.
Crewebar vide Crewebarwe.
Crewebarwe, Crewebar, WiUehnus de,

1539


266


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The numbers refer to the etues not to the page».


Greytona, Milo de, 1979
Grikecot, WiUelmuB de, 1920
Grimes, Grnnes, Graaes, GalMdas
de, 170

Hawisia filia Galfridi de, 170

MatilliB azor Galfridi de, 170
Griob, BartholomeuB, 11
Gristecharche, Prior de, 1634
Cristeschurche, Prior de, 979, 1414
Gristi Ecclesia, Prior de, 457
Griur, Galfridus le, 1675
Groberst vide Groherst.
Groc, Bobertus, 962
Groft, Gecilia uxor Bogeri de, 203

Bogeras de, 203
Groherst, Groberst, Odo de, 477

Stephanus de, 477
Groiland, Abbas, 538
Grok, Bicardus, 81

Thomas, 438
Grondona, Galfridus de, 1896

Hawisia uxor Galfridi de, 1896
Groshohnia, Elena de, 1204
Growe, Grewe, Thomas, 1478
Groxtona, Abbas de, 949
Grac, Bogeras, 652
Gruo', Osbertus de, 1225
Gruce, Galfridus de, 843, 868

Beginaldus de, 40, 843, 868
Gruell', Eulle, Margeria uxor Walteri
de, 195

Walteras de, 195
Graes, Bicardus de, 976
Grunes vide Crimes.
Crapet, Willelmus, 1265
Crastwyc, Emma de, 841
Cruteuilla, Willelmus de, 266
Cruues vide Crimes.
Cublicota, Badulfus de, 1614
Cudeham, Gilebertus de, 1246

Sarra uxor Gileberti de, 1246
Cudintona, Petrus de, 1650
Cugenho, Cungeho, Lucia uxor Wil-
lelmi de, 1399

Willebnus de, 1399
Cuillur, Nicholaus le, 835
Cuilly, Hugo filius Johannis de, 1305


Guilly, Johannes de, 1306

Mabilia uxor Walteri de, 1305

Walteras de, 1305
Gulindona, Walterus de, 969
Gulinge, Bobertus de, 592
Gultura, Abbas de, 296, 399, 1398
Gulum, Prior de, 387
Cumba» Abbas de, 1586

Alexander de, 613

Editha uzor Bicardi de, 1705

Elias de, 860

Bicardus de, 113, 454, 1143, 1705

Willelmus filius Elie de, 860
Gumbremere, Abbas de, 1622
Cumerse, Juliana uxor Petri de, 1034

Petras de, 1034
Cumin, Eua uxor Willelmi, 714, 904,
941

WiUehnus, 714, 904, 941
Gumpeigne, WiUehnus de, 1764
Cundstan, WiUehnus de, 53
Cungeho vide Gugenho.
Cuni, Bicardus de, 127
Cunquest, Galfridus, 1782
Gunuers, PhiHppus le, 1825
Curcy , MatiUis uxor WiUehni de, 1569

WUlehnus de, 1569
Curiel, Euriel, Bertramus de, 1117,

1273
CurnuV, Odo, 1754
Gursun, IsabeUa de, 1703
CurteU, Waundricus de, 116
Curtenay, Cortenay, Ada uxor Wil-
lelmi de, 96

Adam de, 1322

Hawisia de, 516

Henricus de, 516

Matmis de, 170, 1396, 1669

BeginaMus de, 164, 170, 1331,
1396, 1569

Bobertus de, 164, 170, 516, 1331,
1569

Willehnus de, 86, 96, 109
Curteys, Bartholomeus fiUus Boberti
le, 489

Bicardus fiUus Walteri le, 1927

Bobertus le, 489


INDEX OF PERS0N8.


267


The numbcrs refer to the caaes not to the paget.


Curteys, Walterus la, 1927

WiUelmus filius Walteri le, 1927
Curtona, Oortona, Alina uxor Ogeri
de, 996

Ogerus de, 996

Thomas de, 1073

Willelmus de, 559, 996
Curtpeil, Ela uzor Hugonis, 413

Hugo, 413
Cuserigge, Bogerus de, 842
Cuseruge, Rogerus de, 1078
Cusin, Amicia filia Simonis, 934

Asoelina filia Simonis, 934

Cecilia filia Simonis, 934

Eleonora filia Simonis, 934

Hawisia uxor Boberti, 1427, 1499

Isabella filia Simonis, 934

Margeria filia Simonis, 934

Bobertus, 1427, 1499

Simon, 934

WiUelmus, 345
Cusingtona, Casingtona, Jobanna
uxor WiUelmi de, 1770

Stephanus de, 262

WiUelmus de, 1770
Custances, WiUelmus de, 913
Cut, Walterus, 896
Cuuere, Mabilia la, 1908
Cuuert, WiUelmus le, 776
Cuwyc, Prior de, 616
CuyUi, Joljannes de, 1335

MabUia uxor Walteri de, 1335

Walterus de, 1335
CuyUy, Johannes de, 273
Cygoingny, Engelardus de, 1109
Cygony, Engelardus de, 1117
Cyr, Johannes le, 286
Cyrencestria, Abbas de, 1651

Thomas de, 1172
Cyresi vide Crescy.
Cyrry vide Tyrry.
Cyry, Fulco de, 978

Daous, le Daneys, Johannes, 1201

Walterus, 532, 1910, 1940
Dagod vide Bagod.
Dakeham, Agnes uxor Henrici de, 758


Dakeham, Henricus de, 758
DalHng', Petrus de, 614
Dames, Badulfus de, 351
Daneby, Johannes de, 1847
Danecastrie, S. Nicholai de, Magister,

1169
Danes', Petrus de, 488

Thomas de, 488
Daneys, le, vide Dacus.
Danmartin, Daunmartin, Muntmer-
tin, S. Martino, Godefridus de,
1698

Johanna uxor Jordani de, 1605

Johannes de, 1275

Jordanus de, 906, 1605, 1698

Odo de, 185, 574

PetroniUa uxor WiUelmi de, 777

Beginaldus de, 777

Bogerus de, 251

WiUelmus de, 185, 777. 906

WiUehnuB fiUus Jordani de, 906,
1698
Danteseye, Daunteseia, Dauntesye,
MatiUis nxor Bogeri de, 297, 375,
690, 797, 830

Bogerus de, 297, 375, 690, 797,
830
Dauid, Comes, 451, 572, 708, 1124

S., Walterus de, 113
' Dauid, Abbas, 648
Dauinar vide Dauintr*.
Dauingtona, Priorissa de, 767
Dauintr', Dauinar, WiUelmus de,

1067, 1076
Dauintre, Prior de, 31, 308
Daunmartin vide Danmartin.
Daunteseia vide Danteseye.
Dauntesye vide Danteseye.
Daur', le, vide Pour.
Daye, Auicia le, 514
Deingtona, Bartholomeus de, 1769

Simon de, 1769
Delce, WiUehnus de, 1490
Dena, Florencia uxor WiUehni de,
1630

Thomas de, 872

WUlelmus de, 1630


268


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The numbert refer to the catet not to the p<tget.


Denchelwrihe, Daneheswnrthe, Wa-

rinas de, 922
Denchewrthe, Warinns de, 1050
Dene, GilebertoB de la, 1433

BadolfnB filias Willehni de hi, 608

Boeysia de la, 1165

Sunon le, 1661

Willehnas de la, 608

WillehnaBle, 1661
Deneband,Denebond,Eneband,Eado,
93, 560, 673

Mabilia azor Eadonis, 560, 573

Philippas, 560, 573

Badalfas de, 93

Bobertas de, 93
Denebond vide Deneband.
Denemede, HageUna filia Willehni
de,844

Matillis filia Willehni de, 844

Willehnas de, 844
Denstede, Thomas de, 163
Dentona^ Galfridas de, 917

Walteras de, 220
Dentorp, Alida axor Willehni de,
1874

WmehnaB de, 1874
Depeford, Stephanas de, 1172
Derby, Comes, 1236
Derebienses Archidiaooni, 51, 480,

552
Derebargo, Amicia nxor Bicardi de,
319

Bicardas de, 319
Dereby, Agnes filia Thome de, 1382

Alicia filia Thome de, 1382

Beatricia filia Thome de, 1382

Eaterina filia Thome de, 1382

Thomas de, 1382
Derefield, Alicia axor Hagonis de,
1853

Hago de, 1853
Derefordia, Elias de, 1873
Derh', Prior de, 1089
Derham, Abbas de, 1238

Agnes axor Boberti de, 1774

Floria filia Boberti de, 1774

Bobertas de, 1774


Derherst, Prior de, 1646, 1701
DerP, Bobertas de, 1019
Derlintona, Elena de, 1463
Desebing', Bicardas de, 319
Desebargo, Galfridas de, 571

Jaliana axor Galfiridi de, 571
Despenser, Adam le, 150

Agatha filia Bicardi le, 1964

Albreda nxor Bicardi le, 1964

Alicia filia Bicardi le, 1964

Elizabeth filia Bicardi le, 1964

Isolda fiha Bicardi le, 1964

Eaterina axor Ade le, 150

Bicardas le, 1964

Bogeras le, 271

Tharstanas le, 967

Willehnas le, 1930
Deailla, Bobertas de, 1197
Deaon, Johannes, 736

Walteras, 422, 862
Deaonie, Comes, 1172
Dibenham, Didenham, Johannes de,
1277

Bogerns de, 1277
Dichefordia, Beatricia axor Galfridi
de, 1116

Gaimdas de, 1116
Dichtona, Thomas de, 1517
Diokewrthe, Bicardas de, 222
Dictona, Henricas de, 1863
Didenham vide Dibenham.
Dinant, Bobertas, 1811
Dinas, Dynas, Johannes, 358

Bicardas, 358

Willehnas, 358
Dinham vide Binham.
Dionisio, S., Bobertas de, 425

Bogeras de, 378, 1376, 1445, 1833

Sarra axor Bogeri de, 378, 1376,
1445
Duinel, Willehnas, 1481
Disci, Thomas de, 1354
Dispensarias, Alanas, 1312
Dispensator, Hago, 1117
Dispenser, Baldewinas le, 1731
Diaa, Diae, Agnes uxor Willehni de,

313


INDEX OF PERSONS.


269


T)ie numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Diua, Hugo de, 887

Johannes de, 811

Margeria uxor Badulfi de, 1042

Matillis de, 1045

Philippus de, 811

Badulfus de, 1042

Simon de, 313

Willelmus de, 313
Diue vide Diua.
Do, Willehnus, 841
Dockinge, Henricus de, 1797

Bicherus de, 844
Dod, Hugo, 298, 683
Doddenesse, Prior de, 766
Dodenes, Thomas de, 1918
Doissel', Willehnus, 1710
Dol, Bicardus de, 10
Dolfin, Bogerus, 436
Dompit, Emma uxor Walteri de, 1048

Walterus de, 1048
Doneslande vide Dnneslande.
Dontona vide Duntona.
Dorcestria, Abbas de, 1088
Dorkecestria, Abbas de, 719
Domapetona, Adam de, 54
Dorset', Alexander, 464
Dorsete, Alexander de, 257, 416
Dorsetia, Alexander de, 1422, 1467,
App. 2

Elyas de, 1825
Dorsingtona, Johannes de, 840
Douera, Bobertus de, 1764

Boysia de, 1764
Douere, Boheysia de, 1593
Douore', Prior, 163
Draicote, Johannes de, 196

Willelmus filius Johannis de, 196
Draitona, Braytona, Agnes filia Wil-
lehni de, 631

Alicia filia Willehni de, 631

Bogerus de, 1055

Willelmus de, 631
Drautona, Henricus de, 625
Draytona, Alexander de, 1800

HenricuB de, 693
Drengho, Helewisia filia Thome de,

1097


Drengho, Mazilia filia Thome de,
1097

Thomas de, 1097
Dreytona, Thomas de, 1370
Driffield, Fraericus de, 1052
Driwe, Walterus, 1420
Druffeuldia, Walterus de, 373
Druual, Hugo, 566

Mabilia uxor Hugonis, 566
Diybi, Simon de, 1579
Dublinensis Archiepiscopus, 857
Duo, Bogerus le, 489
Dudelegha, Prior de, 1758
Dudenosse, Prior de, 559
Dndintona, Bobertus de, 1288

Willehnus de, 1756
Duffeldia, Emma uxor Bad' de, 1153

Bad' de, 1153
Dugun, Philippus, 652
Duket, Johannes, 620

Maria uxor Nicholai, 73

Matillis uxor Johannis, 620

Nicholaus, 73

Bicardus, 873, 1716, 1909
Dullingeham, Nicholaus, 1260
Dun, Emma uxor Nicholai, 371

Gregorius de la, 1129

Nicholaus, 371

Willehnus, 29, 834

Willehnus de la, 1129
Dun', Willehnus de, 792
Duncheswurthe vide Denchelwrthe.
Dunckarde, Willehnus, 132
Dunekeswella, Abbas de, 1575
Duneslande, Doneslande, Johannea

de, 856
Dunestora, Hugo de, 1172
Dunewico, Josoeus filius Bicardi de,
1421

Nicholaus de, 1429

Bicardus de, 1421
Dunham, Johannes de, 83, 369

Bicardus de, 1255
DunhohnensesEpiscopi, 35,847, 1096,

1117, 1213, 1223, 1238, 1852, 1884
Dunhohnensis Archidiaconus, 433

Prior, 847


270


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The numhers re/er to the cates not to the pajes.


Dnniiigtona, Margeria nxor Boberti
de, 607

Bobertos de, 507
Donitona, Walterus de, 307
Dunmarz vide Danuar.
Dunmawe, Danrawe, Bieardus filius
Simonis de, 1037

Simon de, 1037
Dunrawe vide Dunmawe.
Dunstanuilla, AlanuB de, 165, 1512

Galfridas de, 390, 856

Sibilla uxor Walteri de, 101

Walterus de, 101, 1601
Dunstaplia, Prior de, 1572, 1607
Dunstauilla, Waltems de, 1534
Dunstona vide Duntona.
Dnntona, Dontona, Dunstona, Isa-
bella uxor Thome de, 882

Johannes filius Thome de, 882

Badulfus de, 236

Bobertus de, 221

Theodorus de, 309

Thomas de, 882

Willelmufl de, 77
Dunuar, Dunmarz, Agnes uxor Bi-
cardi de, 924

Bicardus de, 924
Durantestorpe, Petrus de, 1976
Duredent, Emma, 339
Durnefordia, Bicardus de, 1019
Dusing', Willelmus, 291
Dustona, MariauxorWiUelmide, 1390

WiUelmus de, 205, 707, 994, 1390,
1747
Dwygun, Johannes, 1287
Dynas vide Dinas.
Dyne, Bobertns de, 1289

Willelmus filius Boberti de, 1289
Dysey, Thomas de, 515

Eadmundi, S., Abbas, 13, 38, 417, 511,
592, 616, 700, 851, 945, 1162, 1443
Senescallus, 38, 1632
Eadmundo, S., Beatricia uxor Salo-
monis de, 1086
Gristiana uxor Badulfi de, 852
Badulfus de, 852


Eadmundo, S., Salomon de, 1086
Eatona, Prior de, 1250

Prioiissa de, 1250
Eboracenses Archiepiscopi, 324, 329,

515, 537, 759, 959, 1117, 1273, 1339,

1463, 1680, 1686, 1730
Eboracensis Ganonicus, 628
Eboraci, Prepositus, 16

Thesaurarius, 171
Eboraco, Abbas de, 911, 995, 1339,
1871

lueta uxor Petri Hund de, 138

Petrus Hund de, 138

S. Leonardi de, Magister, 22

S. Leonardi de, Prior, 60

S. Marie de, Abbas, 254

S. Trinitatis de, Prior, 19, 97, 515,
1415, 1877

W. de, 1197

WiUehnus de, 148, 697, 1285
Eborycy, Gantor, 262
Ebreicis, Gecilia de, 227

Bogerus de, 227
Ebrojcis, IsabeUa uxor Stephani de,
288

Stephanus de, 288
Echefeldia, Bicardus de, 1762
Echingham, Simon, 561
Ecleshale, Badulfus de, 26
Edenham, Henricus de, 231
Edgarus Bex, 1628
Edmundo, S., Beatricia uxor Salo-
monis de, 1905

Salomon de, 1905
Edwardo, S., Abbatissade, 173, 1713

Eschina uxor Petri de, 658

Leticia uxor Bogeri de, 1695

Petrus de, 658

Bogeriis de, 1695
Edwardas Bex, 145, 1716

Sanctus, 1628
Egewrthe, WiUehnus de, 1687
Egidii, S., HospitaUs, Prior, 1349
Eintona, Eudo de, 1329

Idonea uxor Eudonis de, 1329
Ela, Comitissa, 3, 363, 463, 532, 775,

1110, 1698


INDEX OF PERSONS.


271


The nunibera re/er to the cases not to tJie pages.


Elande, Elonde, Hugo de, 244

Walterus de, 244
Eldeneia, Elteneia, Gilebertus de, 717

Maria filia Walteri de, 717

Walterus de, 717
Eldingtona, Margeria uxor Willelmi
de, 485

Willelmus de, 485
Elena, S., Adam de, 325, 640, 738

Adam filius Henrici de, 284

H^mcus de, 284, 325
Elene, S., Londonie, Priorissa, 419,

1085
Elianota, Comitissa, 3, 363, 463, 532,

775, 1110, 1698
Elingeham, Bicardus de, 1555
Elinges, Bicardus de, 689
Elingtona, Galfridus de, 558
Ellerton', Elretona, Prior de, 82, 911
Elmeduna, Juliana uxor Simonis de,
813

Simon de, 813
Elmham, Bicardus de, 1304, 1371,

1666
Elonde vide Elande.
Eketona vide EUerton'.
Elteham, Jacobus de, 1788
Elteneia vide Eldeneia.
Eltesduna, Agnes uxor Willelmi de,
332

Willelmus de, 332
Eltindona, Willehnus de, 76
Eluedena, Emma filia Boberti de,
1917

Bobertus de, 1917
Ely, Willelmus de, 805
Elyenses Episcopi, 299, 715, 722,

1117, 1368, 1381, 1641, 1582, 1716,

1719, 1762, 1925
Enebahd vide Deneband.
Enfant, Johannes le, 1576
Engaigne, Engaine, Engainne, En-
gaun', Engonn', Vitalis, 86, 148,
181, 427, 1322

Walterus, 445
Engaine, Engainne vide Engaigne.
Enganne, Vitalis, 1639


Engaun' vide Engaigne.
Engaune vide Engayne.
Engayne, Engaune, Vitalis, 1541,
1634

Warnerus, 1224
Engleffeuldia, Willehnus de, 390
Engonn' vide Engaigne.
Enueise vide Enueyse.
Enueys' vide Enueyse.
Enueyse, Enueise, Enueys', Lonueyse,
Agnes uxor Willehni le, 631

Hamon le, 56

Jacobus le, 600

Matillis uxor Hamon le, 56

Bobertus le, 428, 1086

WiUehnus le, 369, 600, 631, 1242
Eproill, Johannes de, 35
Ercet, Willelmus de, 364
Erdingtona vide Erdintona.
Erdintona, Erdingtona, Herdingtona,.
Egidius de, 412, 467, 1226, 1387,
1654

Henricus de, 412

Boeisia uxor Thome de, 108

Thomas de, 108, 412, 1226, 1387
Ernaldus, Willelmus, 396
Ersham, Alicia de, 561
Escota, Estcota, Bobertus de, 1293
Escotingny, Thomas de, 251
Esham, Alicia de, 643
Eskeling vide Eskelling.
Eskelhng, Eskeling, Johannes, 35

Bobertus, 35
Espercer, Floria uxor Galfridi le, 1774

Galfridus le, 1774
Espigumel, Celeatria uxor Walteri,
569

Walterus, 569
Espoc, Walterus, 1085
Esputel, Willelmus, 270
Esquieler, Bogerus le, 1953
Esquier, Geua uxor Simonis le, 19^0

Simon le, 1970
Ess', Bicardus, 166
Essartis, Bandulfus de, 243 i

Esse, Hese, Aluredus de, 59
Esseby, Adam de, 1341


272


INDEX OF PERSONa


The munben refer to the coies not to the pages.


Esseby, Elena nxor Ade de, 1341

Jordanus de, 1730

Prior de, 246

Bobertns de, 146, 206

Thomas de, 1968
Eseemgge, Ifatillis de, 471

VliimnB filins Maiillidis de, 471
Essewilla, Elias de, 1125
EBsexia, EmaldnB de, 551

Johannes de, 1205

Henricns de, 1275

Boberins de, 1275

Thomas filins Emaldi de, 551
Essexie, Gomes, 297, 801, 375, 1397,

1487, 1570
Estanetona, Anicia nxor Badnlfi de,
1707

Jnliana de, 1707

Badnlfns de, 1707
Estanmfordia, Priorissa de, 406
Estannfordia, Willelmns de, 332
Estcota vide Esoota.
Estcote, Bobertus de, App. 1
Eston*, Alanns, 514
Estona, WillelmnB de, 922, 923
EBtr*, Alicia nxor Willehni de, 1223

Willehnns de, 1223
Estradlegha vide Stralegha.
Estrannge, Johannes, 591
Estrannges, Benedictus le, 369
Estre, Bicardns de, 853

Willelmns de, 378
Estrifordia, Michael de, 282
Esturmnwe, Alanus de, 1771

Dionisla uxor Alani de, 1771
Esturmy, Adam, 1266

Galfridus, 250, 1266

Thomas, 250

Willehnus, 13
EstnteniUa, Elewysa de, 1871

Eustachius de, 1106

Nicholaus de, 254, 599, 1106
Estwyc, Bogerus de, 734

Bogerus filius Bogeri de, 734
Ethingeham, Simon de, 1745
Etona, Osbertus de, 1431

Priorissa de, 276, 300, 488, 583


Etona, Bogems de, 1115

WUIehnus de, 276
Ettona, Priorissa de, 1492
Enere vide Eure.

Eneringeham, Isabella uxor Boberti
de, 849

Bobertus de, 849
Euemiue, Enermuwe, Waltems de,

48, 456, 531, 595, 638, 1842
Eneminwe vide Euermue.
Euertona, Bobertns de, 899, 933
Enesham, Abbas de, 645

WiUefanns de, 1116
Enesk, Henricns le, 1619

Osbertns le, 1619
Enre, Enere, HawlEBa filia Walteri
de, 1770

Hngo de, 1505

Jacobns de, 1770

Johanna filia Willelmi de, 1770

Johannes de, 455

Matillis nxor Hugonis de, 1505

Badulfns de, 1770

Bicardus de, 1770

Bobertns de, 1770

Waltems de, 1770

Willehnus de, 1770
Eustachius, Comes, 262
Exonia, S. Nicholai de, Prior, 5, 6
Exonie, Decanus, 348

Precentor, 920
Exonienses Episcopi, 143, 426, 516,

808. 894, 1070, 1117, 1145, 1172,

1666
Eydona, Thomas de, 933
Eye, Prior de, 416
Eyneffordia vide Eynefordia.
Eynefordia, Eyneffordia, Willelmus

de, 376. 474
Eynesham, Abbas de, 291, 1603, 1672
Eyr, Willehnus le, 644
Eyuilla, Johannes de, 1366
Eywas, Bobertns de, 172

Bobertus filins Boberti de, 172

Faber, Adam de, 435
Agnes nxor Henrici, 634


INDEX OE PEBSONS.


273


TJie nimbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Faber, Agnes uxor Joscei, 1531

Alicia ozor Bicardi, 751

Auicia azor Badulfi, 1707

Henricus, 634, 688

Hago, 285, 446

Josceus, 1531

Paganus, 200

Radulfus, 1531, 1707

Bicardus, 751

Bobertus, 43

Bobertas filius Boberti, 43

Bogerus, 1464, 1911, 1941

Stephanus, 1140

Thomas, 1910, 1940

WiUelmus, 1041, 1949

Willelmus filius Bogeri, 1941
Fabianus, Magister, 125
Fader, Willelmus, 1226
Fairfay, Willelmus, 697
Fakeham, Willelmus de, 1812
Faleisa, Willelmus de, 81
Falkeborgo, Galfridus de, 1546
Fallide, Johannes, 907
Fambridge, Faunbrig', Decanus de, 221
Fancillun, Helton, 563

Johannes, 563
Faran, Oilebertus, 1630
Fardingestona, Matillis de, 1522

Bioardus de, 1522
Farmamuilla, Furmamuilla, Basilia
de, 310

Bobertus de, 310
Fambumia, Agnes uxor Bogeri de,
1847

Bogerus de, 1847
Fauconer, Bobertus le, 263

Willebnus le, 1188
Faucumbergo, Eustachius de, 1411

Petrus de, 1551
Faucunberge, Eustachius de, App. 8
Faucuner, Willehnus le, 1960
Fauersham, Abbas de, 192
Faukebergo, Philippus de, 256
Faukenbergho, Willelmus de, 599
Faunbrig' vide Fambridge.
Fay, Beatricia uxor Badulfi de, 1410,

1765

M. I.


Fay, Beatrix de, 915

Johannes de, 525, 553, 587, 679,
1118

Matillis uxor Badulfi de, 525

Badulfus de, 525, 553, 679, 913,
1410, 1765
Feld, Bogerus de la, 1345
Felebrigge, Bicardus de, 937

Walterus filius Bicardi de, 937
Feleintona, Oalfridus filius Hugonis
de, 142

Hugo de, 142
Femnes, Willelmus de, 1465
Fenderne, Hugo de, 51
Fer, Braz de, Bicardus, 1773
Ferariis vide Ferrariis.
Fercles, Galfridus de, 1634

Hugo de, 363
Ferebrigg, Bicardus de, 261
Ferenbergo, Stephanus de, 453
Ferenduna, Abbas de, 655
Ferers, Comes, 1117
Feritate, Margeria de, 574, 796
Ferlegha, Pnor de, 1714
Ferlege, Henricus de, 19
Fem', Hugo de la, 1067
Feme, Bicardus de, 606, 673
Femelegha, Prior de, 1749
Ferrant, Bicardus, 514
Ferrariis, Ferariis, Agnes uxor Comi-
tis de, 1127, 1213

Comes de, 696, 1127, 1211, 1213,
1214, 1216, 1236, 1273, 1758,
1949

Johauna uxor Boberti de, 12, 1571

Bobertus de, 12, 1571

Thomas de, 85

Willelmus de, 674, 676, 752, 1125,
1127, 1214, 1236, 1273
Femn, Clemens filius Bogeri le, 662

Galfridus filius Bogeri le, 662

Bogems le, 662
Fesaunt, Johannes filius Bogeri, 577

Bogeras, 577
Feueresham, Bicardus de, 767
Fich, Basilia uxor Joscelini, 1807

Joscelinus, 1807

18


274


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


The numben refer to the eatee not to the pages.


Fiohet, Bicardos, 1764

Fioil, Fithil, Hago, 208

Fidis, Sm Prior, 548

Fietenglaoe, Fntenglat*, Sarra nxor

Walteri, 1761
Waltems, 1751
Fifhide, Bobertns de, 957
Filia—
AbsoloniB, Mabilia, 104
Ade, Alioia, 1034

Cecilia, 1034
Agathe, Beatricia, 1905
Alani, Alicia, 959

OHoa, 1811

PetroniUa, 959
Aldithe, Sarra, 1112
Alezandri, Emma, 841
Algari, Estrilda, 662
AUcie, Alditha, 676

Anelina, 1834

Hersenta, 653, 676

Johanna, 487

Jnliana, 1034

MatiUis, 676
Aline, Alina, 512
Ahnari, Semara, 147
Alnredi, Alina, 512
Amicie, Alicia, 1958
Andree, Agatha, 1905

Basilia, 1095

Egidia, 1905

Elena, 1905

Elizabeth, 1905

MatiUis, 1905

OUna, 1905
AnketUU, MatiUis, 1293, App. 1
Amaldi, Alicia, 1139
AsceUne, AUcia, 317
Anicie, Agnes, 1475
Briani, Agnes, 892
Cristiane, Beatricia, 1877

Emma, 702

IsabeUa, 702

Snniua, 1877
Danid, Anicia, 639
Derewini, GunUda, 1287
Eadmnndi, MatiUis, 1477


Filia^
EUe, Margeria, 271

MatUUs, 34

Bohdsia, 34
Emme, Beatricia, 1203
Enwici, AUcia, 1018

Editha, 1018

IsabeUa, 1018
Emaldi, AUcia, 1185
Entropi, AUcia, 1520
FeUcie, Maria, 717
Florencie, AUcia, 1259
Galfridi, MatUUs, 797, 1026

Boesia, 1044
GeorgU, AUda, 185
Godehonde, Enstachia, 1058
GodeUne, Thnrilda, 993
Godwini, MabUia, 1906
Goldingi, Agnes, 1419

CeciUa, 1419
GoseUni, Auicia, 556
Gnnnore, Cristiana, 1128
Haldeni, Emma, 1729
Hawisie, Eua, 1379
Helye, Auicia, 225

Claricia, 225

MiUsantia, 225

Boheisia, 225
Henrici, Agnes, 758

AUcia, 403, 575

CeoUia, 1670

Celestria, 569

Djnamia, 758

Johanna, 758, 774

Saluea, 804
Howardi, Emma, 1842
Huberti, Cristiana, 1830
Hugonis, AUcia, 528, 1004

GunUda, 1004

MiUsantia, 1004
Hyldredi, MatUUs, 1040

Sominna, 1040

Truyta, 1040
IsabeUe, AUcia, 1774

IsabeUa, 1774
Johanne, Agnes, 470

Isabella, 1754


INDEX OF PERSONS.


275


The numbers refer to tlie case» not to the pages.


Filia —
Johaimis, Alioia, 1839

Annora, 1039

Aoicia, 1839, 1954

Berta, 1954

Gunnilda, 1839, 1954

Jaliana, 1120

Eaterina, 354

Sarra, 1112
Juliane, Margeria, 815
Laurencii, Juliana, 1011
Leuce, Agnes, 260
Leweline, Elena, 1655
Luce, Johanna, 1909

Mabilia, 1909
Lucie, Eaterina, 1761
Mabilie, Dionisia, 1685

Margeria, 1906
Margerie, Amicia, 1740

Gristina, 1675

Margeria, 950
Matillidis, Agnes, 1672

Alesia, 1773

Auicia, 1954

Berta, 1954

EUa, 1708

Emma, 1773

Gunnilda, 1954

Juliana, 1336

Wymarca, 1773
Mayne, Juliana, 815

MatilUs, 815
Milisantie, Agnes, 1004
Nicholai, Sabina, 90
Normann*, Juliana, 846
Osberti, Cecilia, 530

Margeria, 507
Osmundi, Agnes, 951

Gristiana, 951

Matillis, 951
Petri, Gristiana, 1877

Juliana, 241

MatiUis, 522
Philippi, Margeria, 328
Quenir, MatiUis, 1026
Badulfi, Agatha, 1905

Agnes, 480


Filia —
Kadulfi, AUcia, 1917

Margeria, 1524

MirabeUa, 1793
Kannulfi, Agnes, 1048

AUcia, 1048, 1845

Diamanda, 1048

GodeUna, 1557

luetta, 1792

MabUia, 1792
Beginaldi, MatiUis, 86
Bicardi, Agnes, 1876

AUna, 460

AueUna, 1764

Emma, 1748

Idonea, 551

lueta, 989

Mabilia, 86

Margareta, 1040

Margeria, 86, 966, 1675, 1748

MatUUs, 460, 476, 1764, 1876

Boysia, 476, 1044
Boberti, Alioia, 751, 1463

Beatricia, 851, 1174

Florencia, 1630

Gunnora, 1128

Isolda, 1951

Joscea, 1420

MabUia, 751

Margeria, 1420

MarsUia, 1554

Boysia, 1044
Bogeri, Agnes, 947

AUcia, 1437

Cristina, 1048

Ela, 1437

Emma, 937, 1048

FeUcia, 1048

Hilda, 1682

lueta, 889

Jowetta, 522

JuUana, 1048

MUisanta, 1840
Boysie, Eaterina, 846
Salomonis, MatiUis, 1672
Sigari, AUoia, 1753
Simonis, Margeria, 1906

18—2


276


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The numben refer to the caees not to the page$.


Filia^
Simoiiis, MatiUifl, 11

PetroniUa, 973
Sireo, Anna, 1357

Margeria, 1357

MatilliB, 1357
Stephani, Emma, 1769

MaSilia, 45

Matillis, 45
Thome, Alicia, 1958

Lucia, 66
Tlmrgis*, Ilda, 335
Thurkilli, Matillis, 1905
Umfridi, Alioia, 1100
Usndi, Helewysa, 237
Walerandi, Margareta, 1057
Walteri, Hawisia, 1427

Saanilla, 30
Warini, Alicia, 1311
Warlingi, Elena, 1167
WiUehni, Agnes, 311, 833, 834,
1857

AUoia,311

Auelina, 1705

Gonstancia, 702

CriBtiana, 702

Dionisia, 833, 834

EU, 1235

Emma, 90, 774, 1858, 1957

Helewisia, 659

Isolda, 1295

Johanna, 1010, 1674

Jnliana, 100, 1068, 1563

Licoriza, 1857

Mahilia, 1685

Margeria, 950, 1382

Moriella, 425

Boiaia, 1858

Sihilla, 1010
Wnlnofi, Matillis, 1773
Filius —
Ahsolonis, Hogo, 103, 104

Walterus, 523

WiUehnus, 103, 104, 523
Ade, Adam, 249, 428

Annselinus, 1023

Aunsellus, 703


Filiue —
Ade, Brianus, 892

Hugo, 1416

Johannes, 703, 1023

Nicholaus, 1887

Oshertus, 795

Bicardus, 249

Bohertus, 1341, 1939

Bogerus, 50, 252, 892, 1241

Simon, 864

Thomas, 281, 537

Walterus, 596, 991

WiUebnus, 386, 404, 492, 592,
1836
Adgari, Bicardus, 55
Agathe, Henricus, 1259
Agnetis, Adam, 1181

Oraalandus, 1048

Johannes, 1169

Petrus, 1041

Badulfus, 955

Bioardus, 411, 1849

Bogerus, 892

Walterus, 1795

WiUehnus, 947
AUhini, WiUehnus, 200
Aihnari, Bannulfus, 1935

Safridus, 1935

WiUehnus, 1935
AUmeri, Adam, 1936
Alani, Adam, 771

Brianus, 20, 28, 1458

Dauid, 1167

Oalfridus, 1167, 1840

Hamon, 1930

Johannes, 173, 1288, 1390

Petrus, 554

Bicardus, 215, 240, 1135

Bohertus, 1189

Bogerus, 554-

Buwaldus, 1276

Stephanus, 1933

Thomas, 1747, 1933

Walterus, 147

Warinus, 1933

WUlehnus, 147, 215, 554, 1251,
1288, 1590, 1933


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


277


The numben refer to the easee not to the pagei.


FiUus —
Albani, Johannes, 1207
Alberti, Philippus, 328

Gmdo, 1877
Albrede, Alezander, 370

Warinus, 373

Walterus, 1793
Albrichi, Gregorius, 132
Aldiihe, Azo, 676
Aldrichi, Gilebertus, 84
Alexandri, Alanus, 959, 1510, 1578

Alezander, 851, 1187

Emulfus, 20

GodeMdus, 959

Henricus, 959

Johannes, 1206, 1321

Laurencius, 959

Bicardus, 551
AHcie, Adam, 1157, 1161

Dauid, 1167

Gallridus, 343

Haoo, 185

Johannes, 381, 1437, 1917

Mauricius, 929

Bogerus, 1784

Thomas, 653

Walterus, 377, 1070

Willehnus, 440, 938
Alienore, Wakelinus, 496
Aliesie, Bicardus, 1044
Aline, Thomas, 512
Almari, Willebnus, 235
Ahiathi, Alina, 612

Willelmus, 612
Alofi, Petrus, 715
Aluine, Willehnus, 528
Aluredi, Johannes, 1005

Martinus, 70, 86

Bobertus, 1729

Willehnus, 370
Alurici, Andreas, 1005

Badulfus, 31
Alwini, Johannes, 1954

Philippus, 1062

Bicardus, 80
AmabUis, Henrious, 331

Willehnus, 812


Filius —
Amauri, Alanus, 1882

Galfridus, 1882
Andree, Johannes, 1620

Mauridus, 1095

Petrus, 30

Walterus, 1888

Willehnus, 1005
Anfridi, Serlo, 118
Amaldi, Bicardus, 1749
Amuldi, Willehnus, 1779
Arturi, Petras, 324
Asceline, Bogerus, 1045
Aselack*, Bogerus, 1936
Atheline, Ordgarius, 1041
Aucheri, Henricus, 144, 533, 1119,
1476

Bicardus, 742
Audoeni, Alexander, 1007

WiUehnus, 1750
AueUne, Badulfus, 1834

Bicardus, 1764
Aufredi, WiUelmus, 1017
Augustini, Bicardus, 1785

WiUehnus, 1368
Auicie, Bicardus, 1169
Aylardi, Aluredus, 1005

Alurious, 1005
Aylmari, HugOj 228
Baldewmi, Galfridus, 192, 562

Henricus, 1966

Johannes, 833, 1968

Badulfus, 616

Beginaldus, 45

Thomas, 369

WUlehnus, 192, 459
BasiUe, Joudewinus, 1095
Beatricie, Galfridus, 8, 586

Henricus, 403

Johannes, 88, 851, 965

Bobertus, 1457
Benedioti, Benedictus, 30

Thomas, 66

WiUelmus, 126, 1421
Bemardi, Johannes, 1704« 1932

Lambertus, 655

Osbertus, 186


278.


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


The ttumhert refer to the caaei not to the pages.


FUitu —
Bemardi, BadnlfuB, 116, 1410, 1699

Willelmns, 386
Bertini, Adam, 1779
Briani, Henricus, 47

Badolfus, 1278

Bobertns, 54, 1189
Bricii, Johannes, 1560

Ino, 1560
Brioi, Bicardns, 107
Bnchardi, Beginaldns, 91
GameU', Beginaldns, 1856
Cecilie, Galfridns, 1504, 1645

Henricns, 1670

Beginaldns, 1034
Celestrie, Bobertns, 1011
Clerici, Bobertns, 1900
Gomitis, Briennins, 1688

Henricns, 85, 1512, 1660, 1666,
1732
Cristine, Bioardns, 1041

Wnielmns, 1717
Gnstanc^, Nicholans, 1517
Danielis, Lanrencins, 663

Bobertns, 90

Thomas, 1759
Danid, Bicardns, 982

Bobertns, 1000

Johannes, 1124
Deodati, Adam, 722
Dere, Waltems, 523

Willehnns, 523
Dionisie, Adam, 1685

Godefridns, 787
Dionisii, Badulfns, 179
Drogonis, Willehnns, 121, 251,

1543, 1722
Eadmnndi, Beginaldns, 1834
Edgari, Patricins, 226
Edine, Hermannns, 228
Edithe, Beginaldus, 1041

Bicardus, 824

Willelmus, 1324
Edmeri, Bogerus, 1783
Edrici, Durandus, 1072

Siotridus, 1072
Edwardi, Galfridus, 1289


Filiui—
Edwini, Adam, 233

Badulfus, 1905
Eilnod, Bogems, 499
Eilnolf, Bartholomeus, 499
Ele, Bicardus, 1437

WiUehnns, 1235, 1277
Elie, Glemens, 287

Gonanus, 301

Georgius, 252

JosceUnns, 287

PhiUppns, 271

Badulfus, 287

Beginaldns, 287

Bicardus, 878, 1193

Bogems, 252

Tristram, 1240

WUlehnns, 212, 675, 850, 860
Eluene, Siwacns, 1167
EmeUne, Bobertus, 386
Emme, Badulfus, 1917

Bogerus, 1783
Engeh*', Henricus, 262
Engelranni, WUlehnus, 570
Engehon', Stephanus, 499
Ernisii, PhUippus, 1090
Emnlfi, WakeUnns, 496
EruisU, Johannes, 641
Estrangie, Bobertus, 1075
EstrUde, Edwinns, 1905

Badulfus, 662

Bogems, 662

ThurkUdus, 1905
Eudonis, Alanus, 1418

Michael, 1893

Nicholaus, 1473

Bobertns, 145

Waltems, 1827
Eue, Bobertus, 1379, 1733, 1942
Euerwini, Bicardus, 385
Eufemie, Simon, 1007
EustachU,6artholom6ns, 916, 1103

Eustachius, 895, 1030

Galfridns, 837

WiUelmus, 964, 1915
Eutropi, WUlehnus, 1426, 1520
riorie, GUebertus, 517


J


INDEX OF PERSONS.


279


The numberi refer to the caees not to the pagei.


Filius —
Fretesante, Andreas, 747
Fromundi, Robertus, 831
Fulcheri, Henricus, 176

Warinus, 176, 1581
Fulconis,Radulfus, 163, 1511, 1838

Bogerus, 947

Walterus, 840

WUlelmus, 1234
Galfridi, Alanus, 804

Baldewinus, 1660

Glemens, 1830

Galfridus, App. 2

Gilebertus, 387

HerebertuB, 1044

Hubertus, 1516

Johannes, 585, 652, 797, 1190,
1214, 1241, 1273

Petrus, 1676

Bicardus, 476, 898, 1044, 1369

Bobertus, 398, 648

Bogerus, 1437, 1472

Thomas, 734, 1690

Warinns, 425

WiUehnus, 1748, 1868
Generose, Gerardus, 357
Georgii, Hugo, 185
Gerardi, Bobertus, 984

Warinus, 984
Germani, Dauid, 1299

Johannes, 1167
Geroldi, Henricus, 1749

Warinus, 1643
Geruasii, Euerwinus, 348

Bobertus, 138, 348
Gilci, Johannes, 716
Gileberti, Alanus, 1972

GalMdus, 1435
< Gilebertus, 41, 451

Henrious, 84

Herbertus, 617

Hugo, 980

Johannes, App. 7

Martinus, 783

Matheus, 1749

Osbertus, App. 7

Bobertus, 1427


Filius —
Gileberti,WiUehnus,314,584, 1526
Gippe, Willehnus, 1207
Godefridi, Gilebertus, 1084

Matheus, 1224

Petrus, 1074

Beynerus, 1074

Bicardus, 227

Thomas, 718

Wmehnus, 906

Wlfridus, 1041
Godehne, Bicardus, 993
Godman, Willehnus, 1192
Godrici, Bobertus, App. 3
Godstani, Alanus, 1062
Godwini, Alanus, 1062

Hubertus, 1105

Mauricius, 1105

Nicholaus, 1062

Petrus, 924

Bicardus, 36

Bobertus, 704, 1105

Walterus, 704

Willehnus, 1893
Goselini, Bobertus, 556
Gote, Thomas, 938
Gregorii, Johannes, 144, 1476
Gudmundi, Eadmundus, 887
Gundrede, Bobertus, 705
Gunilde, Willehnus, 1115
Gwidonis, Simon, 1203
Gyle, Hugo, 917
Gyue, Galfridus, 1654
Haconis, Bicardus, 185
Haldani, Alanus, 1135
Hahiaci, Johannes, 648
Hamonis, Gerardus, 1782

Hamon, 550

Badulfus, 715, 1533

Thomas, 550

Walterus, 10

WiUehnus, 530, 614
Hanesgod, Bobertus, 999

Wydo, 999
Harding», Elias, 860

Bobertus, 860
Hawisie, Johannes, 867, 1565


280


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The numhen refer to tke easee not to the pages.


Filiui —
Hawisie, Radalfiis, 1565

BobertnB, 1565, 1569
Helewisie, Anaelmiis, 1382

Bobertnfl, 526
Helye, Willelmns, 1303
Henrioi, Adam, 660

Alanas, 1738

Oernasiiui, 976

Gilebertns, 281, 758, 1067

Hamon, 161

Henrioos, 665

Hngo, 1629

James, 1009

Johannes, 282, 403, 1009, 1108

JoBceus, 1531

Nicholaus, 176, 1099

Philippos, 1026

BadolfuB, 1865

Bannolfus, 148, 231, 323, 1845

Bioardos, 1009

Bobertus, 1011

Bogerus, 1149, 1952

Saherus, 1568

Simon, 1009

Thomas, 758, 1476

WiUelmus, 265, 696, 702, 884,
916, 1030, 1103
Hereberti, Adam, 1023

Alexander, 622

Bartholomeus, 1023

Matheus, 54

Petrus, 181, 235, 651, 764, 943,
1176, 1273, 1363, 1573, 1589
Hereuioi, Gilebertus, 1000
Herlewyni, Ayhnarus, 228

Hermannus, 228
Hersante, Thomas, 676
Heruei, Adam, 1120, 1176

Bogerus, 396
Herwardi, Willehnus, 1749
Howardi, Joscelinus, 1509
Huberti, Hnbertus, 1507, App. 4

Milo, 298

Willelmus, 1105
Hugonis, Alanus, 1924

Bernardus, 1842


Filiue —
Hngonis, Emisius, 1174

Eutropus, 1426

Gilebertus, 1576

Henricns, 72, 237

Hugo, 578, App. 8

Johannes, 432, 832, 1120, 1176,
1412, 1573, 1649, 1924

Nicholaus, 1252

Badulfus, 1870

Banulfus, 272, 393

Bicardus, 1117

Bobertus, 490, 1186, 1870

Bogems, 695

Simon, 1842

Thomas, 467

Waltems, 402, 1335

Warinus, 490

WiUehnus, 34, 207, 311, 663,
1756
Humfridi, Thomas, 1759
Hurewardi, Willehnus, 343
Ingeron, Bicardus, 499
Isabelle, Oliuems, 596, 991

Bobertus, 644

Thomas, 1157, 1161, 1821

Willehnus, 343, 985
Isaunti, Johannes, 523
Isilie, Henricus, 379

Bicardus, 379

Bobertus, 315, 379

Bogems, 315

Sampson, 315
Isolde, Hugo, 1951
luonis, Bobertus, 1517, 1735, 1963

Thomas, 1400
Iwani, Johannes, 1811
Joeli, Warinus, 908
Johanne, Willehnus, 774
Johannis, Alanus, 63

Andreas, 868

Dauid, 1167

Galfridus, 832, 1120, 1176

Johannes, 35, 400, 708, 1603,
1954

Henricus, 309, 403

Matheus, 1436


INDEX OF PERSONS.


281


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Filiu8 —
Johannis, Nicholaus, 510

Badulfus, 831

Bicardus, 400, 815

Bobertus, 35, 853, 1811

Bogerus, 1801, 1954

Simon, 846

Thomas, 802

Walterus, 307

WiUehnus, 200, 608, 1082, 1104,
1427, 1870, 1903, 1944, 1954
Johelis, Warinus, 1285, 1657
JoUani, Jollanus, 947

Walterus, 531
Jordani, Alanus, 1811

Brianus, 47

Jordanus, 889

Petrus, 889

Bicardus, 1229

Bobertus, 1851

Willelmus, 979
Joscei, Nicholaus, 692
Joscelini, Bartholomeus^ 1793

Hugo, 1793

Petrus, 1793

Willdmus, 1609, 1793
Joudelini, Willelmus, 1091
Joudewini, Willelmus, 1095
Jowette, Bicardus, 484
JueUs, Willehnus, 1367
Juette, Brianus, 1074

Beynerus, 1074

Hugo, 1074
Juhane, Mauricius, 241
Juwette, Brianus, 668

Hugo, 668
Kecel, Hugo, 1671
Lamberti, Lambertus, 1209
Laurencii, Johannes, 1011

Willehnus, 194
Lene, Bobertus, 836
Leofwini, Hugo, 16
Leonardi, Bicardus, 316

Bobertus, 316
Leticie, Bobertus, 1899

Willehnus, 737
Lucie, Johannes, 716


Filius —
Lucie, Eustachius, 1167

Willelmus, 1792
Mabilie, Adam, 104

Dauid, 1099

Gilebertus, 955, 1673

Johannes, 103

Bogerus, 86, 1891

WiUehnus, 1673, 1908
Majoris, Alanus, 1302
Malgeri, Arnuldus, 1779
Marciani, Bicardus, 779
Margarete, Jacobus, 30
Margerie, Andreas, 815

Hugo, 950, 1565

Badulfus, 845
Marie, Alanus, 1811

Bicardus, 1893

Bobertus, 1965
Martini, Heruicus, 1393

Simon, 779
Mathei, Herbertus, 1117, 1273

Thomas, 871
MatilUdis, Andreas, 86

EUas, 86

Galfridus, 1026

Hamon, 1773

Henricus, 855

Johannes, 86

JoudeUnus, 1091

MatiUis, 476

Petrus, 1091

Badulfus, 1216, 1773

Begmaldus, 1834

Bicardus, 134, 1040, 1477, 1522

Bobertus, 1044, 1216, 1764

Bogerus, 664

Snnon, 11, 855, 1905

Walterus, 676

Willehnus, 86, 146, 815, 1674
Mauricii, Stephanus, 241

Heruicus, 1155
Mayne, Walterus, 815

Bicardus, 815
MichaeUs, Thomas, 417

Bicardus, 657

Unfridus, 454


282


INDEX OF PEBSOKS.


The numben re/er to the ea$es not to the pages.


Filiut —
Milonis, Hago, 807

Nicholaus, 298

Bicardus, 32

BogeruB, 68
MoBse, Bicaidiui, 479
Kicholai, Johannes, 908» 1447

Milo, 298

Nicholaus, 1085

Osbertns, 663

Badnlfos, 300, 657, 1117, 1163,
1492

Beginaldus, 596, 991

Thomas, 1974

Warinus, 1532

Willehnas, 609, 1867
Nigasie, Henricos, 774
Kigelli, Johannes, 230, 1678

Jordanus, 1851

Osbertus, 538

Bannulfus, 230

Bicardns, 321, 1674

Bobertns, 1311

Willehnas, 652
Normanni, Bicardus, 571

Bobertus, 1928
Odonis, Willehnus, 502

Thomas, 1590
Ogeri, Petrus, 143

Bogerus, 1249
Ordmer, Hamon, 593
Orenge, Badulfus, 227

Willehnus, 227
Osberti, Elyas, 1899

Helyas, 225

Henricus, 1619

Oliuerus, 564

Petrus, 507

Badulfus, 564

Bicardus, 1056

Bobertus, 582, 1621

Bogerus, 564, 788, 1055, 1838,
1891

Thomas, 1896

Walterus, 335

WiUdmus, 507
Osmundi, Elias, 344


Filiue —
Osmandi, Bogeros, 348

UmMdus, 1759
Othonis, Willehnus, 887
Pagani, Gilebertus, 1663

Thomas, 281

Walteras, 87

Warinus, 1663

Willehnus, 215
Patricii, Johannes, 226, 239
Petri, Adam, 537, 849

Alanus, 554

Brianus, 668, 1074

Galfridus, 241, 758, 797, 858,
1190, 1334, 1487, 1570

Gilebertus, 833

Godardus, 1490

Hugo, 668, 1074

Humfridus, 1041

Johannes, 833, 868

Joudelinus, 1091

Petrus, 637, 1403

Badalfus, 330

Beginaldus, 1024, 1041

Beynerus, 1074

Bicardus, 771, 1051, 1087

Bobertus, 1570, 1942

Sunon, 833, 1799

WiUehnus, 82, 484, 1384, 1488
Philippi, Adam, 104

Alexander, 1033

Johannes, 187, 1768

Badulfus, 1836

Bicardus, 609

Bobertus, 778, 885, 980

WiUehnus, 1128, 1489, 1768
Picot', Andreas, 211
Porteman, Edwardus, 1903

Johannes, 1903
Prepositi, Hugo, 72
Presbiteri, Wimerus, 1823
Punohardi, Bobertus, 634
Quenil', Alanus, 1026
Badulfi, Adam, 185

Alanus, 1631

Alezander, 90

Brianus, 1917


INDEX OF PERSONS.


283


The numhera refer to the cases not to the pages.


Filius —
Badum, Gaufridus, 1041

Hamelinus, 1411, App. 8

Hamon, 715

Henricus, 1003

Hubertus, 486

Hugo, 467, 480

Johannes, 667, 686, 831, 1524,
1681

Laurencius, 686

Mauricius, 1095

Michael, 1151, 1809

Petrus, 994

Radulfus, 227, 955, 1029, 1437,
1445

Ricardus, 467, 945, 1957

Robertus, 949, 1029, 1174, 1957

Rogerus, 404, 848, 1543, 1558

Thomas, 284

Viuianus, 629, 939

Walterus, 92, 384, 467

WiUehnus, 20, 156, 227, 394,
665, 726, 752, 1241, 1554,
1797, 1883
Ranene, Willehnus, 1685
Rannulfi, Alanus, 1861

Hugo, 272, 393

Johannes, 214

Philippus, 1048

Reginaldus, 1041

Ricardus, 230, 1806

Rogerus, 1048

Thomas, 1935

Willehnus, 59, 1280
Ranwe, Euerardus, 1909
Reginaldi, Adam, 357

Johannes, 973

Jordon, 774

Radulfus, 278, 344

Ricardus, 476, 650, 811, 1044,
1764

Robertus, 1678, 1899

WiUehnus, 318, 774
Regis, Robertus, 1569
Reinbaldi, Willelmus, 59
Reinfridi, Rogerus, 913
Renn', Henricus, 994


Filius —
Reyneri, Hugo, 1853

Willehnus, 1568
Ricardi, Bartholomeus, 303
Brianus, 1816
Fulco, 215
Galfridus, 476, 1764
Henricus, 1455, 1979
Herbertus, 476
Heruicus, 1800
Hugo, 838
luo, 1967
Jacobus, 1816
Johannes, 243, 367, 656, 815,

894, 945, 1521, 1638, 1663,

1951
Jordanus, 843
Nicholaus, 1260
Osbertus, 303, 671
Philippus, 343, 977
Radulfus, 455, 1876
Randulfus, 867
Reginaldus, 86
Ricardus, 114, 1040, 1260
Robertus, 303, 316, 349, 604, 836,

1539,1585
Rogerus, 123
Simon, 139, 1849
Thomas, 138, 392
VitaUs, 1639
Walterus, 1663
WiUelmus, 186, 358, 663, 867,

1105, 1351, 1360, 1546, 1722,

1806
Richeri, Adam, 249
Roberti, Adam, 1100
Alanus, 201
Alexander, 1069
Andreas, 601, 1711
Augustinus, 1429
Bartholomeus, 754
Fray, 634

Galfridus, 1462, 1858
Gilebertus, 316, 1268
Godefridus, 889
Hamon, 495
Hugo, 758, 1565, 1671


284


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


The numberg refer to the eoies not to the pages.


Filiue^
Boberti, Johannefl, 85, 75, 190,

280, 634, 694, 853, 982, 1668,

1680
Biaoriciiis, 860
Petnu, 754, 1970
BadulfQB, 125, 604, 939, 1558
BannnlfaB, 1280, 1618
BeginaldnB, 31, 1427
Bioardos, 125, 220, 582, 992,

1105, 1185, 1477, 1675
Bobertus, 43, 125, 315, 379, 1032,

1569, 1966, 1981
Simon, 739

Thomaa, 982, 1013, 1952
Walterus, 490, 777, 855, 886,

1040, 1128, 1828
WiUehnus, 147, 498, 802, 949,

1557, 1729
Bogeri, Alexander, 1777
EUae, 252
Oilebertus, 1682
HenriouB, 1867
Herewardus, 1068
Hugo, 695, 1712
Johannes, 1565
Milo, 1001
Nicholaus, 1802
Osbertus, 564, 1055
Fetrus, 554, 1926
Badulfus, 848, 1006, 1048, 1054
Bandulfus, 275
Bicardus, 892, 994, 1048, 1678,

1766
Bobertns, 75, 224, 292, 910, 1048,

1223
Bogerus, 1223
Stephanus, 1459
Thomas, 1521, 1592, 1974
Walterus, 591
WiUehnus, 319, 663, 697, 947,

1054, 1352, 1814, 1911, 1941,

1952
Wymerus, 848
BoUondi, Johannes, 307
Boscelini, Johannes, 632
WUlehnus, 614, 632, 1900


Filiut —
Bojsie, Fobertus, 476

Bobertus, 1044

Thomas, 1858
Sabine, Adam, 1100

Umfridus, 1100

Warinus, 90

WiUehnus, 1100
Saheri, Nicholaus, 683
Salomonis, Thomas, 1647
Samde, Walterus, 366
Samuel, Nicholaus, 773
Sarre, VitaUs, 1639
Sauarici, Eborardus, 34, 1353
Saxini, Petrus, 771
Sconardi, WUlelmus, 1960
Sefridi, WUlehnus, 1935
Selote, Henricus, 1247
Semare, Alanus, 147

WUlehnus, 702
Seywini, Nioholaus, 1902
SibUle, Godefridus, 227

WUlehnus, 366
Sictridi, Osbertus, 1072
Sigar, Endo, 659
Simeonis, Bicardus, 1394, App. 1

Thomas, 676
Simonis, Hugo, 161

Johannes, 1016

Martinus, 1279 *

Petrus, 1799

PhiUppus, 232

Beginaldus, 76, 1293, App. 1

Bicardus, 42, 139, 188, 427, 1293,
1529, 1658

Bobertus, 285, 644

Bogerus, 1394, 1529

Boges, 1660

Simon, 11, 212, 756, 887, 1861

Thomas, 653, 1049, 1730

Walterus, 224, 856

WiUehnus, 1036
Siredi, Badulfus, 1631
Siwaci, Galfridus, 1167
Siwardi, Galfridus, 1025
Sominne, Bobertus, 1040
Sowar', Johannes, 1603


INDEX OF PERSONS.


285


The numbera refer to the cases not to the paget.


Stephani, Hubertns, 1443

Petrus, 1860

Badulfas, 1214, 1694

Bioardus, 786

Simon, 940

Thomas, 1694
Steyn', Ricardus, 1981
Suanille, Simon, 30
Suetini, Aldenus, 1729
Swaim, Robertus, 1275
Swenild', Hugo, 1798
Theobaldi, Alanus, 153, 1511

Fulco, 1511

Willelmus, 740
Thome, Adam, 1475

Dauid, 1161

Gilebertus, 617, 600

Henricus, 144

Herbertus, 780

Jacobus, 1543

Johannes, 171, 237, 780, 1563,
1659, 1958

Matheus, 1912

Petrus, 488, 1226

PhiUppus, 1666

Radulfus, 433

Rannulfus, 780

Reginaldus, 1382

Ricardus, 604

Robertus, 982, 1083, 1704

Rogerus, 1703, 1767

Simon, 42

Thomas, 1013

Walterus, 992, 1202

Warinus, 183

WiUeUnus, 467, 1857, 1868
Thorphini, Odo, 1878

Radulfus, 1878
Thurgoti, Magnus, 107
ThuriUi, Ricardus, 1041, 1105
Thurstani, Gilebertus, 980

Henrious, 945

Ricardus, 1455, 1792

WiUehnus, 493, 1268
l^urstini, Osbertus, 80
Tmyte, Rioardus, 1040


Filius —
Turgis', Robertus, 1406
Tyrry, Ricardus, 147
Ulfi, Petrus, 1927
Umfridi, Gilebertus, 736

Robertus, 1100

Thomas, 1759

Umfridus, 736

Walterus, 45
Ursy, Reginaldus, 86, 96

Ricardus, 86
Vitalis, Walterus, 1011
Viuine, Walterus, 1419
Vliani, Vlianus, 429
Wakelini, Robertus, 762

WiUebnus, 994
Wale, Ricardus, 72
Wahnari, Hugo, 1252

Martinus, 1252
Walonis, Ricardus, 72
Walteri, Benedictus, 1904

GUebertus, 1068

Heruicus, 1837

Hugo, 1643, 1870

MUo, 1168

Nicholaus, 1904

Petrus, 1062

PhiUppus, 1731

Radulfus, 1498

Ricardus, 335, 489, 1498

Robertus, 315, 355, 379, 1044,
1764, 1838

Rogerus, 315, 379, 1068

Sampson, 315, 379

Thomas, 1004, 1157, 1161

Walterus, 1904

WUlelmus, 63, 303, 1068, 1360
Wandef ', Adam, 520
Warini, Alanus, 1164

Fulco, 102, 764, 1164, 1220

Gilebertus, 1311

Walterus, 1149

Warinus, 1581

WUlelmus, 371, 1182, 1408, 1608
Waukelini, Henricus, 696
WerUngi, (xermanus, 1167
Widonis, Galfridus, 921


286


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The numberi refer to the cases mt to the pages.


Filiui^
WidoniB, Milo, 871
WiUelmi, Adam, 386, 706, 864,

1181, 1918
Alexander, 809, 1207, 1894
Andreas, 815
Baldewinos, 192
Drogo, 1722
Eborardus, 57
EUas, 34, 860
Fabianus, 828
GerardoB, 1
Oodefridus, 906, 1224
Hamon, 481
Henricns, 214, 611, 659, 686, 905,

1824
Hugo, 133, 1813
Johannes, 608, 706, 733, 822,

1201, 1243, 1351, 1443, 1917,

1973
Martinus, 918, 1245, 1252
Nicholaus, 502
NigeUus, 1090
Osbertus, 67, 1436
Otho, 325, 681, 887
Petrus, 156

Radulfus, 608, 706, 1486
Beginaldus, 1808
Bicardus, 388, 652, 680, 867,

966, 989, 1024, 1094, 1319,

1360, 1722, 1748, 1757, 1808,

1857
Robertus, 146, 158, 214, 251,

315, 508, 795, 809, 815,

894, 1070, 1808, 1811, 1928,

1943
Rogerus, 319, 659, 795, 1803
Serlo, 809
Simon, 251, 508, 887, 1036,

1697
Thomas, 231, 234, 461, 527, 947,

1871
ThuriUus, 1041
Warinus, 1435
Walterus, 367, 562, 1360, 1758,

1957
WUlelmus, 43, 46, 59, 508, 659,


Filiut —

860, 906, 966, 992, 1054, 1064,
1082, 1629, 1734, 1747

Wlfridi, Ricardus, 1041

Wluine, Adam, 1823

Wlwini, Hamon, 1812

Wlwrici, Henricus, 1812

Wor', WiUelmus, 301

Wulwardi, Godefridus, 343
Herewurdns, 343

Wulwini, Henricus, 675

Wymarce, Reginaldus, 1959

Wymeri, Rogerus, 848

Tuonis, Thomas, 951, 988
Findere, Hugo de, 51

Johannes fiUus Hugonis de, 51
Fine, Rogerus, 1914

Wimarca uxor Rogeri, 1914
Finemere, Gilebertus de, 1518

PetroniUa de, 1518

PetroniUa filia Rosanne de, 1960

Rosanna de, 1960
Fisinges vide Risinges.
Fislake, Robertus de, 1196
Fissacr*, Henricus de, 755

Martinus de, 755
Fissebumia, Thomas fiUus WUlehni
de, 1783

WiUelmus de, 1783
Fissinges vide Risinges.
FithU vide Ficil.
Fiton, Ricardus, 220
Fizsamere, WiUehnus le, 702
FUmauiUa, FlamnamuiUa, Agnes
de, 22

MatilUs de, 1016, 1968
FlammeuiUa, Hugo de, 1223
FlamnamuiUa vide FlamauiUa.
FlamuiUa, WiUelmus de, 955
Flandr», Archeb', 976

Henricus, 687

Stephanus, 976
Flaxflet, Isolda uxor Rannulfi de,
1889

Rannulfus de, 1889
Fleckeneye, Lucas de, 1967
Fleg, Johannes le, 582


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


287


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Fleg», Simon de, 531
Flemeburgo, Eadulfus filius Willelmi
de, 118

Willelmus de, 118
Flemenlis, Judeus, 18
Flemtona, Hamo de, 1930
Flexlegha, FUxle, Abbas de, 381, 567,

969
Flitwyc, Dauid de, 727

Dauid filius Dauid de, 727
Flixle vide Flezlegha.
Fokeworth', Johannes de, 286
Fol, Hamon le, 1892
Folebrigge, Johannes de, 1441
Folenfant, WiUebnus, 841
Folet, Beginaldus, 1428

Bobertus, 1428
Folifeat, Alanus de, 24
FoUot, Elias, 1676

Gilebertus, 18, 1029, 1374

Henricus, 69

Hugo, 675

Jordanus, 1859

Bicardus, 513, 1326

Bobertus, 521, 603

Bogerus, 69
Fonte Ebroldi, Abbatissa de, 687
Fontenay, Abbas de, 883
Fontibus, Abbas de, 905, 1880, 1881

Johannes de, 1716 n.

VII., Willehnus de, 389
Ford* vide Forda.
Forda, Ford», Forde, Abbas de, 197,

808, 1160, 1732
Forde vide Forda.
Foresta, Hugo de, 1739
Forestarius, Alexander, 286

Jordanus, 201, 1562

Philippus, 806

Bobertus filius Thurstani, 1971

Thurstanus, 1971
Foristarius, Werreys, 216
Forter, Badulfus le, 1962
Fortibus, Christiana uxor Willelmi
de, 1273

WiUehnus de, 926, 964, 1060, 1227,
1273, 1637


Fose, Willehnus, 1017

Ysolda uxor Willehni, 1017
Fossarde, Bobertus, 1339

Willehnus, 1339
Foun, Badulfus le, 1216
Frakeham, Abbas de, 616
Framptona, Bogerus de, 1152
Franccheynni, Milo de, 1358
Franceys, Fraunceys, Alicia uxor
Salomonis le, 335

Gristiana fiha Salomonis le, 335

Emma uxor Bannulphi le, 1848

Galfridus le, 1160

JuHana uxor Willelmi le, 790

Bannulphus le, 1848

Bobertus le, 647, 1943

Salomon le, 335

Willehnus le, 623, 790

Wimarca filia Salomonis le, 335
Francie Begis Cancellarius, 357
Francie Bex, 39, 71, 110, 1163, 1396
Franchenei, Franchesnei, Henricus

de, 1190
Franchesnei vide Franchenei.
Francheuilla, Willelmus de, 188, 839,

890
Franckeiney, Henricus de, 35
Frankelayn, Henricus, 270

Badulfus, 840
Frankeleye, Boysa uxor Simonis le,
429, 471

Simon le, 429, 471
FrankeuiUa, Bogerus de, 1082
Fraunceys vide Franceys.
Fraxineto, WiUehnus de, 871
Fraxino, AUcia uxor Enger' de, 1314

Enger' de, 1314

Hugo de, 250, 702
Freceoxe, Walterus, 1436
Frechingefeldia, Bicardus de, 1800
Fredeswyda vide Fredewithe.
Fredewithe, Fredeswyda, Frfdewithe,

Frideswitda, S., Prior, 719, 832,

1088, 1545
Frere, Walterus le, 1643
FreschenuiUa, Badulfus de, 486
Frestona, Agnes de, 1520


288


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


The numbera refer to the ea$e8 not to the paget.


Frestona, Philippns filios Agnetis de,

1520
FretewelU, Stephanas de, 897
Frid, Ela del, 669

Johannee del, 849, 1833

Johannes filins JohanniB del, 1833

WalteniB del, 669
Frideswitda vide Fredewithe.
Fridewithe vide Fredewithe.
Frinilla, Isahella de, 671
Froohingeham, Alezander de, 783
Froill', Herehertos de, 15
Frome, IsaheUa de, 702
Fromondo, S., Prior de, 626
Fromondaa, Abhas, 112
Frost, Juliana filia Boherti, 1821

HenriooB filius Boberti, 1821

Margareta filia Boherti, 1821

MatiUis filia Boherti, 1821

Bohertus, 1821

Bogerus filins Boberti, 1821

Sarra filia Boberti, 1821
Frowe, Alioia la, 381
Frowic, Johannes de, 686

Laurenoius de, 686
Fughebir* vide Fugheler.
Fugheler, le, Fughebir', Henricus,
1068

Juliana uxor Henrici, 1068
Fughelestona, Isobella uxor Thome
de, 1703

Juliana uxor Thome de, 1703

Bogerus filius Thome de, 1703

Thomas de, 1703

Willehnus de, 1703
Fuillus vide Aunfeillus.
Fulekyn, Willelmus, 1907
Fulemora, Alicia uxor Boberti de,
1311

Bobertus de, 1311
Fuleuilla, Johannes de, 1637
Fulfordia, Henricus de, 1972
Fulgfordehag*, Bobertus de, 942
FuUus, Badulfus le, 20
Fully, Bobertus de, 1096
Fulton, Godefridus, 227

Bicardus filius Godefridi, 227


Fulton, Willehnus, 795
Furmamuilla vide Farmamuilla.
Fumeaus, Galfridus de, 902

Simon de, 1006
Futenglat* vide Fietenglaoe.

Gahou, WiUelmus de, 1306
Galfridus, Gomes, 1570
Galia*, Bobertus de, 1981
Gkillicus, Johannes, 1848
Gamages, Galfridus de, 1224

Godefiridus de, 1224

Matheus de, 1288
Gambun, Stephanus, 980
Gamel, Bicardus, 1242
Ganges, Bobertus de, 824
Gapewico, S. Trinitatis de, Prior, 945
Garbodesham vide Gerbodesham.
Gardino, Beatricia de, 546

Henricus de, 107

Willehnus de, 1446, 1508
Gargate, Isabella, 803
Garinges, Priorissa de, 765
Garschurche, Andreas de, 1723
Garsintona, Walterus de, 967
Gastineys, Nicholaa uxor Thome de,

1609
Gatesdena vide Gattesdena.
Gattedena vide Gattesdena.
Gattele vide Gatteleg'.
Gattdegha, Badulfus de, 1804
Gattesdena, Gatesdena, Gattedena,
Johannes de, 465, 776, 1171

MatiUis de, 443, 540

Banulfus de, 443, 540
Gattona, Hamon de, 495, 1171

Johannes de, 495

Mabilia de, 1171
Gauleya vide Cauleya.
Gauut, Gilebertus de, 148, 231, 494,
954, 1440, 1675, 1737

Henricus de, 1026

Juliana uxor Henrici de, 1026

Matillis uxor Mauricii de, 105

Mauricius de, 105, 414, 1737

Philippus de, 1026
Gaunt*, Alanus le, 622


INDEX OF PERSONS.


289


The numbers refer to the eaaes not to the pctgei.


Gannt', Letioia uxor Alani le, 622
Gaj, GalfriduB le, 1021

Philippus de, 532
Gaylham, Bogertis de, 758
Gaymer, Gunnilda axor Johannis,
1287

Johannes, 1287

Joliana filia Johannis, 1287

Margareta filia Johannis, 1287
Gecham, Ailwynus de, 499

Amisius de, 499

Martinus de, 499

Walterus de, 499
Geddingeham, Johannes de, App. 4
Gelham, Thomas de, 557, 1255
Gell\ Felicia uxor Willebni de, 364

WiUehnus de, 364
Gehram, Johannes de, 1256
Georgio, S., Agatha de, 1183

Agatha filia Alani de, 543

Alanus de, 168, 543, 1536

Galfridus de, 168

Bicardus de, 168
Gerard, Adam, 1281
Gerardeuilla, Bobertus de, 1239
Geraruilla, Willehnus de, 13
Gerauilla, Eustachius de, 1173
Gerbodesham, G«rbodesham, Maria
uxor Thome de, 1647, 1648

Thomas de, 1647, 1648
Germani, S., Prior, 408, 1015
Germano, S., Badulfus de, 1494

Willehnus de, 188
Gememue, Alida uxor Earoli de, 722

Karolus de, 722
Gememuwe, Alicia uxor Badulfi de,
1467

Badulfus de, 1457
Gemesmue, Emma filia JosceUni de,
1895

JosoeUnus de, 1895

Margareta filia Joscelini de, 1895
Gernet, Gilebertus filius WiUelmi,
1336

Bioardus fiUus WiUelmi, 1336

Bogeras, 86, 1541

WiUehnus, 1336

M. I.


Gernun, Johannes, 279

Badulfus, 564

Bogerus, 664, 1687

WiUehnus, 355, 1928
Gersindona, Walterus de, 1528
Gertona, Johannes de, 1456
Gerwedona, Abbas de, 1057
Gery, PhiUppus, 278
Gessinges, Bogerus de, 1795
GeudefFordia, Johannes de, 913
Geytona, Edmnndus de, 1834

Beginaldus fiUus Edmundi de,
1834
Gibewico, Prior de, 1558
Gibewin', Galfridus, 338
Gibewinus, Galfridus, 1189
Gififard, Giffarde, EUas, 1717

MatiUis, 618, 671

Osbertus, 222, 363, 1306, 1717

Bicardus, 1717

Bobertus, 1306

Walteras, 1734
Giffard', MabUia filia Bicardi, 671

Bicardus, 671

Bogerus, 175
GifParde vide Giffard.
Giffardus, Comes, 1500
Gikeleswioo, EUas de, 155
GildehauUe, GiUiale, WiUelmus de,

1115
GUebertus, Comes, 1037, 1117, 1132
Gilebertus, Mariscallus, 857
GUhale vide GUdehauUe.
Gimoges, WiUelmus de, 366
Gimundeham, Bogerus de, 501
Ginges, JuUana uxor Bogeri de, 674

Bogerus de, 674
Gingos, Banddlfus de, 275
Gipewico, S. Trinitatis de, Prior, 1239
Girunde, PhiUppus de, 106

Bosamunda uxor PhiUppi de, 106
GiseUiam, Alanus de, 884

Juliana uxor Alani de, 884
Gisneto, Jaoobus de, 1900
Gladefen, OUueras de, 564

OsbertuB de, 564

Badulfus fiUus Osberti de, 564

19


290


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


77^ itttm5erf rtjer to iht ca»e» not to the pagee.


Olad6feii,Bogero8fiiiii808bertida,564
Oladwine, Bogenis, 1210
Olftniiiiilla vide Olacuiailla.
Olanmlla vide Olaonnillai
Olanwilla vide Olaanoilla.
Olastonia, Abba8 de, Ul, 157. 223,

667, 1391. U69. 1615
Olaacestria vide Oloaoeetria.
Olaonailla, Clamailla, Clanailla,
Olannailla, Olanailla, Olan-
willa, Olonailla, Bartholomeas
de. 1516

Henrioas de. 180, 265. 385. 1377.
1625

Isabella axor Bartholomei de. 1516

Osbertas de, 1920

Bioardaa de, 180

Willelmas de, 246
Olen, Oregorias, 428
Olentham, Aloredas de, 251
Olonailla vide Olaunailla.
Olorias, Bobertas le, 285, 963, 998
Olotingham, Bobertus de, 1505
Olotinham, Bobertas de, 495
Oloaceetria, Olauceetria, Hugo de,
1961

Isabella uxor Willehni de, 1821

Johannes filias Bogeri de, 1898

JordanoB de, 692

Badolfus de, 687

Bicardas de, 1052

Bobertas de, 687

Bpgeras de, 1898

Willehnas de, 1821
Oloaoestrie, Abbas, 172, 900, 1152

Arohidiaconas, 687

Oomes, 102, 167. 232, 447, 1037,
1045, 1133, 1162, 1238, 1436,
1526, 1567, 1582, 1734

Comitissa, 85

Prior, 172
Oloacewrthe, Bobertas de, 1206
Oodardailla vide Oodarailla.
Oodaruilla, Oodarduilla, Walterus

de, 857, 893, 1133
Oodchep, Estrangia uxor Johannis,

1075


Oodohep, Johannes, 1075
Gk>deboat, Alexander, 423
Oodefeuldia, Matillis uxor Boberti
de, 756

Bobertus de, 756
Oodeherte, Johannes« 1552
Oodelinestona vide Oodstanetona.
Oodestowe, Bicardus de, 1537
Oodingeham, Ooudingeham, Hugo
de, 903, 943

Johannes de, 1443, 1507

Willehnus de, 1443
Oodintona, Petrus de, 1186
Oodman, Willehnus, 135
Oodstanetona, OodeUnestona, Bo-

bertus de, 1779
Ooer vide Coher.
Oog, Johannes, 1705
Oogeshale vide Coggeshal'.
Ooggeshale vide Coggeshal'.
Ooher, Daniel le, 799
Ool, Bicardus le, 1695
Ooldingtona, Petrus de, 492
Ooldintona, Petrus de, 1662
Oomages, WiUelmuB de, 1059
Oorges, Badulfus de, 1267
Oosebirdkirk, Willehnus de, 1736
Oosenhale, Banulfus de, 462
Oosethorp, Bobertus de, 920
Oosewilla, Stephanus de, 1311
Ooudingeham %nde Oodingeham.
Oouiz, Bogerus de, 447
Oowiz, Johannes le, 1620
Oranoort vide Oraunourt.
Orandin vide Oraundin.
Orangia, Oilebertus de, 824
Orant, Johannes le, 1852

Bioardus le, 278

Bogerus le, 1525
Oras, Hugo le, 1087

Johannes le, 1083, 1444
Oraua, Oraue, Bioardus de, 394, 1554

Willehnus de la, 528

Willehnus filius Bicardi de, 394
Oraue vide Oraua,
Oraued vide Oraundin.
Oraueherst, Badulfus de, 1125


INDEX OF PERSONS.


291


Ths numbers refer to the

Graaele, Bobertus de, 864

Unfridus de, 835
Grauenel, Isabella de, 1338

Johanna nxor Thome de, 1085,
1418

Thomas de, 1085, 1418
Grauncurt, Granoort, Walteros de,
64, 111, 413

Willeknus filius Walteri de, 413
Graundi' vide Graundin.
Graundin,Grandin,Graued, Graundi^

Hugo, 180, 385, 1377, 1625
Graundun, Hugo, 829
Gray, Johannes de, 391, 1238
Gredere, Henricus le, 863
Greinuilla vide Grenuilla.
Gremeston' vide Grenestona.
Grendale, Alesia uxor Badulfi de, 845

Badulfus de, 345
Grenduna, Bobertus de, 823

Willehnus de, 752
Greneherste vide Grenestede.
Grenestede, Greneherste, Bicardus
de, 128, 189

Thomas de, 1595
Grenestona, Gremeston', Durandus
de, 1597

Emma uxor Badulfi de, 1769

Badulfus de, 1769
Grenewye, Beginaldus de la, 270
GreniUa vide Grenuilla.
Grentingham, Agnes de, 1626
Grenuilla, Greinuilla, GreniUa,
Eustachius de, 97, 605, 798

Johanna uxor Eustachii de, 605,
798

Bicardus de, 1149

WiUehnus de, 1052, 1606
Gresle, Bobertus de, 1547
Gresley, Bobertus, 1440

Bobertus de, 130
Gresten, Grestenn, Abbas de, 318,

854, 561
Grestenn vide Gresten.
Gretingeham, Agnes de, 1558
Gtettona, Sarra de, 33

Walterus de, 33


eases not to the pages»

Grey, Agnes uxor Johannis de, 838

Johannes de, 838

Bicardus de, 1274
Griffin, Bertramus, 1225

Thomas, 1219
Grim, Willehnus, 1944
Grimesby, Major de, 1205

Prior de, 1035
Grisele, Willebnus de, 1334
Gros, GUebertus le, 375

Badulfus le, 1906
Grossetete, Bobertus, 85
Grubbeheuede, Simon, 1577
Grumb', Walterus de, 536
Grunbant, Bobertus, 378
Grym, Simon, 1041
Gubant, Alanus, 778

Johannes, 733, 822
Gabiim, Henricus, 485, 676

Willelmus, 676
Gubun, Floria uxor Willehni, 517

Hugo, 517

Eaterina uxor Bicardi, 518

Bicardus, 518, 1483, 1513

WiUehnus, 517
Guer, Isabella, 1022

WiUehnus, 1022
Guindona, Matheus de, 1308
GuineSj Baldewinus de, 1339
Gulaffre, Johannes, 846
Gulastre, Alina uxor Bogeri, 361

Bogerus, 361
Gulofre, Bogerus, 1088, 1089, 1701
Gumeges, Thomas de, 1019
Gundeuilla, Hugo de, 1095, 1411,

App. 8
Gunetona, Isabella uxor Mathei de,
1796

Matheus de, 373, 1451, 1796
Gurnay, Ganonici de, 1791

Eua de, 1379

Hawisia de, 1379

Hugo de, 1162, 1465

Hugo filius Hugonis de, 1465

Bicardus de, 376

Bobertus de, 1379
Guuiz, Bogerus de, 1538

19—2


292


INDEX OF PERSONa


The numben re/er to the eau» not to the paget.


Oymingeham, Willelmas de, 177
Oyneges, Willelmiu, 286
Oyppewico, Prior de, 310

Hachardjg vide Hechardis.
Haokebeche, Adam de, 1915
Haddam, Philippns de, 493
Haia, Willebnas de, 260
Haket, Onndreda de, 1458

Margareta nxor Walteri, 590

Margeria axor Willehni, 509

Walteras, 590

Willehnas, 509
Hal vid£ Hales.
Hale, Badalfns de \a, App. 3

Simon de, 615, 1854
Halefead vide Haltfeald.
Halegate, Theodoricas de, 1029
Hales, Hal, Abbas de, 292, 362, 1024

Bobertas de, 821

Bobertas filias Bogeri de, 292

Bogeras de, 245, 292

Simon de, 1016, 1083, 1671, 1691,
1716, 1874, 1909, 1928
Halesby, Bicardas, 907
Halletona, Nicholans de, 1875
Halloras, Badalfos filias Willehni,
1510

Willehnas, 1510
Hals, Marsilia filia Willehni, 1508

Willehnas, 1508
Haltfeald, Halefead, Prior de, 442
Hamberd, Badolfas, 636
Hameldona, Bobertas de, 1544
Hamerwic, Henricos de, 95
Hamet, Warinus de, 1591
Hamewella, Bandolfas de, 1187
Hamme, AaeUna axor Edwardi de,
84

Edwardas de, 84
Hamtona, Willehnas de, 1352
Handena, Agnes de, 1318
Hanekshale, Walterus de, 45
Hanetone, Warinas, 1619
Hanewrthe, Hugo de, 1384
Harang, Febcia, 1104
Harang' vide Harange.


Harange, Harang', Gristiana nxor
Oemagani, 774

Oemagan, 774

Walteras, 265
Harangod vide Haringod.
Hardeoota, Thomas de, 1486
Hardes, Bogeras de, 1209
Harecart, Bicardas de, 708

Bobertus de, 712, 1700, 1744

Willehnos de, 708
Harencort, Willehnns de, 102
Hareng, Hareng* vide Harenge.
Harenge, Hareng, Hareng', Badulfas,

137, 201. 216, 901, 1309
Harengod vide Haringod.
Harested' vide Sharsted*.
Hareweduna, Simon de, 819
Harewode, Priorissa de, 1699
Haric, Adam, 1909

Ahcia uxor Ade, 1909
Haringeye, Willelmus de, 595
Haringod, Harangod, Harengod,
Johannes fiUus Nicholai, 437

Nicholaus, 437, 568, 872

SibiUa, 537, 568

SibiUa uxor Nicholai, 872

Stephanus, 1738
Hari)edena, Harpedona, Bobertns de,
68

S., Johanne de, Bobertns de, 68
Harpedona vide Harpedena.
Harpetre, Johannes de, 992

WUlehnus fiUus Johannis de, 992
Harpur, Adam le, 1281

Annora nxor Ade le, 1281

Emma uxor Bicardi le, 761

Bicardus le, 761
Harre, Herre, Antigania nxor Bicardi
le, 61

Bicardus le, 61
Hartesheued, Hertesheuede, Hugo
de, 1846

Margeria uxor Hugonis de, 1846
Haselbergo, Bicardus de, 1543

Thomas de, 1150
Haseleye, Johannes fiUus Walteri de,
990


INDEX OF PERSONS.


293


The numben refer to the

Haseleye, Matillisuxor Walteri de, 990

Walterus de, 990
Hasting' vide Hastinges.
Hastinger, Gilebertua de, 1689
Hastinges, Hasting', Barbota uxor
Manasseri de, 1604, 1789

Emolfus de, 173

Galfridus de, 111

Henricus de, 1614

Manasserus de, 1604, 1789

MatiUis de, 203

Bobertus de, 718, 795, 848, .1604,
1789

Thomas de, 1878

WiUelmus de, 1953
Hatecrist, Willelmus, 1079
Haterel, Alicia uxor Jobannis, 959

Johannes, 959, 1510
Hatfeldia, WiUehnus de, 1476
Hatfeuld, MatiUis uxor Walteri de,
1908

Prior de, 751

Walterus de, 1894, 1908
Hatfeuldia, Johannes de, 812
Hathelakestan vide Aslakestan.
Hathemus, AUcia, 50
Hatheringtona, Hugo de, 1563
Hathfeldia, WiUehnus de, 144
Hattona, Bobertus de, 504, 509
Hauekescherche, PhiUppus de, 131

Bicardus de, 131
Haueleshirst, Johannes de, 1169
Hauerhalm, Prior de, 849
HauerhuUa, WiUehnus de, 1249
Haueringe vide Haueringes.
Hausringes, Haueringe, Johannes de,
834

WUlelmuB de, 1036

Wydo de, 834
Hauersham, Hugo de, 1399
Haueryate, Bobertus de, 314
Haufordia, Bobertus de, 837
Hauing, Bicardus, 779
Haukestona, NigeUus de, 779
Haultona, WUlehnus de, 895
HaunseUn, Alexander, 752

LesceUna filia Alexandri, 752


eases not to the pages,

Haustede, Badulfus de, 1095

Bobertus de, 1095
Hautayn, Autein, Theobaldus, 1547
Hautein, Hautun, Theobaldus, 859
Hauteyn, Theobaldus, 1728, 1874
Hautona, Henricus de, 1209

Sarra uxor Simonis de, 515, 1092,
1093, 1102

Simon de, 515, 1092, 1093, 1102
Hautun vide Hautein.
Hauuilla, Henricus de, 940
Hawisia Gomitissa, 964, 1213
Hay, Bogerus, 421

Bogerus filius Thome, 410, 421

Thomas, 68, 410, 421
Haya vide Haye.

Haye, Haya, Alexandra uxor Thome
de la, 605, 798

AUenora uxor Boberti de, 1301

EUzabet uxor Bogeri de la, 1314

Isabella filia Bicardi de, 503, 565

Julia fiUa Bicardi de, 503, 565

JuUanus de la, 558

Maurioius de la, 558

Nicholaa de, 503

Nicholaa fiUa Bicardi de, 503, 565

PetroniUa uxor Saeri de la, 558

PhiUppa uxor Boberti de, 513

Badulfus de la, 864

Bobertus de, 513, 864, 1301, 1966

BobertuB filius Boberti de, 1966

Bogerus de la, 1314

Saerus de la, 558

Sanioula uxor Mauricii de la, 558

Stephanus de, 881

Thomas de, 605, 691, 798

Thomas fiUus Bogeri de la, 1314
Hayrun vide Heyrun.
Hayward, WaUerus le, 1837
Hecche vide Hethe.
Hecham, Dionisius de, 1781

Elena de, 1283

HenricuB filius Elene de, 1283

Hugo de, 1905

MatUUs de, 1031

OUua de, 1086

Bobertus de, 1781


294


INDEX OF PEBSOXS.


The tiumben refer to the eoMes not to the pages.


Heoham, Willelmiifl de, 663

Heohardis, Haohardis, Constanoia
Qxor Boberti de, 1787
Bobertne de, 1767
Selekin de, 1787

Heohe, BobertuB de, 19

Heddenesora, Willehnnfl de, 1671

Hegetona vide Begetona.

Heiefl, Petms de, 1268

Heintona, Idonea de, 1409

Hekintona, Bobertns de, 705

Hele, Emma nxor Bogeri de, 290

. BogemB de, 290

Helena, S., Johannes de, 164

Heliun, Bobertns de, 422

Hellebeok, Matillis uxor Boberti de,
729
Bobertns de, 729

Hemdun', Gilebertns de, 834

Hemegraue, Thomas de, 1930
Willehnus de, 1930

Hemelingtona, Galfridus de, 1817

Hemmedena, Walterus de, 1189

Hendemesse, Margeria de, 1356

Henepeneberd', Willehnus, 740

Henred, Johannes de, 469, 1139
Waltems de, 1185

Henricus Oomes, 152, 1584
Philippa uxor Comitis, 1584

Henricus filiufl Henrici II. Begis
Anglie, 199

Henrious I. Bex Anglie, 97, 178« 272,
775, 842, 847, 1238, 1688

Henrious II. Bex Anglie, 49, 80, 97,
145, 178, 199, 272, 305, 582, 775,
842, 1064, 1188, 1285, 1238, 1365,
1684, 1688, 1720, 1733, 1734

Henricus lU. Bex Anglie, 16, 40, 56,
110, 144, 168, 173, 187, 199, 272,
277, 288, 449, 519, 561, 582, 695,
743, 750, 775, 776, 778, 785, 786,
792, 806, 821, 824, 857, 907, 908,
918, 914, 930, 1068, 1066, 1108,
1111, 1117, 1121, 1183, 1136, 1141,
1162, 1164, 1181, 1188, 1217, 1224,
1226, 1285, 1288, 1806, 1487, 1689,
1651, 1716, 1717, 1720, 1730, 1973


Hentona, Badulfas de, 1034
Heroe, Johannes de la, 913
Herchiecesham, Herkenbaud de, 1763
Herdeberghe, Hugo de, 950
Herdenieo, Willelmus de, 919
Herdewioo, Willehnns de, 1105
Herdingtona vide Erdingtona.
Herdres, Milisanta nxor Philippi de,
1787

Philippus de, 1787
Hereforde, Bicardus, 856
Herefordenses Episoopi, 804, 675,802,

946, 1117, 1229
Herefordia, Cecilia de, 593

Gomitissa de, 671

Dauid de, 1472

Imbertus de, 899

Petms de, 1041

Bicardns filius Dauid de, 1472
Herefordie, Gomes, 463, 1117, 1168^
1261, 1278

Decanus, 250, 804, 990
Heriet, Heiyet, Johannes de, 92

Bicardua de, 70, 1487
Heringod vide Haringod.
Herlegha, Warinns de, 766
Herlestona, Alieia de, 812

Bogeras de, 1513

Willehnus filins Alioie de, 812
Herlicun, Willelmns, 790
Herlingefeuld, Osbertus de, 1895
Herseneske, Ismania uxor Philii^i
de, 267

PhilippuB de, 267
Herst, Letioia uxor Bogeri de, 1926

Petms filius Bogeri de, 1926

Bogems de, 1926

Sabina filia Willehni de, 1775

Willelmus de, 1775
Hersy, Mauuesinns de, 829

Theophania nxor Mauuesini de,
829
Hert, Heyr', Amicia uxor Beginaldi
le, 491

Auicia uxor HugoniB le, 1576

Hugo le, 1576

BadulfuB le, 491


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


295


The nujnJber» refer to the ccues not to the pages.


Hert, Beginaldos le, 491
Herting' vide Hertring'.
Hertring', Herting', Hertmg', Alanus
de, 431

Bicardus de, 431, 512, 612

Thomas filius Alani de, 431
Hertrug* vide Hertring*.
Herui, Willelmus, 1542
Herwintona, Emwicus de, 136

Johannes filius Emwioi de, 136
Heryet vide Heriet.
Hethe, Heoche, Alexander de, 1447

Alicia uxor Alexandri de, 1447
Hethfeldia, Hugo de, 1685
Heye, Willelmus, 1222

Willebnus de, 1424
Heyntona, Badulfus de, 238
Heyr, Hugo le, 980
Heyr* vide Hert

Heymn, Hayrun, Jordanus, App. 2
Hiohe vide Niohe.
Hicheham, Joscelina, 1757
Hickefordia, Johannes de, 570
Hida, Abbas de, 113, 1695, 1727

Alanus de, 1611

Auicia uxor Bogeri de, 137

Bogerus de, 137

Walteras de la, 1232

WillebnoB fihus Walteri de la,
1232
mde, Gilebertus de la, 1189
Hidona, Bicardus de, 603
Hidnna, Bicardus de, 521
Hikelinge, Prior de, 1796
Hildelath, Bobertus de, 1749
Hille, Johannes de la, 1681
HHtingtona, Whichington, Bogeras

de, 581
Hiltoft, Johannes de, 1135
Hiltona, Adam de, 1169

Alexander de, 782

Bioardus de, 449

Bobertus de, 449
Hindele, Isabella uxor Willebni de,
1192

Willelmus de, 1192
Hingham, Walterus de, 1820


Hintelesham, Johannes filius Seywini
de, 1902

Nicholaus filius Seywini de, 1902

SeywinuB de, 1902

Thomas filius Seywini de, 1902
Hintona, Bicardus de, 1513
Hipping', Matillis uxor Bicardi, 374

Bicardus, 374
Hirtlintona, Willehnus de, 155
Hiseu^estona, Adam filius Sewalli
de, 1914

Sewallus de, 1914
Ho, How, Domini de, 1163

Frost de, Henricus filius Boberti,
1821

Frost de, Juliana fllia Boberti,
1821

Frost de, Margarita filia Boberti,
1821

Frost de, Matillis filia Boberti,
1821

Frost de, Bobertus, 1821

Frost de, Bogems, 1821

Frost de, Sarra filia Boberti, 1821

Gilebertus de, 1242

Badulfus del, 1122

Bicardus del, 854

WiUehnus de, 1315
Hoberge, Willehnus de, 243
Hobrige, Willehnus de, 1374
Hoc, Thomas de, 891
Hocham, Ocham, Walterus de, 10
Hock, Bicardus de, 824
Hoclintona, Dauid de, 938
Hoctona, Bartholomeus de, 1296

Johannes de, 1013

Nioholaus filius Boberti de, 1822

BobertuB de, 1822
Hoder, Ailwardus le, 1479

Alicia filia Ailwardi le, 1479
Hof, Bicardus de, 280
Hogeling*, Johannes de, 259
Hoget, Berengarius, 117
Hogh, Thomas de, 8
Hoilye, Joscelinus de, 10
Hokescur', Erneburga uxor Willehni
de, 1039


296


INDEX OF PERSONS.


Tht Hwmber» refer to the

Hokesour', WiUelmus de, 1039
Holebech*, Simon filias WiUelmi de,
978

WillelmtiB de, 978
Holebat, Isabella uxor Boberti, S42

Robertus, 342
Holendale, Willehnos de, 932
Hohna, S. Benedicti de, Abbas, 1451
Hoper, Adam le, 1281
Horbiria, Willelmnfl de, 1853
Hordena, Johanna uxor Willelmi de,
1010

Willehnns de, 1010
Hordona, Bobertus de, 1163
Horepol, VitaUs de, 1409
Homigefeadia, Willehnus de, 1838
Horsendona, Alicia uxor Johannis
de, 1677

Ernerburga uxor Johannis de, 1677

Johannes de, 1677
Hortona, Margeria uxor Thome de,
1083

Prior de, 1769

Bobertus fiUas Thome de, 1083

Thomas de, 1083

Willehnus de, 709
Hose, Bartholomeus de la, 655

Henricus, 1310
Hothum, Thomas de, 1444
Hotoft, IsabeUa de, 1782

Petrus de, 774

Bobertus de, 816
Hou, Thomas de, 953
Houedale, WiUelmus de, 1412
Houkegarthe, Beginaldus de, 1884

WUlelmus de, 1884
How vide Ho.

Howbrigge, WiUelmus de, 255
Hoxne, Oxn', Prior de, 1934
Hoylande, Petrus de, 1672
Huoham, IsabeUa uxor Boberti de,
1760

Bobertus de, 743, 1760
Hiichendena, Geruasius de, 285
Hugborsam, Bobertus de, 1306
Huggelegha, Elyas de, 675
Hughel', SibiUafilia WUlelmide, 1740


ecues not to the pages.

Hugbel', WUlelmas de, 1740
Hugo, Gomes, 835, 1827, 1828

Bogeras fiUus Comitis, 1827, 1828
Huithande, Agnes fiUa Bicardi, 1862

Bicardus, 1852
Hul, Bicardus del, 650
Huhmd, Henrious, 1369
Hulecota, PhiUppus de, 1470
HuUe, Osbertus de, 1421
Hukn', Maria uxor Boberti de, 66

Bobertus de, 66
Hulmo, Bobertus de, 1530

S. Benedicti de, Abbas, 1817

S. Benedicti de, Prior, 548
Hukecumba, Bicardus de, 680
Humat' vide Humaz.
Humaz, Humat', Engelardus de, 1734

JuUa uxor Bicardi de, 503

Bicardus de, 503, 1734

WiUehnus de, 565

WUlelmus fiUus Engelardi de,
1734
Humbj, Hugo de, 445
Humelbeby, Eateiina uxor Badulfi
de, 356

Badulfus de, 356
Humet, WiUehnus de, 1500
HumframuiUa vide UmframuiUa.
Hund, lueta uxor Petri, 138

Petrus, 138
Huneby, Hugo de, 1730
Huntercumba, WiUehnus de, 1717
Huntingdona, Johannes filius Thome
de, 1927

Thomas de, 1927
Huntmgdone, Gomcs, 563, 1124, 1213

Gomitissa, 572
Huntingdunie, Archidiaconus, 629
Huntingefeldia, Bogerus de, 1156
Huntmgfeldia, WUlelmus de, 1309
Hurlegha, Banulfus de, 347
Hurleia, Prior de, 1178
Husoard, Thomas, 229
Huscarl, Bogerus, 383

WiUehnus, 383
Huscarle, Agnes, 1284

Bogerns, 1557


INDEX OP PERSONS.


297


The numbert refer to the ca$e$ not to the pc^geg.


Huscarle, Willelmus, 1284
Huse, Bartholomeus de la, 728

Johannes de la, 147

Margeria uxor Willelmi, 840

BicarduB de la, 147

Walterus, 1679

Willelmus, 840, 1003
Hussebumia, Willelmus de, 1359
Hustingefeuld, Bogerus de, 1900
Hnstona, Agnes de, 1672
Hyfordia, Bicardus de, 1656

Bobertus de, 1656

Icumb, Adam de, 645
Ifeldia, Gilebertus de, 376
Ifeuldia, Gilebertus de, 481
Igoldesuilla, Alauus de, 1135

Bioardus filius Alani de, 1135

WiUelmus de, 1135
Ikelesham, Sibilla de, 872
Ikelinge, Prior de, 1813
Ilegha vide Ulegha.
Ilesby, Willehnus de, 1563
Ulefordia, Leprosorum de, Custos,

1694
Illegha, Ilegha, Alioia filia Anselini
de, 1922

Anselinus de, 442, 1922

Hugo de, 1836

Bicardus de, 1922
Immewrthe, Badulfus de, 1122
Inge, Adam, 576, 626
Ingeham, Ingham, Albreda uxor
Johannis de, 1793

Johannes de, 1793

Walterus de, 1793
Ingelistona, Sibilla uzor Thome de,
1298

Thomas de, 1298
Ingewrthe, Johannes de, 1359,
1835

Willelmus de, 1359
Ingham vide Ingeham.
Ingoldeby, Willelmus de, 357
Ingoldesby, Bogerus de, 1156

Willelmus de, 1156
Inkewrthe, Johannes de, 1064


Insula, Brianus de, 543, 638, 930,
1183, 1205, 1496

Gracia uxor Briani de, 1496

Grecia de, 1205

BicarduB de, 582

Bobertus de, 803, 1189, 1408, 1578

Willelmus de, 503, 514, 819
Ireoestria, Petrus de, 483
Ireys, Henricus le, 1724
Isaac, Judeus, 18
Isabella, Gomitissa, 1919

Begina, 1121, 1327, 1406
Isegny, Isny, Adam de, 182

Johannes de, 182
Iselhamstede, Bobertus filiuB Walteri
de, 656

Walterus de, 656
Islepe, Isleppe, Jeruasius de, 625,

693
Isleppe vide Islepe.
Isny vide Isegny.
Itringeham, Willehnus de, 1762

Jacobi, S.; de Norhamtona, Abbas,

344
JarpenniUa, Albreda de, 802

Alicia de, 302

Johannes de, 1175, 1181

Willelmus de, 302
Jaws vide Jowas.
Jermano, S., Willelmus de, 839
Jemsalem in Anglia, Hospitalis,
Fratres, 76

Prior, 263, 308, 319, 666, 836, 1336,
1401, 1581, 1599
Joel, Thoraldus, 1158
Johanne, S., Agatha filia Willelmi
de, 410, 421

Bobertns de, 342, 1350

Willehnus de, 247, 410, 421, 474
Johannes Comes, 279, 992, 994, 1117,

1124, 1127, 1221, 1273
Johannes Bex Anglie, 16, 17, 85, 39,

45, 49, 62, 76, 102, 145, 199, 272,

283, 513, 728, 750, 806, 842, 994,

1063, 1076, 1107, 1114, 1123, 1124,

1172, 1188, 1206, 1217, 1226, 1255,


298


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


The uumben refer to the coMee not to the pagee.


1274, 1306, 1329, 1865, U29, 1500,

1512, 1567, 1570, 1583, 1665, 1666,

1684, 1688, 1720, 1732, 1795, 1854,

1950
Johannis, S., de Norhamtona, Hos-

pitaliB, Magister, 1032
Joscelin, Johannes, 205, 975
Jowae, Jawfl, Badnlfas, 1131
Jndas, Willehnas, 566
JadenB, Bonaoita, 1554

Isaao, 1376, 1445

JnmetuB, 1445
Jnkel, Emma uxor Thome, 924

Thomas, 924
JayeniB, Johannes, 1712

Eabaam vide Gahanm.
Eafin vide Bafyn.
Eahanneys vide Cahannes.
Eailli vide Eailly.

Eailly, Eailli, Eaylli, EayUy, Adam
de, 671, 672, 1717, 1838

MabiHa ozor Ade de, 671, 1717

BogenzB filios Ade de, 839
Ealethorpe, Eado de, 730
Ealmundesdena, Agneg nzor Begi-
naldi de, 320

Beginaldos de, 820
Eammeys vide Cammeys.
Eano', BeginalduB de, 270
Eancie,Gomes, 403, 1108, 1111, 1117,

1136, 1141, 1221, 1233
Eantia, Henricus de, 1269
EarleolenBes Episcopi, 1117, 1153,

1155, 1176, 1181, 1273
Earleolensis Prior, 1153
Earleolo, Eado de, 1040
Earletona, Henricus de, 925

Bicardus de, 925

Simon de, 1388
Eartorpe, Alioia axor Willeimi, 712,
1700

WiUehnas, 712, 1700
Earailla, Badulfas de, 269
Earon, Amicia de, 580

EUzabet fiUa Hugonis de, 580

Hugo de, 580


Eanm, Johannes de, 580, 867

Lnoia fiUa Hugonis de, 580

Margeria fiUa Hagonis de, 580

Bandolfas fiUns Bioardi de, 867

Bicardns de, 867

WiUehnus de, 867
Eassingetorpe, WiUehnns de, 1289
Eateme, Johannes, 1029
Eane, WiUehnns de, 399
Eaneres vide OaaeresweUa.
EaneresweUa vide OaueresweUa.
EaaersweU* vide EeneresweUa.
Eanme, FeUcia axor Henrici de, 1096

Henrions de, 1096

SibiUa de, 448
KanmaiUa vide OamaiUa.
EaunniUa vide OamuHla.
Eanstr* vide Oanston*.
Eaaz, Bogerus de, 1240
Eay, Johannes de, 381
EayUi vide EaiUy.
EayUy vide EaiUy.
Eayu, WiUehnus de, 1274
Eebbel, WiUehnus, 773
Eeche, Hugo, App. 3
Eedingtona, Bobertus de, 1923

WUlehnus de, 1923
EeUing, Bioardus, 1973
EeUinges, Hubertus de, 404
Eemeseok, Henrious de, 797
Eemesinge, Henrious de, 690
Een, Hugo de, 1436

Johannes de, 1436

Bicardus fiUus Johannis de, 1436
EenebeU vide EeneweU'.
EeneresweUe, EauersweU', AUcia
nxor Boberti de, 199

FUomena fiUa Walteri de, 199

Bobertus de, 199

Walterus de, 199
Eenet, Nicholaus de, 984, 1071, 1274
EeneuiUa, Adam de, 1193
EeneweU', EenebeU, WiUehnus de,

1623
EeniUewrthe vide EenUwurthe.
EenUlewurthe vide EenUwurthe.
Eenilwurthe, EeuiUewrthe, EeniUe-


INDEX OF PEBSON&


299


The fmnibers refer to tke caies not to the page».


wurthe, Prior de, 199, 669, 1300,

1362
Eenintona, Geruasiua de, 1442

Margeria uxor Geruasii de, 1442
Eenteuilla, Gilebertus de, 1632
Eeniewella, Gilebertus de, 1239

Willelmus de, 1239
Eerebroc, James de, 1009
Eeret, Adam, 1310

Adam de, 1327
Eerinol, Swanus de, 1868
Eerkestede vide Eirkestede.
Eemec, Bobertus de, 1320
Eersewella, Bobertus de, 1192
Eersimere, Agnes de la, 1321

Johannes de la, 1321
Eesneto, Luoia uxor Petri de, 1337

Petrus de, 1337

Badulfus de, 1337
Eetelbeme, Henricus, 1763
Eeymes, Bogerus de, 1436
Eeynesham, Abbas de, 1788
Eicer, Ada uxor Theobaldi de, 148

Theobaldus de, 148
Eidewar', Walterus de, 38
Eim' vide Eima.

Eima, Eim', Eime, Philippus de, 232,
261

PhilippuB filius Simonis de, 174

Boheisia uxor Simonis de, 24, 37

Simon de, 24, 37, 174, 232
Eime vide Eima*
Einbrigia, Alicia uxor Milonis de, 16

Milo de, 16
Einelingeswrthe, Bogerus de, 44
Eing, Badulfus le, 1862

Walterus le, 1852
Eingeswde vide Eingeswude.
Eingeswude, Eingeswde^Eyngeswude,

Abbas de, 860, 860, 961
Eingtona vide Eintona.
Eintham, Prior de, 686
Eintona, Eingtona, Henricus de, 40

Henricus filius Nicholai de, 401

Nicholaus de, 401
Eirewella, Simon de, 1242
Eirkeby, Johannes de, 658


Eirkestal, Abbas de, 849
Eirkestede, Eerkestede, Eyrkestedia,

Abbas de, 741, 770, 781, 986, 1679
Eiuilly, Thuroldus de, 1374

WiUehnus de, 1374
Eiully, Isabella nxor Nicholai de,
931

Nicholaus de, 931
Enapetona, Alanus de, 24
Eocham, Osbertus de, 286
Eriokelade, Andreas de, 369
Erituf , Willelmus de, 966
Euokewel, Willelmus, 791
Eudingtona, Willehnus de, 762
Eudintona, Fray de, 634
Euilly, Bobertus de, 1096
Euling vide Gulinge.
Eulle vide Cmell'.
Eullinges, Bobertus de, 611
Eully, Bicardus de, 1463
Eunnetona, Leticia de, 1712
Euper, Andreas le, 270
Euriel vide Curiel.
Eyde, Laurencius, 1799
Eyluingeholmia, Walterus de, 1174
Eyma, Philippus de, 1417
Eyme, Philippus de, 472, 1211

Bobertus de, 613

Willelmus de, 472
Eynchtona, Willehnus de, 1088
Eyneburle, Willehnus de, 39
Eyngeswilla, Henricus de, 1066

MatiUis de, 1066
Eyngeswude vide Eingeswude.
Eyntona, Willehnus de, 196
Eyriel, Thomas, 116
Eyrkeby, Alanus de, 905

Petras de, 1636
Eyrkestedia vide Eirkestede.

Laoy, Gilebertus de, 877

Johannes de, 869

Waltems de, 877
Lade, Bicardus de la, 1238
Laf, Adam, 1617
Lafaleisa vide Faleisa.
Lafford', Decanus de, 293


300


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The numben refer to the eau» not to the pages.


Lafham, Ailmenu de, 1986
Lagard, Alda uxor fiogeri, 426

Galfridus, 595

Bogenis, 426
Laghefar, BogenzB de, 184
Labtona, WiUelmns de, 595
Lake, firake, Bogeros de la, 1259
Lambert, Petms, 1361
Lambrict, Jordanns, 699
Lamore, Bogerus de, 804
Lamy, Lami', Lamiy, Willelmiis de,

433
Lan\ Osbertas de la^ 10
Lancastria, Willeimas de, 613
Lanceleuce, Johannes le, 764
Lancelene, Johannes, 1331
Lande, Prior de la, 1365
Langebergo, Philippus de, 1325
Langedona, Abbas de, 1506

Galfridus de, 955
Langeduna, Galfridus de, 634
Langeford, Langefordia, Langeport,
Bogerus de, 1285

WalteruB de, 401
Langefordia vide Langeford.
Langele, Priorissa de, 1295
Langelega, Langelegha, Langeleia,
Abbas de, 75, 559, 874

Beatricia de, 52

Galfridus de, 1263

Prior de, 559

Thomas de, 1107
Langelegha vide Langelega.
Langeleia vide Langelega.
Langeport vide Langeford.
Langetoft, Godefridus de, 1075, 1709
Langetona, Henricus de, 251

Bobertus de, 414

Stephanus de, 691
Langetre, Bicardus filius Sy wardi de,
138

Sy wardus de, 138
Langewade, Hugo de, 420
Langlegha, Galfridus de, 1134
Lanmale vide Lanualey.
lianmaley vide Lanualey.
Lann' vide Lamy.


Lannalay, Gnnnora de, 682

Hawisia de, 682

Willeknus de, 682
Lanny vide Lamy.
Lanualey, Lanmale, Lanmaley,
Hawisia filia Willehni de, 43

Matillis de, 43

Willehnns de, 43
Laringel, Bobertus, 1854
Lasoeles, Ada uxor Theobaldi de, 96

Johannes de, 301

Theobaldus de, 96

Willehnus de, 301
Lascy, Johannes de, 725

MatiUis de, 204

Walterus de, 227
Latebur', Aunfelisa uxor Johannis de,
867

Johannes de, 867
Latfordia, Gilebertus de, 1530
Lathum, Bicardus de, 1577

Bicardus filius Bicardi de, 1577
Lattona, Willelmus de, App. 2
Laudo, S., Adam de, 1341
Lauendena, Abbas de, 648, 1073,

1201
Lauerstoke, Alexander de, 923
Lauintona vide Lauittona.
Lauittona, Lauintona, Willelmus de,

81
Launde, Matillis uxor Bicardi de la,
370

Bicardus de la, 370
Launn, Willehnus de, 628
Laurencio, S., Johannes de, 692
Lay, Hugo de, 24

Bobertus de, 1851
Lazari, S., Hospitalis, Magister, 1535
Leaume, Galfridus, 440
Leoche vide Lecohe.
Lech vide Lock.
Lecke, Theobaldus de, 286
Lecohe, Lecche, Johannes de, 792
Leotona, Gristiana uxor Boberti de,
652

Huffo de, 1641

Bobertus de, 276, 652


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


301


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


Leotona, Willelmas de, 411
Ledecamb', Badulfas de, 287
Ledena, Willelmas de, 250
Ledes, Abbas de, 102

Oristiana axor Walteri de, 1307

Prior de, 1760

Walteras de, 1307
Ledet, Walteras, 1481
Ludues, Ledyes, Prior de, 481
Ledyes vide Ledues.
Lee, Johannes de, 1247

Bicardus de, 1972
Lefaunt, Bobertus, 753
Legha, Alanus de, 1122

Andreas de la, 838

Bartholomeus de, 246

Flandr' uxor Boberti de la, 74

Henricus de, 1370

Hugo de, 246

Johanna uxor Alani de, 1122

Mauricios de la, 499

Nicholaa uxor Bartholomei de, 246

Prior de, 564

Bobertus de la, 74, 1388

Stephanus de la, 1741
Leibume, Leibumia, Leybomia,
Elias de, 1198

MatiUis uxor Walteri de, 1137

Bicardus de, 1380

Bogerus de, 169, 929, 1410

Walteras de, 1137

Wymarus de, 1198
Leibumia vide Leibume.
Leio', Bobertus de, 351
Leicestrie, Abbas, 72, 583

Gomes, 1117, 1953
Leidet, Margeria uxor Wiscardi, 1466

Wiscardus, 1466
Leircestria^ Leyroestria, Asca de,
1948

Petras de, 1188

Simon de, 1188

Walteras de, 1948

Willelmus filius Asoe de, 1948
Leirtona, Willelmus de, 456
Leistuua, Abbas de, 740
Lek, Theobaldus de, 1344


Lelay, Hugo de, 37
Lelbrag', Simon de, 1265
Lenham, Johannes de, 295

Bogeras de, 1595
Lenn' vide Lonn*.

Lenna, Mabilia uzor Wymandi de,
1361

Wymundus de, 1361
Lentona, Prior de, 62, 915, 1236
Leodegario, S., Alida uxor Willehni
de, 184

Galfridus de, 127

Johannes de, 704

Willelmus de, 184
Leofordia, Alicia de, 1346
Lethertona, Willehnus de, 595
Lettres, Nicholaus de, 1111
Leualence, Alicia uxor Bogeri, 1052

Bogeras, 1052
Leuckenora, Simon de, App. 5
Leueriche, Walteras filias Willehni,
710

Willehnus, 710
Leueriz, Willelmus de, 1670
Leuesesham, Mabilia uxor Sanipsonis
de, 1789

Sampson de, 1789
Leuingtona, Bicardns de, 249
Lewe, Beginaldus de, 910
Lewes, Archidiaconus de, 318

Azo de, 1107

Prior de, 142, 248, 350. 539, 1074.
1395, 1663, 1685, 1686

S. Pancracii de, Prior, 350
Lexendena, Willelmus de, 779
Lexetona vide Lexingtona.
Lexingtona, Lexetona, Bobertus de,

281, 466, 760, 831, 901, 1012, 1118,

1171
Leybumia vide Leibume.
Leyrcestria vide Leiroestria.
Lichefeldensis Episcopus, 1286
Lichefeldia, Willehnus de, 227
Lichefeldie, Decanus, 1684
Licio, S., Simon de, 926, 1060, 1273,

1501
Lidefordia, Capellanas de, 610


3M


DTDEX OF rEBSOKR.


7W


rt-tfr t* tfe


■0C Co the pafet.


ITSl
,141«

^4eLl371
Mfclka^ lntoff-'^ lUfc. l^

las, AiAM ^ 141. 1S7,7:3,1C15

Petfn de,
SSi. Un. 1». 1444, 17^

IVm ^ t47, S23. 7iOL 910. €47,
«»»7. IMG. 137S, Ua, l;».
1444. 17»4. im
Xabelo. Sl, B<]«m» de. 14??


4^im
GmlfndM de, 3a. 1570
Hama «ur G«lfriii de, 35
BobertBsde,9U

WnUnns de; 8. », 176, 297, 301,
375, 1397, 14g7

Bobert]isde,U71
ide,7«4
Georgiiis filios Boberti
de,1591
Bkudosde.1591
IfsnqiieBcy, Gerrmidns de, 74
Xsiisel, IfMinBpl. Waniras, 1619

Willefanas, 515
Mmt Yinm ride Ifonte Tiionis.
K^ieldaieluun, Amshilis oxor Bo-
bertide, 734
Bobeitas de, 734
Mspertishsle vide Maopertishsle.
Miqwrtona, Elias de, 923
Msr, Eoa nzor Jobannis de, 714, 941

Johannes de, 714, 941
Msr* vide MariHcallns.
Mara vu2« Mare.

MsTC, Mat, Ena nxor Johannis de,
904
Johannes de, 904
Philippns, 1854
Maroel, Bogems, 1043, 1605
Marcham, Nichobins de, 314, 1308
Warinns de, 373
Willelmas de, 224


filins WiUel-
■nde,224
MsRliaiit, WOIdmas, 1900
Maicliainit, WiDelmns le, 807
MsrIc, Aliaa nzor Egidii de, 269

Egridnis de, 269
Mareo, &, Boipenis de, 102
M»e. Man, Moia, Adam de, 283
Anfridns de la, 40
EmM nzor Osbeiti de la, 1764
God«iBasdela,1764
HcBiicos de la, 1230, 1277
Hnco de 1% 1441
JobaimeB de, 1317, 1679
MabOia filia Willehni de, 1883
MaliDis nzor Wlgani de b^ 146,

208
Osbertos de la, 1621
I de, 1317
idela,1621
Tliomasde, 854
Wigsnns de b^ 146, 208, 271
WlUehnns de la, 649, 967, 1528,
1691,1883
Maienny, J<dianne8 de, 103

Mabiliad^ 104
Maieseallns vide Mariscallns.
Marewioo, Hngo de, 1700
Maifaam, Waltems de, 858
Msria, 8., Alicia nzor Joidani de,
1458
Joidanns de, 1458
Marinia, Hngo de, 266, 1231

Johannes de, 1264
Marinns, Bobertns, 1497
MariBcallnH, Mar', Marescallas, Ge-
dlia nzor Gileberti, 1611
Comes, 183, 247, 288, 354, 567,
763, 857, 1113, 1117, 1132, 1213,
1220, 1306, 1309, 1567, 1574
Danid, 1040
Gaebertos, 1220, 1611
Gunnora ozor Wyoti, 779
Johannes, 247, 382, 1049, 1117,

1220, 1396, 1730
Letida nzor Boberti, 845
Margareta nzor Unfridi, 475


INDEX OF PERSONS.


305


The numbers refer to tke caaes not to the pages.


Mariscallus, Matheus filius Willelmi,
1602

Ricardus, 763,952, 1040, 1087, 1113

Robertus, 845

Stephanus, 475

Unfridus, 475

Walterus filius Willehni, 71

WiUelmus, 71, 102, 108, 297, 667,
854, 1220, 1306, 1349, 1405, 1567,
1574, 1576, 1602, 1611

Willehnus fiUus Willehni, 102

Wyotus, 779
Mariscis, Agnes uxor Willehni de,
266

Ricardus de, 25

Thomas de, 25

WiUelmus de, 266
Marisco, Marsa, Adam de, 1228

Henricus de, 1666

Radulfus de, 1819

Ricardus de, 1238, 1445

Rogerus de, 1132

Thomas de, 1170, 1281

Willehnus de, 285. 1132
Mariseie, Rogerus de, 627
Mark, Hugo filius Phihppi, 61

Philippus, 51
Marke, Phihppus, 1969
Markeby, Prior de, 409, 660, 1418
Markele, Robertus de, 565
Marlborough, Thomas, 645
Marmium vide Marmiun.
Marmiun, Marmium, Albreda de, 94,
95

Johannes de, 164

Robertus, 986, 987, 1882
Marsa vide Marisco.
Marsc*, Willehnus le, 906
Marteiny, Nicholaus de, 139
Martel, Gilebertus, 372, 434

Radulfus, 519
Martini de Messendena, Abbas, 368

S., de Londonia, Decanus, 1555
Martino, S. vide Danmartin.
Martiwair, Willelmus de, 430
Martona, Amaldus de, 118

MatiUis de, 1751

M. I.


Martona, Walterus de, 118
Massay, Johannes de, 1350
Massendena, Abbas de, 524
Mastak, WUlelmus de, 1106
Mat vide Marc.

Matresdona, Alicia uxor Johannis de,
1265

Johannes de, 1265
Matun mde Motun.
Maubant, Lucia uxor WUlehni, 1348

WiUelmus, 1348
Maubaut, WiUehnus, 709
Mauberant, Robertus, 10
Mauclerc, Hugo, 766

WUlehnus, 1794
Maudona, Maria de, 717
Maudut, Agnes fiha Johannis, 74

Auicia fiUa Johannis, 74

Flandr' fiUa Johannis, 74

Johannes, 74

Ricardus, 427, 1914

Robertus, 530, 1324

Thomas, 530, 1354

WUlelmus, 579, 635
Maufe, Reginaldus fiUus WiUelmi,
932

Thomas, 1945

WiUehnus, 932
Mauleurer, Johannes, 1877
Maulhuges vide MauUnges.
MauHnges, MauUiuges, Matheus de,
871

Thomas de, 871
Maumesbiria vide Malmesbiria.
Mauncel, Matheus, 640, 1617
MaundeuiUa vide MandeuiUa.
Maunsel vide Mansel.
MaunseUe, Walterus, 1571
Maupertesale, Johannes de, 283
Maupertishale, Mapertishale, Gile-
bertus de, 915

Johannes de, 916
Maureward', Galfridus, 425
Mauro, S., Simon de, 61
Mausleuerer, Henricus fiUus Radulfi,
906

Radulfus, 905

20


306


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The fmmber$ refer to the eaeet not to the pages.


Mantona, OonstaboUuriafl de, 637
Mantranen, Alicia oxor Johannis,
77, 191

Hawiflia nxor Johannis, 191

Johannes, 77, 191, 532, 1437, 1534

Thomas, 77

Willelmus, 77, 191, 1534
Mauiiaysin vide Mauneysin.
Manueme, Oristina axor Boberti de,
232

Bobertus de, 232
Mauuesin vide Mauueysin.
Mauuey vide Mauueysin.
Maunejseyn ride Manneysin.
Mauneysin, Mauuaysin, Mannesin,
Manuey, Mauueyseyn, Walterus,
511, 592

WiUehnns, 592

Willelmns filius Walteri, 511
Mawertin, Philippus de, 787
Mawrthin, Waltems de, 1471
May, WiUelmus, 436
Maydewella, Hugo de, 725
Meaudona, Meudon, Abbas de, 58,

89
Meandre, Isolda uxor Beginaldi de,
1163

Beginaldus de, 1153
Meautona, Edwinus de, 51

Galfridus de, 51

Muriel nxor Willehni de» 1503

Petras de, 1503, 1829

Bobertns de, 1829

Willehnus de, 1503
Medham, Alicia de, 119
Medicus, Henricns, 215

Willehnus, 542
Mednil, Stephanns de, 1197
Meinne, Walteras de, 671
Meinnild Garin, Willelmus de, 762
Meisuilla, Willehnus de, 1096
Meklegh' vide Melkeleia.
Melecumba, Henricus de, 223
Melepais, Jordanus de, 1536
Melepas, Melepeis, Johannes, 168

Jordanus, 168
Melepeis vide Melepas.


Melkeleia, Meklegh', Bicardus de,
200

Bicardns filius Bicardi de, 200
Melreie, Henricns de, 1619
Melsa, Abbas de, 1096

Hugo de, 1551

Mazelina nxor Thome de, 1096

Petras de, 1880

Thomas de, 1096
Memuilla, Monenilla, Petms de, 1604
Mendham, Nicholaus de, 639, 945
Mentemora, Emma de, 180

MatiUis fiUa WiUehni de, 180

WiUelmus de, 180
Merc, Egidius, 1746

Egidins de, 1920

Simon del, 139
Mercator, Johannes, 1034

Simon, 1029
Mercennarius, Alexander, 790
Mercer, AnxeUus le, 1774
Mercke, Egidius de, 286
Mereflet, Adam de, 859
Merel, Egidia de, 1047

Galfridus de, 1047
Meretona, Prior de, 1353
Merkwrthe, Thomas de, 914
Merlawe, Bicardus de, 646
Merlay, Bioardus de, 1452

Bogerus de, 764
Merle, Willelmus de, 1540
Merlefordia, Adam de, 972

Alicia uxor Ade de, 972
Merse, WiUehnus de la, 18
Merstona, Galfridns de, 1462

Hngo de, 1462

Susanna fiUa Galf ridi de, 1462
Merstuna, IsabeUa fiUa WiUelmi de,
485

Johanna fiUa WiUelmi de, 485

Margeria filia WUlelmi de, 485

Margeria uxor WiUehni de, 485

MatlUis filia WiUelmi de, 485

WiUelmus de, 486
Mertona, Prior de, 34, 359, 654, 1284,
1317, 1594, 1661

WiUelmus de, 469


INDEX OF PERSONS.


307


The numbert refer to the

Mesendena, MesseQcLena, Abbas de,

368, 626, 1064
Mesners, Mainers, Bioardus de, 194
Messendena vide Mesendena.
Messer, Thomas le, 291
Metingeham, Willelmas de, 600
Meudon vide Meaodona.
Meudona, Emma nxor Stephani de,
1138

Stephanus de, 1138
Meysi, Greoia de, 1177
Michant, Bogerus de, 1940, 1941
Middeford, Bogerus de, 20
Middeldona^ Abbas de, 1312
Middelhope, Amicia uxor Bicardi de,
1740

Bicardus de, 1740
Middeltona, Abbas de, 328
Midhop, Johannes de, 1844
Midhope, Johannes do, 1864
Mikelfeud, Galfridas de, 1868

Walterus de, 1868
Miles, Bobertus, 125
Milicie Templi, Fratres, 821
Millers, Agnes de, 1839
Minketona, Priorissa de, 23
Mirabel, Aurabel, Bogerus, 422, 862
Mitlefeld, Galfridus de, 120

Waltems de, 120
Mobray, Mubray, Nigellus de, 1845

Willelmus de, 1845
Moeles, Hugo de, 1708
Mohun, Alicia de, 699
Moinge vide Moyne.
Moiz, Morz, Moyz, Henricus filius
WiUelmi de, 379

Isilia uxor Willelmi de, 315, 379

Bicardus de, 379

Bicardus filius Willelmi de, 379

Bobertus de, 315, 379, 604

Bobertus filius Willehni de, 379

Willelmus de, 315, 379
Molbraio, Bogerus de, 1352
Molendinarius, Hugo, 136

Johannes, 773

Jordanus, 825

Petrus, 1431


cases not to the pages.

Molendinarius, Badulfus, 581, 801

Bobertus, 1683

Bobertus filius Jordani, 825
Molendino, Petrus de, 1584, 1645
Moletona, Thomas de, 978
Molintona, luo de, 205
Monasterio, Bobertus de, 1167
Monemue, Bogerus de, 1471
Moneuilla vide Memeuilla.
Monte, Montibus, Anna uxor Gile-
berti de, 436

Gilebertus de, 436

Umfridus filius Gileberti de, 436
Monte Acuto, Drogo de, 660, 1635

Drogo filius Willehni de, 1722

Johannes de, 70, 88, 247, 318, 354,
902, 1325, 1761

Eaterina filia Johannis de, 247,
354

Lucia uzor Johannis de, 247, 1761

Bicardus de, 121, 1722

Bobertus de, 1722

WiUelmus de, 121, 247, 1635, 1722,
1761

Willehnus filius Drogonis de, 1685

Willehnus fihus Bicardi de, 1722

WiUehnus filius Boberti de, 1722

Willehnus filius Willehni de, 121,
1722
Monte Alto, Mahaut, Mohaut, Leuca
filia Bogeri de, 260

Badulfus de, 1558

Bandulfus de, 260

Bobertus filius Badulfi de, 1558

Bogerus de, 260, 505, 1558, 1626
Montebecon' vide Monte Begonis.
Monte Begon' vide Monte Begonis.
Monte Begonis, Montebecon', Monte
Begon', Jerlo de, 761

OHua de, 403, 549

Bogerus de, 234, 947, 1294

Thomas de, 234
Monte Canisio, Monte Caniso, Monte-
chanesy, Alicia uxor Hugonis de,
1922

Hubertus de, 1443

Hugo de, 442, 1922, 1960, App. 4

20—2


308


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The numben refer io the eases not to the paget.


Monte GaniBio, Monte Caniso, Monte-
chanesy, Stephanns de, 1443

WarinuB de, 373, 618, 671, 743,
890, 893, 983, 1072

WiUelmus de, 387, 893
Monte Caniso vid^ Monte Canisio.
Montechanesy vide Monte Canisio.
Monte Ficheti, BadnlfnBde, 346, 1764

BicardnB de, 1764
Monte Ficheto, Bicardns de, 1044
Monte Forti, Simon de, 1117, 1137,

1164, 1188
Monte Eaneso, Warinns de, 275
Monte Pinzun, Egidius de, 1253
Monte Soielli, Jacobus de, 1543
Montesorelli, Hugo de, 1371
Monte Vironis, Mant Virun, Jo-

hannes de, 1522
Montibus vide Monte.
Mora vide Mare.
More, Alexander de la, 1119

Gilebertus de la, 470

Henricus de la, 824

Bobertus de la, 95, 560, 573

Walterus de la, 579

WJUelmuB de la, 858
Morel, Matheus, 85

Walterus, 316
Moreslegha, Simon de, 821
Moretoign, WUlelmus de, 853
Moretoign*, Comes, 561
Moretoinie, Comes, 994
Moretuna, Comes de, 992
Morewico, Hugo de, 361
Morewyc vide Moruyc.
Morin, Agnes uxor Boberti, 74

Badulfus, 1699

Beginaldus, 238, 957, 1034

Bobertus, 74, 1388
Morlee, Morlegh, Matheus de, 185
Morlegh vide Morlee.
Mortoin', Mortom, Comes, 425
Mortom vide Mortoin'.
Morton', WiUelmus, 853
Mortona, Badulfus de, 1963

Bogerus fiUus Badulfi de, 1963

Waltems de, 1189, 1461


Mortona, WiUehnns de, 26
Mortnm, Eustachius de, 51
Mortuo Mari, Badulfus de, 251

Bobertus de, 21

WiUelmus de, 21, 1243
Mornico, Hugo de, 712
MoruiUa, Elena filia Eudonis de,
1267

Eudo de, 1267
Moruyc, Morewyc, Hugo de, 814
Morwico, Hugo de, 1744
Morz vide Moiz.

Motun, Matun, Amistera uxor Bone-
mie, 918

Benedictus fiUus Bonemie, 918

Bonemie, 918

Josephus filius Bonemie, 918
Monbray, NigeUus fiUus WiUelmi de,
1090

WiUehnns de, 1090
MouUent, Comes de, 71

MatilUs uxor Comitis de, 71
Moun, AUcia de, 796

Beginaldus de, 363
Mowine, WiUehnus de, 1540
Mown, Mowun, WiUelmus de, 630
Mowun vide Mown.
Moyn, WiUelmus, 954
Moyne, Moinge, Moynge, Moynne,
Adam le, 833

Agnes uxor Ade le, 833

Galfridus le, 402

Henricus le, 1209

Hugo le, 826

Johanna uxor Hugonis le, 826

OUuerus le, 954, 1191

Petrus le, 1938

Badulfus le, 402, 1651, 1702

Beginaldus le, 1836

Bicardus le, 1950

Bogerus le, 826
Moynge vide Moyne.
Moynne vide Moyne.
Mubray vide Mobray.
Muc vide Much.
Mucegros, Musegros, AUcia uxor Bo-

berti de, 184


INDEX OF PERSONS.


309


The numhers refer to the

Mucegros, Musegros, Milo de, 1168,
1231

Robertus de, 184, 1117

Walterus de, 1168, 1231
Much, Muc, Hugo, 702

Willelmus, 702
Muchelnje, Abbas de, 1370

Prior de, 1370
Muchet, Muschet, Henricus, 299

Hicardus, 299

Willelmus, 299
Mudefeldia, Laurencius de, 1598
Muhaut, AUcia uxor Willelmi de,
1872

Bogerus de, 1910, 1911

Simon, 1872

WiUelmus de, 1872
MukeUntona, Germanus de, 1383

luetta uzor Germaui de, 1383

Nicholaus fiUus Germani de, 1383

Walterus de, 1383

Walterus fiUus Walteri de, 1383
Muletona, Lambertus de, 13

Thomas de, 641, 627, 986, 1155,
1186
Munceaus, Robertus de, 37
Muncy, Radulfus de, 564
Mundeby, Alanus de, 1418

Eudo de, 1418
Mundeford', Simon de, 1806
MundeuiUa, Johannes de, 230

NigeUus de, 230, 1297

Ricardus de, 230
Mundham, Alanus de, 1618
Munekin', Simon, 215
Munewedena, Henricus de, 1294
Mimtefordia, Thurstanus de, 1366
Muntfichet, Ricardus de, 1044, 1332
Muntmertin vide Danmartin.
Munt Pinzun, Radulfus de, 1838
Murdac, MatiUis uxor Rogeri, 1592

Rogerus, 1592

Thomas, 1592
Muriweder, Robertus, 215
Muro, sub, IsabeUa uxor Ricardi, 861

Ricardus, 861
Musache, Ricardus de, 333


cases not to the pages.

Musard, IsabeUa, 462, 597

Radulfus, 1446

Ricardus, 363, 462, 597

Robertus, 1134

Wnielmus, 462, 697
Muscampo, WiUehnus de, 61
Muschat, Rogerus, 484
Muschaump, Robertus de, 480
Muschaunt, WiUelmus de, 480
Muschet vide Muchet.
Musegros vide Mucegros.
Mustel, Thomas, 1460

NafEordia, Henricus de, 180, 829,
1377, 1626

MatUUs uxor Henrici de, 180, 829»
1377

Walterus de, 1342
Napertona, Adam de, 1052
Naptona, Adam de, 1186

Agnes uxor Ade de, 1186
Neffineumild, WUlelmus de, 882
Neir, Walterus le, 1966
Nel, Robertus, 900
Neoto, S., Prior de, 1028, 1332, 1720
NeouiUa vide NeuiUa.
NeowiUa, WUlebnus de, 1496
Nerefordia, Hubertus de, 193

Petrus de, 1091, 1502, 1938

WiUelmus de, 1091, 1440
Nesse, Godwinus de, 595
Nessefeud, Petrus fiUus Stephani de,
1860

Stephanus de, 1860
Nessendona, Alicia uxor Thome de,
1644

Thomas de, 1644
Netebech vide Netebeht.
Netebeht, Netebech, WUlelmus, 824
Neubet, Neubod, Abbas de, 1831
Neubod vide Neubet.
Neuburg, Galfridus de, 1736

MatiUis uxor Galfridi de, 1736

Radulfus fiUus Galfridi de, 1736
Neucumba, Robertus de, 670
NeuiUa, NeouUla, Albertus de, 27,

56


310


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The numben refer to the

Neailla, Neonilla, Alezander de, 1187

Alicia de, 534

Beatricia nzor Hngonis de, 525,
679, 800

Gliemencia filia Alezandri de, 1187

EmisiuB de, 1174

Floria filia Hngonis de, 517

G. de, 1517

Galfridus de, 102, 534, 810, 869,
1883

Galfridus filius Galfridi de, 1883

Henricus de, 534, 1875

Hugo de, 251, 517, 525, 679, 800,
1087, 1174, 1365, 1670, 1679

Johannes de, 516, 1273

Jollanus de, 821, 947, 1280

Mabilia uzor Galfridi de, 869, 1883

Nicholaus de, 1125

Badulfus de, 33, 494

Bobertus de, 25, 1045

Bogerus de, 398
Neuou vide Neuu.
Neuport, Prior de, 1387

Painel, Prior de, 412
Neutona, Homines de, 463

Picatus de, 735

Sewale de, 731
Neuu, Neuou, Nouu, Willelmus le,

136, 243
Neweham, Bicardus de, 185
Neweman, Aelesia uzor Bicardi le,
124

Bicardus le, 124

Bogerus le, 124

Willelmus le, 124
Newenham, Nywenam, Nywenham,
Johannes de, 185

Petrus de, 1886

Prior de, 1133, 1607

Bicardus de, 400, 551
Niche, Hiche, Ailwardus de, 1508

Idonea filia Ailwardi de, 1608
Nicholai, S., Danecastrie, Magister,
1169

Ezonie, Prior, 5, 6
Nicholaus Legatus, 412
Niger, Hugo, 186


easet not to the pages.

Niwetona, Waltems de, 286
Nodariis, Nuers, Almaras de, 202,
302

Milo de, 1762

Simon de, 793, 1762, 1836
Noel, Bicardus, 17
Noke, Bogems, 433
Norel, Alicia filia Siwati, 1823

Hnghelina filia Siwati, 1823

Mabilia filia Siwati, 1823

Siwatus, 1823
Norenuit, Badulfus, 32
Noreys, Galfridus le, 220

Hamo le, 1778

Bobertus le, 1778

Willehnus le, 1778
Norf ' vide Norfolcia.
Norfeu, Homines de, 1721
Norfolda, WiUehnus de, 1226
Norfolcia, Norf ', Agnes uzor Boberti
de, 291

Alicia uzor Badulfi de, 159

Gilebertus de, 261

Badulfus de, 159

Bobertus de, 5, 291

BobertuB filius Badulfi de^ 159
Norfolcie, Comes, 695, 1036
Norfolkia, Alicia uxor Radulfi de,
1525

Badulfus de, 1525

Bobertus filius Badulfi de, 1525
Norham, Agnes de, 749
Norhamtona, Abraham filius Samuelis
de, 581

Samuel de, 581

S. Jacobi de, Abbas, 344

S. Johannis de, Hospitalis, Magis-
ter, 1032
Norhamtone, Archidiaconns, 72, 820

Decanus, 351

Major, 351
Norm', Badulfus de, 846

Bojsia uzor Badulfi de, 846
Normanie, Senesoallus, 752
Normanuilla, Margeria uxor Nicholai
de, 483

Nicholaus de, 483


INDEX OF PERSONS.


311


The numbers refer to the casee not to the p<ige8.


Normannilla, Badnlfus de, 661, 955
Normaunt, Willelmus le, 677
Northburgo, Eadmundus de, 1659
Northie, Thomas de, 1409
Northilada, Henricus de, 1170
Northona, Nortona, Alicia uxor Ra-
dum de, 1728

Eustachius de, 215

Philippus de, 289

Badulfus de, 1728

Badulfus filius Badulfi de, 1728

Bobertus de, 215

Willelmus de, 1436
Nortona vide Northona.
Norwicenses Episcopi, 89, 100, 310,

355, 391, 424, 427, 490, 548, 578,

642, 722, 793, 801, 865, 883, 942,

1064, 1095, 1117, 1238, 1273, 1618,

1928
Norwicensis Archidiaconus, 1762

Prior, 632, 721
Norwico, Isaac de, 1376
Norwude, Feidena uxor Stephani de,
App. 7

Stephanus de, App. 7
Norwyc, Willelmus de, 835
Notingeham, Prepositus de, 459
Nouo Loco, Prior de, 416, 769, 928
Nouo Mercato, Adam de, 248, 1685

Dionisia uxor Henrici de, 1685

Henricus de, 1685

Willelmus de, 583
Nouu vide Neuu.
Nuers vide Nodariis.
Numet, Mabilia de, 1145
Nunancurt, Mabilia de, 1393
Nunant, Hugo de, 1416
Nunchamp vide Longo Campo.
Nuny, Henricus de, 1360
Nutach, Nutebec, Nutebet, Willel-

mus, 824
Nutebec vide Nutach.
Nutebet vide Nutach.
Nutelegha, Abbas de, 1500, 1535
Nutrix, MatilUs, 343
Nyweburgo, Edmundus de, 237
Nywelande, Walterus de la, 1338


Nywenam vide Newenham.
Nywenham vide Newenham.
Nywentona, Petrus de, 1053
Nyweport, Prior de, 940
Nywetona, Johanna filia Petri de,
924
Petrus de, 924

Ocham vide Hocham.
Odewilla, Margareta uxor Simonis
de, 1890

Simon de, 1890
Offaton vide Uffinton*.
Offrecherche, Decanus de, 1683
Oilly vide Oylli.

Okeburnia, Prior de, 273, 274, 326
Oldierde, Simon, 1084
Olestorp*, Bobertus de, 313

Simon filius Boberti de, 313
Oligant, Bogerus, 1024
Oliuer, Jordanus, 1436
Oliueri, Jordanus, 1172
Oliuerus, Petrus, 1189
Omnibus, Alanus de, 409
Omnibus Sanctis, Alexander de, 1815
Optona, WUlehnus de, 29
Orbatur, Agnes uxor Thome le, 1888

Thomas le, 1888
Orchertona, Alina uxor Johannis de,
965

Johannes de, 965
Ore, Abbas de, 1078
Ormesby, Prior de, 1035, 1211
Orreby, Philippus de, 260
Orry, Alanus, 1275

Magister, 1275
Osen' vide Oseneia.
Oseneia, Osen', Abbas de, 823, 1189
Oseuilla, Willehnus de, 519
Ossoriensis Episcopus, 1173
Osuluestona, Abbas de, 79, 1219
Otheringebiria, Gilebertus de, 262
Otter, Thomas de, 871
Ouerlande, Vitalis de, 1745
Ouertona, Acelinus de, 286

Beginaldus filius Acelini de, 286
Ouinges, Johannes de, 1104


312


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The numbers refer to the cases not to tke paget.


Oainges, Willdmas de, 1104

Ooie, Prior de, 914

Oaainges, WiUelmaB de, 774

Oxeaye, Nioholaas de, 1178

Oxecambft, Sarra de, 1751

Oxn' vide Hoxne.

Oxonia, Johannes de, 1238

Oxonie, Archidiaconas, 817
Comes, 790, 848, 1117, 1485
Gomitissa, 619, 633, 827, 881, 1919

Oye, Joscelinas de, 1766

Oylli, Oillj, Henricas de, 1589, 1688
Henricas filius Henrici de, 1689
MatiHis de, 1688
Bobertas de, 1688

Oylly, Henricas de, 106, 856, 1363
Margeria filia Boberti de, 855
Matillis filia Henrici de, 105
Matillis axor Henrici de, 855

Pabbebam, Hugo de, 819
Pacheshulla, Simon de, 758
Packere, Bobertas le, 470
Pagaham, Osbertas, 1348
Paganellas vide Paynel.
Paganus, Alanas, 503
Page, Willehnus, 135
Pagraue, Cecilia uxor Henrid de,
1824

Henricus de, 1824
Paide, Bicardus, 1898
Painel vide Paynel.
Pakeham, Alicia de, 461, 627

Thomas filius Willehni de, 461

Willehnus de, 461
Pakintona, Bicardus de, 919, 1105
Pamforer, Geruasius filius Henrici,
1780

Henricus, 1780

Bicardus, 1780

Bogerus, 1780
Pancracii, S., de Lewes, Prior, 350
Pandulfus Legatus, 1760
Pantolfus, Hugo, 1224
Papa, Dominus, 536, 1039, 1095,

1339, 1387, 1388, 1599, 1928
Fapedi, Matillis, 1184


Papillu*, Alnathus, 820
Parcarius, Hugo, 940

BeineroB, 343
Parchimener, Alicia uxor Galfridi le,
1293, App. 1

Galfridua le, 1293, 1394, 1529,
App. 1

Matillis uxor Galfridi le, 1394, 1529
Parco, Petrus de, 507
Parent, Alexander, 1119

IsabeUa uxor Alexandri, 1119
Parker, Gerardus le, 984

Bicardus le, 984

Bobertus filius Gerardi le, 984

Warinus filius Gerardi le, 984
Parleben', Gilebertus, 293
Parles, Perles, Henricus de, 1982

WiUehnus de, 1052
Parlet, Margareta uxor Walteri, 1821

Walteras, 1821
Parmarius, Johannes, 36
Parmentarius, Adam, 1801

Henricus fiUus Boberti, 568

Bobertus, 568
Parmenter, Odierna uxor Badulfi le,
389

Badulfus le, 389
Paruus, Elias, 248

Simon, 1712
Passelewe vide Passelwe.
Passelwe, Passelewe, GUebertus, 506,
924, 1053

Bobertus, 106, 1108, 1904

Sarra uxor GUeberti, 924, 1053

Simon, 506
Patay, Hugo de, 926
Pateriz, Comes, 363

Ela uxor Comitis, 363

WiUelmus, 615
PateshiU' vide PateshuUa.
PateshoU' vide PateshuUa.
PateshuUa, PateshiU*, PateshoU',
PatteshuUa, Henricus de, 1286

Martinus de, 278, 583, 983, 1030,
1084, 1279, 1294, 1618, 1691,
1827, 1884

Simon de, 1358, 1411, App. 8


INDEX OF PERSONS.


313


The numbcrs refer to the cases not to the pages.


Patheshulla, Martinus de, 669, 870
Patric, Auelina uxor Badxilfi, 1764

Badulfus, 1764
Patricius, Comes, 1235

WiUelmus filius Comitis, 1235
Patteshulla vide Pateshulla.
Pattona, Robertus de, 279
Pauilly, Johannes de, 143

Badulfus de, 1253

Bogerus filius Walteri de, 732

Walterus de, 530, 732, 1110
Pauleshost, Bicardus de, 791
Pauli, S., de Londonia, Decanus, 78,
481, 493, 654, 692, 886

Thesaurarius, 599
Paulo, S., Thomas de, 1194
Paumer, Auicia filia Johannis le,
1954

Berta filia Johannis le, 1954

Elyas le, 1514

Gunnilda filia Johannis le, 1954

Herbertus le, 342

Isabella filia Bicardi le, 342

Johannes le, 1954

Matillis uxor Johannis le, 1954

Bicardus le, 215, 342, 1177

Thomas le, 16
Pauncefot, Bicardus, 365, 507, 946
Paunte, Godign', 20
Pauntona, Baldewinus de, 810, 1117
Pauntulf , Isolda, 1295

WiUelmus, 1295

Willelmus filius Waiehni, 1295
Paynel, Paganellus, Painel, Paynelle,
Alexander, 97

Ascuillus, 97

Dionysia, 19

Frechesanta filia Willelmi, 97

Fulco, 97, 565, 1415

Hugo, 97, 747, 1415

Badulfus, 97, 747

WiUehnus, 97, 166, 1575, 1539,
1642
PajneUe vide Paynel.
Pebbenesse, Bandulfus filius WiUelmi
de, 243

WUlelmus de, 243


Pecche, Beche, Agnes, 1130

Bartholomens, 1168, 1178, 1231,
1368
Pecham, Jacobus de, 960

Johannes fiUus Monasseri de, 1144

Mar' uxor Monasseri de, 1048

Monasserus de, 1048, 1144
Peche, Hamon, 427

Bicardus, 353
Peck, IsabeUa fiUa Bicardi de, 820

MatiUis uxor Bicardi de, 820

Bicardus de, 820
Pecoc vide Pecock.
Pecock, Pecoo, IsabeUa uxor WUlel-
mi, 1018

N. uxor Bicardi, 1018

Bicardus, 1018

WUlelmus, 1018
Pecot, Bogerus, 20
Peirer, Thomas le, 1568
Peiteuin, Johannes le, 1257
Peiure, Piure, PauUnus, 296, 399

Petrus, 607

Bogerus, 296, 399
Pele, WiUelmus de, 642
Pelton', Piautona, Bogerus de, 1379
Pembrocio, Pembrok, Penbrochio,
Comes de, 102, 297, 1164, 1405,
1611

Comitissa de, 854, 1164
Pembrok vide Pembrocio.
Pempol, Serlo de, 1015

Warinus de, 1016
Penbrigge, Penebrigg', Henricus de,

250, 304
Penbrochio vide Pembrocio.
Pendeford, Bobertus de, 95
Penebrigg* vide Penbrigge.
Penhert vide Penhurst.
Penhurst, Penhert, Maria uxor Wil-
lelmi de, 1770

WiUehnus de, 1770
Penitenciarius, Godardus, 1463
Penna, Walterus de la, 1064

WUlehnus de la, 1064
Penne, Colinus de la, 1600

Nicholaus de la, 1600


314


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The nmnhen refer to the eases not to the pages.


Pentecoste, WiUelmas, 1650
PeppeweUa, Abbas de, 665
Peroehale, OalMdns de, 1632
Peroehaye vide Perohaje.
Perohaye, Peroehaje, Cristiiia filia
WiUebni, 1717
WiUebnus, 1717
Perchie, Comes, 666
Percy, Gristiana nzor Galfridi de,
1414

Galfridns de, 1414

Bicardos de, 660, 907, 1083, 1090,
1395

Bobertns de, 1061, 1081

Simon de, 1414

WaUeruB de, 22, 23, 60

WiUehnas de, 23, 158, 660, 796,
1081, 1881
Perer, Thomas, 1544
Perham, Thomas de, 1115
Perles vide Parles.
Perpnnd, Johannes de, 279
Persona, Petrus, 1768
Persore, Abbas de, 1628
Pert, Nicholaus de, 606, 673
Pertehale, Galfridus de, 1369

Bicardus de, 1369
Pertock, BaduUus, 652
Pertona, Bobertus de, 401
Pesehale, Badulfus de, 533, 593, 598,

698
Pesinges, FeUoia de, 1048
Pestelega, WiUeknus de, 40
Pestur, Henricus le, 237
Petit, Isolda uxor WiUehni, 83

Badulfus le, 51

Wniehnus, 83
Petraponte, Bimon de, 1272
Petro, S., Johannes de, 692
Petyt, WiUelmus le, 1552
Peuerel, Andreas, 258, 268

Galfridus, 1058

Hugo, 946, 1190, 1331, 1967

Petrus, 1970

BobertUB, 1013, 1967

Thomas, 758, 1013
PeuereUe, WUlehnus, 1236


Peyure, Bogerus, 1398
PhiUberto, S., WiUelmus de, 1405
Piautona vide Pelton\
Pichard, Milo, 1232
Pichelesthorna, Galfridus de, 1614
Picher, Bobertus, 793

Thomas, 784
Picoc, Pikoc, WiUehnus, 1269
Picot, Hugo, 1341

JuUana uxor WiUehni, 1026

WiUelmns, 1026
Pictauensis, Badulfus, 1259
Pictauia, WiUelmus de, 671
Pictauie, Gomes, 765, 883, 1117, 1121,
1172

IsabeUa uxor Comitis, 765, 883
Pictor, Bobertus, 1879

WiUehnus, 1696
Pigun, Johannes, 886

WiUehnus, 1226
Pikeman, Bobertus, 1969

Sunon fiUus Boberti, 1969
Pikeringe, Hugo de, 186
Pikerun, Bobertus, 889
PUceuot, WiUelmus, 211
PikeweUa, Lodowicus de, 814
Pikoc vide Picoc.
Pilesdona, Sampson de, 1732

Simon de, 1732

Werresius de, 1732
PiUsintona, Bogerus de, 130
Pin, Dionisia uxor Johannis, 1089,
1701

Johannes, 1089, 1701
Pincema, Auelina uxor £Ue, 1760

EUas, 1760

Bicardus, 1169
Pincerne, Cristina fiUa Jordani, 1606

JordanuB, 1606
Pinkeneye, Badulfus de, 1437

WiUehnus de, 1809
Pinkeniny, Simon de, 938
Pinkeny vide Pinkingny.
Pinkingny, Pinkeny, Bobertus de,

868
Pino, Herbertus de, 214
Pinu, Herbertus de, 367


INDEX OF PERSONS.


315


The nunibers refer to the ccLSes not to the paget.


Finzebek, Thomas de, 1207
Pinzun, Munt, Badulfus de, 1838
Piou vide Priou.
Pipant, WiUelmus, 1969
Pipard, Henricus, 657

Bicardns, 657

Bobertus, 259, 618

Bogerus, 657

WiUelmus, 657
Pipaund, Jacobusfilius Willelmi, 1948

WiUelmus, 1948
Pipere, Walterus, 1311
Pipestran, luo, 523
Pirar', Michael de, 1718

Stephanus de, 1718
Pirie, Johannes de, 1337

Philippus de, 1660

Bicardus de, 1707

Bobertus de, 1427, 1499

Sarra uxor Bicardi de, 1707
Piritona, Johannes de, 250
Piro, Alicia uxor WiUehni de, 1557

WiUelmus de, 1557
Purot, Badulfus, 870, 1572

Bicardus, 870, 1572
Piselegha, AmabUis uxor Nicholai
de, 782

Nicholaus de, 782
Pistor, Gristiana uxor Nicholai, 265

Dionisia uxor Bicardi, 435

Galfridus, 1029

Matheus, 1897

Nicholaus, 265

Bicardus, 435, 1479

Thomas, 767

WUlelmus, 411, 1711
Pitona, Adam de, 1192
Pitte, Leticia uxor Boberti de la,
1425

Bobertus de la, 1425
Piuere vide Peiure.
Planez, Johannes de, 298
PlantefoUe, Johannes, 1724

Bobertus, 1692
Pleministro, Prior de, 1370
Plesetto, Johannes de, 1666
Plesingeham, Eustachius de, 964


Plessetto, Johannes de, 1028
Plugeneye, Hugo de, 613
Plugenhay, Alanus de, 116
Plumberge, Gristiana uxor Thome de,
1279

Thomas de, 1279
Poddehale, Petrus de, 36
Poer, Alexander le, 1619

Walterus le, 1184
Poher, Hugo le, 136

Johannes le, 847

Otewicus le, 40
Pointona, Alexander de, 182, 986,

1049, 1207
PokehuUa, Julianus de, 6
Pokeslegha, Elias de, 1649

Matmis uxor Elie de, 1649
Pokintona, WUlehnus de, 250
Polfeld', Michael de, 1287
PoUard, Bogerus, 907

WUlehnus, 1665
Polsted', Hugo de, 1287

Michael de, 1287
Polstede, Hugo de, 295, 871
Poltona, Nicholaus de, 1785

Orabla uxor Nicholai de, 1785

Bobertus de, 401
Pomerar, Godefridus de la, 367
Pomeray, Galfridus de la, 894, 1148

Henricus de la, 1148

WiUelmus de la, 1148
Ponte, Bobertus de, 1343
Pontefracto, Henricus de, 1764
Ponte Fracto, Prior de, 1169, 1850
Ponte Boberti, Abbas de, 1566
Pontis de BeUo, Abbas, 6
Popham, Gilebertus de, 1268
Port, Adam de, 1136
Porta, Alicia uxor Beginaldi de, 1259

Nicholaus de, 1147

BeginalduB de, 1259
Porter, AueUna uxor Beginaldi le,
1705

Gelestria uxor Henrici le, 343

Henricus le, 343

Beginaldus le, 1705
Portes, Walterus de, 1266


316


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The numben refer to the

Porteseia, Adam de, 15
Portn, Adam de, 1684

Johannes de, 326

Sibilla uxor Ade de, 1684

Thomas de, 326
Potema, Jaoobus de, 201
Pottot, Ermengarda de, 1513

Johannes filins Ermengarde de,
1513
Pouere, Herbertns le, 488
Ponnesse, Henricus de, 1283

Philippns de, 1282
Ponr' vide Ponre.

Poure, Daur', Pour*, Alina uxor Egidii
le, 1142, 1158

Egidius le, 1142, 1158

Herbertus le, 1653

Isabella uxor Walhamet le, 203

Johannes le, 1809

Bogems le, 49

Walhamet le, 203
Poydras, Willelmus, 316
Prat, Gal&idus, 1818

Margeria uxor Galfridi, 1818
Pratellis, Engelardus de, 1601

Engebramus de, 35, 101

Sibilla uxor Engelardi de, 1601

Sibilla uxor Engekami de, 101
Pratis, Prior de, 272, 393

S. Marie de, Custos, 870
Prato, Godefridus de, 816

Muriella uxor Godefridi de, 816

S. Marie de, monachi, 272, 393
Praule, Alina uxor WiUehni de, 965

WiUehnus de, 965
Predes, Willehnus de, 1906
Prepositus, Adam, 446

Ahnerus, 85

Hubertus, 418

Hugo, 1169

Bogerus, 85

Boysa uxor Huberti, 418
Presbyter, Phihppus filius Badulfi,
1964

Badulfus, 1964
Frest, Hughelina uxor Willelmi, 1823

Willelmus, 1823


eates not to the paget.

Prestelegha, Unfridus de, 544
Prestona, Albredus de, 1916

Hawisia uxor Albredi de, 1916

Johannes de, 859

Waltems de, 440
Prestwnde, Henricns de, 388

Margeria nxor Henrici de, 388
Pridias, Beatricia nxor Beginaldi de,
965

Galfridus de, 965

Isabella nxor Galfridi de, 965

Beginaldus de, 965

Bobertus de, 596, 991
Prion, Piou, Hngo, 1412
Prior, Simon, 832
Produmme, Johannes, 843
Promus, Promys, Alicia filia Willel-
mi de, 1563

Emma filia Willehni de, 1563

Sarra filia Willehni de, 1563

Willelmus de, 1563
Promys vide Promus.
Prate, Thomas le, 1348
Praz, WiUehnus le, 1285
Pucot vide Putot.
Puddindene, Gilebertus de, 20
Pudding, Margeria, 852
Pudindena, Gilebertus de, 1490
Pudlesdona, Custancia filia Willehni
de, 195

Margeria nxor WiUelmi de, 195

WiUehnus de, 195
Puketorpe, Stephanns de, 1195
Pulein, Galfridus, 705
PuUiam, Bicardns de, 1931
Punohard, Fray, 688
Punchardun, Beginaldus de, 1642
Punninges, Margeria de, 672
Puntfeldia, WiUelmus de, 1779
Purcel, Bustachius, 156, 1519

Badulftts, 156, 1519

Bobertus, 156, 1519
Purcele, IsabeUa, 863
Purle, Nicholaus de, 113

WiUehnus de, 356
Purtepol, Jordanus de, 825

Bogeras fiUus Jordani de, 825


INDEX OF PERSONS.


317


TJie numbers refer to the cases not to the paget.


Puteo, Beginaldas fiUas Willelmi de,
1678

Bicardus de, 1678

Ricardus filius Willelmi de, 1678

Robertus de, 1678

Rogerus filius Willelmi de, 1678
Puteum, Augustinus ad, 1773

Emma uxor Augustini ad, 1773
Putot, Puco|;, Willelmus de, 556,

1772
Putrel, Henricus, 1942
Pyn, Herbertus de, 1286
Pyrefrict, Petrus de, 40
Pyrho, WiUelmus de, 695

Quency, Hawisia de, 999, 1127

Rogerus de, 1126
Querendona, Galfridus de, 29, 340,
846, 1487

Radulfus filius Galfridi de, 845
Quneyfe, Hamon le, 27

Matillis uxor Hamonis le, 27

Raddona, Radduna, Baldewinus de,

143, 856
Radduna vide Raddona.
Radecliue, Eugenia de, 1846
Radefordia, Simon de, 694
Radelegha vide Ralegha.
Radham, Prior de, 1624
Radinges, Abbas de, 842
Radinges vide Bendenges.
RafFyn, Eafin, Bertram, 251

Willelmus, 251
Baggeholf, Willelmus, 1788
Baghtona, Alexander de, 1155

Beginaldus de, 1155
Bakelf , Bicardus, 282
Bakingtona, Bartholomeus, 579

MatiUis, 579
Bal', Bobertus de, 1189
Balegha, Badelegha, Elyas de, 1581

Willelmus de, 348, 401, 427, 471,
508, 514, 756, 886, 1143, 1146,
1186, 1193, 1215, 1482
Ballesby vide BoUesby.
Bameseia, Abbas de, 822, 360, 1716


Bameseia, AUcia de, 1701

Editha de, 1646

Juliana uxor Thome de, 1701

Stephanus de, 1701

Thomas de, 1701
Bannulfus Comes, 272, 1102, 1127,

1213, 1224, 1273, 1721
Bappendona, Prior de, 51
Bessele, Gerardus, 1344

Katerina uxor Gerardi, 1344
BaueUngham, MabUia uxor Thome
de, 1171

Thomas de, 1171
Bayndona, GaU^ridus de, 1836
Baytulphage, AUoia fiUa Edithe de,
1839

Auicia fiUa Edithe de, 1839

Editha de, 1889

GunnUda fiUa Edithe de, 1839
Bec, Walterus, 445
Beddenhale, Galfridus de, 1805

WUlehnus de, 1805
Bedham, WiUeUnus de, 1841
Begetona, Hegetona, Bicardus fiUus
Boberti de, 185

Bobertus de, 185
Beginaldus Comes, 1666
Begny, Beygni, Beygny, Thomas de,
407

Walterus de, 1146

WiUelmus de, 1147
Being' vide Boing'.
Beingnes, WiUehnus de, 1760
Beingny, Johannes de, 280

Bobertus de, 280

Thomas de, 610
Beinig', Johannes fiUus Bicardi, 474

Bicardus, 474
Bemg*, Bicardus, 427
Benard, WiUehnus, 1118
Bengny, Beygn, Johannes de, 908
Benham, Gilebertus de, 834

Johannes de, 834
Benigny, Thomas de, 547
Beples', Johannes de, 237, 1659
Berefordia, Abbas de, 526
Berham, Berham, Mauricius de, 929


31S


IXDEX OF PEBSON&


Tke


rruT t0 tke cm$e* mot to the page».


Brxl H=x«. 311

RDCKmiL~311
Ervvl HcBriras ^ 1977
Rpvxax. J >bftaaef ^, luSS

Bfe7-£si r.de B£c:>t.
B«7^T rii^ BcsnT.
Bkariss. CooM. 3»4. 703. 734, 857.

«e^S. U17, lltl, UTt, 1290. U38,

13!0
BiardBS Bcx AdcIm. 16. 17. 75. 7»<.

102, 173. 199. 2>3, 663, ftfl, 915,

994. IIA 1139. 1148. 11>«^ 1319,

1334. 1336. 1306. 14^. 1651, 1730
Bidiafea^dift. Wilkfannft de. 1887
Bidevmre. iJAtr.is oxor WAltcri de,
333

Walteros de, 353. 1758
Bigs?ebT, Pnor de. 909
BikintyhaK Hogo de, 917
Bikot\ Bobertns de, 815
Bindham, Tristimm de, 1340
Bingesdona. Hngo de, 1416
Bingestede, Gecilia oxor Gilebeiti de,
731

Gflebertos de, 731

Mfttillis de, 721
Bipariis, Hawisia de, 979

Mai|?eria de, 363, 737, 849, 1383
Bipple, Ibtillis uxor Thome de, 1333

Thomas de, 1333
Biptona, Bicaidos de, 360
Biaele, Bobertns filins Walteri de,
1741

Waltems de, 1741
Bising*, Bobertns de, 1357

Bogems de, 1357
Bisinges, Fisinges, Fissinges, Bogems
de, 1663

Walterus de, 1663
Bissepe vide Bissleppe.
Bissleppe, Bissepe, Stiffleppe, Prior

de,272
Bisns, Agnes nzor Boberti, 1937

Bobertns, 1937
Binallibus, Abbas de, 749
Binallis, Petras de, 776


Binefe, Walteras de la, 1307

Bineres, Willehnns de, 1172

Bo, Ifazgoia, 907

Bobertns, Comes, 71, 765, 1769, 1953

Twabpna nxor ComitiB, 765

Matillis nxoT Comitis, 71
Boe. Jofaannes filins Boberti, 1772

Bofaertns, 1773

WiUelmns fitins Boberti, 1772
Boehagh*, Alanus de, 369
Boehe, Abbas de la, 1708

Badnlfus de la, 1708
Bochefordia, Matillis de, 1072

Bobertus de, 1438
Bodes, Badnlfns de, 770
Boffa, Prior de, 1644

Bieardus de, 74, 1388
Bollenses Episcopi, 88, 262, 350, 376,

474, 481, 616, 983, 1117, 1163.

1383,1644
Bogerus, Comes, 314, 695, 754, 835,

1343, 1371, 1436, 1520, 1813
Boin, Henricus de, 932
Bmng', Being', Qnenilda uxor Bicardi
de, 748

Bicaidns, 748
Boinges, Johannes de, 1025

Bobertns filius Simonis de, 727,
809

Simon de, 727, 809
Bokeshale, Hamon de, 715
Bokeiryla, Willehnns de, 251
Bollesby, Ballesby, Agnes uxor Wa-
rini de, 373

Waiinus de, 373
Bomanus, Johannes, 1463
Bomenel, Dauid, 302
Bomesye, Abbatissa, 775

Wallems de, 775
Boppelegha, Simon de, 1209
Bos, Hugo de, 382

Muriella uxor Willelmi de, 382

BobertuB de, 82, 685

Sibilla de, 685

WakelinuB de, 1835

WiUehnus de, 134, 376, 382, 474,
685, 894, 1199, 1898


INDEX OF PERSONS.


319


The numbers refer to the cases not to the pages.


RoB, Willelmus filius Willelmi de,

1898
Bossell, Willelmus, 881
Bothomagi, Decanus, 357
Rothomago, Willehnus de, 367
Roullestona, Henricus de, 1454
Rowe, Aluredus, 1893
Roxheuede, Hamon de, 715
Rozholm, Roysia uxor Thome de,
1858

Thomas de, 1858

Thomasfilius Thome de, 1858
Rude, Juliana uzor Warini, 863

Warinus, 863
Rudingtona, Ricardus de, 433, 628
Rue, Elizabeth uxor Willelmi de,
1470

WiUehnus de, 1470
Ruffordia, Galfridus de, 1184
Ruffus, Adam, 1778

Amabilis uxor Roberti, 331

Augustinus, 1533

Henricus, 304

Herbertus, 1733

Hugo, 578, 695

Isabella uxor Willelmi, 329

Robertus, 331

Thomas, 102

WiUelmus, 329, 1383
Ruffyn, Philippus, 262
Rufus, WiUelmus, 1733
Rugham, Walterus filius Willehni de,
461

Willelmus de, 461
Rughedona, Johanna uxor WiUelmi
de, 219

Willelmus de, 219
Rughenheje, Priorissa de, 200
Rughenora, Radulfus de, 179
Ruilla, Alexander filius Rogeri de,
252

Rogerus de, 252
Rnines, Walterus de, 530
RuUond, Adam, 1222

Ricardus, 1222
RnUos, IsabeUa uxor WiUelmi de,

503


Rumbalde, Henrious, 1691
Rumely, Alanus fiUus Mathei de,
1173

Matheus de, 1173
Rumenal, Thomas filius XJmfridi de,

1140
Rumeseia, Abbatissa de, 395, 1110
Rumesye, Abbatissa de, 1346
Rumully, Emma uxor Henrici de,
1748

Henricus de, 1748
Runeray, WiUehnus de, 74
Runingham, Runingheham, Gapel-
lanus de, 237

Johannes de, 237

Simon de, 237
Rupe, Supe, Abbas de, 1876

Agnes de, 231, 954

Radulfus de, 1339

Thomas de, 1664
RupeUa, Godefridus de, 841
Ruphus, Ricardus, 924
Rus, Adam le, 1778

A]icia uxor Galfridi le, 981

Galfridus le, 981
Ruscel, Robertus, 893
Russel, AUcia uxor WiUelmi, 365

Hugo, 436

IsabeUa uxor Roberti, 1774

Ricardus, 1256, 1925

Robertus, 1774

Thomas, 1866

Walterus, 367

WUlelmus, 365, 593
RusseU', Petrus de, 264
Russok, AUcia de, 1266
Rusteng', WUlelmus, 777
Ruswrthe, Adamde, 1826
Ruuenhache, Ricardus de, 179
Ruwedona, WiUelmus de, 1109
Rye, CapeUanus de, 132
Rytona, Regin* filia Ricardi de>, 1548

Ricardus de, 1548

Sabestona, WiUehnus de, 1805
Sachecroft, Adam de, 1856
Safeid', Henricus de, 304


320


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The numbers refer to the eases not to the pages.


Safeabae, Ssffable, Safiible, Georgius,
252

Gregorins de, 252

WiUelmas de, 252
Saffable vide Ssfeabse.
Safable vide Safeabse.
Saham, Bobertas filias Simonis de,
644

Simon de, 644
Sahre, Eborardas de, 369
Saloeto vide Saaoeje.
Salefordia, Bogeras de, 1607
Salfletebj, BicardaB de, 1751
Salicibas, Willelmas de, 186
Salle, Agnes de, 1798
Saln' vide Salne.
Salne, Saln', Willelmas de, 411
Salopesbirie, Abbas, 305

Comes, 305
Salopesira, Editha de, 1725
Salseto vide Saaceje.
Sanctiohesmar*, Galfridas de, 173
Sanctis, Omnibas, Alezander de,

1815
Sanctona, Bobertns de, 47
Sanctas, Johannes, 1474
Sandwico, Henricus de, 237, 711,
1333, 1659

Johannes filias Henrici de, 1333

Juliana uxor Simonis de, 1771

Simon de, 1771

Simon filius Henrici de, 711
Sanfordia, Cecilia de, 1617

Hugo de, 1664

Johannes de, 1617

Osbertus de, 1389

Bogerus de, 1389
Santesmar' vide Santichesmar.
Santichemar' vide Santichesmar.
Santichesmar, Santesmar', Santi-

chemar', Galfridus de, 1417
Sanum, Willelmus, 15
Sanzau', Hugo, 119
Sapertona, Matillis de, 851
Sar' vide Sarrisbirie.
Sarisbiria, Edwardus de, 1698
Sarisbirie vide Sarrisbirie.


Sarrisbirie, Sarisbirie, Sar\ Sar\
Comes, 3, 906, 1235, 1574, 1698

Comitissa, 363, 463, 532, 775, 1110,
1277

Ela uxor Comitis, 3, 1235, 1698

Precentor, 1388

Thesaurarius, 1388
Sarrisbuienses Episcopi, 109, 114,

173, 242, 256, 636, 800, 906, 1115,

1282, 1312, 1354, 1698, 1731
Satcote, Galfridus de, 256
Sauage, GalMdus le, 1003, 1605

Mabilia uxor Galfridi le, 1003

Walterus le, 1878
Sauoeye, Salceto, Sauseye, Badulfus
de, 624, 688

Bobertus de, 1186

Walterus de la, 739
Sauila, Grauel, Hugo de, 248
Saunc, Walterus, 1084
Saundale, Matillis uxor Thome de,
1708

Thomas de, 1708
Saunderlande, Badulfus de, 723
Saunders, Andreas de, 151
Saanford, Saunfordia, Hugo de, 178,
183

Johanna uxor Hugonis de, 178

Bicardus de, 183

Bobertus de, 183

Thomas de, 183

Warinus filius Thome de, 183
Saunfordia vide Saunford.
Saimreuilla, Dauid de, 1099
Sauser, Aluredus le, 1425

Athelina uxor Aluredi le, 1425
Sautemareys, Petrus de, 536, 609
Sautereje, Abbas de, 948
Sauuage, Auicia uxor Thome le, 74

Henricus le, 116

Jacobus le, 983, 1653

Bobertus le, 483, 1310

Thomas le, 74, 1388

Willelmus le, 450
Saxlingeham, Bobertus filius Bogeri
de, 793

Bogerus de, 793


INDEX OF PER80NS.
The numben rrfer to the casee not to the pagee.


321


Sazlingeham, Bioheras de, 1836
Saxtona, Johannea de, 1259
Say, Beatricia de, 1765

Beatrioia filia Willelmi de, 8

Galfridus de, 606, 574, 1765, 1782

GUebertus de, 1635, 1722

Margeria uxor Galfridi de, 574

MatiUis de, 8, 12

MatUUs fiUa WUlehni de, 8

MatiUis oxor GUeberti de, 1635,
1722

WUlehnus de, 8, 806, 1117, 1166
Scacoario, Henrlous de, 229, 318, 431,
1465, 1616

Bogerus de, 1276

WiUehnus fiUus Henrioi de, 1616
ScalarUs, Ala uxor Hugonis de, 4

Henricus de, 4

Hugo de, 4
Scales, Bicardus de, 1422
SoaUariis, Andreas de, 766
SoardecUue, Hubertus fiUus Badulfi
de, 930

Badulfus de, 930
SohaueUngewrthe, WiUehnusde, 1325
Schengham vide Suenham.
Schuche vide Suche.
ScUeduna, Skeleduna, Dauid de, 862

Bobertus de, 862

Bogerus fiUus Dauid de, 862
Scissor, Durandus, 1698

Emma uxor Humeden, 577

Humeden, 577

Petrus, 1261

WUlehnus, 1131, 1814
Scootegni, Thomas de, 947
Scode, Scotere, Emma uxor Walteri
de, 888

Walterus de, 888
Soolde, Walterus, 1639
Soonard, Bosanna nxor WiUehni,
1960

WUlehnus, 1960
Soot, Dunecanus, 328, 400

Johannes le, 955

Badulfus, 291 •

Bioardus le, 1461

M. I.


Scot, Bobertus le, 1487
Sooteny, Thomas de, 234
Scotere vide Scode.
Scotie Bex, 97, 648, 696, 904, 1221
Scottus, Bicardus, 1402
Scotus, Johannes, 588
• Osbertus, 575
Screppe, Galfridus, 821
Scrlptor, Bobertus, 962
Seculer, Nicholaus le, 7, 1328
Sedham, Nicholaus de, 68
Segraue, Emma uxor Johannis de,
331

GUebeftus de, 1113

Johannes de, 331

Stephanus de, 4, 10, 307, 351, 372,
465, 750, 778, 983, 1087, 1113,
1124, 1273, 1309, 1592, 1950
Seinges, MatiUis uxor Bicardi de,
1618

Bioardus de, 1618

WiUehnus fiUus Bioardi de, 1618
Seingnes, Bicardus de, 1069
Seingues, Henricus de, 1896
Seinte, Bobertus le, 140
Sekole, Bobertus, 861
Seleby, Hugo de, 1889
Seler, Geruasius le, 1080
Seleuin, WiUehnus, 1326
SeUar, Gilebertus, 1179

Isabella fiUus GUeberti, 1179
Seltona, Alexander de, 1807

Bobertus fiUus Alexandri de, 1807
Selue, Badulfus fiUus WiUehni de,
1786

WUlehnus de, 1786
Seneourt, WiUehnus de, 1616
Senesoal, WUIelmus le, 37, 906
Senescallus, OUuerus, 1237

WUIehnus, 37
SenewaUe, Walterus de, 166
SeneweUa, WiUehnus de, 699
Senzauer, Eua uxor Hugonis, 828

Hugo, 828
Sepeshee, Bobertus, 20
Septem Fontibus, WUlelmus de, 389
Seriant, WUlehnus le, 1207

21


322


INDEX OP PERSONS.


TJie numbert refer to the easee not to the pttges.


Seriatint, Lneas le, 699
Sessons vide Sexan'.
Set, Bobertns, 259
Senero, S., Abbas de, 1710
Seoilla, Jobannes de, 1169
Sexan', Sessons, Biolfas de, 75
Seyle vide Seyles.
Seyles, Seyle, Badolfns de, 1758
Sbanke, Badnlfns, 1416
Sharpetoft, Nieholans filins Boberti
de, 1855

Bobertns de, 1855
Sbarsted', Harested', Simon de. 262
Shatingdona, Tbomas de, 1773
Sbelfordia^ Jobannes de, 894

Beimnndns de, 1404
Sbdtona, Bannnlfns de, 1407, 1618
SbenefFddia, Tbomas de, 1742
Sbepele, Matbens de, 26
Sbepen', Alicia nzor Vinoensii de,
1185

Vincensins de, 1185
Sberdelawe, Bicardns de, 466
Sberleoota, Bogems de, 1
Sbiolingtona, Bobeztns filins Thome
de, 1844

Tbomas de, 1844
Sbifrewast, Bicardns, 1621

Bobertns de, 1621
Sbin, Jobannes filins Bogeri, 840

Bogeros, 340
Sbinelesho, Holdiarda nxor WiUelmi
de, 1033
.WiUeknnsde, 1033
Sbirebnmia, Sbyrebnmia, Abbas de,
923, 927

Prior de, 416, 769
Sbirefordia, Tbomas de, 412
Sbirewode, Gecilia nzor Willelmi,
1686

WiUehnus, 1686
Sbiringtona, Geroasius de, 867
Shirlok, WiUehnus, 1287
Sboffordia, WiUehnns de, 481
Shoghebiria, Bicardns de, 1226
ShoreniUa, ShoreweUa, WiUehnus de,

906


SboreweUa vide ShoreniUa.
-Sbndbam, Stndham, Bobertns de,

858
Sbapestona, Margeria nzor Bicardi
de, 934

Bicardas de, 934
Sbnrefordiay Bobertus de, 1305
Sbyrebnmia vide Shirebnmia.
SiffrawaU' vide SiffrewaU'.
SiffrewaU', SiffrawaU», SnfrewaU',
Snffrewast, Galfridns de, 773

Bicardns de, 773

WUlehnns de, 431, 512, 612
Sike, Beatricia nxor Hugonis de la,
1046, 1069

Hngo de la, 1046, 1069
SUnetona, MatiUis nzor Badnlfi de,
1313

Badnlfas de, 1313
SimiU' vide SimiUy.
SimiUy, SimUl', Wmehnns de, 1734
SimUy vide SymiUy.
SimpHngebam, Prior de, 182, 211
SimpUnges, Agnes nxor EHe de, 1795

EUas de, 1795

Walteros fiUns EUe de, 1795
SimpUngbam, Magister de, 1366
Siwao, Galfridas, 1167
Siward, Bicardus, 1117
Sixle, Prior de, 720, 909
Skeledima vide ScUeduna.
Skeringe, Simon de, 1006
Skotere, AUcia uxor Simonis, 888

Simon, 888
Smalbere, Clemens de, 154

Henricus de, 164

Johannes de, 164

MatiUis uxor Henrici de, 154

Bobertus de, 154
Snane, Johannes de, 1140
Snones, Bobertus de, 14
Solariis, Jacobus de, 1229

Johanna nxor Bogeri de, 1229

Margeria uxor Jacobi de, 1229

Bogeros de, 1229
Solers, Boeysia nxor Bogeri de, 1439

Bogeros de, 1439


: .<i^.~j<f.iriJsiii^tm


INDEX OF PERSONS.


323


Tfie nunibert refer to the cases not to the pages.


Solers, WillelmuB de, 1439
Sonewella, Bobertus de, 1576

Bobertus mius Walteri de, 1642

Walterns de, 1575, 1642
Sorel, Robertus, 1137
Sotfordia, Thomas de, 723
Sowy, Willelmus de, 1689
Sparham, Stephanus de, 193

Willelmus de, 193, 1120
Spark, Bobertus, 265
Spaudling', Prior de, 1209
Spigumel, Isabella uxor Boberti,
1946

Bobertus, 1946
Spiztona, Alicia uxor Johannis de,
1700

Johannes de, 1700, 1744
Sproxtona, Johannes de, 708, 712

Johannes filius Johannis de, 708

Bobertus de, 749

Simon de, 749
Squieler, Bobertus le, 1483
Stactona vide Stoctona.
Staffordia, Henricus de, 1692

Milisanta de, 1043
Staffordiensis Archidiaoonus, 187
Stagno, Adam de, 784
Stainwath vide Steinwath.
Stake, Willehnus, 1955
Stampes, Cressant de, 1179
Stane, Bobertus de, 530

Bogerus de la, App. 5
Stanedisse» Alexander filius Badulfi
de, 1386

Badulfus de, 1386
Stanelesby, Johannes de, 1563
Stanes, Elias de, 670

Johannes de, 282

WiUehnus de, 1012, 1702
Stanewella, Margeria uxor Thomede,
342

Thomas de, 342 *
Stanfordia, Hugo de, 1596

Johanna uxor Hugonis de, 1596
Stanham, Ascelina uxor Johannis de,
317

Johannes de, 317


Stanham, Osbertus de, 1931
Stanho, Herueus de, 506, 844, 1812,

1836
Stanhus, Johelus de, 1759

Margeria uxor Joheli de, 1759
Stanlegha, Abbas de, 1063
Stanmere, Johannes filius Boberti de,
1554

Marsilia uxor Boberti de, 1554

Badnlfus filius Boberti de, 1554

Bobertus de, 1554

Bobertus filius Serlonis de, 1554

Serlo de, 1554

Simon filius Boberti de, 1554

Willehnus filius Serlonis de, 1554
Stanwico, Abbas de, 971
Stapelford* vide Stapelfordia.
Stapelfordia, Stapelford', Bicardus
de, 758, 1898

Willehnus de, 1949
Stapeltona, Nicholaus de, 220

Bobertus de, 1169
Stapinges, Stepinges, Albinus de,
1563

Elena uxor Boberti de, 944

Eliena uxor Walteri de, 1667

Emma uxor Albini de, 1563

Gila uxor Johannis de, 716, 936

Helena de, 1102

Helena uxor Walteri de, 966

Johannes de, 716, 936

Bobertus de, 944

Walterus de, 944, 956, 1657
Starki, Elena uxor Bannulfi, 1901

Bannulfus, 1901
Starky, Bandulfus, 876

Bicardus filius Bandulfi, 876
Stauella, Stiuella, Adam de, 1846

Alanus de, 1845

Alicia filia Ade de, 1845
Stauely, Adam de, 1866

Alicia filia Ade de, 1865
-Stauertona, Galfridus de, 1063
Staundfordia, Adam de, 332

MatiUis uxor Ade de, 332
Stauntona, Gilebertus de, 316

Bobertus de, 316

21—2


824


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


Tke numben refer to the eaees not to the pages.


Stdnwath, StainwEth', JohanneB de,

213
Btella, Agatha uxor Eicardi de, 547

Bicardns de, 547
Stepinges vide Stapingea.
Stialey vide Sfcraley.
Btibbeheie vide Stibbeheye.
Stibbeheye, Stibbeheie, BriciQS de,
150

Danielde,150
Stiffleppe vide Biflsleppe.
Stifordia vide Stortfordia.
Stikeman, Warinns, 1935
StilUod, Bogeros le, 705

Salomon filins Bogeri le, 705
Stinekeya, Bartholomeos de, 188
Stiteoilla, Stortenilla, Stnteoilla,
Eidm' Qxor Nicholai de, 89

Johannes de, 745, 746

Mazgeiia nxor Willehni de, 195,
1606

NicholaoB de, 89

WiUehnofl de, 195, 1606
Stittenilla, WiUehnoB de, 16
Stiaeheya, Adelstanns de, 1830

Bobertns filine Adelstani de, 1830
Stinekeye, Bartholomens de, 1817,

1836
Stinella vide Staaella.
Stioingtona, Miranda filios Walteri
de,680

Prior de, 272

Waltems de, 680
Stiward, Gote, 1041
Stooke, Henrioos de, 1810

Willehnns de, 1810
Stookeby, Beginaldns de, 595
Stoctona, Stactona, Eborardas de,
629

Herbertas de, 1561

Petras filias Willehni de, 151

Bicardas de, 10

Bogems de, 423

Willelmas de, 151
Stoges, Hogo de, 950
Stoke, Adam de ]&, 845

Cristina de la, 446


Stoke, Henzions de, 524

Johannes de U, 446

Badnlfns de, 1156

Bicardos de, 868

Bobertas de, 286, 446

Stephanns de, 858

Walkelinas de, 1115
Stokeby, Alanns de, 595, 1794

Alexander de, 1841
Stokely, Bobertns de, 1257
Stokes, Johanna de, 1683

Johannes de, 554

Petras de, 1898

Badalfas de, 1339, 1800

Thomas de, 1683

Walkehnns de, 10

Willehnns de, 178
Stokesby, Bobertns de, 731
Stolke vide Stowe.
Stonbrog', Bobertns de, 795
Stonore, Badnlfns de, 36
Stopham, Bzianns de, 1183

Badolfas de, 1484

Badolfas filias Briani de, 1183
Stortfordia, Stifordia, Miohael de,

275
Stotefordia, Johannes de, App. 7
Stowe, Stolke, Johannes de, 194
Stracy, Walteros, 45
Stradena, Hago de, 1786
Stradeset', Cecilia de, 836
Straffordia, Abbas de, 284
Stralegha, Estradlegha, Stradlegha,
Isilia axor Walteri de, 815, 379

Bobertas de, 379, 604

Bobertas filias Walteri de, 315, 379

Bogeras filias Walteri de, 315, 379

Sampson filins Walteri de, 315, 379

Walteras de, 315, 379
Straley, Stialey, Philippas de, 815
Strange, Galfridns, 678

Johannes le, 21, 1309
Stratfordia, Strattfordia, Abbas de,
270, 586, 963, 998, 1323, 1477

Willehnos de, 1477
Strathefelde, Thomas de, 19
Stratte, Alwinas de, 1018


INDEX OP PERSONS.


325


The numbert refer to the easet not to the paget.


Strattfordia vide Stratfordia.
Strattona, Beatrioia nzor Rioheri de,
1843

Bicheros de, 1848

Stephanus de, 19
Strettona, Hugo de, 433
Strode, Jowetta de la, 545
Stmmeshale, Willehnns de, 637
Stndham vide Shndham.
Stnetona, Waltems de, 1460
Stnnhus, Joel de, 958
- Margeria nxor Joelis de, 958
fitnrmnwe, Willelmns de, 1768
StnrteniUa vide Stitenilla.
Stutenilla vide Stitenilla.
Snohe, Schnche, Bogems de la, 53,
305, 1043, 1149

Bogems le, 247
Snckele, Johannes de, 352
Snenham, Sohengham, Waltems de,

858
Snerde, Simon, 10
Sneuenetona, Philippns de, 1358
Snffolchie, Arohidiaconns, 788
Snffordia, Beginaldns de, 1814

Willehnns de, 1814
Snfrewall* vide SifErewall*.
Snilgnarin, Willelmns de, 1489
Suinestorpe, Ceoilia de, 1708
Snleby, Abbas de, 820

Hngo de, 633
Snlenny, Alnredns de, 51
Snlingny, Bandnlfns de, 265
Snlplicii, S. Abbatissa, 1163
Silmerdeby, Thomas de, 1210
Sumertona, Brianus de, 1816

Jacobns de, 595, 1816

Mauricius de, 1095
Snmemilla, Margeria de, 1861
Snmeiy, Agnes filia Bogeri de, 550

Elias de, 10

Margeria de, 40

Milo de, 1001

Bogems de, 550

Simon de, 718

Thomas filins Bogeri de, 550
Sumine, Summie, Martinns de, 439


Snnbiria, Thomas de, 1317
Sunderlande, Johanna nzor Badnlfi
de, 642

Badnlfus de, 642
Sundemisse, Galfridns de, 1505
Sunninges, Serlo de, 1583
Snore, Badnlfus de la, 1938
Supe vide Bnpe.
Snr' vide Sarrisbirie.
Snrdendale, Elizabetha nzor Willel-
mi de, 1470

Willehnus de, 1470
Sumingezheyt, Priorissa de, 22
Snrreie, Comes, 1243
Suthamptone, Maior, 1123
Suthurste, Willeknns de, 10
Suthwerk, Johannes de, 1027

Matillis nxor Johannis de, 1027
Sntingtona, Henricns de, 250
Suttona, Gilebertus de, 756

Mabilia nzor Willehni de, 566

Margeria filia Boberti de, 1279

Bobertns de, 58, 89, 1279, 1641

Sahems de, 256

Willehnns de, 256, 566
Snward, Bicardns, 513
Snwella vide SuwiUa.
Snwerc, Johannes de, 90

Prior de, 983
Snwic, Prior de, 1570
Snwilla, Suwella, Hugo de, 554
Suworc', Decanus de, 550
Snwyc, Willehnns de, 1286
Swafham, Odo de, 623
Swalecliue, Galfridus de, 1202
Swanetona, Bowy de, 1816
Swaringes, Galfridus de, 1836

Philippus de, 1886
Swayn, Cristiana nzor Johannis, 1139

Johannes, 1139
Swift, Nicholaus, 639
Swin*, Moniales de, 256
Swinnertona, Bobertus de, 1300
Swithnni, S., Prior, 114, 1237, 1495
Swynecnmba, Bandulfus de, 274

Wymnndus de, 274
Syffrewast vide Siffrewair.


826


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


The numben refer to tJie eaaee not to the pagee.


Symilly, Simily, Emma ozor Henrici
de,694

Galfridiis de, 594

HemiooB de, 594

Willelmai! de, 594
Sywarde, Bicardiu, 857

Taidene vide Taydene.

Taillor, Beatrida nxor Badnlfl le, 59

Luoia nxor Willelmi le, 87

Badnlfas le, 59

BobertQB le, 478

Willelmns le, 87
Tainlande, Badnlfas de, 1218

Willelmns filins Badulfi de, 1218
Talebat, Emma filia Willelmi, 270

WiUelmus, 270
Talebot, Adam, 1947

Galfridas, 54

Willelmas, 752
Talemasoh, Hngo, 13, 871
Talemasohe, Alicia axor Willelmi,
1100

Petrus, 137

Willehnus, 1100
Talewrthe, Petrus de, 1594
Tallewurth, Maria de, 115
Tamlande, Bobertus de, 1140
Tanore, Johannes, 1787

Bogerus, 1787
Taner, Alicia uxor Gkdfridi le, 418

Galfridus le, 418
Tann, Badulfus de, 51
Tannator, le Tanur, Gregorius, 1131
Tanur vide Tannator.
Tarente, Fromundus de, 1622
Tart Gurteys, Adam, 709
Tateshale, Bobertus de, 1248
Tauncar, Prior de, 143
Taunkaruilla, Badulfus de, 750
Taydene, Henricus de, 126
Tayllur, Beatricia uxor Badulfi le,
1559

BadulfuB le, 1559
Techewella, Hamon de, 500

Herlewinus de, 500

Matillis uxor Hamonis de, 500


Teflfordia, Gilebertus de, 650

Isabella axor Gileberti de, 650

Margareta filia Gileberti de, 650

Prior de, 210
Tegula, Gilebertus de, 824
Teintona, Drago de, 902
Teler, Beginaldas le, 1080
Templarius, GalMdus, 1124
Templer, Petronilla nxor Boberti le,
1960

Bobertus le, 1960
TempU MiUtea, 486, 821, 852, 1022,

1101, 1160, 1752
Tenderugge, Deoanns de, 766
Terri vide Terry.
Terry, Willehnus, 411
Testard, WillehnuB, 1347
Testepin, Thomas, 508

Willehnas, 1902

Willehnus filius Willehni, 1902
Tethelby, Bobertus de, 689
Teutonious, Baldewinus, 1169

Eborardus, 1228

Henrious, 1121
Tewere vide Thewyere.
Textor, Jordanus, 821
Teyl, GalMduB de, 41
Thama, Adam filius Eue de, 1142,
1158

Eua de, 1142, 1158
Theggewella, Wiilehnus de, 584
Thein, Alicia filia Thome le, 159

Thomas le, 159
Thelnetham, Mati1h'fl uxor Petri de,
1920

Petrus de, 1920
Theofordia, Prior de, 222
Theokesburia, Abbas de, 112
Thewyere, Tewere, Twere, Alanos
filius OBberti de la, 771

Osbertus de U, 771

PetruB de U, 771

Saxinus filius Osberti de la, 771
Thim', Basilia uxor Thome de, 557

Thomas de, 567
Thoine, Willehnas de, 1482
Tholy, Dionisia axor Boberti, 1712


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


327


The nunibers refer to the eatet not to the pagee.


Tholy, Bobertns, 1712

Bobertas filius Boberti, 1712
Thomas, Comes, 855, 1117
Thoringtomi, Wymems de, 848
Thorintomi» Wyemams de, 1380
Thoraeia, Matillis uxor Bicardi de,
128

Bioardns de, 128
Thomhohnia, Prior de, 1364
Thomoure, Adam de, 515 .

Willehnas de, 515
Thorpe, Alezander de, App. 3

Andreas filins Badulfi de, 1548

Badulfus de, 1548

Willebnus de, 117
Thorpelle, Bogems de, 1736
Thudeham, Edmundus de, 1931
Thnrgantona vide Thurgarstona.
Thurgarstona, Thurgantona, Prior

de, 1851
Thumeham, Mabilia fiUa Stephani
de, 1765

Stephanus de, 1765
Thurstona, Matheus de^ 1939

MatilUs uxor Mathei de, 1939
Thwec, Bogems de, 423
Tibbetet vide Tybbeat.
Tibbetot vide Tybbeat.
Tibetoft, Henricus de, 1959
Tichewella, Thomas de, 500
Tideham, Hugo de, 763
Tidelementona, EleonoranzorThome
de, 934

Thomas de, 934
Tilemanestona, Gilebertus de, 1596

Johanna uxor Gileberti de, 1596
Tillebiria, Jacobus de, 2
Tillebroo, Willehnus de, 1460
Tinotor, Hugo, 1908

Mabilia uxor Hugonis, 1908

Badulfus, 555

Willelmus filius Hugonis, 1908
Tinemino vide Tynemue.
Tinemue vide Tynemue.
Tintagel, Turtegor, Geraasius filius
Boberti de, 1660

Nioholaus de, 243


Tintagel, Tnrtegol',Bobertusde, 1660
Tisho, Johannes de, 1062
Tiuilla, Tyuilla, Matillis uxor Badulfl
de, 1376, 1445

Badulfus de, 385, 829, 1376, 1445,
1825

Bicardus de, 61

Bobertus de, 899
Toche, Walteras, 1195
Toftes, Simon de, 784

Willehnus de, 1827
Toggesd' vide Togyesden.
Togyesden, Toggesd', Gilebertus de,

1385
Tohulla, Alditha uxor Jaoobi de, 1627

Jacobus de, 1627
Toke, Bobertus de, 818
Toky, Stephanus, 686
Tony, Badulfus de, 1006, 1071, 1117
Torel, Bobertus, 47

Willelmus, 47, 1299
Toreny, Badulfus de, 922
Torintona, Toritona, Abbas de, 1236

Auicia uxor Willehni de, 1065

Matheus de, 1065

Willehnus de, 1065
Toritona vide Torintona.
Torpel, Bogeras, 406

Bogerus de, 1042, 1045
Torpoll', Bicardus de, 217
Tothulla, Walterus de, 1287
Tottone, Arohidiaconus, 678, 1143
Toumestona, Bobertus de, 1704
Tracy, Henricus de, 1146, 1732

Willehnus de, 1732
Traffordia, Galfridus de, 72
Trally, Nicholaus de, 1085
Trassel vide Tmssel.
Trauers, Bobertus, 270

Willehnus, 1116
Traxtona, Johannes de, 1502
Traylli, Johannes de, 1133
Tregoz, Tresgoz, Galfridns de, 1372,
1738

WiUehnus de, 1440, 1738
Tremehale, Tremeshale, Prior de, 442
Tremeshale vide Tremehale.


328


INBEX OF PERSONS.


The numbert refer to the caeet not to the pages.


Tresgot, Henrioas de, 169

Johannes de, 169
Tresgoz vide Tregoz.
Trespas, Andreas, 270
Trenerby, Walterus de, 596, 991
Treaergan, Jordanns de, 214
Treaet, Thomas, 431, 512, 612
Tribot, Margeria axor Boberti, 1357

Bobertas, 1357
Trigesyre, Deoanas de, 143
Trillegha, Willehnus de, 773
TriUy, Osbertas, 962
Trinitatis, S., de Boseo, Prior, 1319

de Eboraoo, Prior, 19, 97, 615,
1415

de Gapewico, Prior, 945

de Gipewieo, Prior, 1239

Prior, 711
Trocard, Johannes, 684

Mabilia nxor Johannis, 684
Trocmaretona, Adam de, 250, 609
Trokemereton, Henricas de, 1222
Trono, S., Matheas de, 1323

Boeysia axor Mathei de, 1323
Tropinel, Hawisia axor Willehni,
1916

Willehnas, 1916
Trotecliae, Willehnas de, 1047
Trableailla, Alicia de, 799

Alioia axor Badalfi de, 799

Badalfas de, 874
Trampintona, Agnes axor Johannis
de, 966, 1559

Johannes de, 966, 1559
Trampitona, Eborardas de, 57
Trune, Bogeras filias Willehni, 662

Willelmus, 662
Trussel, Trassel, Matillis, 146, 208

Willehnas, 196
Tryl, Johannes, 1148
Tadeham, Tadenham, Eadmandos
de, 521, 603

Osbertns de, 1891

Beinerus de, 478

Bioardas de, 478, 1891

Bogerus fiUus Osberti de, 1891

Sarra de, 1264


Tadenham vide Tndeham.
Taeng*, Mannadac de, 1883
Tambestona, Darandas de, 1072

Bobertus de, 1072
Tanberhangre, Walteras de, 220
Tander, Ascelinns, 398
Taneire vide Tanere.
Tanere, Toneire, Tuneyre, Henricus,

223
Tunestona, Bobertus de, 710
Tnneyre vide Tunere.
Tungelonde, Thomas de, 958
Tupehohn vide Tuphohn.
Tnphohn, Tupehohn, Tuphohne,

Tuppehohn, Abbas de, 445, 535,
810
Tuphohne vide Tapholm.
Tappehohn vide Taphohn.
Tur, Jordaaus de ht, 1397
Turberuilla, Alicia uxor Walteri de,
77

Johannes de, 1414

Walterus de, 77, 1401, 1599
Turet, Bartholomeus, 1458
TureuiUa, Thureuilla, Amaldus de,
368

Emaldus de, 524

Isabella uxor Willehni de, 203,
1355

Matillis uxor Willehni de, 203,
1355

Badulfus de, 524

Bicardus de, 524

Sunon de, 368

Willelmus de, 203, 1355
Turgarton' vide Turgeretona.
Turgeretona, Turgarton', Prior de,

1454
Turgis, Alina uxor Boberti, 460

Bobertus, 460
Tumeham, IsabeUa filia Boberti de,
1869

Bobertus de, 1869
Turnham, Edelina uxor Stephani de,
1410

Johanna uxor Boberti de, 1754

Bobertus de, 1339, 1754


INDEX OF PERSONS.


329


The numbers refer to the eases not to the paget.


Tumliam, Stephanus de, 1410
Turold vide Turolde.
Turolde, Turold, Clarioia uxor
Ricardi, 1361

Hugo, 1351

Bicardus, 1351
Turreuilla, Henricus de, 879

Johanues filius Bicardi de, 879

Petronilla uxor Simonis de, 879

Bicardus de, 879

Simon de, 879
Turri, Emma uxor Gregorii de, 702

Gregorius de, 702

Jordanus de, 1306

Bicardus de, 274
Turry, Bobertus de, 1610
Turs, Agnes uxor Bicardi de, 137

Auicia filia Bicardi de, 137

Beatricia uxor Boberti de, 1418

Bicardus de, 137

Bobertus de, 1418
TurtegoP vide Tintagel.
Tus, Beatricia uxor Boberti le, 409

Bobertus le, 409
Tuscat, Thomas, 914
Tuschet, Henricus, 279

Thomas, 974, 1712
Tuzseinz, Bogerus de, 46

Willehnus de, 46
Tweinge, Marmaduo de, 661
Twere vide Thewyere.
Twyfordia, Alina uxor Henrici de,
970

Henricus de, 970

Willehnus filius Henrici de, 970
Tybbeat, Tibbetet, Tibbetot, Hen-

ricus, 864
Tyd, Adam de, 134

Beginaldus filius Ade de, 134
Tydeby, Dionisia de, 324
Tye, BobertuB, 286
Tyes, Henricus le, 1532

Isabella uxor Henrici le, 1632

Waleranus le, 1406
Tyeys, Waleranus le, 1310
Tykambreche, Isabella filia Badulfi

de, 1161


Tykambreche, Badulfus de, 1161

Tylle vide Tylli.

TyUi, Tylle, Mabilia de, 1685

Odo de, 1686

Willelmus, 1032

Willelmus de, 1066
Tyllol, Petrus de, 249
Tynemue, Tinemino, Tinemue, Prior

de, 226, 1716
Tynemuwe, Johannes de, 817
Tyrel, Bogerus, 570
Tyrelle, Clemencia uxor Badulfi, 1320

Dionisiai uxor Bioardi, 1101

Badulfus, 1320

Bicardus, 1101
Tysun, Adam, 1375

Alicia uxor Ade, 1376
Tyuilla vide Tiuilla.
Tywarday, Prior de, 1070
Tywe, Walterus de, 1107

Uffinton', Offaton, Johannes de, 1416
Uhnis, Johanna uxor Stephani de,
178, 1596

Stephanus de, 178, 1596
Uhno, Bogerus de, 1041
Uluescroft, Prior de, 1967
Umframuilla, Humframuilla, Bi-

oardus de, 1044
Umfrauilla, Bicardus de, 1764
Undel', Decanus de, 625
Underdun, Mauricius, 607
Uniet, Bicardus, 1966
Uparhide, Gemasius, 1718

Mabilia uxor G^rnasii, 1718
Uppetona, GalfriduB de, 269
Upsale, Galfridus de, 769
Uptona, Florida uxor Nicholai de
1062

Nioholaus de, 1062

Stephanus de, 1062
Uptone, Adam filius Galfridi de, 186

Galfridus de, 185
Utdeners, Agnes filia Philippi, 804

Alicia filia Philippi, 804

Philippus, 804, 1633
Utewrthe, Helyas de, 928


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


The numben refer to the eaeee not to the pagee.


Utewrthe, Walteras de, 928
Utlaghe, Simon, 907
Utflcietona, Sibilla nxor Willelmi de,
163
Willekniu de, les

XJXOT —

Ade, AHds, 1334

Joliana, 1120, 1176
Alani, Alicia, 1510

Matania, 1972
Alezandri, Matillis, 622
Andree, Lncia, 198
Anselmi, Margeria, 1382
Anenelli, Mabilia, 566
Baldrioi, Isabella, 345
Briani, Grecia, 1205
Brienni, Matillis, 1688
Clementis, Giistiana, 1830
Danid, Galiena, 1299
Edmeri, Emma, 1783
Elie, Mabilia, 751
Emnlfi, Alienora, 496
Enstachii, Johanna, 605
Galfridi, Agnes, 1654

Editha, 1840

Emma, 1858

Odiema, 389

Petronilla, 921
Georgii, Sibilla, 1887
Geruasii, Alicia, 976
Gileberti, Agnes, 1000

Albreda, 41
Goidonis, Beatricia, 1877
Haldeni, Goda, 1729
Hamonis, Agnes, 550
Helje, Beatricia, 225
Henrioi, Celestria, 1011

Gonilla, 1455

Hawisia, 611

Johanna, 994
Herlewini, Edina, 228
Heruioi, Eaa, 1800

Theda, 1837
Huberti, Matillis, 1507, App. 4
Hugonis, Alicia, 1853

Emma, 1842
Hde, Alioia, 335


Uxor —
Johannis, Albreda, 591

Alicia, 1638

Anicia, 833

Gristiana, 1603

Editha, 1839

Feidina, App. 7

Gunnora, 1120, 1673, 1649

MatilUs, 694, 1120, 1954
Jollani, Alicia, 531
Jordani, Alicia, 1034, 1851

Eoa, 1229
Martmi, Barbota, 1279
Mathei, Johanna, 54
Mauricii, Alicia, 1105
Miohaelis, EateriDa, 1151
Nicholai, Agnes, 502
Osberti, Anna, 638

Mabilia, 1891
Petri, Alicia, 181, 994

Auicia, 833

Editha, 1041

Gundreda, 1128

Ingelejsia, 1258

Juetta, 1074

Margareta, 30

MatiUis, 1676
Phillippi, Alicia, 730, 1033

Johanna, 392
Badulfi, Alioia, 939, 1865, 1866

AHenora, 116, 1410

Margeria, 467

Maria, 1278

Orenga, 227
Bannulfi, Alioia, 1866
Beginaldi, Alexandna, 91

Beatrioia, 86, 96, 1832

Leticia, 1899
Beymeri, Theda, 1837
Bioardi, Alicia, 365

Amabilis, 331

Elena, 878

Emma, 1981

Geua, 1024

luetta, 1792

Lucia, 66

Mabilia, 381


INDEX OP PERSONS.


331


The numberi refer to tke ease» not to tke pagee.


Uxor —
Bicardi, Boysa, 476

Roysia, 1764

Sarra, 1639

Siritha, 220
Boberti, Gecilia, 1919

Juliana, 778, 886

Margeria, 752, 1565

MatiUis, 1477, 1669. 167S, 1674

OUua, 1811
Bogeri, Alicia, 1394

Aaelina, 1241

Cristiana, 1784

Hawisia, 1565

MatiUis, 1936
Simonis, JuUana, 1563

Sarra, 1093
Stephani, JuUana, 1469
Swani, Geua, 1690
Thome, AUcia, 938

Amicia, 1958

Dionisia, 1974

Floria, 517

Isabella, 1703

Margeria, 1590, 1952

MatnUs, 1759
Toraldi, Eua, 1142, 1158
Unfridi, Maria, 736
WakeUni, AUcia, 994
Walteri, AUcia, 1004

Cauleya, 92

Emma, 937

IsiUa, 315

MatiUis, 351, 1764
Warini, Benedicta, 425

Custancia, 129
WnieUni, Agnes, 1181, 1182, 1241,
1608

Albreda, 696

AUna, 469

Alpesia, 740

Amicia, 319

Clemencia, 1187

Constancia, 1870

Emma, 1798

Eua, 1360

Ida, 1834


CTicor—
WiUehni, IsiUa, 315

Isolda, 83

luoria, 726

Johanna, 54

Lecia, 614, 632

MabUia, 666, 1792, 1890

Margareta, 166

Margeria, 840, 1279, 1361

Maria, 1390

MatUUs, 59, 905

Bosanna, 1960

Susanna, 1017
Yuonis, MatiUis, 951

Vabadun, Bicardus de, 1077
ValaineB vide Valeines.
Yaleines, Valaines, Valenn', Walenn*,
Thomas de, 1378, 1381

AUcia uxor WiUehni de, 1100

WiUehnus de, 1100
Valenn' vide Valeines.
Valerico vide Walerico.
Valeynes, Matheus de, 1912
VaUe, WiUehnus de, 1923
VaUe Dei, Abbas de, 414, 1737
VaUe Torta, Vautort, WaUetorta,
Johanna uzor Beginaldi de,
1584, 1601

Johannes de, 400

Johel de, 521, 603

Beginaldus de, 965, 1584, 1601

Bicardus fiUus Johannis de, 400
VaUibus, Adam de, 1900

Alezander de, 1843

AUcia de, 190

Hugo de, 632, 898

OUuerus de, 1824

Bobertus fiUus Hugonis de, 893

WiUehnus de, 1843
Valoines, Bobertus de, 318
Valoinis, Hamon de, 650

Maria de, 380
Valoniis, Bogerus de, 1238
Valoynes, WiUehnus de, 1128
Vasto, Prior de, 262
Vauasur, Bobertus le, 1855, 1856


832


INDEX OF PERSONS.


The numben refer to the eatet not to the pages.


Vaatort vide VaUe Torta.
Vantre vide Veatre.
Veigeley vide Vergelay.
VeiU*, WiUelmiu le, 1693
VeiUy, Bobertas de, 1194
Venator, Johanna oxor WiUelmiis.
1432

WUlelmnB, 440, 1432

WiUelmos filius WiUelmi, 1432
Venaz, Bartholomeas de^ 337

Constancia de, 1433

Johannes de, 1433

Johannes fiUaa Boberti de, 1494

Bobertas de, 1494
Ver, Albrioas de, 633, 848, 881, 1488

Baldewinas de, 286

GUebertas fiUas Widonis de, 1364

Henrioas de, 925, 1117, 1597

Hago de, 633, 848, 1916, 1919

IsabeUa axor Albrioi de, 633

IsabeUa axor Boberti de, 1919

Bobertas de, 790, 1485, 1769, 1919

Simon de, 1364

Walteros de, 1364

Wido de, 1364

Wido fiUas Widonis de, 1364
Verby, Badalfas de, 1041
Verdam vide Verdan.
Verdan, Verdam, Werdan, Wordam,
AUda oxor Widonis de, 1100

AmabiUs axor MUonis de, 1979

Bertramas de, 601

Gwydo de, 473

Hawisia axor Henrici de, 1747

Henricos de, 1747

MUode,'1979

Nieholaas de, 209, 601

Thomas de, 601

Walteras de, 58, 89

Wido de, 1100

WiUelmas de, 261
Vergelay, Veigeley, WiUelmas de,

464
Verly, Hago de, 782
Vernay vide Wemay.
Vemon, Vemnn, Oalfridas de, 236

Henricas fiUus Badalfi de, 236


Vemon, Veman, Heuerardas de, 236

Eaterina axor QalMdi de, 236

Badalfas de, 236

BadaUas fiUns Galfridi de, 236

Walteras de, 1126

WiUehnus de, 505
Veman vide Vemon.
Veronny, Badalfus de, 72
Vesoy, Warinus de, 129

Warinas fiUus Warini de, 129

WUlelmus de, 1184
Veteri Ponte, Johanna uxor Boberti
de, 1085

Bobertus de, 127, 10^5

Tdonea uxor Boberti de, 127
Veutre, Vautre, WiUebnus le, 1836
Viane, OeciUa uxor Badulfi de, 1756

Badulfus de, 1756
Viotona, Hubertus de, 1815
VUeis, Bogeras de, 760
VUers, Bogeras de, 264
VUly, Bannulfus de, 1739
Vinaz, Bicardus de, 624

WUlelmus de, 624
Vinoent, Dawe, 1067
Vinetarius, Baldewinus, 1705

Matheus, 1711
Vineter, AUcia uxor Amulfi le, 1027

Amulfus le, 1027
Vinitarius, Amma uxor Henrici, 787

Henrious, 787
Vinun, Hugo de, 897
Vitdeners, PhiUppos, App. 6

Wao, Cristiana, 1605

Hugo, 488

Johannes, 1555
Wac', Cristina, 87
Wace, Agnes, 1500

WUlehnus, 512
WaceUn, Johannes, 1316

WiUehnus, 1316
Wachefordia, Edita de, 824
Wack, Hugo, 796, 1106

Wydo, 406
Wadberg' vide Waldelegh.
Wadefordia, Bioardus de, 466


INDEX OF PEBSONS.


333


The numbers refer to the eaeee not to the pagee.


WadehuUa, WarinaB filias Willelmi
de, 1668

WillelmuB de, 1668
Wadenhale, Johannes de, 1338

Thomaa de, 1338, 1776
Wadingefealdia, Alicia uxor Willehni
de, 490

Willelmufl de, 490
Wadingefordia, Wadingfel, Willelmua

de,404
Wadingfel vide Wadingefordia.
Waggehastr*, Bobertus, 496
Wahalla, Agnes de, 1182

Henricus de, 1608

Johannes de, 1408, 1608

Johannes filius Agnetis de, 1182

Margerla filia Michaelis de, 1107

Michael de, 766, 1107

Simon de, 765, 920, 960, 1767
Wainflet, Cristianus de, 733, 822

Edelina uzor Cristiani de, 733,
822

Willehnus filius Cristiani de, 822
Wakeruilla, Jordanus de, 468
Waldelegh, Wadberg*, Homines de,

1588
Walebreus, Willelmus de, 1151
Waledena, Hawisia uxor Beginaldi
de, 343

Idonea uxor Simonis de, 1007

Beginaldus de, 343

Simon de, 1007
Waledona, Willelmus de, 65
Waleis, Bannulfus le, 1392
Walemund, Abbas de, 39
Walenn* vide Valeines.
Walensis vide Waleys.
Walepol, Alexander de, 1668

Grecia uxor Alexandri de, 1668

Johannes de, 1258
Walerioo, S., Valerico, S., Albreda
uxor Widonis de, 1607

Henricus de, 1587

Beginaldus de, 1108

Wido de, 1607
Walerand', Johannes, 716, 936
Walerande, Johannes, 1697
Waleranen, Willehnus, 699


Waleshale, Eua filia Warini de, 1733

Warinus de, 1733

Willelmus de, 1733
Walesham, Prior de, 1840

BadulftiB de, 1159, 1626

WillelmuB de, 639
Waletona, Agnes de, 1849

Paganus de, 922

Bioardus filius Agnetis de, 1849
Waleys, le, Walensis, Adam, 834

Agnes uxor Ade, 834

Johannes, 450, 1311

Mabilia uxor Walteri, 1130

Nicholaus, 644

Beinerus, 80

Bobertus filius Willehni, 1630

Bogerus, 644

Walterus, 1130, 1940

WiUelmus 136, 1630
Walletorta vide Valle Torta.
Wallingfordia, Prior de, 1126
WaUinham, Prior de, 785
WaUop', Matheus de, 1315
Walsingeham, Prior de, 1238
Waltham vide Watham.
Wanetinge, Nicholaus fiUus Boberti
de, 491

Bobertus de, 491
Wantona, Johannes de, 39, 126
Wara, AUcia uxor Bicardi de, 528

Bicardus de, 528
Waranna, Gundreda de, 1128
Waranne, Comes, 1272
Warchilla, Margareta uxor Boberti
de, 1040

Bobertus de, 1040
Warda, WiUdmus de, 1962
Wardena, Abbas de, 144, 1085
Warderoba, JosceUnus de la, 29, 1487
Wardona, Abbas de, 981

Walterus de, 1606
Ware, Dauid la, 425

Johannes la, 425

Jordanus la, 425

Bogerus de, 492
Waredona, Abbas de, 1258
Warenna, Beatrioia fiUa WUlelmi de,

1686


334


INDEX. OF PEBSOKS.


Tke nmmbert refer to the eatee not to the ptiges.


WaraiiiA, Beginaldiu de, 1686

WDlelmaB de, 1243, 1686
Waraime, Comes, 10, 26, 194, 222,
244, 245, 248, 261, 694, 695, 806,
1025, 1117, 1220, 1561, 1685,
1686, 1755, 1838

llAtilliB nzor Gomitis, 261, 694,
695,1755
Wafennie, Gomee, 1395
Wftrewiei, Warewye, Warrewici,
Warwici, Gomee, 152, 212, 855,
1117, 1584

ComitiBfla, 513, 1324

Philippa nzor Comitis, 1584
Warewyc vide Waiewiei.
Warham, Enstachia oxor Haberti
de,1058

HnbertoB de, 1058

Thomas de, 1312
Wamecham, Thomas de, 1385
Warrewici vide Warewict
Warwel, Fnlky, 34

Hngo filias de Fnlky, 34
Warwici vide Warewici.
Wascelin, Bogems, 395
Waspail, Henricns, 530

Osbertne, 530

BobertoB, 530
Waasinglegha, Bobertns de, 1079
WastineiB, Johannes de, 1636
Waswilla, Bobertns de, 1460
Waterdena, Bartholomens de, 1803

Bogems filios Bartholomei de,
1803
Waterletere, Galfridns de, 383
Waterlotere, Alezander, 713
Watemilla, Hamon de, 1077

Hngo de, 820

Johannes filins Boberti de, 1788

Bicardus de, 772, 820

Bobertns de, 1788

Wido de, 117, 286

Willelmns de, 1077
Watfordia, Hugo de, 867
Watham, Waltham, Wautham, Abbas
de, 78, 107, 122, 1681

Heniious de, 19

Prior de, 144


Watham, Waltham, Wantham, Simon

de,366
Wattona, Galfridns de, 256

Johannes de, 821

Prior de, 995
Wande, Bicardns de, 641

Bobertns de la, 646
Wanerleia, Abbas de, 1484
Wanr*, Oodefridus de, 20
Wanre, Oodefridns de, 1706
Wanteby, Pliilippns de, 546
Wantham vide Watham.
Wantona, Gemasins de, 1324

WiUehnns de, 126, 633
Waztonesham, Alanus de, 1106

Wamerins de, 373

Willehnns de, 1793
Waybrigia, Simon de, 99
Wayte, Jaoobns la, 713
Waytewath*, WiUehnns, 514
Weoheham, Egidins de, 1212
Wedona, Badnlf ns de, 8, 44
Wednna, Lanrenoia nzor Badulfi de,
579,635

Badnlfns de, 579, 635
Wehitlegha, Gilebertns de, 242
Weice, Geoilia nzor Bicardi le,
1419

Bicardns le, 1419
WeU', Petms de, 1345
WeUenses Archidiaconi, 407, 411
WeUensis Decanus, 1170
WeUes, Bobertns de, 243

Waltems de, 1475, 1508
WeUetona, Gonanus de, 1035
Weltona, IsabeUa nzor Johannis de,
1076

Johannes de, 1076
Wemge, Ena uzor Bicardi de, 729

BicarduB de, 729
Wendouere, Decanus de, 576
Wendonre, Deoanus de, 626
Wenelok vide Wenloo.
Wenhale, Wlenhale, Galfridus de,
1683

Galfridus fiUus Galfridi de, 1683

Bicardus de, 1683
Wenlac, Prior de, 1768


INDEX OF PERSONS.


335


Tfte nunibers refer to the eases not to the pages.


Wenloo, Wendok, Prior de, 504, 509,

690
Wepstede, Whepstede, Johannes de,
1648

Maria filia Johannis de, 1648

Salomon de, 1648
Werdun vide Verdun.
Wermale, Bicardus de, 1435
Wermlnistre, Bioardus de, 742
Wemay, Vemay, Johannes de, 734
Westacra, Prior de, 100
Westacre, Prior de, 83
Westlande, SibiUa de la, 1610
Westmanecota, Walterus de, 970
Westmonasterio, Abbas de, 1628
Westmund, WilleUnus de, 279
Westona, Westuna, Alicia uxor Wil-
lehni de, 1519

Emma filia Swani de, 257

Emma uxor Philippi de, 371

Qrecia filia Swani de, 257

Gunilda fiha Swani de, 257

Johannes de, 1365

Juliana de, 1149

Matillis filia Swani de, 257

Petrus filius Willelmi de, 1519

Philippus de, 371

Swanus de, 257

Willehnus de, 1519
Westuna vide Westona.
Westwioo, Serlo de, 309
Westwike, Isabella uxor Serlonis de,
1875

Serlo de, 1875
Westwyke, Johannes de, 243
Wetherefeuld, Gilebertus de, 387
Whepstede vide Wepstede.
Whichington vide HilUngtona.
Whilkingtona, Bogerus de, 801
Whitamora, Badulfus de, 95
Whitewurthe, Baldewinus de, 510

Lucia uxor Baldewini de, 510
Whitheued, Johannes, 79
WhithuUa, Hugo de, 69

IsabeUa uxor Hugonis de, 69
Whytestona, Petrus de, 765
Wibitona, Nioholaus de, 901


Wioham, Wikham, Emma de, 90
Wichacra, Jordanus de, 1319
Wiche vide Wick.
Wichfordia, Theodoras de, 1546
Wichtona, Hugo de, 1726

Sarra uxor Hugonis de, 1726
Wick, Wiche, Cristina uxor Petri de,
233

Johannes de, 233

Petrus de, 233
Widewurthe, WiUehnus de, 367
Wifaude, Bobertus de la, 1230
Wigaunt, Alditha uxor WiUehni, 647

WiUelmus, 647
Wigehale, Johannes de, 162
Wigenhale, Adam de, 1181

Agnes de, 1181

Alanus de, 1181

Nicholaus fiUus Alani de, 1181

WiUelmus de, 1175
Wigentona, Odardus de, 1270
Wigge, Bandulfus, 428
Wiggemore, Abbas de, 675
Wigornenses Episoopi, 209, 412, 813,

1027, 1273, 1387, 1402
Wigomensis Archidiaconus, 89
Wigornia, WiUelmus de, 642
Wika vide Wyka.
Wike vide Wyka.
Wikelawe, Bicardus de, 20
Wikes, Bobertus de, 1920
Wikham vide Wicham.
WUde, Bicardus le, 616
WUdeker, Walterus de, 685
WUeford, Bicardus de, 202
Wileghby, Badulfus de, 62
WUegheby, Maria uxor Bogeri de,
1418

Bogerus de, 1418
WUelegha, Gristiana de, 1413
WUetona, Wyletona, Nioholans de,

51
WilUegha, Amicia uxor WiUehni de,
1413

WUlohnus de, 1413
WiUntona, Badulfus de, 142, 969
WUlefordia, EmeUna de, 742


336 INDEX OF PERSONS.

The nawben refer to the cases mt to the pages


Willefordia, Johannes de, 742
WiUega, WiUeye, Wylegha, Johanna
de, 392
Johanna uxor Boherti de, 224
Bicardua de, 392
Bohertos de, 224
Willehnus, Comea, 363, 375, 667,
752,* 854, 964, 1127, 1236, 1273,
1306, 1349, 1406, 1561, 1567.
1574, 1685, 1686, 1755
Ela uxor Comitis, 363, 1235
Willehnus, Rex Anghe, 102, 145
Willeye vide Willegha.
Willingtona, Radulfus de, 857

Rohertus de, 1766
Wihnecota, Galfridus de, 1324
Badulfus de, 1324
Willehnus filius Radulfl de, 1324
Wilne, Ahmus filius Thome de, 25

Thomas de, 25
Wilt', WalteruB de, 1145
Wiltona, Abbatissa de, 906, 1698
Wimbeldona, Cristma uxor Ricardi
de,73
Ricardus de, 73
Wimberuilla, Eustaohia uxor Rogeri
de, 450
Rogerus de, 450, 856
Winchelese, Paulinus de, 397
Wimundeleia, Prior de, 1666
Winde, Adam, App. 3

Alioia uxor Ade, App. 3
Windesore, Willehnus de, 161
Windesores, Wyndeaores, Andreas
filiuB Johannis de, 868
Constabularius de, 824
Hugo de, 106, 437
Johannes de, 868
RicarduB de, 294
WUlelmuB de, 528, 1038
Winelegha, Walterus de, 1314
WineUega, Johannes de, 338
Wingham, Hugo de, 151
Winterbumia, GUebertus de, 372, 434
Jacobus de, 1434

Nicholaa uxor GiJeberti de, 372,
434


Winteroumba, Beatrida uxor WiUel-
mi de, 586
WiUehnus de, 586
WintereshuUa, Henricus de, 679
Winteringeham, Galfridus de, 1785
Wintertona, Beatricia uxor WiUehni
de, 640
WUlelmuB de, 640
WinteshuUe, Henricus de, 266
Wintewurthe, Robertus de, 26
Wintonia, Walterus de, 136
Wintonie, Comitissa, 492, 529
Wintonienses Episoopi, 16, 92, 247,
276, 324, 395, 647, 699, 715, 928,
1570, 1594, 1689, 1761, 1764
Wintoniensis Archidiaoonus, 276
Wintrmgbom' vide Wyteringbum.
Wirmecota, WiUehnus de, 1324
Wircsop, Prior de, 552
Wischarde, Hugo, 1442
Wistenestona, Johannes de, 526
Witeby, Abbas de, 1676
Witefeldia, Henricus de, 1303
Witelegha, Radulfus de, 1716
Witenesse, Amicia uxor Henrici de,
1629
Henrious de, 1629
Witherdale, Alanus de, 698
Withewrthe vide Wythewrthe.
Withrenwike, Amicia de, 1879

Nioholaus filius Amicie de, 1879
Witintona, Henricus de, 916
Wittona, Prior de, 1
Wlenhale vide Wenhale.
Wlfrid*, Amicia uxor Ricardi de,
934
Ricardus de, 934
WUe, PhUippus de, 1666
Wlsintona, FeUcia uxor Rioardi de,
1002
Ricardus de, 1002
Simon de, 1002
Wlurichestona, Stephanus de, 1587
Wlwico, Dauid de, 1776
Wod, Hobbe, 514
Wodefordia, Thomas de, 1681
Wodetona, Galfridus de, 1473


INDEX OF PERSONS.


337


The numhera refer to tke cases not to tke pages.


Wolauitona, Ceoilia oxor Walteri de,
934

Walterus de, 934
Wordum vide Verdun.
Wrachesham, Osbertus de, 207
Wridewella, Alexander de, 851
Wrockeshale, Priorissa de, 694
Wroteham, Willehnus de, 931, 1339
Wrthe, Henrious de, 957, 1034
Wubumia, Abbas de, 633
Wudeburg, Prior de, 578
Wudecota, Henricus de, 15
Wudetona, Bobertus de, 675
Wulewardia, Wulward, Bobertus de,

1052
Wultertona, Walterus de, 1818

WiUelmus de, 1818
Wuluelegha, Isabella de, 1863, 1864
Wulward vide Wulewardia.
Wuttona, Amicabilis de, 648
Wyauilla, Qodehut uxor Bicardi de,
452

Bicardus de, 452
Wydiho, Agnes uxor Bicardi de, 466

Bicardus de, 466
Wydingdona, Badulfus de, 285
Wygge, Bobertus, 478
Wyk, Agnes filla Nicholai de la, 643

Matillis uxor Nicholai de la, 643

Muriella filia Nicholai de la, 643

Nicholaus de la, 643
Wyka, Wika, Wike, Alioia filia Bi-
cardi de, 1070

Johannes de la, 1749

Petronilla uxor Johannis de la, 1749

Bicardus de, 1070, 1229

Bobertus de la, 662

Thomas de, 1749


Wyka, Wika, Wike, Walterus de,

1070
Wyke, WiUelmus de, 769
Wykenhale, Adam de, 1175
Wylburham, Bobertus de, 1672
Wyleby, Bobertus de, 1416
Wylegha vide WiUegha. •
Wyletona vide Wiletona.
WyUngtona, Nicholaus de, 680
Wymbisse, Bobertus de, 243
Wymer, WiUehnus, 479
Wymund*, Petrus, 755
Wymundeham,Wymundesham, Prior

de, 321, 997
Wymundesham vide Wymundeham.
Wyndeby, PhiUppus de, 273
Wyndeham, Adam de, 843
Wyndeshores, WiUelmus de, 1287
Wyndesores vide Windesores.
Wynelegha, PetroniUa de, 664
Wyredebyria, AUcia uxor WiUehni
de, 528

Wnielmus de, 528
Wyrham, Walterus de, 985
Wyteby, Abbas de, 1886
Wyteri, Bogerus, 514
Wyteringburn*, Wintringbom*, WU-

lehnus de, 262
Wythewrthe, Withewrthe, Fuloo de,
1234

WUlehnus de, 1234

YeUestede, Bobertus, 476
Yep, Alicia fiUa Roberti, 1956
Bobertus, 1956

Zuche, Bogerus la, 1183
Zusche, Bogerus de la, 664


END OF VOL. I.


M. I.
