This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.


Google books


https://books.google.com


This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.


Google books


https://books.google.com


- ^ 4 4A
"c , » dca
"V«P- n
p —-


4 4
P nahe di Nes


' LIC —N €
& 4 -— ^ mo ew


cCiwzg4gcls
equos mm mí nal


A o


. Tm
í * —-- 9»
xw —— XC
" » - o mm -
LAE ,
-— —-—
"* o» ns -— d


—
4- e o -— M - o - P dir me V.


LL we (— ——


b. L3
CUm nm
w »
Wm we p smdi. dias aie arr n
MAT min deo de o
—


—  ÀÀ omo
o ri rtl "OE

A t eem um i

E cz Ex


-— -


REA. SEES


LI -


- ——H
-—— p — -
m n ara oom


-— o: R3
EE ERSEMA ria


—— — — — — —'
*


DIOE


—Ó—— €—


Z--— — putes VT ir


Digitized by Google


|


RERUM BRITANNICARUM MEDII EVI
SCRIPTORES,


OR


CHRONICLES AND MEMORIALS OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND IRELAND


DURING


THE MIDDLE AGES.


Q 6306. — Wt. 2377. ü


THE CHRONICLES AND MEMORIALS


OF


GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND
DURING TIE MIDDLE AGES.


PCBLISIED DY TilE AUTHOlTY OF HER MATESTY'S TREASURY, UNDER
THE DIRECTION OF THE MASILR OF TIE ReLLs,


— € — —— M Ha ——— Ha QM


Ow the 26th of January 1857, the Master of the Rolls
submitted to the Treasury a proposal for the publication
of materials for the History of this Country from the
Invasion of the Romans to the reign of Henry VIIT.


The Master of the IVolls suggested that thesc materials
should be selected for publication under competent
editors without reference to periodical or chronological
arrangement, without mutilation or abridgment, prefer-
ence being given, in the first instance, to such materials
as were most scarce and valuable.


He proposed that cach chronicle or historical docu-
ment to be edited should be treated in the same way as
if the editor were engaged on an Editio Princeps; and
for this purpose the most correct text should be formed
from an accurate collation of the best MSS.


To render the work more generally uscful, the Master
of the Rolls suggested that the editor should give an
account of the MSS. employed by him, of their age and
their peculiarities ; that he should add to the work a
brief account of the life and times of the author, and
any remarks necessary to explain the chronology; buf
no other note or comment was to be allowed, except
what might be necessary to establish the correctness of


the text.
uA


d


The works to be published in octavo, separately, as
they were finished ; the whole responsibility of the task
resting upon the editors, who were to be chosen by the
Master of the Rolls with the sanction of the Treasury.


The Lords of Her Majesty's Treasury, after à careful
consideration of the subject, expressed thcir opinion in à
Treasury Minute, dated February 9, 1857, that. the plan
recommended by the Master of the Rolls * was well
caleulated for the accomplishment of this important
national object, in an ceffectual and. satisfactory manner,
within a reasonable time, and provided propcr attention be
paid to economy, in making the detailed arrangements,
without unnecessary expense."


They expressed their approbation of the proposal that
each Chronicle and historical document should be edited
in such a manner as to represent with all possible correct-
ness the text of. each writer, derived from a collation of
the best MSS., and that no notes should be added, except
such as were illustrative of the various readings. "They
suggested, however, that the preface to each work should
contain, in addition to the particulars proposed by the
Master of the Rolls, a biographical account of the author,
so far as authentic materials existed for that purpose,
and an estimate of his historical credibility and value.


Holls House,
December 18957.


nO————————Á—


ANGLLE.
LIBRI QUINQUE


IN VARIOS TRACTATUS DISTINCTI.
AD DIVERSORUM ET VETUSTISSIMORUM CODICUM
COLLATIONEM TYPIS VULGATI.


EDITED


BY


SIR TRAVERS TWISS, Q.C., D.C.L.


PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHORITY OF THE LORDS COMMISSIONERS OF HER MAJESTY'S
TREASURY, UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE MASTER OF THE RO


QN


VOL. V. : AUC '£87 * |
S Ma gat S 4d
LONDON: DLE
LONGMAN & Co., PArERNOsTER Row ; TRÜBNER & Co., LupaaTE HiLL :
ALSO BY


PARKER & Co., Oxronp; ANp MACMILLAN & C€o., CAMBRIDGE;
À. & C. BLACK, ANp DOUGLAS & FOULI!S, EDINBURGH;
AND A. THOM, DÜBLIN.


——


1882.


N


c


.-.
7 .


/


Printed by
EYE and SPoTTISWOODE, Her Majesty's Printers.
For Her Majesty's Stationery Office.


CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION - - - -
TABLE or THuE CoNrkNTS OF CHAPTERS3
Or AN AcrrIoN or ENuTRY, Dook IV.—

TREATISE VII. - - -
Or A WRIT OF RiGaur, Book V.—

TaEamISE I. - - - -
Or EssoiNs, Book V.—

'TREATISE II. - - - -
Or DErauLTS, Boox V.—

TRrATISE III. - EU


INDEX - - - - -


Page
- vii


Ixxxiv


131


- 969
- 195


INTRODUCTIO YN.


— ——— —— dá IA — —


— — Nes---


—— HA inerat


iie mae


INTRODUCTION.


4 oMOSNI NIU NSMTIS NI SÉ SIN


THERE are evident signs in the later treatises of


Bracton, that the text of them has been either more .


hastily constructed, or not so carefully revised as the test
of the treatises which precede them in the order of the
present work. "The later trcatises, however, are not. on
that account less interesting, on the contrary, they are in
a certain sense more instructive, as they disclose more
explicitly the method whereby that hranch of thelaw of
England, which is distinguished by the title of the
Common Law, was being gradually defined by the judiz-
ments of the king's justiciaries in such à manner, as to
supply upon almost every subject principles of recog-
nised right for the decision of future cases. The Eng-
lish law was at this time well advanced in its passage
through that intermediate stage between  unwritten
usage and written right, which may be styled recorded
custom, in other words, usage approved by the deliberate
judgment of righteous men, whereof an authorised rceord
was kept, which formed a precedent of general obliga-
tion. It was especially to the task of examining these
ancient judgments of righteous men that Bracton ap-
plied himself, as he states in the first chapter of his first
book, and it was by reducing into order whatever he
thought noteworthy in their acts, counsels, and. answers,
that he hoped to supply an useful summus for tho in-
struction of & younger generation, who might be called
upon to ascend the judgment scat, and might otherwise
risk to ascend it, before they had learnt the laws which
they had to administer. Such à work w&s the more


—,


viii INTRODUCTION.


called for at & time when the king was carrying on the
administration of justice without & justiciar or & chan-
cellr. Stephen Segrave, who upon the disgrace of
Hubert de Burgh had succeeded to the office of. justiciar,
had been dismissed by Henry III. in 1234, and no suc-
cessor had been appointed in his place, whilst Ralph
Neville, Bishop of Chichester, had vacated by death
the office of chancellor in 1244, and the king, who had
taken from him the seals sometime before his death,
entrusted them to kecpers from time to time, and made
no fresh appointment of a chancellor.

The treatise, with which the present volume com-
mences, is & treatise concerning Entry (de Ingressu),
in other words, concerning the method of proceeding
on the part of the owner of a tenement for the recovery
of the seysine of it, when it isin the possession of à tenant
for & term of years, whose lease has expired. The
tréatise is in Jtself of considerable juridical interest, as it
illustrates a development, which the jurisprudence of
the Curia Regis had undergone since the reign of Henry
IT., whilst the subject matter is of no slight historical
importance, as it marks a further stage in a course of
political and economical progress, which the Provisions
of Merton had inaugurated, and whereby the feudal
organisation of the cultivators of the soil was being
gradually replaced by & system of free eultivators under
leases from the owners of the land. It would appear
from Glanville's trcatisc, that 1n his time the courts of the
king declined to take cogmisance of any contract be.
tween the owner and the cultivator of the Soil of the
kind known to the Roman law as locatio conductio,
and that they declined in any such case to enforce the
payment of rent, or to enforce recovery where the lessee
had failed to comply with the conditions of his lease.
There can be little doubt that the change in the practice
of the king's courts was attributable to the circum-
stance, that the custom was becoming general for the


INTRODUCTION. ix


owners of land to let it to free eultivators for rent, in-
stead of granting it to feudal retainers for services, and
that accordingly the king's courts found it expedient to
exercise jurisdiction over leasehold contracts, which had
hitherto been regarded as outside the pale of the law.
The assise of novel disseysine had already, in the reizn
of Henry II., laid the axe to the root of feudal tenures
in England, and the writ de Ingressu seems to bave
been originally devised by the king's justiciaries early in
the reign of Henry IIL, as subsidiary to the writ of novel
disseysine, with the view of enabling the heir of à party
disseysed to recover & tenement, notwithstanding the
disseysee or the disseysor had died before etfect had
been given to the writ of novel disseysine. The fur-
ther application of the writ of entry to cases of land
demised for à term seems to have originated with
the same justiciaries, namely, William de Ralegh and
Martin de Pateshull Mr. Reeves, in his well-known
History of the English Law, attributes the introduction
of the writ of entry to the refinement, which had
pervaded all parts of the law relating to seysine and
property in the early years of the reign of Henry III.
There can be no doubt that the scientific attainments of
the school of jurists, who occupied the bench in the early
years of the reign of Henry ILI., facilitated the develop-
ment of English jurisprudence in a direction adverse to
feudalism, but, a necessity for the exercise of that retinc-
ment in the direction indicated by Mr. Reeves must have
arisen either from new conditions of land-tenure having
become general, or from ancient conditions of tenure,
which had existed before the conquest, having been
once more revived. | Amongst those ancient conditions
that of loeiland, held by free cultivators, was well-known
in England before the conquest, and the introduction of
the writ de Ingressu, whereby the king's courts came to
the aid of the owners of land demised for & term to
free cultivators, was calculated to encourage the revival
of an ancient system of tenure, in lieu of granting the


X INTRODUCTION.


freehold in fce on condition of personal serviee. Whilst
Braeton, aecordingly, has not overlooked the original
objeet of the writ of entry as subsidiary to the writ
of novel disseysine, and has dedicated to the discus-
sion of it from that limited point of view several chap-
ters in his treatise on an assise of novel dissceysine,
he now proceeds to dedicate & whole treatise to the dis-
cussion of proceedings under & writ of entry, where that
writ is sued out for the purpose of recovering seysine of
à tenement, which is in the possession of a lessee under
à demise for a term of years. Tho juridical necessity for
à special remedy in such a case arose from the fact, that
neither an assise of novel disseysine nor an assise of
mortdancester would apply to such & case. An assise
of novel disseysine would not be applicable to the case
where the claimant had himself demised the tenement
for à term, because there would not have been any tor-
tious act on the part of the tenant in acquiring seysine
of the tenement ; on the other hand, an assise of mort-
daneester would not apply to the case where an ancestor
of the claimant had so demised the tenement, inasmuch
as the ancestor would not have died seysed of it as of
fee and in his own domain. But the king's justiciaries
set a limit to an action of entry in such cases, and only
allowed it, where the entry could be proved by the sight
and hearing of living persons. In all other cases, where
the entry had been too remote to admit of such proof,
the claimant had to proceed by the ancient way. of a
writ of right,

To the jurists who had studied in the School of
Vacarius at Oxford, or who had followed the teaching of
those upon whom the mantle of Vacarius may have
fallen, amongst whom Bracton has by tradition & place,
the distinetion between the usufruetuary of land and
the proprietor of land was familar, and they would
have no difticulty in distinguishing the right to the use
and the fruits of land from the right to the dominion,
the property, the fee, and the freehold. Thus Bracton


INTRODUCTION. xl


lays it down in his treatise. De Inzressu, p. 5, that he
who deinises the use and the fruits of land for a term of
years, although of very great. length, provided that the
entry into the land can be proved by the testimony of
sight and hearing, retains for himself the doininion, the
property, the fee, &nd the freehold, provided that he had
them all previously, and if not so, & certain portion of
them aecording to what he had previously. This pas-
sage is noteworthy, as Bracton clearly contemplates the
application of a writ of entry to lands leased by &
feudal lord to a free cultivator,.over which the lord
would retain the doininion notwithstanding the lease,
whereas in the next following reign of Edward I. the
right of dominion in such & case had become so uniim-
portant, that Britton omits all allusion to it. Thus
Britton says: The word *term" extends as well to a
term of life as to à term of years. But he who leases
for & term of years, although he makes the lease for &
term of a hundred years (and here Britton follows the
language of Bracton), leases the profits only, and retains
for himself the fee, and the right, and the frechold, if he
had them before the lease, and all that he retains he will
leave at his death to his heir. Liv. V. ch. xiv., 8ec, 8.
The proceedings under a writ of entry, where the
owner of land sought to recover possession of it at the
expiration of the lessee's term, were held in ordinary
course before the king's justieiaries on their iter, except
in the. case where the tenant set up a title to hold the
land through & feoffment from & third party for his
homage and service. In such a case he might sue out &
writ from the Crown to the Viscount, requiring him to
gummon twelve knights or other loyal men of the visne,
to recognise on their oaths, whether he held the land for
& term of years from the claunant or his ancestor, or
otherwise had been enfeoffed of it by & third party.
An alternative proceeding inight be had before the king's
justieiaries at Westininster. In the former case, where


xli INTRODUCTION.


an inquest had been held in the full county court, the
result had to be certified under the seals of the viscount
and of the keepers of the.pleas of the crown to the
king's justiciaries at Westminster. Bracton does not
define the cireumstances, under which the inquest itself
was to be held before the justiciaries and not in the
county court, but it may be presumed from the language
of the writ used in the case of an inquest in the county
court, that the claimant was entitled to have the inquest
held before the king's justiciaries a& Westminster, when-
ever the viscount was connected by affinity with the
tenant, or was otherwise likely to be interested in the
tenant's favour. — Mr. Reeves, in commenting on the al-
ternative proceeding of summoning the jurors to appear
before the justiciaries at. Westminster to try what he
terms & * commune placitum," observes that, it seems
* very particular and not easily to be accounted for,"
but he appears to have overlooked the importance of
the issue, which in some cases was to determine whether
the tenure of the land was feudal or allodial, and not
merely whether A. or B. had the better title to it.

I have used the term * viscount" here and elsewhere
as the English equivalent of the Latin vicecomes. I
am not unaware that objection may be taken to this use
of the term * viscount" as the desiguation of the king's
officer, to whom the royal writs were addressed on occa-
sions when the county court had to be convened, and
that several learned persons, for whose judgment in
such matters I have a great respect, would have preferred
that I should have translated the word *'vicecomes,"
wherever it occurs in Bracton's work, by the English
title of sheriff. I am also fain to confess that, if I had
consulted iny own convenience I should have adopted the
term sheriff in preference to that of viscount, as of more
familiar use, and so commending itself more readily to
my pen; in fact, tho undue preference of my pen in
favour of the term "sheriff" must plead my excuse for


INTRODUCTION. xii


having inadvertently in some few passages, whilst trans-
lating the text of Bracton, deviated from the rule which
I have invariably observed, as I believe, in the English
rendering of the royal writs. My reasons for adopting
the term '* viscount " in preference to ' sheriff" are partly
formal and partly substantial To deal first with the
formal reasons, and by formal I mean the reasons founded
on the commvunis usus of contemporary statesmen and
lawyers. That visconte was the Norman equivalent of
vicecomes cannot be denied, nor can it be denied that the
practice of pleading in Norman French was introduced into
the curia regis as early as in the reign of Henry I. From
this time forward, down to the reign of Richard III. the
language of lawyers was either Latin or Norman French,
and vicecomes or visconte is the term invariably used to
denote the chief representative officer of the Crown in
general matters of justice and revenue in the several ccun-
ties. Latin meanwhile maintained its place in constitu-
tions of the king in council and in Royal Charters down to
the reign of Edward I., although French had been adopted
in the reign of Henry II. on the iter of the justiciaries,
and as the spoken language of the courts. Further the
French tongue had acquired in the reign of Henry III. an
undisputed place in publie Ácts and was adopted in the
Statutum de Seaccario, which is assigned to 51 Henry III.
In the next following reign of Edward l. French be-
came the language of the Statute Law, and visconte or
viscounte is the term invariably used in the Statutes
down to the fourth year of Henry VII. when English at
length became the language of the Acts of Parliament.
This invariable use of the term '* viscount" is not pecu-
liar to the Statute Book. It was in general use as the
alternative of vicecomes in the Law 'Treatises and in
the Year Books. Britton, for instance, and the Mirroir
des Justices are instances of the use of viscounte in the
text books of the reigns of Edward I. and Edward IT,
whilst the instances in the Year Books and the Law
Q, 6366. b


xlv INTRODUCTION.


Reports are too numerous to admit of citation. By a
strange coincidence, as the time drew near for the sub-
stitution of the English language in place of the French
as the language of Acts of Parliament, a necessity arose
for discontinuing the use of the title of viscount, as the
official designation of the king's representative and presi-
dent of the county court. Heny VI., with what parti-
cular object in view does not clearly appear, except for
the pleasure of exercising a right heretofore enjoyed by
the kings of France, shortly after he had succeeded in
establishing himself in the capital city of the kings of
France, conferred the title of viscount as a title of
personal dignity on John, Lord Beaumont, by letters
patent of 18 Hen. VI. The title itself had. no territorial
significance in England, but it warranted the bearer to
take precedence over barons. n the next following
year the same king conferred the title of viscount on
John, Lord Bouchier. Edward IV. followed the exainple
of Henry VI, and created Lord de l'Isle, Viscount
Berkeley, in 1480, and thus it happened that the title of
viscount moet with a similar fate to that which the title
of earl] had met with in the reign of King Stephen.
It had become & term of ambiguous import, and was no
longer exclusively used to designate the Crown's repre-
sentative at the head of & county. It was accordingly
thought expedient to devise another title for the Crown's
representative in the place of viscount, and, as English
was henceforth to be the language of the Statute Book,
the old Anglo-Saxon title of * scirgerefa " was furbished,
but instead of the softer southern and midland inflexion
of shirreve being adopted, the harsher form of * shiref "
as current in the north was preferred, a form which has
misled many persons in tle present day to suppose that
the modern term * sheriff" belongs to the same family
as the Arabic *' shroffe " & writer.

There is an old saying, * give me the songs and the
" laws of & country and I will write its history." I have


INTRODUCTION. XV


quoted the laws of England inillustration of the alterna-
tive use of the terms vicecomes and viscount during four
centuries. I will now invoke, as evidence on the part of
the songsters of the Edwardian period, a Latin song on
the venality of the king's justiciaries written in the
reign of Edward L, and which is preserved in a MS. in
the Harleian collection in the British Museum, No. 930,
fol 19. I shall have occasion in a future passage to
allude to Sir Henry Spelman's derivation of the term
scirgerefa from the Anglo-Saxon verb *' reafan," to plun-
der, and to his justification of that root by his reference
to the term * exactor, which is used by many contem-
porary Latin writers as descriptive of the functions of
the vicecomes. The vicecomes of the Angevin period
kept up in his character of "exactor" the traditional
disrepute of his Norman predecessor, and thus the Ed-
wardian songster sings of him and his brethren under
their Latin title of vicecomites :


De vicecomitibus
Quam duri sunt pauperibus
. Quis potest enarrare ?
Qui nihil potest dare,
Hue et illuc trahitur,
Et in assisis ponitur,
Et cogitur jurare
Non ausus murmurare.
Quod si murmuraverit,
Ni statim satisfecerit,
Est totum salsum mare,


The Latin title of vicecomes was evidently ringing
daily in the ear of this Edwardian songster, whilst &
litlle later on in the same thirteenth century the author
of the Life of Edward the Confessor, written in French
verse, complains of king Harold, and likens him to a
* veseunte" counting out his money at the door of the


king's exchequer:
b 2


xvi INTRODUCTION.


Deners cum usurer amasse
De gent rendre ne s'alasse
Cwm  vescunte al eschecker.
Cet per deners & cunter.
Thus much for the songs of the period. Itis not, how-
ever, for the sake of formal &ccuracy that I have em-
ployed the term * viscount" as being in contemporaneous
use with the term vicecomes during the Angevin period,
for I might be open to the charge of pedantry, if merely
for the sake of antiquarian precision I had used a phrase,
which might not be so intelligible to English readers as
the term *sheriff"  'There are, however, substantial
grounds for not designating the vicecomes of the Angevin
period by the Tudor title of sheriff. The vicecomes of
the Angevin period had a sphere of duty far more com-
prehensive and more authoritative than that of the
sheriff of the Tudor period, or than that of the high
sheriff of a county in the present day ; whilst to style
him the shire reeve, as if he were the scirgerefa of the
Anglo-Saxon period, who had passed unscathed through
the fiery furnace of the Norman Conquest, would equally
lead to & misconception of his functions. The vicecomes
of the Ángevin period was a far more important officer
than the Anglian scirgerefa. "The Norman idea of the
vicecomes, the feudal delegate of the comes, had crept
in and dominated the Anglian idea of the scirgerefa.
Earls and bishops, the former representatives of the local
independence of the shire, had lost their official charac-
ter as administrators of the law. The king's justiciaries,
representing the central authority of the Crown, had re-
placed them as administrators of the law in its more
weighty matters, whilst the vicecomes, as the local
representative of the Crown, presided alone in the county
court, whence the alderman and the bishop had been
successively eliminated, and where he administered the
law in minor matters once & month subject to an appeal
to the curia regis. Further, he bad authority to convene


LI 0 LLLA


— ——— M —— m0 oa cm oom


INTRODUCTION. xvil


the bishops and the earls and barons who had baronies in
his county twice à year in his shire moot or tourne, and
to amerce them at his pleasure if they failed to appear.
This was one of the grievances of the barons set forth in
their petition at the so-called * Mad Parliament " of Ox-
ford of 1258, and which led up to the war of the barons
in 1263. If it had been absolutely necessary to select
from Anglian official titles one which should appreach
nearest in its meaning to the Norman vicecomes, I
Should have considered the title of king's reeve to be
more appropriate to the vicecomes in respect of the
analogy of his fiscal and judicial functions than that of
shire reeve, but by many of my readers, who might not be
familiar with the organisation of an Anglo-Saxon shire
after it became part of & kingdom, I should have been
held guilty of the fault of interpreting an antiquated
Latin term by a still more antiquated and far more ob-
scure Ánglian term. On the other hand, I was unwilling
to make use of the title either of king's reeve or of shire
reeve, as the English synonym of vicecomes, because no
two legal antiquaries agree as to the proper meaning of
the term reeve, or as to the etymology of its Anglo-Saxon
predecessor *gerefa" Mr. John Mitchell Kemble, one
of our most profound Anglo-Saxon scholars, derives
gerefa from the verb *refan" or *rofan," to call aloud,
and if this view be correct, the original function of the
scirgerefa was to convene the freeholders of the shire in
the * scirgemote," in which the ealdorman and the bishop,
according to & law of king Edgar, were joint presidents
On the other hand, Sir Henry Spelman, no mean
authority, holds the word * gerefa" to be equivalent to
"gereafa, and to be derived from the verb "reafan,"
to plunder, and this view has some support in the fact
that the word "scirgerefa" is frequently translated by
the Latin word ''exactor," and the exaction of shire-dues
was & characteristic feature in the Ánglo-Saxon period
of a shire reeve's duties. Further, the term gerefa is &


xvlii INTRODUCTION.


generic term, and it is used throughout the Germanie
constitutions always in connexion with judicial proceed-
ings, so much so that Mr. J. M. Kemble maintains that
wherever there was & court there was & reeve, and wher-
ever there was & reeve there was a court.

We find, accordingly, frequent. mention in the Saxon
Chronicle of a reeve in relation to persons or places other
than the ealdorman or the shire. There was, in the first
place, the heahgerefa or high reeve, who seems to have
been a royal officer appointed on extraordinary occasions,
and for the most part of military rank, as Simeon of
Durham describes him in A.D. 780 by the Latin title of
*dux" Next in importance to this officer was the
cyninges gerefa, the king's reeve, who is mentioned in the
laws of Alfred, and also in the Saxon Chronicle under
the year 787, and whom Florence of Worcester styles
"regis prsepositus" ^ Neither of these officers are
mentioned until we read of Anglo-Saxon kings. "The
scirgerefa, on the other hand, was an officer of earlier date,
who seems to have existed before the office of king was
known in England, when the scir constituted the entire
state territory, so to say, of which the ealdorman was the
hereditary chief, who presided in conjunction with the
bishop in the scirgemote. The scirgerefa was at this time
the executive officer of the scirgemote, elected by the voice
of the freeholders of the scir, and he accounted to the
ealdorman of the scir for all fines and dues levied on the
freeholders. Whether he was also the legal assessor of
the ealdorman and the bishop is by no means clear, and
it is useless to seek in the etymology of the word the so-
lution of this difficult problem. Phillips, in his Englische
Reichs-und-Rechts-geschichte suggests that gerefa is
but a transposed form of gefera, which means socius, in
which case the gefera of à shire may be supposed to have
occupied à place in relation to the ealdorman anala-
gous to that which the comes of & province occupied in
relation to the emperor or king. Other reeves of the


—


—


INTRODUCTION. xix


Anglo-Saxon period may be named, as, for instance, the
burh gerefa or the reeve of a fortified town, the port
gerefa or the reeve of & town protectel by & fence
and a ditch, into which access could only be had through
& gate (porta)  À wic gerefa or vilage reeve may be
added to the catalogue, and & tungerefa or reeve of a
township. Other reeves might be mentioned, amongst
whom & bishop's reeve deserves notice, but of all these
reeves the latest in origin, and perhaps the most im-
portant, seems to have been the king's reeve, who is
mentioned twice in the laws of king Alfred as sitting
with the king in the folkmote and administering justice
there. Hence the question arises whether the king's
reeve was & new officer and the predecessor of the Crown
officer known subsequently as the king's chancellor, or
whether he was & development of the scir-gerefa with
this difference, that whereas the Anglo-Saxon scir-gerefa
was originally elected by the freeholders of the shire, the
king's reeve was nominated by the king and had to
render his account to the king instead of to the ealdor-
man of the shire. The first step in the process of con-
solidating an Ánglo-Saxon kingdom appears to have been
to eliminate the ealdorman from the shire-mote, and the
next step was to eliminate the bishop and to convert the
shire reeve into a king's reeve, constituting him the sole
president of the county court and of the shire motes.
King Canute the Dane accomplished the first stage in
this process by mediatising the ealdorman, and by ap-
pointing à Danish yarl or earl to rule over several shires.
Under this Danish innovation the king's writs were
directed to-the earl and to the bishop. Still there were
some shires in which the ealdorman was not removed,
but was allowed to die off, and meanwhile he con-
tinued to preside conjointly with the bishop over the
shire-mote.

The institution of the office of earl was an im-
portant step towards the consolidation of the Danish


XX INTRODUCTION,


monarchy in England, but William the Norman saw in
the great earldoms a possible danger to the supremacy of
his crown, and he broke them up wherever they were
aggregates of several contiguous shires. He allowed,
however, the earls to preside over more counties than
one, provided the counties were separate and apart from
one another. William Rufus went a step further and
created titular earls with & money payment known as
the third penny collected from the county which gave its
title to the earl, who had, however, no further official con-
nexion with the county. Hence we find in the Dialogus
de Seaccario written in the reign of Henry IL. this defi-
nition of an earl: '* Comes autem est, qui tertiam por-
* tionem eorum, quae de placitis proveniunt, in quo-
* libet comitatu percipit. Meanwhile the bishop had
been eliminated from the county court by William the
Conqueror, and the meaning of the term comes had be-
come denaturalised, for we find in the same Dialogus de
Scaccario this debased definition of the title, * Summa
* pamque illa, que nomine firms requiritur a vice
* comite, tota non exsurgit ex fundorum redditibus,
* ged ex magna parte de placitis provenit, et horum
* tertiam partem comes percipit, qui 4deo sic dicitur,
* quia fisco socius est et comes in percipiendis. Porro
* vjce-comes dicitur, quia vicem comitis suppleat in
* placitis illis, quibus comes ex sus dignitatis ratione
* participat."

The vicecomes of the Angevin period would thus ap-
pear to have combined in his own person the ancient
judicial functions of the ealdorman with the executive
functions of the scirgerefa, for the comes or earl, although
he had in theory succeeded to the presidency over the
county, abandoned in practice to the vicecomes the func-
tions formerly discharged by the ealdorman in the county
court. On the other hand, the vicecomes was & nominee
of the Crown, and was in fact the king's representative
within the county. He farmed the king's revenues both


INTRODUCTION. xxl


from the folkland, which William the Conqueror had
converted into Royal demesne, and from the fees levicd
upon the suitors in the county court. He was not, how-
ever, necessarily resident within the county, unlike the
scirgerefa, who resided within his shire. A favourite of
the crown, for instance, might be constituted vicecomes
of more than one county. Fulk de Breaute,a Norman
follower of king John, when he was disgraced by
Henry III. in 1224, was the vicecomes of six counties,
whilst an earl or count in his turn was not disqualified
from being the viscount of the county over which he was
earl. Ofthis we have several instances in the reign of
Henry III. William de Warrene, ear] of Surrey, was
also viscount of the county of Surrey, whilst Hubert de
Burgh, earl of Kent, was also viscount of Kent. Nay
more, Prince Edward, earl of Chester, afterwards king
Edward IL, was viscount of Bedfordshire and of Bucking-
hamshire in 52 Henry III. at. the time when he set out
for the Holy Land. In all these cases the viscount per-
formed the duties of his office by & subvicecomes or
custos.

It would be an error to suppose that the term " shire"
after the conquest was identical in its meaning with the
term "county." Cornwall, which was a single county,
was divided even so late as the twelfth century into
six shires, one of which, Triconshire, at present the
hundred of Trigg,is mentioned in King Alfred's will,
unless we adopt Mr. J. M. Kemble's suggestion that the
Triconshire of King Alfred's time was the entire county
of Cornwal. The county of York was divided into
Richmondshire, Riponshire, Hallamshire, Islandshire,
Norhamshire, and probably other similar districts, the
names of which have passed &way, for the term scir or
shire, or as it was pronounced in East Anglia, "' sheer,"
signified à separate unit of any organised system, and
the verb "shear" is still in use in its primitive sense
of cutting off or separating, as for instance, the shearing


xxl INTRODUCTION.


the fleece of a sheep. Even the city of York was divided
into seven shires, one of which was the archbishop's
shire, and the title of sheriff is still kept up in the city
of York as the title of an honorary officer of the city:
by the side of the mayor. In fact the term "scir" or
"Shire" meant little more than a separate district.
There is no difficulty in understanding its use in such
a sense during the period known as the Heptarehy,
when the kingdom was the organised system, and the
shire was a subdivision of it, but it 1s difficult to realise
the pre-existence of the shire before & kingdom was
formed, unless the shire in its earliest use meant sepa-
ration in the sense of independence.
.— I have, accordingly, felt à reluctance to render in Eng-
lish the office of vicecomes during the Angevin period
of the history of our legal institutions by the term
sheriff, for however much the title of sheriff may have
become rehabilitated in public estimation since the reign
of Henry VII. by the Statutory use of it as the designa-
tion of the chief officer of the Crown within a county,
inasmuch as the office of Lord Lieutenant was not intro-
duced until the reign of Philip and Mary, it was un-
doubtedly in Bracton's time employed for less noble uses.
Hence when English became the language of our Statute
Book, as the term viscount had then come to signify &
dignity without an office, and the title of * sheriff" was
to be recoined, it was coupled in our Statute Book with
the term *'county," notwithstanding the tautology of
the phrase "sheriff of & county." . Further it would
appear as if the vitality of the word * sheriff" had been
due to its debased use in common parlance, and it failed
on its revival to secure for the king's representative
in the county à proper place in publie estimation, so
that it was found expedient to revive another AÁnglo-
Saxon title, that of high sheriff (Heahgerefa), and to
distinguish the sheriff of & county from other sheriffs
by the distinctive appellation of high sheriff.


INTRODUCTION. xxii


If I should be asked, then, why I have rendered the
Latin title of vicecomes, wherever it occurs in Bracton's
Summa, by the Norman-French title of viscount instead
of the Anglo-Saxon title of sheriff, my answer is that
the vicecomes of the Angevin monarchs differed so much
from the Seirgerefa, that it is well to mark the difference
by the use of the distinguishing term of viscount. It
Is & mistake, in my opinion, to contend for à formal
continuity of Anglo-Saxon institutions. "The viceconies
of the Angevin monarchs was a very different personage
from the scirgerefa of the Anglo-Saxon period. Under
the reign ,of Edgar it was the ealdorman who presided
twice in the year in the shiremoot conjointly with the
bishop (Laws of Edgar IL, $ 5) This enactment is
repeated nearly in identieal words by King Canute in
his Secular Dooms, G. 18. The scirgerefa, on the other
hand, was the executive officer of the shire who carried
into execution the judgments of the shiremoot in civil
and criminal matters. Under the Angevin monarchs
the ealdorman had disappeared from the political stago,
and the bishop had abdieated his joint presidency in
the county court, whilst the vicecomes in the name of
the king presided over the freeholders of the county,
both in their monthly courts and in their six-monthly
tourns. Further, the vicecomes had become the chief
fiscal officer of the Crown within the county, and he had
the command of the fyrd, which in Anglo-Saxon times
could only be summoned by the ealdorman. I may cite
in illustration of the military authority of the vicecomes,
the conduct of Ranulph de Glanville, who as viscount of
the county of York called out the armed force of that
county during the absence of King Henry II. in Norma ndy,
in order to resist the invading army of the King of
Seota, overtook King William at, Alnwick, took him and
his army by surprise, and captured the King himself
with the chief nobles of his court, and thereby put an

end to the war. It was on this occasion that Ranulph


XXlV INTRODUCTION,


de Glanville did such good service at the head of his
knights, that he commended himself to the king's favour-
able notice, and so was enabled to plant his foot on the
first step of the ladder, by which he subsequently as-
cended to the post of chief justiciar of the kingdom.

It is also worthy of remark that the office of viscount
of a county had been very much reduced in importance
in the interval between the reign of Henry III. and that
of Henry VIL, when the title of sheriff superseded it.
From the date of the Inquest on the Viscounts in 1170,
which Henry II. instituted in consequence of the loud
complaints against their exactions,it had been the policy
of the Crown to lower the dignity of the office by dis-
continuing the practice of appointing local magnates to it,
and by replacing them by officers of the king's exchequer.
Further by the assise of Northampton in 1176 the king's -
justiciaries were authorised to exercise & control over
the viscounts, not merely in matters strictly judicial,
but in their character of farmers of the Crown revenues.
How searching were the enquiries of the justiciaries into
the extortionate practices of the viscounts may be
learned from the Articles of Enquiry set out by Bracton
himself in his Treatise de Corona (chapter IL) to be
exhibited by the justiciaries to the jurors of the assise.
Similar articles were exhibited in the reign of Edward I.,
which will be found printed in the appendix to my
second volume. Canon Stubbs has published amongst
his Select Charters the text of the Articles of Enquiry of
1170 from & manuscript in the Bodleian Library (Raw-
linson C. 641), and upon comparing them with the
articles which Bracton represents to have been in use in
the reign of Henry IIL, it seems probable that the articles
drawn up in 1170, respecting which we know very little,
were model articles, which it became part of the normal
business of the king's justiciaries on future occasions to
exhibit to the jurors of each county in the course of
their iter. Edward I. commenced a reform in the manner


INTRODUCTION, XXV


of appointing the viscounts, by authorising the freeholders
of each county, where the office of viscount was not
hereditary, to elect. their viscount, but this practice was
not attended with satisfactory results, and Edward II.
was content with enacting that the viscount should
thenceforth be a landholder within the county, but his
nomination should rest with the chancellor, treasurer,
and barons of the exchequer together with the justi-
eiaries, and in the absence of the chancellor with the
treasurer &nd barons of the exchequer together with
the justiciaries. Here and there, however, the hereditary
eharacter of the office of vicecomes was maintained in
certain families even after the title of sheriff had come
into general use in England. The last Earl of Thanet
was hereditary sheriff of Westmoreland within the
memory of living persons, just as the office of vice
comes in Scotland, introduced by William the Conqueror,
and noticed under that name in the Latin Statutes of
the Seotch Kings and in the * Regiam Majestatem,"
continued to be an heritable office, even after the title of
* schireff" had been substituted for that of vicecomes in
the reign of James IV. (1509). But strange to say the
Crown in Scotland, instead of abolishing the hereditary
character of the territorial vicecomes, preferred to set up
& king's sheriff by the side of him, and appointed the
king's sheriff to reside in the county with a view to
look after the revenues of the Crown, and to see that
justice was properly administered in the local courts.
It was not until the middle of the last century that by
an Act of Parliament called the Heritable Jurisdiction
Act ( A.D. 1748), the hereditary shirewicks were abolished,
and whilst the office of principal or high sheriff was
a&nnexed to the Crown, the judicial functions of the
ancient vicecomes were devolved upon a nominee of the
Crown under the title of the sheriff depute, paid by a
salary from the Crown and holding his office ad vitem
aut ad, culpam.


xXvl INTRODUCTION.


The nomenclature of the English law is almost more :


perplexing as to its origin than the nomenclature of
English State-institutions. ^ Earl, sheriff, and county
are without difficulty traced to Danish, Anglo-Saxon,
and Norman sources, but Braeton in his treatise on
Entry introduces us to the term *'firmarius," of which
we have no mention in Glanville's work, and the origin
of which is & matter of irreconcileable dispute amongst
antiquaries. The word firmarius is used by Bracton to
signify & termor or the lessee of & tenement for & term,
but we find it applied in the earliest extant Pipe Roll,
long supposed to have been a relie of king Stephen's
Exchequer, but now accepted as a roll of 31 Henry I,
to the contract between the king and the vicecomes,
who was said to "farm" the revenues of the Crown arising
within the county, and had to account to the king's
exchequer annually pro firma comitatus. Many persons
are disposed to regard the word " firma" as a Low Latin
translation of the Anglo-Saxon " feorme," whilst others
hold that the term "ferme" is an. Anglicised rendering
of the Roman "firma, and that the Anglian settlers
in Britain found the contract *ad firmam" already
known there, and adopted it as establishing à most con-
venient relation between themselves and the conquered
cultivators of the soil. That the system of pledging land
as a security for money, which was known to the Roman
law by the term *invadiation, was introduced into
England by the Romans, may be gathered from Xiphi-
linus, the Greek translator of Dio Cassius. This author
informs us that the violent seizure of the lands of the
British chiefs by Seneca in the reign of the Emperor
Nero, under the pretext that they had forfeited them
by failing to pay off certain loans of money which he
had induced them to to accept on the security of their
lands, was the cause of the insurrection of the Iceni
under their Queen Boadicea, which for & time threatened


INTRODUCTION. xxvil


to be fatal to Roman supremacy in Britain. It is higlily
probable that many traditions of the Roman law sur-
vived the settlement of the Anglians in Britain. The
contracts of borrowing and lending, of hireing and
letting are institutions of natural law, which positive
law may modify but cannot suppress, and when once
the cultivated reason of the jurist has moulded those
contracts into a form suitable to the wants of & people
and ecustom has hallowed his work, it is as much the
interest of the conquering host as of the conquered
people to maintain the established practice in such
matters, for its maintenance may be indispensable to
secure to the conqueror the tranquil enjoyment of the
fruits of his conquest.

Irrespective of these considerations the economical
convenience of the consensual contract of the lease was
of such universal application, and had struck such deep
roots into every part of the Roman Empire before it
was overrun by the Germanic tribes, that economical
science forbids us to suppose that the system of leasing
land for a produce rent originated in England with the
followers of Hengist and of Horsa. I speak of the thing
now as distinct from the name, nor do I conceive that
the admission of the Roman origin of the locatio fundi
goes to determine in any way that the Ánglian " ferme,"
is derived from the medieval Latin * firma." That the
system of the "ferme" existed in England before the
Norman Conquest is historically certain, and it is equally
certain that the Normans left it behind them in the
Norman Duchy precisely as it is certain that they found
it in existence in the province of Neustria, when Rollo
and his followers first landed there. What may have
been the title by which it was popularly described in
the Norman tongue may be open to discussion, but we
find it described in the Norman French of the most
ancient collection of Norman customs under the title of
* loage " and & century later under the title of * ferme."


xxvili INTRODUCTION,


There ean be little doubt that the term *'loage " repre-
sented the "locatio publica" of the Roman law, and
that the Normans were content to build upon the old
. foundation of a civilisation earlier than their own, but
how the title of *ferme" came into use and replaced
that of loage may require & more careful investigation.
The word *feorme" comes of an Anglo-Saxon stock.
It is represented by lexicographers to be synonymous
with food or agricultural produce, and the verb * feor-
mian" is accordingly held to signify to *supply with
*' food or provisions." What may be the root of the word
I do not pretend to say, nor do I find that the latest
edition of Ducange's Glossary goes further than to derive
the Latin '*'firma " from the Anglo-Saxon " feorme," and
it quotes a passage from Henry of Huntingdon, to this
effect, * Mandavitque regi, quod ad firmam suam pro-
* perans cibos salsatos sufficienter inveniret, alios
* secum deferre curaret."  'This passage is found jin
Henry of Huntingdon's Historia Ánglorum under the
year A.D. 1064, and it represents Earl Tosti, the brother
of Harold, to have made an assault on & house, which his
brother had fitted up at Hereford for the reception of the
king, and to have slaughtered all the servants, and to
have placed their mutilated limbs in dishes and vases as
if served up for à banquet to receive the king, and then
to have sent a message to the king to the effect that he
should come to his * ferme," where he would find plenty
of salt provisions, but he must bring fresh provisions with
him, if he wanted them. This reference of the lexico-
grapher is not & very happy one, as we do not know
from what Anglo-Saxon Chronicle Henry of Huntingdon
borrowed the Tosti legend, and it has been suggested
by the late Henry Petrie, Esq., Keeper of the Records
of the Tower, that he has attributed to Earl Tosti & raid
made by Prince Caradoc of Wales on & well stored house
at Hereford prepared by Harold for the reception of
King Edward. The Saxon Chronicle is altogether silent


INTRODUCTION. XXlX


as to any such outrage on the part of Earl Tosti. But
if we carry our researches & little further back in the
Saxon Chronicle, we shall find ourselves standing on
more solid ground, on which also Henry of Huntingdon
has built up another part of his narrative. Under the
year of our Lord 1006 the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle
supplies us with two valuable illustrations of the use
of this term *feorme." "The Anglo-Saxon text of the
Chronicle, with the English translation, has been prinved
in the valuable collection of materials for the History of
Britain, which the late Sir Thomas Duffus Hardy has
published under the title of Monumenta Historica
Britannica: The first passage occurs in the course of
a narrative of & Danish invasion, in which, speaking
of the foreign army, the chronicler says, * When it
became winter, theu went the forces home ; and the
" army then came over St. Martin's mass to their ' frith-
* * stole, Wiht-land, and procured for themselves there
'" from all parts that which they needed. And then
at midwinter they went to their ready feorme out
* through Hampshire into Berkshire to Reading; and
" they did their old wont; they lighted their war-
* beacons as they went" And further on, * But there
* might the Winchester men see an army daring and fear-
less, as they went by their gates towards the sea and
* fetched themselves food and treasures over fifty miles
* from the sea. Then had the king gone over Thames
* into Shropshire and there took his feorme during the
* midwinter'* tide." I &m not aware of any earlier
instance of the use of the word * feorme," and it would
seem that, if the word "*feorme" in its origin signified
agricultural produce, it is in both these passages of the
Saxon Chronicle used to signify a "store" of such
produce, and such I am personally disposed to think
was its primitive use. Now, Henry, Archdeacon of
Huntingdon, uses the Saxon chronicle as the basis of


his work on the history of England, the first edition
Q 6366. c


6t


XXX INTRODUCTION.


of which he published in 1135, bringing it down to the
death of king Henry I. He subsequently published a
second edition, which he brought down to the accession
of Henry IL, and which has been recently edited by
Mr. Thomas Arnold of University College, Oxford, as
part of the Rolls series. He describes the ravages com-
mitted by the army of Sweyn, king of the Danes, in
its march through Hampshire and Berkshire to Reading,
where it devoured everything that was in readiness,
" quocunque autem pergebant, quz parata erant, hilariter
* eomedentes," and then he goes on to say, evidently
following the narrative of the Saxon Chronicle, * Vidit
* igitur gens Wincestre exercitum hostilem, superbum
* et audacem, juxta portas urbis transeuntem, et cibum
quem ultra L. milliaria à mari conquisiverat, et spolia
* qua & bello victis acceperat, secum deferentem. Rex
* gutem ÁAdelred cum mszstitia et confusione erat ad
* firmam suam, in Salopscire, sepe rumorum sauciatus
" aculeis It isa reasonable inference that Henry of.
Huntingdon employs the term "firma" in this passage
as the equivalent in his opinion of the Anglo-Saxon
*feorme," notwithstanding that the Latin term firma
had in his time acquired a secondary meaning, namely,
& contribution of produce instead of & store of produce.
This secondary use of the word "firma" occurs first of
all in the Domesday of William the Conqueror, of which
the date is probably A.D. 1086, and which speaks of the
* firma" of king Ethelred and of king Edward, but the
same observation will apply to the use of such a term,
as applies to the use of the term vicecomes in the
reputed laws of Edward the Confessor. The compilers
of the Domesday used the term * firma" in the secondary
sense which it had acquired in the Norman period, namely,
as the money consideration from the county or the town
in lieu of & contribution of produce for the king's use.
This commutation money had come to be termed * Firma
" Alba" being payable in silver. But neither the


INTRODUCTION. xxxl


Domesday nor any Anglo-Saxon law speaks of the
firma of & shire except in connection with & king,
and itis not too bold a conjecture to assume that the
origin of the ** feorme " or store of produce in each shire
was traceable to the fact, that the king found it necessary
to have stores of produce collected in certain localities
for the support of himself and his court, when he
máde à progress. Such is also the probable explanation
of the manorial parishes of the archbishops and the
bishops, which formed suitable halting places for them
in making their visitations. The '"feorme" of the king
in each county was accordingly in the first instance &
store of produce collected for the use of the king when
he came into the county; or transmitted to him else-
where in kind for the support of himself and his court.
In the next stage it was the annual rent or commutation
money paid to the king by the vicecomes, and called
the *ferm" of the county, for which the viscount had
to account to the king's exchequer in Westminster, and
in respect of which the vicecomes was the firmarius
of the king's dues. He was not, however, & volunteer
like the publicunus of the Roman system, nor was he
a conductor of the king's revenues; but the Norman
lawyers at once perceived &he analogy between the
Anglo-Saxon ferm, and the locatio publica of the Roman
law, and they saw no good reason for disturbing the
system which had been instituted by the Anglo-Saxon
kings. But although the "locatio publica" was at
once recognised by the Norman kings, and the *' firma "
of the county eonstituted an important branch of the
revenues of the Crown, no mention of the recognition
of *locationes privatae" by the Curia Regis occurs
before the time of Bracton. They were regarded as
outside the strict pale of the feudal system, and it would
seem that in the reign of Henry II. any account between
& fermor of land &nd the owner of the land, to whom
the fermor did not owe homage, had to be tried in the
c 2


xxxli INTRODUCTION.


manor court, and according to Glanville no appeal lay
to the king's court. Thus OGlanville in the concluding
chapter of his tenth book after discussing the contract
of locatio conducto, says :—

* Predictos vero contractus, qui ex privatorum con-
* sensu fiunt, breviter transigimus, quia, ut predictum
* est, privatas conventiones non solet curia domini
* regis tueri, et quidem de talibus contractibus, qui
* quasi private quedam conventiones censeri possunt,
" se non intromittit curia domini regis, L. X. c. 18."

If the above view of the relations between the Anglo-
Saxon word '"feorme" and the Latin word '* firma" be
correct, and the contract * ad firmam" was & contract
to pay so much produce annually for the use of the soil
or an equivalent in money, then we must suppose that
the relation of & firmarius to the owner of the soil was
either a graft upon the feudal institutions of the Norman
land system, or had continued to exist by the side of
them. There can be little doubt that à considerable
quantity of land forming the endowment of churches
and of religious houses was allowed by the Conqueror
to be leased out to cultivators of the soil upon.condition
of their supplying to the church or to the religious
house & certain proportion of the produce of the soil
So long as the church or the religious house fulfilled
its feudal obligation of furnishing one or more knights
with their followers to recruit the forces of the royal
army, the king was not solicitous to interfere in iis
private conventions with the cultivators of its lands,
and the king's courts were content to ignore any disputes
founded on such conventions. Such seems to have been
the condition of things even in the latter years of the
reign of Henry IL. when Glanvilles work was com-
posed.

To what circumstance may we attribute the change
in the practice of the curia regis, which Bracton ex-
pounds &t considerable length? Is it to be attributed


INTRODUCTION xxxiii


to the infiltration of Roman notions unto the feudal
system of land tenure in England, or is the *feorme" a
contract as old as the notion of private property in land,
and was itin this case an Anglo-Saxon form of tenure,
which was again coming into general use during the
Angevin period, and was gradually superseding the
system of the feud? In the Eastern Empire a grcat
change had taken place in the system of land tenure
in the reign of the Emperor Zeno (474—491) by the
introduction of the contract of emphyteusis, with the
economical object of encouraging the clearing of land
and its cultivation, in order to meet the growing demands
for agricultural produce on the part of an increasing
population. There are some persons who regard the
feudal system of land tenure as & barbaric adaptation of
the contract of emphyteusis, and hold the term * feud "
to be nothing more than a corrupt abbreviation of
emphyteusis, & contract which the Franks found ready
at hand, when they overran Gaul, and which they made
the basis of their military system. The contract, how-
ever, of emphyteusis was unknown to the Theodosian
code, which was alone received in England before the
Anglo-Saxon invasion, whilst the contract of locatio
conductio was well known to that code, and the system
of locationes privatam was recognised by the Roman
tribunals long before the Romans evacuated Britain.
There is no difticulty therefore in regarding the system
of leasing land for & term in England as & Roman insti-
tution, precisely as the invadiation of land was introduced
into England by the Roman usurers, who followed in
the train of the Roman proconsuls, and it inherits from
the Roman law in the present day its appellation of
" mortgage," the Norman equivalent of the Latin * mor-
* tuum vadium."

Another explanation of the importance, which the
" locatio privata " of land had acquired in Bracton's time
as contrasted with that of Glanville, may be sought in


XXXlV INTRODUCTION.


the vast expansion which the specific jurisprudence of
eontract had acquired under the teaching of the law
school of Bologna. Glanville treats the debt *ex causa
* locati et conducti" as founded on & private conven-
tion, which the king's court did not recognise as the
ground of an action at law, whereas in Bracton's time
the convention had been elevated into & contract, which
could be the foundation either of an actio locati or an
actio conducti in the Curia Regis  Feudalism was no
doubt founded on the early Roman conception of &
contract, but it was essentially unsocial towards the
later offspring of the same parent, and it acknowledged
no kinship with them. "The result was that as the law
of contract became developed and new facts or conven-
tions came to be enforced in the more advanced stages
of Roman jurisprudence, there grew up a family of legal
contracts outside the feudal pale and cast in another
mould than that of personal service. The Statute of
Merton passed in the 18th year of King Henry III.
gave & great impulse to the application of the contract
of locatio conductio " to land, inasmuch as it empowered
the owners of the soil to convert into arable land
extensive districts, over which their feudal tenants had
heretofore enjoyed & common right of pasture, and on
that ground had barred for & long time the insertion
of the ploughshare into any part of them. It is probable
that the king's justiciaries, one of whom, William de
Ralegh, had drawn up the Statute of Merton, thought
it inconsistent with the due administration of justice to
leave the settlement of disputes arising out of the new
forms of contract solely to the jurisdiction of the
manorial courts.

The term * mortgage" has been already alluded to
as & Norman equivalent of the Latin term * mortuum
* vadium." This is à remarkable instance of the caprice
of English legal nomenclature, for this barbarous term
* mortgage" has not merely survived to our time, but


INTRODUCTION. XXXV


having passed into the chrysalis state it has acquired
the butterfly form, and would fail to be recognised by
the jurists of Glanvilles time, who probably under the
influence of the new teaching of the Canonists had come
to regard the contract of * mortuum vadium " as usurious,
and had agreed to stamp it out. The term * mortuum
" vadium," however, seems to have had a special vitality,
and the mortgage of the present day is treated with all
becoming consideration in the highest courts of the
Crown.

The custom of pledging lands, which the Anglo-Saxon
invaders brought with them into Britain, was no novelty
to the earlier inhabitants of the island. "There can be
no doubt that the older Roman law permitted the owner
of land to pledge it with the stipulation, that the
creditor should retain the property in satisfaction of the
debt, if the debt should not be paid in accordance with
the conditions of the loan. I have already alluded to
& passage in Xiphilinus, from which it would appear
that the usurers in the train of the Roman proconsuls
made the British chiefs familiar with this stipulation
in the reign of Nero. À century and & half later intro-
duces to us Papinian, one of the most famous of the
great jurists of the Eastern Empire, occupying the
highest seat of judgment as prsefectus pretorio at York
in the reign of the Emperor Septimius Severus (195-211).
By & curious coincidence & passage exists in & MS. dis-
covered in the early part of the present century by
Angelo Maii at Rome, and published amongst the '* Vati-
* cana. Fragmenta " by Bethmann-Holweg in 1833,
which gives us the law as laid down by Papinian :

* Creditor & debitore pignus rite emit, sive in exordio
"* contractus ita convenit, sive postea Nec incerti
* prefii venditio videbitur, si convenerit, ut pecunia
* foeenoris non soluta creditor jure empti dominium
* retineat, cum sortis et usurarum quantitas ad diem
"* solvendz pecunie prestitutam certa sit."


xxxvi INTRODUCTION.


The pawning or pigneration of land was thus evidently
common in Britain, and the enforcement of the contract:
by the Imperial tribunals was & matter of course before
the Romans evacuated the island, and as the habit of
pledging their lands was prevalent amongst the Ger-
manie tribes, the Anglo-Saxons brought no new practice
in that respect with them into Britain, neither was it
& novelty to the Norman invaders as they left it behind
them in Normandy. Whether the objection to the ** mor-
* tuum vadium " as an usurious transaction, which pre-
vailed in Glanvilles time, had also a Roman origin is
open to discussion, inasmuch as the Emperor Constantine,
in pursuance of his system for the abolition of usury,
. forbade the further application of the:old Roman law of
pigneration to land, and substituted & novel law of
hypothec. That Constantine's legislation met with a cer-
tain acceptation in the courts of the Western Empire is
not improbable, but that it influenced the practice of the
courts in Britain to such an extent as to bring about
the condemnation of the " mortuum vadium" as an
usurious transaction is, I think, untenable, for the new
law of hypothec would in that case have assuredly be-
come established in England under the same influence,
but of this latter law we do not find the slightest trace.
For all] these reasons it is quite intelligible that we
should find the old Roman law of pigneration recognised
and enforced in its application to land by the curia
regis &t the earliest period, when we have any certain
knowledge of its procedure. Thus Glanville in discuss-
ing the contract of *" mutuum" on the security of a
pledge, says : |

* Creditur quoque mutuo res aliqua sub vadii posi-
* tione, quod cum fit, quandoque res mobiles, ut ca-
* talla, ponuntur in vadium, quandoque res imniobiles,
* ut terre et tenementa, et redditus sive in denariis
.* give in aliis rebus consistentes ;" and in the next
section he adds, * Item invadiatur res quandoque ad ter-


INTRODUCTION. xxxvii
* minum, quandoque sine termino: item quandoque
" jinvadiatur res in mortuo vad?io, quandoque non.
* Mortuum vadium dicitur illud, cujus fructus vel
* redditus, interim percepti, in nullo se acquietent."
Lib. X. cap. vi. $ 1 and 2.

Further, Glanville goes on to state that the mortgagce
is bound not to allow the thing mortgaged to become
deteriorated, whilst it is in his possession, and if it be
land, which requires some expenses to be incurred either
by feeding cattle upon it or by manuring it, such ex-
penses must be matter of convention between the crei-
torand the debtor. "This looks very like early Roman
law arrested in its growth by the feudal system, which
kept out of England the relaxations introduced by the
later Imperial system, under which the courts were
empowered to award such expenses as to them might
seem reasonable. | But whence arose the expression
" mortuum vadium"? We are forbidden to refer it to an
ecclesiastical source, unless indeed it was a term of recent
origin in Glanville's time, invented by the clerical judges
with a view to disceredit & species of pawn, which the
Church condemned and which it was desirous that
the curia regis should. discountenance. — And thus it
happened that Glanville, after again laying it down that
the curia regis ignored all such transactions as private
conventions, proceeds to define the * mortuum vadium " .
more precisely.

*Cum vero res immobilis ponitur in vadium, ita
" quod inde facta fuerit seisina ipsi creditori et ad
* terminum, aut it& convenit inter creditorem et debi-
* torem, quod exitus et redditus interim se acquie-
" tent, aut sic, quod in nullo se acquietent. Prima
" eonventio justa est et tenet, secunda injusta est et
inhonesta, que dicitur mortuwwm vadvwm, sed per
* euriam domini regis non prohibetur fieri, et. tamen
* reputat eam pro specie usure. Unde si quis in tali


[11


xxxviii INTRODUCTION.

* vadio decesserit et post mortem ejus hoc fuerit pro-
* batum, de rebus ejus non aliter disponetur, quam
* de rebus usurari." LL. X. c. viii. $ 6.

It would appear as if the discredit, into which the
contract of * mortuum vadium " had thus fallen in Glan-
ville's time, coupled with the possible confiscation of the
land to the Crown, if it was still in the mortgagee's
possession at his death, had caused it to be discontinued,
and that instead of an explicit. invadiation of land the
practice in Braeton's time was to substitute a conditional
donation, namely a donation of land, which should cease
to be operative, if the donor should pay back to the
donee & certain sum of money on & given day. In like
manner Britton ignores the term * mortgage " and treats
of the contract under the head of conditional gifts, when '
he says, *if a gift is made on such & condition, that, if
* the donor shall pay so much on & certain day and at
* & certain place, the gift shall return to the donor, and
« if not, the land shall remain in fee with the creditor
* and his heirs" L.IT. ch. v. $ 14. Nevertheless Brac-
ton does not altogether discard the use of the term
* pignus," nor does Britton discard the use of the term
* gage " as descriptive of land, of which & donation had
been made subject to the condition, that the land should
be conveyed back to the donor on his refunding the
purchase money. It might have been expected that the
discredit into which the term * mortuum vadium " had
fallen during the Ángevin period would have caused it
to be expunged from the vocabulary of English law, yet
strange to say the term was rehabilitated by Littleton
and Coke, who must have lost sight of its origin, and
under their countenance it has come back into use as&
generie term for a conditional donation of land, whether
the fruits of the land are to go to the mortgagor or to
the mortgagee pending the- refunding of the purchase
money. Lord Coke must have been & master of dry


INTRODUCTION. xXXIX


humour, if he was not ignorant of the real origin of the
phrase, when he endorsed Littleton's novel exposition
of the term, that it signified that the estate was dead
for ever to the mortgagor, if he failed to fulfil the con-
ditions under which he had pledged it.

It has been suggested by an able writer on law that
the term '" vadium mortuum" in its application to the
* pigneratio" of land may have been borrowed from the
Anglo-Saxon law of distress (naam). The author of the
Mirroir des Justices says:

* Deux maniers sont de Naams, naam morte sicome
* des blees, vine et autres tielx chateix, et naam vief
" sicome de home, beste et tielx vife choses."

Upon this hypothesis the term * vadium imnortuum "
would properly be applicable to every invadiation of
land as being a dead. pledge for the debt, but Glanville's
explanation of the phrase is supported by the Ancienne
Coutume de Normandie, of which &n admirable edition has
been very recently published by Mr. William Laurence
de Gruchy, juré-justicier of the Royal Court of the
island of Jersey. The Latintext of this ancient '*cou-
tume," which was probably coinpiled in its present form
towards the end of the thirteenth century, is to this
effect, p. 273: |

*^ Notandum insuper est, quod vadiorum quoddam
^ vivum, quoddam mortuum nuncupatur — Mortuum
* autem dicitur vadium, quod se de nihilo redimit vel
* gequitat, ut terra tradita in vadium pro centum so-
*' ]idis, quam cum obligator rehabere voluerit, acceptam
*" pecuniam restituit in solidum. Vivum autem dicitur
* vgdium, quod ex suis proventibus acquitatur, ut
* terra tradita in vadium pro centum solidis usque ad
* tres annos, qus&, elapso anno tertio, reddenda est ob-
* ligatori; vel tradita in vadium quousque pecunia
* recepta de ejusdem proventibus fuerit persoluta."


) Jersey : Charles Le Fevere, St. Helier, 1881.


xl INTRODUCTION,


Baeked by this authority, Glanville's explanation of
the phrase * vadium mortuum " has very strong claims
upon our acceptance as presumably correct, and, further,
it may be assumed that the phrase * vadium mortuum "'
was of Roman origin, for no mention of it occurs in the
earliest collection of Etablissements et Coutumes de Nor-
mandie, published for the first time in 1839 by M. Marnier
from a manuscript now in the National Library in Paris,
but formerly in the library of Sainte Genevieve.

Bracton's work, for reasons which are not known to
us, has not been completed in aecordance with his original
design, as avowed in several places. For instance, in
his treatise De Actionibus, f. 105. b., he promises to treat
below of the plea of forbidden distresses (placitum de
vetito namii), which he has omitted to do. We are not
therefore entitled to infer from the silence of Bracton
touching the pledge of land under the condition that the
mortgagee was to take the fruits of the land without
setting them off against the debt, that it had totally fallen
into desuetude in his time ; and perhaps Lord Coke, in his
antipathy to the Norman element of the law of England,
was interested in repudiating the ancient interpretation
of the phrase, as being à Norman perversion of it, On
the other hand, & more recent school of jurists have
wandered further away from Glanville, and have con-
tended that the * mortuum vadium " was introduced into
England upon the common law principle of conditions,
rather than after the Roman doctrine of the pignus.
Why such a strained view of the origin of the contract
of mortgage should have been adopted by & writer so
learned as Hargrave it is not easy to divine, unless it
was considered by him to furnish to the courts of the
Crown a groundwork for favoring the equity of redemp-
tion as against the right of foreclosure in cases, where
the conditions of redemption had been imperfectly stated
in the mortgage deed. A writ of entry, according to
Bracton, proceeded in such a case upon the assumption


INTRODUCTION. xli


that the tenant, against whom it had becn sued out, held
the land for a term which had passed, upon which writ,
however, & plea might be given in by the tenant, which
at once challenged the title of the claimant, and converted
the proceedings into a trial of right, precisely as if they
had been commenced by &a writ of right.

Bracton proceeds in the next following book to treat
of the plea of Right (de Recto), and the first treatise is ex-
iremely interesting from the light which it throws upon
the process, by which & new spirit was infused into the
feudal institutions by the Crown authorising the viscount
to hold cognisance of pleas of right in the county court
in the first instance, when the lord's court was in default,
and by the Crown in cases, where there was just ground,
allowing the argument to be transferred from the county
court to the curia regis. There is a slight variation ob-
servable in the title which is prefixed to this book in
Tottell's edition, as compared with the title in the table
of contents. The latter coincides with the title in the
Rawlinson MS., C. 160. It is possible that the title in
Tottell's edition is not & part of the original work ; but
if that be the case, then it may be conjectured with good
reason that the fifth book was originally a treatise De
Recto, of which the respective treatises De Essoniis, De
Defaltis, and De Exceptionibus were component parts.
It would be premature to discuss this question on the
present occasion, as the bulk of the fifth book will form
the sixth and last volume of the present edition, and it
will have sufficed for my immediate purpose to have
called the reader's attention to the title of the fifth book.
I may, however, notice that the treatises, to which dis-
tinguishing titles are prefixed in Tottell's edition, are con-
tinued, in MS. Rawlinson, C. 160, without any dis-
tinguishing title, as if they were constituent parts of the
Tractatus de Recto. |

lt seems not improbable, that in Bracton's time the
courts of the lords of the sinaller manors were becoming


xli INTRODUCTION.


inefficient from an increasing reluctance on the part of
the tenants of the manor to obey the summons of the
bailliff to do suit at the manor court, in other words to
attend and form & court. Other causes also were in
operation to render the minor courts unequal to their
original duties; in some cases the lords were unwilling,
in others they were unable to do full justice to the plain-
tiff, as i6 was necessary that both parties should live
within the manor to found the jurisdiction of its court.
It would seem, accordingly, as if the first step on the part
of the Crown had been to constitute the court of the
viscount & superior court to hear the complaints of
parties, where the inferior court had made default. The
process of change, whereby the viscount drew into his
court all questions of proprietary right, was gradual.
The Crown did not in the first place set aside the
manorial court, where the lord was willng and able
to declare the right between the parties, but only where
after due notice from the serjeant of the king the
inferior court continued in default. Further, we learn
from Hengham Magna, ch. 3, that most lords were con-
tent to waive their jurisdiction respecting titles to land,
as little profit accrued to them from holding such pleas
in their courts. Whenever, therefore, the manorial court,
continued in default the viscount was authorised by &
writ of the Crown to assume jurisdiction over the case,
but even in this stage of the proceedings the lord might
appeal to the king's justiciaries to stay proceedings in
the viscount's court, which in most cases they refused to
do. Further, the course of proceeding in the viscount's
court, when it had been set in motion by & claimant, was
extremely considerate towards the tenant in giving him
full time to appear and to defend his tenancy, and each
viscount's court had to observe the customs of the county,
which the king's justiciaries on appeal treated with the
greatest respect. So far each county retained one of the
characteristies 'of the ancient shire, namely, a formal


-


INTRODUCTION. xliii


independence in its manner of giving effect to new prin-
ciples in the administration of justice under & king's
officer instead of its ancient ealdorman. It would
appear that in & plea of right in the viscount's court
i6 was competent for the claimant or the tenant to
maintain his title either by wager of battle or by
putting himself on & great assise,in which latter case
a writ of peace might be sued out by the tenant to
suspend further proceedings until the coming of the
king's justiciaries. Meanwhile à writ had to be taken
out by the claimant for the viscount to summon four
knights, who should choose on their oath twelve of the
more loyal knights of the visne to make a recognition
at the next iter of the king's justiciaries, and so care-
fully was the judiciwm parium kept in view, that, if the
tenant held in gavelkind the four knights were to be
chosen from such persons as held in gavelkind, and they
were to choose twelve recognisors who also held in
gavelkind. It was competent, however, for either the
claimant or the tenant to petition the Crown for & writ
to transfer the cause from the viscount's court to the
king's court. This writ was granted, at the prayer
of the claimant, where the tenant belonged to a privi-
leged order, such as the Templars or the Hospitallers,
who were not bound to answer to any plea except before
the king himself or his chief justiciary, or wherever the
viscount was himself interested or the question of right
was very diffieult to determine. Further, where battle
had been joined in the county court contrary to the cus-
tom of the realm the cause might be removed from the
county court to the royal court on petition of either of
the parties. Bracton is silent as to any penalty to be
incurred by the viscount for failing to do justice to &
plaintiff in the county court, but Britton lays it down
thatif any viscount or his deputy failed to do justice to
& plaintiff, if he farmed his office, he was punishable by
fine and imprisonment; but if he held his office in fee he


xliv INTRODUCTION.


should lose his franchise and make satisfaction to the
plaintiffin damages  L. VI. ch. iv. $ 8.

Two rules of practice, which have been observed in
English courts until very recently, are traditions of Brac-
ton's time. According to one the service of & summons
was to be made upon the defendant at his principal
domicile, where he had several domiciles in à county ;
&ccording to the other, an interval of fifteen days was to
be allowed to elapse between the service of a summons
and the necessary appearance of the party in court; but.
both these rules were heirlooms of the early Roman
settlers in Britain, which the Anglian immigration was
glad to maintain. There were, however, in Bracton's
time certain cases of exception, where a defendant might
be summoned to appear within a shorter interval ihan
that of fifteen days, as for instance in cases of vacant
churches, where lapse might take place under the decree
of the Council of Lateran, or in the case of merchants
who eould not wait for tardy justice, and to whom
justice was on that account administered in courts of
pepoudrous. But in all cases where & party was served
with a summons to appear within fifteen days he was
entitled to essoin himself, and Bracton accordingly pro-
ceeds to discuss the nature of essoins in the next fol-
lowing treatise. It may deserve notice that the last
sentence of Bracton's first treatise on à writ of Right
does not oecur in MS. Rawlinson, C. 160, whilst it
neither seems apposite to the place where it is inserted,
nor is the promise of Bracton to discuss it hereafter
fulfilled. — Britton also, L. VI. ch. iv. 5 11, seems to have
been misled by the passage in. Bracton, and to have in-
serted in his text a similar promise, which Mr. Nichols
in his edition of Britton, vol. 11, p. 333, has commented
upon as not having been fulfilled by Britton.

The second treatise of the fifth book treats of essoins,
& term of law of which the origin is somewhat obscure,
for it is difficult to accept Sir Henry Spelman's deriva-


INTRODUCTION. xlv


tion: Essonium or exonium from er privativum and
80?ng cura, that is, ab angustia, cura, vel labore libe-
rare. The noun " essonium " seems to have been used in
Bracton's time to signify an excuse for not appearing in
court to a summons, and £he verb *essoniare" to make
excuse on behalf of & person for not appearing in
court to & summons. "The same train of thought which
has suggested that "feud" is & Frank abbreviation of
*emphyteusis " has suggested that "essoin" is derived
from the Greek :£»vota,, whilst other etymologists have
discovered in '" essoniare" & medieval corruption of the
Latin exonerare, and cite in support of their view
the Norman form of the word *exoine" But it is
probable that the primary meaning of the word '' essoin "
was not an excuse for not &ppearing, but an obstacle,
which prevented the party summoned from appearing in
court on the day appointed, and that the earliest form of
the word was '*soinus," which was & Latinised fori of
the Germanic *sonnis." Thus to carry back our inquiry
systematically, let us commence with the Costumal known
as the Laws of Henry IL, which, although it may have
been compiled at & period subsequent to the reign of
that king, purports to be framed upon the customs of
his time. We find in these laws several instances of the
use of the word " soinus," of which the following passage
may be selected as an illustration :——

*S$1 de nominatis placitis terminum non susceperat,
" nisi competens sonus eum detineat, et non venerit,
" omnium reus sit, de quibus placitum suscepit."

I have quoted the above passage from the text of the
Ancient Laws and Institutes of England as edited by
Thorpe, who refers his readers to another reading of the
word, namely *essoinus" as found in MSS. Selden and
Twysden. I prefer, however, the reading of " soinus,"
as it connects the language of the Ánglo-Saxon law more
immediately with that of the Capitularies of the Emperor


Charlemagne and with the Laws of the Salian and
Q 6366. d


xlvi INTRODUCTION.


Ripuarian Franks. Thus in the capitularies of Charle-
magne, c. vi. $ 211, itis provided: Si quis ad mallum
legibus mannitus fuerit, et non venerit, si eum sonnis
non detinuerit, quindecim solidis culpabilis judicetur,
simililer ad secundam et tertiam. So & law of the
Salian Franks, Tit. L, provides: Si quis ad mallum
legibus dominicis mannitus fuerit, s; eum sunnis non
detinuerit, 600 denariis, qui faciunt solidos quindecim,
culpabilis judicetur. So & capitulary of the Ripuarian
Franks. of the year 803, Tit. V., provides: Si quis
ad mallum legibus bannitus fuerit et non venerit, si
eum sonnis non detinuerit, quindecim solidis culpabilis
judicetur. Sie ad secundam et tertiam. I have quoted
these passages from Walters Corpus Juris Germanici
Antiqui, and it is obvious that the laws are all derived
from à common source. At & period about & century
later the monk Marculfus drew up his formulary, and we
find him using the word * sunnia" in & similar sense in
the following passage: Ipse nec venisset ad placitum
* pec nulla sunnia nuntiasset, l IL, $ 37. As Mar-
culfus dedicated his Formulary to Pope Lando, who
became Pope A.D. 912, and was succeeded in the same
year by Pope John X. this circumstance enables us to
fix the date of this passage with reasonable accuracy.
But after all, if we are able to establish the fact that the
words " sonnis " and *sunnia" were in use amongst the
Franks in the sense of impediments sufficient to excuse
a person for non-appearance upon & summons to attend
his lord's eourt, it does not follow that the Romance form
of exoigne was not the offspring of their supposed alliance
with the Latin word *exoneratio, pronounced "ex-
* oniatio. In the Longobardie code the word assumed
the forms of * sumnis " and * sommnis " and the modern
German word 'saumniss" signifies in the present day
an impediment causing delay. In England, on the
other hand, the word not merely assumed a certain
counterfeit dress as if it were of Latin origin, but it


INTRODUCTION. xlvii


changed its meaning to suit its new dress, and came to
signify an excuse by reason of an impediment instead
of its proper meaning of an obstacle on the way.

Whatever may have been the origin of the word
" essoin " i£ seems probable that the practice of allowing
three essoins to each party in & cause was a tradition of
the Carlovingian period, for the further practice of Glan-
ville's time of taking into the hands of the king the lands
of the tenant, i£ he made default a fourth time, was also
& provision of the capitularies of Charlemagne. A
fourth essoin was only allowed in & case of languor,
that is, of à tedious illness, perhaps incurable. I am dis-
posed to think that the term essoin was originally con-
fined to an exeuse on the ground of bodily illness, first
of all for illness on the way in coming to court, in which
case the essoin might be made by a single messenger ;
secondly, for illness confining the party to his bed, which
was to be certified by two messengers; and thirdly for
languor or permanent illness, the excuse of which was
only admitted after the sick man's condition had been
verified by four credible knights or vavasours. The
other excuses for non-appearance in court by reason of
detention in & prison or of attendance on the king in
war, or of & pilgrimage to the Holy Land or to St, James'
of Compostella, seem originally to have been classed under
the head of **delaiements" in the earliest Norman Cou-
tumier, whilst in Glanvilles time they rank under the
general class of essoins.

There can be little doubt, I think, that juridical
science in England during the reign of Henry II. had
taken the lead of juridieal science in Normandy. The
field for improvement was larger in England, whilst
the hands of the King of England were more free than
the hands of the Duke of Normandy, and so far from
England borrowing her legal institutions from Nor-
mandy, the Kingdom imparted its improvements to the
Duchy. When Rollo and his Norsemen settled in

d 2


I NEXU ADISU MED ILClIM "UI E CC DE C EI CSS M MMC C Ec p E QC Kcd —A-— 0 o me crimi -—— -—— ommo :
— TM ÁÁ———REÓBBE.-77 0 LA^ "e a


xlvii INTRODUCTION.


Neustria and did homage to king Charles the Simple
of France for the Norman: Duchy, they accepted the
feudal institutions of Neustria. : Duke Rollo, for
instanee, did not invent the office of vicecomes. He
found it ready to his hand. In like manner William
the Norman was no less fortunate on his arrival in
England, as he found the allodial ealdorman and the scir-
gerefa already converted into & comes and a vicecomes
by Canute the Dane. But the earls &nd the viscounts
in England were not identical with the counts and
the viscounts of continental feudalism. The strong hand of
the Danish conqueror had substituted for the immediate
territorial connexion between the ealdorman and the
scirgerefa a personal connexion only between the earl and
the viscount, by constituting the earl the personal superior
of several viscounts. William the Norman went a step
further, and snapped the official link between the earl
and the viscount, and constituted the viscount the fiscal
officer of the king, and his sole judicial representative in
the county court, reserving for himself or for a justiciary
sent on behalf of the crown the cognisance of the more
important pleas. So far the king had succeeded in con-
stituting himself the supreme fountain of justice and the
persona] guardian of the peace of his realm. But in
these matters he had made little or no advance beyond
the institutions which he had left behind him in Nor-
mandy; he had merely assimilated in respect of the
'eounties the institutions of his newly acquired kingdom
to those of his hereditary duchy. The institution of &
great justiciar of England, which was forced upon the
Norman king by his occasional absence from England,
was the starting point of a new system, which, although
it did not acquire any striking development during the
Conqueror's reign, was pregnant with important conse-
quenees after the justiciar had become & permanent
functionary. The creation of the justiciar's office was in
fac& & new point of departure; it inaugurated & new


INTRODUCTION. xlix


principle of government distinct from that of the sword ; it
initiated ihe reign of law, and its significance was dis-
covered as soon as Roger le Poer, bishop of Salisbury,
was advanced froin the otfice of the king's chancellor to
that of chief justiciar in the 7th year of king Henry I.
In no department of legal procedure is the progress of
juridieal science since the reign of Henry lI. more
evident than in the regulation of the right of essoin, &
right of vital importance to the security of property, and
most essential as & barrier against the abuse of the
judicial autonomy of the vicecomes.  Glanville had
evidently attached great value to the regulation of the
right of essoin, but Bracton has devoted & separate
treatise to the subject, which Glanville was content to
discuss by the way, and it would seem as if the attention
of the king's justiciaries had. been directed in the early
part of the reign of Henry III. to the simplification of
the procedure, and in pursuance of the recognition of the
* attornatus " in the king's court to the shortening of the
delay incidental to the system of essoins. It has been
already observed in the introduction to the third volume
of the present work that the office of ' attornatus " was
first recognised in England during the time when
Hubert de Burgh was chief justiciar (1215-1232). "The
* responsalis " had been recognised in the king's court in
Glanvilles time. The responsalis, however, could only
be appointed by the principal party himself appearing
in court before the king's justiciaries resident in the
Bench, and again the functions of the responsalis were
limited to the special business of the particular suit.
The case was otherwise with the attornatus. His
powers were more ample, and they might be general, so
as to provide for the cage of his principal being absent
in the king's service abroad, or on & pilgrimage to the
Holy Land or to St. James of Compostella. "The attor-
natus might also be appointed by letters of attorney, so
that the institution of such an officer made a great


] INTRODUCTION.


inroad into the feudal system, under which the feudatory
was liable to be summoned to appear in person before the
lord's court, and in default might risk the forfeiture
of his feud.

It will be seen that some progress had been made in
the time of Bracton in simplifying the procedure in the
matter of essoins. It should be borne in mind that
Bracton discusses the law of essoins in their appliea. .
tion to real actions, in which questions of difficult and
doubtful right were sure to arise. A first step, how-
ever, had been made in limiting the exercise of the
right of essoin, when & greatassise was substituted for
the duel The object of the limitation, according to.
Glanville, was to save labour and to reduce expense.
* Assisa enim," are his words, "tot non expectat esso-
* nia, quot duellum, ut ex sequentibus liquebit, ac per
* hoe et l&boribus hominum fparcitur et sumptibus
* pauperum." L. IL. ch. vii. $1.

Further, in an assise of novel disseysine no essoin was
allowed. "The reason given by Glanville was that the
courts did not spare & person who had taken the law
into his own hands. *In hac autem recognitione nul-
* jum essonium admittitur. Prima enim die sive vene-
* pyjit sive non is, qui disseysinam fecerit, procedit
* recognitio, quia hic nemini parcitur, nec majori, neque
* minori, nec etiam warrantus expectabitur" — L. XIIL.
ch. xxxvii. $ l. Bracton himself also rests the denial
of an essoin to & disseysor on the ground of the dissey-
sine being an act of spoliation, for which the party dis-
seysed might claim summary redress. ^" Revera non
* jacet essonium in odium spoliationis, quia denegari
* debet eis dilatio.  F. 340 b. And here perhaps it
may be apposite to suggest a distinction between an
assise of novel disseysine and a recognition of novel dis-
seysine. n assise of novel disseysine was & form of
suit instituted by King Henry II. with the advice of his
. eouncil; à recognition of novel disseysine was & part of


INTRODUCTION. li


the process of such suit. An assise of novel disseysine
when instituted by King Henry IL. was limited to dis-
seysines which had taken place since the last voyage of
the king into Normandy, but this limit might be varied
by an ordnance of the king in council  * Postremo,"
says Glanville, *de illa recognitione, quz appellatur de
* nova disseysina, restat dicendum. Cum quis itaque
infra assisam domini regis, id est, infra tempus
& domino rege de consilio procerum ad hoe constitu-
tum, quod quandoque magis, quandoque minus cen-
setur, alium injuste et sine judicio disseysiaverit de
libero tenemento suo, disseysito hujus constitutionis
" beneficio subvenitur et tale breve habebit." L. XIII.
cap. xxxii.

The king's writ, which follows this passago, specifies
the last voyage of King Henry II. to Normandy as the
limit of time, within which the disseysine must have
taken place. This limit, however, had been curtailed in
the time of Bracton by an ordinance which is recorded
in the Patent Rolls of 21 Henry ILL, and by which the
time was limited to the last return of King Henry III.
from Normandy.

Medical science, if it existed in any degree in England
at this time, was not invoked in aid of justice to decide
the question, whether the essoinee was fit in point of
health to comply with the summons of the court. That
he should fall sick by the way was & common occur-
rence, seeing that the parties summoned lived for the
most part in à country where there were no high roads,
where the bridges were frequently broken down, and the
rivers were out in flood, and the traveller had to sleep in
the open air. The occasións accordingly for an essoin of
sickness by the way would not be unfrequent, and it
was held sufficient that & single essoiner should appear
at the court to announce the sickness of the absentee.
In such à case the essoiner might be required to find
sureties or to pledge his faith, that he would present his


lii INTRODUCTION.


principal in court on & further day. "This might be
twice repeated in a case of bed-sickness, but after the
third essoin the party was ordered peremptorily to appear
either in person or by a responsalis authorised by him
" to win or to lose" the cause. The responsalis, whose
title was borrowed from the Roman law, had, as already
observed, & limited authority. He does not appear in
Glanville's time to. have been required to produce letters
mandatory, if he were & blood relation of the party, but
after the *'attornatus" had come upon the scene, the
viscount might send four knights to visit the sick man
and to require him to appoint an attorney. The respon-
salis, however, does not disappear altogether from the
Scene, as it was sufficient in & case of languor, where
the cause had been adjourned for & year and a day to
the Tower of London, that & responsalis should appear
on behalf of à party on the day appointed. The diffi-
culty in a case of languor, where the cause was adjourned
for & year and & day by the king's justiciaries, was to
determine to what court it should be adjourned, with
& certainty that the court would be sitting on the day
appointed, for there was no certainty as to the judges
itinerant being present in the county on a given day,
neither was there any certainty that any justiciary
would be resident at the Bench at Westminster on a
given day; the result appears to have been that the
cause was adjourned to the Tower of London, where the
parties were to appear before the Constable of the Tower,
an officer bound to be in continual residence in the
Tower. We learn from the passage in Bracton, f. 353 b.,
which explains the reason of this recourse to the Con-
stable of the Tower, that a justiciary was not continuously
resident throughout the year at the Bench. "The course
of proceeding after the parties had appeared at the
Tower seems to have been in this wise. "The constable
certified their appearance and gave them letters to the
justiciaries, if any were in residence at the Bench, and


INTRODUCTION. hi


if none were then in residence, the letters were to bo
presented to the justiciaries who should come first, into
residence, and thereupon the justiciaries at the Bench
were to transmit the cause to the justiciaries itinerant,
if they were in the county where the cause originated,
or they were bound to hear it themselves, if there were
no justiciaries itinerant in the county.

The adjournment of the cause to the Tower of London
in the case above mentioned was made for & year and &
day. In the Carlovingian Capitularies the provision is
simply "si infra annum non venerit" The practice of
a year and a day was observed in Glanville's time. How
it originated does not appear, but a day was probably
added to the year in consideration of the fact that every
solar year consisted of three hundred and sixty-five
days &nd six hours. Copernicus had not lived at the
time when Bracton wrote, and astronomers still relied
on the observations of Hipparchus, which had led
Ptolemy to devise & planetary system, of which the
sun was the master planet, revolving round the earth
and constituting by its revolution the alternation of
day &nd night. But Julius Cesar had ascertained
during his sojourn in Alexandria that & later school of
Egyptian mathematicians had discovered certain errors
in the Ptolemaie calculations, and accordingly he decided
on his return to Rome to correct those errors and to
introduce a new and amended calendar. It will be rather
a surprise to the reader to find a chapter in the present
volume dedicated to a scientific exposition of the Ptole-
maie system.  Bracton has already intimated that the
Julian calendar was in use in the English courts of jus-
tiee by stating, that the justiciaries were accustomed in
granting a further day after an essoin to appoint a day
after or before & given festival, or after or before the ides
or the calends of & given month ; and, further, he had re-
marked that if the year should be bissextile, the day ap-
pointed might prove to be unlawful, f. 357. A further


liv INTRODUCTION.


perplexity arose in calculating the year and a day in the
ease of an essoin for languor, when the party had been
assigned to appear at the Tower within & year and a day.
How was the period so assigned to be calculated when
the year in which it was assigned was bissextile, and it
consisted of three hundred and sixty-six days instead of
three hundred and sixty-five days?  Wasthe last day to
be regarded as an excrescent day, or as an ordinary day
of the eurrent year? The origin of the term bisextus
dates from the Julian reform of the Roman calendar. The
year of Numa Pompilius consisted of three hundred and
fifty-five days, into which & month termed Mercidonius
was intercalated every second year after the time of the
Decemvirate, subject to certain variations in the number
of its days so as to constitute an average year of three
hundred and sixty-six days and six hours; but this
average being astronomically too great, twenty-four days
were omitted in every twenty-four years, so as to diminish
the average to three hundred and sixty-five days and six
hours. This very compliegted method of calculating the
legal year at Rome continued down to the time of Julius
Casar, who recast the Roman calendar, establishing
twelve months in the place of ten, and dividing the ordi-
nary year into three hundred and sixty-five days; and,
further intercalating & day of twenty-four hours in every
fourth year. As under the old system of the Decemviral
year the month Merceidonius had been intercalated im-
mediately after the 23rd February, the anniversary of
the Terminalia, Julius Casar directed the 24th day of
February to be doubled in every fourth year, and as the
24th day of February was the sixth day before the
ealends of March the double day was styled thence-
forward bi-sextus. Under the Roman system this double
day was caleulated as à single day, &nd & person born at
any hour of the double day was born on the sixth day
before the ealends of March. * Cum bisextum kalendis
* est" says Celsus, nihil refert (utrum) priore an pos-


INTRODUCTION. lv


* teriore die quis natus sit, et deinceps sextum ka-
* lendas ejus natalis est: nam id biduum pro uno die
* habetur; sed posterior dies intercalatur, non prior;
* ideo quo anno intercalatum non est, sexto kalendas
* natus; cum bisextum kalendis est, priorem diem na-
* talem habet." 98.
It might have been reasonably expected, that tho king's
justiciaries would have had no difference of opinion as
to the mode of dealing with the excrescent day in leap
year, but as a writ of right was & procceding under the
feudal law, it seems to have been doubted amongst the
king's justiciaries, whether the calculation of the Roman
law was applicable to an essoin for languor in & proceed-
ing under a writ of right. There seem to have been two
difficulties, first as regarded the usual year of three hun-
dred and sixty-five days and six hours, whether an appear-
ance during the six hours was an appearance within &
year and & day, and secondly whether in leap year an
essoinee for languor was within time, if he appeared on
the three hundred and sixty-seventh day.  Bracton was
apparently in favour of the former view and adverse to
the latter. These doubts were d.stined to be appeased in
England by a statute of the realm, the date of which is
left in some uncertainty, for i& is open to doubt whether
the text of. the statute itself has been preserved. It has
been customary to print amongst the statutes of tho
realm & document, which in point of form has the appear-
ance of & writ addressed by the king to his justiciaries,
and which in the early editions of an English text of the
statutes has been assigned to 21 Henry III. So early a
date, however, of the statute cannot well be reconciled
with Braeton's text, as the king's writ was calculated to
put an end to the doubts, which Bracton states to have
been entertained by some of the king's justiciaries at the
time when he composed his treatise De Essoniis. "Two
: Other dates, however, have been assigned to the so-called
statute, namely, 40 Henry III. and 44 Henry III.


lvi J INTRODUCTION.


The first rests on the authority of à text preserved in
the Red Book of the Exchequer originally kept in the
chapter house at, Westminster ; the second rests on a text
preserved in MS. Cotton Claudius, D. II. in the British
Museum, which has been copied by Hawkins and by Rufft-
head into their respective editions of the Statutes. The edi.
tors of the recently revised Statute Book have adopted the
text of the Red Book of the Exchequer, which is as follows:

* H. Dei gratia Rex Anglie, Dominus Hybernie, Dux
* Normannie, Áquitanie, et Comes Andegavie justici-
* griis suis de Banco salutem. Sciatis quod cum in regno
* nostro de anno et die qui languidis per breve nos-
* tyrum (de Recto) inplacitatis prefigi consuevit, quo
* modo scilicet et & quo die anni precedentis in alium
* diem anni sequentis debuit annus ille et dies in
* anno  bisextili accipi et computari, diu exstiterit
* dubitatum ; nos, volentes uniformitatem ubique in
* regno nostro super hoc observari, et periculis liti-
* gantium precaveri, providimus et de consilio fide.
* ]ium nostrorum statuimus, quod ad delendam de cetero
* omnem super hoc ambiguitatem computetur dies ex-
* erescens in anno bisextili in ipso anno; ita quod
* yropter diem illum non oceasionentur aliqui inplaci-
* tati, set sit et habeatur de mense illo, in quo ex-
* crescit, et, contineatur dies ille excrescens in integri-
* tate anni predicti; et computentur dies ille et dies
* proximus precedens pro unieo die. Et ideo vobis
* mandamus, quod hoc coram vobis publicari et de
* cetero faciatis observari. T. me ipso apud Wynde-
* goram ix? die Maii a? regzmni nostri xlmo,

On the other hand, the text. of the so-called statute
preserved in MS. Cotton Claudius D. 11 in the British
Museum purports to have been issued in the forty-fourth
year of Henry IIL,the testimonium clause being of this
tenor: Teste me ipso apud Westm. anno regni regis
*« H. quadragesimo quarto," whilst the text commences Rex
* Justiciariis suis de Banco salutem." Itis hardly neces-


INTRODUCTION. lvii


sary to observe that this is the text of & writ addressed
to the king's justiciaries, and that the original testimonium
clause must have contained the words *anno regni nostri,"
instead of the words *anno regni regis Henrici" This
alteration in the testimonium clause is probably due to
the desire of the scribe of the MS. to place on record the
name of the king, which does not occur at the com-
mencement of the writ. .

If we assume that this document, as printed in the
last revised edition of the Statutes, was issued in the
40th year of King Henry IIL, the said 40th year would
be & bissextile year, as Henry III. came to the throne
A.D. 1216 and it would be reasonable that such &
statute should be forthwith communicated to the jus-
ticlaries, who were &bout to set out on their iter with
& view to its publication by them and to their acting
upon its provisions.

The course, which was pursued in the case of the
previous Statute of Merton (20 H. III), may throw some
light on the practice in such cases King Henry III.
held à court at Merton on 23 January 1235, in which
certain constitutions were established by him with the
consent of the magnates. "Those constitutions were forth-
with embodied in à Royal writ directed to the viscounts
throughout the realm and to the justiciaries in Eyre,
and the writ was issued to them on 30th January next
following. By this writ the new constitutions were
directed to be published in every county court and to
be firmly kept. The text of this writ was further en-
rolled and is now preserved in the.Close Rolls of 20
H. IIL m. 18 d. The fact of this enrolment enables us
to verify the aecuracy of the text of the constitutions of
Merton as preserved in MS. Claudius Cotton, D. 11. - It is
from the same MS. that Hawkins and Ruffhead have
both derived their text of the so-called Statute of Leap
Year, which purports to have been issued in 44 Henry
III. That a writ should have been addressed in that


lviu INTRODUCTION.


year for & second time to the king's justiciaries is not
improbable from two circumstances: it was in the first
place again Leap Year and the justiciaries were about
to proceed upon their circuit; in the second place the
king had recently reverted to the constitutional practice
of appointing & chief justiciary (Justitiarius Anglie),
having ruled since 1244 without either & chief justiciary
or à chancellor or a &reasurer. It was amongst the stipu-
lations of the so-called * Mad Parliament " of Oxford in
42 H. III. that there should be again & chief justiciary,
& chancellor, and & treasurer, and in 43 H. III. a jus-
ticlary of England reappears after an interval of twenty-
six years, whose name is recorded in the Abbreviatio
Placitorum of 44 H. IIL as holding the office of chief
justice. Iam disposed to regard the so-called statute
of 44 H. III. as merely a fresh issue of & Royal writ of
the sume tenor as the writ of 40 H. IIT., and the renewed
issue of the writ in that particular year is supported by
the style of the king, inasmuch as King Henry III, in
the month of October of the forty-third year of his
reign, ceded to King Louis X. of France the provinces
of Normandy, Anjou, Touraine, Maine, and Poitou, and
thereupon discontinued the use of the titles of Duke of
Normandy and Count of Ánjou. We find the king
accordingly described in his second great seal, as well
as in the charters after the year 1259, as Henricus Dei
gratia Rex Anglie. Dominus Hybernie, and Dux Aqui-
tanie, and such is the royal style in. the writ of A.D. 1260
(44 H. IIL). I pass by another text of a similar writ con-
tained in the Liber Seacc. Westm. x. fol. 22 b., which
has & testimonium elause of a still later date, * Quarto
* die Junii anno regni nostri quinquagesimo quarto."
If we assume this document to be authentie, it is an
instance of a further writ of alike tenor with the pre-
vious writs addressed to the king's justiciaries. There
was, however, no Parliament sitting at Westminster in
the month of June 1270,as we know from the Liber


INTRODUCTION. lix


de Antiquis Legibus, which is preserved in the arcbives
of the Corporation of London, that the Parliament of
1270, which was called for April 27, 1270, was ad-
journed from the paucity of meinbers in attendance to
July 2, 1270.

On a review of these concurring cireumstances there
can be little doubt, I think, that the various versions of
the 20-called Statute of Leap Year are in fact repeated
issues of the royal writ enjoining the king's justiciaries
to observe the statute. Unfortunately the Great Roll of
the Statutes, as it 1s termed, does not go so far back as
the reign of Henry III. "The statute of Gloucester, for
instance, 6 Edward I. (a9 1278) is the earliest statute
now extant on any statute roll. But we have not
merely & justification in the language of the royal writ
of 40 H. III. (providimus et de consilio fidelium nos-
trorum statuimus) for regarding that writ as the em-
bodiment of a statute, but an important confirmation of
that view is supplied by the text of Fleta.

Bracton, in treating of an essoin for languor, has
observed that if it be an essoin for non-appearance
before the justiciaries on their iter, an a&ppearance on &
further day will have to be made before the Constable
of the Tower, as the justiciaries may neither be itinerant
in the county nor resident at the Bench on a given day.
In like manner he briefly adds that the appearance will
have to be made at the castle in & county. Fleta, when
he comes to discuss the question of an essoin for languor,
ma&kes no reference to the Tower of London, but says
the essoin is to be allowed for a year and a day, when
the party must appear at the castle (apud castruan). He
then goes on (L. VL, cap. xi.) to discuss the appearance
to be made at the castle, following very much the lan-
guage used by Bracton as to a reasonable day's journey
of the essoinee who has to appear at the Tower, and then
he observes:


Ix INTRODUCTION.


* 6 2. De &nno vero bisextili fit tale breve ; rex justi-
" ejariis suis de banco salutem. Sciatis quod cum in
regno nostro de anno et die quo languidis, per
* breve nostrum implacitatis, preefigi dies consuevit,
* quo modo scilicet e£ & quo die anni presentis in
* glium diem suum sequentem debuit annus ille et
* dies in anno bisextili computari, diu extiterit. dubi-
* tatum. $3. Nos volentes uniformitatem ubicunque
* in regno nostro super hoc observari, et periculum
* litigantium przcaveri providimus et de consilio fide-
"* ]ium nostrorum statuimus, quod ad delendam super
" hoe ambiguitatem computetur dies ille et dies ex-
" crescens in integritate in unicum annum et diem, ita
* quod propter diem illum non occasionentur aliqui
* implacitati; et ideo vobis mandamus, quod hoc stat«u-
* twm. coram vobis publicari faciatis et de cotero
* observari."

It wil be seen on comparing this document, which
Fleta explicitly describes as a writ, with the text of the
so-called Statute of Leap Year in the Statute Book, that
they are documents of an identical character, but there
is this remarkable feature in Fleta's writ, that 1t contains
the words * hoc statutum observari " whereas the so-called
statute has only the words hoc observari" The con-
clusion on comparing Fleta's writ with the earlier docu-
ments would appear to be that there was & Statute of
Leap Year, of which the roll, if it ever existed, has
perished, whilst the substance of the statute has been
preserved in the writ, which has been entered in the
Red Book of the Exchequer.

I have previously stated that there are certain features
in Bracton's work which may warrant the theory, that
the chapter on Essoins was written before the treatise de
Acquirendo Rerum Dominio was completed. The fact
that Bracton makes no reference to the statute respecting
Leap Year is à strong presumption, that he wrote the


INTRODUCTION. ixi


chapter on Essoins before 40 H. IIL, if we may rely
upon the Red Book of the Exchequer for the true date
of the Statute of Leap Year. On the other hand, the
reference to the confirmation of the election of Earl
Richard as king of the Romans being still contingent,
which occurs in the treatise De Acquirendo Rerum
Dominio, f. 47, warrants us in supposing that treatise
to have been composed or at least completed in the early
part of the year 1257 (41 H. III.).

I have alluded above to the course pursued in the
instance of the Statute of Merton of sending a Royal
writ to the king's justiciaries ordering them to publish
the statute on their iter. "We have but a faint insight
into the working of the king's courts during the reign
of H. IIL, and itis somewhat of an enigma to under-
stand how in the absenee both of a chief justiciary and
of & chancellor the due administration of justice was
maintained. The king had no doubt able clerks, and
,Bracton himself, as we know, was & Royal clerk before
he vas advanced to the post of a justiciary. The practice
duriig this reigm in respect of a new law seeins to have
been for the Crown to issue a Close Letter to the justi-
ciaries and Letters Patent to the inferior authorities
enjoinit g them to give effect to the new statute, and as
the exainples of this practice are rare, an instance may
deserve to be cited, of which & record is preserved in the
Liber de Antiquis Legibus already referred to, as being
in the archives of the Corporation of London. We
should otherwise have had no knowledge of a statute
passed in the 51 Henry III (ao. 1271) to forbid the
Jews to become possessed of any frechold tenements
except for their own habitation. The Letters Patent
sent on this occasion to the mayor and viscounts of
London are preserved in the manuseript above nrentioned.
They are of this tenor: * H., Dei gratia Rex Anglie,
* Dominus Hybernie, Dux Aquitanie, dilectis et fide-


* libus suis. majori et vicecomitibus Londoniarum et
Q 6366. e


Ixii INTRODUCTION.


* omnibus ballivis et fidelibus suis, ad quos presentes
* littere pervenerint, salutem. Sciatis quod ad hono-
* rem Dei et universalis ecclesie ac. emendationem et
" utilitatem terre et relevationem Christianorum de
" dampnis et gravaminibus, que sustinuerunt occasione
* liberorum  tenementorum, que Judei regni nostri
* clamabant habere in terris, tenementis, feodis, reddi-
* tibus et alis tenuris, et ne nobis seu communitati
* regni nostri vel ipsi regno possit de cetero prejudi-
* eium generari, providimus de consilio prelatorum,
* magnatum et procerum, qui sunt de consilio nostro,
* &c etiam ordinavimus cet statuimus pro nobis et
* heredibus nostris, quod nullus Judeus liberum tene-
* mentum habeat in manerii, &c, &c" I omit the
further recitals and provisions of the writ, as the Letters
Patent occupy & whole page of the work as edited by


Mr. Thomas Stapleton for the Camden Society in 1846;


the concluding clause is as follows: '* Et ideo vobis pre-
* cipimus, firmiter injungentes quod provisionem, ordi-
" nationem et statutum predictum publice per totam
* balivam vestram  proclamari et firmiter teneri
* faciatis. In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras
* fieri fecimus patentes. Teste me ipso apud West-
* monasterium xxv? die Julii anno regni nostri quin-
* quagesimo quinto. We can have little hesitation, I
think, after this instance, to arrive at the conclusion
that the so-called Statute of Leap Year which is main-
tained in the revised Statute Book is not the original
statute itself, but & Royal writ founded on the statute
and of like authority.

The thirteenth chapter of the treatise on Essoins, in
which Bracton explains the peculiarities of the Bissextile
year,is very curious. If we are to place the errors of
arithmetic, which occur in several parts of this chapter,
to the account of Bracton himself, and not of the scribe,
who has misread or miscopied Bracton's numerals, we
should have to credit Bracton with only. a moderate


—-—— -—
—— —— "—Á


INTRODUCTION. Ixiii


amount of mathematical attainment, in fact with hav-
ing omitted to master the first rudiments of arithmetic
before undertaking to explain & most difficult problem
of the higher mathematics. But I am not disposed to
attribute to Bracton himself, but rather to the scribe,
the miscalculation of the number of moments in & day
in the following passage :—*' Hora autem fit ex quad-
" raginta momentis et sie fit dies ex novem millibus
" et sexcentis momentis." Several MSS. support this
reading, but on referring to MS. Crewe (Add. MSS,
No. 11,353) in the British Museum, another reading is
found, which is in harmony with the laws of arith-
metie :—'' Hora autem fit ex quadraginta momentis et
* sje dies constat ex novem centum et lx. momentis,"
The division of the hour into forty moments, which
Braeton has previously used in his treatise on an assise
of mortdancester, fol. 264, has been already discussed in
the introduction to the fourth volume of the present
Work, p. xxx., as having been in use in the University
of Bologna in the time of Accursius. I have since
ascertained that the division of the hour into forty
moments was in use in England in the eighth century,
as I shall proceed to show, and that it was based on
astronomical principles, which warrant the presumption
that it continued in use in England until Bracton's time,
and was not a foreign importation of the civilians. One
or two other errors of Tottell's text in high numbers may
also be put down to the account of the scribe, as it was
not unusual for the scribe to omit the numerals of the
thousands and to give only the hundreds and the tens.
Bracton himself, however, is probably responsible for
the ornission of the hundreds, where he says that an
essoinee ought to appear at the Tower on the sixty-sixth
day, when he really has in his mind the three hundred and
sixty -sixth day, that is a full ealendar year and & day. On
the other hand, we have two instances of an opposite prae-
tiee in stating the high numbers and dropping the low
e 2


lxiv INTRODUCTION.


numbers, which are probably attributable to the scribe,
namely, where the text describes the number of days
in four solar years as one thousand and four hundred days,
instead of one thousand four hundred and sixty-one
days. This apparent miscalculation I am unwilling to
attribute to Bracton, as in the sentence almost imme-
diately preceding he has described the solar year as
consisting of three hundred and sixty-five days and the
fourth part of a day.

I have found no direct clue to the authority upon
which Bracton has relied in expounding the system of
the Julian calendar. His language would not lead us to
suppose that he was familiar with the writings either of
Censorinus or of Macrobius, the two best authorities
on the subject of the reform of the calendar instituted
by Julius Cesar, whilst his fanciful comparison of the
Julian year to & serpent with its tail in its mouth
savours rather of monkish than of classical lore, and we
may not be very far from the mark in conjecturing that
he found that illustration in some commentary on the
writings of the Venerable Bede, to whom the intro-
duction of the adjective * bissextilis" to denote the year
in which the day termed bisextus was intercalated, in
other words leap year, is generally attributed. I have
not, however, been successful in discovering the metaphor
of the serpent in the writings of the Venerable Bede
himself, but there have been numerous commentators
on his philosophical treatises, of which the widespread
study is testified by the copious Gloss of Bredefert
of the famous Benedictine Abhey of Ramsey, and by
the Scholia of John of Lisieux.

Beda, as is well known, was regarded by his contem-
poraries as à prodigy of learning.: He was born probably
A.D. 672, and died A.D. 735. Boniface, the apostle of
Germany, Beda's contemporary, calls him the candle sent
by God for the spiritual illumination of the church. His
Historia Ecclesiastica Gentis Anglorum, perhaps the most


INTRODUCTION. Ixv


highly prized of his writings, is believed to have been
translated into Anglo-Saxon by king Alfred, at least such
is the tradition which attaches to the Anglo-Saxon ver-
sion, which has been printed by Dr. Ingram in parallel
columns with the original Latin text of the work.
There is no doubt that Beda's learning was very extra-
ordinary for the age in which he lived, and it speaks
favourably for the collection of MSS. in the united
monasteries of St. Peter and 8t. Paul at Wearmouth
and at Yarrow, in which he passed his life devoted to
study, to teaching, and to writing. The epithet * Vener-
able" appears to have been applied to |Beda in the
ninth century, and it has been customary since that
time always to speak of him as "the Venerable Bede."
I have gone thus briefly into the history of Beda with
a view to show that he was & writer of great research,
whose works, of which he has himself left a catalogue
compiled four years before his death, were of the highest
authority amongst his contemporaries, and of which the
historical portion supplies in the present day the most
trustworthy materials for the early history of Britain
and the Anglian settlements imn it.

Beda, however, did not confine himself exclusively to
historical studies, although his philosophical writings
are not so widely known nor so generally read as his
ecclesiastical history. Beda appears to have composed
& treatise entitled De Temporibus A.D. 703, and upon
the representation of his brother monks that he had
treated the subject too briefly, more especially with
regard to the proper determination of Easter, then much
controverted, he composed a fuller treatise entitled De
Temporum Ratione, A.D. 725, and to this latter work he
subjoined & chronicle entited * De Sex hujus sxculi
* fEtatibus" It is in the last portion of the chronicle
entitled * Sexta /Etas" that Beda treats of the birth of
Christ, and supplies a brief record of the reign of each
of the Roman emperors down to the ninth year of Leo


Ixvi INTRODUCTION.


Isauriceus (A.D. 729) with the date of the accession of
each, caleulated from the Incarnation of Christ. Beda
upon the credit of this work enjoys the reputation of
having introduced into England the system of dating
events from the era of Christ.

There can be no doubt that at the time when Beda
composed his '* Sexta 7Etas " the practice of inserting the
date of the Incarnation in charters and other public
instruments was not usual in England. "The earliest
charters so dated, of which the genuineness is not dis-
puted are those of Sigered King of Kent, and of Eardulf
King of Kent, which are dated respectively indictione XV.
anno Domini Incarnationis DCCLXIT., and anno ab Incar-
natione Christi DCCLXIL., indictione XV. Both of these
charters are cited by Sir Thomas Duffus Hardy in his
Introduction to the Rotuli Chartarum. In speaking of
these charters as the earliest English charters in which
the date of the Incarnation is used, I au not unaware
of the existence of & document which is dated ' anno
* vecapitulationis Dionisi, id est ab incarnatione, sex-
* centesimo octuagesimo indictione sexta revoluta."
This document purports to have been issued by Oshere,
King of the Hwiccii, who began to reign over the Hwic-
cians, & people occupying & territory co-extensive with
the bishoprick of Worcester, in the year 680. But the
authenticity of this document is open to suspicion, not
merely by reason of the date being prefixed to it, but
because the sixth indiction does not coincide with the
year of our Lord 680, The reference to the recapitulation
of Dionysius may demand a few words of explanation.

Dionysius, surnamed Exiguus, & Seythian monk and
subsequently a Roman abbot, is believed to have first
used the date *ab incarnatione Christi" about the year
59'1 after the birth of our Saviour, and hence the Christian
era was at first termed Recapitulatio Dionys. The
system, accordingly, of dating documents from theIncarna-
tion did not come into usein Italy until the middle of the


o


A —A—— qn-- —a—— —XHÁ RÀ -—— o——


INTRODUCTION. Ixvii


sixth century, and although it was introduced into France
in the seventh century, it was not generally used there un-
til the eighth century. It is possible therefore that King
Oshere may have had at his court à French monk, who
was conversant with the new system of dating docu-
ments in France, and who thought it necessary to ex-
plain his use of it, by inserting the words * Recapitu-
" lationis "Dionisi," a» explanatory of his authority for
the date of the Incarnation. There is further à remark-
able feature of this document, which points to a forcign
hand, and to which I have already alluded, namely, that
it commences with the date, whereas it is usual in the
Charters of Anglo Saxon Kings to add the date at the
end of them.

However this may be, Beda's Treatise on the * Sixth
* Age of the World," was the first work that rendered
his countrymen familiar with the Christian era, and so
prepared the way for its general adoption in England in
the latter half of the eighth century. I have alluded to
this fact as showing that Beda in dealing with the divi-
sions of time had carefully studied his subject, and I
may add that he was not a blind follower of Dionysius
Exiguus, as Beda's computation of the date of the Incar-
nation commences two years before the vulgar era of the
Seythian monk. When Beda, accordingly, in his treatise
* De Temporum Ratione," discusses the division of the
solar year into months and days and hours and moments,
we have the testimony of & writer accurately versed in
the mathematical learning of his day, and who explains
the divisions of time, which were then in general use,
in accordance with a system of solar and sidereal obser-
vation, the phenomena of which may have been correctly
noted, although it was attempted to explain them upon
& false hypothesis. Beda, acccordingly, having said in
the earlier part of chapter ii. De Temporum Ratione,
and I quote from the edition of his works published by
Herwagius at Basle in 1563, * Recipit &utem hora iiii.


[xvin . INTRODUCTION.


* punctos, x. minuta, xv. partes, xl momenta ct in
* quibusdam luns computis v. punctos," refers towards
the conclusion of the same chapter to the mathematical
subdivision of the zodiacal circle into 172,800 momenta.
* Attamen mathematici in explorandis hominum geni-
* turis ad atomum usque pervenire contendunt, dum
* Zodiacum circulum in xii signa, signa singula in
* partes xxx. partes item singulas in punctos xil,
* punctos singulos in momenta xl, momenta singula
* jn ostenta lx. distribuunt, ut considerata diligentius
* positione stellarum fatum ejus, qui noscitur, quasi
* g&bsque errore deprehendant." I quote this passage
by reason of Beda's reference to the science of the as-
trologers, in which, however, he had no faith, and for the
purpose of illustrating the astronomical use of the term
* momentum" as designating the fortieth part of a
* point " in the zodiacal circle.

But it may be asked what is à moment of time, and
what is the meaning of the term "momentum" when
employed to designate the fortieth part of an hour of
the day? A complete answer to these questions is
supplied by Beda himself, and still more fully by the
Gloss of Bredefert of Ramsey.  Bredefert says, *Si vis
* scire quot atomos et momenta et punctos et horas
* habeat (sic) in die vel in hebdomada, necnon et in
* mense naturali, istam calculationem attende et in-
* venies. Primitus ad horam incipiamus.  DLXIIII
* &tomi faciunt. unum momentum, quatuor momenta
*" faciunt. unum minutum, duo minuta et dimidium
"^ faciunt unum punctum  solarem, quatuor puncü
* faciunt unam horam solarem." Cap. iii. The same com-
mentator goes on to say, * Momentum vero est quadra-
" gesima pars unius hore. lta enim voluerunt as-
* trologi minutissimum siderum motum per umbras
* jntellgere, ut quadragesimam partem unius hore
* sentirent, dum umbram per quadragesimam partem
" jin horologio ipsius spatii, quod unum horam signi-


INTRODUCTION. ]xix


" ficat, signifer transiret. Nec hoc suffecerat iis, sed
* et minora addidere spatia, quse vocantur ostenta.
" Unum enim momentum ostentum semis coinpre-
" hendit. Maxima ergo spatia divisionum unius hor:
* puncta dicuntur, minora vero ostenta vel atomi.
* Sed ut praediximus, punctorum dus sunt mensure,
" unà quidem quartam partem unius hore, id est,
* decem momenta, altera vero quintam continet,
* habens in se octo momenta." Cap. xv.

It would appear from this statement of Bredefert of
Ramsey that on the horologium, or hóur-dial, forty spaces
were marked as subdivisions of the hour, over which the
shadow of the index (gnomon) travelled with the move-
ment of a star, &s the star was supposed, according to
the Ptolemaic theory, to rotate round the earth. "There
were thus indicated on the dial forty appreciable move-
ments of à star in the interval of time marked on the
dial as an hour, or, if the sun was observed, forty appre-
ciable movements of the sun.

Further, it would appear that the observers of the
heavenly bodies in Beda's time were accustomed to use
some instrument in the nature of & micrometer for the
purpose of measuring the velocity of the movement of
the sun in its supposed daily course of revolution round
the earth, so that each space marked as & moment indi-
cated an identical portion of the sun's daily course in
the heavens which it had travelled over, in other words
indicated that & certain portion of the artificial day of
twenty-four hours had elapsed. Thus Beda in his
* Computi Ratio" says: * Porro momenta & motu syde-
* rum celeberrimo nuncupantes, dum aliquid sibi bre-
" vijssimis in spacies cedere aut succedere sentitur," or
as it is more explicitly stated in the Gloss upon
Chapter II. of *De Temporum Ratione" *"In initio
* motionis momentum fit, initium enim motionis, quo
* movetur sidus aliquod, momentum dicitur, non tota
* motio sideris vel cujusque rei, sed hoc est, cum


Ixx INTRODUCTION.


* aliquid sibi id est, sideri cedere, scilicet a loco; id
* transire atque succedere, scilicet in loco, quod per
* foramen probatur, quando stella. aliquid. perspi-
* citur." This is a remarkable passage, as it is & fore-
cast of Galileo's telescope, that is, of the tube without
the lenses! I do not venture on the present occasion
to offer more than a general explanation of the experi-
ment. My object has been to show that the division of
the hour into forty moments was & scientific division,
grounded at the time when it originated upon a careful
method of observing the heavenly bodies, to which
nature then set limits, which optical science has long
since enabled the observer to overleap.

It would thus appear that the division of the hour of
the day into forty moments was well known in England
in the time of Beda, and that & tradition of it was
handed down amongst learned men, so that it should
not excite in us any surprise that Bracton makes use of
that division of the hour. ] have spoken of the Ptole-
maic system, as if it were generally received in England
in Beda's time, but in speaking of the system of Ptolemy
I do not mean the writings of Ptolemy, but simply his
system, according to which the earth was regarded as
the centre of the visible universe, and the sun was held
to revolve round the earth in the course of & day and a
night of twenty-four hours. It seems probable from the
citation which I have made in iny introduction to the
fourth volume of a passage from the writings of Papias,
an Italian grammarian of the XIth century, that the
Italians were not at that time acquainted with the
writings of Ptolemy, which were first brought to the
notice of European astronomers through the translations
made by the Moors of Spain. Sir George Biddell Airy,
who has so long and so ably filled the office of the
Astronomer Royal, has kindly informed me that there
is no trace in Ptolemy's works of the division of the
hour into forty moments. *'* Ptolemy's scale of time,"


INTRODUCTION. Ixxi


he says, *'is very remarkable. Beginning with the day
" he divides it into sixty parts (of course each part
*" equal to twenty-four minutes of our time), and he
" divides each part by sixty, and then divides by sixty,
* and so on. It would seem, in fact, he elsewhere says,
" that Ptolemy himself, and his followers, whenever
* they attempted anything accurate, resorted to sexa-
" gesimals" "The strange fact still remains unaccounted
for that no English Glossary or Encyclop:edia makes
mention of the ancient division of the hour of the day
into forty moments, notwithstanding it must have been
& scientific division of the hour in England during more
than five centuries.

There is a special essoin mentioned by Bracton which
deserves & passing notice, as it is not recognised in the
Ancienne Coutume de Normandie, and it seems to have
been peculiar to the English courts, namely, an essoin
for vill-sickness. Glanville has noticed it inl. I,cap. xxviii.
This notice of it leads us to infer that the king gener-
ally held his courts of justice in some vill, unlike the
feudal lord, who was aecustomed to summon his vas-
sals round his tent or his castle. Bracton speaks of
this essoin &s &nomalous, inasmuch as it does not
follow the rules of other essoins, and defines it otherwise
than Glanville. "The latter treats of it as an essoin in
the case where & person has arrived in a vill to prose-
cute his suit, and is unable from illness to appear in
court. On the other hand, Bracton applies it to the
case of a party, who has appeared the first day in court
and is unsble from some supervenient infirmity to
appear the next day in court, and who, if he be detained
by his infirmity more than four days, may appoint an
attorney *ad lucrandum vel perdendum." This was a
step in advance of the principle that an essoinee for bed-
sickness could not appoint an attorney, and it tended to
facilitate the administration of justice. Fleta (l. VI. c.
xiii) 1s content to copy the language of Bracton on this


Ixxii INTRODUCTION.


subjeet, with the further observation that the essoih of
vill-sickness was not admitted in the county court.
Britton, on the other hand (1l. VI, c. vii, 6 4), promises to
discuss the essoin of vill-sickness in a future chapter,
which has either been lost or was never completed.
Braeton concludes his chapter on essoins with a
reference of some historical interest as ilustrating the
judicial eareer of Martin de Pateshull I have appended
à note p. 610 of the first volume of the present work
calling attention to & correction supplied by M.S. Rawl,
C. 160, of an error in Tottell's text, which has perplexed
many commentators. Tottells editor, in speaking of
the first pleas after the war in the County of Essex has
misinterpreted the contraction of the word * comitatu,"
and has rendered it * communem," so that the passage in
in Tottells edition reads, * post guerram communem
* Essex," instead of *'post guerram comitatu Essex."
I have observed in that note that the case there cited by
Bracton is the earliest case cited by him. I ought to
have said ex majori cautela the earliest case cited by
Braeton, in which he gives the name of the party to the
suit, so as to allow of our identifying the case. Bracton,
in fact, alludes to & still earlier case in his concluding
chapter of essoins, fol. 364, as confirmatory of the posi-
tion that the record of the four knights sent by the
court to take & view of & party essoined de malo lecti,
could not be impeached. In support of this position :
Bracton says, * You have a case in the iter of Martin
* de Pateshull in the county of Leicester, in the time
" of King John." Unfortunately Bracton does not
name the year, nor the party concerned in the suit.
All that we can learn from the passage is that, Martin
de Pateshull was one of the judges itererant in the
reign of King John. I have already, in the introduc-
tion to vol. IL, commented on this fact, as having
escaped the notice of Mr. Foss, who in his * Lives of
* the Judges " speaks of Martin de Pateshull as having


INTRODUCTION. Ixxiii


been raised to the Bench very soon after the accession
of H. III.

The last treatise of the present volume, which is
entitled in Tottells edition the third treatise of the
fifth book, is in several manuscripts not noticed as
a separate treatise, but is continued as an integral part
.of the treatise which precedes it, having simply the
heading De Contumacibus, &c. prefixed to it. Glanville
has treated the question of the absence of the party
summoned very briefly (l. I. c. vii.) and according to the
order of the feudal law, whereas Bracton discusses the
doctrine of contumacy at considerable length, dis-
tinguishing between defaults in real actions and de-
faults in mixed actions, meaning by the epithet * mixed "
such actions as are directed 4m veni as well as 4n per-
sonam, and in which defaults are to be adjudged ac-
cording to the same rules that apply to real actions.
Ai the conclusion of the fourth chapter, where the
special treatment of defaults terminates, Bracton makes
a curious allusion to proceedings under a writ of Quo
warranto, which writ at à later period of our legal his.
tory was converted into an instrument of great oppression
on the part of the Crown against certain corporate bodies.
There seems to have been a difference of opinion amongst
the highest legal authorities in Bracton's time, whether if
& person was summoned to shew by what warrant he
held a certain tenement, which the king claimed. either
as an escheat or as of his ancient demesne, the tenc-
ment forthwith, upon the default of the tenant to ap-
pear, should be taken into the hands of the king or
not. Bracton, eontrary to the opinion of some others,
held that the rule applicable to a real action should prevail
in pursuance of the additional words in the writ "and
which land the king claims as his escheat."  Other-
wise, however, he observes, if & writ of *quo warranto "
without any such additional words is sued out against a
tenant of land, inasmuch as the inability of the tenant


Ixxiv INTRODUCTION.


to prove his right to hold the land would not of itself
establish any right on the part of the claimant to take
it, an attachment only of the tenant should take place,
if he failed to appear, and not a caption of his land.
He then goes on to observe, that although the claimant by
& proceeding under a * quo warranto " would not aequire
for himself the land of the party, whose title he sought
to impeach, and it was against the civil law that a pos-
sessor should be compelled by a writ of *quo warranto "
or of * quo jure" to disclose his title, nevertheless the
proceeding by & writ of "quo warranto" was effective
for à claimant, in order that he might ascertain gene-
rally by what title the tenant claimed to hold his land,
whether as heir or as possessor, and thereby he might
know by what action he ought to proceed, if he sought
to recover it. It would thus appear that the king's
justiciaries were at this time introducing & new prin-
ciple into proceedings for the recovery of real estate by
allowing the claimant to sue out & writ of discovery, so
far as to enable him to ascertain the general nature of
the tenant's title. Certain of the high legal authorities
were opposed to the prerogative right of the king, so to
say, to & writ which would comprise two actions under
one proceeding, and under which, if the tenant failed to
appear, hisland would be forthwith taken into the hands
of the king. What seems however to have given colour
to this high handed proceeding, and to have recommended
it to the support of the king's justiciaries was that it
was an effective weapon for the Crown to use against
the Norman adventurers, whom King John had intro-
duced into England, and against whose aggressions
Hubert de Burgh, as chief justiciary, had to struggle
for a long time in vain, although he was ultimately suc-
cessful in compelling Fulk de Breaute, their leader, to
leave the kingdom in 1224. But notwithstanding the
bulk of the alien barons had withdrawn into Normandy
before 1244, they continued up to that year to draw


INTRODUCTION. ]xxv


large revenues from their possessions in England, so
that the king at last with the double motive of mak-
ing himself popular with the English barons and of
increasing the revenues of the Crown, so as to be in-
dependent of the supplies which the Parliament of
1244 had refused to grant, caused all the lands of the
Normans to be seized and confiscated. "Thenceforth it
would seem to have been the normal duty of the king's
justices itinerant to hold an inquest in every county
respecting *the lands of the Normans," with & view
to ascertain by what warrant they were held, and, if
they were held without a warrant from the Crown, to
seize them into the hands of the king. Bracton sup-
plies an illustration of this practice on the part of the
king's justiciaries in the articles of enquiry, which he
has set out at length in his treatise de Corona, fol.
116. This liability of &ll lands derived from the Nor-
mans to be confiscated to the Crown seems to have
been maintained even in Britton's time, as in his chap-
ter on the king's rights (l. L. ch. xix) directions are given
for an inquest to be made * concerning the lands of the
* Normans, and of felons who hold of us in chief, which
" . have been aliened after the cominission of the felony,"
and even Fleta, in his chapter * De Brevibus Visuum;"
(lL VI. c. xxii, $ 1.) speaks of the proceeding of Quo
warranto under which the king was entitled to & view
of the land, which he claimed in his court * ut eschzetam
" suam de terris Normannorum." Of course after
Henry III. had ceded his rights over the Duchy of
Normandy to King Louis of France in 1239, the Nor-
mans would have ceased to owe any allegiance to Henry
IIl, or to his successor ; but it may well have been the
case that the Crown claimed to seize at any time lands,
which had been derived from Normans who had been in
possession of them after 1244. Matthew Paris, in his
Historia Anglorum, Rolls. edition, vol. II. p. 480, gives
the fullest account of the king's decree of confiscation.


Ixxvi INTRODUCTION.


After stating that Ralph de Neville, the king's chancellor
had died on the calends of February, he goes on to say :

* Circa. eadem tempora dominus rex, considerans quod
Normanni bona regni irrevocabiliter ingrati ex terris
et redditibus opulentis, quos habebant in Anglia, an-
nuis asportabant, omnes fecit in manu sua seisiri;
rege tamen Francorum occasionem suscitante."

It deserves remark that at this time Henry III.
governed his kingdom without either a justiciar, or &
chancellor, or & treasurer, but he seems to have had
& body of able councillors, who were of English origin,
and one of whom, John de Lexington, Gigures at. & sub-
sequent time frequently amongst the justiciaries itinerant.
His name is mentioned by Bracton on an occasion of &
judgment given by him at Clarendon, which Bracton
did not consider to be sound law.  '" Casus iste evenit
* &pud Clarindone in presentia Johannis de Lexinton,
* et male ibi fuit terminatum, objecta quadam excep-
" tione servitutis contra primo feoffatum," f. 45. At
the time when Bracton criticised this judgment he must
already have had some experience of the duties of the
office of justice itinerant.

The subject matter of the next chapter (V.) is some-
what inconsistent with the general title which Tottell's
editor has prefixed to the treatise, namely * De Defaltis,"
inasmuch as it treats of the appearance of the plaintiff
and of the declaration to be made by him on the ap-
pearanee of both parties in court. The science of
pleading had made considerable progress since Glan-
ville's time, and Bracton's contemporaries had borrowed
from the civil law the term * intentio," which they em-
ployed to signify the statement on the part of the plain-
tiff or what is now styled in English procedure the
declaration. Whether such was the precise meaning of
the term "intentio" as & term of the Roman law of
procedure mnay be open to some doubt, as we have but
& linited insight into the improved procedure of the


INTRODUCTION. Ixxvii


Roman courts through the discovery of the Institutes
of Gaius during the present century. But the Brac-
tonian purport of the word "intentio" corresponds to
that for which the Norman French word *counte" is
used by Britton (l. I, ch. xxxii $ 15), and for which
the legal term * count" is still in use in the English
courts.

The special pleader had not as yet found & vocation
open to him in the English courts, nor does Bracton
speak of the ' narratores" or ' counters" as an order
of legal practitioners, but. they were well known in his
time on the continent of Europe. In England, on the
other hand, the duty of narrating or of counting scems to
have devolved upon the order of serjeants-at-law in the
next following reign of Edward I., for the author of the
Mirroir des Justices dedicates & chapter to countors,
" Countors sont serjeants sachant ]la Ley del Roialme,
* qui servent al commission des people à pronouncier
* et defendre les actions en jugement pur ceux qui
* mestier ent ont pur loier," ch. ii, sect. 5. I pass
over the technical rules, which Bracton lays down re-
specting the artieles of the declaration. He observes
that a writ of right could not set up & title beyond the
time of King Henry, the grandfather of the lord the
king, because no witness could speak either from his
own memory or from that of his father beyond that
time. Hence, he says, if & claimant should speak of the
time of King Henry the elder (Henry IL), he might lose
his cause from failure of proof. And here Bracton
speaks of & curious practice under which, upon pay-
ment of a fee, the tenant might have mention made of
the time, where the claimant, having made an error in
ihe time, had placed himself on & great assise. '" Et
* unde cum quis post talem errorem inde se posuerit
* in magnam assisam, dat aliquando tenens de suo pro
* habenda mentione de tempore," f. 373. Mr. Reeves


seems to consider this favour to the tenant to have been
Q 0366. f


]xxviii INTRODUCTION.


& relic of the ancient practice of selling justice, which
the kings of England had renounced in those memorable
words of the great charter of liberties, * Nulli vende-
* mus, nulli negabimus aut differemus rectum aut
* justitiam." | Art. 40. He considers, however, that the
great charter did not contemplate the abolition of all
fees, as & moderate recompense to the officers of the
court for their labour and attendance. He further goes
on to say that there is an obscurity in this passage, that
renders it difficult to make out any meaning at all,
inasmuch as Bracton, having used the word * mentio"
to express the naming of the time of the seysine in the
claimant's writ, uses it afterwards to signify the moving
of the question of seysine by the tenant, It is un-
fortunate that Britton's later work breaks off abruptly
after diseussing essoins, so that it throws no light. upon
the passage in Bracton, whilst Fleta also omits all
allusion to the subject.

There is an old adage of the l&w courts, *optimus
* interpres usus," and we can fortunately appeal to the
practice of the king's court to clear up the difficulty.
Whatever may be the correct interpretation of Brac-
ton's language, there was primá facie nothing corrupt
in the court allowing the tenant to make & statement
on his part as to the time of his seisine, where it was
caleulated to disprove the case of the claimant either as
negativing a fact alleged by the claimant, or as show-
ing that the ancestor from whom he claimed was not
in, rerum natura in the reign of such à king. Besides,
the tenant was entitled in equity to put the claimant
in his turn upon the proof of his title, inasmuch as the
issue to be decided by a great assise was which of the
parties had the greater right. "We have here the first
germ of the practice, known in later times as the tender
of the demi-mark, of which there is an apposite illus-
tration in the proceedings on a writ of right set out by
Sir William Blackstone in the Appendix to the third


INTRODUCTION. ]xxix


volume of his Commentaries. From these proceedings
(tempore Georgii I. et IL) we learn that it was coinpe-
tent for the tenant in possession, when a claimant had
put himself upon a great assise, to put the claimant on
the proof of his alleged title by tenderinz in court. the
sum of six shillings and eightpence to the use of the
lord the king. This was entitled "the tender of the
" demi-mark," the mark being thirteen shillinys and
fourpence, two thirds of à pound sterling. "This tender
of & demi-mark on the part of the tenant was accom-
panied by the prayer, that an inquiry should be made
into the title allezed by the claimant. We are disposed
to regard the requirement of. the court, that. the tenant
on such occasions should pay & moderate fee to^ the
king's use, in the nature of a test of tlie zrood faith of the
tenant in challenging the elaimant's title.

The seventh chapter takes up the question of excep-
tions, the classification of which into pereiptory and
dilatory is evidently borrowed froin the civil law. Hav-
ing simply touched upon them in a short chapter, Bracton
defers the further treatment of this subject, preferring,
as he says in the eighth chapter, to collect them all as it
were into one bundle (in unum fasciculum colligere), and
to discuss them all together in order. The rest of the
treatise is devoted to * the making of & view," in order
that & thing certain may be brought into judgment.
The object of the view was to inform the tenant precisely
of the quantity of land, of which the frechold was claimed
by the plaintiff, in cases where it could not be otherwise
ascertained by description or by specification, or else of
the quantity of land, out. of which a rent or common
of pasture was claimed, or in respect of which suit of
court was demanded. It would appear from the cases
cited in illustration of the law in such matters that
Bracton had access to the Plea Rolls from the commence-
ment of the reign of Henry IIL, although it seems
doubtful whether the names of the justiciarles were


Q 6366. o
-


]xxx INTRODUCTION.


entered on the rolls in the two first years of that
king's reign.  Bracton, for instance, cites in the present
treatise five cases of pleas in the second year after the
war, in none of which is the name of & justiciary men-
tioned, neither is any such name mentioned when he
cites & case amongst the first pleas after the war, f. 376, b.
The same remark will apply to the various cases in other
parts of his work, which Bracton cites either as the first
pleas after the war, or as the pleas in the second year
after the war, or as the pleas in the second year of
King Henry after the war, the war in question being
that which King John transmitted as & legacy to his
successor. This war saw Lewis, son of Philip, king of
France, to whom the barons of England had offered the
erown, master of the city of London, where he received
the homage and fealty of the English barons. It was
this war which all but imperilled the succession of
Henry IIL, who was crowned &t Gloucester, and whose
main support was the loyalty of the barons of the
western shires. The coronation of Henry III. took
place on Oct. 28, 1216, but the normal administration
of justice was suspended by the operations of the war
until the conclusion of the treaty of Lambeth on Sept. 11,
1217, after which the child-king re-issued the great
charter in its final form. From this time the annual
cireuits of the king's justiciaries were resumed, and it
1s from this period that the cases in question are dated.
But Bracton has made an exception on two occasions
in favour of Martin de Pateshull. On the first occasion
Martin de Pateshull seems to have been president of &
commission to dispose of a variety of cases waiting for
judgment immediately after the war. On the other
occasion Martin de Pateshull gave judgment in Banco
in the second year after the war. Whether Martin de
Pateshull had been more careful than the other justi-
ciaries of his time to have his judgments enrolled, we
have no means of asecrtaining, hut. it is hy no means


INTRODUCTION. Ixxxi


improbable that Bracton himself was present on both
occasions and took & note of the judgments. From the
familiar manner in which Bracton speaks of Martin de
Pateshull, sometimes citing him as dominus Martinus
and sometimes simply as Martinus, it has been thought
that Bracton was on terms of personal intimacy with
that eminent judge, who was certainly one of the most
distinguished ornaments of the bench at Westminster in
. an age of distinguished judges.


The Temple, 1882. j i à


Digitized by Google


Q 6366.


INDEX.


]xxxiv


INDEX


RERUM OMNIUM, QUJ£ IN HOC OPERE


CONTINENTUR.


TRACTATUS SEPTIMUS LiBRI QUARTI, IN QUO TRACTA-


m


TUR DE INGRESSU.


CAP. I. fol. 317.


, Ubi locum habet ista actio . à ; à
. Breve, si quis dimiserit ad terminum, qui pra-


terit.


. De modo pace dendi in hujusmodi lasts :
. Si respondeat tenens, quod non per talem


nominatum in brevi, sed per alium talem


. Breve, si juratores venire debeant coram jus-


titiariis


CaP. II. fol 319 b.


. De responsione et exceptionibus tenentis con-


tra petentem


. Cum partes in judicio comparuerint
. De exceptione contra ingressum, et quod


tenens poterit renuntiare exceptioni, si
voluerit, et vocare alium, quam eum qui
in brevi nominatur, ad warantum, licet
hoe sit contra seipsum


14


16


18


24


Ixxxv


TABLE


OF ALL THINGS WHICH ARE CONTAINED IN
THIS WORK.


THE SEVENTH TREATISE OF THE FOURTH BOOK, WHICH
TREATS Or ENTRY.


CHAPTER I. leaf 317.


Page
l. Where this action has place . &.4 9
2. A writ, if & person has demised fora term,
which has passed — . 7
3. Of the mode of proceding i in a plea of this
kind . à —
4. If the tenant answers, that not through 80-
and-so named in the writ, but — 80-
and-so & different person. 15
5. A writ, if the jurors - io come vbeforé the
justiciaries — . 01M
CHAPTER II. leaf 319 b.
l.


Of the answer and exceptions of the tenant
against the claimant . : . 19
2. When the parties have appeared in | eourt e —
* Of an exception against an entry, and that the
tenant may renounce an exception, if he
wishes, and call another person than him
- Who.is named in the writ, &s & warrantor,
although this may he against himself ^ . 25
h 2


lxxxvi INDEX.


-] 2» OU


Car. III. fol 321.


. Breve, si heres petat, quod antecessor dimi


sit. &d terminum : ; à


Car. IV. fol. 321 b.


. Breve, si vir donationem fecerit de heredi-


tate uxoris, cui ipsa in vita sua contra-
dicere non potuit


. Breve, si heres fuerit ex alio viro, T S) vir


heredem habuerit ex alia uxore


CaP. V. fol. 322.


. Breve, si dos fuerit alienata per seeundum


virum . " .


. Breve, 8i vir dotem alienaverit ;
. Breve, quod competit heredi, si uxor dotem


-alienaverit,


. Item, si uxor dotem alien&verit ;
. Breve, si per abbatem sine assensu capituli .
. Breve, si celerarius vel procurator

. Breve, &i per ballvum contra voluntatem


domini sui


. Breve, si. felo alienaverit vost fcloniam fac-


tam


. Breve, i villanus alienhverit. id quod emu:


erit in villenegio  . :


. Breve, si per eum, qui non fuit San Ment
. De ingressu per eum, qui non tenuit nisi ad


vitam quacunque ratione, et cum post
mortem reverti debet


. De ingressu per intrusionem.
. De ingressu per custodem
. De ingressu per maritum


Page


28


28


36


48


50


TABLE. ]xxxvii


CHAPTER III. leaf 321.


À. writ, if an heir claims what his ancestor de-
: mised for.& term


CHAPTER IV. leaf 321 b.


. À writ, if à husband has made a grant of the


inheritance of his wife, which she could not
contradict during his lifetime


. À writ, if the heir has been by anctor hus-


band, and if the husband has had an heir ay
another wife , :


CHAPTER V. leaf 322.


. À& writ, if dower has been alienated by &


second husband .


. À writ, if the husband has alicimted door
. À writ, to which an heir is entitled, if & wife


has alienated her dower


. Likewise if & wife has alienated je: dower
. À writ, if by an abbot without the assent of


the chapter


. À writ if à steward or an aont ;
. À writ, if through a bailiff against the will of


the lord


. À writ, if & felon lids xicnsted after ihe com-


mission of felony


. À writ, if & villein has slienated What he held


in villenage


. A writ, if through him who | is not of Sound


mind .


. Of entry through him who did not hold E


for life in some way or other, and when it
ought to revert after his death .


. Of entry by intrusion à;
. Of entry through a guardian .
. Otentry through à husband |.


Page


2


29


37


49


ol


Ixxxvii INDEX.


15.


Qt


Si heres peteret de seysina antecessoris, dum
fuerit infra etatem . à


. Item dum fuerit infra etatem í . :
. Item dum 1n custodia . ]
. Item dum fuerit infra etatem et niodo faber


etatem


. Dum maneret de faxiilia Su&
. Breve de pastura data ad iemiponi qui


preeteriit


Cap. VI. fol. 324 b.


. De diversitate juratorum secundum diversi-


tatem brevium-. : -


. Si partes posuerint se in joratam eccumum


diversitatem brevium


. Jurata sine assensu episcopi, vel ane. vel


abbatis .


. Item super intrusionem
. Item. breve, si per uxorem quee non nisi


dotem n ;


Cap. VII. fol. 325 b.


. &i jurata summonenda sit coram justiciariis .


CA». VIII. fol. 326.


. De brevibus, si firmarius pu seysinam


propnam . .


. Qualia brevia non vertuntur ad. brevia de


recto per narrationem, quia ille qui petit
non habet nisi liberum tenementum


. Qualiter et que vertuntur
. Qualiter recurritur per inquisitionem per


jur&tam de ingressu .


50
52


62


64


68


NN


TABLE. . . ]xxxix


. If the heir claims from the seysine of his an-


cestor, whilst he was under age .


. Likewise whilst he was under age . :
. Likewise whilst he was under guardianship .
. Likewise whilst he was under age, and has


only lately come of age


. Whilst he remained à member of his family
. À writ for pasture granted for & term which


has passed .


CHAPTER VI. leaf 324 b.


. Of the diversity of juries according to the


diversity of writs


. If the parties have put themselves on & buy


according to the diversity of the writs


. À jury without the assent of the D or of


the prior, or of the abbot


. Likewise upon an intrusion .
. Likewise, if dica & wife who had only her


dower


CHAPTER - leaf 325 b.


. If & jury is to be summoned before the justi-


ciaries "


CHAPTER VIII. leaf 326.


. Of writs. If & termor has claimed his proper


seysine


. What writs are not turned into writa of right


through the pleadings, because the claimant
has only a freehold


, In what manner, and what writs are so —'
. In what way recourse is to be had through an


inquest by a jury concerning entry . .


Page


57
59


63


69


xc INDEX.


LiBkER QuiNTUS DE RECTO.


Car L fol 3927 b.


pend


. De materia hujus libri . :
. Quare hoc placitum de recto ultimum poni-
tur : , . .


L2


Car. II. fol. $828.


1l. De diversis formis brevium de recto
2. Breve de recto, si terra prs sit de so-
l0.
9. Breve de yoso ballivis sake: vel vüstodibus
honorum
4. Breve de recto, si quis tenore debet i in enit
de rege
5. Breve de recto castodi ubi liora: füerit in-
fra etatem. '
6. Breve ballivis maneriorum iecudibunt consue-
tudinem maneriorum
. Breve ballivis de burgo ;
8. Breve de recto de dote, ubi mulier partem
habuerit à
90. Breve de recto de sorvitiis " de consuetudi:
nibus.


-


Car. IIL fol. 329.


l. Qualiter placita transferuntur a curia domi-
norum usque ad comitatum :

2. Quod pluribus modis pnr curia domini de-
ficere .

3. De summonitionibus " modo procedendi in
curia domini regis


Car. IV. fol. 329 b.


1. Qualiter defalta recti in capitali domino
debeat probari in curia regis. .


Page


82


84


$8


88


90


92


92


r9


e


S3


TABLE.


TugE FirrH. Book coNCERNING RiGHT.


CHAPTER Ll. leaf 327 b.


Concerning the matter of this book
. Wherefore this ple& pe right is placed


last


CHAPTER II. leaf 328.


. Of different forms of writs of right . :
. A. writ of right, if the land be shareable in


SOcage


, À writ to ilis bailiff of the "m of dad &


, place, or to the keeper of such an honour


. À writ of right, if any person Supe to hold in


chief of the king


. A writ of right to the guardian Meis the heir


is under age


. À writ to the bailiffs of manors secording to


the custom of the manor


. À writ to the bailiffs of a borough . :
. À writ of right UE dower, where &


woman has & part


. À writ of right concerning services and cus-


toms . l ;


CuaPTER III. leaf 329.


. How pleas are transferred from the lord's


court to the county court .


. That the lord's court may fail in many "ways à;


Of summonses and the mode of proceeding in
the court of the lord the king


CHAPTER IV. leaf 329 b.


.In what manner the default of right in the


court of the chief lord ought to be PONE
in the court of the king


xcel


8l


83


89


89
91


93


93


xeil


[d


»- Q5


10.


11.
12.


13.


INDEX.


De processu in comitatu adi defaltam curie
probatam .


. Quando loquela lice esse in Qonitata .


Car. V. fol 330 b.


: Cum fmc fuit in comitatum translata
. De modo procedendi in placito de recto cum


fuerit in comitatu, et de forma diversorum
brevium


. Si in comitatu vocetur — M
. Si tenens se posuerit in magnam assisam in


comitatu . " i


. Breve de pace usque ad adventum dust:


ariorum " . 2oÍjf " : . :


. Prohibitio custodi .
. Ri placitum fuerit in comitatu de consuetu-


dinibus et servitiis . i


. Si ille; qui se posuerit in magnani assisam


de servitiis et consuetudinibus, et habuerit
breve de pace, distringatur & domino suo
pendente placito


. Breve de pace, ubi terra petita teneri debet


in Gavelkind .. : .
Quod tenens, qui se posuerit in magnam
assisam, cum breve de pace habuerit, per-
quirat sibi petens de arramando magnam
assisam coram justitiariis in adventu ipso-
Püll 4 — e .0k o c3 -— 0&7 0 — 3
Breve de eodem de assis& arramanda . .
De assisa &rramanda, cum placitum de recto
fuerit de servitiis et consuetudinibus  .
Breve de assisa arramanda in jurata de Ga-
velkind loco magne assise .


Page


96
98


100


102


106


10.


11.


12.


18.


TABLE.


Of the proceeding in the county court after
proof of the default of the lord's court

When the argument commences to be in the
county court


CHAPTER V. leaf 330 b.


. When the argument has been transferred to


the county court


. Of the mode of proceeding ina A of ET


when it has been in the county court, and
of the form of diverse writs


. If à warrantor be called in the county court .
. I£ & tenant has put himself upon a great assise


. in the county court .


. À writ of peace until the coming of the duet


claries


. & prohibition to & guardian ;
. If there be & plea in the county eoürt con-


cerning customs and services


. If he, who has put himself upon a — &ssise


concerning customs and services, and has
had & writ of peace, is distrained by his
lord pending the plea.


. À writ of peace, when the land claimed ought


to be held in gavelkind :

That when the tenant, who has put himself
upon & great assise, has obtained & writ
of peace, the claimant should procure for
himself & writ to prepare a great assise
before the justiciaries at their coming

À writ concerning the same for preparing &

. great assise

Of preparing an assise, when the plea of right
shall be concerning services and customs

À writ for preparing an assise in & jury of
gavelkind in the place of & great assise


xciii
Page
97


99


101


107


109


111


xclv INDEX.


14. Qualiter removetur placitum de comitatu ad
.magnam curiam per breve quod dicitur
Pone . : . , . 110
15. Pone ad petitione TN à —
16. Pone ad petitionem petentis de insueta dini
bus et servitiis . : 0 —
17. Pone ad petitionem tenentis et ex causa  . 112
18. Ubi duellum vadiandum est contra consuetu-
dinem regni : . '. : . . 116


CaP. VI. fol. 333.
..1. De diversitate et divisione summonitionum . 118


2. De summonitione generali . : i e —
3. De summonitione speciali  . . ; . 120
4. Quis potest summonere. . . 122
5, Per quos et per quot facienda sit summo-
nitio, et, quando ; : ; . 124
6. Qui» summonitio est legittima — . 0. —


TRACTATUS SECUNDUS DE EssoNiis..


Cir. L fol 334.


]. De modo procedendi post summonitionem . 130
2. Breve de habendo eum coram justitiariis qui

per fraudem, malitiam et falsitatem essoni-

&vit &dversarium suum  . ; . . 140


CaP. II. fol 336 b.
l. De exceptionibus, qui non venerit ad sum-


. monitionem  . 146
2. De exceptionibus non venientis ad faddom
, post summonitionem. ; 152


9. Verba excusationis proferenda ab ensonisfore
in essonio de malo veniendi . , . 154


—


- -— — — ——— 0 — ——


14.


CY 4» G5 t5 o


TABLE.


How & writ is removed from the county court
- & great assise by & writ which is called
* Pone " : , .


.À*" ' Pone " at the prayer of the eiat.
. À "Pone" at the prayer of a claimant for


services and customs .


. A "Pone" at the prayer of & tenant and for


& cause


. Where battle is to waged E the custom


of the realm ; , a


CHAPTER VI. leaf 333.


. Of the diversity and division of summonses

. Concerning & general summons

. Concerning a special summons ; "
. Who has the power to summon  .


Through whom and through how many Bebsdns
& summons ought to be served, and when .


. What summons is lawful : : , i


THE SECOND TREATISE ON ÉsSOINS.
CnaPTER I. leaf 334.


. Of the mode of proceeding after a summons
. À writ to produce before the justiciaries the


person, who through fraud, malice, and
falsehood has essoined his adversary .


CHAPTER Il. leaf 336 b.


. Of the exceptions of him who has not appeared


to the summons : : :


Concerning the exceptions of & person not


coming to judgment after & summons


. The words of the excuse to be uttered by the


essoiner in an essoin for bed-sickness.


131


141


xcvi INDEX.


Car. IIL fol 339.


De excusationibus non venientis post, summo-
'"nitionem per essonium de malo veniendi,
et de divisione essoniorum . . j


. Qualiter irrotulatur essonium de ultra mare
. Essoni& de servitio domini regis de ultra


Inare.


. Placita speeialiter Eos in T non . jacot


essonium de servitio domini regis


. Si quis' implacitatus fuerit a duobus, et ad


. unum placitum essoniaverit se de malo
lecti et ad aliud de malo veniendi . .


. Si duo placita, de quibus unum de malo lecti,


et aliud de malo veniendi


. Quis se potest essoniare
. Si plures sint petentes .
. Bi tenens fecerit. attornatum . ;
. Si attornatus obierit, dum dominus princi-


palis litis fuerit in peregrinatione ^


. Bi tenens plures vocaverit warantos vel unum
. Quis post duelli vadiationem se possit esso-


niare .


. Quando quis possit essoniari .
. Ubi possit essoniari
. Quotiens possit essoniari


Car. IV. fol. 344 b.


. De essoniis de malo lecti  . QN ou
. Quando fieri debet essonium de malo Tct


et qualiter


. Quotiens fieri debet essonium ide 3ndlo Jesto.


quando et qualiter . ,


TABLE.


CHAPTER III. leaf 339.


. Of the exceusations of him, who does not come


after & summons, by an essoin of sickness
in coming, and of the division of essoins. .


. In what way an essoin for absence beyond the


sea is enrolled


. Essoins for the service of the lord the LE


beyond the sea .


. Pleas specially excepted, in which an essoin for


the service of the lord the king does not hie


. 1f à person has been impleaded by two parties,


and he has essoined himself to one plea for
bed-sickness, and to &nother for sickness in
coming  .


. If there be two pleas, of which one is Pooined


for bed-sickness, and the other for sickness
in coming . : : '


7. Who may essoin himself.
8. If there be several claimants .
9. If the tenant has constituted an aitoHiey
10. If an attorney has died whilst his principal
has been on a pilgrimage . à .
ll. If a tenant has called several wWarraniors, Or &


single one .


. Who may essoin himself after the Mu of


battle


. When & person may be essoined
. Where he can be essoined
. How often he may be essoined


CHAPTER IV. leaf 344 b.


. Of essoins of bed-sickness — .
. When an essoin of bed-sickness ought. to be.


made, and in what manner


. How often an essoin of bed-sickness ought [o


be made, when, and in what manner .


xcvll


165


JA


Em de


xeviil INDEX.


Y


. Si quis habere possit duo essonia de malo


veniendi simul propter necessitatem .


. Si vir et uxor se semel essoniaverint de malo


lecti


. Ad quas brevia pertinent duo essonia de malo


veniendi et similiter de malo lecti


. Ubi vertitur breve de recto in breve de in-


gressu per narrationem ei e contrario


Car. V. fol 344.


. Qualiter essonium de malo veniendi debeat


irrotulari et judicari de servitio domini
regis .


. Qualiter de simplici essonio de malo veniendi


. Si warantus vocatus fuerit . . .
Car. VI. fol 348.
. Qualiter essonium de malo veniendi judicatur


. Si breve originale non venerit, breve vice-


comiti quod faciat aliud venire


CaP. VII. fol, 349.


. Qualiter irrotulatur essonium de malo lecti .
. Si: adjungatur essonium de malo veniendi


essonio de malo lecti


Car. VIII. fol 349 b.


. In eujus persona non jacet essonium de malo


leeti .


. Qualiter essonium de malo lecti judicandum


sib . ; à ; : ; ; "


Page


218


220


221


2206


Qt


TABLE.


. If a person may have two essoins for sickness


on the way at the same time from neces-
sity


. If the husband aud S have axi enr:


selves at the same time for bed-sickness


. To what writs two essoins for sickness by the


way &nd in like manner for bed-sickness
appertain .


. When a writ of right is turned into à writ of


entry by the counting, and contrariwise


CHAPTER V. leaf 347.


. How an essoin of sickness by the way ought


to be enrolled and adjudged concerning the
service of the lord the king


. How concerning a single essoin of sickness by


the way


. If & warrantor has bcd S eduhred


CHAPTER VI. leaf 348.


. How an essoin of sickness Ld the way is


judged


. If the original writ has noi. come, & writ to


the viscount that he cause another writ to
come


CHAPTER VII. leaf 349.


. How an essoin for bed-sickness is enrolled
. If an essoin for sickness on the way be added


to an essoin for bed-sickness , ; :


CHAPTER VIII. leaf 349 b.


. In whose person an essoin of bed-sickness does


not lie
. In what way an essoin of bedisicieneds is to
be judged . . ; .
Q 6366, 1


Xclix


Page


219


221


225


227


233


235
297


239


INDEX.


Car. IX. fol. 351.


. Qualiter redduntur essonia de malo lecti et de


malo veniendi per ordinem


. Qualiter redduntur essonia de malo entendi
. Qui essoniatores affidabunt et qui plegios in-


venient, et de plegiorum datione


. Quid sit warrantizare essonium per sacramen-


tum .


. Si in die dato erratum Tuer, duid sit faci-


endum


CaP. X. [Íol 352 b.


. Breve ad mittendum quatuor milites ad eum,


qui essoniatus est de malo lecti, ad eum
videndum .


. De officio vicecomitis, cum Bonon breve
. Irrotulatio, si visores non venerint

. Breve de attachiendo milites.

. Si unus visorum infirmus sit vel inutilis


ponatur alius loco suo


. Qualiter petenda sit licentia Redi ;
. Breve, si post licentiam petitam et obtentam


arrestatus fuerit per adversarium


. Sj in curia baronis vel alterius denegetus


licentia surgendi, dominus rex licentiam
dabit in defectu talium


CaP. XI. fol. 350.


. De officio quatuor militum in visu faciendo.


De essoniis, cum missi venerint ad locum
ubi essoniatus jacere debet


Page


260
204


266
208


272


302


TABLE.


CHAPTER IX. leaf 351.


l. How essoins of bed-sickness and of sickness
by the way are returned in order . .

2, In what way essoins of sickness on the way
are returned .

9. What essoiners shall ied sthemsdivés and
what shall find sureties, and concerning the
finding of sureties

What it is to warrant an essoin by an | oath

. If there be an error in the day given, what
is to be done


So»


CHAPTER X. ]leaf 352 b.


l. À writ to send four knights to him, who has
been essoined for bed-sickness, in order to
view him .

2. Of the office of the viount. when he has

received à writ .

Àn enrolment, if the knight Jays not come

À. writ for attaching the knighte

If one of the viewers be infirm or inefficient,

let another be put into his place ;

6. How leave to rise from bed is to be asked
fo . : " I ; : . ;

7. À writ, if after having asked for and ob-
tained leave he has been arrested by his
.&dversary . ;

8. If in the court of a baron Or of another Eenuon
there be denied leave to get up, the lord
the king shall grant leavein default of such
persons ; : :


Sou 9


CHAPTER XI. leaf 356.

. Of the office of the four knights in making a
view. Of essoins, when those sent have
come to the place where the essoinee ought

to be lying


un


i2


ci


303


cil


INDEX.


. Cum milites venerint ad testificandum ]lan-


guorem


. Qualiter dandus i dies et sub Diii bus veibis


Cap. XII. fol. 357


. Qualiter essoniatus custodire debet languorem,


et qualiter se tenere.


. Si essoniatus inventus fuerit vagans, qualiter


debet arrestarl .


. Breve, 81 essoniatus MNT sine licentia.


quod milites mittantur ad ipsum ad viden-
dum, si ita surrexerit vel non post languo-
rem ei adjudicatum .


Cap. XIII. fol. 359.


. Qualiter essoniatus venire debet ad Turrim


London, et quando, vel mittere responsa-
lem . i :


. Qualiter sit annus bissextilis:
. De apparitione essoniati
. De officio constabularii .


CAP. XIV. fol. 361.


. Cum visus fieri debet, vel factus fuerit, si


visores non sunt legittimi, quid facere debet
essoniatus .


. Si languor vertatur in — incuébulens.


quod essoniatus venire non Bose tunc
mittat responsalem


. Breve de mittendo ad languidum, ut sciatur,


si ratam habuerit responsionem, quai
responsalis pro eo fecit


Page


308


322


324
326
336
338


342


346


348


— — — A— D mmm


TABLE.


. When the knights have come to testify to
& languor . :
. How à day i is to be sraibed: and i in what words


CnaPTER XII. leaf 357.


. In. what way an essoinee ought to observe &
languor, and in what way to kecp himself .
. If an essoinee has been found at large, in what
way he may be arrested

. À writ, if the essoinee has got up without
license, that knights be sent to view him,
 ifhe has so got up or not after a languor
has been adjudged to him . i .


CHAPTER XIII leaf 359.


. In what way an essoinee ought to come to the
Tower of London or to send & responsible
person
. In what manner the M becoinos biscutile i
. Of the appearance of the essoinee

. Of the office of constable


CHAPTER XIV. leaf 361


. When the view ought to be made, or has been
made, if the viewers are not legitimate,
what the essoinee ought to do

. If à languor is turned into an incurable dissdse
so that the essoinee cannot come, then let
him send & person to answer for him .

. À writ to send to & languid person, that it
may be known, if he ratifies the answer,
which his representative has made on his
behalf


323


325
327
onyí
390


943


947


349


civ


pd


M C» N


. Compensatio defaltarum
. De excusationibus non venientis . ;
. Si legittime summonitus defaltam fecerit,


INDEX.


Car. XV. fol. 362.


. Si plures sint participes tenentes unicum jus


habentes, qualiter procedendum est in es-
sonio de malo lecti ; ;


Car. XVI. fol. 363.


. Si quis essoniatus fuerit in comitatu de malo


lecti, qualiter debeat essoniatus apparere et
quando


. Breve de videndo eum, Gi Bseordbtun in comi-


tatu de malo leeti . : : : :


Car. XVII. fol. 363 b.


. De essonio de malo ville
. Ubi non jacet essonium de malo ville .


TRACTATUS TEnTIUS. DE DreraArris.


CaP. I. fol 364 b.


. De contumacibus et non venientibus ad judi-


cium post legittimam summonitionem


breve quod vocatur magnum cape


. Natura et effectus brevis magnum cape justa


virtutum vocabulorum contentorum in brevi


. Qualiter terra capta in manum domini regis


per defaltam peti debeat per plevinam


. Quid fieri debet in placito advocationis post


defaltam E


972


Page


352


358


360


362
364


368
370


YE


376
378


380


TABLE. cv


CHAPTER XV. leaf 362.


Page

l. If there be several coparcener tenants having
a& single right, how proceedings are to be
had in an essoin for bed-sickness . 9598

CHAPTER XVI. leaf 3638.

l. If & person has been essoined in the county
eourt for bed-sickness, in what way the
essoinee ought to appear, and when . . 959

2. À writ for viewing him, who is essoined in &
county court for bed-sickness  . ; . 961


CuaAPTER XVII. leaf 363. b.


]. An essoin for vill-sickness ; 3963
9. When an essoin for vill-sickness dos ut hne . 305


Tug THIRD TnaEATISE. CoNCERNING DEFAULTS.


CHAPTER I. leaf 364 b.


1. Of persons contumacious and not coming to

judgment after a legitimate summons. 369
2. À compensation of defaults . 371
3. Of the excusations of à person not appearing . 973
4. 1f legitimately summoned he has made default,

a writ which is called à Magnum Cape  . 375
5. The nature and effect of the. writ Magnum

Cape, according to the virtue of the words

contained in the writ.  . 977
6. How land taken into the hand of the lord the

king through default ought to be claimed

through a plevin 379
7. What ought to be done in & plea o of Mdvowsod

after & default . à . 981


cvi


ee


d


10.
11.


INDEX.


Qualiter defenditur summonitio et sursisa per
legem.

Si defalta facta fuerit, qualiter sit nocendi:
dum . : . : :

Irrotulatio post defaltam

Breve de seysina habenda, tatodumr quis
recuperavit per defaltam .


Car. II. fol. 367 b.


. Quale competat remedium tenenti, postquam


amiserit per defaltam, et usque ad quod
tempus


Car. III. fol. 367.


. Qualiter sanatur defalta per servitium domini


regis . ' . . .


. Brevia, quae exceusant per Servia doniini


regis .


. Qualiter exeusatur DRRUM mulis modis
. Si post defaltam capiatur dies &moris .
. Quis poterit remittere defaltam


Car. IV. fol. 369.


. Si in actione mixta facta fuerit defalta -
. Si in uno brevi actio duplex
S1 petens defaltam fecerit et tenens venerit,


si petens possit salvare


. Si petens non venerit, nec tenens se essonia-


verit .


. Si unus ex pluribus tenentibus, qui ienent | in


communi, defaltam fecerit, et alius essonia-
tus fuerit, et tertius comparuerit


. Si partieeps nominatus in brevi sequi noluerit,


vel non venerit, summoneatur ad sequen-
dum, si voluerit , :


Li


388


412


10.
11.


TABLE,


. How the summons and the neglect are to be


contested at law.


. If à default has been made, how proceedings


are to behad  .
Àn enrolment after & default . :
À writ for having seysine after & person has
recovered through a default


CHAPTER II. leaf 307.


. What sort of remedy is allowable to & tenant


after he has lost. through a default, and up
to what time ;


CHAPTER III. leaf 367 b.


. How & default through the service of the lord


the king may be cured


. Writs, which excuse for the service of the lord


the king


. In what manner absence in many Ways is


excused


. If after & default a day of love be (akeli.
. Who can remit a default .


CHAPTER IV. leaf 369 b.


. If default be made in & mixed action
. If there be & double action in one writ
. If the claimant has made default and the (ona


"has come, if the claimant can save it .


. If the claimant has not come, nor the tenant


has essoined himself .


. If one out of several tenants io hold in


common, has made default, and another has
been essoined, and a third has appeared


. If à eoparcener named in à writ is unwilling


to sue or has not come, let him be summoned
to sue, if he wishes to do so


389


413


cvill ] INDEX.


HB» C2 b9


. Si vir et uxor simul petant, et alter eorum


defaltam fecerit ; :


. 81 quis defaltam fecerit anbequam: comparue-


rit, si loquela translata fuerit ad a ds
curiam  . .


. Parvum cape, Si (jis defaltam fecerit, post-


quam in curia comparuerit


. Forma brevis, quod dicitur parvum cape
11.
12.


Si quis defaltam fecerit in actione mixta

Si dus actiones, quarum una personalis et
alia realis, currant versus unum in uno
brevi


Car. V. fol 9372 b.


. Partibus in judicio comparentibus, qualiter


petens proponere debet intentionem suam.
De modo narrandi


. De articulis; quibus uti debet in Panetiode .
. Qualiter breve de recto limitetur s :
. Quod tenens poterit mutare intentionem suam


in parte . i . : .


CAP. VL fol 373 b.


. Qualiter sit narratio descensus usque ad pe-


tentem per singulos gradus  . , .


. Si fieri debeat narratio & linea recta usque


&d transversalem


. Si. antenatus in vita patris communis mori-


atur .


. Si abbas vel prior petenti T breve de recto
. Si plures sint petentes, omnes nominentur


in brevi, sive legittimi, sive bastardi, sive
servi.


Page


414


416
420


424
426


428


432
434


- - -— mimis RR. ll


—


11.
12.


OQ o


TABLE.


. If husband and wife claim together, and one of


them makes default .


. If à person has made default before he has M


peared, if the cause has been transferred to
the great court .


. À little cape if any one has made default after


he has appeared in court


. The form of the writ, which is NS &  Jittle


cape .
If & person bu made default i in à nixed ict
If two. actions, of which one is personal and
the other real,run against one person in
one writ . $ , . ,


CHAPTER V. leaf 372 b.


. Upon the parties appearing in court, in what


way the claimant ought to propound his
declaration. Of the manner of declaring «


. Of the articles, which he id to use in his


declaration .


. In what way & writ of right is i'dinitted : :
. That the claimant. may change his declaration


inpart  . : i à: à : .


CHAPTER VI. leaf 373 b.


. In what way the declaration is made of the


descent down to the claimant E single
degrees  .


. If & declaration ought to be made from & ri ight


line to & transverse line


. If the elder-born dies in the life of ilis common


father


. If an abbot or à prior claim by à writ ot right
. If there be several claimants, let them all be


named in the writ, whether legitimate, or
bastards, or serfs


433
435


Cx


tz


INDEX.


. Qualiter et quibus modis cadit actio, per de-


faltam vel errorem in narratione


. Quibus jus descendere potest
. Quod donatorio nihil juris descendere volet


.de seysina donatoris vel antecessoris


CaP. VII. fol. 376.


. Proposita intentione actoris, videat tenens an


sit jurisdictio, et justiciarius qui judicare
possit. Item an sit ibi actor, et de cau-
tela cirea responsionem tenentis conside-
' randum, et. de visu petendo .


Car. VIII. fol. 376 b.


. De visu petendo,et quare faciendus est visus
. De visu faciendo, et eui non visus, scilicet


vel quod tantundem valeat


. Si post visum petitum se essoniaverit tenens,


et postea dicat quod visum non habuerit


CaP. IX. fol 377 b.


. Si de rebus incorporalibus jaceat visus, sicut


de juribus


. Cum jus advocationis petatur et purs sunt


ecclesia


. 8i jus &dvocationis capi debeat in manum


Tegis .


Ubi visus jacet, vel tantundem. ;


458


460
462


470


472
474


476
478


oo *d


TABLE.


. In what manner and in what ways an action


falls through default or error in the counting


. To whom right may desceud .
. That no right can descend to the donutoty


from the seysine of the donor or his an-
cestor


CHAPTER VII. leaf 376.


. Upon the declaration of the claimant having


been propounded, let the tenant see if there
be jurisdiction, and & justiciary who can
judge. Likewise it is to be considered
, Whether the claimant be there, and concern-
ing the caution about the answer of the
tenant, and concerning the claiming & view


CHAPTER VIII. leaf 376 b.


Concerning the making of a view, and where-


fore & view 1s to be made .


. Of making & view, and to whom it is nut to be


granted, to wit, or what is an equivalent .


. If after à view has been claimed the tenant


has essoined himself, and afterwards should
say that he has not had a view .


CHAPTER IX. leaf 377 b.


. If there lies à view of incorporeal things, as of


rights


. When the right of dvo sb is elaiinod and


there are several churches .


. If the right of advowson ought to be taken


into the hand of the king .


. Where a view lies, or an equivalent


459


461


463


471


473
4175


4717
479


exii INDEX.


CAP. X. fol 379.


De irrotulatione post visum concessum. . 480
Brevia& de visu faciendo, scilicet de toto . 482
Si de parte, unde dotata fuit ; —
Si ad breve de recto, quo jure petatur visus

de communia pasture  .. ; ; 0 —


B Co ron


Car. XI. fol. 379 b.


. Ad diem datum post visum habitum nene
atur essonium . 484
S1 loquela posita fuerit. ad magnam curiam de
comitatu, et contentio fuerit de visu habito
vel comitatu  . ; : . 486


d


d


Car. XII. fol. 379 b.


. Qualiter petens debet designare tenenti rem
petitam, ut sciri possit, si illam tenuerit
vellnon . .. . 486

Si contentio habeatur, quantum terree posi-
tum fuerit in visu, iii fii inde
jocus partitus . ; . 488

. Si fiat inde inquisitio, tune sic. ; —

. Habito visu, tunc warrantum vocet tenens, |

si voluerit, si warrantum habeat  . . 490


iul


NN


- 5


FINIS TRACTATUS QUARTI LIBRI QUINTI.


TABLE. cxiil


CHAPTER X. leaf 379.


l. Concerning the enrolment after & view has

been granted . . 481
2. Writs to make & view, to wit, of the whole . 483
3. If of a part, with which she was endowed .  —
4. If upon à writ of right quo jure & view may

be claimed concerning common of pasture . | —


CHAPTER XI. leaf 379 b.


1. At the appointed day after & view has been
had an essoin may be recommenced . 485
2, If the trial has been transferred to the PR6st
court from the county court, and there shall
be & dispute respecting & view having been
had or the county . i 0. . 487


CHAPTER XII. leaf 379 b.


l, In what way the claimant should designate to

the tenant the thing claimed, that it may

be known, if he has itor not  . 487
2, If there be a dispute how much land has beon

included in the view, there is sometimes

made of it an alternative risk . . 489
3. If an inquisition be thereon made, then thus 0 —
4. Upon & view having been made, let the tenant

then eall & warrantor, if he wishes, if he

has & warrantor ; . ; . 491


HERE ENDS THE FOURTH TREATISE OF THE FIFTH BOOK.


HENRICI DE BRACTON


DE


LEGIBUS ET CONSUETUDINIBUS ANGLLZ.


HENRICUS DE BRACTON


ON THE


LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF ENGLAND.


Q6366. Wt 2377. A


HENRICI DE BRACTON


DE


LEGIBUS ET CONSUETUDINIBUS ANGLLA,


E
Ubi locum
habet ista
fictio.


f. 318.


TRACTATUS SECUNDUS LIBRI QUARTI:


IN QUO TRACTATUR DE INGRESSU.!


SUT8S FUA IS A8 8 IAS PS UIS8LUACAPS.


UPS


Car. I.


Dietum est supra de causa possessionis, qus per
assisas et recognitiones terminatur: nunc autem dicendü
de causa proprietatis, quz, terminatur per jurata ex
testimonio et probatione eorum, qui probare possunt
de visu suo proprio & auditu, s. ubi quis seysinam
sua ppriam petierit, vel alicujus antecessoris sui, quam
de voluntate sua de aliqua re &d terminum annorum
vel ad terminu vite alus dimisit, & d post terminum
pteritum ad ipsum reverti debeat, & ubi locum non ha-
beat assisa nove disseysinze, quia contra voluntate suam
& injuste non est disseysitus, nec etiam assisa mortis
antecessoris, quia antecessor suus non obiit seysitus ut
de feodo in dominico suo, quia alius inde habuit liberu
tenementü qui rem illam tenuit ad vitam, q quidem
aliter esset si ad terminu annoru, quamvis centum, d
vitam hominum excederet. Et non solu locum habet
ista actio versus eum qui rem ita receperit ad termi-
num, verum etiam contra omnes qui talem habent
ingressum, quatenus gradus et tempus pmiserint. Non


ow


! Hic incipit Tractatus Septimus libri Quarti de Ingressu. MS. Rawl.
C. 160.


THE FOURTH BOOK


or


HENRICUS DE BRACTON


ON THE


LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF ENGLAND.
THE SEVENTH TREATISE,


WHICH TREATS OF ENTRY.


CHAPTER I.


We have treated above of & cause of possession


l.
? Where this


which is determined by assises and recognitions ; nOW action has
indeed we must treat of a cause of property, which is Place.


determined by & jury upon the testimony and proof
of those, who can prove by their own sight and hearing,
for instance, where a person has claimed his own seysine,
or the seysine of some ancestor of his, which he has of
his own will demised to others for a term of years, or
for the term of their life, and where an assise of novel
disseysine would not have place, because there is no
disseysine against his will and unjustly, nor indeed an
assise of mort-dancester, beeause his ancestor has not
died seysed of it as of fee in his own demesne, because
another person had the freehold thereof who had the
estate for life, which would be otherwise if he had it
for & term of years, as for instance for one hundred
years, which would exceed the life of men. And not
only this action has place against him who has so
received the estate for a term of years, but against all
who have such an entry, as far as degree and time shall
A 2


f. 31*.


Britton, v.
ch. xiv.

8 7.

Fleta, 361.


4 DE INGRESSU.


enim excedit tertiam gradum, nec tempus q excedit
testimoniu, de visu et auditu. Item non solü locum
habet versus eos qui per tales habent ingressum, sed
locum habet versus alios, qui ingrediuntur per tales, et
qui rem transferre non possunt sine consensu aliorum,
licet aliquod jus habet! transferendi: ut canonicus sine
assensu episcopi et capituli. Item si uxor sine con-
sensu viri, et e converso si vir sine consensu uxoris, si
abbas sine consensu capituli. Item si celerarius cleri-
cus, vel alius peurator sine consensu abbatis vel prio-
ris, vel aliorum quorum cosensus requiri debet in
translatione facienda. Item locü habet hsc actio ver-
sus omnes qui ingressum habent per tales qui trans-
ferunt, et qui liberum tenementum non habent nec jus
transferendi, nisi q sunt in nuda possessione et nomine
aliorum, et transferunt contra voluntate dominorum, ut
eustos, vel ballivus, dum aliquis infra rmtatem, vel ab-
sens, vel in prisona, vel non san: memorie, vel alio
modo, secundü q inferius plenius dicetur. Et notandu
quód hiec dictio (terminus) large se habet, et ad ter-
minum vite, & ad terminum annorum qui pteriit. Et
sciendum q ille qui ad terminum annoru dimittit,
quamvis longissimum, dum tamen pbari possit ingres-
sus ex testimonio visus & auditus, retinet sibi domi-
nium, pprietatein, feodu, et liberum tenemetum si hzc
omnia priüs habuerit, vel qdam eorü, secundum q
prius habuerit. Nihil enim transfert ad firmarium ad
firmam nisi q uti possit & frui, s. habere usum & pci-
pere fructum. Et unde bene poterit pprietarius hzc
omnia &d aliu transferre, q sibi retinuit, sine injuria
firmarii, g si non fecerit, heec omnia transfert ad hz-


! * habeant," MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ** clericus," omitted, id.


OF ENTRY. 5


permit. Forit does not exceed the third degree, nor a
time, which goes bevond testimony from sight and
hearing. Likewise it has place not only against those
who through such persons have entry, but it has place
acainst those who enter through such persons, and who
cannot transfer the estate without the consent of others,
although they have some right of transferring it, as a
canon without the assent of the bishop and the chapter.
Likewise if a wife without the consent of her husband,
and conversely if a husband withovt the consent of his
wife, if an abbot without the consent of his chapter.
Likewise if & steward clerk or other agent without the
consent of the abbot or prior, or of others whose consent
ought to be sought for in making a trausfer. Likewise
this action has place against all who have entry through
such as transfer, and who have not a freehold nor &
right to transfer, except that they are in the bare
possession and in the name of others, and ihey transfer
against the will of the lords, such as a steward ora
bailiff, whilst some one is under age, or absent, or in
prison, or of not sound memory, or in some other manner
which will be explained more fully further on. And it
is to be noted that this word "term" has & wide
meaning, and applies to the term of life, or to a term
of years which has passed. And it is to be known that
he who demises for à term of years, although of very
great length, provided only that entry can be proved
hy the testimony of sight and hearing, retains for him-
self the dominion, the property, the fee, and the free-
hold, if he had all these previously, or a certain portion
of them according to what he had previously. For
he transfers nothing to the farmer to farm. but what he
can use and enjoy, that is to have the use and to reap fruits
thereof. And hence a proprietor may well transfer all
these things to another, which he has retained for him-
self, without injustice to the farmer, because if he has
not done so. he transfers all these things to his heirs.


6 DE INGRESSU.


redes suos. Item notandum gq iste dictiones (ad ter-
minu qui pteriit) generales sunt, et terminare possunt
plures casus speciales, et in narratione facti suppleri
poterit q min? dictü est in brevi, & cüm generale sit,
priüs dicatur de eo. Forma brevis talis est.


2. Rex vicecomiti salute. Precipe À. q justé & sine
de. dilatione reddat B. tantu terre cum ptinentiis in tali
miserit ad. villa, q idem PB. ei dimisit ad terminü qui pteriit (ut
Dm dicit) et nisi fecerit et B. fecerit te securü de clamore


teriit. suo psequendo, tunc summoneas p bonos summonitores
pfatum A. q sit cora justiciariis nostris &c. ad primáa
assisa cüm in ptes illas venerint, ostesurus quare non
fecerit. Et habeas ibi summonitores et hoc breve.
Teste &c.


3. Qualiter autem tenens summoniri debeat, et si non
2 Ms venerit ad summonitionem, qualiter defalta puniri de-
inhujus. beat, infra dicit pleniüs in actionibus realibus. Poterit
mt , autem se essoniare si voluerit de malo veniendi, & non
£318». de malo lecti, quia nunqua locum habebit essoniu de
d malo lecti, nisi breve de ingressu per narratione ver-
Fleta, 364. tatur in breve de recto, ppter logissimu ingressum, qui
pbari non poterit per visum pprium alicujus & auditu
sed alienum, & ubi agi oportet de necessitate de mero
jure p magnam assisam vel per duellum. Et cüm
breve de ingressu incipiat esse alterius nature qui
primó fuit, s. breve de recto, merito debet habere om-
nia que breve habet, cujus naturam sequitur in nar-
ratione, & vice versa, si contingat q per narrationem
vertatur breve de recto in breve de ingressu, desinit


habere naturam brevis de recto, & sic &mittet essonium


. 0QF ENTRY. T


Likewise itis to be noted that these expressions (for a
term which has;passed) are general, and may determine
many special cases, and in the statement of the facts
there may be supplied that which has been understated
in the writ, and since this is general,let us first treat
ofit. The form of the writ is of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin A. that mes 3
justly and without delay he restore to B. so much land a person
with its appurtenances in such a vill, which tne said B, h*de.-
has demised to him for a term which has passed, as he a term,
says, and unless he has done so, and if B. has given you im
security to prosecute his claim, then summon by good
summoners the aforesaid A. that he present himself
before our justiciaries, &c., at the first assise, when they
shall come into those parts, in order to show cause
wherefore he has not done so. And have there the


summoners and this writ. Witness, &c.


But in what manner a tenant ought to be. summoned, 3.
and, if he has not appeared to his summons, how his Saa


default ought to be punished, is expounded more fully procecding
in realactions. ^ For he may essoin himself on account 5, nada
of siekness on his journey, and not on aecount of sick- kind.
ness in bed, for an essoin on account of sickness in f?!8b
bed will never have a place, unless a writ of entry has
been converted by the declaration into à writ of right on
account of a very remote entry, which cannot be proved
by the proper sight or hearing of any one, but only by
one from hearsay, and where the action of necessity
must be about the absolute right by & great assise or by
battle. And when the writ4/of entry begins to be of a
different nature than it was at first, to wit, a writ of right,
it ought to have deservedly every thing which a writ has,
whose nature it follows in the declaration, and conversely,
if it happens that through the declaration a writ of right
is turned into & writ of entry, it ceases to have the
nature of a writ of right, and so it will lose an essoin of


e


8 DE INGRESSU.


Britton, i&. de malo lecti ratione premissa. Sed si cüm breve de


& 2.


recto per narratione incipiat esse breve de ingressu, &
petens narrationem suam pposuerit & fundaverit, &
paratus sit pbare eam p patriam, tamen in voluntate
tenentis est utrum ponere se voluerit in jurata de
ingressu tali vel non, cüm tria habeat remedia, s. de-
fendendi se p duellum, vel ponendi se in magnam
assisam de jure, vel in jurata de ingressu. Sed cüm
in voluntate tenentis sit eligendi quà istarum viarum!
voluerit, no priüs fiet breve de recto breve de ingressu,
quà tenens elegerit defendere se p jurata cotra ingres-
sum: ut si abbas, prior, vel alius petierit versus alique
p breve de recto aliquam terra ut jus ecclesie sure,
vel alius ut jus suü p verba de recto & ut de jure
mero, & adjiciat in fine clausulam istam: Et in quam
non habet ingressum nisi p talem predecessorem vel
antecessorem suum, qui terra illam ei dimisit ad certu
terminum &c.; vel si aliquis dicat: Et in quam non
habet ingressum nisi p talem quz fuit uxor talis, quze
terram illa tenuit in dotem de dono talis, cujus heres
ipse petens est, & quamvis tempus brevis de ingressu
hoe permiserit, non tamen ppter hoc vertitur breve de
recto &d breve de ingressu, sed in suo statu durabit p
omnia, nisi tenens gratis se posuerit in juratà de in-
gressu. Vertitur quandoq, e converso p narratione breve
de ingressu ad breve de recto, de necessitate & non
de voluntate: quandoq, ppter longissimum ingressum,
quandog, ppter donu & feoffameétum. Propter longissi-
mum ingressum, qui pbari non possit de alicujus visu
pprio vel auditu, sed alieno, sieut de visu patris &
auditu qui injuxit filio: quo casu ppter necessitate, &


! * juratarum," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ENTRY. 0


sickness in bed *for the reason premised. But when a
writ of right through the declaration begins to be & writ
of entry, and the claimant has propounded and founded
his declaration, and is prepared to prove it by the
country, nevertheless it is at the option of the tenant
whether he wishes to put himself upon a jury concern-
ing such entry or not, since he has three remedies, to
wit, of defending himself by battle, or of putting himself
upon & great assise concerning the right, or upon & jury
concerning the entry. But since it is at the option of
& tenant to elect which of these ways he wishes, a
writ of right shall not become & writ of entry before that
the tenant has elected to defend himself by & jury
against the entry : as if an abbot, prior, or another has
claimed against any one by a writ of right any land as
the right of his church, or another person as his own
right by words concerning the right and as of absolute
right, and should add at the end this clause: and into
* which he has no entry, except through such à prede-
" cessor of his ancestor who demised that land to him
'" for & certain term &c." or if some one should say * and
* into which he has no entry except by such & person,
" who was the wife of so-and-so, who held that land
" as dower by the grant of so-and-so, whose heir the
" elaimant is," and although the time of the writ of
entry has permitted this, the writ of right is not on
that &ccount turned into & writ of entry, but it will
continue in its own state through everything, uuless
the tenant has put himself gratuitously on a jury concern-
ing the entry. Conversely & writ of entry is sometimes
turned into a writ of right by the declaration, of necessity
and not of option, sometimes on account of a very remote
entry, sometimes on account of a grant and a feoffment.
On account of & very remote entry, which cannot be
proved by any one's own sight or hearing but only by
that of another, as by the sight and hearing of his
father who enjoined his son: in which case on account


f. 319.


10 DE INGRESSU.


alterius pbationis defectu, oportet q'tenens se ponat
in magnam assisam, vel defendat p duellü. Ut si in-
gressus longinquus sit de tempore H. regis avi vel
infra usg ad teépus assise mortis antecessoris, ut si
dicatur: Et unde À. non habet ingressu nisi p B. qui
non nisi custodiam inde habuit cum C. cujus hzre-
ditas terra illa fuit, & quse fuit jus pdicte C. matris
B. uxoris ejus qui petit, & p quà pdictus talis & uxor
ejus qui petunt clamant terra illa, & postea sie: Et
unde pdicta talis &via fuit seysita in dominico suo ut
de feodo & jure tepore talis regis capiendo inde ex-
pletia &c. et de tali descendit jus &c. sicut p breve
de recto. Et quo casu oportet q tenens se ponat in
magnam assisam vel defendat se p duellum in defectu
alterius pbationis, nisi sit qui dicat q breve cadere
debeat ppter tepus et longissimum ingressum. Si aute
in! tempus permiserit, tenens habebit electionem po-
nendi se in juratam de ingressu, quousque se posuerit
in magnam assisam vel se defenderit p duellum. Po-
nere autem se poterit in juratam per hse verba. De-
fendere enim poterit talem ingressum, & q nullum
habet ingressum per talem, quia antequàm talis aliquid
inde haberet, fuit ipse tenens seysitus p alium talem,
& ita q per predictam aviam nullum ingressum habuit,
Sicut ipse petens dicit, & pvenire poterit ad inquisitio-
nem si tempus permiserit de ingressu, p hac verba,
scilicet si pdictus talis tenens aliud jus, vel alium in-
gressum habuit in predictam terram, quàm p ipsum
talem, &c. qui terram illam dimisit B. uxori de here-
ditate À. &e. vel qui terra illam ei dimisit de hierédi-
tate talis uxoris suse, vel alio quoeunq modo, &c. ltem


! * in? omitted MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ENTRY. 11


of the necessity and the failure of any other proof it is
incumbent that the tenant put himself upon & great
assise, or defend himself by battle.  Às if the remote
entry be of the time of Henry the grandfather of the king,
or within that time up tothe time of an assise of mort-
dancester, as if it be said: and whereof A. has no entry
except through B. who had only the custody of it with
C. whose inheritance that land was, and which was the
right of the aforesaid C. the mother of B. the wife of
him who claims, and through whom so-and-so aforesaid
and his wife the petitioners claim that land, and after-
wards thus: and whereof so-and-so aforesaid the grand-
mother was seysed in her demesne as of fee and of rivht
in the time of the said king in taking thereof profits &c.,
from so-and-so the right descends &c. just as through
a writ of right, and in which case it is incumbent that
the tenant should put himself upon a great assise or
defend himself by battle in default of any other proof,
unless there be some one who says that the writ ought
to fall on account of time and a most remote entry. But
if time shall allow, the tenant will have an election of
putting himself upon a jury concerning entry, until
he shall have put himself upon à great assise or shall
defend himself by battle. But he will be able to put
himself upon & jury by these words. For he may defend
such entry, and that he had not entry through such
person, because before such person had anything thercof,
he the tenant was seysed by another so-and-so, and so
that he had no entry through his grandmother aforesaid,
as he the claimant says, and he will be able to attain to
an inquest, if time shall allow, concerning entry, through
these words, to wit, if so-and-so &aforesaid the tenant had
another right or another entry into the aforesaid land,
than through the said so-and-so &c. who demised the
land to B. nis wife of the inheritance of À. &c. or who
demised that land to him of the inheritance of his said
wife or in some other manner &c. Likewise that a writ


f. 319.


13 DE INGRESSU.


q breve de ingressu vertitur ad breve de recto, ubi
contra ingressum de termino opponitur feoffamentum
sieut ppter tempus longissimum, videri poterit in iti-
nere W. de Ralegh in comitat North. de Pet de Gal-
dington, d petiit terrà versus W. de Breton p breve de
ingressu, & ubi W. defendit talem ingressum, & dixit
q habuit ingressum per &ntecessorem ilum de cujus
seysina idem Petrus petiit terram illam, qui de terra
illa feoffavit eum tenedum p homagio & servitio suo,
& q talo fuit jus suum per feoffamentum, & non p
talem ingressum, posuit se in magnam assisam, & pces-
sit assisa, quia clamavit tenere per feoffamitü per hec
verba, scilicet, utrum ipse majus jus habeat in terra
illa, ut in illa quam talis antecessor predicti Petri ei
dedit p homagio & servitio suo, an idem Petrus tenendi
eam in dominico. Ad idem facit de termino P. aiio
regis H. decimo quarto in com Wilton de Radulph. de
Moigne, quia tenens locutus fuit de feoffamto anteces-
sorum petentis de tempore L. annorum, ubi excedit
tempus assisa? mortis antecessoris, statim desinit esse
breve de ingressu, propter longissimum temporis in-
gressum nisi ex necessitate, ut infra. Item de hac
materia inveniri poterit in rotulo de termino Sancte T.
anno regis Henrici quarto in com Eborum de Petro de
Malo Lacu & Isabella uxore ejus petentibus, & de priore
de S. Oswaldo tenente. Si autem tenens omninó non
venerit nec p se, nec p attornatum suum, tunc capia-
tur terra in manum dom regis p magnum cape, q tale
est, ut infra. de actionibus realibus, et ibi breve. Et
si ulterius aliam fecerit defaltam, tune pcedatur cotra
ipsum postquam comparuerit p parvum cape, & tunc
fiat ut ibi. In fine aute cüm tenens comparuerit, vel


! ** Goldyngtone," MS. Rawl. C. ? *assism.,," MS. id.
160.


OF ENTRY. 13


of entry is turned into à writ of right, where against ai
entry for & term & feoffment is opposed as on account of
a very long time, may be seen in an Iter of William de
Ralegh in the county of Northampton, concerning Peter
of Galdington, who claimed land against William de
Breton by & writ of entry, and where W. denied such
entry, and said that he had entry through that ancestor,
concerning whose seysine the said Peter claimed that
land, who enfeoffed him with that land to be held for
his homage and service, and that his said right was by
feoffment and not by the said entry, and he put himself
upon & great assise, and the assise proceeded, because he
claimed to hold through a feoffment, in these words, to
wit, whether he had the greater right in that land, as
the land which the said ancestor of the aforesaid Peter
granted to him for his homage and service, or the said
Peter to hold it in domain. To the same effect is the
ease of Radulph de Moigme in the Easter term in the
fourteenth year of king Henry in the county of Wilts,
because the tenant spoke of a feoffment of the ancestors
of the claimant of fifty years standing, where it exceeds
the time of an assise of mort-dancester, it ceases forth-
with to be a writ of entry, on account of the entry being
of a very long time, unless from necessity as below.
Likewise on this subject a case may be found in the roll
of the term of Holy Trinity in the fourth year of king
Henry in thé county of York, concerning Peter de Malo
Lacu and Isabella his wife the claimants, and the prior
of St. Oswald the tenant. But if the tenant has not
appeared at all neither in person nor by his attorney,
then let the land be taken into the hand of the lord the
king by the great C«ape, which is such as is described
below concerning real actions, and the writ there. And if
he has further made another default, then let proceedings
be taken against him after he has appeared by the little
Cape, and then let it be done as there. In the end how-
ever, when the tenant has appeared, he will be able to


14 DE INGRESSU.


excipere poterit contra bre, vel contra psonam peten-
tis, vel alio modo multis de causis & multis rationibus,
ut infrà de exceptionibus pleniüs, cüm petens inten-
tionem suam pposuerit, fundaverit, & pbaverit, secundü
quosdam. Non enim sufficiat! dicere q tenens talem
habuit ingressum sicut ipse dicit, nisi docere possit q
ad ipsum pertineat actio  & q ad ipsum debeat res
reverti post terminü, ratione seysine antecessoris sui,
de cujus seysina fecerit métione non tamen narrare
debet sicut p bie de recto, nisi ita sit q bre de ingressu
versü sit in bre de recto. Sufficit enim si dicat, peto tant
terra ut jus meu possessoriü si ad vitam tenuerit, vel
ut hereditate si teneat in feodo, & in quam talis non
habet ingressu nisi p talem, &c., quia sufficit ista nar-
ratio tátüm ad seysinà in judicio possessorio: ut si ille
f.319 b. dederit ad terminü, vel in feodo, qui non tenuerit nisi
ad vità quacunq, ratione. Si aute mentione fecerit de
usu & expletiis, & in dico suo ut de feodo, respoderi
possit sicut ad breve de recto, & posset tenens se
defendere per duellü vel magnam assisam q in hoe
breve locü non habet. Potest etiam tenens defendere
jus petentis & talem ingressum p tale, & dicere quód
non habet ingressum p tale de quo breve loquitur,
immo per aliü tale, & inde se ponat in inquisitione, &
fiat tale breve de inquirendo venitate, nisi tenens ita
esse cognoverit sine inquisitione. Forma brevis talis
erit, si fieri debeat inquisitio in comitatu.


4. Rex vic. salute. Proecipimus tibi q venire facias


2 ur, coram te & cora custodibus placitorü coronz nostrse
: E n: Es . L] RE) e.
quod no. in pleno comitatu (uo duodecim tam milites quàm alios


! * sufficit," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ENTRY. 15


except against the writ or against the person of the
claimant, or in some other manner for many causes and
for many reasons, as below concerning exceptions will be
stated more fully, when the claimant has propounded his
declaration, has supported it, and has proved it according
tosome. For it would not be sufficient to say that the
tenant had such an entry as he himself says, unless he
can show that he is entitled to the action, and that the
estate ought to revert to him after the term by reason
of the seysine of his ancestor, concerning whose seysine
he has made mention, he ought not however to count as
through a writ of right, unless it be that the writ of
entry is turned into a writ of right. For it is sufficient
if he says, I claim so much land as my possessory right,
if he holds it for life, or as my inheritance, if he holds
it in fee, and into which so-and-so has not an entry
except through so-and-so, &c., for this count suffices only
for seysine in a possessory judgment, as if he has granted
it for a term or in fee, who is only tenant for life in f. 31v v.
some manner, Butif he has made mention of use and
profits, and in his own domain as of fee, an answer may
be made as in a writ of right, and the tenant may defend
himself by battle or by & great assise, which has no
place in this writ. For the tenant may deny the rirht
of the elaimant and such an entry through such a person,
and say that he had not an entry through such a person,
coneerning whom the writ speaks, nay through so-and-
s0 another person, and thereupon may put himself upon
an inquest, and let such & writ be made concerning an
inquest into the truth, unless the tenant has confessed
it to be so without. an inquest. The form of the writ
shall be of this kind, if the inquest ought to be held in
the county.


The king to the viscount greeting. "We enjoin you, 4.
that you cause to appear before you and before the d an-
keepers of the pleas of our crown in. your full county swers that


per talem
nominatum
in brevi,
sed per
alium
talem.


DP
Breve, *i
juratores
venire
debeant
coram jus-
ticiariis.


16 DE INGRESSU.

liberos, legales, & discretos homines de visneto tali, per
quos rei veritas meliüs sciri poterit, & qui À. de N.
nulla affinitate attingant, & etia qui nullo modo süt
essoniabiles, ad recognoscendü super sacramentü suum,
$i pdictus À. aliud jus vel alium ingressum habuerit
in talem terram cum ptinentiis in tali villa, quàm per
B. fratrem C. cujus heres ipse est, qui terra illam ei
dimisit ad terminü qui pteriit, vel si A. ingressum
habuit p D. qui terram illam dedit in feodo (ut ide
A. dicit), quia tam predict? A. quàm pdietus C. posu-
erunt se inde in juratà illam. Et inquisitione quam
inde feceris scire facias justic. nostris apud W. ad talem
terminü evidenter, distincte, et &perté per literas tuas
sigillatas sigillo tuo, & sigillis prsdictorum custodum
placitorum corons nostre, & per duos vel quatuor ex
ilis per quorum sacramentum inquisitionem illam fece-
ris, & habeas ibi hoc breve & nomina eorum per quo-
rum sacramentum inquisitionem illam feceris. Et ita
per affirmatione petentis & contradictione tenentis fit
discussio per patriam de veritate, & secundum hoc aut
remanebit tenens in seysina quousj petens sibi per-
quisiverit per breve de recto, vel petens recuperabit
seysinam suam per inquisitionem. $i autem fieri de-
beat inquisitio coram justiciariis & no in comitatu,
tunc fiat hoc modo.


Rex vicecomiti salutem. | Precipimus tibi quód venire
facias coram nobis vel coram justiciarüis nostris apud
Westmonasterium duodeciün &c. ad recognoscendu &c.
Si &e. quia tà &c. & interim terram illam videant, &
se inde interim certificent, q nos vel justiciarios nostros
ad prefatum terminum pleniüs inde certificare possunt,
& habeas ibi nomina recognitorum, & hoc breve. T.


&c.


OF ENTRY. 17


court twelve as well knights as other free, loyal, and notthrough
disereet men of such a visne, through whom the truth 59*^d4o
of the matter may be more conveniently known, and the writ,
who are not in any way connected with A. de N. by Putthroueh
affinity, and who are in no manner essoinable, to recog- a different
nise upon their oaths,if the aforesaid A. has had any
other right or any other entry into such a land with its
appurtenances in such a vill, than through B. the brother

of C. whose heir he is, who demised that land to him

for & term which has passed, or if À. has had entry into

it through D. who granted that land to him in fee (as

the said À. says), because as well the aforesaid A. as the
aforesaid C. have put themselves thereon upon the said

jury. And certify the inquest, which you have held
thereon, to our justiciaries && Westminster at such a

term evidently, distinctly, and openly by your letters

sealed with your seal and with the seals of the aforesaid
keepers of the pleas of our crown, and by two or four

of those by whose oath you have held that inquest, and

have there this writ and the names of those by whose

oath you have held that inquest. And thus upon the
affirmation of the claimant and the contradiction of the

tenant a discussion of the truth is made by the country,

and according to it either the tenant will remain in sey-

sine, until the claimant has obtained for himself & writ

of right, or the claimant will recover his seysine through

the inquest. But if the inquest ought to be held by

the justiciaries and not in the county court, then let
proceedings be in this manner.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you , 5
that you cause to appear before us or our justiciaries at AE
Westminster, twelve &c., to recognise &c. if &c., because ought to
as well &c,, and meanwhile let them view the land and RP the
certify themselves thereon in the mean time, that they Justiciaries.
may be able to certify more fully thereon our justiciaries
at the aforesaid term, and have there the names of the
recognisors and this writ. Witness &c.


V h Q 6366.


18 DE INGRESSU.


Car. II.


i Dictum est supra cüm petens intensioné suam sim-
De reP^"- plieiter proposuerit, & tenens contra intentione suà
exceptioni- excipere noluerit, sed simpliciter posuerit se in juratà
nU" da ingressu, Nüe aut& dicédum est si tenens excipere
contra

petentem. voluerit contra intentione, inprimis necesse est q petens
intentioni suc; fundamentu imponat, s.q doceat ad ipsu
pertinere actione, quia ipse tradiderit ad terminu, vel
aliquis antecessor suus, cujus haeres ipse sit. Et non
f.320. Sufficit quód doceat rem ita esse tradita p ipsum vel
antecessores suos, nisi ostendat q tenes tale habuerit
ingressü, & p tales, sicut ipse dicit. Ite non sufficit
ita pponere et fundare intentione sua, nisi proposita et
fundata pbaverit, cüm simplici voci alicujus non sit
fides adhibenda, secundum! q pbatur in itinere episcopi
Dunholià et M. de P. in coi Eborü anno regmi regis

H. 83. de Aghevilda Murdac.


2. Constitutis igitur partibus in judicio, aut habet pe-
"Apa eis tens pbationé aut no habet, vel non nisi secta tantu,
comparue- quae no inducit nisi tantü psumptione, et quae no suf-
ES ficit, quia in cotrariu admittit defesionc p lege. Si

aute nullà onino habuerit pbationé p se, videtur q
tenens no habet necesse ei in aliquo respodere ppter
defectum pbationis, quia possit deficere pbatio licet
nunquà deficiat jus, secundu * q pbatur in itinere epi-
scopi Dunholm et Mart de Pateshul in comitatu Eborü
ano regis H. 3. de Reginaldo Murdaker. Et q cadit
breve videtur, nisi sit qui sustineat, q de gratia justic.
possit & debeat ei subveniri p juratà patrie, sed cum


!1* secundum quod?" down to ?* gecundum quod" down to
* Murdac " omitted MS. Rawl. C. | * Murdaker" omitted MS. id.
160.


OF ENTRY. 19


CHAPTER II.


We have treated above the case when the claimant ,,
has propounded his declaration, and the tenant has been Of the
unwilling to except against his declaration, but has simply er
put himself upon & jury concerning entry. Butnow we "pn
must speak of the case, if the tenant wishes to except against the
against the declaration, in the first place it is necessary C'*imant.
that the claimant should set up & foundation for his
declaration, to wit, that he should show that he is
entitled to bring an action, because he himself delivered
it for à term, or some ancestor whose heir he is. And
it is not sufficient that he should show, that the estate  f.320.
was so delivered by himself, or by his ancestors, unless
he can show that the tenant had such an entry and
through such persons, as he himself says. Likewise it
is not sufficient for him thus to propound and set up his
declaration, unless he shall prove it when so propounded
and set up, since faith is not to be given to the single
voice of an individual, according to what is proved
in the iter of the bishop of Durham and Martin de .
Pateshull in the county of York, in the third year of the
reign of king Henry, concerning Aghevilda Murdac.


The parties therefore having appeared in court, the EUR
claimant has or has not his proof, or only a sect, which parties
does not give rise to more than a presumption, and hve 4P.
which is not sufficient, because 1t admits in contradiction COUEE d
a defence by law. But if he has no proof at all on his
side, it seems that the tenant is not under the necessity
of answering in any thing to him on account of his
default of proof, because the proof may fail, although the
right may never fail, according to what is proved in the
iter of the bishop of Durham and Martin de Pateshull
in the county of York, in the third year of king Henry,
concerning Rezinald Murdaker. And that the writ fails
seems to be the case, unless there be some one to support
it, which by the favour of the justiciary can and may be

B 2


Bntton, v.
ch. xvi. $1.


90 DE INGRESSU.


caus» cognitione, vel quia forte instrumenta pbationis
deperdita sunt, vel quia illa ad pbationem suà facienda
ad manum non habuerit, vel sine difficultate habere
non poterit. Quo casu dabitur alius dies, ut de ter-
mino Pasche ano regis Henrici decimo quarto in comi-
tatu Dors. de Matilda quas fuit uxor Stephani de Bosco
&c. Si aute instrumetum pbationis ptulerit de termino
et de dimissione, et ei contradieatur, pbetur veritas
instrumenti per testes et per patria, qua pbata, adhuc
erit necesse probare ingressum et terminu pteritum, sed
contra excipiatur, alioquin inutilis erit actio. Si aute
instrumentu ab initio cocedatur, et tenens excipiat de
feoffamento, ut si cocedat quód primó receperit ad ter-
minum, et q infra terminum datum sit ei tenemetum
in feodo. Si petens feoffameto cotradicat et charts,
pceedet inquisitio de feoffameto p testes et p patria.
Et quo casu si feoffametum sufficiens sit et bonü,
retinebit tenens, et sic terminabitur negotium. Si aute
feoffamentü nullü, sic recuperabit petens sine aliquo
regressu, quem tenens habere possit ad terminü, quia
in eo, q se tenuerit ad feodü, tacité termino renuntiavit.
Si autem petens p se nullam habeat pbationem nisi
simplex dictum, et simplicem vocem de dimissione et
termino, et tenens ex &bundanti (licet ad hoc non
teneretur) pferat chartà de feoffameto, quae dedici non
potest, tenens in seysina su& remanebit: ut de ultimo
itinere M. de P. in comitatu Suff. de Wilhelmo de
Wanham et Matilda uxore ejus, nec etiam tenens sive
petens audiendus esset, si se ponere vellet super patriam


OF ENTRY. 21


done by the help of & jury, but with cognisance of the
cause, either because by accident the instruments ol
proof have been lost, or because he may not have at
hand or cannot without great difficulty procure the
instruments to establish his proof. In which case
another day will be allowed to him, as in Easter term in
the fourteenth year of king Henry, in the county of
Dorset, concerning Matilda, who had been the wife of
Stephen de Bosco. But if he has produced an instru-
ment in proof of the term and of the demise, and it be
contradicted, let the truth of the instrument be proved
by witnesses and the country, which having been proved
it will still be necessary to prove the entry and the past
term, but it may be excepted against it, otherwise the
action will be useless. But if the instrument be ad-
mitted from the commencement, and the tenant except
on the ground of & feoffment, as if he should concede
that he received it at first for & term, and that within
the term the tenement was granted to him in fee. If
the claimant contradicts the feoffment and the charter,
let an inquest proceed concerning the feoffment by wit-
nesses and the country.  AÁnd in which cease if the
feoffment be sufficient and good, the tenant will retain
the tenement, and so the business will be terminated.
But if the feoffment is null, the claimant will thereupon
recover without any recourse that the tenant can have
to the term, because inasmuch as he has clung to the fee,
he has tacitly renounced the term. But if the claimant
has by himself no other proof except his simple assertion
and his single voice concerning the demise and term,
and the tenant has superfluously (for he is not bound to
this) produced a charter of feoffment, which cannot be
gainsayed, the tenant will remain in his seysine: as in
the last iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county of
Suffolk, concerning William of Wanham and Matilda his
wife, for neither the tenant nor the claimant would have
to be heard, if he wished to put himself upon the


f, 820 b.


29 . DE INGRESSU.


de ingressu suo, cü nulla habeat pro se presumptionem,
nec contra chartam (ut videtur) respondere poterit, quae
proponitur in modum exceptionis, cum actio sua non
teneat super principali Item esto quód petens dicat
quód tenens non habeat ingressum nisi per Á. et tenens
respondeat et dicat quód ingressum habeat per ipsum
petentem, vel aliquem antecessoré suü qui dederint,
recognoverint, vel remiserint per chartam suam, qus
probata hoc testetur. Si petens cüm ad chartam
responderit illam concedat, et q facta fuit, sed tali
tempore quód valere non debet, quia cognoscit chartam
quocunque modo, & qualitereund chartam concesserit
per consequens ingressum p talem petentem, s. seipsum
vel antecessorem suu qualitereund, & non p eum quem
petens nominat in brevi suo, & ideo cadit actio, &
tenens sine die, & petens sibi pquirat p aliud bie: ut
de itinere W. de Ralegh in com Warr de Hugone de
Cayel Marestorp! Et ciun objectu fuerit feoffamtum,
& excipiatur contra chartam à petente, ubi pbationem
habuerit de ingressu, vel saltem psumptionem, & uteri
se posuerit in juratam, tune fiat recogniào p hsec
verba. Ad recognoscendum videlicet si pdictus ÀÁ. aliud
jus, vel alium ingressum habuit in predictam terram
quàn p pdictum B. qui terram illam ei dimisit ad
terminü qui preteriit, vel si idem A. ingressum ha-
buit in pdictam terrà p eundem B. qui terram illam
ei vendidit vel dedit in feodo p charta suam, ut idem


' À. dicit. Et unde etiam cognoscit q predictus B.


terrà ilam primó ei dimisit ad terminu, & durante
termino illam ei dedit in feodo per charta suam. Et


feré per eadem verba fieri poterit recognitio, si partes.


! * Cayelmaresthorpe," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


T —-


OF ENTRY. 93


country concerning his entry, when he has no pre-
sumption on his behalf, and cannot reply against the
charter (as it seems), which is propounded in the man-
ner of an exception, when his action does not hold upon
the principal question. Likewise let it be that the
claimant says that the tenant has no entry but through
À., and the tenant replies and says that he has an entry
through the claimant himself, or some of his ancestors,
who granted, recognised, or remitted the tenement by
their charter, which being proved bears witness of this.
If the claimant, when he has replied to the charter,
admits it and that i& was executed, but at such & time
that it ought not to be valid, because he acknowledges
the charter in some way or other, and has admitted the
charter somehow or other, and consequently ingress
through so-and-so the claimant, to wit, himself, or his
ancestor in some way or other, and not through him,
whom the claimant names in his writ, and accordingly
the action falls and the tenant is without & day, and the
claimant should provide for himself by another writ, as in
the iter of William de Ralegh in the county of Warwick,
concerning Hugh de Cayel Marestorp And when a
feoffnent has been objected, and an exception is raised
against the charter by the claimant, when he has a proof
concerning the entry or at least a presumption, and each
has put himself upon a jury, then let & recognition be
made through these words: ' To recogmise forsooth, if
" the &foresaid A. had any other right or any other
* entry into the aforesaid land than through the afore-
" said B., who demised that land to him for à term which
has passed, or if the said A. had an entry into the
* aforesaid land through the said B., who sold that land
* to him or granted it in fee by his charter as the said
* Á.says" And whereupon he acknowledges that the
aforesaid B. first demised that land to him for a tern,
and during that term granted it to him in fee by his
charter, And the recognition may be made in neatly


f. 320 b.


94 DE INGRESSU.


absq pbatione vel instrumentorum exhibitione se gra-

tis posuerint in juratam. ltem excipi poterit contra

petétem, q alius majus jus habet quam ille qui petit.

Item q alius dimisit & non ille de quo fit mentio in

bri p errorem. Item q terminus non preterierit, & si

terminus prsterierit quantüm ad primum instrumen-

tum & primam conventionem, progatus fuit terminus

p aliam conventionem & p aliud instrumentum, q

quidem statim exhibeat. Item excipere poterit contra

petentem g terminus excedit tempus assise mortis

antecessoris, & ideo q deficit probatio. Et infinitz

sunt exceptiones de quibus non est necesse hic facere

mentione, quia de illis inferiüs pleniüs dicendum erit.

3. Cüm aute tenens excipiat, & dicat q non habet
Deexcep- . : y

tionecontra lhgressum p talem, de quo breve loquitur, immo p

ingressum, a]ium tale, si petens hoc dedicere non possit, vel si
et quod : , : s , :

tenens negaverit & recognitum sit p juratam q sic cadit breve,

porett- quia non convenit veritati. Sed reverà bene poterit

exceptioni, tenens (si voluerit) renuntiare illi exceptioni contra

2 nds breve, & sustinere breve (& hoc erit potius ad danum

alium quam suum. quàm ad cómodum) & warantum vocare aliu


ves 17 quim illum, qui in brevi nominatur. Sed ad hoc arc-


brevi

nominatur, tari non poterit, nisi velit gratis renunciare exceptioni.
warantum, . * . . * e

licet hoe si; E&. € 1t&. facere possit si velit, pbatur in rotulo de


coutra — termino. Volunt tamen quidam arctare tenentem,' q
seipsum. i e , ,
ipse alium talem quem nominavit, vocet ad warantum,
quod non est concedendum, quia si teneretur talem
vocare ad warantum precise & warantizaret, ita possit
ile aliü vocare, & ille alius tertiu, & sic in infinitu
usque ad mille. Et si sie, non limitaretur breve de


OF ENTRY. 95


the same words, if the parties without any proof or the
exhibition of instruments put themselves gratuitously
upon a jury. Likewise it may be excepted against a
claimant, that, another person has more right than he
who claims. Likewise that another person demised the
tenement, and not he of whom mention is made in the
writ by error. Likewise that the term has not passed,
and if the term has passed as far as regards the first
instrument and the first convention, the term was pro-
rogued by another convention and by another instrument,
which he should forthwith exhibit. Likewise he may
excep& against & claimant that the term exceeds the
time of an assise of mortdancester, and on that ground,
that the proof fails. And there are infinite exceptions,
concerning which it is not necessary here to make men-
tion, because we shall have to speak about them more
fully below.


But when the tenant excepts, and says that he has 3.


" an ex-
not an entry through so-and-so, of whom the writ,


speaks, nay, by & certain other person, if the claimant again-t an
. . . . . . entry and
cannot gainsay this, or if he has denied it. and it has uat


been recognised by a jury, then the writ falls, because d
I& does not agree with the truth. But in truth tlie an excep-
tenant well may, if he wishes, renounce that exception tion, - he

à R " : : ] wishes, and
against the writ, and sustain the writ (and this will be catt anothe
rather for his loss than for his advantage), and may call PPP9n..
a warrantor other that him who is named in the writ. who i«
But he cannot be constrained to this, unless he wishes Mead
gratuitously. And that he may do this if he will, is a« a war-
proved in the roll of the term. Some persons however jitovun
desire to constrain the tenant, that he should call such this may
other person whom he has named as a warrantor, which j£ *E2/st
is not to be allowed, because 1f he were bound to call
such & warrantor precisely, and he should warrant, so
he might call à second one, and the said second one
night call a third, and so without end up to a thousand.


And if so, the writ of entry would not be limited within


t. 321.


96 DE INGRESSU.


ingressu infra suos limites & suos gradus: nec habet
ienens necesse vocare talem ad warantum, cüm cadit
breve per exceptionem, eó quód ingressum non habuit
per talem in brevi nominatum, nec egeat quód alius
non defendat in sua possessione, cüm sufficiat ei sua
propria exceptio ad defensionem. Et quód cadere de-
bet in hoe casu breve, inveniri poterit de termino
Pasche anno regis Henrici septimo in comitatu Buck.
de Guidone de Windeslore! Et ad hoc facit de ter-
mino eode in comitatu Kanc. de Alicia qus fuit uxor
Richardi, & in aliis multis locis. Sed cüm ingressus
sib talis, sicut petens dicit, bene poterit tenens (cüm
cognoverit ingressum) vocare warantum suum, per quem
ipse ingressum habuerit, & quilibet suum usqué ad
quartum gradum, & non ultra, dum tamen tenens ipse
tenuerit ad vitam ut liberum tenementum, vel in feodo
sibi & hsredibus suis, vel ad feodi firmam, vel hujus-
modi. Revera si impetratum fuerit super firmarium,
non cadit breve, quia ipse poterit vocare warrantum,
quasi non,? sie amitteret usufructuarius usumfructum,
quod esset iniquum, cüm tantundem juris habet in
usufructu quantum proprietarius in libero tenemento,
& cüm veniat breve, super eum vocet warantum, &
sj fuerit defensus, retinebit usumfructum. Si autem
non, habebit regressum versus suum  warrantum de
usufructu, & warrantus suus si ulteriós vocaverit &
fuerit ei warrantizatum de libero tenemento, & de ex-
eambio. Si autem ad terminum annorum, credo aliud
est dicendum, ciun ipse non teneat in dominico tene-
mentum & secundum quod petitur, nisi tantum usum
fructum, & multo minus si teneat de anno in annum.
Item qu:zritur si petatur versus abbatem aliquem vel
priorem vel alium religiosum expresso proprio nomine
vel non expresso, & ubi dieatur & in quà non habuit


! *Windelesore," MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ? ** quod si non, sic amitteret," id.


OF ENTRY. 27


its bounds and its degrees, nor is the tenant under the
necessity of calling so-and-so, as & warrantor, since the
writ abates through the exception, inasmuch as he had
not an entry through so-and.so as named in the writ,
nor would he want that &nother should defend him in
his possession, since his own exception would suffice for
his defence. And that the writ ought to abate in this
case may be found in Easter term in the seventh year
of king Henry, in the county of Bucks, concerning Guy
de Windeslore. And for this makes the case of Alicia,
who was the wife of Richard, in the same term in the
county of Kent, and many other cases. But when the
entry is such as the claimant says, the tenant (when he
has acknowledged the entry) may well call his war-
rantor, through whom he had his entry, and each his
own up to the fourth degree, and not beyond, provided,
however, the tenant himself has held for life as a free
tenement, or in fee for himself and his heirs, or as & fec-
farm or such like. In truth, if it has been sued out
against the farmer, the writ does not abate, because he
may call a warrantor, as if not, so the usufructuary
might lose the usufruet, which would be incquitable,
since he has as much right in the usufruct as the pro-
prietor in the free tenement, and when the writ comes,
let him call à warrantor upon it, and if it be defended,
he wil retain the usufruct. But if not, he will have
recourse against his warrantor concerning the usufruct,
and his warrantor if he has further called a warrantor, and
he has had his free tenement warranted, and concerning
compensation for it. But if for a term of years, I believe
something else is to be said, since he does not hold the
free. tenement in domain and aecording to what is
claimed, except only the usufruct, and much less if he
holds from year to year. Likewise it is questioned, if a
claim be made against an abbot or & prior or some other
religious person with his proper name expressed or not
expressed, and where it is said and * into which he had


l.
Breve, si
heres petat
quod
antecessor
dimisit ad
terminum.


f. 321 b.
]


Breve, si
vir dona-
tionem
fecerit de
hzreditate.


98 DE INGRESSU.


ingressum nisi per talem abbatem predecessorem suuni,
& cadat breve si plures abbates medii intervenerint ?
& an faciunt gradum de abbate in abbatem sicut de
haerede in heredem ? & videtur quód non magis, quàm


in coputatione descensus, quia etsi alternetur persona,.


non propter hoc alternatur dignitas, sed semper manet.


Car. III.


Dictum est supra, si ille petat qui dimisit, nunc
autem dicetur si haeres petat quod antecessor dimisit
ad terminum. Forma brevis talis est. Rex vicecomiti
salutem.  Przcipe tali, quód juste & sine dilatione
reddat tali tantum terre cum pertinentiis in tali villa
quod clamat esse jus & hereditatem suam, & in quod
predictus talis non habet ingressum nisi per talem,
cui talis pater vel mater, frater vel soror, avus vel
avia, avunculus vel amita, consanguineus vel comsan-
guinea, sive predecessor predieti talis (cujus heres ipse
est) illud dimisit ad terminum qui prseteriit (ut dieit).
Et nisi fecerit, et idem talis fecerit te securum de
clamore suo prosequendo, tune summoneas per bonos
summonitores praefatum talem, quod sit coram justi-
tariis nostris ad primam assisam cum in illas vene-
rint, ostensurus quare non fecerit, et habeas ibi sum-
monitores et hoc breve. Teste, &c.


CAP. IV.


Si quis donatione fecerit de hereditate uxoris, quz
el in vita sua contradicere no potuit, tüc post morte
viri cosulitur ei p tale breve. Rex vie. salute. Prz-


"- — Lu
TAE M Er mmis [e vu er eem *


OF ENTRY. 29


not an '* entry except through such an abbot his predeces-
" sor," and the writ should abate, 1f several intermediate
abbots have intervened ? and whether they make & step
from abbot to abbot, as from heir to heir ? and it seems
not more so, than in à computation of descent, because
although the person be alternated, the dignity is not
thereupon alternated, but it remains always.


CHAPTER III.


We have discussed above, if he claims, who has de- |o
mised : now then it shall be discussed, if the heir claims 4 rr ^
what his ancestor has demised for & term. "The form of claims


the writ is of this kind. The king to the viscount ^t is
greeting.  Enjoin so-and-so, that justly and without Megan
delay he restore to such an one so much land with its Men
appurtenances in such a vill, which he claims to be his

right and his inheritance, and into which the aforesaid
so-and-so has not entry except through a certain person,

to whom such an one's father or mother, brother or
sister, grandfather or grandmother, uncle or aunt, cousin-

male or cousin-female, or the ancestor of the aforesaid

such an one (whose heir he himself is) demised it for &

term, which has passed as he says. And unless he does

so, and if the said claimant has given you security to
prosecute his claim, then summon by good summoners
.so-and-so aforesaid, that he appear before our justiciaries

at the first assise, when they have come into those parts,

in order to show cause wherefore he has not done so,

and produce there the summoners and this writ. Wit-

ness, &c.


CHAPTER IV.
If any one has made a grant of the inheritance of his , 1!


wife, who could not contradict it during his lifetime, pbi ud
then provision is made for her after his death by & writ npieny ;
(0


ofthis kind. The king to the viscount greeting.  En- the inheri-


uxoris, cui
ipsa in vita
sua contra-
dicere non
potuit.


Britton, v.
ch. x. 8 18.


30 DE INGRESSU.


cipe tali q juste &c. reddat tali quz fuit uxor talis,
titü terre cu ptinentiis in tali villa, q clamat esse jus
& hereditate sua vel maritagiu suu, & in q pdictus
talis non habet ingressum nisi p predietü talé quonda -
virü suum, qui illud ei dimisit, eui ipsa in vita sua
eotradieere non potuit (ut dicit) & nisi fecerit, & ide
talis fecerit te securü &ce, ut supra Ad que ingres-
sum tenens poterit multipliciter respondere, secundüu q
superiüs dictum est. Et etiam poterit defendere in-
gressum p pdictum virum, & dieere quod habuit in-
gressum per pdietam mulierem, antequam esset despon-
sata tali viro, vel post morté viri sui, & hoc pbare
per instrumenta, & per testes simul cum patria, vel
ex toto se ponere in juratam, & secundum talia verba
formari poterit inquisitio. ltem concedere possit quód
habuit ingressum per talem virum suum, & dicere quód
Ddieta talis postea in legia viduitate sua confirmavit
donum viri sui, vel q in legia viduitate sua remisit
ei totum jus & clamorem suum, Item ad hoc q dicit
(cui in vita contradicere non potuit) respondere poterit
q pdicta mulier personaliter fuit in curia dfii regis
cum viro suo, & donu illud liberaliter & bona volun-
tate sua sine aliqua coactione concessit, & ratum habuit,
q quide terminari poterit per inspectionem rotulorum,
q quidem non esset si hoc fieret extra curiam regiam,
quia ibi fieri possunt coactiones contra voluntate, q
quidem non fieret in curià domini regis. Ibi enim
nulla violentia infertur, nec metus incutitur, nec est
verisimile aliquem in curia domini regis per violentià
copulsum esse ad aliquid contra voluntatem faciendum,
vel non faciendum, cüm ibi tutum invocari possit aux-
iium. Item distinguendum est in hoc casu, utrum


OF ENTRY. 3l


join so-and-so that justly, &c. he restore to such an one, ane ad ns
who was the wife of such an one, so much land with its jc .ould
appurtenances in such a vill, which she claims to be her not con-


rieht and her inheritance or her marriage portion, and tian ius
into which so-and-so aforesaid has not had any entry lifetime.
except through such an one aforesaid formerly her hus-
band, who demised it to him, which she herself could not
contradiet during his lifetime, as she says, and unless he
has done so and the said so-and-so has given you security
&e.as above. To which entry the tenant may answer
in manifold ways, according to what has been said above.
Ànd he even may contest the entry through the husband
aforesaid, and say that he had an entry through the
aforesaid woman before she was espoused to her said
husband, or after the death of her husband, and may
prove it by instruments and by witnesses together with
the country, or put himself on the whole case upon a
jury, and the inquest may be shaped according to such
words. Likewise he may admit that he had an entry
through such person her husband, and may say, that the
aforesaid woman afterwards during her free wilowhood
confirmed the gift of her husband, or that in her free
widowhood she remitted to him all her right and her
claim. Likewise to this which she says, (which she
could not contradict during his lifetime,) he may answer
that the aforesaid woman was personally in the court
of the lord the king with her husband, and allowed the
grant freely and of good will without any compulsion
and ratified it, which may be determined by an inspec-
tion of the Rolls, whieh would not be, if this had been
done outside the court of the king, because there might
be there enforced compulsions against the will of a party,
Which could not be done in the court of the king. For
there no violence is offered, nor fear caused, nor is it likely
that any one in the court of the king has been compelled
by violence to do anything, or not to do it, against his
will, since there & safe help may be invoked. Likewise &


f. 322.


32 DE INGRESSU.


donatio facta fuerit per virum ad hoc q revocetur, vel
tenet ex causa honesta & necessaria, & communi utili-
tate tam viri quám uxoris, vel ex causa voluntaria
tantüm. Si autem ex eausa honesta, ut si communi
filio fiat donatio, vel in maritagium cum filia, hoc erat
in causa honesta, & ideo tenenda ubicunque facta. Si
autem tantüm ex causa voluntaria, & non utili, tunc
aut intervenerit coactio vel non. Si autem coactio
intervenerit, quod de facili perpendi poterit per vultu
& per gestü mulieris, quamvis in curia dii regis nun-
quam fiat inde cyrographum, sed vix inrotulatio con-
cedatur. Et notadum, q irrotulatio per se sine cyro-
grapho nunquam tollet actionem uxoris post mortem
viri sui, & si uxor premoriatur, heres eorum comunis
nunquà recuperabit per aliquam actione, cüm warran-
tizare teneatur ut hsres patris, propter homagium &
servicium q ei accidit ex feoffamento patris, cotra donum
patris q mater in vita sua revocavit, ne sit. ejusdem
tenementi dominus & tenens. Si autem, cüm mater
peteret, vocaretur ad warrantum & amitteret, ita irri-
tum esset donum patris, & dissolveretur homagium
inter ipsum & feoffatum à patre suo, & ipse teneretur
ad eschambium de hsereditate patris, & cü mater obti-
nuerit, & descédat materna hereditas ad ipsü, nunqm
reviviscit homagium, q p matre, que per juditiu obti-
nuit, semel est extinctum. Si autem sic feoffaverit vir
tenendum de dis capitalibus, vel si aliu habuerit
antenatum de alia uxore, aliud erit, quia tüc no erit


OF ENTRY. 93


distinction must be made in this case, whether the grant
has been imnade by the husband with the object of its
being revoked, or it holds from an honest and necessary
cause and the common interest of the husband and the
wife, or only from a voluntary cause. But if from an
honest cause, as if à donation is made to & common son,
or à marriage portion is given with & daughter, this was
in an honest cause, and is therefore to be upheld where-
soever made. But if only from a voluntary cause and
not for their interest, then either compulsion will have
intervened or not. But if compulsion has intervened,
which may easily be discovered from the look and the
gesture of the woman, although in the court of the lord
the king, & chirograph would never be made thereof, and
scarce an enrolment would be allowed. And it is to be
noted that an enrolment by itself without a chirograph
will never take away a right of action on the part of &
wife after the death of her husband, and if the wife pre-
deceases him, their common heir will never recover by
any action, since he is bound to warrant as the heir of
his father, on account of the homage and service which
accrue to him from the feoffiment of his father, against
the grant of his father, which his mother has revoked
during her lifetime, lest he should be the lord and the


tenant of the same tenement. Bui if, when his mother -


was the claimant, he has been called to warrant and he
has lost, the grant of his father would thus be void, and
the homage would be dissolved between him and the
feoffee of his father, and he himself would be bound to
make compensation from the inheritance of his father,
and when his mother has prevailed, and his maternal
inheritance has descended to him, the homage never
revives, which has been once extinguished through his
mother, who has prevailed by à judgment. But if the
husband has so enfeoffed it to be held of the chief
lords, or if he has had another earlier-born son by another


wife, it will be otherwise, because in that case the com-
Q 6366. C


f. 322.


94 DE INGRESSU.


filius communis hares patris, sed tantum matris: & sic


habebit repetitionem, quia ad warrantum non tenetur:


sicut de itinere in comitatu Eborü. Si aute coactio
non intervenerit sed mulier hoc affectaverit, q de facili
ppendi poterit per gestü & per vultum, concedatur
fieri eyrographu. Mulier enim aliquando plus amat
donatoriü quàm seipsam vel puerü suum, & bona cau-
tela est in irrotulatione facere mentionem de voluntate
mulieris, secundü quod fuerit gratuita vel coacta. | Sed
ad hoc quód tale breve eopetat vel non de donatione
viri, refert utrum vir preemoriatur vel uxor: si autem
uxor premoriatur, tale breve non competit communi-
bus haeredibus uxoris & virij quia si eis competeret
tale breve, ita posset impugnare & revocare factum
patris, q teneretur defendere, ciun sit hsres patris ex
tali donatione. Sed videtur quód hoc non sufficit
dicere, quia factum patris non tenetur defendere de
hareditate matris, cüm ex parte patris nulla hsereditas
ei descendat, & cüm non sit heres patris sed filius
tantüm, & hsres matris propter hereditatem descen-
dentem ex parte matris & cüm hsres dicatur ab he-
reditate & non e converso. Si autem aliqua hereditas
descendat à patre, factum patris tenetur warrantizare
& defendere, quatenus hsreditas patria se extendat &
non ultra, si mater obtinuerit, sive talis progenitus
fuerit ex primo viro vel secundo. Et unde videtur
quód tale breve competat haredi, & secundum quod
videri poterit in itinere episcopi Dunholm & Martini
de Pateshul anno regis Henrici tertio in comitatu
Eborum in fine rotuli, ubi continentur verba ista: &


OF ENTRY. 35


mon son will not be the heir of the father, but only of
the mother, and so he will have a right of reclaiming it,
because he is not bound to à warranty, as in the iter in
the county of York. But if compulsion has not inter-
vened, but the woman has affected it, which may easily
be discovered by her gesture and her look, let it be
allowed for & chirograph to be made. For a woman
sometimes loves à donatory more than herself or her son,
and it is & good precaution in the enrolment to make
mention of the will of the woman, according as it has
been voluntary or compulsory. But in order that such
& writ should be suitable or not concerning the grant of
the husband, it is important whether the husband or the
wife has died first : but if the wife dies first, such à writ
is not suitable for the common heir of the wife and hus-
band, because if he were entitled to such & writ he would
thus be able to impugn and revoke the act of his father,
which he would be bound to maintain, since he is ihe
heir of his father from such a grant. But it seems that
it is not sufficient to say this, because he is not bound to
defend the act of his father concerning the inheritance of
his mother, since on the part of his father no inheritance
descends to him, and since he is not the heir of his father
but only the son, &nd the heir of his mother on account
of the inheritance descending to him on the part of his
mother, and since he is called heir from the inheritance,
and not conversely. But if any inheritance descends
from the father, he is bound to warrant and to maintain
the act of his father, as far as the inheritance of the
father extends and no further, if his mother has pre-
vailed, whether such son has been begotten by the first
husband or by the second.  Ànd hence it seems, that the
heir is entitled to such a writ, and according to what
may be seen in the iter of the bishop of Durham and
Martin de Pateshull in the third year of the reign of
king Henry in the county of York at the end of the
rol, where these words are contained, * and into which
c 2


96 DE INGRESSU.


in quam talis non habet ingressum nisi per talem
quondam virum ipsius talis uxoris matris ipsius talis,
cujus hzsres ipse est, qui illam ei vendidit in vita sua,
cui predicta talis in vita sua contradicere non potuit.


2. Sed videtur e contra, quód ad ipsum non pertineat
dais * tale breve, ex quo mater in vita sua donum non revo-


fueritex — cavit, & ideo dissimulando injuriam concessit, nec vide-
alio Y! tur hreredi injuriatum, ex quo antecessor injuriam dis-
heredem — 31mulando sustinuit: secundum illud quod non potest
habuerit 9X v ocere hgredi quod antecessori non nocuit. Et unde
videndum utrum uxor diu vixit post mortem viri vel

cito obiit, vel in vita viri. Sed revera (quicquid dica-

tur) non competit hzsredi tale breve, sed nec breve ad
terminum qui preteriit, quia replicatio qua competeret

mulieri si viveret, non competit hsredi, sicut videri

poterit aperté: ut si ipsa dum viveret peteret, excipi

poterit contra ipsam de donatione, contra quam repli-

care posset quód. viro suo contradicere non potuit, &

ista replicatio non jacet in ore hsredis, quia cüm dicat,

mater mea contradicere non potuit, per hoc ostendit

quod replieatio illa competit matri & non ei, nec con-

grueé dicere posset hsres, quód oportuit matrem facere
voluntatem domini sui, nec constare poterit heredi de
voluntate matris, qui forte si viveret nunquam donum

illud revocaret. Revera, licet nullam habeat hereditate

f.322b. ex parte patris, & sic non heres (ut videtur), petere
non potest, cüm teneatur warrantizare, licet mater

petere posset, warratizare tenetur ut heres, quia in

hoc erit heres patris ppter homagiü et servitii q ei


OF ENTRY. 97


" he had no entry except through such a one formerly
* the husband of the said wife, the mother of him whose
* heir he himself is, who sold it to him during his life-
* time, whom his said wife could not contradict during
" his lifetime."

But it appears on the contrary, that such à writ does m
not pertain to him, since his mother in her lifetime did tn, ncir has
not revoke the grant, and therefore by dissimulating bod
allowed the injury ; nor does injury appear to have been nusband
done to the heir, since the ancestor supported the injury end if the
by dissimulating: according to that saying, that what has had an
has not been hurtful to an ancestor cannot be hurtful to ien
his heir. And hence itis to be seen, whether the wife wife.
lived a long time after the death of her husband, or died
soon after it, or in the lifetime of her husband. But
(whatever may be said), such à writ is not suitable to the
heir, nor again & writ for the term which has passed,
because the replication which would be suitable to the
woman, if she were alive, is not suitable to the heir, as
may be seen clearly, as if she claimed whilst she was
alive, an exception might be raised against her concern-

Ing the grant, against which she might reply that she
could not contradict her husband, and that replication
does not lie in the mouth of the heir, because when he
says, iny mother could not contradict, he thereby shows
that that replication is suitable to hi$ mother and not
to him; nor can the heir congruously say that it was
ineumbent upon his mother to execute the will of her
lord; nor ean the heir be certain concerning the will of
his mother, who, perhaps, if she were alive, would never
revoke that grant. In truth, although he has no in-
heritance on the part of his father, and so he is not
heir as it seems, he cannot claim, since he would be
bound to warrant, although his mother might claim, he f. 322 b.
is bound to warrant as the heir of his father, for he will
be the heir of his father in this respect, on account of the


38 DE INGRESSU.


descendere debet de seysina patris, licet. feoffametum
sit factü de hereditate matris, poterit enim quis alie-
nam rem dare tenendam de se & heredibus suis, &
ratione talis feoffamenti erit filius heres suus, licet ei
alia hereditas non descendat, sed ad escabium non tene-
tur, nisi de eo qua ei descédit de hszreditate patris.
Sed aliud erit, si pater dederit tenendü de aliis qm
de heredibus suis, sieut de capitalibus düis vel aliis.
Et quid si dicat de uxore & heredibus suis? hoc non
obligat uxorem nec hzsredes suos. Sed quid si uxor
petierit & heres communis vocetur ad warrantum ?
tenetur warrantizare praedicta ratione, & ipsa recupe-
rabit, & heres comunis, cüm nihil habeat de hzredi-
tate paterna, quoad escambiu non tenebitur, licet tene-
atur ad warrantiam, & post mortem matris succedet
ei in terrà illam, & de e& non tenetur facere escha-
bium, et unde videtur (quiequid alii dicant) q si mater
obieri& ante virum suum, & haeres uxoris de eodem
viro petat, q cüm ad warrantiam teneretur, repelli
deberet ab agendo q non recuperet, licet non teneatur
ad eschambiu de hzreditate matris. Revera, si neq,
pater neq, mater alium habuerint heredem, ut si pater
de alia uxore filium non habuerit, vel uxor fiium de
alio viro & ipsi duo unicum hzrede, talis hs,eres revo-
care non poterit donü patris de hereditate matris, cum
ideo teneatur istum warrantizare ut heres ratione prze-
dieta. Sed mater hoc facere poterit si virum super-
vixerit, & sie poterit ad communem haeredem res sic
data descendere cüm per.factum matris adnihiletur
donum patris, q per communem herede fieri non po-
terit. Si autem communem hzredé non habuerit,! bene
poterit hz»res matris donü tale repetere, & hsres


! * habuerint," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ENTRY. 39


homage and service, which ought to descend to him on
account of the seysine of his father, although a feoffment
has been made of the inheritance of his mother, for a
person may grant another person's estate to be held of
him and his heirs, and by reason of such a feoffment the
son will be his heir, although the other inheritance does
not descend to him, but he is not bound to make com-
pensation, except out of that which descends to hin from
the inheritance of his father. But it will be otherwise
if his father has granted it to be held of others than his
heirs, as of chief lords or others. And what if heshall say
of his wife and her heirs? "This does not oblige his wife
nor her heirs. But what if the wife has claimed, and the
common heir is called as à warrantor? He is bound to
warrant for the reason alleged, and she shall recover, and
the common heir, as he has nothing of his paternal in-
heritance, will not be bound to make compensation,
although he is bound to à warranty, and after the death
of his mother he shall succeed to her in that land, and he
shall not be bound to make compensation from it, and
hence it seems (whatever others say) that if the mother
has died before her husband, and the heir of the wife from
the same husband claims, that, since he is bound to a war-
ranty, he ought to be repelled from proceeding so that he
should not recover ; although he is not bound to make
compensation from the inheritance of his mother. In
truth, if neither the father nor the mother has any other
heir, as for instance, if the father has not a son by another
wife, or the wife a son by another husband, and both of
them only & single heir, such an heir cannot revoke the
grant of his father from the inheritance of his mother,
since he is expressly bound to warrant it as their heir
for the reason alleged. But the mother may do this, if
she has survived her husband, and the estate so granted
may descend to the common heir, since the grant of the
father is annihilated by the act of the mother, which
could not be effected by the common heir. But if they
have not had & common heir, the heir of the mother


*


4060 DE INGRESSU.


patris tenebitur aliunde ad warrantiam & escambium,
& non heres matris, & hac ratione habebit actionem
post mortem matris.


Cap. V.
- Si forte quis ingressu habuerit p secundu virü de
Drew? 9. terra quà uxor habuit in doté de dono primi viri sui,


alienata — tüc fiat tale breve. Rex vic. salute. Przceipe tali q

Pum virum, Justé &c. reddat tali tantü terre cü ptinentiis in tali

villa, qd' clamat esse rationabile doté suà, ut! de ratio-

nabili dote sua, quà habuit de dono talis primi viri

sui, & q? pdietus talis no habet ingressu nisi p tale

seeundum virü suü, qui illud ei dimisit, cui ipsa in

f.328. vita su& contradicere non potuit (ut dicit) & nisi fece-

rii &c. ut supra. Et qualiter respondere debeat &

negotium terminari, satis videri poterit superius per
exemplum.


2. Si vir dotem uxoris alienaverit quam habuit de dono
Dreve, si 1 $e ; s; E
vir dotem 8lterius viri, & quas post mortem uxoris sui reverti
alienaverit. deberet ad hsredes primi viri, consulitur heredi per

tale breve. Rex vic. salutem.  Preecipe tali quód juste
&e. reddat tali tantu terre cum pertinentiis &c., & in
q ldem talis non habet ingressum nisi per talem, qui
illud ei dimisit, & qui ilud tenuit in dotem talis
uxoris sug de dono talis quondam viri sui, patris vel
fratris, avi vel avunculi, vel consanguinei sive ante-
cessoris prsdicti talis cujus haeres ipse est ut dicit.
Et nisi fecerit &c. ut supra.


Breve;quoa ltem si heres petat dotem alienatam per ipsam
competit — uxorem, tunc sic. Et in q predictus talis non habet


1 * ve],? MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ?*in quod," MS. id.


OF ENTRY. 41


ray well be able to claim back such a grant, and the
heir of the father will be bound from other sources, to
make warranty and compensation, and not the heir of
the mother, and for this reason he will have an action
after the death of his mother.


CHAPTER V.


If by chance & person has had an entry by a second
husband into land, which the wife had as dower by
the grant of her first husband, then let & writ of this
kind issue. The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin
so-and-so that justly, &c., he restore to such an one
so much land with its appurtenances in such a vill,
which she claims to be her reasonable dower or of her
reasonable dower, which she had from the grant of her
first husband, and into which so-and-so aforesaid had not
an entry except through such an one the second husband,
who demised it to him, whom she could not contradict
during his lifetime (as she says), and unless he shall do
s0, &c., as above. And in what way he ought to answer,
and the business ought to be terminated, may be suftici-
ently seen above by an example.

If à husband has alienated the dower of his wife,
which she had by the grant of another husband, and
which after the death of the wife ought to revert to the
heirs of the first husband, the heir is aided by the fol-
lowing writ. The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin
so-and-so, that justly &e. he restore to such an one so
much land with its appurtenances &c., and into which the
said so-and-so has no entry except through such an one,
who demised it to him, and who held it as the dower of
such an one his wife by the grant of such an one formerly
her husband, the father or brother, grandfather or uncle
or cousin or ancestor of such an one aforesaid, whose heir
he is, as he says. And unless he do so &c. as above.


Likewise if an heir claims dower which has been


l.
A writ, if
dower has
been alie-
nated by a
second
husband.


f. 323.


writ, if
the hus-
band has
alienated
dower.


3.
A writ, to


alienated by the wife herself, then thus. And into which which an


49 DE INGRESSU.


haeredi, si ingressu nisi per talem, quz fuit uxor talis, quie illud

dien ioca tenuit in dotem de dono pdicti talis quoda viri sui,
patris vel fratris &c. ut supra. ltem si vir alienave-
rit dotem & uxor petat, tunc sic. Quam clamat esse
dotem suam, quam habuit de dono talis primi viri sui,
& in quam non habet ingressum nisi p tale secundü
virum suum, qui illam ei tradidit ad voluntatem suam,
cui ipsa contradicere non potuit (ut dicit), & nisi fece-
rit &c. vel aliter: & in qui non habet ingressum nisi
p talem quondam virum suum qui illam ei vendidit,
cui ipsa in vita sua contradicere non potuit &oe.


4. Item si heres petat quód uxor dimisit q tenuit
lem,s , nomine dotis, & tune sic: Et in quam non habuit
alienaverit. ingressum nisi p talem, quz» fuit uxor talis avi pra-

dicti talis, cujus heres ipse est, & ex cujus dono ipsa
talis illam tenuit in dotem de h:reditate pdicti talis
avi ut dieit &c. vel aliter: in quam non habet in-
gressum nisi per C. cui D. avia ipsius C. (eujus heres
ipse est) illam vendidit, quze illam tenuit in dotem (ut
dicit) &e. vel aliter: Precipe A. quód justé &e. reddat
B. & C. uxori ojus tantum terre &e. quam clamat esse
jus & hereditatem ipsius C. & in quam idem ÀÁ. non
habet ingressum nisi per D. quondam uxorem ipsius
À. eui C. quoda uxor E. terrà illam dimisit, quee non
nisi dotem inde habuit ex dono predicti E. quondam
viri sui & avi ipsius C. cujus heres ipse est, ut idem
B. & C. dieunt. Si procurator sicut celerarius vel
alius, abbas vel prior sine assensu capituli, vel epi-
scopus, vel capitulum, sine consensu capituli, episcopi,


E OF ENTBY. 43


so-and-so aforesaid has no entry except through such an
one, who was the wife of such an one, who held it in
dower from the grant of such an one aforesaid formerly
her husband, her father or brother &c.,as &bove. Like-
wise if the husband has alienated the dower and the
wife claims it, then thus. Which she claims to be her
dower, which she had from the grant of such an one her
first husband, and into which so-and-so had no entry
except through such an one her second husband who con-
veyed it to him of his own will, which she could not
contradict (as she says), and unless he does, &c. : or other-
wise, and into which so-and-so has no entry except
through such an one formerly her husband who conveyed
it to him, whom she could not contradict during his life-
time, &c.


Likewise if an heir claims that the wife has demised
what she held in the name of dower, and then thus: and
into which he had no entry except through such an one
who was the wife of so-and-so the grandfather of such
an one aforesaid, whose heir he is, and from whose grant
such an one herself held that land 1n dower of the inhe-
ritance of such grandfather aforesaid as he says &oc.: or
otherwise, and into which he had no entry except through
C., to whom D. the grandmother of the said C. (whose
heir he is) sold the land, who held it as dower (as he says)
&c, or otherwise. Enjoin À. that justly &c. he restore to
B. and C. his wife so much land &e., which he claims to
be the right and inheritance of the said C., and into
which the said A., has no entry except through D. for-
merly the wife of the said A. to whom C. formerly the
wife of E. demised that land, which she only held as
dower from the grant of the aforesaid E. formerly her
husband and the grandfather of the said C. whose heir
he is, as the said B. and C. say. If an agent such as &
steward or other, an abbot or prior without the assent
of the chapter, or a bishop or a chapter without the con-
sent of the chapter or of the bishop, or of another person


heir is en-
titled, if a
wife has
alienated
her dower.


Likewise if
& wife has
alienated
her dower.


5.
Breve, si
per abba-
tem sine
assensu
capituli.


6.
Breve, si
celerarius
vel procu-
rator.


f. 323 b.


7.
Breve, si
per balli-


44 DE INGRESSU.


vel alius eujus assensus fuerit necessarius, dimiserit
sine assensu, tunc si &bbas dimiserit, fiat tale breve.


Rex vicecomiti salutem.  Precipe tali, quód justé
&c. reddat tali abbati tantum terre cum pertinentiis
in tali villa, quod clamat esse jus ecclesi sum, & in
quod idem talis non habet ingressum nisi per talem,
quondam abbatem de tali loco, qui illud ei dimisit sine
assensu capituli sui ut dicit &c. Et nisi fecerit &c.


Rex vicecomiti salutem. Precipe tali, quód juste &c.
reddat tali abbati, tantum terrae cum pertinentiis in
tali villa, quod clamat esse jus ecclesise sue, & in
quod przdictus talis non habet ingressum nisi per
celerarium vel per procuratorem domus ipsius abbatis
de tali loco, qui illud ei dimisit sine assensu ipsius
abbatis (ut dicit), & nisi fecerit &c. Eadem forma
erit, si canonicus dimiserit sine assensu episcopi Item
Sj uxor dimiserit sine assensu & voluntate viri, tunc
sic: Quam clamat esse jus & hereditatem suam, vel
jus & maritagium ipsius mulieris, vel quam clamat
esse rationabilem dotem suam, vel de rationabih dote
ipsius mulieris, quam habuit de dono talis quondam
viri sui: & in quam predictus talis non habet ingres-
sum, nisi per pdictam talem mulierem, quie illud ei
dimisit sime assensu & voluntate predicti talis quon-
dam viri sui (ut dicit) et nisi fecerit &c. Item si
balivus dimiserit sine volütate domini sui, tunc sic.
Et in quam idem talis non habet ingressum, nisi per
talem quondam ballivum suum de tali villa, qui illam
ei dimisit sine voluntate ipsius talis, ut dicit: & nisi
fecerit &c. Item si per ballivum domini regis dum
aliquis fuerit in prisona domini regis, tunc sic.


Rex vicecomiti salutem. Prccipe tali quód juste &c.
reddat tali tantum terre cum pertinentiis in tali villa,


vum contra quod clamat esse jus & hereditatem suam, & in quod


OF ENTRY. 45


whose assent has been necessary, has demised without
that assent, then if the abbot has demised, let & writ
issue of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin so-and-so , ,5
that he justlv &c. restore to such an abbot so much by an
land with its appurtenances in such a vill, which he AR the
claims to be the right of his church, and into which so- assent of
and-so aforesaid has no entry except through so-and- peicoapem
so, formerly abbot of such & place, who demised it to
him without the assent of his chapter, as he says &c. and
unless he do so &c.


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin so-and-so 6.
that justly &c. he restore to such an abbot, so much land E ;
with its appurtenances in such a vill, which he claims to or an
be the right of his church, and into which so-and-so ?E*"*-
aforesaid has no entry except through the steward or
through the agent of the house of the said abbot of
such & place, who has demised it to him without the
assent of the said abbot (as he says), and unless he do so
&c. The same form shall be used, if à canon has demised
without the assent of the bishop. Likewise if & wife
has demised without the assent of her husband, then  f.324b
thus : which he claims to be his right and his inheritance,
or his right and the inarriage portion of his wife, or
which he claims to be her reasonable dower, or of the
reasonable dower of his wife, which she had from the
grant of so-and-so her former husband, and into wich
such an one aforesaid had no entry except through the
aforesaid woman, without the assent and will of her for-
mer husband aforesaid (as he says), and unless he do so
&e. Likewise if though the bailiff of the lord the king,
whilst some one was in the prison of the lord the king,
then thus.


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin such an


one that justly &c. he restore to so-and-so, so much land ^ vri', if


raw i . , j : through a
with its appurtenances in such a vill, which he claims to vai


voluntatem
domini.


8.
Dreve, si
felo aliena-
verit post
feloniam
factam.


9.
Dreve, si
villanus
alienaverit
id quod
tenuerit in
villenagio,


10.
Breve, si
per eum,
qui non
fuit sang
mentis.


460 DE INGRESSU.


predictus talis non habet ingressum nisi per talem
quondam ballivum nostrum, qui illud ei dimisit, dum
idem talis fuit in prisona nostra, & terra sua in manu
nostr& &c., ut dicit, et nisi fecerit &c. Item si quis
per eum qui feloniam fecerit, et. tune si post feloniam
factam convictus sit, competit domino suo de quo
tenuit tale breve ad recuperandam eschaetam suam.


Rex vicecomiti salutem.  Precipe À. quód juste &c.
reddat B. tantum terre cum pertinentiis &c., in quam
idem A. non habet ingressum nisi per C. de N. qui
eandem terram tenuit de predicto B. et qus terra
esse debet eschaeta ipsius B. propter feloniam, de qua
idem B. in curia nostra coram nobis vel justiciariis
nostris talibus convictus fuit et damnatus, 'et quam
terram idem C. dimisit predicte À. postquàm fecerat
predictam feloniam, ut idem B. dicit, et nisi fecerit
&c. ut supra. Item si per eum qui tenuerit in ville-
nagio habuit quis ingressum, tunc consulitur domino
per tale breve.


Rex vicecomiti salutem. Przecipe tali &ec. quód red-


dat tali tantum terre cum pertinentiis in tali villa,


in quod predictus talis non habet ingressum nisi per
talem, qui illud tenuit de predicto tali in villenagio,
ut dicit &c.,, et nisi fecerit, summoneas &c. ut supra.
Item si quis per eum ingressum habuerit, qui non fue-
rit compos sui, nee sans mentis, et tunc sic.


Rex vicecomiti salutem.  Preceipe tali, quód juste
&e. et in quod idem talis non habet ingressum nisi
per talem patrem, vel alium antecessorem preedicti talis,
cujus heres ipse est, qui illud ei dimisit dum non
fuit compos mentis sus, vel dum non fuit compos sui,
nec sans mentis (ut dicit) Et nisi fecerit &c. ut
supra Item si quis per eum qui non tenuerit niei


OF ENTRY. 47


be his right and inheritance, and into which such an one against thc
aforesaid. has no entry except through such an one for- ibo
merly our bailiff, who demised it to him, whilst so-and-

so was in our prison, and his land was in our hand &c., as

hesays. And unless hedo so &c. Likewise if any one

through him, who has committed à felony and then has

been convicted after the commission of the felony, his

lord from whom he held is entitled to such & writ to

recover his escheat.

The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin A.that ^ s.
justly &e. he restore to B. so much land with its appur- Eu
tenances &c., into which the said A. has no entry except alienated
through C. de N., who held the same land from the afore- rm
said B., and which land ought to be &n escheat of the of the
said B. on account of & felony, of which the said B. was c
convicted and condemned in our court before us or our
justiciaries, and which land the said C. demised to the
aforesaid A. after he had committed the said felony, as the
said B. says, and unless he do so &e. &s above, — Likewise
if & person has an entry through him who held in villen-
age, then the lord is aided through a writ of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin so-and-so, , i it
&c. that he restore to such an one so much land with its villein has
appurtenances in such a vill, into which so-and-so afore- ?'enated
said has no entry except through such an one, who held hcl in
it from such an one aforesaid in villenage, as he says &c., "llenare.
and unless he do so, summon &c. as Bbove: Likewise if
& person has an entry through him, who was not in pos-
session of his faculties, nor of sound mind, and then thus.


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin so-and-so 1o.
that justly &c., and into which the said so-and-so had AE if
rough
no entry except through such a father or another ances- him, who
tor of the said so-and-so, whose heir he is, who demised D of
it to him when he was not in possession of his faculties, mind.
nor of sound mind (as he says) And unless he do so


&c, as above. Likewise if anyone (had entry) through


11.
De in-
gressu per
eum, qui
non tenuit
nisi ad
vitam
quacunque
ratione, et
cum post
mortem
reverti
debet.


f. 324.


123.
De in-
gressu
per in-
tru-ionem.


48 DE INGRESSU.


&d vitam suam quacunque ratione, sive nomine dotis,
sive per legem Anglis, sive per finem factum, et tunc
sic.


Rex vicecomiti salutem.  Precipe tali, quód juste &c.
et in quam idem talis non habet ingressum, nisi per
talem, post mortem cujus prsdicta terr& reverti debeat
&d predictum talem, per finem factum in curi& domini
regis Johannis! regis patris nostri, vel in curia nostra
coram justiciariis nostris, apud talem locum, inter ta-
lem patrem predicti talis (cujus heres ipse est) peten-
tem, et pdictu talem tenentem de tanto terre cü pti-
nentiis in tali villa: vel sic: In quam idem talis non
habet ingressu nisi p talé, qui terrà illam tenuit ad
vitam suam p fine factu in curi& nostra &c. inter ipsü
talem petente, et pdictum talem tenente, per que finem
eade terra reverti debuit ad pdictum talem petentem,
post morte ipsius tenetis (ut dicit), & unde queritur
quód ipse talis injusté ei deforceat, & nisi fecerit &c.
ut supra. Si quis autem per initrusionem fuerit in
seysina, et ille qui jus habet petat versus eum, tunc
fiat ei breve in hac forma.


Rex vicecomiti salute. Praecipe A. q juste &c. reddat
B. tantum terre &c. quem idem B. clamat ut jus suum
versus eum ex dono C. patris ipsius À. (cujus heres
ipse est), et in quam idem A. non habet ingressum
nisi per hoc, q ipse se intrusit in terram illa post
morte D. matris ipsius À. q terram illam recuperavit
ut dote suam versus pdictum B. in curia nostra coram
&c. per judicium ejusdem curis nostre, et qm injuste
ei deforciat: et nisi fecerit &c. Tunc summoneas &c.
vel aliter: quam B. clamat esse jus suum de dono C.


! * jn curia domini Johannis," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ENTRY. 40


him who held it only for his life in some way or other,
whether in the name of dower, or by the law of England,
or through a fine levied, and then thus.


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin so-and- 11.

so, that justly &c., and into which so-and-so aforesaid had edu
no entry except through such an one, after whose death him, who
the aforesaid land ought to revert to such an one afore- hold except
said, after a fine made in the court of the lord the king dE id in
John our father, or in our court before our justiciaries " LA
at such & place, between so-and-so the father of such an and when
one aforesaid (whose heir he is), the claimant, and so-and- iir E en
so aforesaid the tenant of so much land with its appur- bis écath.
tenances in such a& vill; or thus, into which so-and-so f"?*
aforesaid had no entry except through such an one, who

held that land for his life by a fine EI in our court

&c. between the said party himself the claimant and so-

and-so aforesaid the tenant, according to which fine the

said land ought to revert to the said claimant after the

death of the tenant, as he says, and wherefore he com-

plains that so-and-so aforesaid unjustly excludes him by

force ; and unless he do so &c. as above. But if anybody

has been in seysine through intrusion, and he who has

the right claims against him, then let & writ issue in this


form.


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin A.that 12.
justly &c. he restore to B. so much land &e. which the Of entry br
said B. claims as his right against him from the grant
of C. the father of the said A. (whose heir he is), and
into which the said À. had no entry except through these
means, that he intruded himself into that land after the
death of D. the mother of the said À. who had recovered
that land as her dower against the aforesaid B. in our
court before &c. by a judgment of our said court, and
who unjustly excludes him by force, and unless he do
so &c., then summon &e.: or otherwise : which B. claims
to be his right by & grant from C. his father, and into

Q 6366. D


13.
De in-
gressu
per eus-
todiam.


14.
De in-
gTessm per
maritum.


15.
Si haeres
peteret de
seysina


20 DE INGRESSU.


patris sui; & in quam non habet ingressum, nisi per
intrusionem, quam fecit in terram illam post mortem
ipsius C. qui terram illam habuit in custodia ad opus
ipsius B. dum infra »tatem fuit, ut dicit: vel aliter:
Precipe A. q juste &c. reddat B. & C. uxori ejus tan-
tam terram &ec. quam idem A. dedit in maritagium
pdieto B. cum pdicta C. filia sua, & in quam idem A.
non habet ingressum post donum illud nisi per intru-
sionem, quam in eam fecit post mortem D. patris ipsius
B. qui terram illam habuit in custodia ad opus pdic-
torum B. et C. uxoris sue de voluntate & assensu
ipsius D. qui fuit eorum custos, per assignationem et
voluntatem ipsius À. (ut ipsi B. et C. dicunt)  Ttem
si vir alicujus uxoris vendiderit hereditatem alicujus
pueri uxoris sue, d fuerit in custodia ipsorum: et tune
sic.


Rex vicecomiti salutem. Precipe À. quód juste &c.
reddat B. qui plenze statis est (ut dicitur) tantum
terree cum pertinentiis in tali villa, quod clamat esse
jus et hereditatem suam, et in quod jdictus A. non
habet ingressum nisi per C. qui non nisi custodiam
inde habuit, dum idem D. infra :etatem et in custodia
sua fuit (ut dicit): et nisi fecerit &c. ut supra.


Rex vieecomiti salutem.  Precipe A. quód juste et
sine dilatione reddat B. &c.,, et in quam idem A. non
habet ingressum nisi per C. quondam virum matris
ipsius B. (eujus haeres ipse est) qui illam ei vendidit
ut dicit &ec. Item si quis dederit. dum heres fucrit
infra statem & in custodia sua, et heres petat de
Sseysina sua propria, tunc fiat breve in hac forma.


Si autem aliquis hires petat de seysina antecessorum
suorum aliquam terram, quam custos eorum alienaverit
dum fuerit infra swtatem, et in custodia sua, tune fiat


OF ENTRY. ol


which he has no entry, except by an intrusion, which he
has made into that land since the death of the said C.,
who held that land in his custody for the benefit of the
said B. whilst he was under age, as he says: or other-
wise: Enjoin À. that he justly &c. restore to B. and C.
his wife so much land &c., which the said À. gave as a
marriage portion to the aforesaid B. together with C. his
daughter, and into which the said A. has no entry after
that grant except by an intrusion, which he made after
the death of D. the father of the said B. who had that
land in his custody for the benefit of the aforesaid B.
and C. his wife with the will and assent of the said D.,
who was their guardian by the assignment and will of
the said A. (as B. and C. say). Likewise if the husband
of any wife has sold the inheritance of any male child
of his said wife, which had been in the custody of them
both : and then thus :


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin A.that 13.
justly &e. he restore to B. who is of full age (as it is Mn cue
said) so much land with its appurtenances in such a guardian.
vill, which he claims to be his right and his inheritance,
and into whieh the said A, had no entry except through
C. who had only the custody thereof, whilst B. was
under agre and in his guardianship (as he says): and
unless he do so &c. as above.


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin A. thathe — i4
justly and. without delay restore to B. &c, and into which f enty-
the said À. has no entry except through C. formerly the nustaud.
husband of the mother of the said B. (whose heir he is),
who sold it to him as he says &e. Likewise if & person
has granted it, whilst the heir was under age and under
his guardianship, and the heir claims of his own seysine,
then let the writ issue in this form.


But if any heir claims from the seysine of his ancestors — 15. -
& certain land, which their guardian has alienated, whilst AL
they were under age and under his guardianship, then from the


D2


52 DE INGRESSU.


antecesso- breve in hac forma,  Procipe &c. ut supra: quod cla-
DLE mat esse jus et hereditatem suam, et in quod idem A.
etatem. non habet ingressum nisi per C., qui non nisi custodiam
inde habuit dum talis pater vel mater, frater vel soror,
&vus vel avia, avunculus vel amita, consanguineus vel
consanguinea, sive antecessor ipsius B. (cujus heres
ipse est) infra statem et in custodia sua fuit, ut dicit


&c.: eb nisi &c.


f. 324 b. Vel aliter: & in quam non habet ingressum nisi per
16. i ; i í
Item, dum C. cujus pater vel alius antecessor terram illam habuit


fuerit infra in. custodia cum ipso B., dum idem B. fuit infra sta-

TU. tem: modo! habet etatem (ut dicitur). Et unde idem
talis pater vel alius antecessor obiit seysitus de terra
ila ratione custodie ipsius B.: & nisi fecerit &c.


17. Vel aliter: In quam idem A. non habet ingressum
de nisi per C. qui terram illam ei dimisit, dum terra illa
custodia. fuit in custodia ipsius C. per preceptum nostrum, &

nisi fecerit &c.: vel aliter: Precipe A. quód juste &c.
reddat B. (qui plens setatis est) tantam terram &c.,
quam clamat esse jus & hereditatem suam, & in quam
non habet ingressum nisi ratione custodim, eo quód
predicta terra est de feodo ipsius À.: & nisi fecerit &c.
ml - Vel sic: Et in quam non habet ingressum nisi per
fuerit infra C, cujus pater terram illam habuit in custodia cum
ir et ipso B. dum idem B. fuerit infra statem, & modo ha-
habet bet statem. Et unde idem pater talis obiit seysitus
*tatem. — de terra illa, ratione custodie ipsius B.: et nisi fecerit


&c.


19. Vel aliter: In quam idem À. non habet ingressum
die de Disi per C. dum idem B. fuit in custodia sua, & idem


familiasua. À, terram illam ei dimisit, dum remaneret de familia


! * et modo," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ENTRY. 53


let the writ be in this form.  Enjoin so-and-so &c. as scysine of
above, which he claims to be his right and inheritance, suben
and into which the said A. has no entry except through he vas

C. who had only the guardianship thereof, whilst his ""*" *£*-
said father or mother, grandfather or grandinother,

uncle or aunt, cousin-male or cousin-female, or the
ancestor of the said B. (whose heir he is) was under

age and under his guardianship, as he says &e.: and

unless &c.


Or otherwise; and into which he had no entry except f 324b.
through C., whose father or other ancestor held that land Likewise
in his custody together with B. himself, whilst the said D :
B. was under age, and lately he is of age (as it is said), age.
and whence his said father or other ancestor died
seysed of that land by reason of his guardianship of the


said B. : and unless he do so &c.


Or otherwise: into which the said A. has no entry D M
except through C. who demised that land to him, whilst vni
that land was in the custody of the said C. through our "ndcr

- .. guardian-
precept, and unless he do so &e. Or otherwise: Enjoin ship.
À. that justly &c. he restore to B. (who is of full age) so
much land &c., which he claims to be his right and in-
heritance, and into which he has no entry except by
reason of his guardianship, inasmuch as the aforesaid


land is of the fee of the said A. : and unless he do so &c.


Or thus: and into whieh he has no entry except 13.
through C., whose father held that land in his custody pd
together with the said B. whilst the said B. was under vas under
age, and he has lately come of age. And whence the Susie
said father of so-and-so died seysed of that land, by come of
reason of his guardianship of the said B., and unless he ^


do so &c.


Or otherwise: into which the said A. had no entry 19.
except through C. whilst the said B. was under his Me


guardianship, and the said A. demised the land to him Mivdead
whilst B. remained & member of the family of said C. miS


20.
Breve de
pastura
data ad
terminum,
qui prze-
teriit.


l.
De diver-
sitate ju-
ratarum
secundum
diversi-
tatem
brevium.


2.
S1 partes
posucerint
se in jura-
tam secun-
dum diver-
sitatem
brevium.


f. 325.


54 DE INGRESSU.

ipsius C.,, & modo non est de familia ipsius C. ut
idem B. dicit: et nisi fecerit &c. Eodem modo de
communia pasture, si fuerit alienata et dimissa ad
terminum qui preteriit. Et tune fiat tale breve, dum
tamen pastura fuerit certa et designata ad certum
numerum averiorum.


Rex vicecomiti salutem.  Precipe À. quód juste &c.
reddat B. communiam pasture ad tot boves, et tot
oves (et sie deinceps) in tali villa, quam clamat esse


jus suum, ut pertinentem ad liberum tenementum suum


in tali villa, in quam idem A. non habet ingressum,
nisi per C. (cujus heres idem B. est) qui pasturam
ilam ei dimisit ad terminum qui preteriüt, ut dicit:
et nisi fecerit &c.


Cap. VI.


Cum petens se posuerit in inquisitionem & juratam
de intentione probanda, et tenens similiter de respon-
sione et exceptione, tune fiant jurate secundum forinam
et diversitatem brevium in hac forma.


Si autem per virum cui uxor eontradicere non potuit,
tune sic: ad recognoscendum super sacramentum suum,
si prexlietus talis tenens aliud jus vel alium ingressum
habuit, vel simpliciter alium ingressum, in. tantam ter-
ram cum pertinentiis in tali villa, quam predicta talis
clamat ut jus suum, vel ut jus et h:wreditatem suam,
vel ut jus et maritagium suum, vel ut dotem suam,
quam habuit de dono talis primi viri sui versus
talem, quam per talem quondam virum suum vel
seeundum virum suum seeundum formam brevis de
ingressu, et cui in vita sua contradicere non potuit,
vel si ingressum habuit in prwdicta talem terram per
predictum talem petentem qui terram illam ei dedit
vel vendidit, antequàm przedictus talis vir suus eam
desponsasset, vel post morte talis viri sui in ligea


OF ENTRY. 55


and he has lately ceased to be à member of his family,
as D. says: and unless he do so &e. In the'same way
concerning common of pasture, if it has been alienated
and demised for & term which has passed. And then
let such à writ issue, provided however that the pasture
be certain and designed for a certain number of cattle.


The king to the viscount greeting.  Enjoin A. that  »o.
justly &c. he restore to B. common of pasture for so br
many beeves, and so many sheep (and so in succession) granted for
in sueh a vill into which the said A. has no entry $e.
except through C. (whose heir the said B. is) who has passed.
demised that pasture to him for a term which has passed,


as he says: and unless he do so &c.-


CHAPTER VI.


When a claimant has put himself upon an inquest and an di-
a jury to prove his demand, and the tenant has put him- versity of
self in & similar manner to prove his answer and exeep- QU MM
tion, then let the juries be constituted according to the the diver-


form and diversity of the writs in this form. ig


But if through the husband, whom his wife could not ,, |?
If the par-


contradict, then thus : to recognise upon their oath, if so- ties have
and-so &foresaid has had any other right or any other nr
entry, or simply another entry, into so much land with jury ac-
its appurtenances in such a vill, which so-and-so afore- (p n8 t
said elaims as her right, or as her right and inheritance, sity of the
or as her right and her marriage portion, or as her dower, "^
which she had by gift from so-and-so her first husband,

against so-and-so, or which she had through so-and-so
formerly her husband, or her second husband aecording

tothe form of the writ of entry, and whom she could

not contradict during his life, or if he had an entry into f. 325.
such land aforesaid through so-and-so aforesaid the
claimant, who granted or sold that land to her before

her said husband espoused her, or after the death of her


sàjd husband in the full widowhood of his said wife,


50 DE INGRESSU.


viduitate ipsius uxoris, quee terram illam ei dedit vel
vendidit &e. Et semper cüm modus & forma ingres-
sus dedicta sit, oportebit semper formare formam in-
quisitionis distincte secundum responsionem tenentis,
qui dedicit ingressum, excipiendo & respodendo, quód
alium habeat ingressum quàm petens proponat, vel
diversum, & per alium. Item si alio modo uxor alie-
naverit rem viri sui, vel rem ppriam sine consensu
viri sui, tunc sic: Ad recognoscendum super sacra-
mentum &c. si predictus talis tenens aliud jus vel
alium ingressum habuerit in tantam terram cum per-
tinentiis in tali villa, quam talis clamat ut jus suum,
Si terra fuerit propria, vel quam talis & uxor ejus
clamat esse jus uxoris sus, vel in dotem uxoris sus,
vel de rationabili dote secundum formam brevis de
ingressu, & quam predicta talis uxor ei dimisit sine
assensu viri sui, ut. idem petens dicit, vel si prsedictus
talis tenens ingressum habuit in terram illam per prze-
dictum virum, qui terram illam ei vendidit vel dedit,
per praedictam uxorem ante desponsationem vel post,
ut supra, sicut idem tenens dicit.

3. Item si sine assensu episcopi, abbatis, vel prioris,
Ain E per capitulum fiat alienatio, vel per canonicum sine
episcopi, assensu capituli, vel per obedientiarium, vel procura-
vel prioris, . . AT .
velabba. torem sine consensu &bbatis vel prioris, vel per balli-
tis. vum siue assensu domini, vel per ballivum, dum quis
Britton, V. fuerit in prisona, tune semper fiat una pars juratze
ch.xiv.$7. secundum formam brevis, & disjuncta secundum re-

sponsionem tenentis, & omni casu in brevibus de
ingressu singularibus, ut si per illum qui tenuerit in
vilenagio. Item per aliquem dum non fuit sane
mentis ltem si per eum qui non tenuerit nisi ad
vitam. Item per felonem post feloniam factam. Item


OF ENTRY. 57


who granted or sold that land to him, &c. And always
when the mode and form of the entry has been denied,
it will be requisite to shape the form of the inquest
distinctly according to the answer of the tenant, who
denies the entry, by excepting and answering, that he had
another entry than that which the claimant propounds,
or a diverse entry and through another person. Also if
the woman has in a different manner alienated the estate
of her husband, or her own estate without the consent
of her husband, then thus: to recognise upon their oath,
&c. if so-and-so the tenant aforesaid had any other right
or any other entry into so much land with its appur-
tenances in such a vill, which so-and-so claims as his
right, if the land be his own, or which so-and-so and his
wife claim to be the right of his wife, or as the dower
of his wife, or of her reasonable dower according to the
form of the writ of entry, and which the wife aforesaid
demised to him without the assent of her husband, as
the said claimant says, or if such tenant aforesaid had
an entry into that. land through the aforesaid husband,
who sold or granted the land to hin, or through the
aforesaid wife before her espousals or after them, as
above, as the said tenant says.


Likewise if an alienation has been made without the | 3.
assent of the bishop or of the abbot or of the prior, or ipost de
through à canon without the assent of the chapter, or ^*nt of
through an obedientiary or à steward without the con- io ái
sent of the abbot or prior, or through a bailiff without iu
the assent of the lord, or through a bailiff whilst one
was in prison, then let one part of the jury be con-
stituted aecording to the form of the writ, and the re-
mainder according to the answer of the tenant, and in
every case in single writs of entry, as if through him
who held in villenage. Likewise through some one when
he was not of sound mind. Likewise through him who
did not hold except for his life. Likewise through &


felon afier his commission of felony. Likewise if an entry


58 DE INGRESSU.


si ingressus simpliciter proponatur & simplicitur dedi-
catur absque eo quód aliquid excipiatur cotra ingres-
sum, tune sie: Ád recognoscendum &c. si À. pater B.
aliud jus vel alium ingressum habuit in tantam ter-
ram cum pertinentiis &c. nisi per C. custodem D.
fratris E. scilicet. qui petit, cujus heres ipse E. est,
dum idem D. fuit infra setatem, & in custodia prze-
dieti C. cum terra sua & alis terris suis, quia tam
predictus B. filius & hsres predicti A,, cui. F. de N.
warrantizavit praedictam terram, & versus quem B.
idem E. in eadem curia nostra clamavit terram illam
ut jus suum, quam praedictus E. frater & hores prze-
dicti D. posuerunt se inde in juratam illam, & interim,
&c. & se interim ita inde certificeent quód praefatos
justiciarjios nostros inde reddant certiores. Teste &c.


Mm. Item si per intrusionem, tune sic: Ad recognoscen-
tem super : ;

intrusi. dum super sacramentum suum, si Á. pater B. die quo
9^" obiit fuit seysitus ut de feodo de tanta terra cum per-


tinentiis in tali villa quam C. in curia nostra &c.
clamat ut jus suum versus predictum B., vel si idem B.
alium ingressum non habuit in terram illam cum per-
tinentiis, quàm per hoc quód. se intrusit in terram illam
post mortem predicti À. patris sui, cui predictus C.

f 325b. terram illam dimisit ad terminum qui preterit (ut
dicitur), quia tam predictus &c. Et hsc exempli causa
sufficiant, quia infiniti sunt ingressus, & form: brevium
infinito, & variantur forme inquisitionum multiplici-
ter, & sepiüs secundum varietatem brevium, & respon-
sionum : de quibus omnibus (eum sint infinita) mentio
fieri non poterit.


-


DP .
Item breve Item si uxor alienaverit dotem, & dicatur in brevi


sj per : x . : .
Burr de ingressu: Et in quam talis non habet ingressum


que non nisi per talem, quz fuit uxor talis, qui terram illam


— Án Ó—— RR ERR RR moo


OF ENTRY. 59


be simply propounded and simply denied without any
exception being raised against the entry, then thus: to
recognise, &c., if A. the father of B. had any other rirht
or any other entry into so much land with its appur-
tenances, &c., except through C. the guardian of D. the
brother of E., to wit, the claimant, whose heir E. is, while
the said D. was under age and in the guardianship of the
said C. with his land and other lands of his, because the
aforesaid B. the son and heir of the aforesaid A. to whom
F. de N. warranted the aforesaid land, and arzainst which
B. the said E. in our same court claimed that land as his
right, as well as the aforesaid E. the brother and heir of
the aforesaid D. have placed themselves thereupon on that
jury, ànd in the meanwhile, &c, and let them certify
themselves thereon in the mean time, so that they may
render our aforesaid justiciaries more certain thereof.
Witness, &c.


Likewise if through an intrusion, then thus: to recog-
nise upon their oath, if A. the father of B. on the day on
which he died was seysed as of fee of so much land with
its appurtenances in such a vill, which C. in our court,
&c., claims as his right against the aforesaid B., or if the
said B. had not any other entry into that land with its
appurtenaneces than by intruding himself into that land
after the death of the aforesaid À. his father, to whom
the aforesaid C. demised that land for à term which has
passed (as is sail), because as well the aforesaid, &c.
And these are suffieient for example's sake, because
entries are infinite, and the forms of writs infinite, and
the forms of inquests are varied in manifold ways, and
repeatedly according to the variety of writs and answers ;
concerning all of which (since they are infinite) mention
cannot be made.


Likewise if & wife has alienated her dower, and it is
said in the writ of entry, and into which so-and-so has
no entry except through such an one, who was the wife


4.
Likewise
upon ati
intru*ion.


f. 325 b.


9.
Likewise, if
through a
wife who


60 DE INGRESSU.


nisi dotem ei dimisit, & quz non nisi dotem inde habuerit, de
Ae dono talis quondam viri sui, post. cujus mortem terra
ila reverti debet ad talem sicut &d warantum de dote
Sua, si tenens ingressum ^ilum per talem defendat, &
dieat quód nullum habuerit ingressum per predictam
uxorem, sed per talem antecessorem ipsius petentis
(cujus hzres ipse est), qui terram ei dedit per chartam
suam quam profert, & quse hoc testatur: si ex parte
adversa replicetur, q charta valere non debeat eo quód
facta fuit dum donator non fuit compos mentis su,
tune fiat ut supra, quia cognoscit quodamodo chartam
& donum, licet invalidum, & de jure irritandum. Item
si charta omninó dedicatur, vel dicatur quód omninó
valere non debeat, quia ille qui donasse debuit nullam
omninó inde seysinam habuit, tunc petens pbet dictum
suum si possit. Sed simplici voci sus» non erit cre-
:dendum, nisi sufficientem habeat probatione, nisi ita
sit quód credendü sit ei & simplici voci sux in causce
cognitione. Et in quo casu, tenens se ponet in jura-
tam per haec verba. Sed videndum erit utrum ille
qui dedit hzares fuit, & warrantus de dote mulieris,
vel extranea persona: quód si non, non valeret dona-
tio: sed si sic, valere poterit. Poterit enim heres dare
id quod suum est, scilicet proprietatem, jus & feodum,
& attornare donatorio servitium, ita quód uxor tenens
quoad vixerit habeat liberum tenementum. Et si uxor
tenens dum vixerit se dimiserit, & donatorio suo sey-
sinam reddiderit, non habet propter hoc donatorius
ingressum per uxorem sed per haeredem, quod secüs
esset, si tantü per uxorem. Ideo dicatur: Ad recog-
noscendum si predictus A. pater B. &liud jus vel alium


OF ENTRY. 61


of such an one, who demised that land to her, and who *ad only


had only her dower thereof by the grant of such an one
formerly her husband, after whose death that land ought
to revert to so-and-so as to the warrantor of her dower,
if the tenant contests that entry through so-and-so, and
says that he had no entry through the aforesaid wife,
but through such an ancestor of the claimants (whose
heir he is) who granted him that land through his
charter, which he produces, and which attests this : if on
the opposite side it be replied, that the charter ought
not avail,inasmuch as it was made when the grantor
was not in possession of his faculties, then let it be done
as above, because he acknowledges in à certain manner
the charter and. the grant, although it be invalid and is
of right to be declared void. Likewise if the charter be
altogether denied, or it be said that it ought not to
avail at all, because he who should have granted it, had
no seysine thereof at all, then let the claimant prove his
own assertion, if he can. But credit is not to be given
to his simple assertion, unless he has a sufficient, proof,
except it be that credit, is to be given to him and to his
simple assertion in the cognisance of the cause; and in
which case the tenant shall put himself upon a jury in
these words. But it wil have to be seen, whether he
who granted it was the heir and the warrantor of the
dower of the wife, or an extraneous person, because if
not, the grant would not avail, but if so, it may be valid.
For the heir may grant what is his own, that is the
property, the right, and the fee, and may attourn to the
donatory & service, so that the wife the tenant may have
a. free tenement as long as she lives. And if the wife as
tenant during her lifetime has demised herself and has
restored seysine to her donatory, the donatory has not
on that account an entry through the wife, but through
the heir, which would be otherwise, if only through the
wife. Therefore let it be said: to recognise, if the afore-
aaid A. the father of B. had any other right or any other


her dower.


l.
Si jurata
sumno-
nenda est
coram
justiciariis.


69 DE INGRESSU.


ingressum habuit in predictam terram, quàm per prz-
dictam C. qua terram illam tenuit in dotem, de dono
predicti D. quondam viri sui (eujus heres ipse est),
scilicet qui petit, sicut idem E. dicit, vel si ingressum
habuerit in terram illam per predictum B. qui terram
ilam ei dedit per chartam suam, & inde eam posuit
in seysinam ita quód attornavit eidem À. servitium
C. de praedicta terra ut idem B. dicit, & interim &c. :
et hoc sufficiat de inquisitione ad presens.


CAP. VII.


Si aute aliqua jurata sumonenda sit cora justic. vel
corà ipso rege, qus aliquado fuit coram iv. justic. as-
signatis, tune fiat tale breve. Rex vic. salute, peipi-
mus tibi q juratam qus sumonita fuit coram dilectis
& fidelibus nostris &e. in adventu ipsorü in partes illas
inter tales de tanta terra cü ptinentis in tali villa,
& quis jurata nondu capta est (ut idem talis recor-
datur), venire facias coram justiciariis nostris &e. in
eodem statu quo sumonita fuit coram prwfatis talibus,
& habeas &c. Et in quo casu, si recognitores non
venerint, tune fiat tale breve. Precipimus tibi, quód
habeas coram &e. ad talem terminuü corpora A. B. &
C. recognitoru juratz süinonitee in curia nostra, &c.
inter tales de tanto terre &e. ad faciendam juratà
illam, vel ad faciendam jurata illam cum aliis ad hoc
electis.  Precipimus etia tibi, quód loco talis unius
electorum qui obiit, vel qui amotus est, ponas aliü
militem, & illum habeas ad pfatum terminu ad facien-
dam jurata illam simul &e.: vel sie: peipimus tibi q
in jurata qus suinonita est &c. inter tales de tali re


OF ENTRY. 63


entry into the aforesaid land than throu;h the aforesaid
C. who had that land in dower, of the grant of the afore-
said D. formerly her husband (whose heir he is), to wit
who claims, as the said E. says, or if he had an entry
into that land through the aforesaid B. who granted that
land to her by his charter, and placed her into seysine
thereof in such à manner, that he attourned to the said
À. the service of the aforesaid C. concerning the afore-
said land as the said B. says, and meanwhile, &c.: and
let this suffice concerning the inquest for the present.


CHAPTER VII.


But if a jury is to be summoned before the justiciaries s LP
or before the king himself, which was soinetime sunimoned e Ma d
before four justiciaries assigned, then let such a writ Md
issue, The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin justiciaries.
you, that. you cause to come before our justiciaries the
jury whieh was summoned before our beloved and faith-
ful &c. upon their coming into those parts between such
persons concerning so much land with its appurtenances
in such a vill, and. which jury has not yet been held
(as the said so-and-so records) &c., in the same state in. f. 32v.
which it was summoned before the aforesaid so-and.so,
and have with you &c. AÁnd in which case, if recognisors
have not come, then let à writ of this kind issue. We
enjiin you that you have before &c. at such a term the
bodies of A. B. and C., recognisors of the jury summoned
in our court &c. between so-and-so, concerning so much
land &c., to make up that jury, or to make up a jury
with others chosen for that purpose. We enjoin you
that in the place of so-and-so one of those chosen who
has died, or who has been struck off, you place another
knight, and have him present at the aforesaid term to
make up that jury together with &c.: or thus, we enjoin
you that on the jury which has been summoned &c.
between certain persons on & certain subject &c. you


l.
De brevi-
bus, si
firmarius
petierit
seysinam
propriam.


2.
Qualia
brevia non
vertuntur
ad brevia


04 DK INGRESSU.


&c. ponas sex liberos & legales homines, alios à pelec-
tis ad praeelectos, & qui non sunt essoniabiles, & eos
habeas cori &c. it& q jurata illa non remaneat p de-
fectu recognitorü &c. qui interim tenementa illa videant
&c.


CAP. VIII.


Item: Inter csetera in fine notandum, q cüm aliquis
firmarius petierit seysinam ppriam, hoc facere possit,
etsi non habuerit jus in re sive in tenemto, & illud
alicui dimiserit &d terminu qui pteriit, quia quodamodo
jus habet possessoriu quale quale, quare copetat ei actio
de dimissione ppria & facto pprio. Quod si in feodo,
tune expirat sua actio, & tunc incipit copetere pprie-
tario, vel de nova disseysina vel de ingressu, vel de
mero jure per breve de recto, secundum q tenuerit ad
vitam quocung modo, ut de libero tenemento tantü,
vel in feodo sibi & heredibus suis, sine usu & exple-
tiis tantu, vel cum usu & expletiis ut de jure mero.
S1 autem ille dimiserit, qui tantum tenuit ad termi-
num vitz», & de seysina propria petierit. ingressum,
ubi alius habucrit pprietatem, feodu scilicet & jus
merum, tale breve nunquà vertetur per narratione in
breve de recto. Eodé modo, si quis petierit per in-
gressum tenementü q dimisit ad terminü, & q tenuit
tantü in feodo sine usu & expletiis, nunqua vertetur
tale breve de ingressu per narrationem in breve de
recto.

Si aute petierit de seysina ppria q tenuit ut liberü
tenemétum & in feodo cum usu & expletiis, & sic de
jure mero, tunc copetere poterunt petenti dus actiones,


OF ENTRY. 65


place six free and loyal men, different from those pre-
viously chosen, in addition to those previously ehosen,
and who are not essoinable, and have them present
before &c., so that the said jury shall not be stayed for
default of recognisors &c, who may in the meantime
view those tenements.


CHAPTER VIII.


Likewise, amongst other things it is to be noted that, . 1.

when a termor has claimed his proper seysine, he may DC
do this, although he has no right in the estate, or in the has claim-
tenement, and has demised it for a term, which has wd
passed, because in a certain manner he has a possessory seysne.
right of some kind or other, wherefore he is entitled to
an action concerning his own demise and his own act.
But if it be in fee, then this action expires, and then the
proprietor begins to be entitled, either concerning novel
disseysine, or concerning entry, or concerning the mere
right through a writ of right, according as he has held
for life in some manner or other, as concerning the
freehold only, or in fee for himself and his heirs without
the use and profits, or with the use and profits as of
mere right. But if he has demised it, who only held it
for the term of his life, and he claims an entry in virtue
of his proper seysine, where another has the property, to
wit, the fee and the absolute right, such a writ will
never be turned through the pleadings into & writ of
right. In the same manner, if any one has claimed
through an entry & tenement which he has demised for
a term, and. which he has held only in fee without the
use and profits, such a writ of entry will never be turned
through the pleadings into a writ of right.


But if he has claimed of his proper seysine what he E.
has held as a freehold and in fee with the use and profits, writs are
and so of absolute right, then the claimant is entitled PEpts
to two actions, and he may employ which he pleases. of right


Q 6366. E


66 DE INGRESSU.


derecto  & uti poterit quà voluerit. Et tunc etiam una electa,
tonem,  Vértitur quandóg, una in aliam. Competit enim ei


quiaille — breve de ingressu, vel breve de recto. Et si breve de
tit M EC e. L e» 3»
mon haber ingressu eligitur ubi omnia pdieta concurrunt, & petens
nisilibe- fundaverit intentionem suam, & docuerit de jure suo,
rum tene- . . . .
mentun, € Quod ad ipsum pertineat actio, tunc proponet in-
gressum, & illum probet per patriam vel instrumentum,


ut supra dicitur.


8. Et si primó posuerit ingressum, & postea docere
heu * velit de mero jure suo per descensum, sie vertitur
tuntur. — breve de ingressu ad breve de recto, & conjungitur
f.326b. una actio cum alia, scilicet. per breve de recto, vel per

breve de ingressu per juratam, secundum quod tenens
elegerit, totum terminabitur negotium. Et ideó habet
tenens electionem, quia si, càm peteti plures competant
actiones, & uti poterit qua voluerit, eodem modo si
tenenti cópetant plures responsiones sive exceptiones
peremptorie, quae terminant totum negotium, uti pote-
rit pro voluntate sua quacunq, illarum voluerit, qua-
tenus tempus & probatio permiserit, ut si se tenuerit
tenens ad ingressum, cavédum erit quód terminus non
excedat tempus assise mortis antecessoris, ita quód
deficiat probatio de proprio visu & auditu. Et si se
tenuerit ad rectum, extunc sicut p breve de recto erit
procedendum, postquam tenens se posuerit in magnam
assisam, vel se defenderit per duellü: & sic vertetur
una actio pprictatis in aliam super pprietate. Sed
actio super possessione nunquam per narratione verte-
tur ad actionem super pprietate, nec e converso. Sed
cüm uiraq, actio cópetat petenti ab initio, & inceperit


co —m———rr PEIPER NEA ec Ru E


pr ————— al bom m md md ma iita e em MA pU o ct - w-— — EIU o — Du M, He. 7 NEELCENENEC 00S oom


OF ENTRY. 67


And then even upon one having been chosen, sometimes through
one is turned into the other. For he is entitled to à tug
writ of entry or to & writ of right. And if the writ cause the
of entry be chosen where all the aforesaid conditions e "
concur, and the elaimant has founded his declaration freehold
and has explained his right, and that the action apper-

tains to him, then he shall propound his entry, and let

him prove it by the country, or by an. instrument, as

above said.

And if he has first. propounded his entry, and after- — $.
wards wishes to explain his mere right by a descent, 1^ "t
then the writ of entry is turned into & writ of right, and what
and the one action is conjoined with the other, to wit, yo turned.
through à writ of right, or through & writ of entry f.326 b.
through a jury, aecording as the tenant has elected, the
whole business shall be determined. And aecordingly
the tenant has an election, because 1f, when the claimant
is entitled to several actions and may employ which he
pleases, in the same manner if the tenant is entitled to
several answers or peremptory exceptions, which ter-
minate the whole business, he may employ according to
his pleasure whichever of these he wishes, as far as
time and proof permits, as if the tenant has held himself :
to an entry, he must be careful that the term does not
exceed the time of an assise of mortdancester, so that
the proof from the proper sight and hearing [of the wit-
nesses| should fai. And if he has held himself to the
right, thenceforward the proceedings must be as through
a& writ of right, after the tenant has put himself upon a
great assise, or should defend himself by battle, and so
one action of proprietorship shall be turned into another
action concerning the proprietorship. But an action of
possessorship shall never be turned by the pleadings into
an action concerning the proprietorship, nor conversely.

But whenthe claimant is entitled from the commencement
to either action and has begun at first to claim by a
E 2


68 DE INGRESSU.


petere primó per breve de recto, & narraverit de jure
suo per descensum, si tempus pbationis permiserit in
fine, post. descesum bene poterit descendere ad ingressü
per hec verba. Et unde talis non habet ingressu nisi
p tale eui &e. (ut supra per totu), sive hoc fuerit de
ppria seysina sive aliena, & tunc (ut supra) secundum
quod tenens elegerit defensionem erit pcedendum, sicut
p breve de recto in omnibus, tam in essoniis quàm in
alis, secundü q pceditur per breve de ingressu, & de
hac materia infra de essoü de malo lecti.


4. Quandoq, tamen locü habet breve de ingressu, &
er pbatio de visu pprio & auditu, ultra terminum assis»
perinqui. mortis antecessoris, q quidem contingit de necessitate,
morlureton & p defectu alterius actionis, ubi quis, qui no habuerit
deingressu. nisi liberum tenementum, dimiserit ad terminu longis-

simii, qui excedit tépus assise mortis antecessoris, &
ubi scilicet agere non possit p breve de recto sup jure
mero, cü nulluü aliud ei cóopetat remedium, tunc de
necessitate recurritur ad inquisitione p jurata de in-
gressu, non obstante termino, quia q aliàs non est
lieitü, necessitas licitü facit, ut si quis, qui ad vità
tenuerit quacuq, ratioe, vel in feodo sine usu & exple-
tiis, dimiserit ad terminu tale qui excedit tepus assism
mortis antecessoris, & ulteriüs supvixerit p tepus qui!
excedit terminu, adhuc subvenitur ei p breve de in-
gressu, & p juratam & pbationé de visu pprio alicujus
& auditu, q. de jure non esset cocedendü. Et q ita
fieri possit, pbatur de termino S. H. anno regis H.
vii. in cof Lync. de Thoma de Estotengni, ubi quseda,
qui tenuit nomine dotis, dedit cuidam ad terminum
dotem suam, qui duravit per lx. annos & amplius.
Et petit per breve de ingressu. Et secundü ea qus
dicta sunt, perpendi poterit q quodlibet breve de in-


! * quod," MS. Raw. C. 160.


OF ENTRY. 69


writ of right and has pleaded concerning his right by
descent, if the time of the proof will permit at the end,
after the descent he may well be able to descend to an
entry in these words: and whereof so-and-so has no
entry except through such an one to whom &e. (as
above through the whole), whether this may have been
of his proper seysine or of another's, and then (as above)
proceedings must be had according as the tenant has
elected his defence, as in a writ of right in all things
as wellin essoins as in other matters according to the
course of proceeding in à writ uf entry, and on this
matter below concerning an essoin of an illness confining
one to bed.


Sometimes however à writ of entry has place, and & — 4
proof by the proper sight and hearing of witnesses, I" din
beyond the term of an assise of mortdancester, and course delà
where an action could not be brought by & writ of m bnt m
right upon the mere right, when he is entitled to no inquest by
other remedy, then of necessity recourse must be had to Eur
an inquest by & jury concerning entry notwithstanding entry:
the term, because what otherwise is not lawful, necessity
makes lawful, as if a person who holds for life in any
manner whatsoever, or in fee without user and profits,
has demised for such à term which excecds the time of
an assise of mortdancester, and has survived to &
further period for a time which exceeds the term, he
is still suecoured by & writ of entry and by a jury, and
a proof by the proper view and hearing of some one,
which of right would not have to be conceded, and that
it may so is proved in Hilary term in the eighth year
of king Henry in the county of Leicester, concerning
Thomas of Estotengni, where & certain woman who
held in the name of dower, granted her dower to
some one for a term, which lasted for sixty years and
more. And he claimed by a writ of entry. And accord-


ing to what has been said, it may be understood that


f. 327.


70 DE INGRESSU.


gressu non convertitur in breve de recto, nec etiam in
persona cujuslibet petentis per breve de ingressu, quia
ei soli competit qui loqui possit de seysina propria, vel
alicujus antecessoris sui, qui inde obiit seisitus ut de
feodo & jure, & cujus seysinam petierit, non autem in
persong ejus qui ad terminum annorum tenuerit, sicut
firmarius, ut $1 ad terminum alicui tradiderit, & finito
termino illo terminum suum repetere voluerit. Item
dici poterit de eo qui tenuerit ad terminum vite quo-
cunj modo ut liberum teütum, & illud dimiserit ad
terminum, & finito termino repetere velit q dimisit.
Item illud idem dici poterit de eo qui non tenuerit
nisi in feodo tantum, sine jure mero, i. sine usu &
expletiis; & tales, licet jus habuerint quale quale, sicut
jus possessorium, non tamen petere poterunt jus pro-
prietatis, nec in judieiü deducere, quia jus tale non
habuit. Cüm igitur competat alicui utrumd jus, viz.
possessionis, & pprictatis, & petat p breve de ingressu
seysinà ppriam, vel alicujus antecessoris, ut jus & hz-
reditatem suam, vel maritagiu suum cum expressione
tali vel sine, & sie dicat in fundatione intentionis sus.
Peto tantu terre cum ptinentiis ut jus meum &c. Et
unde ego, vel talis antecessor meus fuit seysitus in
dominieo suo ut de feodo tempore talis regis, capiendo
expletia ad valentiam tanti, & de tali descendit jus
ilius terre tali, & sie per omnia sieut per breve de
recto, usq ad petente. Et tunc adjiciat: & unde idem
talis non habuit ingressum nisi p talem &e. Et ita q
faeiat mentioiü de ingressu, statim incipit breve de in-
gressu esse breve de recto ex narratione petentis, nisi


OF ENTRY. 71


every writ of entry is not converted into à writ of right,
nor indeed in the person of every claimant by à writ of
entry, for he is alone entitled to it who can speak of his
proper seysine, or of the seysine of some ancestor of his,
who died seysed thereof as of fee and right, and whose
seysine heclaimed, but not in the person of him who
held only for à term of years, as & termor, as if he had
delivered à thing to any one for & term of years, and
that term having been finished he wished to reclaim his
term. The same may be said concerning him who has
held for the term of his life in whatever manner asa
free tenement, and has demised it for a term, and upon
the term being finished wishes to reclaim what he has
demised. Likewise the same may be said, concerning
him who has not held except only in fee without the
absolute right, that is without the use and profits, and
such persons although they have & right of some kind
or other, as & possessory right, cannot however claim a
right of property, nor bring it into court, because he
had not such a right. When therefore any one is en-
titled to either right, à right of possession and of pro-
perty, and he claims by & writ of entry his own sey-
sine, or the seysine of & certain ancestor, as his right
and inheritance, or his marriage portion with or without
such an expression, and alleges thus in the foundation of
his declaration, I claim so much land with its appur-
tenances as my right &c., and whereof I myself or so-
and-so my ancestor was seysed in his domain as of fee in
the time of such a king, by taking profits for the value of
so much, and from such person the right of that land
descends to so-and-so and so through everything as in
& writ of right, up to the claimant. | And then add, and
whereof the said so-and.-so had no entry except through
such & person &c. And so that he makes mention of an
entry, the writ of entry begins forthwith to be à writ of
right from the pleadings of the claimant, unless the tenant


f. 321.


79 DE INGRESSU.


tenens ingressum elegerit. Et cüm in electione tenetis
sit ab initio in responsione sua utrum se tenere volu-
erit ad defensionem juris vel ingressus, omnia habebit
remedia, & omnes dilationes quz ei eopetere possent
p breve de recto, saltem  quousq elegerit defension
juris vel ingressus. Et si defensionem juris elegerit,
remaneat loquela sicut p breve de recto. Si autem
defensionem ingressus, q tunc desinat esse bie de recto,
& redeat iterum ad naturà suam sicut p breve de in-
gressu. Cim aute petens ab initio, & in intentione
sua pponat utrumq, scilicet jus & ingressum, oportet q
offerat se pbare utrumd, nisi tenens velit jus suum
recognoscere. Ad cujus intentionem & pbationem opor-
tet tenente utrumq defendere, habebit tamen electio-
nem quam istarum defensionu subire voluerit, juris
viz. vel ingressus: utramqQ veró subire non tenetur,
cüm una sufficiat p se sine alia, quia ciun petens jus
suum pponat & ingressum, si in pbatione unius defi-
ciat, erit quasi deficeret in probatione utriusq, ppter
conjunctionem copulativam (&) quse utramqQ conjungit.
Expedit igitur tenenti illà partem eligere, quam petens
pbare non possit. & incerta erit pbatio petetis, donec
tenens elegerit: poterit enim petens jus habere in re
petita, & tame inde ingressus no erit talis ut pponitur ;
vel é converso, poterit etiam esse q petens jus habeat
in re petita, & q talis sit ingressus ut pponitur, quo
casu cüm tenens ad duas non teneatur defensiones,
nec petens per consequens ad duas probationes, & factà
cleetione, probare possit illam quam tenens elegerit,
hoe erit tenenti periculosum. Et quia, cüm elegerit


OF ENTRY. 13


has elected an entry. And since it. is. at the clection of
the tenant from the commencement in his answer
whether he will keep himself to the defence of his right
or of his entry, he will have every remedy and every
delay to which he could be entitled by a writ of rizht,
at least until he has chosen the defence of his right or of
his entry. And if he has chosen the defence of his vight,
let the argument stand over as in a writ of right. But
if he has chosen the defence of his entry, that then it
ceases to be & writ of right, and it returns again to. its
nature as through à writ of entry. But when the
claimant from the commencement and in his declaration
propounds both, to wit, his right and his entry, it is
incumbent that he offer to prove both, unless the tenant
wishes to recognise his right. To whose declaration
and proof it is incumbent that the tenant defend both,
he shall have however the election which of these
defences he wishes to undertake, to wit, that of theright
or of the entry : but he is not bound to undertake both,
since one is sufficient by itself without the other, for
when the claimant propounds his right and his entry,
if he fails in the proof of one, it will be as if he failed in
the proof of both on account of the copulative conjunc-
tion (and) which conjoins both. It is expedient therefore
for the tenant to choose that part which the claimant
cannot prove, and the proof of the claimant will be un-
certain until the tenant has elected ; for the claimant
may have a right in the thing claimed, and nevertheless
the entry thereof will not be such as is propounded ; or
conversely, it may even be that the claimant has the
right in the thing claimed, and that the entry has been
such as is propounded, in which case, since the tenant is
not held to two defences, nor the claimant consequently
to two proofs, and an election having been made, he may
prove that which the tenant has elected, this will be
perilousto thetenant. And because when he has elected


f. 327 b.
Cf. 267 b.


T4 DE INGRESSU.


jus, videtur tacit? innuere per consequens ingressum
esse talem ut proponitur, & é converso. Cüm autem
tenens elegerit defensionem juris contra intentionem &
probationem petentis, & aliam habebit electionem utrum
viz. se ponere voluerit in magnam assisam, vel defen-
dere per duellum, seeundum quod inferiüs dicetur in
caus& proprietatis, per breve de recto, & maximé si
tales sint persons petens & tenens, quod inter eos
jaceat magna assisa vel duellum. Si autem conjuncta
sint persons, & sit jus descendens utrique de uno sti-
pite, sicut inter fratres, antenatum & postnatum, avun-
culum & nepotem, ubi locum habebit computatio, quis
eorum sit hares propinquior, & cüm de propinquitate
constiterit, quamdiu casus regis duraverit, nunquam
&d judieium procedetur. Cüm autem breve de recto
(ut. praedictum est) per narrationem petentis, & respon-
sionem tenentis qui ingressum elegerit, vertatur ad
breve de ingressu, ex tunc deficiunt tenenti esse dila-
tiones, & essonia de malo lecti, que ei competebant
antequam tenens ingressum eligeret, & extunc proce-
dendum erit sicut per breve de ingressu. Si autem
defensionem juris elegerit, tunc fiat per omnia sicut
dietum est supra inter extraneas personas & conjunc-
tas. Et in fine notandum, quod si inter conjunctas
personas in placito per breve de recto, & per narratio-
nem adjieiatur de ingressu, non expedit tenenti quód
se teneat ad ingressum, quia si talis sit ingressus ut
proponitur, & probari possit, & tenens càüm ingressum
elegerit, & per consequens tacit? innuit jus esse peten-
tis, ut proponitur, probato ingressu, non obstante casu
regis, petens obtinebit. Si autem ad defensionem juris


OF ENTRY. 75


the right, he seems silently to imply as & consequence
that the entry has been such as is propounded, and
conversely. But when the tenant has elected the de-
fence of the right against the declaration and proof of
the claimant, he shall also have another election whether
he will put himself upon & great assise, or defend
himself by battle, according to what shall be said below
in & cause of property by & writ of right, and chiefly if
the claimant and the tenant be such persons, that a great
assise or battle lies between them. But if they be
privies in blood, and each has a right of descent from
one stock, as between an elder and a younger brother,
an uncle and à nephew, where a computation shall have
place, which of them is the next heir, and when the next
heir has been ascertained, they shall never proceed to
judgment as long as the case of the king shall last. But
when a writ of right (as said above) through the
declaration of the claimant and the answer of the tenant,
who has elected (to defend) his entry, is turned into a
writ of entry, thenceforward delays cease to be allowable
to the tenant and essoins of illness confining him to his
bed, to which he was entitled before the tenant elected
(to defend) his entry, and thenceforth proceedings must
be taken as by a writofentry. But if he has chosen to
defend his right, then let every thing be done as above
sald between strangers and privies in blood. And in
the end it is to be noted, that 1f between privies in blood
in à plea by a writ of right and through the declaration
mention be added of the entry, it is not expedient to
the tenant thathe hold himself to the entry, because if
the entry be such as is propounded, and it can be
proved, and the tenant when he has elected the entry,
and consequently has tacitly implied that the right is
the claimant's, as propounded, upon the entry having
been proved, notwithstanding the case of the king, the
elaimant shall prevail. But if he has kept himself to the


f. 3-1 b.


70 . pEB INGRESSU.


se tenuerit, sive talis sit ingressus ut proponitur, sive
non, factà computatione parentelae, quamvis constiterit
quis eorum sit heres propinquior, nunquàm  pcedet
judicium ppter casum regis, nec aliud unquàm in causa
pprietatis, inter conjunctas personas, durante casu, dum
tamen tenens ad defensionem juris se tenuerit.


OF ENTRY. T1


defence of his right, whether his entry be such as is
propounded or not, upon a computation of relation-
ship having been made, although it has been established
which is the next heir, the judgment shall never proceed
on account of the case of the king, nor any other ever
in à cause of property between persons privies in blood,
whilst that case lasts,! provided however that the tenant
has kept himself to the defence of his right.


! The case of the king, to wit of , of Prince Arthur, in 1241, when
King John against his nephew, | both titles to the crown were united
Arthur of Brittany, came to an end ' in King Henry III.
on the death of Eleanor, the sister |


l.
De materia
hujus libri.


f. 328.


Z2.
Quare hoc
placitum
de recto
ultimo
ponitur.
Britton, vi,
ch. iv.


INCIPIT LIBER QUINTUS,


QUI DIVIDITUR IN
QUINQUE TRACTATUS,
QUORUM PRIMUS EST DE RECTO.


CAP. I.


Expedito tractatu de assisis & recognitionibus, quae
proditte sunt sup jure possessorio, ad seysinam ppriam
vel alicujus antecessoris ut de feodo recuperáda: et
similiter expedito tractatu placitoru de ingressu asse-
quendo, ecosequéter agendü erit d placito sup jure, &
pprietate, de seysina ppria vel alicujus antecessor, de
tento vel aliquo alio jure, d quo atecessor no obiit
seysitus ut de feodo, & ubi in judiciü deducit, & ter-
minat utrüj jus simul, tà possessio viz quam  pro-
prietatis, secundum quod inferiüis dicetur, & ibi ratio
quare.


Placitü vero de recto ultimü sibi locum vendicat in
ordine placitorü, quia quicund in hoc placito semel
amiserit p judicium, vel per assisam, vel per duellum,
nunqm ad alia actionem habebit regressum, quia séper
obstabit ei exceptio rei judicatze. Et tale erit judi-
cium reddend', scilicet q petens recuparet seysinam
sua quieté sibi & heredibus suis, de pdicto tali tenente


! Hic incipit Liber Quintus de tractatu super Breve de Recto. MS.
Rawl. C. 160.


HERE BEGINS THE FIFTH BOOK,


WHICH IS DIVIDED INTO


FIVE TREATISES,


OF WHICH


THE FIRST IS ABOUT RIGHT.


CHAPTER I.


The treatise having been completed concerning assises
and recognitions, which have been handed down to us
respecting possessory right, to recover one's own seysine
or the seysine of an ancestor as of fee, and in like man-
ner the treatise of pleas for obtaining entry having been
completed, we must consecutively treat of the plea re-
specting right and property, of one's own seysine or of
the seysine of an ancestor, concerning a tenement or any
" other right, of which an ancestor has not died seysced as
of fee, and where it is brought into jud; ment and. both
rights are determined simultaneously, as well that of
possession as of property, according to what will be said
below, and there the reason wherefore.


But a plea of right claims for itself the last place in
the order of pleas, because whoever in this plea has once
lost through a judgment or through an assise, or through
battle, shall never have recourse to another action, be-
cause the exception of the matter having been adjudged
will always be in the way. And such & judgment will
have to be rendered, to wit, that the claimant should
recover his seysine quietly for himself and his heirs
from s0-and-so the tenant aforesaid and his heirs in per-


l.
Concern.
ing the
matter of
this book.


f. 328.


2.
Wherefore
this plea
respecting
right is
placed last.


1.
De diversis
formis


80 DE,BREVI DE RECTO.


& heredibus suis imperpetuum. Per judiciü dico:
quia secüs est si per defalta, aliqua habita distinc-
tione, sicut inferius dicet de defaltis. Et si quis semel
egerit p hoc breve de recto qualitereundg, (ut pdictum
est) si in suo loco impetretur, nunquà postmodu ad
actioné super possessio regressum habebit, & maxime
cüm placitum p breve de recto utrumqQ jus, tam pos-
sessionis quàm pprietatis (ut pauló ante dictum est),
comprehendat.


CAP. II.


Et quia vari:&e sunt forme brevium de recto, ideo
de formulis videamus, & imprimis de illis qu» ali-


brevium de quando terminantur in curia dominorum suorum, quo-


recto.


rum hzc est prima. Rex tali episcopo salutem.  Prz-
cipimus tibi, quód sine dilatione plenum rectum teneas
tali de tanto terre cum pertinentiis in tali villa, quod
clamat tenere de te p liberum servitium tanti per
&nnum pro omni servitio, & quod talis ei deforciat
Et nisi feceris, vic' talis faciat, ne amplius inde cla-
morem audiamus pro defectu recti. Teste &e. Vel
sic: de tertia parte unius feodi militis in tali loco vel
villa, quam clamat de te tenere, & quam talis ei de-
foreiat. Si autem servitium fit militare, tunc sic: Per
servitium feodi unius militis, vel dimidii, vel quartz
partis feodi unius militis, vel per servitium tot dena-
rioum quando 40 s. capiuntur de scuto, vel sie: per
servitium tot denariorum quando duse mares, vel xx.
s. capiuntur de scuto, vel per servitium, unde tot ca-
rucatz faciunt feodum unius militis, vel sic: per ser-
vitium, unde tot bovatz vel tot virgate terrse faciunt
feodum unius militis pro omni servitio. Et notandum
quód in servitio militari non dicitur per liberum servi-
tium, & ideó, quia constat quód feodum tale liberum est,


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 81


petuity Isay by & judgment, because it is otherwise
if it is through default, some distinction having been
made,as wil be explained below concerning defaults.
And if any one has once proceeded by this writ of right
in any manner whatever (as aforesaid), if it be sued out in
its proper place, he shall never have recourse afterwards
to an action about the possession, and chiefly since &
plea by & writ of right comprehends each right, that of
possession as well as of property, as has been stated
above.


CHAPTER II.


And because the forms of writs of right are various, ^ 1.
therefore let us see about formulas, in the first. place f different
concerning those, which are sometimes determined in the write of
court of their own lords, of which this is the first. The Het
king to such & bishop greeting. "We enjoin you, that
without delay you maintain full right to such an one of
so much land with its appurtenances in such a vill,
which he claims to hold of thee by & free service of so
much by year for all service, and which so-and-so deprives
him of. And unless you do so, let such a viscount do it,
that we may not hear any further complaint thereof for
default of right. Witness &e. Or thus, of the third
part of & knight's fee, or of & half fee, or & fourth part
of a fee of one knight, or by the service of so many
denarii when forty solidi are taken for & shield, or thus,
by & service of so many denarii when two marks or
twenty solidi are taken for & shield, or by a service,
under which so many carucates make the fee of one
knight, or thus, by & service under which so many
bovates and so many virgates of land make the fee of
one knight, for every service. And it is to be noted
that in the case of military service it is not said by
free service, and for this reason, because it is certain that

such a fee is free, nor even, where the quantity of the
Q 6366. F


f. 328 b.


Britton, iii.
ch. ii. 8 6.


2.
Breve de
recto, si
terra par-
tibilis sit in
socagrio.


82 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


nec etiam, ubi quantitas feodi exprimitur in quatitate
terre petite, non opponitur! aliquod servitium, quia in
quantitate feodi ostenditur quantitas servitii. Sunt
aute infinita svitia, & diversa, & innumerabilia in brevi
de recto, secunduü q sunt à diversis dominis capitalibus
feoffatoribus constituta. Etc ideó non possüt in scripto
coprehendi omnia. Fit etiam aliquando feoffamentum
sic, & breve sie. Quod clamat tenere de te per libe-
rum servitium inveniendi tibi unum servientem equi-
tem ad eundum tecum in exercitum in Walliam, ad
summonitionem tuam, &d custum suum, vel custum
tuum, pro omni servitio, vel sic: Per liberum servitium
sequendi curiam tuam, vel portandi brevia tua infra
regnum Anglie, ad summonitionem tuam, & custum
suum, vel custum tuum, pro omni servitio, vel sic:
Per servitium unius asturcii sori, vel unius espervarii
sori vel per servitium unius paris calcarium deaurato-
rum, vel albarum cherothecarum, pro omni servitio, &
sie de aliis, secundum formam chartarum & feoffamen-
torum. Fit etiam aliquando servitium annuum, & ser-
vitium militare simul & pro eadem terra, & tunc in
brevi proponendum est servitium annuum, sie: Per libe-
rum servitium x.s. per annum, & tune dicatur, & per
Svitium unius feodi militis pro omni servitio, quia si
haee determinatio p annum postponeretur huie ultime
clausule, sic videretur referri ad totum przcedens, &
ita sequeretur inconveniens, quia servitium militare
non est annuum.


Rex tali domino salutem. Precipimus tibi, quód
juste & sine dilatione plenum rectum teneas talibus
de tanto terr cum pertinentiis in tali villa, quod cla-
mant esse rationabilem partem suam qu:e eos, vel eas,
contingit de libero tenemento quod fuit talis patris,


! * apponitur," MS, Rawl. C. 160.


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 83


fee is expressed in the quantity of the land claimed,
there is not appended any service, because in the quantity
of the fee is shown the quantity of the service. But
services are infinite and diverse and innumerable in &
writ of right, according as they have been appointed by
different chief lords the feoffors. And therefore they
cannot all be comprehended in writing. A feoffinent is
also sometimes made in this manner, and à writ thus:
That he claims to hold of thee by a free service of find-
ing for you one serving horseman to go with you to the
army in Wales at your summons, at his own cost or at f.328 b.
your cost, for the entire service ; or thus, by the free
service of following your court, or of carrying your writs
within the realm of England at your summons and at
his own cost, or at your cost, for the entire service; or
thus, for the service of one falceon in his first plum-
age, or of one sparrow-hawk in his first plumage, or
for the service of one pair of gilt spurs, or one pair
of white gloves, for the entire service, and so of others,
&ccording to the form of the charters and of the
feoffments. There is sometimes established & yearly
service, and & military service at the same time and for
the same land, and then in the writ the yearly service is
to be propounded thus: by a free service of ten solidi
annually, and then let it be said, and by the service of
one knight fee for the entire service, because if this
determination * annually " were postponed to this last
clause, i£ would thus seem to be referred to the whole
which precedes it, and the consequence would be incon-
venient, because military service is not annual.


The king to lord so-and-so greeting. We enjoin you, M
that justly and without delay you maintain full right to right if the
such persons of so much land with its appurtenances im nd be
such & vill, which they claim to be their reasonable share in socage.
that belongs to them, male or female, of a free tene-
ment which belonged to so-and-so their father or their


rF 2


84 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


vel matris, avi vel avie, avunculi vel amite sui! in
eadem villa, & tenere de te per liberum servitium
tanti per annum pro omni servitio, quod talis ei de-
forciat, & nisi feceris, vicecomes talis faciat ne amplius
inde clamorem audiamus pro defectu recti. "Teste &c.,
vel sic: Quod clamat? esse de rationabili parte sua
que eos contingit de libero tenemento quod fuit talis
patris vel matris, avunculi vel amita, ut supra.


; Rex balivo soks de tali loco, vel custodi talis
Bre d* honoris salutem. Preecipimus tibi quód sine dilatione
balivis — plenum rectum teneatis tali, de tanto terre cum per-
UR tinentiis in tali villa, quod clamat tenere de predicta
bonorum. goka, vel de predicto honore, per liberum servitium

tanti per annum pro omni servitio, quod talis ei de-
forciat, & nisi feceris, talis vicecom faciet, ne ampliüs
inde clamorem audiamus p defectu recti . Teste &c.


i Rex vicecomiti salutem.  Przecipe tali quód just?

recto, s; &c. reddat tali tantum terre cum pertinentis in tali

que tenere villa, quod clamat esse jus & hereditatem suam, &

ebet in Re. cs . .

eapite de tenere de nobis in capite, & unde queritur quód pre-

rege. dictus talis injusté ei deforciat, & nisi fecerit, & idem
talis fecerit te securum de clamore suo prosequendo,
tune sumoneas per bonos summonitores prefatum ta-
lem, quód sit coram justitiariis nostris apud Westmo-
nasterium, tali die, ostensurus quare non fecerit, &
habeas ibi summonitores, & hoc breve. Teste &c.


5. Rex custodi terre & hsredis talis salutem.  Preci-
Breve de e. . . e . . . T
recto cus. pimus tibi quód justé & sine dilatione plenum rectum
tod, ubi teneas tali de tanto terre cum  pertinentüs in tali
heres 4 : ;
fuerit infra villa, quod clamat tenere de predicto hzrede per libe-
sut". mm servitium tanti per annum pro omni servitio, quod
talis ei deforciat, & nisi feceris, vicecomes noster talis


faciat, &c. ne ampliüs &c.


1«gug," MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ?* clamant," id.


: OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 85


mother, grandfather or grandmother, uncle or aunt in
the same vill, and to hold from you by the free service of
so much for the year for all service, which so-and-so de-
prives him of, and unless you do so, let such & viscount
do it, that we may not any longer hear a complaint
thereon. from defect of right. Witness &c., or thus:
which they claim to be of their reasonable share, which
belongs to them, of the free tenement which belonged
to such &a father or mother, uncle or aunt as above.


The king to the bailliff of the soke of such a place, or | 83.

to the keeper of such an honour, greeting. We enjoin nue

you that without delay you maintain full right to such of the soke
a person of so much land with its appurtenances in eo s

such & vill which he claims to hold of the aforesaid the keeper
soke, or of the aforesaid honour, by a free service of so eid
much for the year for all service, which so-and-so

deprives him of, and unless you do so viscount so-and-so

shall do so, that we may not hear any longer a complaint


thereon for defect of right.


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin so-and-so 4.
that justly &c. he restore to such an one so much land dp
with its appurtenances in such a vill, which he claims to sny person
be his right and inheritance, and to hold of us in chief, wir.
and whereof he complains that so-and-so aforesaid de- chief of the
prives him, and unless he do so, and if the said so-and-so ^ ^
has given you security to prosecute his claim, then sum-
mon by good summoners so-and-so aforesaid, that he
appear before our justieiaries at Westminster on such a
day in order to show wherefore he has not done so, and


have there the summoners and this writ. Witness &c.
The king to the guardian of the land and of the heir 5


of so-and-so greeting. We enjoin you that justly and hd
without delay you maintain full right to such & person guardian,
of so much land with its appurtenances in such a vill, mu
which he claims to hold of the aforesaid heir by free under age.
service of so much by the year for all service, which so-
and-so deprives him of, and unless you do so, let our


viscount so-and-so do it &c., that we may no longer &c.


86 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


6. Rex ballivis suis de tali villa salutem. Pracipimus
edit vobis, quód sine dilatione. & secundum consuetudinem
manerio ppanerii nostri de tali villa plenum rectum teneatis
dum con- tali, de t&to terre cum pertinentiis in tali villa, quod
icis talis ei deforceat, ne amplius &c. "Teste &c. Si autem
neriorum, burgagium petatur, tunc sic.

f. 329. Rex ballivis suis de tali burgo salutem. Precipimus
NE vobis, quod plenum rectum teneatis Á. de tali villa,
ballivis de de uno mesuagio cum fptinentiis in tali villa, quod
"UE? ^ elamat tenere de nobis per liberum servitium tanti

per annum p omni servitio, vel in liberum burgagium,
vel in liberum maritagium pro omni servitio, quod talis
el deforcjat, & nisi, &e. "Teste &c. Est etia alterius
modi breve de recto, quod -dirigitur hwredi alicujus,
sub nomine mulieris qus babuit parte dotis sus,


sive plus sive minus, quod tale est.


ul Rex tali heredi salutem.  Precipimus tibi, q sine
recto de — dilatione plenum rectu teneas tali mulieri, de tertia
iria » parte tante terrse, vel redditus, vel bosci, vel prati, vel
pem unius vel duoru, vel tot mesuagiorü, cum ptinentiis in
— tali villa, qm clamat esse de rationabili dote sua, que

eam contingit de liberto teüto quod fuit talis quondam

viri sui in eadem villa, vel in alia, & tenere de te p

liberum servitium ut supra. Si autem dos, qus peti-

tur, defendi debet sub servitio dotis que tenetur, tune

sic: Quam clamat pertinere ad liberum teneiitum suum

quod de te tenet in dotem in eadem villa vel in alia,

p tale servitiu: vel sie, Quam clamat tenere de te in

dote p tale servitiü. Est etià alterius modi bte de

recto de consuetudinibus & 8vitiis, quod imediate diri-


OF A WRIT OF RIGIT. 87


The king to his bailiff of such & vill greeting. , |. S.
A ! . writ to
We enjoin you that without delay, and according to the the bailiffs
custom of our manor in such a vill, you maintain full i os
right to such an one of so much land with its appur- to the
tenances in such a vill, which so-and-so deprives him fem of.
of,lest any longer &c. Witness &ec. But if a burgage
tenancy be claimed, then thus.
f. 329.
zi . e319 » e 1.
The king to his bailiffs of such a borough greeting. , 7...


We enjoin you that you maintain full richt to A. of the bailiffs
such a vill of a messuage with its appurtenances in B: s "n
such a vill, which he claims to hold of us by a free

service of so much for the year for all service, either as &

free burgage tenure or & free maritage for all service,

which so-and-so deprives him of, and unless &c. Wit-

ness &e. There is also à writ of right of another kind,

which is directed to the heir of any one, under the

name of the woman who has had part of her dower
whether more or less, which is of this tenor.


The king to such an heir greeting. Weenjoin youthat s.
without delay you maintain full right to such a woman TM Pad
of the third part of so much land or its revenue, or of cerning
so mueh wood or meadow, or of one or of two or of is
so many messuages with thcir appurtenances in such a womau bas
vill which she claims to be of her reasonable dower MEUM
which accrues to her from a free tenement, which be-
longed to so-and-so formerly her husband in the same
vill, or in another vill, and to hold of you by a free
service as above. But if the dower which is claimed
ought to be defended under the service of the dower
which is held by her, then thus: which she claims
to pertain to her free tenement, which she holds
from you as dower in the same vill or in another by
such & service; or thus, which she claims to hold from
you as her dower by such a service. There is like-
wise a writ of right of another kind concerning customs
and services, which is addressed immediately to the


e
88 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


gitur vicecomiti, ubi tenens $vitium suü dedixerit in
parte vel in toto, quod tale est.


Rex vic. salutem.  Precipe tali, q juste & sine dila-
tione! faciat tali consuetudines & recta 8vitia, que ei
facere debet de libero tenemto quod de eo tenet in
tali villa, & nisi fecerit, & idem talis fecerit te securu
&c. tune sumoneas p bonos sumonitores &c. q sit cora
jusüc nostris ad primà assisam, cüm in partes illas
venerint, ostensurus quare non fecerit Et habeas &c.
Teste &c. De Svitio vero q quis cognoverit, si illud
facere aliquado contradixerit, dirigitur tale breve vic'
de justitiando eum, q dicitur breve de recto, in hac
forma: Rex vic salutem.  Precipimus tibi, quód jus-
tities talem, q- juste & sine dilatione faciat tali con-
suetudines & recta Svitia, quz ei facere debet de libero
tenemito suo quod de eo tenet in tali villa, ut in ho-
magiis, releviis, redditibus, arreragiis & aliis, sicut
rationabiliter monstrare poterit quod ei facere debeat,
ne ampliüs inde clamorem audiamus p defectu justitic.
Teste &c. Si autem tenementum fuerit in burgo, tunc
dicatur sic: Quod talis faciat tali recta Svitia, nulla
tamen fiat mentio de consuetudinibus.


Car. III.


Constat ex precedentib? q quiedà sunt bfia de recto
ex supra nominatis quas in curia doinorü terminari
debet, & qua aliquando p defaltà dominorü, qui rectü


euria do. tenere vel nolüt, vel non possunt, transferüt ad comi-
m tat, & ibi multis modis terminari poterunt, nisi ita sit


! * et recte," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 89


viscount, where the tenant has denied his service in
whole or in part, which is of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin so-and-so, ^ 9.
that justly and without delay he do to such a person zd
his customs and right services, which he ought to do to cerning
him in respect of the free tenement, which he holds of 54 cus.
him in such a vill, and unless he do so, and if the said fomes.
so-and-so has given you security &c., then summon him
by good summoners &c., that he appear before our jus-
ticiaries at the first assise, when they shall have come
into those parts, in order to show wherefore he has not
done it. And have &c. Witness &e. But concerning
a service which any one has acknowledged, if he has
at any time vefused to doit, à writ of this kind is directed
to the viscount for enforcing justice against him, which
is ealled & writ of right, in this form. "The king to the
viscount greeting. We enjoin you, that you enforce
justice against so-and-so, that justly and without delay
he do to so-and-so the customs and right services, which
he ought to do for his free tenement, which he holds
from him in such a vill, as in homapges, reliefs, rents,
arrears &nd other things, as he will be able reasonably to
show that he ought to do to him, that we may not any
longer hear à complaint thereof for failure of justice.
Witness &c. But if the tenement be in à borough, then
let it be stated in this manner: that so-and-so perform
for such & person right services, but let no mention be


made of customs.


CHAPTER III.


It is clear from what precedes, that there are some writs ,,
How pleas


of right out. of those above-named, which ought to be are trans-
determined in the lord's court, and which sometimes f*''ed from

: the lord's
from the default of the lords, who are either unwilling or court to
unable to maintain the right, are transferred to the county Rdbn "ay
court, and may be there determined in many ways,


f. 329 b.
Britton, vi.
ch. iv. 8 8,


2,
Quod
pluribus
modis
possit curia
domini
deficere.
Britton, ib.
S 4.

Fleta, 375.


90 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


q Lenens se posuerit in magnam assisam, vel q domi-
nus rex (ad instantiam petentis, & aliquando ad instan-
tiam tenentis, sed ex justa causa) velit q loquela ad
curià suam & comitatu transfertur, ideó per ordinem
erii incipliendum à curiis dominorum, ubi ipsi doi
quandoque curiam tenent & quandoque eorum ballivi,
ut si ipse petens tenere clamaverit de aliquo per libe-
rum servitium, qui velit & possit loquelam in curia
su& deducere & placitare & terminare per duellum, vel
alio modo, qui quidem si nolit, vel non possit multis
de causis, vel ppter impotentiam, vel ppter aliquam
dubitationem emergentem, vel incidentem : & ita quód
curia sua de recto tenendo petenti deficiat, tunc rite
pbata defalta per defaltam recti in curia domi capitalis,
vicecomes rectum teneat per verba in brevi cotenta (si
non feceris vic hoc faciat).


Poterit quidem curia de recto tenendo deficere mul-
tis modis, ut si deforcians tenuerit de aliquo alio quàm
de eo, de quo petens tenere clam&averit, quia in hoc
casu non habet dominus capitalis coertionem, per quam
deforciante trahere possit ad curiam suam, propter
quod de necessitate erit ad comitatu recurrendum.
Item quia capitalis dominus omninó recusat tenere
rectum, vel cüm nemo sit vel inveniatur in curia, qui
rectum teneat, vel quia ipse dominus nullam curiam
habet, nec erit (ut videtur) ad superiores dominos
capitales, preterquam ad comitatum, recurrendum, cüm
in brevi contineatur, quód si talis nominatus non fece-
rii q vic immediaté se intromittat — Item propter im-
potentiam domini capitalis, ut si warrantus vocetur,
qui sit manens extra potestatem suam, vel fort? de-
forcians alibi se essoniaverit de malo lecti, quàm infra


! «* transferatur," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 91


unless it be that the tenant has put himself upon a great
assise, or that the lord the king (at the instance of the
claimant and sometimes at the instance of the tenant,
but for& just cause) wills that the argument be trans-
ferred from the county court to his own court; therefore f. 329 v,
we will begin from the courts of the lords where the
lords themselves sometimes hold the court, and some-
times their bailiffs, as if the claimant has claimed to hold
from & certain person by & free service, who is willing
and is able to bring the argument into his own court and
to plead and to determine it. by battle or in some other
manner, who indeed, if he be unwilling or be unable for
many reasons, either on account of his want of power, or
on account of some doubt emergent or incident, and so that
his court fails in maintaining the right to the claimant,
then the default having been duly proved, through the
default of right in the court of the chief lord, let the
viscount maintain the right through the words contained
in the writ (if you will not do it, let the viscount do it).


The court indeed may fail in keeping the right in 5$
many ways, as if the disturber has held from somebody ed the
else than the person from whom the claimant claims to Aid. may
hold, because in this case the chief lord has no coercion fàil in
by which he can. drag the disturber into his court, on SijR
account whereof recourse must be had of necessity to the
county court. Likewise because the chief lord altogether
refuses to maintain the right, or when there is no one
nor can any one be found in the court to maintain the
right, or because the lord himself has no court, nor shall
recourse (as it seems) be had to superior chief lords, but
to the county, since it is contained in the writ, that if
the party named shall not do justice, the viscount shall
immediately intervene. Likewise on account of the want
of power of the chief lord, as if a warrantor be called,
who is resident beyond his jurisdiction, or by chance the
disturber has essoined himself elsewhere on account of
bed-siekness than within the power of the lord, and so


99 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


potestatem dom sui, & ita q milites mittere non pos-
sit, licet dominus. Rex faciat hoc aliquando per breve
suum. ltem si tenens posuerit se in magnam assisam,
& alie sunt cause infinite. Et si dominus capitalis
rectü tenere inceperit, & postea obierit, licet hsres
suus infra statem extiterit, propter hoc non cadit
breve, quia curia judicabit.


3. De summonitionibus vero ad curiam capitalis domini
ide ud , faciendis, quee esse debeant, vel quot sursisse, vel quot
buset — essoti fieri, nclo inserrere! huic tractatui propter diversas
vid die consuetudines, quze in diversis curiis diversimode ob-
curia regis. Servantur. Sed sciendum q in visu petendo, & in war-
Bnet ranto vocando, aliquando & in exceptionibus  propo-
Fleta, 376. hendis, & in duellis vadiandis, & in omnibus aliis quz
Britton, i$. in curia dominorum terminari possunt & debent, obser-


5. :
3 vari debent prout in curia regia observantur.


Car. IV.


1l. Cum aute ita sit q doin capitalis rectum tenere nolit,

Qualter vel non possit, & euria sua ita de recto defecerit, vi-
efalta MOREM: : : . .

rectiin. — dend' erit qualiter defalta pbari possit, & debeat, ita q

aids loquela ad comi trasferat, & tüc quando loquela incipit

omino . "- - - ; ; is

debeat pro- esse in coi, & usi ad quod tempus dom capitalis curià

Far MEN suá petere possit, cüm forté de recto non defecerit.

Post defaltà curie domini capitalis, statim ad comita-

tum aecedat petens & ostendat ibi q curia domini sui

ei defecerit de recto, & (secundu quosdam) vadiata

f.330. pbatione defalte in manum servientis domini regis, vic'


dieat serviéti domini regis, q assumptus secü pbis &


! * ingerere," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


—


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 93


that he cannot send knights (to examine his condition)
although he is the lord. The king may do this some-
times by his writ. Likewise if the tenant has put
himself upon a great assise, and there are other infinite
causes. And if the chief lord has begun to maintain the
right and has afterwards died, although his heir may
have been under age, the writ does not abate on this
account, because the court will judge.


But concerning the making of summonses to the , ?
court of the chief lord, what they ought to be, and how Ad
many adjournments a&nd' how many essoins there ought the mode
to be, I am unwilling to insert in this treatise on account Seedinu in
of the diverse customs whieh are observed in diverse the court |
manners in diverse courts. But it is to 'be known in the king.
claiming à view, and in calling & warrantor, sometimes
also in propounding exceptions and in wagering battle,
and in all other things which may and ought to be
determined in the court of the lord, the rules ought to be


observed as they are observed in the court of the king.


CHAPTER IV.


But when it shall so happen thatthe chieflordis un- |.
willing or is unable to maintain the right, and his court I? Mis
shall have made default of the right, if will have to be default of
seen in what manner the default may &nd ought to be rizhtinthe
proved, so that the trial should be transferred to the the chief
county court, and then at what time the trial begins to BO
be in the county court, and up to what time the chief ved in the
lord may claim his court, when perchance it shall not vEncuh
have made default. After the default of the court of
the chief lord let the claimant forthwith apply to the
eounty court, and show there that the court of his lord
has made default to him of right, and according to some
the proof of the default having been wagered into the
hand of the serjeant of the lord the king, let the viscount


say to the serjeant of the lord the king, that having  f.5330.


NV


Britton, iP.
6.


04. DE BREVI DE RECTO.


legalibus hominibus, statim accedat ad curia illius doíü
capitalis, si curiam habuerit & curià tenuerit, vel si
curiam nO habuerit, tunc ad locü ubi habuerit reseà-
tiam,! dum tame hoc sit in feodo illo, ubi terra illa
est qua petitur, & si nihil horum habuerit vel fecerit,
tune sufficit q defalta pbet quo loco voluerit super
feodum illud, secundü quod ipse dofi election habuerit
tenendi curiam suà quo loco voluerit sup feodum suu
(eu extra no liceat de jure) & videat serviens si curia
petéti defecerit de recto, q ipse ei rectu tenere nolu-
erii vel non possit, & statim p jurametü ipsius peten-
tis, & aliorü duorü quos petens secü habuerit, audiat
serviens pbation defaltve in psentia capitalis dor, si
interesse voluerit p se, vel p certum attornatu, senes-
eallü, vel aliu ballivum ; secund' quod inveniri poterit
de termino P. & S. T. ano regis H. tertio in com
Surrey de Gylbert de Albyngewerth & Reginaldo de
Brewese. ,Qui quide si suinonitus interesse noluerit,
nihilominus pcedat pbatio, & pbata defalta, ut. pdictum
est, redire debent ad com tam petens quàm serviens.
Et S$viente (qui in hoe recordum habet) pbationem
defalte attestante, tunc petat petens inde juditium, &
ibi per juditium pceipietur, q tenens sumoneatur q sit
ad alium coti inde petenti responsurus. Ad quem
diem si uteri comparuerit, pcedat loquela, si &utem
neuter, sed se essoniaverit, dabitur alius dies per esso,
& idem erit si de altero ipsorum. $Si autem nullus,
vacua erit loquela, quamvis videatur q compensari de-


! * reseantisam," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 95


assumed with himself honest and loyal men, he should
forthwith apply to the court of the chief lord, if he
have & court and has held a court, or if he have not a
court, then to the place where he shall have had a resi-
dence, provided this be in that fee, where the land is
which is claimed, and if he shall not have any of these,
nor has done any of these things, then it is sufficient
that he prove the default in whatever place he pleases
upon that fee, according as the lord himself has had the
choice of holding his court in whatever place he pleases
upon that fee (since it is not of right allowable beyond
it), and let the serjeant see if the court has made de-
fault to the claimant concerning the right, so that the
lord has been unwilling or unable to maintain the right
to him, and forthwith by the oath of the claimant him-
self, and two others whom the claimant has produced
with himself, let the serjeant hear the proof of the
default in the presence of the chief lord, if he wishes
to be present in person or by a certain attorney, senes-
chal, or other bailiff, according to what may be found
in Easter term and in Holy Trinity term in the third
year of king Henry, in the county of Surrey, con-
cerning Gylbert de Albyngewerth and Reginald de
Brewese. Who indeed if on having been summoned he
is unwilling to appear, nevertholess let the proof proceed,
and on the default having been proved, as said above,
both the claimant and the serjeant ought to return to the
eounty court. nd the serjeant (who has & record in
this matter) attesting the proof of the default, then let
the claimant scek judgment thereupon, and there it
shall be enjoined by the judgment, that the tenant be
summoned to be present at another county court in order
to make answer thereon to the claimant. At which
day if both appear, let the argument proceed, but if one
of them does not appear, and he has essoined himself,
another day shall be granted through the essoin, and it
shall be the same in the case of either one of them.
But if no one appears, then the argument will be void,


Consue-
tudo ..
Lancastr.


comitatu


96 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


beat defalta cii defalta, ex quo tenens quietus per
judicium non recessit. Si autem petente comparente
tenens non comparuerit, presentibus summonitoribus,
& summonitiones testificantibus, pcedatur contra ipsum
ad defaltam, secundum diversam cósuetudinem diver-
sorum comitatuu, vel p captionem terre in manum
domini regis, vel alio modo. Et secundum q in comi-
tatu Lancastt observatur, & quz consuetudo ab M. de
P. eommendata fuit & approbata, & qus talis fuit:
quod si tenens ad primam summonitionem non veni-
ret, tunc praesentibus summonitoribus & summonitio-
nem testificantibus, per considerationem comitatus sum-
moneatur secundó, q sit ad alium comitatum, ad quem
si non venerit presentibus summonitoribus &ce. ut
prius, p cosiderationem comitatus capiatur parvum nma-
pium de eadem terra nomine districtionis, & tenens
summoneatur tertió, q sit ad tertium comitatum, ad
quem si non venerit, capiatur magnum nampium de
eadem terra, scilice&. averia & catalla in duplum pro
aforciamento districtionis, & tenens quartó sumoneatur
quód sit ad quartum cori, ad quem si non venerit, per
cosiderationem comi capietur terra in manum domini
regis, & tenens quintó sumoneatur, q sit ad quintum
cof, ad quem si non venerit, nec terra petita sit p
plevina, petens seysinà suà recuperabit p defalta, nec
poterit tenens se defendere contra recordum com per
legem, defendendo summonitionem &. sursisas.


Fit etiam processus hujusmodi post defaltam proba-
tam pluribus aliis modis & diversis, secundum diversi-
tatem comitatuum, quia post probationem defalte,


OF A WRIT OF RIGIIT. 07


although it would seem that the default of one ought
to be compensated by the default of the other, since
the tenant has not gone away acquitted by the judg-
ment. Butif uponthe claimant appearing the tenant has
not appeared, the summoners beiug present and attest -
ing their summonses, let proceedings go on against him
by default according to the different custom of different
counties, either by the taking of his land into the hand
of the lord the king, or in some other manner. And
according to what is observed in the county of Lan-
caster, and which was commended and approved by
Martin de Pateshull, and which was of this kind, that if
the tenant did not come at the first summons, then upon
the summoners being present and attesting the summons,
upon & resolution of the county court let him be sum-
moned a second time, that he attend at another county
court, at which if he be not present the summoners
being present &c. as before, upon a resolution of the
county court let & little naam be taken of the same
land in the name of a distress, and let the tenant be
summoned a third time that he be present at & third
county court, at which if he be not present, then let &
great naam be taken of the same land, to wit, beasts
and chattels to.à double amount to enforce the distress,
and let the tenant be summoned a fourth time that he
be present at a fourth county court, at which if he be not
present, upon a resolution of the court his land shall be
taken into the hand of the king and let the tenant be
summoned & fifth time, that he be present at a fifth
county court, at which if he be not present, and the land
be not claimed by & plevine, the claimant shall recover
his seysine by default, nor can the tenant defend himself
against the record of the county court by his law, by
denying the summonses and the adjournments.


A proceeding of this kind is had after the default has —— 3.
been proved in several and divers other ways according Cour
to the diversity of the counties, because after proof of the the county

Q 6866. G


98 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


f. 330b. faciet serviens hundredi incontinenti sumonitione vel
postdefl- asside& partibus dio (si present fuerint) ad pximü coi,
probatam. & semp stabit ejus recordo cum testimonio pborum
eb ene Yi hominum qui sentes fuerint, & de sumonitione facta,
. *  & die dato, & a&d quem si tenens non venerit, se p
legem non defendet contra recordum servientis  Sta-

bitur etiam ejus recordo, si in curia regis contentio
habeatur, utrü loquela fuerit in curia capitalis domini,

vel in comitat, vel si facta fuerit p eum sufiüonitio vel


non, ut de itinere W. de Ralegh in comi Warr.


3. Et quamvis quidam sie dicant, q statim post sumo-
Mene nitionem factam p Svientem, incipit loquela esse in


incipit esse comitatu, tamen non est ita, nisi tunc demüm cum
ttu serviens presens fuerit in comitat & testatus fuerit pba-
tionem defalt:aà & summonitione, & cum ita fuerit
loquela in com, sine calumnia domini capitalis, sive
tenens se essoniaverit sive non, capitalis dominus curiam
suam nunquam rehabebit, sive tenens in cof se esso-
niaveri& sive non. Ex tunc enim vel statim poterit
loquela ad magnà curiam dom regis p pone transferri,
vel in eofü terminari, & unde, càüm multotiens contin-
gat, q petens per fraudem dicit q curia de recto ei
defecerit, cim forté loquela nunquàa fuerit in curia domi
capitalis, & cüm ipse dofii paratus esset ei rectum
tenere, ipse petens ad comitat convolavit. Et quo pbato
esset curia domino capitali restituenda, si ilam ad
horam petierit, oportet q illam petat hora congrua,


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 09


default, the serjeant of the hundred shall make forthwith f 330 b.
& summons or shall assign to the parties & day (if they il
be present) at the next county court, and reliance shall the acfault
always be placed on his record with the testimony of ?f tbe
honest men who were present, both concerning the sum- court.
mons having made and a day assigned, and upon which

day if the tenant has not come, he shall not defend him-

self by his law against the record of the serjeant. Re-

liance shall also be placed on his record, if the contention

is held in the court of the king, whether the argument

has been in the court of the chief lord, or in the county

eourt, or whether or not & summons has been made by

him, as in the iter of William de Ralegh in the county

of Warwick.


And although some personssay thus, that immediately ^8.
after the summons has been made by the serjeant, the I
argument begins to take place in the county court, never- commences
theless it is not so, unless then indeed when the serjeant iem
is present in the county court and has attested the proof court.
of the default and the summons, and when thus there
has been an argument in the county court, without any
charge against the chief lord, whether the tenant has
essoined himself or not, the chief lord shall never have
again his court, whether the tenant has essoined himself
or not. For from that time either the argument may be
transferred by & pone to the great court of the lord the
king, or be determined in the county court, and hence
when it oftentimes happens that the claimant fraudu-
lently declares that the court has failed him in & plea of
right, when perhaps there has never been an argument
in the court of the chief lord, and when the lord himself
was prepared to maintain his right, the claimant himself
has hastily had recourse to the county court, And upon
proof of this the court will have to be restored to the
chief lord, if he has claimed it &t the proper hour, and
1t is incumbent that he claim 1t at à suitable hour, before
there has been an argument in the county court, to wit,

a 2


100 pE BhEVI DE RECTO.


antequam loquela fuerit in comitat, scilicet tertio die
inclusivé, ne si diem com attenderet, superveniret ptes-
tatio pbationis defaltze, & summonitionis per recordum
servientis, vel essonium tenentis, & postea breve de
ponendo loquelam ad magnam curiam, quia sic non
esset curia petita ad horam.


Car. V.
1. Probata sic defalta & per servientem testata, & simi-
Cum lo- li o NI ER A :
quela fuit iter summonitione, sic incipit placitum de recto esse


in comita- in comitatu, & ubi in esson de malo veniendi ita fieri


tum trans- . . . e . L] .*
iatá: debet sicut fit in curia domini regis, nisi ex consuetu-


dine & ex jure antiquo aliter observetur.


2. De essonio vero de malo lecti ita fiat, seeundum quod


Demodo  ipferius videri poterit de essoniis, si in comitatu. De
procedendi .,


in plaeito visu vero habendo & de exceptionibus, & replicationi-
d bus, fiat sicut inferiüs dicetur, & eodem modo. Si
cum fuerit; &utem | vocetur warrantus in comitatu, non habebit
no comitatus potestatem suimonendi warrantum ad war-
fori rantizandum sine speciali precepto domi regis, quo casu
e recurrendum erit ad curiam p breve de warrantia, quod


tale erit.

..9. , Rex vicecom salutem.  Precipe tali, g juste &c. war-
UE rantizet tali tanta terrà cum ptinentiis in tali villa,
tor waran- quam telis Titius in curia nostra clamat esse jus suum,

& unde &c. ut infra inter brevia de warrantia. Et
nisi fecerit, q sit in adventu justic' &c. & unde si in
comitatu warrantizaverit, bene erit, si autem non, tunc
dabitur dies partibus in adventu justiciariorum, ubi


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 101


on the third day inclusively, lest if he wait for the day
of the county court, there should arrive & protestation
of the proof of the default, and of the summons by the
record of the serjeant, or an essoin of the tenant, and
afterwards the writ of transferring the argument to the
great court, because so the court would not have been
claimed at the proper hour.


CHAPTER V.


The default having been thus proved and attested by — ,
the serjeant, and in like manner the summons, the plea When the
of right then begins to be in the county court, and p peer.
where in an essoin of sickness on the way it ought to transferred
be done just as it is done in the court of the lord the d
king, unless from custom and ancient right it is other- court.


wise observed.


But eoncerning an essoin of bed-sickness let it be 2.
done according to what may be seen below concerning T
essoins, if it be in the county court. But concern- proceeding
. : : : : : in a plea of
ing holding a view and concerning exceptions and 7 Sit When
replieations, let it be done as will be explained below,  f.331.
and in the same manner. But if à warrantor should be au x
caled in the county court, the county court shall not county
h th f tors ion to L court, and

ave the power of summoning à warrantor WATT&D of the form
without & special precept from the lord the king, in E

. ., WIlíS.

which case recourse must be had to the court by & writ ^


of warranty, of which the form shall be such.


The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin so-and-so, s.
that justly &c. he warrant to such an one so much land Em
with its appurtenances in such a vill, which & certain called in
Titius in our court claims to be his right, and whereof nl
&c. as below amongst writs of warranty. And unless
he do so, that he should be present at. the arrival of our
justiciaries, &c., and whereof if hehas warranted in our
court, it shall be well; but if not, then a day shall be


given to the parties at the arrival of our justiciaries,


109 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


terminabitur p tale bre plaeitu de warrantia, & cüm
warratizaverit, remittetur loquela principalis iteru ad
coi, & ibi terminabitur, si justiciarii hoc voluerint.
Poterit tame utraque corà eis de gratia terminari, si
voluerint, etiam sine pone. Et si warrantus infra
statem fuerit, remanebit principale placitum in sus-
penso in comitatu & placitum de warrantia coram jus-
ticiariis, quousque warrantus statem habuerit, q ad
warrantiam respondere poterit.


4. Si autem tenens p duellum in comitatu se defendere
2 uat voluerit, tunc fiat eodem modo in essoniis & aliis,
in magnam sicut fit infra de duellis: Cüm auté tenens se posuerit
assisam 11 in maeng assisam in comitatu, dabitur ei dies usi ad
alium comitat, infra quem sibi pquirere debet breve de
pace usque ad adventum justiciariorum, quod quidem
facere non possit p interpositam personam, cüm in
ppria persona jurare teneatur q tenens est, & q se in
comitatu posuerit in assisam, q si infra comitatum sibi
non perquisiverit, vel essoniatus non fuerit, sed defal-
tam fecerit, amittere poterit p defalta, salvo ei quód
habeat recuperare suü, quale habere debebit. Et eodem
modo faciat petens ex parte sua, perquirat sibi breve
de summonendo magnam assisam coram justiciariis ad
eundem terminum, secundum q inferiüs dicetur.


5. Rex vieecomi salutem.  Prohibemus tibi, ne tencas


Brevede placitum quod est in comitatu tuo inter À. petentem
pace usque
adadven- & DB. tenente de tanto terre cum ptinentiis in N. quod


Kel , idem A. elamat versus predictum B. p breve nostrum
e recto, nisi duellum inde fuerit vadiatum, quia idem


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 103


when the plea of warranty shall be determined by such
& writ, and when he has warranted, the principal argu-
ment shall be remitted again to the county court, and
there shall be determined, if the justiciaries so will.
But both pleas may be determined by favour before
them, if they are willing, even without à pone. And if
the warrantor be under age, the principal plea shall
remain in suspense in the county court and the plea of
warranty before our justiciaries, until the warrantor has
full age, so that he may be able to answer to tho
warranty.


But if the tenant is desirous to defend himself by 4.
battle in the county court, then let it be done in the b
same manner in the essoins and other matters, as is done himself
below concerning battle. But when the tenant has put JP. aides
himself upon a great assise in the county court, a day in the
shall be granted to him until another county court, pud
within which he ought to procure for himself & writ of
peace until the coming of the justiciaries, which indeed
he cannot do through the interposition of a person, since
he is bound to swear in his own person that he is the
tenant, and that he has in the county court put himself
upon an assise, but if within the county court he has
not procured for himself a writ, or has not been essoined,
but has made default, he may lose by default, saving to
him that he should have his recovery such as he ought
to have. Andin the same way let the claimant do of
his own part, let him proeure for himself à writ of sum-
moning & great assiso before the justiciaries for the same


term according to what shall be said below.


The king to the viscount greeting. We prohibit you, 5.


that you should not hold a plea, which is in your county x hine


court, between À. the elaimant and B. the tenant con- the coming
cerning so mueh land with its appurtenances in N. which er
the said A. claims against the aforesaid B. by our writ
of right, unless battle has been wagered thereon, because


104 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


B. (qui tenens est) posuit se in magnam assisam nos-
tram, & petit recognitionem fieri uter eorum majus jus
habeat in terra illa. Et sic fiat de omnibus aliis assisis,
secundum quod videri poterit in magnis assisis infe-
rias. Si autem placitu de recto fuerit in curia alicujus,
tune fiat phibitio custodi, vel ballivo, p tale breve.


6. Rex vicecom salutem.  Prohibe ballivo, vel custodi
P terre & hsredis Á. ne teneat placitü, quod est in curia
ejusde custodis, vel ballivi de tali honore &c. ut supra.
Vel si phibitio fieri debeat domi curie, tune sic. Pro-
hibe À. ne teneat placitum in curia sua inter À. pe-
tentem & B. tenente de tanto terre cum ptinctiis in
N. quod ide A. clamat versus eundem B. p breve nos-
trum dé recto &c. Si autem placitum fuerit inter ali-
quos in comitatu de servitiis & consuetudinibus per
breve de recto patens, quod dicitur, prohibemus ; vel
per breve de justiciando aliquem ad faciendum recta
servitia & consuetudines, & tenens se posuerit in magna
assisam (q bene poterit) habebit breve de pace vice-


f.331b. ^'^. ]
com quod tale erit.

T. Rex vicecomiti salutem. — Prohibemus tibi, ne teneas

a reE placitum quod est in comitatu tuo inter Á. petentem,


ince & B. tenente vel defortiante, de cosuetudinibus & $vi-
dinibuset tli8 quee predictus A.exigit de pdicto B., per breve nos-
servitiis. trum de tanto terre cum pertinentiis in tali villa, nisi
duellum inde vadiatum fuerit, quia idem B. (qui tenens
est) posuit se in magna assisam nostram, & petiit re-
cognitionem fieri utrum debeat pdicto A. de pdicto
teito tale 8Svitium & tale tantum per auum pro omni
$vitio sieut ei recognescit: an idem servitium, & pte-
rea tale, & tale, sicut. idem A. ab eo exigit. "Teste &c.


—— 0€


aet


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 105


the said B. (who is the tenant) has put himself upon our
great assise, and prays a recognition to be made which of
them has the greater right in that land. And let it be
thus done with all other assises, according to what may
be seen in great assises below. | But if there be a plea of
right in any person's court, then let there be a pro-
hibition to the guardian or the bailiff by & writ of this
kind.


The king to the viscount greeting.  Prohibit the — 6.
bailiff or the guardian of the Jand and the heir of A. EE
from holding & plea, which is in the court of the said guardian.
guardian or bailliff, concerning such an honour &c. as
above. Or if the prohibition ought to be issued against
the lord of the court, then thus: Prohibit À. not to hold
& plea in his court between A. a claimant, and B. a
tenant, concerning right &ec. But if there be & plea
between certain persons in the county court concerning
services and customs by an open writ of right, which
is called * prohibemus," or by & writ to adjudge some
one to perform rightful services and customs, and the
tenant has put. himself on a great assise (which he may f. 331 b.
well do), he shall have a writ of peace to the viscount


of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. We prohibit you 7.
from holding a plea, which is in your county court, sls
between A. the claimant and B. the tenant or disturber, the county
concerning customs and services, which the aforesaid A. ied
exacts from the aforesaid B. by our writ concerning customs
so much land with its appurtenances in such a vill, dd
unless battle has been wagered thereon, because the said
B. (who is the tenant) has put hiniself upon our great
assise, and has prayed a recognition to be made whether
he owes to the aforesaid À. from the aforesaid tenement
such & service and such only yearly for all service as he
acknowledges to him, or the same service and in addi-


tion such and such service, as the said À. exacts from


106 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


Et variat istud breve inultotiens secundum varietatem
Svitiorum. Contingit quandoj q ille qui se posuerit
in magnam assisam de Svitiis & consuetudinibus, post-
quà sibi pquisiverit breve de pace usque ad adventu
justiciariorum, interim nihilominüs distringitur pro cis-
dem servitii per dominü capitalem, & quo casu con-
sulitur ei per breve quod tale est.


..8. | Rex vicecomiti salutem. Ostendit nobis talis, quód
2 p cüm tulerit tibi breve nostrum de pace habenda usq
in magnam ad adventum justiciariorum ad partes ilas de 8vitiis
assisam de : . d. :
servitiis et. consuetudinibus quas talis ab eo exigit, & quas ei
cousuctu- non cognoscit, & unde posuit se in magnam assisam
n1 us et - » la] . . . . *.
habuerit DOStram corà te in com tuo, idem talis nihilominüs
breve "e distringit eum pro eisdem servitiis & consuetudinibus
ace 18- . e. . *s . . . .
tringatur a quas ei non cognoscit, et in aliis gravis existit eidem &
dono fub injuriosus. Et ideo tibi peipimus, q non permittas de
pendente : ; e .
placito. —Cmtero quod prsdictus talis distringat ipsum talem pro
eisdem servitiis et consuetudinibus, ita q pdictà occa-
sione de cwtero ei molestiam inferat vel gravamen.


Et it& te habeas in hoc negotio &e. Teste &c.


9. Rex vicecomiti salutem.  Prohibemus tibi ne teneas

E um placitum, quod est in comitatu tuo inter talem et
terra petita talem. &c. ut supra, nisi duellum &e. quia idem talis
dolori qui tenes est, posuit se in juratà loco magnes assism
gavelkind. pvisam et concessá, et petiit recognitionem fieri uter
eorum majus jus habeat in terra illa. Teste &c. Et
notandum est quód omnia brevia de pace sie fiunt, ut

supra: vel sic: vel q sit phibitio vicecomiti ne teneat,

vel vicecomiti quód aliis prohibeat, sicut dominis, custodi-

bus, vel ballivis, ne ipse! teneant placitum quod est in

curia corum &e. ut supra. Et sciendum q omnia brevia


de pace irrotulari debent in rotulo de cácellaria.


! *ipsi", MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 107


him. Witüness &c. And that writ varies in manifold
ways according to the variety of the services. It hap-
pens sometimes that he, who has put himself upon a
great assise concerning services and customs, after he
has procured for himself à writ of peace until the coming
of the justiciaries, is nevertheless in the meanwhile dis-
trained for the same services by the chief lord, in which
case he is aided through & writ, which is of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. So-and-so has , 8
shown to us, that when he has delivered to you our writ rs id
for keeping the peace until the coming of our justiciaries himself
to those parts, concerning the services and the customs zicit assis
which so-and-so exacts from him, and which he does not concerning
acknowledge to him, and in other respects aggrieves and de audi
injures him. And therefore we enjoin you that you do rices end
not permit henceforth that so-and-so aforesaid should writ of
distrain the said such-an-one for the same services and pere z
customs, 80 that on the aforesaid pretext he should by hislord,
henceforth cause him trouble and grievance. And so pending the


lea.
conduct yourself in this business &c. Witness &c. !


The King to the Viscount greeting. "We prohibit you — 9.
to hold & plea, which is in your county court, between E e ud
80-and-so and so-and-so, &c. as above, unless battle &c., the land
because the said so-and-so, who is the tenant, has put td be
himself upon & jury provided and conceded to him in held in
the place of a great assise, and has prayed a recognition 5***!n4.
to be made which of the two has the greater right in
that land. Witness &c. And itis to be noted that all
writs of peace &re to be drawn up as above, or thus:
either that there be a prohibition to the viscount not to
hold, or to the viscount that he prohibit others, such as
lords, guardians, or bailiffs, that they should not hold
& plea which is in their court &c. as above. And it is
to be known that all writs of peace ought to be enrolled
in roll of the chancery.


108 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


10. Cüm autem tenens hujusmodi breve de pace sibi
Quod ten- Ne : : " i35 .
ens, qui se Perquisiverit, statim debet petens aliud sibi perquirere,
dinodiMs scilicet de magna assisa coram justiciariis in eorum
assisam, — &dventu arramanda, & per quod summoneantur qua-
d t tuor milites ad eligendum duodecim ad faciendam
habuerit, a&ssisam illam, in hac forma.
perquirat ;
FEM AME Rex vicecomiti salutem. Summoneas per bonos sum-
mando monitores quatuor legales milites de comitatu tuo, quód
asbam Sint eoram justiciariis nostris ad primara assisam cüm
coram jus- in partes illas venerint, ad eligendum super sacra-
Hans mentum suum duodecim de legalioribus militibus de
ipsorum.  visneto tali, qui meliüs sciant & velint veritatem
ac dicere, ad faciendam recognitione magns assise nostre
eodem de inter talé petentem & talem tenentem, de tanto terrse
nir ia eum) pertinentiis in tali villa, quia idem talis (qui
£359, tenens est) posuit se in magna assisam nostram, &
petit recognitionem fieri uter eorum majus jus habeat
in terram illam. Et sumoneas p bonos suionitores
pdictum talem &c. quód tunc sit ibi auditurus illam
electionem, & habeas ibi nomina militum & hoc breve.
Teste &c. Et sciendum q variantur hujusmodi brevia
secundü varietatem assisarum, secundum q videri pote-


rit infra de assisis.


T Rex vicecom salutem. Sumoneas per bonos suinoni-
E Mai tores quatuor legales milites de comitatu tuo &c. ut
cum placi- Supra, ad faciend' recognitionem magn:e assise nostre
les inter A. petentem & B. deforeiantem de consuetudini-
fuerit de bus & 8vitiis que idem A. exigit à pdicto B. de tanto
dM. terree cum pertinentiis in tali villa. Et unde idem B.
dinibus. (qui tenens est) posuit se in magnam assisam nostram,

& petiit recognitionem fieri utrum debeat pdicto A. de
pdicta terra tale S$vitium, vel tale! tantum per anum


p omni 8vitio sicut ei recognoscit, an idem servitium,


! ** et tale," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 109

10.
But when the tenant has procured for himself a writ red
of peace, the claimant should forthwith procure for him- ro E

ut him-
self another writ, to wit, about preparing & great assise br upona
before the justiciaries at their coming, and through ds E
which four knights should be summoned to elect twelve edu


knights to make that assise in this form : writ of
peace, the


cluimaut


The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good snould pro-
summoners four lawful knights of your county, that they eure
attend before our justiciaries at their first assise, when ed )
they have come into those parts, to choose upon their PrPérea
oath twelve of the more loyal knights of that neigh- betore the
bourhood, who know well and can Scal: the truth, io ees
make & recognition of our great assise between so-and.so coming.
the claimant and so-and-so the tenant concerning so  !!.
much land with its appurtenances in such a vill, because ENS
the said so-and-so (who is the tenant) has put himself same for

preparing
upon our great assise, and prays a recognition to be, grat
made which of them has the greater right. to that land. sseise.
And summon by good summoners 80 -and-so aforesaid, teen
&c., that he be there in order to hear that election, and
have there the names of the knights and this writ.
Witness &c. And it is to be known that writs of this
kind are varied aecording to the varieties of the as- .
sises, according to what may be seen below concerning


assises.


The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good 12.
summoners four loyal knights of your county &c., as ie ob dd
above, to make a recognition of our great assise between sise, when
A. the claimant and B. disturbing him from certain Ehored
customs and services, which the said Á. exacts from the beconcern-
aforesaid B. concerning so much land with its appur- inda
tenances in such a vill. And whereon the said B. (who customs.
is the tenant) has put himself upon our great assise, and
has prayed & recognition to be made whether he owes
to the aforesaid A. from the aforesaid land such a service


and such only yearly for all services as he acknowledges to


110 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


& pterea tantu, sicut. idem A. &b eo exigit. Et sum-
moneas &c. ut supra.


13. Rex vicecom salutem. Sumoneas &c. quatuor legales
br'v* dé homines de coii tuo qui teneant in gavelkynd, q sint
arramanda COrà justiciariis nostris &e. (ut supra) ad eligend' super
ed sacramentum suum xii. de legalioribus hominibus de
kyndeloco visneto tali, qui teneant in ga&velkynd, et qui meliüs
asbe Sciant et velint veritatem dicere, &d faciendà juratam

loco magnae assisam pvisam et concessam, inter tales


&c. ut supra. Et sumoneas &c. et habeas &c.


14. Et tali modo pcedat placitum de recto in com, nisi
sia fort? sit aliquis capitalis dominus, ut pdietum est, qui
placitum de Curià suam &d hora petierit antequàm placitum fuerit
coma in cof vel fort càüm in comitatu fuerit perquirat sibi
assisam — petens de ponendo loquelam illam ad magnam curiam
Prod diet per breve q vocatur (pone), et quod tenenti de facili
turpone non conceditur, nisi ex causa necessaria in brevi ex-


primenda.


15. Rex vicecofü salutem. Pone: ad petition8 petent
Fonead eoram justiciariis nostris apud Westii tali die loquelà,
petitionem : 2 ; z:
petentis, quae est in com tuo per breve de recto inter A. petente

et B. tenente de tanto terre cum pertinetiis in tali
villa, vel sie: exceptis tot acris &c. Et sumoneas &c,
pdictum B. q tunc sit ibi prefato À. inde responsurus,


et habeas ibi summonitores et hoc breve. Teste &c.


16. Rex vicecom salutem. Pone ad petitionem petetis


vet m coram justiciariis nostris apud W. tali die loquelam
tenentis de quze est in comitatu tuo p breve nostrum inter ÀÁ.


deme petentem et B. deforciantem de consuetudinibus & svi-


servitiis.


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 111


him, or the said service and so much besides, as the said
A. exacts from him, And summon &oc. as above.


The king to the viscount greeting. Summon &e. four — 13.


loyal men of your county, who hold in gavelkind, that p :
they appear before our justiciaries &e. (as above) to an asse in


choose upon their oath twelve of the more loyal men of Euelond


such à neighbourhood, who hold in gavelkind, and who in the plaee.


of a great
assise,


know well and are willing to Say the truth, to make up
3 jury provided and conceded in the place of à great
assise, between such and such persons &c. as above,
Ánd summon &c. and have &e.


And in this way let & plea of right proceed in the us . sl
; plea

county court, unless by chance there. is some chief lord, is removed
as said above, who has claimed his court early before a rm
plea has been admitted in the county court, or perchance court to the
when it has been admitted in the county court, the een
claimant has procured for himself & writ to remove the which is
argument into the great court by a writ which is called dne
à * Pone," and which is not allowed to the tenant easily,
except from a cause of necessity, to be expressed in the
writ.

The king to the viscount greeting. At the petition , 19. ,
of the claimant put before our justiciaries at  West- 4t Nac
minster on such a day the argument, which is in your ies
county court, by a writ of right between A. the claimant ant.
and B. the tenant, of so much land with its appur-
tenances in such a vill, or thus, excepting so many acres
&ec. And summon &c. the aforesaid B. that he be there
to answer thereon to the aforesaid À., and have there


the summoners and this writ. Witness &c.


The king to the viscount greeting. At the prayer of 16.
the claimant put, before our justiciaries at, Westminster A pone"
on such & day the cause, which is in your county court Pe ors
by our writ between A. the plaintiff and B. who with- Pepe
holds from him customs and services, which the said A. PEE


332 b.


17.
Pone ad
petitionem
tenentis et
ex causa.


112 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


tiis, que idem ÀÁ. exigit de pdicto B. de libero teüto
suo, quod de eo tenet in tali villa ete. Et summoneas
etc. pfatum B. quód tunc sit ibi prefato A. inde re-
sponsurus, et habeas ibi summonitores, et hoc breve
et aliud breve. Teste etc. Et ideo dicit (aliud breve),
ut si placitum fuerit in comitatu per aliquod breve
clausum inter aliquos de debito, vel de alia re, et ita
quód non sit patens, et quod quidem remanere debet
penes petentem. Sed esto, quód tenens warrantum
vocaverit in comitatu antequàm loquela posita fuerit
coram justiciariis de baneo, et ita quód warrantus die
habeat coram justiciariis itinerantibus, quia statim ad
peeptum vicecomitis non "warrantizavit, nunquià fiet
meétio in pone de warrato? Non, quia in curia diüi
regis post essonia et dilationes incipiet petes narrare
versus tenetem, ex quo warratus in comitatu nondum
warrantizavit, & ipse tenes tunc incipiat de novo war-
rantum vocare, & dies datus cora justic' itinerantibus
nullus erit, & locum non tenebit. Raro aute fit hoc
breve (pone) ad petitionem tenetis, ut predictum est,
nisi ex causa, quae multiplex esse poterit, ut si tenens
longe agens fuerit in. partibus transmarinis, vel ita
impotens sui q comparere non possit in comitatu, vel
vice versa, si petens sit vicecom parentela conjunctus,
$viens, vel multum familiaris, vel sit valde potens, &
vicecomes de cof, & fit tale (pone) sic cü causa ex-
pressa.


Rex vicecom salutem. Pone ad petitionem tenentis,
eo g agit in partibus transmarinis, vel eo quód petens
est amicus, vel familiaris vicecomiti, & hujusmodi,
coram justic' nostris ad talem diem loquelam quse est


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 113


requires from the said B. in respect of his free tenement,
which he holds in such a vill &c., and summon &c. the
aforesaid B. that he be there to answer thereon to the
aforesaid À., and have there the summoners and this writ
and any other writ. Witness &c. And for this reason
it says * any other writ, ' that if there has been a plea
in the county court by a close writ between some per-
sons for debt or for some other matter, and so that it is
not an open writ, and that it ought indeed to remain in
the possession of the plaintiff. But let it be that the
tenant has called à warrantor in the county court before
the cause was put before the justiciaries of the bench,
and so that the warrantor may have a day before the
iustieiaries itinerant, because he has not forthwith
warranted at the precept of the viscount, shall mention
of the warrantor never be made in the * Pone?" No,
because in the court of the lord the king after the
essoins and adjournments the claimant will begin to
plead against the tenant, since the warrantor has not
yet warranted in the county court, and let the tenant
himself begin anew to call & warrantor, and the day
given before the justiciaries itinerant shall be null
and shall have no place. But this writ of * Pone" is
seldom issued at the prayer of the tenant, as has been
said above, except from & cause which may be of many
kinds, as if the tenant has been long employed in parts
beyond the sea, or so little master of himself that he
cannot appear in the county court, or conversely if the
claimant is connected by relationship to the viscount, or
if he is his servant or à member of his household, or if he
be very powerful and the viscount of the county, and let
the * Pone" be of this kind with the cause expressed.


The king to the viscount greeting. At the prayer of
the tenant, on the ground that he is employed in parts
beyond the sea, or on the ground that the claimant is &
friend or & member of the family of the viscount, and
such like, put before our justiciaries on such & day the

Q 6366. H


Y.

* pone ??
at the
prayer of
the tenant
and for a
cause.


Britton, vi.
ch. iv. $ 17.


114 DE BREVI-DE RECTO.


in comitatu tuo p breve nostrum de recto, inter A.
petentem & B. tenentem de tanto terre cum perti-
nentiis in tali villa. | Et die predicto À. q tune sit
ibi loquelam suam versus predictum B. psecuturus, si
voluerit Et habeas ibi hoc breve. Teste &c. Et
notandum, quód si tenens quacund de causa pquisive-
rit suum (pone) coram justiciariis, & primo die coram
eis defaltam fecerit, oportet eum wayvare ! suum (pone)
vel amittet p defaltam. Item esto q petens defaltam
fecerit primo die càm (pone) suum pquisiverit; &
Ccüm tenes se essoniaverit, recesserit essoniator sine
die, non poterit petes ulterius p aliud (pone) resumere
placitum suum, & illud iterum transferre de comitatu
ad magnam curiam, quia in comitatu nullum est pla-
citum ex quo inde semel translatum est: ut de ter-
mii Paschae ano regni regis H. nono in com Hunt
de Wilheli  Hatechrist & Roberto de Washingley.?
Et unde ide Robert (qui tenes fuit) recessit sine die
de placito illo quod translatum fuit & comitatu p
secüdum pone, & ideo placitum de novo reincipien-
dum. Transfert etiam loquela ad magnam curiam ad
petitionem petentis ex necessitate ppter privilegium
tenetis, quale habet Templarü, & Hospitalarü, & alii
plures, q non respondeat de aliquo placito, nisi corà
ipso rege, vel ejus capitali justic, qui etsi aliquando
contra privilegium suum intraverint in responsum, ex
poenitentia resilire non possunt; ut de itinere abbatis
de Radyng & M. de Pateshul in com Wygorü ano
regni regis H. quinto. "Transfertur etiam generaliter
quzelibet loquela de com per necessitatem, s. ubi comi-


! * wayviare," MS. Rawl. C. 160.
? « Wassyngelegh," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 115


cause which is in your county court by our writ of right
between À. the claimant and B. the tenant of so much
land with its appurtenances in such a vill. And say to
the aforesaid A. that he be there to prosecute his cause
acainst the aforesaid B. if he wishes, and have there
this writ. Witness &c. And it is to be noted, that if
the tenant for any cause whatever has procured his
* Pone" before the justiciaries, and on the first day has
made default before them, he must waive his * Pone,"
or he shall lose it by his default. Likewise let it be
that the claimant has made default on the first day
when he has procured his * Pone," and when the tenant
has essoined himself, the essoiner has withdrawn without
a day, the claimant cannot further by another '* Pone "
resume his plea, and transfer it again from the county
court to the great court, because in the county court &
plea is null from the time when it has been once trans-
ferred from it,as in Easter term in the ninth year of
the reign of king Henry in the county of Huntingdon,
concerning William Hatechrist and Robert de Washing-
ley. And wherefrom the said Robert (who was the
tenant) withdrew without & day concerning the plea,
which had been transferred from the county court by &
second * Pone," and accordingly the plea had to be re-
commenced anew. "The argument is also transferred to
the great court of necessity at the prayer of the claimant
on account of & privilege of the tenant, such as the
Templars, the Hospitallers, and several others have, that
they should not answer upon ahy plea, except before
the king himself or his chief justiciary, who also, if on
any occasion contrary to their privilege they have en-
tered upon &n answer, cannot, if they should repent it,
draw back: as in the iter of the abbot of Reading and
Martin de Pateshull in the county of Worcester, in the
fifth year of the reign of king Henry. For generally
any plea is transferred from the county court of neces-
sity, to wit, where the county court has not the power
H 2


18,
Ubi duel-


116 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


tatus non habet potestatem terminandi placitum, ut si
bastardia objiciatur, vel hujusmodi, & eodem modo
ppter difficultatem judic,! & multis aliis modis. Et
eodem modo transferuntur loquele coram justitiat iti-
nerantibus &* indifferenter, absQ eo g aliquid detur
pro (pone). Et eodem modo de curiis baronu. Et in
fine notandum, q in placito per parvum breve de
dominicis domi regis nullum fiat (pone).  Transfertur
etiam loquela à cof ad curiam ppter falsum judiciü,
vel fatuum.


Rex vicecofi salute. Pone cora justitiaf nostris &c.


lum vadi- duellü quod vadiatü est in coíiü tuo inter À. querétem
andum est & talia hundreda, de quodà juditio eidé A. facto, de


eontra con-


suetudinem &Verlis captis & cotra vadiu & plegium detétis, ut. idem


regni.


f. 333.


À. dicit. Et unde queritur q duellum istud injust? &
cotra cosuetudinem regni nostri vadiatum est. Et in-
terim recordum illud unde predictum duellum vadia-
tum fuerit fieri facias, & illud habeas corà prefatis
justitiariis nostris ad pdictum diem p quatuor legales
milites de coii tuo qui recordo illi interfuerint. Et
sumoneas &c. quatuor legales milites de com tuo, qui
recordo illi interfuerint, & pterea quatuor legales mili-
tes de quolibet hundredorum pdictorum, qui tunc sint
ibi audituri recordum illud, & responsuri, & judicium
recepturi, p pdietis hundredis. Et habeas ibi sumoni-
tores, nomina militum, & hoc breve. "Teste &e. Et
sunt hujusmodi forms infinitz secundum diversitatem
placitorum. .


! * judicii," MS. Rawl.C. 160. | ?*'et" omitted MS. id.


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 117


of terminating the plea, as if bastardy be objected, or
such like, and in the same way on account of the diffi-
eulty of the judgment, and in many other ways. And
in the same way arguments are transferred before the
justieiaries itinerant, and indifferently, excepting that
something is given for the * Pone." And in the same
way from the courts of the barons. And finally it is to
be noted, that in a plea by a petty writ concerning the
domains of the lord the king no * Pone" may issue.
The cause is also transferred from the county court to
the (great) court on account of & false or fatuous
judgment.


The king to the viscount greeting. Put before our Where
justiciaries p & duel which has been waged in your battle is T
county between À. complaining and certain hundreds deis the
concerning a certain judgment done to the said A. con- eu
cerning beasts seized and detained against & surety
and bail, as the said A. alleges. And whereof he com-
plains that & duel has been waged unjustly and against
the custom of our realm. And in the meantime cause
to be made & record of the cireumstances whereupon the
aforesaid duel has been waged, and have that before ^ 999
our aforesaid justiciaries on the aforesaid day with four
loyal knights of your county who took part in that
record. And summon &c. four loyal knights of your
county, who took part in that record, and besides four
loyal knights from any of the aforesaid hundreds, who
should be there in order to hear that record, and in
order to make answer, and in order to receive judgment
on behalf of the aforesaid hundreds. And have there
the summoners, the names of the knights and this writ.
Witness &ec. And forms of this kind are infinite ac-
cording to the diversity of pleas.


l.
De diver-
sitate et
divisione
summoni-
tionum.


2.
De sum.
monitione
generali.


118 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


Car. VI.


Translata ad magnà curiam ad petitionem petentis
qua incepta est p breve de recto p pone, oportet q
sumoneatur tenens, q sit ibi petenti inde responsurus.
Et unde inprimis videndum est an sit sumonitus, &
ideo de suimonitionibus aliquid dicatur. Et sciendum
q est sumonitio, & est post sumonitiot aliquando captio
in manum dofüi regis p defaltam, vel attachiament,
secundum quod actio fuerit realis vel psonalis, secun-
dum quód inferiàs dicetur. Item est mandatum dii
regis sive preceptum sine alia sümonitione, q quis sit
coram eo responsurus, vel aliquid facturus, vel q quis
sit & habeat talem ad respondend', vel aliquid facien-
dum. Item est pceeptu vicecomi, quod faciat alique
venire, vel attachiet, vel q habeat corpus alicuj?, vel
ita attachiet q sit securus habendi corpus: secundum
diversitatem sumonitionum, & attachiamentorum, ut
inferiàs dicetur de esson, & ubi aliquando sequitur
esson, aliquando no. ltem sumoiü alia fit in actione
reali tà in causa possessionis, qm in causa pprietatis.
Item alia in causa psonalh, ubi s. aliqua psona obli-
gatur in contractibus ad aliquid dandum vel facien-
dum, & in actionibus injuriarum.


Item sumonitionum, alia generalis, alia specialis:
generalis autem sive communis est, que tangit ali-
quam universitatem, sicut omnes de com, vel omnes
alicujus civitatis, burgi, vel ville, pro aliquo q tangat


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 119


CHAPTER VI,


Upon an argument which has been begun by a writ q, b
of right having been transferred at the prayer of a versity and
claimant to the great court by a '* Pone," it is incumbent iind
that the tenant be summoned to be present in order to ses.
make answer thereon to the claimant. And hence it is
first to be seen, whether he has been summoned, and
therefore something should be said about summonses.

And it is to be known that there is à summons, and
there is after & summons sometimes & seizure into
the hand of the lord the king on account of & default,
or an attachment, according as the action has been
real or personal, according to what will be explained
below. Likewise there is & mandate or precept of
thelord the king without any other summons, that a
person should present himself before him in order to
make answer or in order to do something, or that &
person should be present and produce a certain person
to make answer or to do something. Likewise there is
& precept to the viscount, that he cause some one to
come, or that he attach him, or that he produce the body
of some one, or that he attach him so that he should be
sure to produce the body : according to the diversity of
summonses and attachments, as will be explained below
concerning essoins, and where sometimes an essoin fol-
lows, and sometimes not: and a different summons is
made in & real aetion as well in à cause of possession as
in & cause of property. Likewise a different summons
ls made in & personal action, where, for instance, any
person is obliged in contracts to give something or to
do something, and in actions of tort.


Likewise of summonses some are general, others " 2.
special, but à general or common summons is that which RUE
touches some corporate body, as all the inhabitants of a ral sum-


eounty, or al! the inhabitants of a city, à borough, dig IDOBS


120 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


universitatem, sicut generalis sumonitio qus fit ante
iter justitiar$iorum & hujusmodi, qui semper fieri de-
bet in loco magis publico, & ideo dedici non poterit
nec defendi, quia quod omnis de comitatu vel civitate
sciverit vel cognoverit, unus vel plures hoe dedicere
non possunt. Et talem generalem summonitionem
sequuntur essonia, qus quidem dicuntur essonia de
communi summonitione, p qua defenditur quis, & ejus


 &bsentia, si ad primum diem comunis summonitionis


93.
De sum-
monitione
speciali.


f. 333 b.


Britton, vi.
ch. v. 8 8.


non venerit, dum tamen veniat ad diem sibi datum
ad warrantizandum essonium, & ita q inde postmodum
sine licentia non recedat.


Est etiam specialis summonitio, quse sub generali
continetur, & si quis de aliquo placito speciali sumo-
nitus sit coram justitiariis, quo casu si primo die non
venerit, nec se essoniaverit in placito speciali, erit in
defalta, nec excusabitur, quàmvis de communi summo-
nitione fuerit essoniatus, sed si in placito speciali,
excusatur per essonium illud quantum ad comunem
sumonitionem, quamvis de e& causa specialiter essoni-
atus non fuerit. Item videndum ubi specialis sumo-
nito fieri debeat, si ille qui summonitus est non in-
veniatur. Si &utem inveniatur, fiat ei sumonitio
ubicund inventus fuerit in domicilio suo vel extra, sub
testimonio duorum ad minus, qui hoc (si opus fuerit)
possint certificare & testificare. Si autem non fuerit
inventus, non tenentur sumonitores eum ulterius quz-
rere qu m &d domicilium suum, & in quo si fuerit
inventus, fiat ei sumonitio ut pdietum est, vel familim
suse, ei denuncianda cüm venerit. ltem siin comitatu
plura habeat domicilia, potiüs fiat ei suimonitio ad
domicilium ubi magis habitaverit, vel ubi majorem
habuerit substantia. $i autem domiciliü non habuerit,


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 171


vill, in respect of something which touches the whole
body, as a general summons which is made before the
circuit of the justiciaries, and such like, which ought
always to be made in & very public place, and therefore
cannot be gainsaid nor denied, because what every person
of a county or of a city has known and had cognisance of,
one or more cannot gainsay it. And the essoins, which
are called essoins of & general summons, follow such &
general summons, by which a person is defended and
his absence, if he has not come on the first day of
the common summons, provided he has come on the day
given to him to warrant his essoin, and so that after-
wards he may not withdraw without a licence.


There is also à special summons, which is contained
under the general summons, and if any one is summoned ;


3


Concern-
ing a


concerning & special plea before the justiciaries, in which special
case if he has not come on the first day, nor has essoined "^ 79^*


himself in the special plea, he will be in default, nor
will he be excused, although he has been essoined on
the general summons, but if he has been essoined in
the special plea, he is exceused by that essoin, as far as
regards the general summons, although he has not been
specially essoined for that cause. Likewise it is to be
seen, when & special summons ought to be made, if he
who has been summoned is not found. But if he be
found, le& the summons be served upon him wherever
he be found in his domicile or out of it, upon the testi-
mony of two persons at ieast, who (if it be requisite)
may certify and testify. But if he be not found, the
summoners are not obliged to seek him further than at
his own domicile, in which if he has been found, let the
summons be served upon him as said above, or let it be
served upon the household, to be announced to him,
when he has come home. Likewise if he should have
several domiciles in the county, let the summons rather
be served upon him at the domicile where he most re-
sides, or where he has his greater substance. But if he


f. 838 b.


122 DE BREVI DE RECTO


nec dominicum in coíb, tune si feodum habuerit, fiat
summonitio ad feodum suum, & cüm ita qualitercunq
preventus fuerit sumonitione, non poterit se extra
regnum transferre, ut p hoc sibi acquirat dilationes de
ultra mare, secundum quod inferiüs dicetur. Et quid
81 per suimonitionem sic pventus extra regnum se trans-
tulerit, & ad diem suum essoniatus fuerit de ultra
mare, quaro (eüm non copetat tale essonium) an verti
possit in essonium de malo veniendi, q bene compete-
ret, si &b initio se taliter essoniasset? & videtur primá
facie q sic, quia si quis primó se essoniaverit de malo
lecti, ubi se essoniasse debuit de malo veniédi, ordine
nO observato, vertitur essoü de malo lecti in esson de
malo veniendi, & qui facit id q majus est, facit id quod
minus est. Videtur igitur q eadem ratio est in casu
pmisso, quód essoü de ultra mare vertitur in essoü de
malo veniendi, cüm sumonitus suinonitione sit pventus
sed non est idem in utroqué casu, quia in uno casu
competit utrum essofi, sed vertitur unum in aliud,
propter ordinem non servatum. In alio veró casu non
copetit nisi unicum tantum, s essoü de malo veniendi,
i de citra mare & non de ultra. Et unde cüm se
essoniaverit de essoü de ultra mare, q non jacet, & non
de essonio de citra, quod jacet, videtur (& verum est)
quod carebit utrod, quia essonium q non est non potest
cadere in essonium quod non est, quamvis esse deberet.


4. Item vidend' quis summonere possit, & sciendum q
Quis potest : : Wr xe iudrendi
summo- Omnis qui habet jurisdictionem & potestate Judican
nere.


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 193


should not have a domicile, nor a domain in the county,
then if he should have & fee, let the summons be made
at his fee, and when the summons has thus reached him
in some way or other, he cannot transfer himself out of
the realm, so as to be able for that reason to acquire
delays as being beyond the sea, according to what will
be explained below. And what if, after the summons
has thus reached him, he has transferred himself out of
the realm and on his day has been essoined as being
beyond the sea, I ask, since he is not entitled to such an
essoln, whether it can be turned into an essoin of illness
in coming, to which he would be well entitled, if he had
so essoined himself from the commencement ? and it
seems at first sight he may do so, because if & person
has in the first place essoined himself on account of bed-
sickness, when he ought to have essoined himself for
illness in coming without any observation of order, the
essoin of bed-sickness is turned into an essoin for illness
in coming, and he who does that which is more, does
that which is less. It seems therefore that the same
reason holds in the case &bove mentioned, that an essoin
of absence beyond the sea is turned into an essoin of
illness in coming, when the party summoned has been
seised with the summons, but it is not the same in both
cases, because in one case both essoins are allowable, but
one 1s turned into the other on account of due order not
having been observed. But in the other case a single
essoin alone is allowable, to wit, an essoin of sickness in
coming, that is, within the sea and not beyond the sea.
And hence, when he has essoined himself with an essoin
of being beyond the sea, which does not lie, and with an
essoin of being within the sea, which does lie, it seenis
(and it is true) that he shall be deprived of both, because
an essoin, which is not, cannot fall into an essoin, which
is not, although it ought to be.


Likewise it is to be seen who has the power to sum- — 4.


mon, and it is to be known that every person who has Nisl ;


-——— — -—


124 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


ordinariam, sicut, ipse dominus rex, vel delegatam, sicut
justitiarius ab eo constitutus, & non alius à justitiario
substituendus, quia justitiarius justitiariü substituere
non potest, & ideo dico (ab eo qui habet jurisdictio-
nem), quia alius coertionem non habet, & cüm coertio-
nem non habeat, punire non poterit contumace, nec
judicium à non suo judice factum ligat, nec tenet. Et
in hoec casu aut constat ab initio justitiarium habere
jurisdictionem, aut. constat q non habeat, aut. dubitatur
an habeat. Si autem constiterit q habeat, venire tene-
tur summonitus vel se legitim? excusare, alioquiu pc-
nam contumacie non evadet. Si autem constiterit
quód non, summonitus impune se absentabit. Si autem
 dubitetur, venire debet summonitus, saltem privilegium -
fori allegaturus, ut infra pleniüs dicetur de phibitioni-


bus.
5. Item p quos & p quot facienda sit sumonitio, & vide-
ud m tur q per duos ad minus, qui si necesse fuerit, testifi-


f.334. Càri possunt sumonitionem esse legitime facta, & qui
facienda — eam possint pbare si opus fuerit, & cüm inde dubite-
sit sum- — tur, cim p justiciarios fuerint inde requisiti, de tem-
monitio, et 3 : Eo
quando. pore, die & loco, & aliis circumstantiis, secundum q

inferiàós diectur. Item quando? & sciédum q p quin-
decim dies ante diem quo comparere debeat fiat talis


Quatuor  suimnonitio omnibus, qui in regno sunt & extra comitatu


maria. — & infra quatuor maria.

6. Et talis sumonitio dici debeat legitima. $i autem
Qu£ s'UP- minus spacium cotineat, possit illegitima judicari nisi
monitio
sit legiti-


ma.


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 125


jurisdietion and an ordinary power of judging, as the to sum-
lord the king himself, or a delegated power as a justi- E
eiary appointed by him, and not another person to be
substituted by the justiciary, because a justiciary cannot
substitute & justiciary, and therefore I say * by him who
* has jurisdiction," because another person has not coer-
cion, and if he have not coercion he cannot punish a
contumacious person, nor does a judgment, which is not
made by his proper judge, bind any one, nor hold him.
And in this case it is either certain from the beginning
that the justiciary has jurisdiction, or it is certain that
he has it not, or it is doubted whether he has it. But
if it be certain that he has it, the person summoned
is bound either to come or to excuse himself lawfully,
otherwise he will not escape the punishment of con-
tumacy. But if it be certain that he has it not, the
person summoned will absent himself with impunity.
But if it be doubted, the person summoned ought to
come, in order to allege &t least his privilege of a tri-
bunal, as will be explained below more fully concerning
prohibitions.


Likewise through whom and through how many per- — 5.
sons the summons ought to be served, and it seems Eia if
through two persons at least, who, if it be necessary, digi
are &ble to testify that the summons has been lawfully adem "d
made, and who can prove, if it be necessary, and when ee
there are doubts thereon, if they should be required by Yocivél
the justiciaries, concerning the time, the day, and the and when.
place, and other circumstances according to what will f ?3*
be explained below. Likewise when ? and it is to be
known that for fifteen days before the day when an
appearance should be made, such à summons ought to
be served upon all, who are in the kingdom and beyond
the county and within the four seas.


And such & summons ought to be pronounced lawful. i
But if it comprise & less space, it may be adjudged ore is
awful.


Cf. ff. 241,
247.


Britton, vi.


ch. v. $ 4.


126 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


ob eausam legitimà minus tempus statuatur. Ut si
ppter causam qu: instantia desiderat, ppter rem forte
qua tempore pitura sit, vel ppter alias causas ubi in-
ducis» arbitrari sunt, ppter necessitatem, ut ppter
concilium Lateranense de ecclesiis vacantibus. Item
propter prssentiam partium in itinere justiciariorum
in eodem comitatu existentium, quod secüs est si ali-
qua manes sit extra. Item propter personas qui cele-
rem habere debent justitiam, sicut sunt mercatores qui-
bus exibetur! justitia pepoudrous? & sic ex causa
moderatur tempus sumonitiois, & continet minus tem-
pus quandoq quàm spacium xv. dierum. Et quandoq
tempus summonitionis ex causa continet tempus magis
diffusum, propter longam pegrinationem, secundum quod
quis fuerit in remota peregrinatione vel ppinqua, & in
hoc erit dilatio arbitrativa.  Legitima igitur sümor
erit quindecim dierü, modo quo pdictii est, & &i minus
spacium cotineatur qm quindecim dierü sine causa
rationabili, tunc cüm suimonitus comparuerit, aut ca-
lumniata est summofti sicut illegitima, aut non calum-
niata. Si autem non calumniata, tunc pcedat loquela
ac si sumonitio esset legitima. Si aute calumniata fue-
rit & pbata illegitima, detur alius dies legitimus in
curia, que dedici non possit cotra recordu justiciarior.
Si autem post minus legitima suinonitiofi tenens se
essoniaverit, vel defaltam fecerit, vel sine calünia in
plaeito processerit, vel diem amoris ceperit, sumonition
minus legitim? factam ulteriàüs causari non poterit. Et
etiam bene poterit quis respondere sine sumonition si
voluerit, nec ei injuriatur càm hoc velit. Sunt aute
quidam casus q tenens suimonition dedicere non poterit,


! € exhibetur," MS. Rawl. C. 160. |  ? * pepoudrus," MS. id.


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 197


unlawful, except upon a legitimate cause a less time be
appointed. As of on aecount of & cause which demands
instancy, on account of a thing by chance which is pe-
rishable, or according to other causes where a suspension
of proceedings is arbitrary on account of necessity, as
on account of the Council of Lateran concerning vacant
churches. Likewise on account of the presence of the
^ parties on the circuit of the justiciaries who are in the
same county, which would be otherwise if any one of
them was resident beyond the county. Likewise on ac-
count of persons who ought to have speedy justice, such
as merchants, to whom justice is administered in courts
of pepoudrous, and so for & certain cause the time of &
summons is reduced, &nd it sometimes comprises & less
time tban & space of fifteen days. And sometimes the
time of summons for & certáin cause contains & longer
period of time, on &ecount of a long journey, according
8s & person is engaged on & distant or neighbouring
journey, and in this matter the delay will be optional.
À lawful summons, therefore, will be of fifteen days in
the manner above said, and if it comprises & less space
than fifteen days without reasonable cause, then when
the person summoned has appeared, the summons is ob-
jected to as unlawful, or it is not objected to. But if it
be not objected to, then let the argument proceed as if
the summons were lawful. But if it be objected to and
is proved to be unlawful, let another lawful day be
assigned in court, which cannot be gainsayed against
the record of the justiciaries. But if after an unlawful
summons the tenant has essoined himself, or has made
default, or without objection has proceeded with the
plea, or has taken & day of love, he can no further
allege as an excuse an unlawful summons. And a
person may well answer without & summons if he will,
noris wrong done to him, when he is so willing. But
there are certain cases where the tenant cannot deny
the summons, as if before some one who has & record he


198 DE BREVI DE RECTO.


ut si coram aliquo, qui recordum habet, ubicund attur-
natum fecerit, ppter verba in atturnato faciendo, ut
cüm dixerit tenens, facio attornatum meum in loquela
qua est coram tali, vel coram te, p hoe concedit q pro-
cessit summori, quia non poterit esse coram aliquo nisi
peesserit suimonitio, quia si diceret in loquela quse erit,
sic nunqua admitteret ad attornü faciendum. Et si
petens possit attornum facere statim post impetration
brevis, tenens hoec nunquàm facere possit de jure an-
tequa loquela sua fuerit coram suo judice p sumonition.
Et unde si dicat feci attornatum meum, idem est q
confiteri sumonitione, vel quasi, & si ante factus fuerit
attornatus effectu non habebit ante sumonitionem, nec
justieiarius de aliquo potestate habebit, antequam 1o-
quela fuerit coram eo p sumonition. Nullus autem!
dies dari debet extra coii nisi p spacium xv. dierum,
nec p tantum spacium sine essoil, nisi hoc faciat con-
sensus partium, quo casu fiat ut in fine dicetur de
essonio.!


! « Nullus autem " down to * de | C. 160, but it occurs in MS. Rawl.
** egsonio ? is omitted in MS. Rawl. | C. 159.


u— wp P nem, mn om CTRENEUSU TR má RE TS UNE TOU. y mE CB


OF A WRIT OF RIGHT. 1299


has any where constituted an attorney, on account of the
words in the power of attorney, as when the tenant has
said, I appoint my attorney in the argument which is
before so-and-so, or before thee, by this he concedes that
& summons has preceded, because he cannot be before
any one unless à summons has preceded, because i he
were to say, *in an argument which will be," he would
never be admitted thus to appoint an attorney. And if
the claimant can appoint an attorney immediately after
suing out a writ, the tenant can never do this rightfully
before his cause is before his judge by & summons.
And hence if he says, I have appointed my attorney, it
is the same as to confess the summons, or as it were 80,
and if the attorney were appointed beforehand it will
not take effect before the summons, nor will the justi-
eiary have any power over any person, before the cause
is brought before him through a summons. But no day
ought to be assigned beyond the county except for a
Space of fifteen days, nor for so long & space without
essoins, unless the consent of the parties does this, in
which case let it be done as will be explained in the end
concerning an essoin.


Q 6366. l


f. 334 b.


l.

. De modo
procedendi
post sum-
monitio-
nem,


Glanville,
l. i. c. 30


Britton, vi,


ch. v. 8 6.


TRACTATUS SECUNDUS
LIBBI QUINTI,


IN QUO TRACTATUR


DE ESSONIIS:


CA. I.


Ad diem veró sumonitionis, sive legitima sit suimno-
nitio sive non, aut, coparet summonitus, vel se essoniat,
vel defaltam facit. Si autem venerit, aut dedicit sumo-
nitionem, aut concedit summonitionem legitimam, quo
casu, 8. quando concedit sumonition legitimam, statim
respondeat si vicecofi miserit breve: si autem non,
recedet tenens quietus, & petens pquirat sibi p aliud
breve. Si autem breve venerit, tunc proposita inten-
tione petentis, respondeat tenes intentioni, vel excipiat
cotra breve, vel petat visum. $i autem causetur suim-
monitioi minüs rationabilem esse, detur ei dies ratio-
nabilis, ad quem veniat responsurus. Si aute illa om-
ninó dedixerit, sive sumonitus fuerit sive non, tunc
querend' erit à petete utrum se tenere voluerit ad
defaltà, vel ad placitü principale, si autem ad placitum
principale, tunc tenes statim respodeat. Si autem tenu-
erit se ad defalta, & sumonitus sumonitioü omninó de-
fendat, tunc sumonitores vocandi sunt, q testentur sumo-
nitioi. Et càm diligenter examinati pbaverint sumo-
nition legitimé factam, tunc primó vadiat summonitus


! MS. Rawl. C. 160 has not any break in the Treatise here, but con-
tinues the context.


THE SECOND TREATISE


OF


THE FIFTH BOOK,


WHICH TREATS OF


ESSOINS.


CHAPTER I.


On the day of the summons, whether the summons be
lawful or not, the person summoned either appears or
essoins himself, or makes default. Butif he has come,
either he denies the summons or he allows it to be lawful,
in which cease, to wit, when he allows the summons to
be lawful, he must forthwith answer, if the viscount has
sent à writ; but if not, the tenant shall withdraw quit,
and the claimant must provide for himself by another
writ, But if& writ has come, then upon the declaration
of the claimant having been propounded, let the tenant
reply to the declaration, or let him except against the
writ, or let him claim & view. But if he shall allege
the summons to be unreasonable, let him have & reason-
able day assigned to him, at which he shall appear in
order to make answer. But if he shall have altogether
denied it, whether he has been summoned or not, then
the claimant must be questioned whether he wishes to
hold himself to the default, or to the principal plea,
but if to the principal plea, then let the tenant forth-
with make answer. But if he has kept himself to the
default, and the person summoned denies altogether
the summons, then the summoners are to be called in
order to testify to the summons, And when, having
been diligently examined, they have proved the sum-
mons to have been lawfully made, then let the per-

I 2


f. 334 b.


l.
Of the
mode of
proceeding
after a
summons.


f. 335.


132 DE ESSONIIS.


legem, & defendat summonition p legem cotra testifica-
tionem sumonitorum, s. q summonitio non pvenerit ad
ipsum, sed q nec ad ipsum, nec ad domicilium suum.  5Si
&utem sumonitores in pbatione sümonitionis diligenter
examinati concordes non extiterint, tunc (quasi sümoni-
tione nullà) non habebit summonitus necesse sumoni-
tione defendere p legem, sed detur ei alius dies legiti-
mus, nisi gratis incontinenti velit respondere. Cüm au-
tem post legem vadiatam diem habuerit tenens de lege
facienda, ad diem illum se poterit essoniare de placito
legis vadiatz, & tunc in fine veniat cum lege, & eam
faciat, si possit, & si in lege facienda defecerit tenens;!
petens seysinam suam recuperabit statim, vel si defal-
tam fecerit, petens statim* seysina suam recuperabit
per defaltam, si tenens psens fuerit: si autem absens,
capiatur terra in manum domini regis per parvum
cape, & ipse summoneatur quód sit ad aliam diem au-
diturus judicium suum, per breve inferiàs notandum.
Si aute ad primum diem non coparuerit tenens, sed
antequam comparuerit in curia defalta fecerit, tunc aut
vicecomes misit breve aut non misit: si vicecom ? non
misit breve, tunc cüm petens offerat se liti, justiciarii
pcedere non poterint secundüm defalta sine warrato,
vel sine brevi, nec poterit * alium diem dare, inífra
quem mandare possint vicecomiti q faciat venire breve,
quia tali modo sine brevi et warranto dando diem, sibi
usurparet 5 jurisdictionem, nec etiam si breve veniret
ad alium diem non valeret, quia dies sumonitionis
preteriit, erit igitur opus alio brevi. Si autem miserit
breve, offerente se liti petente, propter defaltam tenen-


! «tenens ". omitted MS. Rawl. 3 * vicecomes ? omitted, id.
C. 160. * * poterint," MS. Rawl. C. 160.
? * statim " omitted, id. 5 ** usurparent," id.


OF ESSOINS. 133


son summoned wage his law and deny the summons by
his law against the testimony of the summoners, to wit,
that the summons did not reach him, and that it neither
reached him nor his domicile. But if the summoners
having been carefully examined on the proof of the sum-
mons have not been found to agree with one another, then
(as if there had been no summons) the person summoned
shall not be under the necessity to deny the summons by
his law, but another lawful day should be assigned to
him, unless gratuitously he should be willing forthwith
to make answer. But when after waging his law the
tenant shali have & day to make his law, on that day he
may essoin himself upon the plea of a wager of law, and
then in the end let him come with his law, and let him
make it, if he can, and if the tenant has failed in making
his law, the claimant shall recover his seysine forthwith,
or if he has made default, the claimant shall forthwith
recover his seysine by default, if the tenant be present,
but if he be absent, let the land be seised into the hand
of the lord the king by a little cape, and let him be
summoned himself, that he be present on another day in
order to hear his judgment, by à writ to be noted below.
But if the tenant has not appeared on the first day, but
has made default before he has appeared in court, then
either the viscount has sent & writ or he has not sent
it: if the viscount has not sent & writ, then when the
claimant presents himself to contest the suit, the justi-
ciaries may not proceed according to the default without
a warrantor, or without & writ, nor can they give another
day, within which they can send a mandate to the vis-
count to cause & writ to come, for by giving & day in
such & manner without a writ or a warrantor they would
usurp jurisdiction to themselves, and even if a writ were
to come for another day, it would not avail, because the
day of the summons has passed, there will therefore be
need of another writ. Butif he has sent & writ, upon
the claimant presenting himself to contest the suit, on


f. 385.


134 DE ESSONIIS.


tis capietur terra in manum domini regis per magnum
cape, cujus forma inferius notatur, et tenens summo-
neatur quód sit ad alium diem responsurus de capitali
placito & de defalta, scilicet quare non fuit ad primum
diem sicut summonitus fuit, ad quem dié si venerit
statim respondeat ad capitale placitum, nisi petens se
tenere voluerit ad defaltam, si &utem se tenuerit ad
defaltam, tunc oportet tenentem docere causam suffici-
entem, et rationem quare non fuit ad alium diem sicut
summonitus fuit. Cause quidem possunt esse plures,
de quibus inferius dicetur. Et quarum una poterit
esse talis inter alias, quód nullam habuit summonitio-
nem, quo casu oportebit petentem docere contrarium
per summonitores qui fecerunt summonitionem, alio-
quin nulla erit summonitio, nec aliqua defalta. Et
ideo statim respondeat tenens ad placitum capitale.
Si autem testata fuerit summonitio & probata, tunc
erit locus defensioni per legem, secundum quod supe-
rius dietum est. Si autem post primam captionem ad
alium diem non venerit, amittet seysinam suam per
secundam captionem per parvum cape, nisi tunc veniat
et defendat per legem, ut supra de summonitionibus et
supersisis! Si autem &d primum diem non venerit
sed se essoniaverit, tunc videtur quodamodo concesisse
summonitionem, donec presens illam defenderit, & de-
dixerit. Quo casu, dabitur ei alius dies per essoniatore
suum, sive breve venerit sive non. Ad quem diem si
tenens venerit, statim respondeat vel excipiat. $Si au-
tem non venerit, capiatur terra in manum diüi regis
per defaltam, et ipse sumoneatur quód sit ad alium
diem per magnum cape, inde responsurus et ostensu-


! * ut supra summonitiones et sursisas," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 135


account of the default of the tenant the land shall be
seized into the hand of the lord the king by a great cope,
the form of which is noted below, and let the tenant be
summoned that he be present on another day in order to
answer concerning the capital plea and concerning the
default, to wit, wherefore he was not present on the first
day as he was summoned, upon which day if he has
come, let him forthwith answer to the capital plea, un-
less the claimant has wished to keep himself to the de-
fault, but if he has kept himself to the default, then it is
necessary that the tenant show sufficient cause and reason
Wherefore he has not been present on another day, as he
has been summoned. "The causes may be several, con-
cerniny which it will be explained below, and whereof
one may be of this kind amongst others, that he has had
no summons, in which case it will be incumbent upon
the claimant to show the contrary by the summoners
who have served the summons, otherwise there will be
no summons, nor any default. And accordingly let the
tenant answer forthwith to the capital plea. But if the
summons has been attested and proved, then there will
be place for à defence by his law, according to what has
been said above. But if after the first seizure he has not
come upon another day, he shall lose his seysine by &
second seizure through a little cape, unless he shall then
come and defend by his law as above concerning sum-
monses &nd demurrers. But if he has not come on the
first day, but has essoined himself, then he seems in some
manner to have admitted the summons, until he should
be present to contest it and has denied it. In which
case, another day will be allowed to him through his
essoiner, whether the writ has came or not. At which
day if the tenant has come, let him forthwith answer or
object. But if he has not come, let his land be seized
into the hand of the lord the king by default, and let
himself be summoned by a great cape, that he be present
on another day in order to answer and to show where.


Glanville,
l. i. c. 19.


f. 335 b.


136 "DE ESSONIIS.


rus, quare non servavit diem sibi datum per essonia-
torem suum. Ad quem diem si non venerit, fiat ut
supra ex secunda defalta. Et si venerit, eodem modo
ut supra. Si autem ad diem sibi datum per essonia-
torem suum de malo veniendi faciat se essoniari tenens
de malo lecti, tunc dabitur alius dies petenti, licet. non
tenenti: infrà quam, & statim post essonium mittan-
tur ad eum quatuor milites de comitatu, ad videndum
utrü infirmitas, qua se tenens essoniaverit, sit languor
vel non. Et tunc cüm venerint ad locü ubi jacuerit
vel jacere debuit, invenerit! eu in lecto sicut essonia-
tus fuit ei confitentem essoniü, sive revera se ipsum
essoniaverit, seu falsÓó essoniatus fuerit p alium. Quo
casu procedent milites in visu faciendo modo debito,
secundum q inferiüs dicetur (ac si omnia rité acta
essent) et. dabunt ei malum transiens, vel languorem,
secundü q judicaverint de statu suo, nec ad diem sibi
datü poterit tenens ulteriàs defendere summonitiones,
nec dedicere, et sursisas contr& attestationem quatuor
militum, nec contra propriam recognitionem essonii,
cum predicti quatuor milites in hoc habeant recordum,
nec etiam si dicat quód petens ipsum falsó essoniari
fecerit, etià sine summonitione: utroqueé essonio audiri
non debeat, quasi propriam allegans falsitatem. — Si
&ute quatuor milites invenerint eum extra lectum in
curia, vel vagantem p rura, & diffitentem ? essoniato-
rem, tune non possunt ei die dare, vel si dederint,
forte non vult alique recolligere, vel forte non est in-
ventus in loco ubi jacere debuit, q possint ei diem
dare. Et unde cüm ad diem eis przfixum in curia,
sive. petens plures dies secutus fuerit versus eos, sive


! * invenerint, MS. Rawl. C. * * deficientem," MSS. RawL C.
160. 160 and C. 159.


mmn AR m —— nom mE o-


OF ESSOINS. 137


fore he has not. kept the day given to him through his
essoiner. At which day if he has not come, let it be
done as above on & second default. And if he has come,
let it be done in the same way as above. But if upon
the day given to him through his essoiner for sickness
in coming the tenant cause himself to be essoined for
bed-sickness, then let another day be given to the claim-
ant, although not to the tenant, within which and
forthwith after the essoin let, four knights of the county
be sent to him, to see whether the infirmity for which
the tenant has essoined himself be languor or not. And
then when they have come to the place where he lies ill
or is said to lie ill, they will have found him in bed as
he was essoined and confessing the essoin, whether he
has truly essoined himself or has been falsely essoined
by another. In which case the knights shall proceed to
make a view in due manner, according to what will be
said below, as if all things had been duly done, and they
shall assign to him a passing sickness, or languor, accord-
ing to what they have judged concerning his state, nor
upon the day assigned to him will the tenant, be able to
contest the summonses nor to deny them, nor the ad-
journments, against the attestation of the four knights,
nor against his own recognition of the essoin, since the
aforesaid four knights have in this matter & record, nor
even if he should say that the claimant has caused him-
self to be falsely essoined, even without a summons :
upon either essoin he ought not to be heard, alleging as
i& were his own falseness. But if the four knights have
found him out of bed in the court, or walking about the
country, and discerediting his essoiner, then they cannot
assign to him a day, or if they shall assign one, per-
chance he is not willing to recollect it, or by chance he
is not found in the place where he ought to be lying, so
that they may be able to assign to him a day. And
hence when on the day prefixed for them in the court,
whether the claimant has obtained several days against


f. 335 b.


138 DE ESSONIIS.


unum, & testati fuerint visum suum secundum q ipsum
invenerunt vel non, tune si tenens non venerit, capia-
tur terra in manum domini regis, & pcedatur per om-
nia sicut superius dictum est. Si aute venerit, defen-
dere poterit sumonitionem & essonium, tam de malo
veniendi quàm de malo lecti, & etiam sursisas tam
primas defalt», ad primam captionem, quàm secunda
&d secundam, usqué ad judicium. Post judiciü vero
non erit locus defensioni per legem contra probationem
summonitionis, cüm judicia rata esse debeant, si pe-
tens! se tenuerit ad defaltam, & quo casu facta exa-
minatione de sumonitione, si sumonitio testata fuerit,
statim vadiat legem, & habeat diem ad legem facien-
dam, & càüm legem fecerit post essonia sua, statim &
eodem die respondebit sine alia summonitione, sicut
inveniri poterit in rotulo de termino ut supra? Si
aute omninó nulla prsecessit summonitio, & petens
falsó essoniare fecerit tenentem aliquo essonio uno vel
pluribus, cüm tenens nihil inde sciverit, & post sum-
monitionem qus fieri debuit & essonia, capta sit terra
in manum domini regis, & post primam defaltam &
secundam adjudicata sit seysina petenti, cüm nulla de-
falta ibidem esse debeat: &d querelam tenentis subve-
niendum est ei hoc modo, scilicet quód sumoneantur
suinonitores, & illi per quorum visum terra capta fuit
in manum domini regis, ut inde diligens fiat exami-
natio, & si pbata non fuerit summonitio, nec testata,
nulla erit defalta, nec necesse esset defendere summo-
nitionem, que nulla est propter defectum probationis.
Item càm nulla sit summonitio nec defalta, nulla sequi
deberet captio, & cüm captio nulla, nulla sequi deberet


! * sj petens ? down to ut '* supra ? ? ** ut supra" omitted M8. Rav.
omitted in MS. Rawl. C. 159. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 139


them or only one, &nd they have testified their view ac-
cording as they have found him or not, then if the tenant
has not come, let the land be seized into the hand of the
lord the king, and let the proceedings in all things be
conducted as above said. But if he has come, he may
contest the summons and the essoin, as well for sickness
in coming as for bed-sickness, and likewise demurrers as
well of the first default at the first caption, as of the
second default at the second caption up to the Judgment.
Put after the judgment there will be no place for a de-
fence by his law against the proof of & summons, since
judgments ought to be ratified, if the claimant has held
himself to the default, and in which case upon an ex-
amination having been made concerning the summons,
if the summons has been attested, let him forthwith
wage his law, and let him have a day to make his law,
and when he has made his law after his essoins, forth with
and upon the same day he shall answer without another
summons, as may be found in the roll of the terin as
above. But if no summons at all has preceded, and the
claimant has falsely caused the tenant to essoin himself
by some one or more essoins, when the tenant has known
nothing thereof, and after the summons, which ought to
have been made, and the essoins, the land has been seized
into the hand of the lord the king, and after the first
and second default seysine has been adjudged to the
claimant, when there ought to have been no default at
all,at the complaint of the tenant he is to be aided in
this manner, to wit, that the summoners are to be sum-
moned, and those persons by whose view the land has
been seized into the hand of the lord the king, that
a diligent examination be thereon made, and if the
summons has not been proved, nor attested, the default
shall be null,nor shall it be necessary to contest the
summons, which is null on account of the failure of
proof Likewise when the summons and the default are
null, no seizure ought to follow, and when the seizure is


140 DE ESSONIIS.


possessionis &missio, ergo à primo, ubi nulla summo-
nitio, nulla sequitur possessionis amissio, quia ubi pri-
mum & principale (quod est summonitio) non subsis-
tit, nec ea qua sequuntur locum habere debent, & ad
querela talis fiat vicecom breve in hac forma.


Bev. qo,  BeX vie saluté. Precipimus tibi, quód habeas coram
habendo  justitiariis nostris &c. talem petentem, scilicet, ad audi-
justi ao^ endum judicium suum et considerationem curie nostre
quiper ^ de hoe, quod ipse per malitiam & manifesta falsitatem
Die fecit disseysiri talem de tanta terra cum pertinentiis
etfalsita- &c. Et unde, cüm idem B. nullam haberet sumonitione,
avit adven, Optulit se idem A. versus eum, ita quod terra capta
sarium fuit in manü nostram semel & secundó, & per quam
"ÜUT-  defaltam idem A. terram illam recuperavit, desicut illa
defalta nulla fuit, ut dicit : & catalla ipsius B. in eadem

terra tunc inventa & ei occasione predicta oblata, ei-

dem sine dilatione reddi facias & restitui. Precipimus

etiam tibi quod habeas coram &c. ad eundem terminum

A. et B. per quos summonitio prima facta fuit, & in

curia nostra testata, & preterea quatuor illos per quo-

rum visum terra illa capta fuit in manum nostram, &

per quos captio illa testificata fuit in curia nostra &c.,

L336. & etiam illos per quos secunda suionitio facta fuit &
testata, ad certificandum justiciarios nis de pdictis sumo-
nitionibus & captionibus. Et habeas ibi hoc breve.

Teste &c. Ad quem diem cüm venerint, diligenter
examinentur. Inprimis sumonitores primi de prima
sumonitione, & postea ili quatuor per quoru visum

terra illa capta fuit in manum domini regis, et ultimó

duo ultimi sumonitores. Et in quo casu, si primi
summonitores 'in omnibus convenerint & concordent, &
summonitionem primam rité factam esse pbaverint, &
predieti quatuor, per quorum visum terr& capta fuit,


OF ESSOINS. 141


null, no loss of possession ought to follow, therefore from
the first, where there is no summons, no loss of possession
follows, because where the first and principal (which is
the summons) does not exist, those things which follow
ought not to take place, and at the complaint of such an
one let & writ in this form issue to the viscount.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you , 2.
that you produce before our justiciaries, &c. so-and-so the ud
claimant, to wit, to hear his judgment and the resolution before the
of our court on this matter, that he through malice and Tugsbund
manifest falsehood has caused so-and-so to be disseysed Mad "
of so much land with the appurtenances &c. And hence fraud. má:
when the said B. had no summons, the said A. presented ce sud
himself against him, so that his land was seized into our has essoin-
hand once and & second time, and through which de- iM im
fault the said A. recovered that land, since that default
has been null, as he says ; and that you cause the chattels
of the said B. found at that time on the said land and pre-
sented to him on the aforesaid occasion, to be rendered
and restored to him witbout delay. "We also enjoin
you that you should produce &e.at the same time A.
and B., through whom the first summons was made, and
was attested in our court, and besides those four persons
by whose view that land was seized into our hand, and
through whom that seizure was testified in our court,

&c., and likewise those, through whom the second sum-  f.336.
mons was made and attested, to certify our justiciaries
concerning the aforesaid summonses &nd seizures. And
produce there this writ. Witness, &c. At which day
when they have come, let them be diligently examined :
in the first place the first suminoners concerning the
first summons, and afterwards those four, through whose
view that land has been seized into the hand of the
lord the king, and in the last place the two last sum-
moners, And in which case if the first summoners have
agreed and are of accord in all things, and have proved
that the first summons has been duly made, and the
aforesaid four persons, by whose view the land has been


a — € :— MÀ —


Glanville,l.
1. i. 30. $
5.
Britton, vi.
ch. v. $ 6.


142 DE ESSONIIS&


captionem rité factam pbaverint, & ultimi suimonitores
sumonitionem ultimam, & sic per omnia conveniant &
concordent, adhuc locum habebit defensio per legem
contra utrasque summonitiones in forma predicta. De
hac materia inveniri poterit de termino S. Michaelis
anno regis Henrici tertio incipiente quarto in comitatu
Surr de Roberto de Basings querete. Si auté primi
duo sumonitores non convenerint nec conecordent, licet
ommes alii conveniant in captione, & in secunda sum-
monitione, non valebit: cüm prima suinonitio deficiet
quasi nulla, & si omnes discordes sint ubique & in
nihilo concordes, multo minus, & quo easu retractabi-
tur judicium, & reformabitur possessio primo posses-
sori. Item non in omni casu imputari possit sumonito-
ribus, sed negligentism vicecomitis, & unde inquirendum
erit quis in culpa fuit, utrum vicecomes vel sumoni-
tores, & si summonitio remanserit facienda pro defectu
vicecomitis, quia illam alicui nunquam injunxit facien-
dam, in misericordia domini regis remanebit, nisi exct-
sationes habeat per quas se defendere possit: qu:e
tales esse possunt, scilicet. breve tam tardé recepit &
extra comitatum, g nulli potuit injungere sumonitionem
faciendam, vel quód aliud preceptum majus supervenit
de negotio ipsius domini regis, ubi oportuerit eum pso-
naliter interesse, et quo casu amittit petens breve suum,
& alio brevi opus erit, quia dies sumonitionis in primo
brevi prsteriit. Si vero dicat vicecomes q summoni-
tionem faciendam injunxit legitimis summonitoribus,
sive extra comitatum sive in comitatu, & illi hoc con-
fiteantur, sed sumonitionem non fecerint, sumonitores


OF ESSOINS. 143


seized, have proved that the seizure was duly made, and
the last summoners have proved the last summons to
have been duly made, and so in &ll matters they aree
and are of accord, & defence on the law against both
summonses shall still have place in the form abovesaid.
On this subject & case will be found in St. Michael's
term in the third and fourth years of king Henry in the
eounty of Surrey, concerning Robert de Basings the
complainant. But if the two first summoners do not
agree nor are of accord, although all the others agree in
the seizure and in the second summons, it will not
avail since the first summons will fail as being as it
were null; and if all should be discordant everywhere
and in nothing of accord, much less will it avail, and
in which case the judgment will be retracted, and the
possession will be re-established for the first possessor.
Likewise it cannot in all cases be imputed to the sum-
moners, but to the negligence of the viscount, and hence
inquiry will have to be made, who has been in fault,
whether the viscount or the summoners; and if the
summons has remained to be made from the default of the
viscount, because he has never enjoined any one to make
it, he will remain at the mercy of the lord the king,
unless he has certain excuses, through which he can
defend himself: which may be of this character, to wit,
that he received the writ so late and outside the county,
so that he could not enjoin any one to make the summons,
or because some other more important precept super-
vened concerning the business of the lord the king him-
self, where it was incumbent upon him to be present
in person, and in which case the claimant loses his writ,
and he will have need of another writ, because the day
of summons in the first writ has passed. But if the
viscount should say that he has enjoined the lawful
summoners to make that summons, whether outside the
county or within ii, and they confess it, but the sum-
moners have not made the summons, the summoners


f. 336 b.


Britton, vi.


ch. v. $2.


144 DE ESSONIIS.


in misericordia remanebunt, & illud breve inutile erit
petenti, quia dies summonitionis pterüt. Si autem ne-
gaverint hoe sibi fuisse injunctu, tunc &ut fuit hoc eis
publicó injunetum in comitatu, vel extra comitatum
sine solennitate aliqua, quo casu hoc dedicere possunt
contra vicecomite, & vicecomes in müserieordia. Si
autem in comitatu hoc fuerit eis injunctu, non pote-
runt hoc dedicere contra recordü comitatus, quia comi-
tatus in hoc habet recordum, sicut in alis publicis
actibus, qui fieri debent cü solenitate. Publici veró
actus sunt, injungere sumonitiones, plegios capere de
psequendo, & de stando ad rectü, tam in civili nego-
tio, quàm criminali. Si aute sumonitores non venerint
&d primum diem ad testificádam sumonitionem, ubi
dedicere non possunt quin hoc eis esset injunctü, in
miserieordia remanebunt. Item quis sumoneri debet
videndum, & sciendum q tam minor quàm major, tam
masculus quàm fcemina, dum tamen minor non sumo-
neatur per se, si costiterit ipsum esse minorem, sed p
tutores, eustodes sive procuratores in loquelis, nisi mi-
nores infra statem respondere tenentur, non obstante
minore setate. Item viri religiosi per procuratores,
sindicos & actores ppetuos & non &a&motibiles, et qui
tales sint quód possint lucrari & perdere, & rem in

judicium deducere. Et notandum in fine quód si quis -
summonitione cognoverit, causetur tame illà esse minus
legitimam, hoc faciat primo die sumonitionis. Si aute
primo die se essoniaverit vel defaltam fecerit, ulteriüs
brevem sumonitionem causari non poterit. Et ad hoc
notandum, q summonitionum, alia poterit esse legitima
& sufficiens ab initio, & cüm testata fuerit & pbata,


w


OP ESSOINS. 145


will remain at the mercy of the lord the king, and that
writ wil be useless to tbe claimant, because the day of
summons has passed. But if they have denied that this
has been enjoined to them, then this has either been
publicly enjoined to them within the county or outside
of it without any solemnity, in which case they may
deny this against the viscount, and the viscount will be
at the mercy of the lord the king. But if this has been
enjoned to them within the county, they cannot deny
this against the record of the county court, because tho
county court has in this matter & record, as in other
publie acts, which ought to be performed with solemnity.
But the publie aets are to enjoin summonses, to take
security for prosecutions and for standing & trial, as
wellina civil as in & criminal business — But if the
summoners have not come on the first day to testify to
the summons, where they cannot deny that this has been
enjoined to them, they will remain at the mercy of the
lord the king. Likewise we must see who ought to be
summoned, and it is to be known that a minor as
well as a person of full age, à male as well as & female,
provided however that & minor be no& summoned by
himself, if it is ascertained that he is & minor, but
through his tutors, his guardians, or his proctors to con-
duet causes, unless minors under age are bound to
answer, notwithstanding their minority. Likewise men
of & religious order through their proctors, syndies and
perpetual agents not removable, and who are such as
may lose or gain, and carry & suit to judgment. And it
is to be noted finally that if any one has admitted a
summons, but he alleges that it is not legitimate, let
him do this on the first day of the summons. But if
onthe first day he has essoined himself or has made
default, he cannot any further allege & short summons.
And in addition to this it is to be noted, that of sum-
monses one may be legitimate and sufficient from the
beginning, and when it has been testified and proved,
Q 6366. K


f. 336 b.


l.
De excop-
tionibus
qui non
venerit ad
summoni-
tionem.


146 DE ESSONIIS.


defendi poterit per legem, sed hoe antequam quis ira
judieio comparuerit. Est etiam alia legitima cum quis
in judicio comparuerit, quze. dedici non poterit, nec
defendi per legem, scilicet. postquam quis in judicio
comparuerit. Item est & alia viciosa & non sufficiens,
ubi fit tantum per unum, qui recordum habere nom
potest, nec per se inducere presumptionem, Item po-
terit esse legitima ab initio sed inefficax ex post facto,
deficiente probatione cüm suimonitores examinati in
probatione non concordent, nec erit necesse talem sum-
monitionem defendere per legem, cüm sit quasi nulla.
Item est omninó vitiosa summonitio, quz» fit fraudu-
lenter per deceptionem petentis per falsos summoni-
tores & non per vieecomitem & ballivos suos. Est
etiam vitiosa, ubi fit in absentia tenentis cüm peregre
profectus fuerit ad partes transmarinas vel alias remo-
tas, vel cüm fuerit in itinere costitutus & iter arripu-
erit eundi, ita quód citatio vel summonitio eum non
comprehendit in domicilio, nec inventus fuerit a sumo-
nitoribus infra comitatum, ubi sumonito facienda de-
mandatur, quia si exir& comitatu inveniatur, non ligat
cum sumonitio, quia non tenetur ubiqué recipere sumo-
nitionem, nec à quocunqué, & non nisi à ballivis cin
warrantum bhabuerint sumonendi. Item poterit esse
sumonitio legitima, & dies & dilatio illegitima, si tem-
pus illegitimum non continuerit, si hoc causetur, aliter
autem non, ut infra.


CAr. II.


Legitimé summonitus si non venerit puniendus erit,
nisi causas exeusationis habeat legitimas, per quas
suam excusare posset absentiam, qua quidem plures
esse possunt, et tune videndum erit utrum absens sit
quis ex causa necessaria & util vel ex causa volun-


OF ESSOINS. 147


it may be contested at law, but this before any one has
appeared in judgment. There isanother which is lezi-
timate when a person has appeared in judgment, which
cannot be denied nor contested at law, to wit, after à per-
son has appeared in judgment. Likewise there is another
which is defective and not sufficient, when it is made only
by one person, who cannot have a record nor by himself
induce a presumption. Likewise it may be lezitimate
from the beginning, but ineffective ex post fucto, tho
proof failing when the summoners having been examined
are not of aecord in the proof, nor will it be necessary
tocontest such à summons at law, since it is as it
were null. Likewise there is a summons that is alto-
gether defective, which is made fraudulently through
the deceit of the claimant by false suminoners and not
by the viscount and his bailiffs, "There is likewise a
defective summons, where it is made in the absence of
the tenant, when he has set. forth on à journey abroad
to parts beyond the seas or other remote parts, or when
he is embarked on a journoy and has set out on his road,
50 that the citation or summons does not find him in
his domicile, nor has he been found by the summoners
within the county, where the summons is ordered to be
made, because if he be found beyond the county, the
summons does not bind him, because he is not obliged
toaecept everywhere the summons, nor from any one
except from the bailiffs, when they have a warrant to
summon him. Again the summons may be legitimate,
and the day and the delay illegitimate, if it has not
contained an illegitimate time, if this be allezed, but
otherwise not, £s below.


CHAPTER II.


: "m l.
À. person having been lawfully summoned, if he has Of the ex-


not appeared, will have to be punished, unless he have ztbtons of
legitimate causes of absence, through which he may has not


excuse his absence, which may be of several kinds, and t? pue
then it is to be seen whether a person has been absent summons.


K 2


f. 837.


148 DE ESSONIIS.


taria, sj autem ex causa necessaria & utili ut rel
publieze. causa, ita quód profectus sit in exercitum
cum domino rege &d defensionem patrie per precep-
tum domini regis, cum. ad hoc obligatus sit, exeusatur:
dum tamen hoec non affectaverit, nec in servitio alte-
rius quàm domini regis, cüm ad hoc non teneatur nisi
velit. Talibus enim non subvenit dominus rex nisi de
gratia. Cüm autem quis ita se excusaverit de servitio
domini regis, videndum erit utrum summonitione prae-
ventus sit vel non. Si autem summonitione prweven-
tus sit ita quód attornatum facere possit, & copiam
habuerit, & non fecerit, non erit ei subveniendum ex
tali causa excusationis, quia mittere poterit attorna-
tun. Sed ita esset, si quis posset. factum domini regis
judicare. Si autem sumonitione non sit praeventus,
tunc videndum utrum commodé & sine periculo ve-
nire possit, sive in servitio fuerit sivc in officio, vel
non. 5i autem commode venire possit, non excusatur,
si autem) coinmmode venire non possit, tune videndum
erit si mittere possit vel non propter vim majorem.
$i nee venire, nee mittere possit, nec attornatum fa-
core, quia dominus rex presens non. est, forte excu-
satur per servitium. Sed in omnibus istis casibus
maris erit spectanda voluntas domini regis quàm jus
strictum, eüm servitium domini regis nulli debeat esse
daunmnosum ; & sicut, non. debet esse tenenti damnosum,
ita non debet esse tenenti injuriosum. Officium vero
alieujus sicut vicecomitis & constabularii neminem ex-
cusat, nisi in officio illo aliqua causa emergat neces-
saria ex inopinato, ubi presentia talis debet esse ne-
cessarià, sicut iter justitiariorum vel incursus hostium,
vel hujusmodi, que quidem cause sufficientes sunt ad


OF ESSOINS. 149


from & necessary and useful cause, or from a voluntary
cause, and if from a necessary and useful cause, as upon
business of the State, for instance, that he has gone to
the army with the lord the kiny for the defence of the
country in obedience to the precept of the lord the king,
since he is under obligation to such service, he is ex-
cused, provided however he has not affected this, nor
has been in the service of any other than the lord the
king, since he is not obliged to this, if he does not wish.
For such persons the king «does not assist except of
grace. But when & person has so excused himself on
account of the service of the lord tne king, it will have
to be seen whether he has heen anticipated by the sum-
mons or not. But if he has been anticipated by the
summons in such & way that he could constitute an
attorney, and has had plenty of time, and has not donec
it, he is not to be aided upon such & cause of excuse,
because he can send an attorney. But it would be so, if
any one could judge the act of the lord the king. But
if he has not been anticipated by the summons, then it
is to be seen whether he can come conveniently and
without danger, whether he be in service or in office or
not. But if he can come conveniently, he is not ex-
cused, but if he cannot come conveniently, then it is to
be scen if he can send or not on account of vis major.
If he can neither come, nor send, nor constitute an
attorney because the king himself is not present, he is
perchance exeused through his service. But in all these
cases the will of the lord tho king is rather to be regarded
than strict right, since the service of the lord the king
ought not to be damaging to any one, and as it ought
not to be damaging to the tenant, so it ought not to be
wrongful to the claimant. But the oflice of any one,
as for instance of the viscount and of the constable, ex-
cuses nobody, unless in that office some necessary cause
arises unexpectedly, where the presence of such person
ought to be necessary, as the circuit of the justiciaries,
or an incursion of enemies, or such like, which causes


f. 531.


Glanville, ].


c. ii.


150 : pE ESSONIIS.


excusationem de servitio domini regis, dum tamen ad
quemlibet diem datum per essoniatorem de servitio
dii regis habeat essoniatus warrantum suum per breve
dii regis, quod si hoe non habuerit, procedatur ad
defaltam contra absentem, sicut contra eum qui non
est exeusatus, Item eodem modo excusat causa pere-
grinationis, sive brevis sit sive longa. Eodem modo
videndum, utrum quis proventus sit summonitione vel
non. tem exeusat summonitum adversa valitudo
nimia, quia pcenam contumacie non patitur, quem ad-
versa valitudo defendit. Et provenit quandoque talis


Britton, vi. adversa valitudo ex infirmitate veniendi, quz infinni-


ch. vii.


"tas dicitur de malo veniendi: sive de infirmitate de
reseantisa quz dicitur infirmitas de malo lecti. Item
exeusatur quis propter majoris causee occupationem, ut
si quis implacitatus fuerit in curia domini regis, vel
vocatus ad curiam regis ob aliquam causam, in omni-
bus euriis inferioribus exceusatur. Sed quid dicendum
erib de curia Christianitatis, càm magis obediendum
sib Deo quàm hominibus ? hoc dico, quód ad hune dif-
ferendum erit, & quód dominus rex warrantizare pote-
rit, ob reverentiam que principi debetur. Item excusat
.&bsentia! non venientis usqué ad quartum diem majo-
ris rei impetus, cui resisti non poterit, per casum for-
tuitum, ut si quis in veniendo versus curiam, cüm
nullam aliam habeat excusationem, captus fuit ab hos-
tibus, & per vim detentus, quód venire non possit.
Item si incidat in latrones, Item propter vim flumi-
num, vel quia pons solutus est, vel per tempestatem
nimiam ad impedimentum navium, & ita quód sum-
monitus venire non possit tempestivé per cireumitum,


! * absentiam," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 151


are sufficient for an excuse on the service of the lord
the king, provided that upon a certain day appointed
through the essoiner on the king's service the person
essoined has his warrantor through & writ of the lord
the king, but if he has not this, let. proceedings be had
for default against the absent person, as against him
who has not been excused. Likewise in the same man-
ner the reason of & journey, whether it be short or long,
is an excuse. In the same way it is to be seen whether
& person has been anticipated by a summons or not.
Likewise excessive infirmity of health excuses & person
summoned, because he does not suffer the penalty for
eontumacy, whom adverse health prevents. And some-
times such adverse health arises from an infirmity in
coming, which infirmity is called sickness on the way,
or from an infirmity in staying at home, which is called
infirmity from bed-sickness. Likewise & person is ex-
eused on account of occupation by & more important
cause, as if he has been impleaded in the court of the
lord the king, or has been called to the court on account
of some cause, he is excused in all inferior courts. But
what shall we say concerning the court of Christianity,
since obedience is rather to be given to God than to
man? Isay this, that & difference is to be made here,
and that the lord the king may warrant, on account of
the reverence which is due to the Prince. Likewise the
pressure of à more important business, by an accident
which could not be resisted, exeuses the absence of &
person, who does not come until the fourth day, as if a
person in coming towards the court, when he has no
other exeuse, has been taken captive by enemies and
detained by violence, so that he cannot come. . Likewise
if he falls amongst robbers. Likewise on account of the
violence of the rivers, or because & bridge has broken
down, or through excessive bad weather, which has im-
peded navigation, and so that the person summoned
could not come in time by a circuitous road; because if


2.

De excep-
tionibus!

f. 337 b.
non veni-
entis ad
judicium
post sum-
monitio-
nem.


152 DE ESSONIIS.


quia si venire possit summonitus tempestivé p circum-
itu, non excusatur p tale fortuitum eventum.


Item non exeusatur, si tardiüs à domicilio recederet
quàm expediret, quia si citiüs, comode venire potuis-
set, nec impediret eum casus fortuitus. Eodem modo
$i priüs à domicilio recesserit quàm deberet, & in casum
fortuitum ceciderit, hoc erit ei imputandum, quia si
tempore congruo, in casus fortuitos non incideret.
Item poterit summonitus assignare causam suam *
quare fuit impeditus & qualiter, ut si contentiones
quio sunt, & occasiones quare fuerit impeditus, dum
tamen post summonitionem & non ante. Item si
sponte in casum fortuitum inciderit, ubi possit casum
de facili evitare. Item refert utrum acciderit ei casus
fortuitus ante diem summonitionis, vel post diem. $i
autem post diem, competit ei excusatio modo quo prx-
dietum est, vel non competit. Item si rationem prz-
tendat quód venire non possit ex certa causa, vel quia
pons solutus fuit, & codem die transivit alius, & statim
post horam vel in eadem hora qua ipse presens fuerit,
non excusatur. Si autem propter inundationem aqua-
rum, & alius eodem die & eadem hora, dum tamen sine
diserimine & difficultate transierit, non erit locus ex-
cusationi Item si tempestas ingruerit, tunc videndum,
utrum eodem die & hora debita aliquis per cymbam
vel per navem transierit, & ita non erit locus excu-
sationi. Et unde consideranda sunt causa, tempus,


| € De excusationibus," MS. * «* Item poterit esse summonitus
Rawl. C. 160. * jn causa," MS. id.


OF ESSOINS, 153


the party summoned could have come seasonably by
& cireuitous road, he is not excused by such a fortuitous
occurrence.


Likewise he is not excused, if he has set out from his 2.
residence later than was expedient, because, if he had dud)
set out sooner, he might have come conveniently, nor ceptions of
would the accidental occurrence have impeded him. In prés
the same manner, if he had set out from his residence not coming
sooner than he ought to have done, and has met with a IP jud.
fortuitous accident, this will have to be set down to his a sum-
own account, because if he had set out at & suitable Pus.
time, he would not have met with the fortuitous acci-
dent. Likewise the person summoned will be able to
assign his own reason wherefore he was hindered, and in
what way, as if there have been any contentions or oc-
casions whereby he was hindered, provided they have
happened after the summons and not before. Likewise
if he has fallen of his own accord into a fortuitous acci-
dent, when he might easily have avoided the accident.
Likewise it matters whether the fortifitous accident has
befallen him before the day of the summons or after the
day. But if after the day, he is entitied to an excuse
in the manner above said, or he is not entitled.  Likc-
wise 1f he holds out à reason that he could not come for
& certain cause, as because & bridge was broken down,
and on the same day another person has passed, and
immediately after the hour or in the same hour, in
which he was himself present, he is not excused. PDut
if on account of an inundation of waters, and another
person on the same day and at the same hour, provided
however without danger or difficulty, has passed, there
will be no place for an excuse, Likewise if & tempest
has supervened, then it is to be seen, whether on the
same day and at the hour due any one has made the
passage in à boat or in a ship, and thus there will be no
plaee for an exeuse. And hence are to be considered,
ihe cause, the time, the place, the day, and the hour;


—À — — ——— "meme  aeemun capu EDU T OEEEEe 5 ans EUEERIe c obeeuros. —— OSEE a
- -


93.
Verba ex-
cusationis
proferenda
ab essoni-
atore in
essonio de
malo veni-
endi.


154 DE ESSONIIS.


loeus, dies, & hora, & infinite. sunt cause quibus quis
absentiam suam poterit excusare. Cüm igitur com-
petat alicui aliqua predictarum exeusationum, vel alia
qus sufficiens sit, sive tenens fuerit ultra mare, sive
citra, sive probata fuerit summonitio sive non, cüm
venire non possit, oportet mittere excusatorem aliquem
qui dicitur essoniator, & qui prsetendat excusationem
summoniti esse talem quód venire non possit per hoc
verba.


Quód, cüàm dominus suus in veniendo esset versus
curiam (si essoniatus fuerit de malo veniendi, sive de
ultra mare, sive de citra), quód talis infirmitas ei de-
venit postquam fuit in veniendo versus curiam à
domicilio proprio, vel alieno, citra mare, vel ultra, quód
venire non potest, pro lucro nec pro damno, quod vul-
gariter dicitur, pro lucrari nequé pro perdere, quod
quidem dicat se paratum docere. Sed quia probatio
non ineumbit essoniatori, sed domino, nec scitur utrum
verum sit essonium vel non, quód summonitus illud
&dvocare voluerit. Ideo ne essoniator oncretur cau-
tione fidejussoria, scilicet plegiorum, qux» quidem gra-
vis esset minimis personis & onerosa, nec depereat
excusatio, constituitur quód soli fidei essoniatoris cre-
datur, quod quidem non est concedendum personis
majoribus, sicut sunt illi qui tenent in baronia, qui
causationem inveniant fidejussoriam, ne judicia sint
delusoria: facilius enim inveniunt plegios & securita-
tem, & maxime cautionem fidejussoriam majores quàm
minores. Cüm autem hujusmodi essoniatores causam
absenti: & exeusationem sie prs,etenderint, non sufficit
quód dieant ita esse, nisi securitatem inveniant hoc


OF ESSOINS. 155


and the eauses, for which & person may excuse his ab-
sence, are infinite. — When therefore & person is enti-
tled to make any of the aforesaid exeuses, or any other
which may be suflicient, whether the tenant has been
beyond the sea or within it, whether the summons has
been proved or not, when he cannot come, it is incum-
bent that he send some one to excuse him, who is called
an essoiner, and who alleges that the excuse of the
person summoned is such that he cannot come in these
words :


That, when his lord was on his way coming to the
. : , : . . The words
court (if he has been essoined for sickness in coming of the ex-
whether from beyond the sea or from within it) that c'e to be
E : N uttered by
such an infirmity has come upon him after he was on the essoi-
his way coming towards the court from his own residence indt He
or from another person's, within the sea or beyond it bed.sick-
that he cannot come, to gain or to lose, which is com- "***
monly termed pro lucrari or pro perdere, which indeed
he says that he is prepared to prove. — But bcecausethe
proof is not incumbent on the essoiner, but on his lord,
nor is it known whether the essoin be true or not, that
the person summoned is willing to avow it. Likewise
that the essoiner may not be burdened with finding bail
and security, forsooth of surcties, which would be rriev-
. ous and onerous to persons of humble station, and that
the excuse may not perish, it is established that credit
is to be given to the faith alone of the essoiner, which
is not. to be granted to persons of higher station, such
as are those who hold in barony, who must find bail
and security lest the judgments should ke illusory, for
persons of greater estate find more easily than persons
of lower estate, bail and security, and particulaily caution
that the parties shall be fortheoming. But when essoin-
ers of this kind have represented the cause of absence
and the excuse, it is not suffieient. tiat they say that it
is so, unless they find security to prove it. Dut since


— — — ip au ——— m — RÀ -
LJ *
-


f. 338.


156 DE ESSONIIS.


probare. Sed cüm non sit procurator ejus, qui ipsum
essoniatorem destinavit, & ideo ad ipsum non pertineat
probare statum vel faetum alienum, nec attornato fac-
tum domini principalis! & ideo dominus faciet legem
si hoc commode fieri potest, & si dominus non vene-
rit, attornatus jurabit in animam domini litis. Ideo
affidabit essoniator, quód habebit dominum suum ad
alium diem ad warrantizandum dictum & essoniu suum,
& ad probandum per sacramentum quód tali infirmi-
tate detentus fuit cüm esset in veniendo versus curiam,
q venire non poterit? &c. ut supra. Et ad quem diem
Sj venerit, warrantizet essonium ita q per sacramen-
tum probet se esse ita impeditum secundüm q esso-
niator suus in essonio suo proponendo exposuit. Sed
videndum erit utrum probatio excusationis fieri debet
judici, vel parti, quia si judici, remittere eam non
poterit si voluerit ppter dilationem qus sequeretur, &
multitudinem pbationum. $i autem fieri debeat parti
& non judici, non sine juris injuria poterit remitti
€ine consensu partis. .Cüm igitur contingat aliquem
abesse ex aliqua predietarü causarum, vel aliqua alia
causa, mittat essoniatorem suum qui ipsum excuset, &
exeusationem suam praetendat, secundum quod przdic-
tum est. Habent etiam essonia ordinem sicut & actio-
nes, Et itaque? essonium de malo veniendi infra reg-
num, sl quis ita infirmatus fuerit in itinere versus
curiam, quód venire non possit nec pro lucrari nequé
pro perdere. Et tale essonium de malo veniendi sequi-
tur quandoque essonium de malo lecti & de reseantisa,
ubi agitur de ipso jure. Cüm autem quis ita essonia-
tus fuerit uno istorum vel utroqué infra regnum, non


! * domino principali," MS. Rawl. ? * potuit," MS. id.
C. 160. 3 ** Est itaque," MS. id.


*


OF ESSOINS. 157


he is not the agent of the person, who has destined him
to be his essoiner, and therefore it does not pertain to
him to prove the state or act of another, nor does it
pertain to an. attorney to prove the act of the lord his
principal, and accordingly the lord shall make his law,
if this can be done conveniently, and if the lord has not
come, the attorney shall swear upon the soul of the lord
ofthe suit. Accordingly the essoiner shall pledge his
faith. that he will produce his lord on another day to
warrant his statement and his essoin, and to prove by
his oath, that he was detained by such an infirmity,
when he was on his way coming to the court, that he
could not come &e. as above. And on which day if he
has come, let£ him warrant his essoin in such manner,
that he should prove by his oath, that he was hindered
according to what his essoiner has set forth in propound-
ing his essoin, But it will have to be seen whether the
proof of the excuse ought to be made to the judge or to
the party, because if to the judge, he could not renit it,
if he wished, on aecount of the delay, which would
follow, and the multitude of proofs. But if it ought to
be made to the party and not to the judge, it cannot
without injury to right be remitted, unless with the
consent of the party. When therefore it happens,
that any one is absent ífrom any of the aforesaid
causes, or from some.other cause, let him send his own
essoiner, who may excuse him and allege his excusation,
according to what has been said. Essoins have also
their order just as actions. "There is thus an essoin on
account of sickness on the way within the kingdom, if
any one has become infirm on the road to the court, that
he could not come neither pro lucrari nor pro perdere.
And such an essoin of sickness on the way is followed
sometimes by an essoin of bed-sickness and of staying
in doors, where the action is concerning the right itself,
Put when any one has been essoined for one of these
causes or for both within the kingdom, it is not allowed


f. 338.


158 DE ESSONIIS.


permittitur essoniato postmodum se transferre extra
regnum ut sibi acquirat dilationem per essonium de
ultra mare. Sunt quidem de ultra mare plura genera,
) seilicet de ultra. mare & citra mare Graecorum, & est
essonium de ultra mare Graecorum & de citra mare
Graecorum, sieut in peregrinatione versus Sanctü Ja-
cobum, vel ppter aliquam aliam necessitatem, sicut
exercitus vel hujusmodi in Allemania vel Hispania vel
hujusinodi,in quibus essoniis dabitur dilatio ad minus
quadraginta dierü & unius flud & unius ebb:e ad ex-
eusationé essoniati de simplici essonio de ultra mare.
Si aute fiat mentio de aliquo loco remoto ppter ali-
quam necessitate (ut. pdictum est), dabitur dilatio ma-
jo p voluntate & arbitrio justitiariorü, secundum q
viderint expedire secundu distantia locorü. In hoc
casu induci» sunt arbitrariie, dum tamen ad minus
quadraginta dierü ut supra. Et eode modo fiat infra
regnu in essoniis supradietis secundu locorum distan-
tias, dum tamen ad minus quindecim dierü. Item est
essonium de ultra mare, ultra mare Graecorum, ut si
quis profectus fuerit in peregrinatione usqué ad Ter-
ram Sanctam. Et quo casu distinguendum erit utrum
in sunpliei peregrinatione versus Terram Sancta, vel
in generali passagio. Si autem in simplici peregrina-
tione, dabitur ei ad minus annus integer & unus dies,
& sie dantur essoniato de ultra mare & citra mare
Graecorum quadraginta dies &d minus & unum flud?
Britton, vi. & unum ebbe. Et postea cüm venerit in regnum,
ch. vi.$39- habebit essonium de malo veniendi, quod continet ad
s minus quindecim dies, & postimodü in suo casu esso-
nium de malo lecti ad breve de recto, & unde quibus-
dam videt (quod non est verum) quod dari debent


1 * de ultra mare? omitted MS. ? « flode," MS. id.
Rawl. C. 160.


Lid


OF ESSOINS. 159


to the person, who has been essoined, afterwards to
transfer himself out of the kingdom that he may obtain
& delay by an essoin for being beyond the sea. There
are several kinds of essoins for being beyond the sea,
and there is the essoin for being beyond the sea of tho
Grecks and for being within the sea of the Greeks, as
on a pilgrimage to St. James, or on account of some neces-
sity, as of serving in the army or of like sort in Germany
or in Spain or in such countries, in which essoins à
delay shall be allowed of at least forty days, and one
one flood and one cbb, for the excusation of the person
essoined by & simple essoin of being beyond the sea.
Dut if mention be made of some remote place on account
of some necessity (as abovesaid), a longer delay will be
allowed aecording to the will and the diseretion of the
justiciaries, according to what they may consider to be
fittiny according to the distance of the localities. In
this case the respite is arbitrary, provided however that
it is a respite of forty days at least as above. And in
the same way let it be done within the kingdom in the
essoins abovesaid according to the distances of the locali-
ties, provided it be for at least fifteen days. Likewise
there is the essoin of being beyond the sea, the essoin
of being beyond the sea of the Greeks, as if any ono has
set forth on & pilgrimage to the Holy Land. And in
which case & distinction must be made whether he has
set out on a simple pilgrimage to the Holy Land, or on
a general passage. But if on a simple pilgrimage there
shall be allowed to him at least à whole year and onc
day, &nd so essoins are allowed for being beyond the sea
and within the sea of the Greeks for forty days at least
and one flood and one ebb. And afterwards when he
has come into the kingdom, he shall have an essoin of -
sickness on the way, which comprises at least fifteen
days, and afterwards in his own case an essoin of bed-
sickness to & writ of right, and hence it seems to some
(which is not true) that there ought to be allowed to a.


f. 338 b.


160 DE ESSONIIS.


essoniato de peregrinatione versus Terram Sanctam
annus & dies, & de ultra mare Grwcoru, & postea
quadraginta dies & une flud! & une ebb. de simplici
cssonio de ultra mare, & sie essoüi de malo veniendi in
regno, & essoiü de malo lecti in suo casu, quia glibet
essoli habet suum terminu p se ex alia parte. Si aute
essoli fia& de ultra mare Graecorum & de generali pas-
sario, tune .remanebit loquela sine die, ubi videlicet
essoii non coprehendit essoniatum infra regnum, & hoc
ppter privilegium cruce signatorü, cüm nor possit de
eorum reversione certus terminus coprehendi ppter
verba decreti domini papse, q donee de ipsorum obitu
vel reditu in regnu certissimé cognoscatur, omnia sua
integra remaneant & quieta consistant. Est igitur ordo
essonierum talis, q ita fieri possunt descendendo a Terra
Sancta usquó in regnum, sed non e contrario: ut si
quis regno essoniatus fuerit de malo veniendi, nullum
de eztero habebit de ultra mare. Et si de ultra mare
simpliciter, de Terra Sancta nullum habebit essonium,
approximare enim possunt regno cüm fuerint implaci-
tati, elongare autem non. Est etiam aliud genus essonii
non de malo veniendi,sed de servitio dui regis, ut si
quis do necesiitate fuerit detentus in servitio domini
regis ppter quod venire non possit &d curiam vocatus,
& aliquando fit hujusmodi essonium de servitio domini
regis in regno, & quandoqué ultra mare. Et de hujus-
modi essonio de servitio domini regis, quandoque pcc-
dit essonium simpliciter de malo veniendi, et quando-


! * flodel," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 161


person who is essoined for a pilgrimage to the Holy
Land a year and a day, and for & pilgrimage beyond the
se& of the Greeks, and afterwards forty days and one
flood and one ebb for à simple essoin for being beyond
the sea, and so an essoin for sickness on the way within
the kingdom, and an essoin of bed-sickness in his own
case, because each essoin has ite own term by itself upon
the other part. Butif the essoin be made for being beyond
the sea of the Greeks and on account of a general
passage, then the trialshall be stayed without a day,
where for instance the essoin does not comprise the
essoinee within the kingdom, and this on account of the
privilege of those who are marked with the cross, since
no certain term can be comprised concerning their return
on account of the words of the decree of the lord the pope,
that until most certain information be received concern-
ing their death or their return into the realm, all their
affairs shall remain entire &nd be quietly stationary.
There is thus an order of essoins of this character, which
fnay be made by descending from the Holy Land down
tothe realm, but not jn the contrary manner; as ifa
person has essoined himself for sickness on his way
within the realm, he shall not have besides an essoin
for being beyond the sea; and if for being beyond the


sea simply, he shall not have an essoin for being in the


Holy Land, for they may come nearer to the realm after
they have been impleaded, but may not enlarge their
distance from it. "There is also another kind of essoin
not for sickness on the way, but for the service of the
lord the king, as if anyone has been from necessity
detained by the service of the lord the king, wherefore
he could not come into court when called, and an essoin
of this kind is made for the service of the lord the king
sometimes in the realm, and sometimes beyond the sea.
AÁnd concerning an essoin of this kind for the service
of the lord the king, sometimes the essoin proceeds
simply concerning sickness in coming, and sometimes
Q, 6366. L


f. 338 b.


TON NOU TE LN


Britton, vi.
ch. viii. $ 1.


162 DE ESSONIIS.


qué subsequitur semel, et quandoqueé sepius secundu
necessitate habitam in servitio pdicto, & valebit essoii,
quoties quis se essoü de servitio domini regis, dum
tamen warrantum habeat ad quemlibet diem breve
domini regis, cüm servitium domini regis nulli debeat
esse damnosum.  Warrantizatur autem essonium mul-
tiplieiter. Quandoqué per breve dii regis, sicut de
servitio suo, ubi non est necesse jurare, cüm dominus
rex hoc testatur per literas suas q sic detentus est in
servitio suo. De servitio autem regis videndum, cui
competat essonium, ad quod distinguendum utrum quis
teneatur de necessitate ad tale servitiü, vel si fuerit
cum aliquo qui tenetur sicut miles, vel serviens de
familia, omnibus istis debet subveniri. Item si quis
non teneatur pdictis rationibus, sed hoc affectaverit ut
esset absens cüm non teneretur, tali non subvenit rex
nisi de voluntate & gratia sua, quia non debet servi-
tium dii regis alicui esse damnosum. Item videndum,
utrum essoniatus de servitio d?i regis venire potuit
commodé vel non. Item ciun venire non posset co-
modé, nee possit mittere, nec breve düi regis in se
contineat veritatein, cüm hsec omnia facere posset, in
hoe sibi caveat cancellarius. Item videndum, utrum
praeventus esset tali sumonitione antequàm profectus
esset in servitio diüi regis, & ita q commodé facere
poterit attornatum vel non, vel praeventus sumonitione
exercitus ante sumonitionem placiti, quód attornare
vel attornatum facere non potuit commodeé, quia prz-
cipit dominus rex q statim visis literis vel cum omni


OF ESSOINS. 163
it follows once, and sometimes more often according
to the necessity which has arisen in the service of
the lord the king, and the essoin will be valid as often
as & person has essoined himself for the service of the
lord the king, provided however that he have as à war-
rant for any day & writ of the lord the king, since the
service of the lord the king should not be damaging to
any one. But an essoin is warranted in many ways.
Sometimes by & writ of the king, as concerning his
service, where it is not necessary to swear, since the
lord the king attests this fact by his letters, that he has
been thus detained in his service. But concerning the
service of the lord the king it is to be seen, who is
entitled to an essoin, in regard to which a distinction
is to be made whether a person is bound of necessity,
or if he has been with some one who is bound as à knight
or a servant of the family, all such persons ought to be
helped. — Likewise if a person is not bound for the
aforesaid reasons, but has affected it, that, he might be
absent when he was not. bound, the king does not help
such & person except of his pleasure and grace, because
the service of the lord the king ought not to be damag-
ing to anyone. Likewise it is to be seen whether & person
essoined on account of the service of the lord the king
could have come conveniently or not. Likewise when
he could not come conveniently, nor could send any one,
and the writ of the king does not contain in itself the
truth, when he could do all these things, let the chan-
cellor take care for himself in this matter. Likewise it
is to be seen whether he has been anticipated by such
a summons before he set. forth on the service of the lord
the king, and so that he could easily have constituted
an attorney or not, or had been served with & summons
to the army before the summons of the plea, so that he
eould not have conveniently attourned or appointed an
attorney, because the lord the king enjoins ' that forth-
* with upon the sight of his letters and with all haste

L 2


164 DE ESSONIIS.


festinatione sub brevi tempore, quód atturnatum facere
non potuit. Item si in servitio regis non ita remotus,
quin sine periculo corporis vel damno domini regis

f.339. venire possit, non arctatur: non enim debet warrantia
de servitio dii regis ei qui placitat esse injuriosa, non
magis quàm ei qui implacitatur damnosa. Sed quo-
niam sunt varie cause excusationum (secundum q
predictü est) & ex diversis causis & variis excusatio-
num varia sequuntur essonia & diversa, ideo varietates
essoniorum  distinguamus per ordinem, & imprimis
dieamus de essoniis de malo veniendi, q quidem mul-
tiplex est.


Car. III.


1. Essoniorum brevis divisio, quia aut est de malo
E veniendi aut de malo lecti: item essoniu de malo
non venien- veniendi ita subdividitur, quia aut est de ultra mare,
spo ^ua. 8ut de citra mare. Item de ultra mare excusatur quis
tionem per per essoi de servitio düi Regis seterni, sicut de Terra
de malo Paneta, habita tamen distinctione utrum peregrinatio
veniendi,eet ad Terram Sanctam simplex sit vel passagiü generale.
dedivisione qc. . . . . .
esson. . P»1 autem simplex, dabitur essoniato terminus unius
orum — &nni & unius diei Si aute generale passagiu, poni

debet loquela sine die quousá essoniatus redierit, &
donee de ipsius obitu vel reditu certissimé cognoscatur
ppter privilegium cruce signatoru, dum tamé talis non
sit sumonitione praeventus, quo casu attornatu faciet


vel remanebit indefensus.


OF FSSOINS. 165


* jn a short time," so that he could not appoint an attor-
ney. Likewise if he has been in the service of the king
not so far remote, but that he could come without bodily
danger to himself and without damage to the lord the
king, he is not thereby kept away, for the warrant con-
cerning the service of the king ought not to be injurious
to him who impleads, any more than it ought to damage
him who is impleaded. But since there are various
causes of excusation (according to what has been said
above), and from the various and divers causes of excusa-
tions various and divers essoins follow, therefore let us
distinguish the varieties of essoins in order, and in the
first place let us speak of the essoin of sickness in coming,
which is of many kinds.


f. 339.


CHAPTER III.


The short division of essoins is because either of sick- — 1.

s . . " . . Of the ex-
ness in coming or of bed-sickness. Likewise an essoin of custos
sickness in coming is divided thus, for it is either for of him who
being beyond the sea or for being within the sea, — Like- Kai
wise for being beyond the sea one is exeused by an essoin $ "ummons

y au

for the service of the Lord the Eternal King, as in the essoin of
Holy Land, a distinction however having been made IE m
whether the pilgrimage to the Holy Land be simple or and of the
a general passage. But if it be simple, there shall be division of
granted to the person essoined the term of one year and

one day. But if it be à general passage, the trial should

be postponed without & day, until the person essoined

has returned, and until it be known for a certainty con-

cerning his death or his return, on account of the privi-

lege of those who are marked with the cross, provided
however such & person be not anticipated by the sum-

mons, in which ease he shall constitute an attorney or


shall remain undefended.


2.
Qualiter
irrotulatur
essonium
de malo
veniendi.


f. 339 b.


166 DE ESSONIIS.


Et sic fiat irrotulatio hujusmodi essoniorü. .À. qui
pfectus est ulira mare in generali passagio versus Ter-
ram Sanetam versus B. de tali placito per talem. $i
autem simplex sit passagium & peregrinatio, tunc sic,
A. qui pfectus est peregré versus Terram Sanctam ante
sumonitionem, vel q nulla fiat mentio de suinonitione,
versus B. de tali placito per talem. Et si simplex sit
peregrinatio & ultra annum & diem moram fecerit
ulteriorem, excusatur ejus absentia (secundü quosdam)
per essonium simplex de ultra mare, & sic habebit
spacium xl. dierum & unius flud & unius ebbe, & si
adhuc moram longiorem protraxerit, habebit simplex
essonium de malo veniendi de citra mare, per quod
habebit ad minus spacium xv. dierum, quod verum est.
Ad minus habebunt essoniati tantum tempus & ex
causa majus tempus, secundum discretionem justiciarii.
Et in hoc sunt dilationes arbitrarie. Et quid si tunc
non venerit? Procedatur ad defaltam contra eum, nisi
forte contingat talem essoniari de morte ad cautelam.
Si quis autem essoniatus fuerit essonio de ultra iare
citra mare Grecorum, quód profectus sit in servitio
Domini Regis eterni in peregrinatione alia quàm ad
Terram Sanctam, sicut apud Sanctum Jacobum vel
alibi, habebit (secundum qq praedictum est) spatium
predicti quod competit de ultra mare, & similiter
simplex essonium de malo veniendi de citra mare, &
hzc omnia habebit ille qui essoniatus est de ultra
mare in servitio Domini Regis sterni. $i autem sumo-
nitione pri:ventus fuerit antequam iter arripuerit ver-
sus Terram Sanctam ,vel ultra mare, non dabitur ei
nisi simplex essonium de malo veniendi, & hie omnia
vera sunt, si debitus ordo essoniorum observetur, quia


OF ESSOINS. 167


And so let there be an enrolment of the essoins in
this manner. À. who has set forth beyond the sea in a
general passage to the Holy Land against B.in sucha


pilgrimage be simple, then thus, À, who has set out on
a pilgrimage towards the Holy Land before the summons,
or that there be no mention of the summons, against B in
such a plea through so-and-so. And if the pilgrimage be
simple and he has prolonged his stay beyond a year and
& day, his absence is excused (according to some) through
a simple essoin of being beyond the sea, and so he shall
have a space of forty days and one flood and one ebb;
and if he has prolonged his stay still further, he shall
have a simple essoin of sickness on the way on this side
of the sea, through which he shall have at least. & space
of fifteen days, which is true. The parties essoined shall
have at least so much time, and upon cause shown inore
time according to the discretion of the justiciaries. And
in this matter the delays are discretional. And what
if then he should not come? . Let proceedings be taken
against him for default, unless by chance it happen that
he has been essoined for death by way of precaution.
But if & person has been essoined with an essoin of
absence beyond the sea within the sea of the Greeks, to
wit, that he has set forth in the service of the Lord
the Eternal King in another pilgrimage than that to
the Holy Land, as to St. James or elsewhere, he shall
have (according to what has been said above) the space
aforesaid, which 1s allowable for absence beyond the sea,
and in like manner a simple essoin of sickness in coming
from within the sea, and all these things the person shall
have, who has been essoined for being beyond the sea
in the service of the Lord the Eternal King. But if he
has been anticipated by à summons before he has began
his journey towards the Holy Land or beyond the sea,
he shall have nothing allowed to him but a simple essoin
for sickness in coming, and all these things are true, if


2.
In what
way an
essoin for


plea through so.and-so. But if the passage and the b ondiis


Sen 1$ en-
rolled.


f. 339 b.


ppm ares o


3.
Essonia de
servitio
domini
regis de
ultra mare


168 DE ESSONIIS.


esto g, cm quis ante sumonitionem profectus sit &
competant ei omnia predicta essonia, & primó se faciat
essonlari de simplici essonio de malo veniendi, non
habebit ulteriüs regressum ad alia essonia de ultra
mare. Et est ratio, quia si se essoniat de malo veni-
endi simpliciter, concedit per tale essonium q fuit in
veniendo à domicilio suo in Anglia, & infirmatus per
viam veniendo versus curiam, q ad curiam venire non
potuit, & unde si postea se essoniare voluerit de ali-
quo przdictorum modorum de ultra mare, non alloca-
bitur ei essonium, quia post tale essonium de malo
veniendi non debet quis se transferre ad partes irans-
marinas, ut per hoc sibi acquirat ulteriores dilationes,
cüm lites potius restringende sunt quàm laxands. Et
eodem modo si quis simpliciter essoniatus fuerit de
ultra mare sine aliqua adjectione, cüm ei competeret
essonium de Terra Sancta, nunquam ei postmodum
allocabitur essonium de Terra Sancta, quia postquàm
taliter se essoniaverit sub certo loco & à propinquo,
&d remotiora se transferre non debet, ut inde sibi
acquirat ulteriores dilatione. Nunquam veró pro ali-
quo essonio de ultra mare remanebit loquela sine die,
nisi quis profectus fuerit in Terram Sanctam pro pas-
sagio generali hoec modo.


Essonia vero de malo veniendi de citra mare sim-
plicia sunt, & quandoque praecedunt hujusmodi essoniis
essonia de servitio domini regis de citra mare, & qus»
non sunt essonia de malo veniendi, quia non est talis


OF ESSOINS. 169


the due order of essoins be observed, for let it be, that
when & person has set out before the summons and he
is entitled to all the aforesaid essoins, and in the first
place he causes himself to be essoined with the simple
essoin of sickness in coming, he shall not have further
any recourse to the other essoins of absence beyond the
sea, And the reason is, because if he essoins himself
simply for sickness in coming, he admits by such an
essoin that he was on his way coming from his residence
in England and was invalided on his way in coming to
the court, so that he could not come to the court, and
hence if he shall have afterwards desired to essoin
himself in any of the aforesaid ways of being beyond the
gea, the essoin shall not be allowed to him, because after
such an essoin of sickness in coming & person ought not
to transfer himself to parts beyond the sea, that he may
thereby obtain for himself further delays, since lawsuits
are rather to be restrained than facilitated. And in
the same way if & person has been simply essoined for
absence beyond the sea without any addition, when he
was entitled to an essoin for being in the Holy Land,
there will never be allowed to him an essoin for absence
in the Holy Land, because after he has in such manner
essoined himself in respect. of a certain place and from
& near place, he ought not to transfer himself to more
remote parts, that he may thereby obtain further delays.
But the trial will never be stayed indefinitely for any
essoin of absence beyond the sea, unless & person has
set out for the Holy Land on & general passaye in this
manner.


But essoins for sickness in coming from some place Bion: for
within the sea are simple, and sometimes this kind of us
essoins are preceded by essoins for the service of tho the king
lord the king within the sca, which are not essoins for i2 074
sickness in coming, because such a person is not invalided
by the way in coming to the court, but he is detained by
the service of the lord the king, so that he cannot conc.


For essoins of this kind may precede and may follow, not


4.
Placita
specialiter
excepta, in
quibus non
jacet es-
sonium de
servitio
regis.


f. 340.


Britton, vi.
ch. viii. S 1.


170 DE ESSONIIS.


in veniendo versus curiam infirmatus per viam, sed
per servitium domini regis detentus, quód venire non
possit. Prscedere enim poterunt hujusmodi essonia &
subsequi non semel sed szpius, quamdiu quis fuerit in
servitio domini regis, dum tamen habet ad manum ad
quemlibet diem warrantum suum, secundum distinctio-
nem prenotatam. Et quando quis se essoniaverit de
servitio domini regis, admitti debet essonium & allo-
cari, & dies dari, cüm de voluntate domini regis non
sit disputandum, & si ad diem datum warrantum non
habuerit, indefensus remanebit.


Sunt placita tamen quasdam specialiter excepta, in
quibus non jacet essonium de servitio domini regis
propter necessitatem, ut in assisa ultime presentatio-
nis: ut de termino S. T. anno regis H. xiv., in fine
rotuli, in com Suff, assisa ultimae preesentationis de
ecclesia de Trillaw. | Ad idem facit quod habetis in
rotulo de banco anno regis H. xxxviii. in comitatu
Kanc. inter S. Cant. archiepiscopum & Robertum de
Saneto Johanne de ecclesia de Eniford, & talem ne-
cessitate inducit lapsus temporis. Item no jacet essoi
de servitio düi regis quadoq ppter favore, sicut in
causa dotis, quia statim post essoü legitima de malo
veniendi nisi veniat sumonitus, pcedatur ad defaltam.
Item ppter favorem minoris setatis quandoq (& secun-
dum quosdam), sicut in assisa mortis antecessoris. Item
quandoq in odium spoliationis, & generaliter in omni-
bus assisis capi poterit per defaltam, cüm tantum ope-
retur absentia summoniti quantum presentia. ltem
non jacet de jure quàvis aliquando de gratia in per-
song ejus, qui non est immediate in servitio cum ipso
rege sed cum alio. Item nec in psona ejus, qui affec-
taverit esse in cjus servitio, cüm ad hoc non teneatur.
Item nec in persona ejus, qui continué & assidue est


! ^ Eyneford," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 171


once but repeatedly, as long as a person may be in the ser-
vice of the lord the king, provided however that he have
at hand his warrantor for & certain day, according to
the distinction previously noted. And when a person
has essoined himself for the service of the lord the king,
his essoin ought to be admitted and allowed, and a day
ought to be given to him, since no dispute is to be per-
mitted concerning the will of the lord the king, and if
upon the day given to him he shall not have had a war-
rantor, he will remain undefended.


There are some pleas specially excepted, in which an ,,. 4 "
essoin does not lie for the service of the lord the king, cially ex-
on aecount of necessity, as in an assise of last presenta- id.
tion, as in Holy Trinity term in the fourteenth year of essoin for
king Henry in the county of Kent, between Stephen, a
archbishop of Canterbury, and Robert of St. John, con- the king
cerning the church of Eniford, and lapse of time causes q^ "^'
such necessity. Likewise an essoin for the service of the
lord the king does not lie sometimes on account of favour,
asin a cause of dower, because immediately after the
legitimate essoins for sickness in coming, unless the party
summoned comes, let proceedings be had to a default.
Likewise on account of favour for minority sometimes  f.340.
(and according to some), as in an assise of mortdancester.
Likewise sometimes in hatred of the spoliation, and
generally in all assises 1t may be taken by default, since
the absence of the party summoned operates as much as
his presence. Likewise it does not lie of right, although
sometimes of grace, in the person of him who is not imme-
diately in service with the king himself, but with another
person. Likewise not in the person of him who has
volunteered to be in his service, when he is not bound
toit. Likewise not in the person of him, who is con-
tinuously and. assiduously in the service of the lord the
king, except at times when they have been in an expedi-
tion. Likewise it does not lie in the person of an
attorney, although he may represent the person of his
lord, because such & person ought to be appointed an


—— ———— p——— —— ——————


172 DE ESSONIIS.


in servitio domini regis, nisi temporibus quibus fue-
rint in expeditione. Ité no jacet in psona attornati,
quamvis personam domini repsentet, quia talis fieri
debet attornatus, qui sequi possit & velit, alioquin
sibi imputari debet qui talem attornatum elegit. Item
non jacet essoii de servitio domini regis in psona ejus
qui pars esse non possit in juditio, sicut nec aliud
essonium, sicut in persona juratorum. ltem quatuor
milituan. ad testificandum visum vel statum alicujus.
De quatuor militibus vero missis in comi cum recordo
ad audiendü judicium suum (cum sint quasi partes in
judicio) credo aliud esse dicendü. Warrantia vero de
servitio domini regis no est concedenda in omnibus,
nec sine causa rationabili, cu si passim & indifferenter
concedatur, possit verti in alterius przjuditium, & non
potest rex aliquid cocedere nisi id q de jure fieri po-
test, & cüm aliquando de voluntate domini regis cóce-
datur, non erit omnino p justice. quassanda, sed volun-
tas regis expressa inde erit expectanda.


- dus Est etià simplex essoniü de malo veniendi q excusat
implaeita- &ad tepus, & q alià habet naturà in multis qm essonia
eed supradicta, s. quis legitimé sumonitus vel etia no legi-
etadunum timé infirmatus fuerit p vià «q venire nO possit, &
Pac" destinaverit aliqu& &d exeusandà suà absenti&, qui sic
averitsede pponat essoniu suü corà justic. si fuerit de modo re-
maleleu. quisitus & dicat: Essonio talem dominü meü, q cum
de malo esset in veniendo versus curia, talis infirmitas accidit
S d per viam, q venire non potest p lucrari nec p per-
dere, & hoc paratus sum docere, sicut curia cosider&-
verit &c, Qui quide si interrogatus dixerit q reliquit
eum domi, essoniü (secundü quosdaà) no allocabitur,
nisi hoc sit de necessitate, q esse poterit, licet quis à
domicilio suo non recedat, ut si alicui in uno placito


&djudieatus sit languor, & in alio summonitus sit ad


OF ESSOINS. 173


attorney, who can and will pursue, otherwise he who
has elected such an attorney must inpute to himself


he consequences. Likewise an essoin for the service of


the lord the king does not lie in the person of him, who
cannot be & party in the judgment, just as no other essoin,
asin the person of the jurors. Likewise of the four
knights to testify the view or state of anyone. PDut
concerning the four knights sent into the county with a
record to hear their judgment (since they are as it were
parties in the judgment) I believe it is to be said other-
wise, But & warrant coneerning the service of the lord
the king is not to be granted in all matters, nor with-
out & reasonable cause, since if it, were to be granted
everywhere and indifferently, it might be turned to the
prejudice of another, and the king cannot grant any-
thing, except what may be done of right, and when any-
thing is granted of the pleasure of the lord the king, it
will not be allowed to be quashed by the justiciaries,
but the express will of the king will have to be awaited.


There is also & simple essoin for sickness in coming ;, is 2s
which excuses for a time, and which has another nature has been
in many respects than the essoins above mentioned, Mun
to wit, if & person lawfully summoned or even not law- parties, and
fully summoned has been invalided on the way, that he RUM
could not, come, and has despatched some one to exeuse him-elf to
his absence, who thus propounds his essoin before the la
justices, if he has been required to state the mode of it, ickness.
and says, I essoin so-and-so my lord, that, when he was other for
coming to the court, such an infirmity fell upon him by Sonn. in
the way, that he cannot come pro lucrari nor pro perdere,
and this I am prepared to show according as the court
has determined, &c. Who indeed, if upon being ques-
tioned he has said that he left him at home, the
essoin (aecording to some) shall not be allowed to him,
unless it be from necessity, which may be, although &
person does not withdraw himself from his residence ;
as if languor be adjudged to anyone in one plea, and in


another he has been summoned to answer and he is


6.
8i duo
placita, de
quibus
unum de
malo lecti,
et aliud de
malo veni-
endi.


f. 340 b.


re
Quis se
possit
essoniare.


174 DE ESSONIIS.


respondendu & copetat ei essoniü de malo veniendi,
si sine licentia surrexerit, amittere poterit & attornatu
facere nó possit. Admittitur igitur essoniu de neces-
Siltate, licet in veniendo no fuerit infirmatus, & etià
magis exeusat laguor qm malu tràsiens. Eode modo
dici poterit si vocatus fuerit in aliquo placito ad war-
rantu,


Ite allocatur quandodq essoniü, q aliàs non esset allo-
cadu, ut si in uno placito laguor fuerit ei adjudicatus,
& in alio placito omnia habuerit essonia, & ad die
sumonitionis suse de facto se essoniaverit cu venire no
possit, nec attornatu fecerit, allocabitur ei essoniü
ppter tale necessitate de cosilio curis, licet no possit
de jure. Eodé modo si vir & uxor implacitati fuerint
& ambo essoniati fuerint de malo veniedi, & unus
illorü postea se essoniaverit de malo lecti, & cii laguor
el sit adjudicatus alius coparuerit, habebit die ex tali
causa, & ad die illu essoü vel diem diffusum quousq
languor pterierit, sed nuqua habebit essonium super
esso in tali necessitate, quia sic cadere posset in
defaltam.


Ite quis se possit essoniare videndu, & quando, & in
quibus placitis, & quado jacet esson, & quado no, &
quid juris, si tenens fecerit attornatos plures vel unü.
Ite si plures sint petentes & unus tenens vel e con-
verso vel plures petentes vel plures tenentes, & aliquis
eorü defalta fecerit. Ite si tenens unus vel plures
warrantü vocet unum vel plures, & aliquis eorum de-
faltà fecerit unus vel plures. Ite qualiter essonia judi-
cantur. Ite qualiter redimütur. Quis se essoniare pos-
sit videndü & quis non? Et sciendü q se essoniare
poterit quilibet cui non phibetur, tam masculus quàm


OF ESSOINS. 175


entitled to an essoin for sickness in coming, if he has
left his bed without permission, he may lose his essoin
and he cannot constitute an attorney. "The essoin is
therefore admitted of necessity although he has not been
invalided in coming, and languor excuses even more
than a passing illness. In the same way it may be said,
if he has been called in any plea to warrant.


Likewise an essoin is sometimes allowed which at other u mn "
times would not be allowed, as if in one plea languor has two pleas,
been adjudged, and in another plea he has every essoin, 9f which
and on the day of his summons he has essoined himself «oined for
in faet when he could not come, and he has not constituted diia
an attorney, there will be allowed to him an essoin on ac- the other
count of such necessity upon the advice of the court, dui iy
although he could not have it of right. In the same coming.
manner if a husband and wife have been impleaded, and
both have been essoined for sickness in coming, and one
of them has afterwards essoined himself for bed-sickness,
and when languor has been adjudged to him the other
has appeared, he will have a day from such a cause, and
on that day an essoin or a day at large until the languor f. 340.
has passed away, but he shall never have an essoin upon
an essoin in such & necessity, because he might thus fall


into & default.


Likewise we must see who may essoin himself, and when, — 7.
and in what pleas, and when the essoin lies, and when not, ^ may
and what is his right, if à tenant has constituted several self.
attorneys or one. Likewise if there be several claimants,
and one tenant, or conversely either several claimants or
several tenants, and one of them has made default. Like-
wise if one or several tenants call one or several war-
rantors, and some of them have made default one or
more. Likewise in what way essoins are judged. Like-
wise in what way they are redeemed. We must see who
ean essoin himself and who not. And it is to be known
that any one may essoin himself who is not prohibited,


176 DE ESSONIIS.


foemina, dum tame plen:z setatis extiterit. Minor aute
se essoniare non poterit de quo constiterit q minor sit,
nee etiam cotra ipsum admittitur essoniu ab aliquo
majore & maximé in assisa, quia cii major psens sit
nihil dieere possit cotra assisam quare remaneat, & si
forte cotingat q minor se essoniaverit cüm tenens fue-
rii in loquela, in quibus infra statem respondere
teneatur, ubi feoffatus fuerit infra statem, & de aliis,
fiat mentio sup essonium in margine q minor sit, &
ad hoc q contra minorem jaeeat essonium & in psonam
minoris, distinguendum erit inter state & state, & ad
hoc quód locü habeat essonium, utrum tenementum sit
feodu militare vel socagiu: secundum q inveniri pote-
rit de itinere M. de P. in eom Suff. anno regis H. x,
& de itinere cjusdé in comitatu Warw. anno regis H.
v. ubi dicitur, q si quis habuerit quatuordecim annos,
talis :etas sufficit quanti ad socagium petedum, & ita
admittitur essonium tam contra ipsum quàm pro eo,
& q essoü non jaeeat in psona minoris contra mino-
rem in causa possessionis, inveniri poterit in itinere!
in comitatu Salop., assisa mortis, si Vincetius. Ratio
autem est quare in persona minoris non jaceat essoü,
quia jurare non potest nec essonium warrantizare.
Item ratio quare in persona majoris non jaceat esso-
nium cotra minorem, quamvis major jurare possit in
causa possessionis, est, quia sl major presens esset in
assisa capienda, nihil dicere posset cotra assisam quare
remaneret. Sed quid si minor & infr& statem conve-
niatur & implacitetur cum uxore sua de jure & here-
ditate uxoris suz, quzeritur an propter statem minoris
debeat placitum remanere? & verum est quód non,


! ** jtinere," after this word there is a blank space in MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOIN&. 177


male as well as female, provided he is of full ave. But

a minor will not be able to essoin himself concerning

whom it is ascertained that he is & niimnor, nor is an

essoin admissable against him on the part of à major and

chiefly in. an assise, because when & major is present. he

can say nothing against the assise why it should be stayed,

and if by chance it should happen that & minor has

essoined hiinself, when he is engaged as a tenant in a trial,

in things in which he may be bound to answer when

under age, where he has been enfeoffed when under age,

and concerning other things, le& mention be made upon

the essoin in the margin that he is à minor, and upon

ilis that an essoin lies against & minor and a;ainst

the person of the minor, à distinetion will have to be

made between age and age, and upon tbis that an es-

soin has place, whether the tenement be a military fee or
& socage, according to what may be found in the Tter of
Martin de Pateshull in the county of Suffolk in the tenth
year of king Henry, and in the Iter of the same in the
county of Warwick in the fifth year of king Henry,
Where it is said, that, if à person has fourteen years, such
an age sufüices as regards claiming & socage tenement,
and so an essoin is admitted as well against himself as
on his behalf ; and that an essoin does not lie in the per-
son of & minor against a minor in & cause of possession
may be found in an iter in the county of Salop, an assise
of mortdancesier, if Vincentius. But the reason, why an
esssoin does not lie in the person of & minor, is because
he cannot swear nor warrant an essoin, Likewise &
reason wherefore an essoin does not lie in the person of
a major against & minor, although & major may swear in
8 cause of possession, 1s, because if & major were present
in the holding of an assise, he could say nothing against
the assise wherefore it should be stayed. But what if
& minor under age he convened and impleaded with his
wife concerning the right and inheritance of his wifo, it
is asked whether on account of the age of the minor the
plea ought to be stayed ? and it is true that it ought not,

Q 6366. M


f. 341.


178 DE ESSONIIS.


licet uxor sine viro respondere non debeat. Et quid
si in curia domini regis implicitati fuerint de uno &
codem tenemento, & eodem die ubl vir minor se esso-
niare non possit nec attornatum facere, videtur quód
amittere debent! in minori curia per defaltam, quod
esset iniquum, cüm nihil sit quod eis debet aut possit
imputari Nullum autem aliud supererit remedium,
nisi quód major curia warrantizet contra processum
minoris curic, & quid si ambe curie pares extiterint ?
Item non jacet essonium in persona disseysitoris, quia
licet. ipse non venerit, ballivus venire poterit. Item
nec in persona ballivi per se, quia dominus venire
poterit per se sine ballivo, cüm uterque illorum at-
tachiatus sit sub disjunetione: & non sufficit si unus
se essoniaverit, nisi uterque fuerit essoniatus, quamvis
sufficiat quód unus eorum veniat. Revera non jacet
essonium in odium spoliationis, quia denegari debet eis
dilatio xv. dierum et suinonitio rationabilis, et ideo
maximé, quia tantum operatur eorum presentia quan-
tum absentia, quia sive venerit sive non, ppter hoc
non remanebit assisa In persona tamen spoliati &
querentis bene jacebit essonium. Item non jacet esso-
nium in psona ejus qui comissus est aliquibus p bal.
livu, ut respódeat? pro eo, sicut corpus pro corpore.
Ito non jacet in psona ejus de quo preceptü est vic.
q faciat eum venire vel q habeat corpus ejus, dum
tame peesserit solennitas attachiamentorü, quamvis sine
essonio. Si autem hic fuerit primus dies attachia-
menti, sequetur essoniu, quia ad quamlibet sumonitio-
nem vel attachiamentum cüm de quocunq, placito de
jure sequi debet essoniü. Sed ubi nullu placitum, ibi


! * debeant," MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ?*' respondeant," MS. id.


OF ESSOINS. 179


although the wife ought not to answer without her hus-
band. And what if they have been imnpleaded in the
court of the lord the king concerning one and the same
tenement and on the same day, when the male minor
could not essoin himself nor make an attorney, it seems
that they ought to lose in the minor court by default,
which would be inequitable, since there is nothing which
could or ought to be imputed to them. But no other
remedy would remain over, except that the major court
shovld warrant against the process of the minor court,
and what if both courts should be equal? Likewise
an essoin does not lie in the person of the disseysor, be-
cause although he has not come, his bailiff mizht come.
Likewise not in the person of the bLailif by himself,
because the lord may come by hinself without his
bailiff, when each of them has been attached disjunctively ;
and it is not sufficient if one has essoined himself, unless
each has been essoined, although it woull be suflicient
that one of them should come. In truth an essoin does
not lie in hatred of the spoliation, because there ought to
be denied to them a delay of fittecn days and. & reason-
able summons, and therefore chiefly because their pre-
sence operates as much as their absence, because whether
they have come or not, the assise shall not be stayed on
thataecount. An essoin however will fitly lie in the per-
son of the party spoiled and complaining. Likewise an
essoin doces not lie in the person of him, who has been
committed by the bailiff to the charge of any persons that
they should answer for him, like as body for body. Like-
wise it does not lie in the person of him concerning whom
it has been enjoined to the viscount, that he should make
him come, or that he should present his body, provided
however the solemnity of an attachment has preceded, al-
though without an essoin.  Dut if this has been the first
day of an attachment, an essoin will follow, because an
essoin ought to follow of right upon every summons or
attachment with every plea whatsoever. But where
M 2


f. 341.


Dritton, vi.
ch. ix.
Fleta, 384,
385.


180 DE ESSONIIS.


nullum essonium. Ut si quis pceperit ballivo suo vel
màadaverit q si&. ad certü diem redditurus de balliva
sua ratociniü, ut si rex pceipiat vieecom vel majori q
ratione reddant et copotum de balliva sua. $i aute
vicecomi vel major summoniti sint ad respondendu quo
warranto vel quo jure ballivam suam tenuerit, aliud
erit: quia ibi erit placitum.. ltem non jacet essoniü
in psong& ejus qui attornatum fecerit, nisi ambo so
forte essoniaverint. Ite non jacet in psona ejus qui se
semel essoniaverit, donec coparuerit. Item non jacet
in psonis appellatorum de forcia nec in appello de pace,
plagis & roberia, ubi illud dicendü est quód domi
remancant, donec illi de facto convineantur. Sed si
non venerint, p essonium exeusantur. Item non jacet
ubi aliqua partium se essoniaverit, ignorans q adversa-
rius suus mortuus sit vel aliquis ex participibus suis.
Ite non jacet ubi placitu ipso jure sit nullum, scilicet
ubi breve non convenit petitioni & hujusmodi. Item
non jacet in aetione personali, postquam quis attachia-
tus fucrit, scilicet. ubi primó se essoniaverit. Item
ubi peeptum est vicecomiti q distringat per terras &
catalla. Item non jacet ubi dies datus est, ut de die
in diem, vel s1 datus fuerit dies sine essonio de con-
sensu partium, quia conventio vincit legem in hoc
casu: ut de termino $. Michaclis anno regni regis
Henrici decimosexto incipiente decimoseptimo, in comi-
tatu Essex, de Ethone filio Wilhelmi, eui non fuit esso-
nium allocatum, quia dies datus fuit sine essonio quam-
vis diffusus ppter consensum, quod aliàs non esset.
Nec ctiam ipse dominus rex potestatem haberet dandi
diem sine essonio, nec alius multo fortiàüs, cüm hoc


OF ESSOINS. 1381


there is no plea, there is no essoin. As if à person shall
have enjoined upon his bailiff or shall have ordered him
that he should render on à certain day an aecount of his
bailivry, as if the king shall have enjoined upon a vis-
count or a mayor that he should return an account and
reckoning of his bailivry. But if the viscount or tho
mayor have been summoned to answer by what warrant
or by what right he holds his bailivry, it will be another
thing, because there a suit will be. Likewise an essoin
does not lie in the person of him who has constituted an
attorney, unless both have by chance essoined themselves.
Likewise it does not lie in the person of him who has
once essoined himself, until he has appeared. | Likewise
i& does not lie in the persons of those who are accused
of forcible assault nor on a charge of breaking the peace,
or of blows and robbery, where it is to be said that they
should remain at home, until they are convicted of tho
fact. But if they have not come thoy are exeused through
an essoin Likewise it does not lie, where any of the
parties has essoined himself, being ignorant that his ad-
versary has died or some of his associates. Likewise it
does not lie, where the plea is null in law, for instance
where the writ does not agree with the petition and
such like. Likewise it does not lie in à personal action,
after that à person has been attached, to wit, where he
has at first essoined himself. Likewise where the vis-
count has been enjoined to distrain upon the lands and
the chattels. Likewise it does not lie where & day has
been given, as from day to day, or if a day has been
given without an essoin by the consent of parties, because
a convention overcomes the law in this case, as in St.
Michael's term in the sixteenth and seventeenth ycars of
the reign of king Henry in the county of Essex, concern-
ing Etho the son of William, to whom an essoin was not
allowed, because a day was given to him without an
essoin, although diffuse, on account of consent, which
otherwise would not have been. Nor would even the
lord the king himself have power to fix a day without
an essoin, and another person still less so since ho can-


f. 341 b.


183 DE ESSONIIS,


facere non possit sine juris injuria sine cosensu par-
tium, quia ex quo hoe voluit, juris beneficium ei non
subvenit cotra voluntatem suam, quia sic invito con-
feretur benefieium &c. Item non jacet, si ille qui se
essoniat visus fuit in curia antequam reddatur esso-
niun. Item non jacet post defaltam postquam terra
capta fuerit in manum domini regis. Item non jacet,
ubi ex virtute mandati non imponitur vocato necessi-
tas veniedi nisi ad voluntate suam, ut si dicatur q
veniat si sibi viderit expedire. Ite non jacet ex vir-
tute màdati,s. ad volütate màdantis. Et dieat in curia
q velit plaeitare. Item non jacet si mandetur vel pci-
piatur vie. vel ballivo, majori, vel pposito ville, vel
burgi, vel civitatis, q veniat redditurus compotum, vel
responsurus de tempore suo, quia ibi nullum placitum
nee aliqua controversia: ltem quis?! Et sciendum q
tain plures tenentes quiim unus, & tune refert utrum
plures tenentes in uno brevi tenuerint in comuni simul
& p indiviso, vel separatim & p diviso, partita inter
cohieredes horeditate. Si autem simul & p indiviso,
quilibet eoru unieum habebit essonium (si voluerit) de
malo veniendi simul & eodem die, vel vicissim. & diver-
sis diebus, secundum q elegerint, donee quilibet eorum
unicum habeat essonium (nisi aliud sit de consuetu-
dine), quia. plura non habebunt antequam simul com-
paruerint, licet illi qui primó fuerint essoniati sepius
copareant, quia semp diem habebunt quousq, omnes


! * Item quis? " onutted. MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 183


not do this without injury to right without the consent
of parties, because from the time he has wished it, the
benefit of the law does not succour him against his will,
because a benefit, &e. would be so conferred upon a per-
son unwilling to receive it. Likewise an essoin does not
lie, if the person who essoins himself has been seen in the
court before his essoin was returned. Likewise it does
not lie after a default after that the land has been seized
into the hand of thelord the king. — Likewise it does not
lie, when in virtue of a mandate the necessity of coming
is not imposed upon the person called except with his
own will, as if it be said that he should come if it
scems to him expedient. Likewise it does not lie in
virtue of &à mandate, that is at the will of the man-
dator. And let him say in court that he wishes to
plead. Likewise it does not lie, if it has been commanded
or enjoined to a viscount or a mayor, or à provost of a
township, or of & borough, or of & city, that he should
come in order to render his account, or in order to answer
concerning his time, because where there is no plea, there
is no controversy. Likewise who may essoin himself?
And it is to be known that as well several tenants as
one tenant, and then it matters whether several tenants
in one writ have held in common together and in an
undivided whole, or separately and in divided parts,
the inheritance having been parted amongst the co-
heirs. But if together and in an undivided whole,
each of them shall have & single essoin, if he pleases,
for sickness in coming together and on the same day,
or in turns and on different days, according as they
shall have chosen, until each of them has had a single
essoin (unless it be otherwise from custom), for they
shall not have more essions until they have appeared
together, although those, who have been essoined the
first, shall have frequently appeared, for they shall
always have a day assigned to them until they have all
appeared together, because an essoin does not follow


f. 341 b.


184 DE ESSONIIS.


simul cóoparuerint, qiia ad omnem apparitionem non


sequitur essonium, q si ita esset, ita fierent dilationes.


innumerabiles. $i autem antequam copareant unus
moriatur ex pluribus tenentibus in communi, cadit
breve, liect. videatur cotrarium, cüm pars sua aeerescat
superstitibus per jus aecrescendi, qui revera die impe-
trationis part6. illam non tenuerunt, nec quantü ad
tenédam parte ilam in communi subfuit causa impe-


trandi. Si auté inter plures partita sit hwreditas, & .


unus tantum de parte sua implacitatus fuerit, unien
habebit essonium antequàm comparuerit si voluerit, &
in persona sua quantum ad ptem illam terminabitur
necotium, nisi ita sit q sie respondeat, q sine partici-
pibus suis. non debeat respodere, & quo casu summo-
nendi sunt participes quód sint ad respondendü cum
eo & sine quibus &c. Et etiam quo casu quilibet ex
participibus (qui dicuntur participes) unicum habebit
essonium ante apparitione, sed non quasi unus hzres
& parüceps, & vicissim, donec constiterit eos esse par-
ticipes. Et cüm psentes sint omnes & dedicere non
possunt cüm sint partielpes, extunc crunt quasi unus
hireg — Divisio enim hzreditatis facit unitate juris esse
plures, & per hoc h:iredes esse plures; defensio enim
omnium revocat unitatem juris, & sic iterum facit
comunes defensio plures personas quasi unum corpus
& unum haeredem ppter juris unionem, quia si tenens
andserit,omnes tenentur contribuere. Si autem plures
sint tenentes in eode brevi, sed tamen diverso jure &
non ut participes, quilibet habebit essonium p se &
non vieissim ut supra, quia hic sunt diversa placita
& ibi tantum unum & non plura. Si aute sint ibi
plures tenentes sieut vir & uxor, licet non teneant in
communi ut supra dietum est, tamen quilibet eorü


! *jp casu vero," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 185


upon each appearance, because 1f it were so, the delays
would thus be innumerable. But if before they appear,
one of several tenants in common dies, the writ falls,
although the contrary would seem, since his share ac-
crues to the survivors by theright of accretion, because
in truth on the day of suing out the writ they did
uot hold that part, nor was there as regards their hold-
ing that part in common any ground for suing out
à writ. Butif the inheritance be parted aimon;'st seve-
ral and one only has been impleaded concerning his
share, he shall have & single essoin before he has ap-
peared, if he chooses, and in his person as far as regards
that part the business wil be terminated, unless it
should happen that he thus answers, that without his
coparceners he ought not to answer, and in which case
the coparceners are to be summoned that they be pre-
sent in order to make answer together with him and
without whom &c. And also in which case each of the
coparceners (who are called coparceners) shall have &
single essoin before his appearance, but not as if one
heir and coparcener, and in turns, until üt has been
established that they are coparceners ; and when they are
all present and cannot gainsay that they are coparceners,
theneeforth they will be as it were one heir. For the
division of the inheritance makes the unity of right to
be in several persons, and accordingly the heirs to be
several in number, for the defence of all recalls the
unity of right, and so the common defence makes apain
several persons to be one body and one heir on account
of the union of right, for if the tenant has lost, all are
bound to contribute. But if there are several tenants
in the same writ, but nevertheless with a diverse right
and not as coparceners, each will have an essoin by him-
self, and not in turns as above, because here there are
divers pleas, and there only one and not several. But if
there be there several tenants, as for instance & husband
and a wife, although they do not hold in common as
above said, nevertheless each of them shall have a single


f£, 343.


186 DE ESSONIIS.


unicum habebit. essonium simul vel vieissim, tum ppter
unitate juris tum ppter unitatem sanguinis, cüm sint.
una caro vir & uxor, q non est in casu supradicto, &
unde si unus illorum defaltam fecerit, ambo puniutur
p defalta unius. In hoe casu vero! supradicto no nisi
ille qui defaltà fecerit, quia in easu supradicto pticipü
jus comune recipit divisione, jus aute viri & uxoris
&! de re uxoria nullà recipit divisionc, & maximà
ciun res sit ppria uxoris & non viri, cüm ad virü non
ptineat nisi tantu custodia ratione uxoris, Plures vero
tenentes (lieet tencat in comuni) quilibet suum habe-
bit essoniatore, quia diverse sunt pson: & diverse
exeusationes.  Cüm aute omnes participes vel tenentes
simul in curia comparuerint, & contingat q tenens
unus vel plures vel unus ex pluribus se essoniaverit,
vel dies datus fuerit partibus si psentes fuerint, sicut
dies amoris sub specie pacis, vel post visum petitum,
vel warrantum vocatü, vel p defectu recognitoru, vel
alia quacunque ratione, poterunt tenentes essonia sua
reincipere sicut primo die sumonitionis. $i aute plu-
res sint tenentes, qui tenuerint pro diviso quilibet
ptem suà, & implacitati fuerint ab uno vel diversis
personis in coinuni, quilibet habebit unieü essonium &
p se, donee omnes simul comparucrint, & non vicissim.
5i autem unus defaltà fecerit, hoe erit sibi soli dam-
nosum & non participibus, si amiserit, & nec versus
participes regressum habebit, sed sibi ipsi negligentiam
ppriam imputare poterit. Cüm autc omnes prwsentes
fuerint, tunc pecdat negotium quasi in communi, quia
nullus sine alio respondebit, sive plures fuerint peten-
tes in communi vel diverso jure, quia bene contingit


! * et ? omitted MB. Rawl. C. 160.


— 0 — "eppure pum


OF ESSOINS. 187


essoin together or in turn, as well on account of the
unity of right as of the unity of blood, since man and
wife are one flesh, which is not in the case above said,
and hence if one of them has made default, both are
punished for the default of one. But in this case above
said only he who has made default is punished, because
in the case abovesaid the common right of the copar-
ceners admits of division, but the right of the husband
and wife respecting an estate of the wife's admits of no
division, and chiefly when the estate is the proper estate of
the wife and not of the husband, since there only belongs
to the husband the custody of the estate in regard of his
wife. Butif the tenants are more than one (althouzh
they hold in common), each shall have his own essoiner,
because the persons are divers and the excuses are divers.
But when all the parceners or tenants shall have ap-
peared together in court, and it happens that one tenant
or several, or one out of several, has essoined himself, or


if & day has been given to the parties, as & day of f. 342.


love under the form of peace, or after & view has
been claimed, or after à warrantor has been called, or on
account of default of recognisors, or for any other rca-
son whatsoever, the tenants may recommence their
essolns, as on the first day of the summons. But if
there be several tenants, who have held each his own
part as divided from the others, and they have been im-
pleaded in common by one or by different persons, each
shall have a single essoin and by himself, until all have
appeared together, and not in turns. But if one has
made default, this shall be damaging to himself alone
and not to his parceners, if he has lost, and he shall
have no recourse against his parceners, but he may im-
pute to himself his own negligenee. But when all shall
have-been present, then let the business proceed &s it
were in common, because none shall answer without tho
other, whether there be more than one claiming in com-
mon, or by a different right, because it well happens, that
some out of several may be able to retain, whether an in-


8.
$1 plures
suut peten-
tes.


188 DE ESSONIIS.


q quidam ex pluribus poterunt retinere, sive ab uno
vel pluribus petatur howreditas, comunis à coh:wredibus
sed divisa, si tamen ab uno jure vel pluribus petatur
in communi, siuille erit judicium tenentium singulorum,
sivc pro, sive contra: nisi sit aliquis qui partem suam
amittat per negligentiam & defaltam, & quo casu ver-
sus partieipes regressum non habebit. Et unde si unus
ex pluribus partieipibus vel pluribus tenentibus in
communi primo die comparuerit, vel pro diviso, sine
partieipibus suis non respodebit nisi velit, hoc tamen
aliegato q partieipes habeat.


Si aute plures sint ibi petctes, sive tenés sit unus
vel plures, observabitur in essonio secundü q obser-
vandü erit in pluribus tenentibus, scilicet. quód omnes
habeant unicum essonium simul & uno die vel vicis-
sim & suecessivé, quia in hoc no licebit reo quod ac-
tori non lieeat,q quidem non contingit nisi ex magna
causa, cüm petens potius desiderare debeat instantiam
litis quàm dilationem. | Et si forte ex pluribus unus
se essoniaverit, ex hoc omnibus aliis proveniet impedi-
mentum & dilatio. Si autem unus ex pluribus defal-
tam fecerit, expectato quarto die, recedet tenens de
brevi quietus ae si omnes defaltam fecissent, & sic erit
unius negligentia omnibus aliis damnosa, quia aut om-
nes sequantur aut nullus. Idem veró dicendum erit de
viro & uxore petentibus, quód absentia viri erit dam-
nos& uxori & e contrarió, sive autem plures sunt qui
teneant sive qui petant, si quidam ex illis pr:esentes
fuerint & quidam se essoniaverint & diem habuerint,
ili qui psentes erunt semper habebunt eundem diem,


OF ESSOINS. 189


heritance be claimed from one or from several, à common
inheritance from coheirs but divided, if however it be
claimed by one right or by several in common, tho
judgment of the individual tenants will be alike, whe-
ther for or against, unless there should be some one
who loses his part through negligence and default, and
in which ease he shall have no recourse against his par-
ceners.  Ánd hence if one out of several pareeners or
out of several tenants in common has appeared on the
first day, or for his divided share, he shall not answer
without his parceners unless he wishes, provided how-
ever it has been alleged that he has parceners,


But if there beseveral persons there claiming, whether — s.
the tenant be one or more, there shall be observed in the ie be
essoin the same as ought to be observed in the case of claimauts.
several tenants, to wit, that all shall have a single essoin
together and on one day, or in turns and successivcly,
because in this there shall not be allowed to the de-
fendant what is not allowed to the plaintiff, which
indeed does not happen except from & great cause, when
the claimant ought rather to desire the urgency of the
suit than the delay of it. And if by chance one out of
several persons shall have essoined himself, there will
result to all the others therefrom an impediment and a
delay. But if one out of several has made default, after
the fourth day has been a waited, let the tenant go away
quit of tho writ as if a&ll had made default, and thus the
negligence of one will be damaging to all the others,
because either all would follow or none. But the same
thing will have to be said concerning a man and his wife
who are plaintiffs, that the absence of the man will be
damaging to the wife and the converse, whether there be
several persons who hold, or who claim, if some of them
have been present and some have essoined themselves
and had a day, those who shall be present shall always
have the same day, lest the continuity of the trial
should be divided, and let there be always added in thc
essoin for caution's sake, who has essoincd bimself to


9.
Si tenens
fecerit at-
tornatum.


f. 342 b.


Dritton, vi.
ch. x. $ 4.


190 DE ESSONIIS.


ne continentia loquele dividatur: & semper addatur in
essonio ad cautelam quis se essoniaverit ad unum diem
vel ad alium, ut scire possunt in fine utrum omnia
essonla sua habuerint vel non. Et hoc vera sint, nisi
consuetudo aliqua se habeat in contrarium, cüm con-
suetudo vicem legis obtineat, longevi enim temporis
usus & consuetudinis non est vilis autoritas.


Esto quód tenens in propria persona su& sequi non
possit, vel licet possit vel pro dubio eventu facit at-
tornatum ad cautelam, quo casu in persona attornati
jacet essonium & non in persona domini, sive petens
qui attornatum fecerit sive tenens: quia attornatus
fere in omnibus personam domini representat. Fere
dico, propter essonium de malo lecti, ut inferius dice-
tur Et quamvis quis attornatum fecerit, in psona
ppria sequi poterit cüm voluerit vel possit. Item q
hoe volütati ejus tribuatur, sed semper durat attorna-
tus quousque domin? eum amoverit, et quamdiu dura-
verit attornatus, nüquam loeum habebit essonium in
persona dni, nisi eüm ambo se essoniaverint ad simili-
tudinem duorum attornatorum vel plurium, quia si
dominus venire non possit per se, possit venire per
attornatum suum, sed non e contrarió, quia non est
in duobus attornandum. Sed quid si dominus cüm
fecerit attornatum & illum non amoverit ad aliqm
diem sine attornato egerit vel respondit,! & diem cepe-
rit in persona sua, quiero quis ad alium diem debeat
se essoniare, dominus vel attornatus ? Videtur q attor-
natus non, quia psens non fuit in judicio nec diem
receperit; dominus non, quia fecit attornatum & illum
non amovit. Tutius est q ambo se essoniaverint, licet
suflieia& quód attornatus se essoniat quantum ad ex-


! * responderit," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 191


one day or to another, that they may know in the end
whether they have had all their essoins or not. And
these things are true, unless there be some custom to
the contrary, since custom plays the part of law, for the
authority of an usage and custom of ancient time is not
slight.


Let it be, that the tenant cannot sue in his own per- — 9.
son, or although he may be able, yet for a doubtful Em
event he eonstitutes an attorney for caution's sake, in constituted
which ease an essoin lies in the person of the attorncy, v
and not in the person of the principal, whether it be the
claimant or the tenant who has constituted an attorney,
because an attorney represents the person of the prin-
cipal almost in all matters. I say almost, on account
of an essoin for bed-sickness, as will be explained below. f. 342 b.
And although a person has constituted an attorney, he
may sue in his own person, when he wishes, or is able.
Likewise that this is allowable to his wish, but the
attorney always continues, until the principal has re-
moved him, and as long as the attorney continues, the
essoin will never have plaee in the person of the prin-
cipal, except when both have essoined themselves after
the likeness of two or more attornoys, for if the prin-
eipal cannot come in person, he may come by his attor-
ney, but not contrariwise, for an attorney cannot be
constituted in the two cases. But what if the principal,
when he has constituted an attorney, and has not re-
moved him, should on a certain day have acted without
his attorney and. should have answered, and have taken
a day in his own person, I ask who ought to essoin
himself on the other day, the principal or the attorney ?

It seems that the attorney should not, because he was
not present at the judgment, nor did he take the day ;
the principal should not, because he has constituted an
attorney, and has not removed him. It is safer that
both should essoin themselves, although it would be
eufficient that the attorney should essoin himself as
regards making an exeuse, since the principal has not


Britton, 2b.


192 DE ESSONIIS.


eusationem, cüm dominus eum non amoverit. Si autem
dominus p se, non valebit quamdiu habuerit attorna-
tum. Et q dicitur de attornato tenentis, dici debet de
attornato petentis. Item esto q petens vel tenens
plures fecerit, attornatos, duos scilicet. vel plures, unus
ex pluribus (si psens fuerit in judicio) agere poterit
pro domino suo vel defendere sine aliis.  Excusare
autem absentiam suam non valeat sine aliis, quin pro-
cedatur ad defaltam aec si omnes defaltam fecissent.
Et est ratio, quia si per unum attornatum non possit
dominus litis comparere, per alium poterit: et sic
oportet quód omnes exeusentur vel nullus. Constituti
enim sunt attornati sub disjunctione, ita quód si unus
non venerit vel venire non possit, quód alius veniat,
nisi uterqué se legitime exeusaverit. Et si unus attor-
natus se essoniaret et alius non, si petens diem reci-
peret versus essoniatorem attornati & recederet, posset
alius attornatus coparere & liti se offerre, & ponere
petentem vel tenentem in defalti, q esset iniquum.
De hae materia inveniri poterit de termino S. Michae-
lis anno regni regis Henrici decimosexto incipiente
decimoseptimo de I. Bathon episcopo & priore Bathoii.
Ad idem facit de termino Hilarii anno ejusdem deci-
mosexto de Johanne de Karum. Item esto q quis
duos fecerit attornatos versus unum querente vcl tenen-
tem vel plures, et uterque se essoniaverit, et tenens
forte vel querens defaltam fecerit: quzritur an unus
essoniator attornati vel ambo expectare debeant quar-
tum diem: Videtur q oportet. quód ambo expectent,
quia non videtur quód sufficiat quód unus expectavo-
rit non magis quàm si unus excusaret. Videtur etiam
q suflicit si unus expectet, quia quoad essonium et


OF ESSOINS. 193


removed him. But if the principal has done so per-
sonally, it shall not avail, as long as he has an attorney.
And what is said of the attorney of the tenant, ought to
be said of the attorney of the claimant. Likewise let
it be that the claimant or the tenant has appointed
several attorneys, two, for instance, or more, one out of
several (if he has been present at the judgment) may
act for his prineipal or defend him without the others.
But he may not avail to excuse his absence without the
others, because proceedings will be had for & default as
if all had made default. And the reason is, because if
the principal in the suit cannot appear by one attorney,
he will be able to appear by another, and so it is ineum-
bent that all should be excused or none. For attorneys
are appointed disjunctively, so that if one has not come
or cannot come, the other may come, unless both have
exeused themselves lawfully. And if one has essoined
himself and the other not, if the claimant should obtain
& day against the essoiner of the attorney and should go
away, the other attorney might appear and offer to con-
test the suit, and put the claimant or the defendant into
default, which would be inequitable. On this subject a
case may be found in St. Michael's term in the sixteenth
and seventeenth years of the reign of king Henry, con-
cerning John bishop of Bath and the prior of Bath. A
case also bears on the same subject in Hilary term in
the sixtcenth year of the same king, concerning John de
Karum. Likewise let it be, that a person has consti-
tuted two attorneys against one claimant or tenant or
several, and both have essoined themselves, and the
tenant by chance or the claimant has made default, it. is
asked whether one essoiner of an attorney or both ought
to &wait the fourth day. It seems that both ought to
await it, because 1t does not seem that it would suflice
for one only to await it any more than for one only to
excuse himself. It seems also that it is sufficient if one
should await the fourth day, for as far as regards an
Q 6366. N


f. 343.


194 DE ESSONIIS.


excusationem utitur vice essonlatoris sive exceusatoris,
& quoad expectandum quartum diem utitur vice quasi
actoris. Et ideo videtur quód sufficiat unus: sed re
ver& quód cüm infra quartum diem posset venire te-
nens nec prius reddi debeat essoniü quàm ante quartu
diem, ideo oportet q uterg, expectet, quia non sufficit
unus, quia si unus tantum se essoniaverit, non valet
nisi unus essoniator diem suum expectaverit. Ite esto
q cim attornatus factus fuerit, ante diem datum in
curia moriatur, & dominus principalis ad die datu se
essoniaverit nulla facta mentione de morte attornati,
& justic. ignorantes de morte attornati judicaverint
essonium nullu, quia talis fecit attornatum, & sie pces-
serit! ad defaltaà, si dominus postea ad diem suum
venerit exeusando absentiam alterius diei & allegado
causas absentie de morte attornati, non excusabitur
quod quidem esse posset si simul cum essonio suo
faciet essoniari attornatum de morte, unde videri po-
terit q non aliter jaceret essonium in persona domini,
cüm attornatu fecerit, nisi tunc demü cüm attornatiü
amoverit, vel eostiterit q mortuus sit. Item esto quód
cüm quis fecerit attornatum, ad primum diem sumo-
nitionis se essoniaverit, & attornatus secundo die vel
tertio, essonium domini nullum erit, quia fecit attor-
natum, & de defalta attornati pcedendum erit ad diem
datum p essoniatorem, si petens se tenuerit ad defal-


tam, quia essonium düi non defendit primum diem
cüm sit nullum &c.


! * processerint," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 195


essoin and an excuse he fills the part of an essoiner or
exeuser, and as far as regards awaiting the fourth day
he fills the part as it were of à plaintiff, and therefore
i& seems that one would suffice, but in truth since the
tenant might come before the fourth day, and the essoin
ought not to be rendered before the fourth day ; there-
fore it is incumbent that both should await the fourth
day, because one does not suffice, because if one only
has essoined himself, it does not avail, unless the one
essoiner has awaited his day. Likewise let it be that,
when an attorney has been constituted, he should die
before the day assigned in court, and the party principal
on the day assigned has essoined himself without any
mention having been made of the death of his attorney,
and the justiciarles being ignorant of the death of the
attorney, have judged the essoin to be null, because the
said party has appointed an attorney, and so have pro-
ceeded to a default, if the principal shall afterwards
come upon his own day, in excusing his absence on the
other day, and in alleging the causes of the absence
from the death of his attorney, he shall not be excused,
which might indeed be, if together with his own essoin
he should eause his attorney to be essoined for death,
whence it may be seen that an essoin in the person of
the principal would not otherwise lie, when he has con-
stituted an attorney, except at such time when he has
removed the attorney, or it has been established that he
is dead. Likewise let it be that, when a person has
constituted an attorney, on the first day of the summons
he has essoined himself, and the attorney on the second
or third day, the essoin of the principal will be null,
because he has constituted an attorney, and upon the
default of the attorney proceedings will be had on the
day assigned through the essoiner, if the claimant has
kept himself to the default, for the essoin of the prin-
cipal does not defend the first day, since it is null, &c.
N 2


f. 343.


196 DE ESSONIIS.


S NL Quidam sumonitione pventus cüm vellet peregre
tus obierit, Pficisei versus Terram Sanctà in passagio generali, duos
dum domi- fecerit! attornatos vel plures, & dum ita esset in pere-
EH DRE ü grinatione moriuntur attornati, ad diem offert se petens
died liti, nec tenens venit nec attornatum habet, queritur
tione. quid juris càun. nihil sit quod possit tenenti imputari?
Consilium curie erit, q attornati essoniarentur de
morte, & sic remanebit loquela sine die usque ad
reditü domini principalis. Casus de Petro de Roches
quondam Winton episcopo, qui profectus fuit in Ter-
ram Sanctam in generali passagio. Et quod dictum est
de tali peregrinatione, observari debet in aliis peregri-
nationibus, sicut apud Sanctum Jacobum vel alibi.
Item esto q quis se vel attormatum suum falsó esso-
niaverit de morte ciun vivus sit, si postea de eo con-
stiterit, quód sit. vivus, resumoncatur loquela in eodem
statu in quo fuit die essonii interpositi per h:ec verba,
ita q loquela illa tune sit ibi in eodem statu quo fuit
quando remansit sine die, eo quód pdictus talis se
essoniaverit falsó de morte, qui adhuc vivit ut dicitur.
Et in quo casu, nisi sanare possit defaltam, amittet p
judicium : ut. de termino S. Michaelis anno regni regis
Henrici decimoquinto incipiente decimosexto in coin


Cant de quodam Osberto.


E 11. Item, esto q quis vocet ad warrantum unum vel
1 tenens . EE . .
plures vo. plures warrantos, post warranti vocationé habebit qui-


n libet unicu essonium  antequà coparuerint, tam vocans
velunum, QUàm warrantus. Si aute plures warranti vocati fue-
rint ab uno, quilibet eoru unicum habebit essonium
eodem modo, primo die simul vel vicissim, seeundum
q superius dicitur, de pluribus tenentibus, scilicet qui-
libet post. alium donee habuerint omnia essonia sua,
scilicet. quilibet unu. Et si plures sint tenentes &


plures warranti eodem modo, et ita q si unus ex plu-


! * fecit," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 197


À certain person overtaken by a summons, when he 19.
was desirous to go abroad towards the Holy Land on & "Ee
general passage, appointed two or more attorneys, and Ms smt
whilst he was so on his pilgrimage, the attorneys died, E aH
on the day assigned the claimant presents himself for m has

. ; 2 )1en on a
the suit, and the tenant neither comes himself nor sends pilgrimage.
an attorney, it is asked, what is the law, since there is
no fault to. be imputed to the tenant ? The resolution
of the court will be that the attorneys are essoined on
account of their death, and so the trial will be stayed
until the return of the principal party in the suit. The
case of Peter de Roches, formerly bishop of Winchester,
who set out. for the Holy Land on a general passage.
And what has been said concerning such & pilgrimage,
ought to be observed in other pilgrimages, as to St.
James and elsewhere. Likewise let it be, that a person
has falsely essoined himself or his attorney on account
of death when he is alive, if it be afterwards established
that he is alive, let the trial be resummoned in the same
state in which it was when it was stayed without a day,
on the ground that so-and-so aforesaid has falsely
essoined himself on account of death, who is still alive,
as it is said. And in which case unless he can cure his
default, he shall lose by the judgment, as in St. Michael's
term in the fifteenth and sixteenth years of the reign of
king Henry, in the county of Kent, concerning & certain


Osbert.


Likewise let it be that some one ealls to warrant one 11.
or more warrantors, after the calling of a warrantor each I3 tenant
shall have & single essoin before they have appeared, as several
well the caller as the warrantor. Dut if several war- m s
rantors have been called by one, each of them shall have one.
& single essoin in the sa me manner on the first day to-
gether or in turns, aecording to what is said above, con-
cerning several tenants, to wit, each after the other until
they have had all their essoins, to wit, each of them one
essoin. And if there be several tenants and several


warrantors in the same manner, and so that if one out


f. 343 b.


198 DE ESSONIIS.


ribus tenentibus vel unus ex pluribus warrantis se
essoniaverit primo die & omnes alii psentes sint, habe-
bunt eundem diem quem habet essoniator & ita de
die in diem poterit se unus essoniare & postea alius,
donee quilibet unicum habuerit essonium. Et eodem
modo eüm omnes semel & simul in judicio coparuerint
& alium diem simul receperint, poterunt reincipere
essonia su& sicut primo die. Si aute quidam se esso-
niaverint & quida psentes fuerint & quidam fecerint
defaltam, de essoniatis & praesentibus fiat ut supra-
dictum est. De absentibus veró fiat ita, scilicet q
petens vel attornatus suus vel essoniator suus si fuerit
essoniatus, expectet quartum diem versus eos, si vocati
infra quartu diem no venerint, & in quarto die si non
venerint, peedatur ad defaltà secundum q inferius dice-
tur de defaltis. Item cüm unus essoniatus fuerit ver-
sus plures, essoniator suus omnes dies recipiet versus
omnes. Si autem plures versus unum, quilibet recipiet
die suü, nec poterit unus alterius diem recipere, non
magis quà duos participes essoniare. Ite dicitur ge-
neraliter, q s) quis se essoniaverit versus unum, esso-
niat se versus omnes, & tunc refert utrum plures sint
petentes & unus tenens unicam rem. Si aute plures
petentes in comuni, sufficit si dicat essoniator tenentes!
q essoniat dominu suum versus tale & omnes alios
nominatos in brevi sine expressione nominum aliorum.
Si autem sic dicat, essonio dominum meum versus
talem de tali placito sine mentione aliqua de aliis in
brevi nominatis, videtur (& verum est) q hoc sufficere
debeat, quia p hoc q dominus essoniatur, nihil aliud


! * tenentis," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 199


of several tenants or one out of several warrantors has
essoined himself on the first day, and all the others are
present, they shall have the same day which the essoiner
has, and so from day to day one may essoin himself and
afterwards another, until each has had & single essoin.
And in the same manner when all have appeared once
and together in the court, and have together received an-
other day, they will be able to recommence their essoins
as on the first day. But if some have essoined them-
selves and some have been present, and some have
made default, let it be done with those who have
been essoined and with those who are present as above
said. But concerning the absent, let it be done thus:
to wit, that the claimant or his attorney, or his essoiner
if he has been essoined, should await the fourth day in
regard to them, if having been called they have not
come within the fourth day, and on the fourth day if they
have not come, let proceedings be had for a default ac-
cording to what will be said below concerning defaults.
Likewise when one has been essoined in reference to
several, his essoiner shall receive all the days with
regard to all. But if several have been essoined in refer-
ence to one, each shall receive his own day, nor shall
one be able to receive the day of another, no more than
to essoin two parceners. Likewise it is said generally,
that if any one has essoined himself with reference to one
person, he essoins himself with reference to all, and then it
is of importance whether there are several persons claim-
ing and only one holding à single estate. But if there are
several persons claiming in common, it is sufficient if the
essoiner of the tenant says, that he essoins his principal
with reference to so-and-so and all the others named in
the writ without expressing the other names. But if
he thus says, I essoin my principal with reference to
so-and-so in respect of such & plea without mention of
any others named in the writ, it seems (and it is true),
that this ought to suflice, because by the fact that the
principal party is essoined, nothing else is pretended,


f. 343 b.


200 DE ESSONIIS.

ptenditur, nisi q dominus suus per infortunium vel per
morbum aliquem supervenientem impedimentum habeat,
quód ad diem sibi datum venire non possit, & ita cüm
in curia semel excusetur absentia ejus per essoniato-
rem suum versus unum & probetur excusatio sua, suf-
ficit versus omnes, quia si alii procedere vellent ad
defaltam cotra essoniatum, hoc facere non possent sine
participe qui exprimitur, & ideo nulla defalta. 5i
&utem ? cotrarió unus vel plures petentes contra plures
tenentes, tunc refert utrum tenentes sint in communi
ut participes, vel tenentes diversa tenementa per di-
versa jura. Si autem diversa teneant tenementa & per
diversa jura, tunc oportet quód petens (si unus sit)
essoniat se versus omnes cum expressione personarum,
quia sunt ibi divers& jura & diversa placita, licet
plures tenentes in uno brevi coprehendantur. Et si
plures sint petentes in comuni & unus tenens sive
plures, oportet quód omnes petentes se excusent aut
sequantur & veniant, sed defalta unius non erit om-
nibus aliis damnosa, nisi tantum ill qui defaltam
fecit de parte sua. Si &utem tenetes teneant in co-
muni vel pro indiviso! dum tamen ut participes, si
petens unus vel plures se essoniaverint, dum tamen
omnes, sufficit si essoniati sint cotra unum & alios in
brevi nominatos, vel tàátum cótra unum sine mentione
de aliis, ratione supradicta, quia cüm petentes excu-
sati fuerint versus unum tenentem ex pluribus in
comuni, alii sine eo pcedere non poterunt ad defal-
tam. Item si cui acciderit aliqua infirmitas in itinere
veniendi & q impotens sit veniendi, eodem modo im-
potens esse poterit mittendi plures personas &d curiam
ad excusandam suam absentiam, & ideo suflicit si uni-


! * pro diviso," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS, 201


except that his principal through misfortune or through
some supervening illness meets with an impediünent, so
that he cannot come on the day assizned to hin, and. so
when in the court his absence is once excused by his
essoiner with reference to one person, and his excuse is
approved, it suffices with reference to all, because if. the
others wished to proceed to a default against the party
essoined, this they could not do without their co-parce-
ner who has been expressly mentioned, and therefore
there is no default. But if on the contrary there be one
or several claimants axainst several tenants, then it is of
importance whether they are tenants in coininon as. par-
ceners, or persons holding divers tenements on ditferent
grounds of right. But if they hold divers tenements and
on different grounds of right, then it is incumbent. that
the claimant, if he be single, should essoin himself in
reference to them all with an expression of their persons,
because there are there different rights and different
pleas, although several tenants are comprehended in one
writ. And if there are several claimants in common
and one tenant or more, it is incumbent that all the
claimants should excuse themselves or should sue and
come, but the default of one shall not be hurtful to
them all, except only to him who has made default on
his own part. PDut if the tenants hold in common or
in entirety, provided they hold as parceners, if one
claimant or more have essoined themselves, provided
they are all, it sufliees if they have been essoined against
one and the others named in the writ, or only acainst
one without mention of the others, for the reason above-
mentioned, because when the elaimants have been ex-
eused with reference to one tenant out of several in
common, the others eannot proceed without him to a
default. Likewise if there has happened to any one
any illness on the way in coming, and so that he be
unable to come, in the same manner he may be unable
to send several persons to the court to excuse his absence,
and accordingly it suffiees if he sends a& single person


f. 344.


12.
Quis post
duelli
vadia-
tionem se
possit.
es soniare.


202 DE ESSONIIS.


cam psonam mittat cotra plures qui sunt quasi unica
psona, ppter unicü jus q habent. Item essonium no
fit parti sed curie (ut videtur), quia in absentia adver-
sarii poterit quis se essoniare sicut in psentia. Et
eodem modo in absentia adversarii poterit fieri war-
rantizatio essonii & sacramentü, & unde videtur q
sufficit si justic. costiterit de impotetia, etià sine pte
altera. Et ideo si impotens sit veniendi vel mittendi
versus unum, impotens esse poterit mittendi versus
plures, & non refert nisi quód justiciarüis costiterit de


impotentia. Sed cotra si plures sint petentes, oportet


q tenens, unus vel plures, se essoniet versus quemlibet
nominatim ita q distinguetur, quid, quis, cotra quem
& de quo. placito, secundum q videri poterit in attor-
nato faciendo, quis attornaverit, & quem, & versus
quem, & de quo placito, que omnia si non expriman-
tur non valebit attornatio. Eodem modo (ut videtur)
observari deberet de essonio, quia potest quis tenens
esse essoniátus versus unum ex pluribus & in defalta
versus alium, sed observandum erit ut supra, secundum
q ibi fuerit unum placitum vel plura. |


Item quis? Et sciendum q« essoniari poterit tam
campio quàm dominus principalis post duelli vadiatio-
nem simul & uno & eodem die vel vicissim: ut «e


. termino S. Michaelis anno regni regis Henrici nono


incipiente decimo, in comitatu Cant, de quodam recordo
de abbate de Haynshà.


OF ESSOINS. 208


against several who are as it were & single person on
account of the single right, which they have. Likewise
the essoin is not made to the party but to the court (as
i& seems), because & person may essoin himself in the
absence of his adversary just as in his presence. And
in the same manner in the absence of his adversary the
warranting of the essoin and the oath may be made,
and hence it seems that it is sufficient if it is made out
to the satisfaction of the justiciaries concerning the
inability of the party to come, even without the pre-
sence of the other party. ^ And accordingly if he be
unable to come or to send with reference to one, he may
be unable to send with reference to many, and it is not
of importance except that the justieiaries should be  f.344.
satisfied as to his inability. But on the contrary if the
claimants &re several in number, it is incumbent that
the tenant, one or several, should essoin himself with
reference to each by name, so that it can be distinguished
as to what, who, against whom and concerning what plea,
aecording to what may be seen in making an attorney,
who has attorned, and whom, and in regard to whom,
and concerning what plea, which matters, if they be
not all expressed, the attornment will not be valid. In
the same manner (as it seems) it should be observed con-
cerning an essoin, because a tenant may be essoined in
regard to one out of several, and may be in default in .
regard to another, but it should be observed as above,
according as there may be one suit or several.


Likewise who? And it is to be known that as well 12.
the champion as the principal party after the wager of E:
battle may be essoined together and on one and the self after
same day, or in turns, as in St. Michael's term in the ee E
ninth and tenth years of the reign of king Henry in
the county of Kent, in a certain record concerning the
abbot of Haynsham.


204 DE ESSONIIS.


13. Item quando? Et sciendum q primo die litis, quia
Ri non sufficit quód in crastino, scilicet, secundo die, ter-
essoniari. tjo, vel quarto, licet expectari debeat ille qui sumoni-

tus est usq ad quartum diem, ut infra veniat vel mit-
tat nuntium &d exeusandum suam absentiam, licet suus
essoniator diem non recipiat si forte essonium locum
non habeat, secundü q inferius dicetur de defaltis. Si
aute essonium competat sumonito & faciat se essoniari
secundo die vel tertio, allocabitur essonium, & dabitur
dies essoniato per essoniatorem suum, & &d diem illum
allocabitur peteti defalta si se tenere voluerit ad de-
faltam, & quo casu, si tenens se excusare non possit ad
diem illum, amittere poterit seysina m.


M. Et ubi? Et sciendum q in judicio corà suo judice
Rbdin & non alio, licet corà eo qui habeat jurisdictionem cum
alis justiclariis, cüm suus non habet jurisdictionem nec
cohertionem. Si auté corà alio per errorem se fecerit
essoniari, adhuc valebit essonium, de gratia tamen, q
salvabitur defalta quousq judicium. reddatur de defalta,

ulterius autem vix poterit excusari.


15. Item quotiens? Et sciendum q ad quamlibet appa-
SDN ritionem in judicio, secundum quod sumonitus tenuerit
essoniar. per se vel in coimuni, postquam diem in judicio rece-

pit, post visum petitum, warrátum vocatum, et post
diem datum sub spe pacis vel alio modo. . Et genera-
liter in omni casu in principio litis, ad quamlibet
suimonitionem ubi cotroversia sive placitum fuerit inter
partes, & ubi fuerit judicium, & qui judicet inter par-


OF ESSOINS. 205


Likewise when ? And it is to be known that on the — 13.
first day of the suit, because it is not sufficient that it n
should be on the morrow, to wit, on the second, third, may he
or fourth day, although he who has been summoned **?^*.
ought to await until the fourth day, that within that
time he may come or send & messenger to excuse his
absence, although his essoiner may not receive & day, if
by chance his essoin should have no place, according to
what will be said below concerning defaults. But if
the party summoned is entitled to an essoin, and he
causes himself to be essoined on the second or third day,
the essoin shall be allowed, and & day shall be granted
to the party essoined through his essoiner, and on that
day there shall be allowed to the claimant & default,
if he wishes to keep himself to à default, and in which
case 1f the tenant shall not be able to exeuse himself, he
may lose his seysine.

And where? And it is to be known that in the. !4
judgment-hall and before his own judge and not another can v« *
judge, although before him who has jurisdietion with soined.
other justiciaries, when his own judge has not jurisdic-
tion nor coercion. But if he has through error caused
himself to be essoined before another judge, the essoin
will still be valid, by grace however, that the default
shall be saved until judgment be rendered concerning
the default, but further he can hardly be excuscd.


Likewise how often? And it is to be known that 4;
at each appearance in the judgment-hall, according as How often
having been summoned he has presented himself alone e
or in common, after he has received a day in judgment,
after & view has been claimed and & warrantor called,
and after à day has been granted under the hope of
peace or in some other way. And generally in every
case in the beginning of a suit, at each summons, when
there has been & controversy or & plea between the
parties, and where there has been & judgment, and a


206 DE ESSONIIS.


tes, & sive ab initio przcipiatur quód vicecomes habeat
corpus sine solennitate attachiamentorum, vel quód
venire faciat, vel distringat per terras & catalla, alio-
quin injuriosum esset vocato in jus juris beneficiu de-
negare. Si &utem nullum sit ibi placitum nec judi-
cium, sed sit aliquis qui mandet aliquod ut ballivum
suum, aliud erit dicendum ut supra.


f. 344 b. Car. IV.


1. | ltem exeusatur alicujus absentia p infirmitate de
Deessnl5 veseantisa de qua pvenit essonium q dicitur essonium
let... de malo lecti, & q semper sequitur immediate (nullo

alio essonio interjecto) essoniü de malo veniendi. Item
nec de servitio diüi regis nec de alio. Et tunc locu
habet ecüm quis infirmitate per malu veniendi ita fue-
rit impeditus & detentus q venire non possit, & se
excusaverit per illud essoniü, & ab itinere revertatur
in domiciliüu suum, & vertatur malum transiens in lan-
guore, quo casu videndü erit utrum talis infirmitas sit
malum trásiens vel languor. Si aute malü transiens,
post visum habebit essoniatus alium diem per spacium
xv. dieru ad minus. Si aute languor, tunc dabitur ei
unus annus & unus dies, & ita q annus sit integer
seeundum q fit ex momentis, horis, diebus, scilicet ex
365 diebus & sex horis, sive annus sit bissextilis sive
alius, nec major erit annus bissextilis aliquo anno pce-
dente, die (ppter diem excrescetem), nec hora, nec


OF ESSOINS. 907


person to judge between the parties, and whether there
has been & precept from the commencement that the
viscount present his body without the solemnity of
attachments, or that he cause him to come, or distrain
him by his lands or chattels, otherwise it would be &
wrong to the party called into court to deny him the
benefit of his right. But if there be no plea nor judg-
ment there, but there is some one who sends some one
as his bailiff, something else will have to be said as
above.


CHAPTER IV. f. 344 b.


Likewise the absence of any one is excused on account 1..
of infirmity keeping him at home, concerning which Oe roPr
there is forthcoming an essoin, which is called infirmity ness.
from bed-sickness, and which always follows imme-
diately (without any other essoin being interposed) an
essoin from sickness on the way. Likewise neither
concerning the service of the king, nor concerning any
other service. And it has then place, when & person
has been so hindered and detained by infirmity from
sickness on the way that he could not come and he has
exeused himself by an essoin for that cause, and he
turns back from his journey to his own home, and a
transient illness turns into a tedious disease, in which
case it is to be seen whether the said infirmity is a
transient illness or a tedious disease. But if it be &
transient illness, the person essoined shall have after
a view another day through a space of fifteen days at
least. Butif it be & tedious disease, then there shall
be allowed him a year and à day, and so that it be an
entire year according as the year is made up of moments,
hours, days, to wit, of 365 days and six hours, whether
it be Leap-year or another year, nor shall Leap-year be
longer than any other preceding year by a day (on ac-
count of the exerescent day), nor by an hour, nor by a


f. 355.


908 . DE ESSONII.


momento, secundum q inferius dicetur plenius de anno
et die, et talis infirmitas infra annum pprieé dicitur
languor, si autem ultra annu duraverit, talis infirmitas
diei poterit morbus sonticus, scilicet morbus incurabilis.
Ité essoniu de malo lecti non sequitur omne essoniü
de malo veniendi, quia sunt qusda brevia in quibus
non sequitur nisi tantü essoniü de malo veniedi sim-
plieiter et per se, & nunquam essonium de malo lecti,
nisi aliquando per aecidés sicut per narrationem, ubi
hreve de ingressu vertitur por narratione ad breve
de recto. Et quo casu, in principio litis non statim
sequitur essonium de malo lecti essonium de malo
veniendi, nisi tunc demü càm mutata fuerit natura
brevis de ingressu in naturà brevis de recto, & eode
modo non statim sequitur essonium de malo lecti
essonium de malo veniendi, nisi tüc demü cüm mutata
fuerit natura brevis de communia pasture (facta spe-
cificatione de qualitate & quatitate) in breve de recto
p narratione, sicut in brevi de quo jure & hujusmodi.
Ite sequitur essonium de malo lecti essoniü de malo
veniendi, & desinit sequi in fine p narratione, ut si
quis primó agat p breve de recto, habebit utrüdq es-
soniü in principio, sed cüm bfe de recto versum fue-
rii in bre de ingressu p narrationem, & tenens se
posuerit in juratam, tunc desinit essoniü de malo lecti
sequi essoniü de malo veniendi, cüm loquela per nar-
ratione incipiat esse alterius natur. Et eode modo
in brevi de recto ubi hereditas descedit à comuni sti-
pite usq ad cojunctas personas, scilicet duos fratres
vel plures vel eoru hzredes in infinitu descedentes.
In principio litis sequitur unum essonium aliud, ut


OF ESSOINS. 909


moment according to what will be said below more
fully concerning a year and & day, and such an infirnity
within & year is properly called a tedious disease, but if
it should last more than & year, such an infirmity may
be ealled morbus sonticus, to wit, an incurable disease.
Likewise an essoin on account of bed-sickness does not
follow every essoin on account of sickness by the way,
because there are some writes, in which there does not
follow any essoin except only an essoin of sickness by
the way simply and by itself, and never an essoin of
bed-sickness, unless sometimes by accident in counting,
when a writ of entry is by counting turned into a writ
of right. And in which case, an essoin of bed-sickness
does not immediately follow at the commencement of
the suit an essoin of sickness by the way, except then
indeed when the nature of à writ of entry is changed
into the nature of & writ of right, and in the same
manner an essoin of bed-sickness does not immediately
follow an essoin of sickness by the way, except then
indeed when the nature of à writ on common of pasture
(upon & specification having been made of the quality
and the quantity) has been changed into & writ of right
by the counting, as in & writ of * quo jure" and such
like. Likewise an essoin of bed-sickness follows an
essoln of sickness by the way, and ceases to follow it at
the end through the counting, as if & person first. pro-
ceeds by à writ of right, he will have each essoin at the
commencement, but when the writ of right has been
turned into & writ of entry by the counting, and the
tenant has put himself upon & jury, then an essoin of
bed-sickness ceases to follow an essoin of sickness by
the way, since the argument on account of the counting
begins to be of another nature. And in the same
manner in a writ of right when tbe inheritance descends
from & common stock, down to privies in blood, to wit,
two brothers or more or their heirs descending in an
endless degree. Át the commencement of the suit the
Q, 63606. O


f. 345.


Britton, vi.
ch. ix. 8 1.


210 .DE ESSONIIS.


pdietü est, sed in fine sequi desinit, càüm judicatu fue-
rit inde duellum, nec magna assisa jacuerit inter tales
psonas à comuni stipite venientes. Ite est & aliud bre
de recto ubi uni! essoniü aliud non sequitur, nec in
principio brevis, nec in medio, nec in fine, nec aliquo
tepore, quale est breve de recto de dote, quia nunquam
erit ibi duelum nec magna assisa Et generaliter
verum est q ubicunque sequi possit magna assisa &
duellü, & quadiu & dum sequi possit, locum habebit
essoniun de malo lecti, & ubicunque non sequitur
duellü nec magna assisa, vel 8i sequi inceperint & se-
qui desierint, nunqua locu habebit essonium de malo
lecti. Item videndum, quis se essoniare possit de malo
lecti post essoniü de malo veniendi? et sciendum q
tam masculus quàin foemina, plures vel unus. Item
warrantus cüm adhuc non warrantizaverit, dum tamen
languor non precesserit, ut inferius dicetur. Item tam
minor quàm major, dum tamen minor infra statem
teneatur de feoffamento ei facto ad breve de recto ei
respondere, quia in hoe casu omnia habebit remedia
qui haberet aliquis major in causa proprietatis, licet
per se respondere non possit vel jurare, potest tamen
p custodem & curatorem, qui (si opus fuerit) jurare
poterunt ad warrantizadum essonium in animam ipsius
minoris, si implacitatus fuerit de aliquo & essoniatus
de malo veniendi, de quo antecessor suus non obiit
seysitus ut de feodo, & ubi presentia sua fuit neces-
sarià q ad jus respondeat. In quo casu, semper fiat
mentio super essonio de minori state, ita scilicet, &
sciendu q talis est infra :wtatem. Si autem petat mi-
nor in causa possessionis seysinam antecessoris sui per


d OF ESSOINS. 211


one essoin follows the other as aforesaid, but at the end
ib ceases to follow, when a duel has been adjudged
thereon, and a great assise will not lie between such
persons coming from & common stock. Likewise there
is also another writ of right, where the one essoin does
not follow the other, neither at the coramencement of
the writ, nor in the middle, nor in the end, nor at any
time, such as is & writ of dower, because there will
never be there à duel nor a great assise. Ànd generally
itistrue that, wherever a great assise and a duel can fol-
low, there an essoin of bed-sickness will have place, and
wherever neither a duel nor a great assise follows, or if
they have begun to follow they have also ceased to fol-
low, an essoin of bed-sickness will neyer have place.
Likewise we must see, who may essoin himself for bed-
sickness after an essoin for sickness on the way ? and it
is to be known that a male person as well as a female
may do so, several or one. Likewise & warrantor, when
he has not as yet warranted, provided however a tedious
disease has not preceded, as will be explained below.
Likewise as well a minor as a major, provided however
that the minor under age is bound to answer to & writ
of right concerning a feoffiment made to him, because
in this case he will have all the remedies, which any
major would have in a cause of property, although he
cannot answer nor swear by himself, he can nevertheless
do so by à guardian or a curator, who (if it be neces-
sary) can swear to warrant the essoin upon the soul of
the minor, if he be impleaded concerning anything,
and be essoined for sickness on the way, whereof his
ancestor did not die seysed as of fee, and where his
presence was necessary, that he should answer to the
right. In which case let mention always be made upon
the essoin concerning the minority, to wit, in this man-
ner, ^and it is to be known that so-and-so is under
* age." But if & minor in & cause of succession claims
the seysine of his ancestor through an assise, the minor
o 2


f. 345.


2.
Quando
fieri debet
essonium
de mulo
lecti et
qualiter.


3.
Quotiens
fieri debet
essonium
de malo
lecti,
quando et
qualiter.


219 DE ESSONIIS.


assisam, nullum habebit essonium minor petens nec
tenens contra eum, cüm tantum operetur ejus absentia
quantü psentia, ciun nihil dicere possit, quare assisa
remaneat quin statim capiatur.


Item quando fieri debeat essonium de malo lecti &
qualiter ? & sciendum q tertio die inclusivo, scilicet
ante diem datum per essoniatorem in essonio de malo
veniendi, & per duos qui non dicuntur essoniatores
sed nuntii, eo q mittuntur vel nuntiant ad exeusatio-
nem, & non essoniant, quia diem non recipiunt nec
aíflidant de habendo warranto suo ad aliquam die ad
pbandam exeusationem, ut supra de essonio de malo
veniendi, & sie mitti possit quis ad essoniandum &
pbandum, vel ad essoniandü & non probadum propter
dubium eventum essonii Item est nuntius, qui ali-
quando mittitur vel licet non mittatur verba faciat! p
absente, quasi pro amico, & nütiat tale impedimentum
intervenisse q sumonitus venire non possit, et talis
pprié dicitur nuntius et no essoniator, sicut alii pdicti,
et audiri debet sicut nuntians usj ad quartü die et
quandodj ulterius usque ad judiciu de defalta.


Ite quotiens, et sciendum q in omni tempore post
essonium de malo veniendi, donec adjudicatus fuerit ei
languor & habuerit languore, scilicet annü & diem,
quia post languoré adjudicatu, aliquádo ex causa de
volütate petetis poterit dari essoniato licétia surgédi,
ut statim respódeat, q quide sine voluntate petentis
nulla ratione est eocedendü ante a&nnü & dió, & cüm
ita respoderit & die habuerit, poterit post essoniu de


! * facit" MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 213


plaintiff shall have no essoin nor the tenant against him,
since his absence operates in the same way as his pre-
sence, since he can say mothing, wherefore the assise
should be stayed from being held at once.


Likewise when ought an essoin of bed-sickness to be — 3.
made, and in what manner ? and it 1s to be known that it hid. ze
should be inade on the third day inclusive, that is before ped-sick-
the day given through the essoiner in an essoin of sickness mide
by the way, and through two persons who arenot called andin —
essoiners but messengers on the ground that they are Mari TON
sent or bring & message to make excuse, and they do not
essoin, because they do not receive & day nor do they
pledge themselves to produce their warrantor on any
day to prove the excuse, as above concerning an essoin
of sickness on the way, and so & person inay be sent to
essoin and to prove, or to essoin and not to prove, on
aecount of the doubtful event of the essoin. Likewise
there is à messenger, who is sometimes sent, or, although
he be not sent, says words on behalf of the absent per-
son, as if on behalf of a friend, and announces that
such an impediment has intervened, so that the person
suminoned cannot come, and such a person is properly
called & messenger and not an essoiner, as the others
aforesaid, and he ought to be heard as & messenger
up to the fourth day, and sometimes further up to the
judgment concerning the default.


Likewise how often ? and it is to be known, that atany s.
time after an essoin of sickness by the way, until there How ofien
has been adjudged to him a tedious disease, and he has of bed-
had his tedious disease, to wit, & year and & day, because INE Bs
after a tedious disease has been adjudged, sometimes upon made, when
cause shown with the consent of the plaintiff licence of etn
rising may be granted to the person essoined, that he manner.
may forthwith answer, which indeed without the con-
sent of the plaintiff is not on any account to be allowed


before à year and à day, and when he has so answered


f. 345 b.


214 DE ESSONIIS.

malo veniendi essoniare se de malo lecti, quia no suf-
fieit q languor sit adjudieatus, nisi sit adimpletus. Ite
sj plures fuerint ptieipes qui tenuerint in comuni, pos-
sunt omnes se essoniare si voluerint simul et uno die.
Et si in essonio de malo lecti fuerit omnibus simul
laguor adjudicatus, erit languor omniu quasi unus là-
guor Gi aute cu plures essoniati fuerint de malo
lecti, cü visus fuerit post essoniü, poterit quibusdà ad-
judicari languor et quibusda malum tràásiens, et omnes
qui languidi sunt ad die quo .testificabitur languor,
habebunt annü & diem apud Turrim Londo! et alii
no eundem diem, sed diem convenientem, cü sine aliis
respondere non tenentur. Et cüm semel uni vel plu-
ribus fuerit languor adjudicatus & in judicio testatus,
nullus eorum de cetero habebit essonium de malo
lecti, nisi (ut. predictum est) si detur licentia surgendi,
sed semper essonium* habebunt de malo lecti, donec
unus vel plures, vel omnes simul habuerint languorem.
Item poterit unus ex pluribus uno & eodem die sc
essoniare de malo lecti, & particeps suus unus vel
plures de malo veniendi, & si illi qui de malo veni-
endi se essoniaverint, de malo lecti ad alium diem se
essoniare non poterunt, donee constiterit de primo es-
sonio utrum habuerit malum transiens vel languore,
quia si languorem habuerit & de hoc costiterit, & alius
similiter se essoniaverit de malo lecti ad alium diem &
haberet languorem, ita possunt esse in uno placito
simul & semel duo languores, q esse non debet. ]Igi-
tur cim unus ex pluribus essoniatus fuerit de malo


-


-


! * London" omitted, MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 215


and has obtained a day, he may after an essoin of sick-
ness by the way essoin himself for bed-sickness, for it. is
not sufficient that an essoin for & tedious disease should
be adjudged, unless it should be completed. Likewise
if there be several who hold in common, they may all
essoin themselves, if they wish, together and on one day.
And if in an essoin of bed-sickness there has been ad-
judged to all together an essoin for & tedious disease, the
tedious disease of all shall be as it were one tedious
disease. But when there are several, who have been
essoined for bed-sickness, when there has been a view
taken of them after the essoin, to some indeed an essoin for
à tedious disease may be adjudged, and to some an essoin
for a transient. malady, and all who are languishing on
the day on which evidence of & tedious malady shall be
produced, shall have à year and & day at the Tower of
London, and the others not the same day, but a convenient
day, since they are not bound to answer without the
others.  Ánd when once to one or several an essoin for a
tedious malady has been adjudged and testified judicially,
none of them shall have an essoin of bed-sickness, unless,
as aforesaid, if a licence to get up is granted, but they
shall always have an essoin of bed-siekness, until one or
more or alltogether have an essoin of a tedious disease.
Likewise one out of several will be able to essoin himself
on one and the same day for bed-sickness, and his parcener
one or more for sickness by the way, and those who have
essoined themselves of sickness by the way will not be
able to essoin themselves for bed-sickness upon another
day, unless it has been ascertained concerning the first
essoin, whether he has a transient illness or à tedious
disease, because if he shall have & tedious disease and
this has been ascertained, and another in like manner
has essoined himself upon another day for bed-sickness
and should have a tedious disease, there might be in one
plea together and at the same time two tedious diseases,
which ought not to be. Therefore when one out of
several. has been essoined for bed-sickness, essoins for


f. 845 b.


216 DE ESSONIIS.


lecti, cessabunt omninó essoni& de malo lecti in per-
sonis aliorü, donec sciatur utrum talis habuerit lan-
guorem vel malumi transiens ppter inconveniens supra-
dictum, & cüm unus languorem habuerit, de cetero
cessabüt omnia essonia de malo lecti in personis alio-
rum. Sed esto gy cüm unus ex pluribus essoniatus
fuerit de malo lecti & ali cüm habuerint diem per
essoniatores suos se faciant essoniari de facto ad diem
ilum de malo lecti, judicium essonii erit in suspenso
usque ad quartum diem, in quo casu si quatuor mili-
tes venerint & testati fuerint visum & q defenderint
ei languorem, tüc (ne absens sit omnino indefensus)
propter necessitatem de consilio curie succurritur ei, ità
quód vertetur essonium de malo lecti in essonium de
malo veniendi. Sed esto quód ad diem datum per
essonium capiatur inter partes dies amoris, cüm uter-
que comparuerit ad illum diem, sequatur essonium de
malo veniendi, & si se essoniaverit de malo lecti, eo-
dem modo poterit verti essonium de malo lecti in
essonium de malo veniendi ut prius Et sic fieri
poterit in omni casu ubi jacuerit essonium de malo
veniendi, sed si nullum, erit hoc defalta, sed nunquam
vertitur essonium de malo veniendi in essoniü de malo:
lecti. Quandoq vertitur essoniü de malo veniendi in
essonium de malo lecti. Quàdodq vertitur essonium de
malo lecti in essoniu de malo veniendi ex necessitate
& de consilio curis, & ita q habebit duo essonia quod-
libet post aliud sine apparitione, & sic cum unus ex
pluribus languore habuerit, extunc cessabunt omnia
essonia de malo lecti in toto placito illo sive tenentes
warrantü vocaverint sive non. Si autem dederint ei
malum transiens, tunc primo tenebit essonium secundüu


OF ESSOINs. 217


bed-sickness shall ecase altogether in the. persons of the
others, until it be known whether so-and-so has & tedious
disease or & transient illness, on account of the incon-
venience aforesaid ; and when one of them shall have a
tedious disease, thereupon all essoins for bed-sickness
shall cease in the persons of the others. But let it be
that, when one out of several shall have been essoined
for bed-sickness, and the others, when they shall have
had & day through their essoiners, cause. themselves to
be essoined in fact upon that day for bed-sickness, tlie
judgment upon the essoin shall be in suspense until tho
fourth day, in which case, if four knights have come and
testified to their view and that they deny & tedious dis-
ease on his part, then (that an abseut person shall not be
altogether undefended) on &ccount of the necessity upon
the advice of the court he is so far succoured, that. his
essoin for bed sickness sliall be converted into an essoin
for sickness on the way. But let it bethat upon the day
given through the essoin & day of love be taken between
the parties, when each has appeared on that day, let an
essoin for sickness on the way follow, and if each has cs-
soined himself for bed-sickness, in the saine. manner the
essoin for bed-sickness may be converted into an essoin for
sickness on the way, as before. And so it may be done in
&ll cases, where an essoin of sickness by the way has lain,
but if none, this will be & default, but an essoin of sickness
by the way is never turned into an essoin for bed sickness,
Sometimes an essoin for sickness by the way is turned into
an essoin for bed-sickness. — Sometimes an essoin for bed-
sickness is turned into an essoin for sickness on the way
from necessity and upon the advice of the court, and so
that he shall have two essoins each after the other with-
out an appearance, and so, when one out of several shall
have had & tedious disease, thenceeforth shall cease all
essoins for bed-sickness in that entire suit, whether the
tenants have vouched & warrantor or not. But if they
have granted to him a tedious disease, then for the first
time à second essoin for bed-siekness shall hold good in


f. 346,


4.
S1 quis
habere
possit duo
essonia de
malo veni-
endi simul
propter
necessi-
tatem.


218 DE ESSONIIS.


de malo lecti in psona alterius essoniati. Si aute qua-
tuor milites non venerint infra quartum diem nec
primó essoniatus, tune eodem modo & ead& necessitate
(ut pradictum est) vertitur essoniü de malo lecti in
essoniü de malo veniendi, donec sciatur utrum primó
essoniatus de malo lecti habuerit languore vel non, &
ad omnes dies sequentes erit ut pdictu est, secundum
q testatum fuerit p quatuor milites. Si aute partitio
facta fuerit inter plures cohzredes de communi hzre-
ditate, & ita q quilibet respodere debeat de pte sua
in principio litis antequa omnes simul coparuerint,
quilibet p se habere poterit essoniuü de malo lecti &
quilibet languorem, & ita quód plures esse possunt
languores post divisionem hereditatis: ut de termino
S. M. ai regis H. ix. incipiente x. in com Suff, de
Salomone de S. Edmudo & Oliva filia Andres. Sed
cüm omnes cóparuerint in curia et ita q nullus sine
alio velit respondere, tunc aliud erit ut in primo casu,
nisi quis habere poterit duo essonia de malo veniendi
simul ppter necessitajem, ita q ex necessitate possit
quis habere duo essoni& de malo veniendi.


Esto q quis implaeitatus fuerit de diversis placitis,
& in uno eorundé fuerit ei languor adjudicatus, et in
alio placito se semel essoniaverit de malo veniendi,
& diem habuerit, & ad que diem venire possit! nec
mittere, cüm attornatu no fecerit, no sequatur essonium
de malo lecti, $1 se iterum essoniaverit de malo veni-
endi, aut de necessitate allocabitur ei essonium de
consilio curie, vel suspedetur pcessus illius loquelem,
quousd essoniatus comparere possit post languorem, &


! * non possit," MS. Raw], C. 160,


OF FSSOINS. 919


the person of the second person essoined. But if the
four knights have not come within the fourth day nor
the person essoined in the first. place, then in the same
manner and by the same necessity, as above said, the
essoin of bed-sickness is turned into an essoin of sick-
ness by the way, until it be known whether the person
essoined in the first place for bed-sickness has & tedious
disease or not, and on all the following days it will be
as aforesaid, according to what shall have been testified
by the four knights. But if a partition shall have been -
made between several coheirs of à common inheritance,
and so that cach ought to answer for his own part at the
commencement of the suit before all have appeared to-
gether, each for himself may have an essoin for bed-sick-
ness, and each for & tedious disease, and so that there
may be several essoins fora tedious disease after the  f.346.
division of the inheritance, as in Michaelmas term in
the ninth and tenth years of king Henry in the county
of Suffolk, concerning Solomon of St. Edmund and Oliva
the daughter of Andrew. But when all have appeared
in the court and so that none is willing to answer with-
out another, then it will be otherwise as in the first
case, unless a person may have two essoins for sickness
on the way at the same time on aecount of necessity, so
that from necessity a person may have two essoins for
sickness on the way.


Let it be that à person has been impleaded in several ,, *

, i , : ; If a person
suits, and in one of them an essoin for a tedious disease may have
has been adjudged to him, and in the other suit, he has tV9 essoins

. : : fof sickness
once essoined himself for sickness on the way, and has on the way
had a day, and on which day he neither could come nor 3: '^e same
send, since he had not appointed an attorney, lest an necessity.
essoin should follow for bed-sickness, if he should &
second time essoin himself for sickness on the way, either
of necessity there will be allowed to hiin an essoin upon
the advice of the court, or the process of the trial will
be suspended, until the person essoined is able to appear


after a tedious disease, and proceedings shall not be had


5.
Si vir et
uxor se
simul es-
soniaverint
de malo
leeti.


220 DE ESSONIIS.


non pcedetur ad defaltam: ut de termino P. anno
regis H. xvi. in comitatu Norf. de Galfrido filio Bald-
wini Item q non proceditur ad defaltam in uno pla-
cito propter essonium de 1nalo lecti in alio, inveniri
poterit de termino S. M. anno regis H. xv. incipiente
xvi in comitatu Midd. de Gylberto de Hendon, & hoc
maxime si placitum emerserit post languorem adjudi-
catü. ltem erit, si languidus post languorem adjudica-
tum vocatus fuerit ad warrantum, secundum quod eve-
nit de predicto Galfrido. Item quod allocari debeat
essonium in prasdicto casu, quód. aliàs non esset licitum,
pbatur de termino S. M. anno regis H. vi. incipiente
vii in comitatu Norf, de Erimnarda de Pocotte & quo-
dam Johanne, qui se essoniavit versus eam de malo
veniendi de uno placito, & cui fuit languor adjudice
tus in alio placito, & quamvis essonium de malo ve-
niendi non jaceret, fuit tamen ei allocatü de consilio
curie ppter necessitatem, quia honestius fuit essonium
allocare ex causa, quàm procedere ad defaltam, cüm
essoniatus non esset in culpa.


Si vir & uxor se simul essoniaverint primó de malo
veniendi, poterunt se simul essoniare de malo lecti ad
alium diem si voluerint, & simul habere languorem,
sed non erunt ibi plures languores sed unus, ppter
juris unitatem. Item poterunt se vicissim essoniare si
voluerint tam de malo veniendi quà de malo lecti, &
seeundum q supradictum est, donec habuerint languo-
rem ambo simul vel alter eorum per se. Sed cüm
ambo primo die simul essoniati fuerint de malo veni-


OF ESSOINS. 291


to & default; as in Easter term in the sixteenth year of


king Henry in the county of Norfolk, concerning God-
frey the son of Baldwin. Likewise that proceedings are
not had to a default in one suit on account of an essoin
of bed-sickness in another, may be found in Michaehnas
terin in the fifteenth and sixteenth years of king Henry
in the county of Middlesex, concerning Gylbert of Hen-
don, and this chiefly if the suit has emerged after an
essoin for & tedious disease has been adjudged.  Like-
wise it will, if & sick man, after an essoin for & tedious
disease has been &djudged, has been vouched to warrant,
according to what happened in the case of the aforesaid
Godfrey. Likewise that an essoin ought to be allowed
in the aforesaid case, which otherwise would not be
allowable, is proved in Michaelmas term in the sixth
&nd seventh years of king Henry in the county of Nor-
folk, concerning Erimnard de Pocotte and & certain Jo-
hannes, who essoined himself against her for sickness in
the way in one a&uit, and to whom an essoin for a tedi-
ous disease was adjudged in another suit, and although


an essoin for sickness by the way would not lie, never- -


theless it was allowed to him on the advice of the court
on &ccount of necessity, because it was more honest to
allow an essoin for a cause than to proceed to & default,
when the party essoined was not in fault.


If husband and wife have together essoined them-
selves in the first, place for sickness on their way, they
may together essoin themselves for bed-sickness to


another day, if they are so minded, and may together 4.


have & tedious disease, but there shall not be there


5.
If husband
and wife
have es-
ined
mselves
at the same
time for


several tedious diseases, but only one, on account of yeiick-


their unity of right. .Likewise they may essoin them-
selves in turns if they wish as well for sickness on the
way as for bed-sickness, and according to what has been
said above, until both together have had an essoin for a
tedious disease, or one or other of them alone. But
when both have been on the first day essoined together
for sickness on the way, and on another day the man


Dess.


f. 346 b.


999 DE ESSONIIS.


endi, & ad alium diem compareat vir & uxor, & vir
essoniatus fuerit de malo lecti, & ad diem datum, cüm
essoniatus visus fuerit testatum fuerit per milites quód.
sit malum transiens, & uxor eodem die se essoniaverit
de malo lecti, quaeritur an sit essonium allocandii im-
mediate post apparitionem, cüm semel in curia com-
paruerit post essoniü de malo veniendi, & non erit
allocandum, quia essonium de malo lecti semper sequi-
tur essonium de malo veniendi immediaté, & de appa-
riione tempore medio tollitur omninó essonium de
malo lecti, & per aliud essonium immediató, sicut de
servitio domini regis si procedat essonium de malo
lecti, vel s1 aliud intervenerit vel non, idem erit di-
cendum. Post essonium vero de malo lecti, nunquam
jacebit essonium de malo veniendi de tempore pr:ete-
rito, & non nisi sumonita fuerit loquela, & posita
coram justiciariis itinerantibus quasi ex nova sumoni-
tione, vel nova resumonitione, post iter justic. cü quis
ad ultimu dié essoniatus fuerit in bàáco, & languor ei
adjudieatus non fuerit, & licentiam habuerit surgendi,
occasione itineris justice. Ite esto q vir essoniatus fue-
rit de malo lecti & milites forte ad diem datum non
venerint, & uxor se essoniaverit de malo veniendi, &
die habuerit per essoniatorem suum, & milites attachi-
ati fuerint, & eundem diem habuerint, &d quem si
milites non venerint oportet q uxor compareat, et si
defaltam fecerit, defalta sua erit utri] dànosa, ita q
uterque amittet p defalta unius, quicund illoru defal-
tam fecerit, quia res sive tenementa uxoris non reci-
piut divisione, sieut inter cohsredes et pticipes De
hac materia inveniri poterit de termino S. H. anno


OF ESSOINS. 293


and his wife have appeared together, and the man has
been essoined for bed-sickness, and on the day given
to him, when the person essoined has been viewed, it
has been testified by the knights that it is & transient
illness, and the wife on the same day has essoined her-
self for bed-sickness, it 1s asked whether an essoin 1s to
be allowed immediately after the appearance, when she
has once appeared in court after an essoin for sickness
by the way, and it will not be allowable, because an
essoin for bed-sickness always follows an essoin for sick-
ness by the way immediately, and by the appearance in
the meantime an essoin for bed-sickness is altogether
taken away, and by another essoin immediately, as con-
cerning the service of the king, if an essoin for bed-
sickness proceeds, or if another has intervened or not,
the same thing will have to be said. But after an es-
soin for bed-sickness an essoin for sickness on the way
will never lie concerning time which is past, and not
unless the trial has been summoned and placed before
the justices itinerant as if upon & new summons or &
new resummons, after the iter of the justiciaries, when &
person on the last day has been essoined in the bench,
and there has not been adjudged in his case an essoin for
& tedious disease, and he has had liberty to leave his bed,
on occasion of the iter of the justiciaries. Likewise let
it be that & husband has been essoined for bed-sickness,
and the knights by chance have not come upon the day
given to him, and the wife has essoined herself for sick-
ness on the way, and has had a day through her essoiner,
and the knights have been attached, and have had the
same day, upon which if the knights have not come, it
is incumbent that the wife should appear, and if she has
made default, her default will be damaging to both, so
that both shall lose through the default of one, which-
ever of them has made default, because the estate or
tenements of the wife do not &dmit of division, as be-
tween coheirs and parceners. On this subject & case
will be found in Hilary term in the thirteenth year of


f. 346 b.


924 DE ESSONIIS.


regis H. xiii. in cof Devo de Thoma de Tyndland.
Et oportet q appareat ad omnes dies sine essonio,
donee visus f&ctus fuerit de viro suo, postquà semel
habuerit essoniü de malo veniendi, quia plura habere
non poterunt anteqm simul ecopareant vir & uxor, et
idé dieatur de viro, eium uxor essoniata fuerit de malo
leeti, Si &ute bis se essoniaverit, tunc observetur ut
supradietü est. Ite cüm quis plures warrantos voca-
verit sive sit tenens unus sive plures, si tale sit pla-
citu & tale breve q sequi debeant essonia de malo
lecti, tune videndu erit, utru tenentes qui warrantü
vocaverint languore habuerint, quidam, vel omnes, vel
non. Si &utem languore habuerint, warranti languore
non habebunt, tenentes vero essonium habebut de malo
leeti, donee warranti warrantizaverint, & warrant nullu,
antequa warrantizaverint, cu auté warrantizaverint,
tunc primó habebunt essonia de malo lecti, ci warrà-
tizaverint, sicut ipsi principales tenetes donec semel
habuerint languorem.


6. Videndü inter cstera, ad quse brevia ptineant ime-
Adque  diate duo essonia. In quo casu necesse erit q in esso-


Mio ada niis de malo lecti allocandis, primó inspiciantur brevia
cssonia d oripinalia, inter quz inveniri poterunt duo brevia, à
endiet — quibus generaliter duo pcedunt essonia, scilicet breve
E n de recto de terra, sed non breve de recto de dote, quia
ad bre de recto de dote, non jacet essoniu de malo
lecti, ex quo non sequitur ex eo duellü, nec magna


assisa. Item duo sequuntur essonia quoda breve de


OF ESSOINS. 293


king Henry in the county of Devon, concerning Thomas
de Tyndland. And it is incumbent that she should
appear every day without an essoin, until & view has
been had concerning her husband, after he shall have once
had an essoin for bed-sickness, because they will not be
able to have more before the husband and the wife have
appeared together, and the same may be said concerning
the husband, when the wife has been essoined for bed-
sickness. But if she has twice essoined herself, then
let it be observed as aforesaid. | Likewise when a person
has vouched several warrantors, whether there be one
tenant or several, if the suit be such and the writ such,
that essoins for bed-sickness ought to follow, then it
will have to be seen whether the tenants who have
vouched & warrantor have had an essoin for & tedious
disease, some or all, or not so. But if they have had an
essoin for a tedious disease, the warrantors shall not have
an essoin for & tedious disease, but the tenants shall
have &n essoin for bed-sickness, until the warrantors
have warranted, and the warrantors shall have none,
before they have warranted, but when they have war-
ranted, then they shall have in the first place essoins for
bed-sickness, if an essoin for & tedious disease has not
preceded, and they may in turns essoin themselves for
bed-sickness, when they have warranted, just as the said
principal tenants, until they shall once have had an
essoin for & tedious disease.


We must amongst other things see to what writs two,, 6.
essoins immediately appertain. Im which case ii will writs two
be necessary that in allowing essoins for bed-sickness, nba d
the original writs should first be inspected, amongst the way
which will be found two writs, from which generally ?"d n hixe
two essoins proceed, to wit, & writ of right concerning bed.sick-
land, but. not a writ of right concerning dower, because pcs «PP
upon & writ of right concerning dower an essoin for
bed-sickness does not lie, since from it neither the duel
nor & great assise proceeds. Likewise two essoins fol-

Q, 6366. P


296 DE ESSONIIS.


recto q vocatur proeipe, sieut illud, ubi quis terram
quam petit clamat tenere de dio rege in capite, quod
immediate terminari debet in curia domini regis. Est
etiam aliud breve quod loquitur de servitio & consue-
tudine. Item breve de advocatione ecclesize, quod. simi-
liter. immediaté terminari debet in curi& regis. —Est
etiam quoddam breve quod vocatur precipe, à quo per
accidens & ex diseretione justiciarii duo procedunt
essonia, in quo fit mentio de longinquo ingressu, verbi
gratia.


es. Procipe À. quód juste &e. reddat tali abbati tantam
UA terram eum pertinentiis in tali loco, quam clamat esse
de ingressu Jus ecclesie su:e, et in quam idem 4A. non habet in-
Lien gressu nisi per B. quondam abbatem talem, qui sine
e contrario. 3ssensu. & voluntate capituli sui illun dimisit &ec. Et
f.347. |n hujusmodi brevibus, priusquam fiat judicium de e--
sonio de malo lecti si factu fuerit, sunt à justiciariis
inquirenda in hoe casu hujusmodi. Inquirendum est à

petente per quantum tempus adversarius suus terram

illam tenuit, & quando abbas obiit per qm ingressum

habuit, si veró dieat q per 30 vel 40 annos vel am-

plius, tunc. admittatur essoniu de malo lecti & hac

ratione, quia cüm alii abbates medii & conventus sem-

per permiserunt ipsum tenente sine clameo, & postea

post pdictum ingressum de tali ecclesia posset alii

abbates succedentes eum consensu conventus cófirmare

factum primi abbatis, videtur & psumendum est quód

ipse tenens justé possideat & justo titulo, donee pbetur

in *eontrarium, unde facilius in hoe easu adinittitur
essonium de malo lecti. Sed qu:zro quare pcessum

est per tale breve, càm breve de ingressu non excedat

tempus assise mortis antecessoris. Responsio. Per


-


OF ESSOINS. 227


low & certain writ of right, which is called a pr«wcipe,
like that where & person claims to hold land, which he
seeks, from the lord the king in chief, which ought to
be immediately determined in the court of the lord the
king. There is likewise another writ which speaks of
service and custom. Likewise & writ concerning the
advowson of & church, which in like manner ought to
be determined in the court of the king. There is like-
wise & certain writ which is called a ''precipe," from
which by accident and from the discretion of the judge
two essoins proceed, in which there is mention of a
remote entry, for instance.


Enjoin A. that he justly &c. restore to such an abbot
so much land with its appurtenances in such & place,
which he claims to he the right of his church, and into


7.
When a
writ of
right is
turned into


which A. has no entry except. through B. formerly such a writ of
abbot, who demised it without the assent and will of 9hty by


his chapter. Andin writs of this kind before judgment is
given upon an essoin of bed-sickness, if 1t has been iade,
inquiries of this kind are to be made by the justiciaries.
It is to be inquired from the plaintiff for how long a time
his adversary has held that land, and when the abbot died
through whom he had entry, but if he should say, that
he has held it for thirty or forty years or more, then let
an essoin of bed-sickness be admitted, &nd for this
reason, because since other intermediate abbots and the
convent have always permitted him to be tenant without
making & claim against him, and afterwards, after the


the coun-


ting and
contrari-


wise.


f. 347.


aforesaid entry, other successive abbots of the said


church might with the consent of the chapter have con-
firmed the act of the first abbot, it seems and it 1s to be
presumed that the said tenant possesses justly and with
& just title, until it be proved to the contrary, whence
there is admitted more readily in this case an essoin
of bed-sickness. But I ask wherefore are proceedings
taken by such & writ, since à writ of entry does not
exceed the time of an assise of mortdancester. The an-
P 2


998 DE ESSONIIS.


tale narrationé & interrogationem non stat in vigore
suo, nec retinet virtutem brevis de ingressu, imo illam
excedit, et càm p narrationem contra sui ipsius natu-
ram incipiat esse q non fuit, ejus habebit naturam q
incipit esse, & omnia habebit remedia qus breve de
recto, et maxime quantum ad essonia, secundum q
superius dictum est. Item duo jacent essonia in bre-
vibus de divisis, et si aliqua particula terre remanet
in contentione, et ubi pcessum est sicut per breve de
recto, & tunc demum jacent, càm terra illa fuerit
specificata. Item jacent duo essonia de servitio et con-
suetudine, postquim deforceator responderit, et certum
est! quid deduxerit in certü judicium, quia ad duel-
lum vel magnam assisam pceedi non potest, nisi super
certa re & expressa. Item in quolibet brevi, ubi quis
exeedit formam brevis et loquitur de jure, et in qui-
bus interseritur narratio, ut de jure, sicut aliquando
eotingit in brevi quo jure, et aliis, et uli pervenitur
ad magnam assisam, jacet essoniu de malo lecti, ut
infra pleniàs dicetur. Et sciendum «4 non ad omne
breve, q vocatur & incipit per pcipe, sequitur essonium
de malo lecti, quia sunt plura qux incipiunt per prze-
cipe, qua» in nullo tangunt jus merum, quia sunt de
ingressu ad firmam & ad terminum, vel breve q sequi-
tur post novam disseysinam, ubi juratores fuerunt
electi & visus terre factus fuit, et quod fertur super
disseysitorem vel filium ejus et haredem vel alium ab
eo qui disseysitus est vel ejus herede. In brevibus
vero de recto, quae vocantur pr:cipe, & ubi duo jacent
essonia, placitum ita aliquando mutari possit, quód
nullum jacebit essonium de malo lecti post mutatio-
nem illam, verbi gratia. Esto quód petens petat ter-
ram aliquam de seysina avi sui, & dicat omnia verba


! * est " omitted, MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 9221)


swer. By such counting and interrogatories it docs not
remain in its original vigour, nor does it retain the cha-
racter of a writ of entry, nay, it exceeds it, and since by
the counting contrary to its own nature it berins to be
that which it was not, it will have the nature of that
which it begins to be, and it will have all the remedies,
which a writ of right has, and especially as far as
regards essoins, according to what has been said above.
Likewise two essoins lie in writs of partition, and if any
particle of land remains in dispute, and where proceed-
ings are had as by & writ of right, and then at last they
lie, when the land has been specitied. Likewise two
essoins lie concerning & service and a custom, after the
deforceant has answered, and he has deduced some-
thing certain to & certain judgment, because proceedings
cannot be had to a duel or & great assise, except upon a
certain and express thing. Likewise in any writ, where
a person exceeds the form of the writ, and speaks of
the right, and in which a count is inserted, as concerning
the right, as sometimes happens in à writ of quo jure
and others, where they arrive at à great assise, an essoin
of bed-sickness lies, as will be explained below more
fully. And it is to be known that upon every writ,
which is called and begins with p;«ecipe, an essoin of
bed-sickness does not follow, because there are several
which begin with prcecipe, which in no respect touch
the absolute right, because they are concerning the entry
upon a farm and for a term or & writ which follows after
novel disseysine, where the jurors have been chosen and
& view has been had of the land, and which is directed
against the disseysor or his son and heir, or another per-
son from him who has been disseysed by him or his heir.
But in writs of right which are called proxcipe, and. where
two essoins lie, the plea may be sometimes so changed,
that no essoin will lie concerning bed-sickness after that
change, as for instance. Let it be that the plaintiff
claims some land of the seysine of his grandfather, and


f. 347 b.


230 DE ESSONIIS.


pertinentia ad duellum, & adjiciat quód avus suus inde
obiit seysitus, ut de feodo & jure, & quód idem tenens
non habet ingressum in terram illam, nisi per hce
quód intrusit se in candem post mortem avi sui, dum
idem petens vel pater ipsius petentis fuit infra :wta-
tem, vel alio modo, ut si dicat, & in quam non habet
ingressum nlsi per hoc quód posuit se in terram illain,
ut capitalis dominus, post mortem ipsius talis avi sui
die quo obiit, & unde fiat jurata per judicium curie
et per consensum partium, s. si tam petens quàm
tenens in hoc consenserint, q aliter fieri non debet
nisi ambo in juratam se posuerint, tunc statim cessa-
bit essonium de inalo lecti, seeundü q superiüs fit
mentio. Eode modo impediri poterit essoniü de malo
lecti, si finis objiciatur, qui factus fuit inter anteces-
sore ipsorum, & aliis modis consimilibus, ubi de con-
sensu tenetis fit descesus in brevi de recto usqué ad
jur&tam, & éconversó in brevibus de ingressu, in qui-
bus inprimis non jacuit nisi unicu essonium de inalo
veniendi. Accrescit aliquando per narrationem esso:
nium de malo lecti, quia esto q tam petens quàm
tenens onüttat loqui de ingressu in narratione sua, &
proponat in narratione sua de jure & proprietate, &
inde (sicut ssepius contingit) emergat magna assisa vel
duellum vel alia forma processus, ingressu pretermis-
sio! quod tamen raró accidit, nisi de consensu par-
tium, statim post diem datü partibus, poterit tenens
se essoniare de malo veniendi, & postea de malo lecti,
& hoc provenit ex narratione juris, potius quàm ex
virtute brevis originalis. Et hoc prima facie videtur


! * prietermisso," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 231


says all the words appertaining to & duel, and adds that
his grandfather died seysed thereof as of fee and of
right, and that the said tenant has no entry into that
land, except through these means, that he intruded him-
self into it after the death of his grandfather, whilst
the said plaintiff or the father of the said plaintiff was
under age, or in some other manner, as if he should say,
and into which he has no entry except through these
means that he put himself into that land, as a chief lord,
after the death of his said grandfather on the day on
which he died, and whereupon a jury is appointed
through & judgment of the court and with the consent
of the parties, to wit, if both the clainant and the
tenant have agreed to this, which otherwise ought
not to be done unless both have put themselves upon a
jury, then forthwith an essoin of bed-sickness shall
cease, according to what has been above mentioned. In
the same way an essoin of bed-sickness may be hin-
dered, if à fine be objected, which has been made be-
tween the ancestors of the said parties, and in other
consimilar ways, where with the consent of the tenant a
descent is made in a writ of right down to a jury, and
conversely in writs of entry, in which at first there lay
only a single essoin of sickness by the way. Án essoin
of bed-sickness accrues sometimes through the counting,
because let it be, that as well the claimant as the tenant
omits to speak of the entvy in his counting, and pro-
pounds counts respecting the right and the property,
and thereupon (as happens frequently) a great assise or
& duel results or some other form of process, the entry
having been by the way omitted, which however rarely
happens, except with the consent of parties, forth with
after à day has been assigned to the parties, the tenant
may essoin himself for sickness by the way, and after-
wards for bed-sickness, and this arises from the counting
of the law, rather than in virtue of the original writ.
And this at first sight seems to be contrary to that


f. 347 b.


l.
Qualiter
essonium
de malo
veniendi
debeat
irrotulari
et judicari
de servitio
domini
regis.


232 DE ESSONIIS.


esse contrarium ei q dicitur, quód secundü brevia ori-
ginalia judieanda sunt essonia, & ab eis pcedunt. Ad
q sie poterit responderi, quód quamdiu breve originale
stetit in suo vigore, tantum unicü sequebatur essoniü.
Sed postqua per narrationem partium & consensuin
eoru locum non tenuit & mutata narratione in jure
pcessum est, tune ad essonium de malo lecti perveni-
tur, & peedendü erit tanquam ab initio pceessum esset
p breve de recto. Et de hiis que dicta sunt hic fit
superius mentio de brevi de ingressu, sed hic fit repe-
titio ut addatur.


Carp. V.


Quia diversimode fit irrotulatio essoniorum secun-
dum diversitaté brevium & placitorum, ad instructio-
nem minorum dicendü erit de irrotulatione. Sed quia
de modo irrotulationis dictum est supra de illis qui
peregre pfecti sunt ultra mare, sive in Terram Sanctam
pro generali passagio, sive pro simplici peregrinatione,
sive citra mare Graecorum in peregrinatione versus S.
Jacobum vel alibi, ideo de modo peregrinationis hmodi
non erit hie repetendu, sed de servitio dni regis, ita
videlicet A. de N. qui est in servitio dii regis ultra
mare vel citra, essoniatur versus talem de tali placito
per talem, & in quo casu differri poterit loquela quam-
diu essoniatus fuerit in servitio domini regis, dum
tamen habet ad manum quolibet die warrantum suum
breve domini regis.


OF ESSOINS. 299


which is said, that essoins are to be judzed according to
the original writs, and they proceed upon them. To
which it may be thus answered, that as long as the
original writ has stood in its proper vigour, only & single
essoin followed. But when from the counting of the
parties and through their consent it has not kept its
place, and the eounting having been changed the pro-
ceeding has come to touch on the right, then an. essoin
for bed-siekness is arrived it, and the proceeding will
have to be had, as if it had been from the berinning by
& writ of right. And concerning the subjects here dis-
cussed mention has been previously made in treating of
& writ of entry, but the repetition is made here, in order
that an addition may be made.


CHAPTER V.


Because the enrolinent of essoins is made in different —— 1.
modes according to the diversity of writs and suits, for diebus
the instruction of the juniors we must speak of enrol- sickness
ment. But because concerning the mode of enrolinent Ebr)
we have spoken above concerning those who have set be enrolled
forth on & journey abroad beyond the sea, whether it be poc m
to the Holy Land for a general passage, or for & single cerning the

TAP une . . Service of
pilgrimage, or within the sca of the Greeks on & pil- thelord the
grimage towards St. James or elsewhere, on that account king
we need not repeat here anything concerning the mode
of the pilgrimage, but concerning the service of the lord
the king ; thus forsooth, A. de N., who is in the service
of the lord the king beyond the sea or within it, is
essoined against so-and-so in such a suit by so-and-so,
and in which case the trial in court may be deferred for
as long as he has been essoined in the service of tle
lord the king, provided however that he have at hand
on & certain day as his warranty & writ of the lord the


king.


2.
Qualiter de
simplici
essonio de
de malo
veniendi.


f. 348.


234 DE ESSONIIS.


Item si quis se essoniaverit de malo veniendi unus
versus unum, tunc fiat sic irrotulatio de simplici esso-
nio. Talis versus talem de tali placito per tale, & ita
q semper in principio fiat mentio de com in margine,
& hoe si tantum fit unus petens & unus tenens, &
quilibet eorum poterit se essoniare semel & simul eo-
dem die sumonitionis vel vicissim, modo unus, modo
alius, si petens hoc voluerit. Et ideo petenti competit
essonium, quia non licet in hoc casu tenenti quod
petenti non liceat, & sic fiat irrotulatio de petete cüm
tenens se essoniaverit. Et idem talis, s. petens versus
tale, s. tenente de eode per tale. Et hoc si ambo se
simul & eode die essoniaverint, si aute vicissim, &
tenens se priüs essoniaverit, & petens coparuerit, &
eundem diem in curia receperit, ad aliu die (si volu-
erit) se essoniare poterit, & e conversó. Si petes primo
die se essoniaverit, & tenens coparuerit, & eunde diem
receperit, ad alium die se essoniare poterit, & ita mul-
totiens quamdiu petens essoniatus fuerit. Si aute
plures sint ibi participes tenentes in comuni vel sepa-
ratim, quilibet habebit essoniü suum, & suum essonia-
tore dum tame si in comuni, poterüt se essoniare
omnes simul, & eodem die vel vicissim, unus vel plu-
res, donec quilibet habuerit unicum essonium, si volu-


erit, antequàm copareat, & non plura, & tunc fiat irro-


tulatio sic. Talis, s. tenens versus talem, s. petente de
tali placito p tale. Et eodem modo dicatur de aliis
lenentibus omnibus, qui se essoniaverint, & de illis qui


OF ESSOINS., 235


Likewise if any one has essoined himself for sickness
on the way, one against one, then let there be an enrol-


9.
How con-


cerning a


ment of a simple essoin thus : So-and-so against so-and so single


in such a suit through so-and.so, and so that always in
the beginning mention be made of the county in the
margin, and this if there be only one claimant and one
tenant, and each of theimn may essoin himself once and
at the same time on the day of summons or in turns,
first one and then the other, if the claimant wishes this.
And accordingly the claimant is entitled to an essoin,
because the tenant in this case is not allowed anything
which is not allowed to the claimant, and let there be
an enrolment concerning ihe clainant, when the tenant
has essoined himself, thus: * And the said. so-and-so, to
* wit, the claimant, against so-and-so, to wit, the tenant,
* concerning the said suit through so-and-so." And this
if both have essoined themselves together and on the
same day; but if in turns, and the tenant has first
essoined himself, and the claimant has appeared, and
has had the same day given to him in court, he will be
&ble to essoin himself to another day, if he chooses, and
conversely. If the claimant on the first day has essoined
himself, and the tenant has appeared, and has had given
to him the same day, he may essoin himself to another
day, and so for as many times as the claimant shall have
beeu essoined. But if there be several parceners there
in common or separately, each shall have his own essoin
and his own essoiner, provided however, if they are par-
ceners in common, they may all essoin themselves to-
gether and on the same day, or in turns, one or more,
until each of them has had & single essoin, if he shall
wish it, before he appears, and not more, and then let
the enrolment be thus: So-and-so, to wit, the tenant,
against so-and-so, to wit, the claimant in such & suit
through so-and-so. Aud in the same manner let it be
said concerning all the tenants who have essoined them-
selves, and to those of them who are present the same


essoin of
sickness on
the way.


f. 348,


9.
Si warran-
tus vocatus


fuerit.


256 DE ESSONIIS.


presentes fuerint, dabitur idem dies, & contra absentes
pecdendum erit ad defaltam. Si aute plures sint te-
nentes qui tenuerint p diviso, quilibet habebit esso-
nium suum sed non vicissim ut supra. Si aute unus
tenens vel plures se essoniare debeant versus plures
petentes, nó oportet mentione facere de omnibus peten-
tibus, sed de uno tantü, & de aliis in brevi nominatis,
& eodem modo fiat de uno petente vel pluribus versus
tenentes plures.


S1 &utem warrantus vocatus fuerit &b uno tenente
vel pluribus, üànus warrantus vel plures, quilibet ipsoriü
unicum habebit essoniü (si voluerit) simul vel vicissim,
tam tenens qui vocavit, quàm warrantus qui vocatur,
unus sive plures, & unde cüm warrantus se essoniave-
rit, sic fiat irrotulatio : Talis warrantus, s. quem talis,
8. tenens, vel alii t&les vocaverunt ad warrantuü, versus
talem petentem, vel tales, de tali placito per talem.
Si autem tenens presens fuerit, habebit eundem diem,
si autem eodem die se essoniaverit, tune fiat irrotu-
latio sic: Idem talis, s. tenens versus eundem, s. pe-
tentem de eodem p talem. $1 autem defaltam fecerit,
sequatur petens defaltam. Si aute tenens se essoniave-
rit & warrantus coparuerit, habebit eüdem diem. $i
aute defalta fecerit, expectet tenens vel ejus essoniator
quartu diem, & tunc si non venerit, pcedatur ad de-
falta; & q dicitur de uno tenente & uno warranto
essoniato, vel non essoniato, dicatur de pluribus tenen-
tibus & attornatis. Et in fine notandii, q nec tenens
versus warrantum nec warrantus versus tenentem, sed


OF ESSOINS. 237


day shall be given, and against the absent proceedings
shall be had to & default. But if there be several
tenants who hold their share in division, each shall have
his own essoin, but not in turns as above. But if one or
more tenants ought to essoin themselves against several
claimants, it is not ineumbent to make mention of all
the elaimants, but of one only and of the others named
in the writ, and in the same manner let it be done con-
cerning one or more claimants against several tenants.


But if à warrantor has been vouched by one or more


tenants, one or more warrantors, each of them: shall jautor has


have a single essoin (if he should wish it) together or in ^
turns, as well the tenant who has vouched him, as the '
warrantor who is vouched, one or more, and hence when
the warrantor has essoined himself, let the enrolment be
made thus: Such & warrantor, to wit, whom so-and-so,
to wit, the tenant or other such persons, have called to
warrant arzainst so-and-so the claimant or such claimants
in such & plea through so-and.so. But if the tenant be
present, he shall have given to him the same day, but if
he has essoined himself on the same day, then let there
be an enrolment thus: The said so-and-so, to wit, the
tenant, against so-and.so, to wit, the claimant, concern-
ing the said suit through so-and so. But if he has
made default, let the claimant follow up the default.
But if the tenant has essoined himself and the war-
rantor has appeared, he shall have the same day given
tohim. But if he has made default, let the tenant or
his essoiner &wait the fourth day, and then if he has not
eome, let proceedings be had to a default, and what is
said concerning one tenant and one warrantor who has
been essoined or not essoined, may be said of several
tenants and persons attourned. And in the end it is to
be noted, that neither the tenant shall essoin himself
against his warrantor, nor the warrantor against the
tenant, but each of them shall essoin himself against


3.
& war-


een
ouched.


l.
Qualiter
essonium
de malo
veniendi
judicatur.


f. 348 b.


2.
Si breve
originale
non vene-
rit, breve


vicecomiti


938 DE ESSONIIS.


quilibet eorum se essoniabit versus principalem peten-
tem, & sive petens sive warrantus se essoniaverit,
semper exigatur ille, qui se non essoniavit.


CAP. VI.


Et ut! essonia de malo veniendi unde judicentur,
inprimis inspicienda sunt brevia originalia, maxime si
placitum novum fuerit, vel brevia judicialia, si sit
novum, ut per hoc scire possit utrum essonium jaceat
vel nón. Si autem placitum novum sit & breve vene.
rit, tunc fia& mentio in margine quód placitum novum
sit. Si autem breve non venerit, eodem modo fiat
mentio in margine q non breve, sed allocetur essonium
si petens venerit, & dicatur ei, q habeat breve suum
ad alium diem per aliud breve vicecomiti directum.


Rex vicecomiti salute. Precipimus tibi q venire
facias cori justiciariis &c. breve nostru quod tibi venit
de placito, quod sumonitum est in curia nostra coram
justiciariis &c. inter talem petentem & talem tenen-


quod faciat tem, de tanto terre cum pertinentiis in tali villa, vel


aliud ve-
nire.


aliter: breve nostrum q tibi venit de sumonendo ta-
lem q esset coram &e. ad respondendum tali mulieri
de dote sua qus eam contingit de libero tenemento,
quod fuit talis quondam viri sui &c. vel aliter: talem
querenté* et talem de attachiando talem de tali pla-
cito, et ita quód semper fiat metio in tali brevi de
brevi originali quale fuerit, et tunc sic: Et tu ipse
tune sis ibi &uditurus judiciu tuum de hoc, q breve
illud prefatis justiciariis non misisti ad talem diem,


- ——— —


! & ut"! omitted, MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ** inter talem querentem," MS. id.


OF ESSOINS. 239


the principal claimant, and whether the claimant or his
warrantor has essoined himself, let him always be ex-
acted, who has not essoined himself.


CHAPTER VI.


And that essoins for sickness on the way may be 1.
thereupon judged, in the first place the original writs Bo" *h,


are to be inspected chiefly if it be à new suit, or the sickness by
judicial writs if it be à new suit, that it may be thereby oed »
known whether an essoin will lie or not. But if it be

a new suit and the writ has come, then let mention be

made on the margin [of the roll] that it is & new suit.

But if the writ has not come, in the saine manner let f, 348 v.

mention be made in the margin that the writ has not

come, but let the essoin be allowed, if the claimant has

come, and let it be said to him, that he should produce

his writ on another day through another writ directed

to the viscount.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you, ?
that you cause to come before our justiciaries &c. our original
writ, which came to you concerning & suit, which is VL
summoned in our court before our justiciaries &c. be- a writ to
tween so-and.so as claimant and so-and-so as tenant, 55". .
concerning so much land with its appurtenances in such he cause
a vill, or otherwise: our writ which came to you about d
summoning so-and-so, that he should present himself come.
before &e. to answer to such & woman concerning her
dower, which belongs to her from a free tenement, which
was Sso-and-so's her late husband's &ce, or otherwise:
between such a plaintiff and so-aud-so about attaching
so-and-so concerning such a suit, and so that there shall
always be in such à writ mention of the original writ, of
what character it was, and then thus ; and do thou thyself
be there then, in order to hear thy judgment on the
circumstance, that thou didst not send that writ to the


aforesaid justiciaries by such a day, as had been enjoined


240 DE ESSONIIS.


sieut, preceptum. tibi fuit. Et habeas ibi hoc breve
simul eum alio brevi. Teste &c. Si autem placitum
vetus fuerit, q quide erit post primum essonium, tunc
codem modo fiat mentio in margine q vetus est, et
eolem modo si vetus, et resumonitum est, et tune
inspiciantur rotuli tam de placitis quàm de essoniis, ut
seiri possit qualiter partes ultimo die litis à curia re-
cesserunt, et per hoc perpendi poterit de facili quibus
competat essonium, et quibus non, et si plures con-
tineantur in brevi, quorum quidam se essoniaverint, et
quidam non, fiat mentio in margine sic: Alius vel alii.
Item si warrantus vel juratores vel recognitores, fiat
mentio in margine sic: Exigatur warrantus vel exi-
gantur juratores. Et eodem modo de omnibus fiat
mentio quos tangit negotium, et quorum presentia
fuerit necessaria, e£ si vir essoniatus fuerit, fiat. mentio
super essonium sic; quód habet uxorem et é converso,
et qui si presentes fuerint, habeant eundem diem; si
autem defaltam fecerint, pcedatur contra eos sicut in-
feriüs dicetur de defaltis. Si autem tenens se essoni-
avcrit et petens non venerit nec breve infra quartum
diem, tunc dicatur essoniatori quód eat sicut venit, et
judicialiter non absolvitur ab observatione judicii.
Justice. aut& ex quo warratum non habent nec breve,
nihil statuere possunt cotra absente, et si postmodü
breve venerit, & dies sumonitionis non jpterierit, ad
diem illum procedi poterit ad defaltam, vel quamvis
dies preterierit, de gratia justic. poterit loquela resusci-
tari, ut de termino S. Trinitatis anno regni regis H.
decimotertio in itinere Midd. circa finem rotuli. Si


OF ESSOINS. 211


to thee, and produee there this writ together with the
other writ. Witness &e. But if the suit be an old one,
which it will be after the first essoin, then in the same
manner let mention be made in the margin that it is
old, and in the same way if it is old and has been re-
summoned, and then let the rolls be inspected as well
concerning the pleas as concerning the essoins, that it
may be known in what manner the parties retired from
the court on the last day of the suit, and thereby it may
be understood easily who are entitled to an essoin, and
who not so, and if several persons are contained in the
writ, of whom some have essoined themselves, and some
not, let mention be made in the marygin thus: Another
or others Likewise if à warrantor or jurors or recog-
nisors, let mention be made in the margin thus: Let the
warrantor be exacted, or let the jurors be exacted. And
in the same manner let mention be made of all persons,
whom the business touches and whose presence will be
necessary, and if & man has been essoined, let mention
be made upon his essoin that he has a wife and the con-
verse, and if they be present, let, them have the same
day given to them; but if they have made default, let
proceedings be had against them as shall be described
below in treating about defaults. But if the tenant has
essoined hunself, and the elaimant has not come nor the
writ within the fourth day, then let it be said to the
essoiner, that he may go away as he came, and judicially
he is not absolved from the observance of tlie judgment.
But the justiciaries, since they have neither à warrantor
nor a writ, can decide nothing against an absent person,
and if the writ should come afterwards, and the day of
the summons has not passed, up to that day proceedings
may be had for & default, or, although the day has
passed, by the favour of the justiciaries the cause may
be revived, as in Holy Trinity term in the thirteenth
year of the reign of king Henry in the Middlesex iter,
about the end of the roll But if the writ has come
Q, 6366. Q


f. 349.


].
Qualiter
irrotulatur
essonium
de malo
lecti.


9429 DE ESSONIIS.


auté breve venerit, et non petens, et tenens se essoni-
averit, essoniatore tenentis quarto die se liti offerente
pro díüo suo, essoniator judicialiter quietus recedet de
brevi illo, petens in misericordia, et sic fiat irrotulatio.
Talis essoniator talis optulit se quarto die versus tale,
de tali placito, et ille no venit, et fuit petens, et ideo
essoniator sine die. Si aute dies advenerit sumonitio-
nis & neuter ipsoruü cóparuerit, & breve venerit, tunc
de gratia post intervallu admitti potest essoniü pete-
tis, &d salvandü breve suü et die sumonitionis. Vel
pcedi possit ad defalta, quia hoc fit ad nullius pjudiciu,
& tenens sibi imputet quód defalta fecerit, quia si
coparuisset, posset recessisse quietus p judicium. Et
ubi jaceat essoniu de malo veniendi, & ubi non, satis
ppendi poterit ex prwemissis. Essonia vero de Terra
Sancta, & de ultra mare, & de servitio dii regis, qua-
liacunq non pveniunt ex natura breviü, sed à casu
fortuitu & ab eventu, & ideo non sunt secundum
naturam brevium judicanda.


Cap. VII.


Sunt etiam duo brevia (secundum q supradictü est),
à quibus duo pcedüt essonia, s. de malo veniendi &
de malo lecti, & semper sequitur essoniuü de malo lecti
essonium q pcedit de malo veniendi, & quandoq ime-
diaté, & quandoQ non imediateé, ut si interveniat esso-


OF ESSOINS. 243


and not the plaintiff, and the tenant shall have essoined
himself, the essoiner of the tenant on the fourth day
offering himself to contest the suit on behalf of his
principal, the essoiner shall withdraw judicially ac-
quitted from that writ, the plaintiff shall be at the
inercy of the crown, and let there be an enrolment thus:
50-and-so the essoiner of such a person has offered him-
self on the fourth day to contest the suit against such &
person in such a suit, and he has not come, and he was
the plaintiff, and therefore the essoiner is without a day.
But if the day of the summons has arrived and neither
of them has appeared, and the writ has come, then the
essoin of the plaintiff may of grace be admitted after an
interval, to save his writ and the day of the suiramons.
Or proceedings may be had for a default, because this is
done without prejudice to anybody, and let the tenant
inpute to himself the fact that he has made default,
because if he had appeared, he might have gone away
aequitted by a judgment. And where an essoin of
sickness. by the way will lie, and where not, may be f.343.
sufficiently ascertained from the premises. But essoins
concerning the Holy Land, or concerning absence be-
yond the sea, or concerning an engagement in the ser-
vice of the lord the king of whatever character they
may be, do not arise out of the nature of the writs, but
from & fortuitous casualty or from an event, and there-
fore they are not to be judged according to the nature
of the writs.


CHAPTER VII.


But there are two writs (aecording to what has been,  !.

. . . . ow an
said above), from which there proceed two essoins, to wit, essoin for
concerning sickness by the way, and concerning bed-sick- bd id
ness, and an essoin of bed-sickness always follows an enrolled.
essoin which precedes it of sickness by the way, and


sometimes immediately, and sometimes not immediately,
Q 2


944. DE ESSONIIS.


niu de servitio dii regis, s. breve de recto de terra, &
alia de recto super jus nominata,! & fieri debet essoniü
de malo lecti tertio die inclusivo ante diem datü p
essoniatorem in essonio de malo veniendi. Irrotulari
aute debet sie, si unus sit petens & unus tenens, primó
scribatur in margine nomen com, ubi essoniatus jacu-
erit, sive Jacuerit in eode cof sive in alio, tune sic.
Talis apud talem locü in eodé coii, vel si in alio com
jaeuerit, tune sic. Apud tale locum ubi essoniatus
jacuerit. Si aute plures sint ibi tenentes simul & p
indiviso, omnes se essoniare possunt de malo lecti,
simul & eode die, si voluerint, & fiat irrotulatio de
quolibet p se secundi forma primi essoniati, & secundu
q essoniatus jacuerit in eode com, ubi terra fuerit, vel
in alio, & omnes poterüt habere laàguore, vel quida
eorum, vel nullus, seeundum q quatuor milites visores
languoré judicaverint essoniato, vel non judicaverint.
Et si omnibus simul judicaverint languore vel qui-
busda vel tantum uni, no erit ibi nisi unicus languor
ppter unitate juris, q habent essoniati, & unde si om-
nes pter unum quoeund tempore post essonium de
malo lecti licentiam habuerint surgedi, et unus se
tenuerit in languore, & habuerit annum & die, nullus
de c:etero essoniu habebit de malo lecti, quia omnes
simul vel p quosdam ex eis vel p unum tantu languore
habuerint.


9. Adjungitur quandoq essonium de malo veniendi es-


- adjungà- sonio. de malo lecti ratione plurium, qui tenent in
ur essoni-


! * superius nominata," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 245


as if an essoin for the service of the lord the king should
intervene, to wit, & writ of rirht to land and other writs of
right above named, and the essoin for bed-sickness ought
to be made on the third day inclusive before the day
given through an essoiner in an essoin for sickness in the
way. Butit ought to be enrolled thus, if there be one
claimant and one tenant, first let there be written on the
margin the name of the county, where the person essoined
was lying, whether he was lying in the same county or
in another, then thus: Such a person at such a place in
the same county ; or if he is lying in another county then
thus: at such & place where the person essoined is lying,
But if there be several persons there i&enants together
and of an individual whole, all may essoin themselves for
bed-siekness together and on the same day, if they wish,
and let there be an enrolment of each by himself accord-
ing to the form of the first person essoined, and according
as the person essoined has lain in the same county where
the land is, or in another, and they niay all have a lan-
guishing illness, or some of them, or none, according as
the four knights the viewers have adjudged to the person
essoined & languishing illness or have not adjudged so.
Ánd if they have adjudged to all at the same time &
languishing illness, or to some of them, or only to one,
there shall not be there any but & single languishing
illness on account of the unity of right, which the persons
essoined have, and hence if all on account of one person
at any time of an essoin for bed-sickness have obtained a
licence to get up from bed, and one has kept himself in
a languishing state, and has had a year and a day, no one
henceforth shall have an essoin for bed-sickness, because
&ll have had an essoin for a languishing illness together,
or in the case of some of them, or in the case of one only.


Sometimes an essoin of sickness by the way is added
to an essoin of bed-sickness in regard of several persons


2.
If an essoin
for sick-


246 DE ESSONIIS.


umdemalo comuni é& vicissim se essoniaverint, & tunc coósequen-


veniendi
essonio dc


malo lecti.


f. 349 b.


ter post essoniü de malo lecti irrotuletur essoniu de
malo veniedi in forma comuni. Et q de uno dicitur
tali, de pluribus qui essoniaverint de malo veniendi
intelligat. Si aute quidam ex pluribus se essoniavc-
rint de malo lecti, e£ quidà coparuerit! cüm no sint
essoniatài de malo veniendi, eunde habent dié qué ha-
bet essoniatus, si ei malü transiens adjudicatur simul
cü petete. Ad qm die si no venerit essoniatus, nec
milites qui eum viderunt, habebunt aliü die. Ite esto
q secundo die ante die datà p essoniatore, in essonio
de malo veniendi essoniaverit se tenens de malo lecti,
jam erit tenens in defalta, si petens petat inde judiciü,
& multo fortius, si die placiti vel in crastino. Et de
hac materia invenire poterit in rotulo de term S. Hill
aü regis H. septimo in crastino Pur B. Marie, inter
Vitale Engayne & quenda de Ferclos de advocatione
ecclesi:e de Ho. Et ad hoc facit de terii S. Michaelis
anno regis ejusdem incipiente octavo, de eodem Vitali,
nisi forte essoniatores ostenderint se fecisse essonium
apud Turrim cum ptestatione & recordo costabularii,
vel si essoniatus primo die litis venerit, & essoniatores
deadvocaverit, q quidem facere poterit quocunqué tem-
pore antequàm factum fuerit essoniü de malo lecti,
cüm autem justic. ad diem datum residentes non fue-
rint in Banco, semper apud Turrim faciendum erit
essonium, & eodem modo in coi) apud castrum.


! * comparuerint," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 947


who hold in common and have essoined themselves in ness ee the
" e wa
turns, and then consequently after an essoin of bed-siek- z11.qto an


ness let an essoin of sickness by the way be enrolled in du t
common form. And what issaid of one person of this gu, —
kind may be understood of several, who have essoined
themselves for sickness by the way. But if some out of
several have essoined themselves for bed-sickness, and
some have appeared, since they have not been essoined
for sickness on the way, they have the same day which
the person essoined has, if an excuse for transient sick-
ness has been adjudged to bim together with the claimant.
At which day if the person essoined has not appeared,
nor the knights who have viewed him, they shall have
another day. Likewise let it be, that on the second day
before the day given through the essoiner in an essoin
of sickness by the way the tenant has essoined himself
for bed-sickness, the tenant will be already in default,
if the claimant seeks judgment thereon, and much more
so, if it be on the day of the plea or on the morrow.
And on this matter à case will be found in St. Hilary
term in the seventh year of king Henry on the morrow
of the Purification of the blessed Virgin, between Vitalis
Engayne and a certain de Ferclos, concerning the advow-
son of the church of Ho. And this is supported by a case
in St. Michael's term at the commencement of the eighth
year of the reign of the same king concerning the same f.349b.
Vitalis, unless by chance the essoiners have shown that
they have made an essoin at the Tower with a protest and
a record of the constable, or the person essoined has come
on the first day of the trial and has disavowed the
essoiners, which he will be able to do at any time before
an essoin of bed-sickness has been made, but when on the
given day the justiciaries have not been resident at the
bench, the essoin will always have to be made at the
Tower, and in the same way in a county at the castle.


].
In cujus
persona
non jacet
essopium
de malo
lecti.


Britton, vi.


ch. ix.


248 DE ESSONIIS.


Car. VIII.


Item videamus in eujus persona non jaceat essonium
de malo lecti, licet agatur p talia brevia ut pdictum
esti, nunquam enim jacebit in psona petentis, quamvis
in hujusmodi placitis copetat ei essonium de malo
veniendi. ltem nec in psona alicujus attornati, si
tenens forte attornatum fecerit unü vel plures, quia
quamvis &ttornatus languidus sit, & de facto se esso-
niet de malo lecti, responsalem mittere non poterit,
no magis quà facere attornatum, nisi alium mittere
possit nuntiu, càm nullum ei copetat essonium, ad ex-
cusationem usj ad quartum diem ppter alicujus impe-
dimenti eventum, ut si ab hostibus vel adversariis
detentus fuerit in vinculis, vel impeditus, sed quid si
attornatus languidus fuerit, excusari eodem modo debet
(ut videtur) sed non nisi usj ad quartum diem. Quis
enim magis vinculis arctatur quim ille qui laguidus
est & graviter infirmatus. Ite nunqua jacebit in | sona
warranti, nisi tunc demü postquàm psens in judicio
warrantizaverlt, &c. ita q effectus fuerit dominus litis:
ut de termino S. Michaelis ai regis H. septimo inter
essonlà in comitatu Sussex de Alano de S. Georgio.
Item nó pderit essoniato essonium de malo lecti quin
peedatur ad defalta, qui se sic essoniavit, q jaceat extra
potestatem domini regis ubi brevia sua non currunt
nec returna, sive hoc fuerit in regno sive extra, &
licet prima facie jaceat essonium, exequi tamen no
poterit ppter defectum. Item non jacet in persona
alicujus nec in placito, ubi quis semel habuerit lan-
guorem, sive tenens principalis sit sive warrantus, non


OF ESSOINS. 92409


CHAPTER VIII.


Likewise let us see in whose person an essoin of bed-
sickness does not lie, although the action is brourght
through such writs as described above, for it will never
lie in the person of the claimant, although in such writs
he is entitled to an essoin of sickness on the way.  Like-
wise not in the person of an attorney, if ihe tenant has
perchanee appointed an attorney, one or more, because
although he imnay have a languishing illness and in fact
has essoined himself for bed-sickness, he cannot send a
representative, no more than constitute an attorney, ex-
cept that he may send à messenger, since he is not entitled
to &n essoin, to make excuse for him up to the fourth
day, on account of the accident of some impediment, as
if he has been detained in chains or has been iinpeded by
enemies or by adversaries, but what if the attorney has a
languishing illness? he ought to be excused in the same
way (as it seems), but not longer than up to the fourth
day. For who is more fettered by chains than he who is
languid and grievously infirm. Likewise it will never
lie in the person of & warrantor, unless then at length,
after being present before the judges he has warranted
&c. so that he has become lord of the suit, as in Bt.
Michaels term in the seventh year of king Henry,
amongst the essoins in the county of Sussex, concerning
Alan de Saint George. Likewise an essoin of bed-sick-
ness will not profit an essoince so as to prevent proceed-
ings being had for a default, in the case of him who has
thus essoined himself, that he lies beyond the power of
the lord the king, where his writs and the returns to
them do not run, whether this be within the realm or
beyond it, and although at first glance the essoin would
lie, it cannot be executed on account of the defect. Like-
wise 1t does not lie in the person of any one nor in &à
plea, where à person has onee had an essoin for languor,
whether he be a principal tenant or his warrantor, I do


l.

n whose
person an
essoin of
bed-sick-
ness does
not lie.


250 DE ESSONIIS.


dieo q quis languorem habuerit antequam fuerit adju-
dieatus, & dies datus apud Turrim, & postea visus
coram justie. testatus, ita q non surrexerit ante an-
num & diem, quod si aliquo casu fecerit, non dicetur
habuisse languorem. Item in comitatu ubi justie. fuo-
rint itinerantes no jacet essonium de malo lecti in
psona ejus, qui se fecerit essoniari infra com de tene-
mento q fuerit in comitatu, quia facere poterit attor-
natum. Si aute extra cofi no sit, sive placita fuerint
forinseca sive intrinseca, dum tamen tenens se essoni-
averit extra com. Item non jacet essoniu de malo
lecti in aliqu& eausa psonali, criminali vel civili. Item
no jacet essonium aliquando in principio litis nisi post
tempus, cüm res de qua agitur fuerit specificata, sicut
in placito & breve de divisis. In brevi de serviciis &
consuetudinibus, in brevi quo jure quis petat comuniam
pasture non jacebit essonium de malo lecti, antequam
1350. res quie petitur fuerit designata & tenens se defende-
rit p duellu, vel 8e posuerit in magnam assisam. Item
non jacet essonium de malo lecti ab initio ad breve
de ingressu, nisi tunc demü cüm per narratione verta-
tur ad breve de recto, & cüm tenens posuerit se in
magna assisam, vel se defenderit p duellü. Ite ab
initio Jacet essonium de malo lecti & competit tenenti,
& postmodum desinit cópetere, ut si quis &b initio
petere inceperit p breve de recto, & post narratione
descensus descendat ad ingressum, & ubi breve de recto
vertitur in breve de ingressu ut supra. Sed contra de
termino S. Michaelis anno regni regis H. sexto in


OF ESSOINS. 251


not say that a person has an essoin for languor before it
has been adjudged to him and a day given to him at the
Tower, and he has been afterwards viewed, and it has
been before the justicaries testified that he has not risen
from his bed before & year and a day, which if he should
have by any chance done, he will not be said to have
had & languor. Likewise in the county, where the jus-
ticlaries are on circuit, an essoin for bed-sickness does
not lie in the person of him, who has caused himself to
be essoined within the county concerning & tenement
which was in the county, because he could have consti-
tuted an attorney. But if he be not beyond the county,
whether the pleas be foreign or domestic, provided how-
ever the tenant has essoined himself beyond the county.
Likewise an essoin for bed-sickness does not lie in any
personal suit, criminal or civil Likewise an essoin
sometimes does not lie at the commencement of a suit,
unless after a time, when the thing concerning which
the action is brought has been specified, as in à plea and
& writ concerning partitions. In a writ concerning ser-
vices and customs, in à writ of quo jure as to & claim for


common of pasture, an essoin for bed-sickness will not lie,


before the thing, which is claimed, has been designated
and the tenant has defended himself by a duel, or has put
himself upon a great assise. Likewise an essoin does not
lie for bed-sickness at the commencement upon a writ of
entry, except then indeed when by the counting it is
turned into & writ of right, and when the tenant has put
himself upon a great assise or has defended himself by &
duel. Likewise an essoin for bed-sickness lies from the
commencement, and the tenant is entitled to it, and he
afterwards ceases to be entitled to it, as for instance if
& person in the commencement has begun to claim by &
writ of right, and after the counting the descent de-
scends to an entry, and where à writ of right is turned
into & writ of entry as above. But on the contrary in
St. Miehael's term in the sixth year of the reign of


32t


).


252 DE ESSONIIS.


 eomitatu Devoü inter essonia de banco, inter Matildam
de Curtney petente & Robertü de Courtney tenente,
quia ibi dicitur q essoniu de malo lecti allocatur
cüm loquela fuerit super judiciü. Ite in eode in es-
sonio de malo lecti q allocandum erit postqgm dies
datus fuerit de audienda electione, ut inter Galfridü
de Lucy in com Sussex. Ite in eode com Sussex
de priore de Blibing, q non jacet ad breve quo jure.
Ite in eodé g non jacet ubi non fuit factü tertio
die ante die placiti in comitatu Gloc. de Roberto .
Toniguy. Ite in eodé com Sussex de Philippo de
Redham, q non jacet de pte sororis p novum breve.
Ite de termino P. an regis H. decimoquarto in com
Buck. q no jacet de fine facto. It& desinit essoniü de
malo lecti copetere, ut si p breve de recto pveniatur :
&d judicium, & fuerit ex utraq pte coclusum, & reman-
serit loquela sup judiciu, & non habuerit aliqua pars
ulteriüs quid pponat, licet judicii de loco in locum,
cüm loquela jam de toto sit determinata, cüm no sit
aliquis qui dieere possit q recordu loquela quz est sed
q fuit, secus tame est si loquela terminata no fuerit.
Ité (secundu quosda) in psona minoris non jacet esso-
niü de malo lecti; q quidem verü est, no magis qm
de malo veniedi in causa possessionis nec in causà
pprietatis, quia ad causa pprietatis infra setate no
respodebit, nisi ita sit q infra swtate feoffatus sit, &
quo casu, cü respondere teneatur, habebit omnia reme-


pnam————— DU OE ——————————EAO UO NEED sed —


! * Tonynguy," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 253


king Henry in the county of Devon, amongst the essoins
of the Bench, between Matilda de Curtney the claimant,
and Robert de Courtney the tenant, because it is there
said that an essoin for bed-siekness is allowed when the
argument is about the jud;gment, | Likewise in the same
year coneerning an essoin of bed-sickness which will
have to be allowed after &a day has been given for hear-
ing an election, as between Godfrey de Lucy in the
county of Sussex. Likewise in the same county of
Sussex concerning the prior of Blibing, that it does not
lie in the case of a writ quo jure. Likewise in the same
that it does not lie where it has not been made on the
third day before the day of the plea, in the county of
Gloucester concerning. Robert. Toniguy. | Likewise in
the same county of Sussex concerning Philip de Red-
ham, that 1t does not lie on the part of & sister throuch
a new writ. Likewise in Easter term in the fourteenth
year of king Henry in the county of Bucks, that it
does not lie concerning a fine which has been mae.
Likewise à person ceases to be entitled to an essoin for
bed-sickness, as in the case where through a writ of
right one has arrived at & judgment, and it has been
concluded on either side, and the argument upon the
judgment remains, and neither party has anything more
to propound, although the judgment be from place to
place, when the argument has been totally determined,
when there is not any one who can speak of the record
of the argument as pending, but as having been pending,
it is otherwise however if the argument has not been
terminated. | Likewise (according to some) an essoin for
bed-sickness does not lie in the person of & minor, which
indeed is true, no more than an essoin for sickness on
the way, in à cause of possession or in & cause of pro-
perty, because in à cause of property he shall not
answer, whilst he is under age, unless it be that he has
been enfeoffed whilst under age, and in which case, as
he is bound to answer, he shall have all the remedies


f. 3!


0 b.


254 DE ESSONIIs.


dia q haberet quilibet major, ne sit deterioris coditio-
nis ppter state, licet essoniu de malo lecti & de malo
veniendi warratizare no possit, nec jurare nec in esso-
niü de malo lecti resposaglem mittere, poterit hzc om-
nia facere p custode, cü tutore autore. Ite no jac.
essoniü de malo lecti in psona warrati pendete placito
de warrátia, anteqin warrantus warrantizaverit. Itc"
nó jacet ubi priüs se ,no essoniaverit de malo veni-
endi, sed vertitur in essoniü de malo veniedi. Item
no jacet ubi tenes se essoniavit in villa de Lond, quia
mitti potest ibi ad capiedü attornatü, ut in com Buck.
de Hugone de Brock, & ita videtur q corà justic. iti-
neràtibus fieri debet ide si fuerit essoniatus in comi-
tatu in quo itineraverint, secüs si extra. te no jacet
in bii quo warrato. lIté no jacet in psona attornati,
ut si vir & uxor implacitati fuerint, vel pticipes, vel
duo exiranel simul, vel in diversis placitis, quorum
unus fuerit &ttornatus alterius, licet jaceat in psona
unius in psona! pprii placiti, tamen non jacet in per-
sona ejusdem de alio placito, quia est attornatus. Ite
non jacet ubi tertio die ante placitü cum? fuerit esso-
niatus. ltem non jacet quia petens, sed exigantur
plegii petentis propter defaltam. Ite non jacet de
pparte sororum. te non jacet in assis& ultima» psen-
tationis quce remansit ppter state, & resumonitio est
in tali statu. Ite si quis essoniatus fuerit de malo
lecti & petens non cóparuerit ante tertium diem pla-
citi, allocabitur defalta ad alium die, cüm essoniatores
petant judicium de defalta. Ite ide erit si tenens


! * in persona unius ratione proprii ? *« eum," omitted, MS. id.
* placiti," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 255


which à major would have, lest he be in & worse condi-
tion on account of his age, although he cannot warrant
an essoin for bed-sickness or for sickness on the way, nor
take an oath, nor send a person to answer for him in an
essoin of bed-sickness, he may do all these things through
a guardian, with a tutor's authority. Likewise an essoin
of bed-sickness does not lie in the person of & warrantor
pending a suit concerning & warranty before the war-
rantor has warranted. Likewise it does not lie where a
person has not previously essoined himself for sickness
on the way, but it is turned into an essoin of sickness
on the way. Likewise it does not lie where a person
has essoined himself in the vill of London, because he
could have been sent there to take an attorney, as in the
county of Bucks concerning Hugh de Brock, and so it
seems that it ought to be done before the Justices itine-
rant, if a person has been essoined in the county in
which they are itinerant, otherwise if beyond it. Like-
wise it does not lie in & writ of quo w«rranto. — Like-
wise it does not lie in the person of an attorney, as if
the husband and wife have been impleaded, or parceners,
or two strangers in blood together, or in different suits,
of whom one has been the attorney of the other, although
it would lie in the person of one in regard of his own
suit, nevertheless it does not lie in the person of the same
concerning the other suit, because he is an attorney.
Likewise it does not lie when on the third day before
the suit he has been essoined. Likewise it does not lie
because he is the plaintiff, but let the sureties of the plain-
tiff be exacted on account of his default. Likewise it
does not lie in & suit of partition between sisters. Like-
wise it does not lie in an assise of last presentation
which has been stayed on account of age, and the resum-
mons is in such & state. Likewise if & person has been
essoined for bed-sickness and the plaintiff has not ap-
peared before the third day of the plea, a default shall
be allowed for another day, when the essoiners claim
judgment by default. Likewise it shall be the same if


f. 350b


Britton, vi.
ch. x. $ 3.


256 DE ESSONIIS.


tertio die se essoniaverit de malo veniendi. Ité non
jacet de plaeito coventionis. Ite nec de placito quo
jure. Ité nec de placito finis facti. Ite si vir & uxor
advocati! fuerint ad warrantü, si tenens principalis se
essoniaverit de malo veniendi vel de malo lecti, an-
tequam vir & uxor warrantizaverit, exigantur warrüti,
& si vir mortuus fuerit, de novo sumoneatur uxor qg
per se sit ad warrantizandum. Si aute uxor premo-
riatur vel ambo, tune sumoneantur h:eredes. Ite no
jacet de ingressu ad terminü, vel cui uxor cotradicere
non potuit, vel de aliquo ingressu, nisi fuerit longin-
quus, videlicet, ubi breve de ingressu vertitur in breve
de recto per electione tenentis: ut de termino 8S. Mi-
chaelis anno regni regis H. septimo incipiente octavo
in comitatu North., de Henry de Gayton versus prio-
rem S. Jobannis de North. [Ite in eo q non jacet
essoniü de malo lecti, ubi non pr:ecessit essonium de
malo veniendi, sed vertitur in essoniü de malo veni-
endi, in comitatu Devon de Alicia Malet. Item in
eode conitatu Buck. de Hugone de Broke, q non jacet
in villa de Londoó non magis quà in comitatu, quia
potest essoniatus attornatum facere per quatuor milites.
Ite cadit breve & essonium no jacet ubi no dirigitur
breve de recto &d primum essonium de malo lecti, ut
in comitatu Lanc. de Alice. de Lanc. & W. de Taham,
Item no jacet quia de dote, sive p breve de recto de
dote, sive per breve de dote. It& no jacet in placito
ubi languor priüs fuit adjudicatus. Ite nec in placito
de escibio faciendo vel fü? capiendo? Item nec in
placito g quis pmittat psentare, sed peedatur ad defalta


! * voenti fuerint," MS. Rawl. C. ? * ve] cyrograffo capiendo," MS.
160. id.


OF ESSOINS. 957


the tenant on the third day shall have essoined himselt
for sickness on the way. Likewise it does not lie in &
suit respecting an agreement, Likewise not in & suit of
quo jure. Likewise not in & suit respecting a fine
levied. Likewise if husband and wife have been called
to warrant, if the tenant principal has essoined himself
for sickness on the way or for bed-sickness, before the
husband and wife have warranted, let. their warranties
be exaeted, &nd if the husband has died, let the wife be
summoned afresh that she appear alone to warrant.
But if the wife has pre-deceased or both, let the heirs in
such case be summoned. Likewise it does not lie con-
cerning an entry for à term, or one which & wife cannot
contradict, or concerning any entry, unless it has been
remote, for instance, where & writ of entry has been
turned into à writ of right by the election of the tenant,
as in St. Michael's term in the seventh and eighth years
of the reign of king Henry in the county of Northamp-
ton, concerning Henry de Gayton against the prior of St.
John at Northampton. Likewise in the case when an
essoin of bed.sickness does not lie where an essoin of
sickness in the way has not preceded, but it is turned into
an essoin of sickness by the way, in the county of Devon
concerning Alice Malet. Likewisein the same county of
Bucks concerning Hugh de Broke, that it does not lie in the
vill of London no more than in & county, because the
person essoined may make an attorney through the four
knights. Likewise the writ falls and an essoin does not
lie where à writ of right is not directed to the first es-
soin of bed-sickness, as in the county of Lancaster con-
cerning Alice of Lancaster and William de Taham.
Likewise it does not lie because it is concerning dower,
whether it be by a writ of right concerning dower, or by
a writ of dower. Likewise it does not lie in & suit
where languor has been previously adjudged. Likewise
not in suits concerning the making of an exchange or
the taking of à chirograph. Likewise not in & suit that &
person should permit a presentation, but let proceedings
Q 6366. R


9.
Qualiter
essonium
de malo
lecti judi-
candum sit,


f. 851.


958 DE ESSONIIS.


Et illud idem fiat in placito de servitiis & cosuetu-
dinibus. Et q ad breve de ingressu non jaceat, de
termino Sancti Michaelis anno regni regis H. sexto in
comitatu Not de Emma de Bella Fago, quia ibi dici-
tur q breve be ingressu squipollet brevi assisz mortis
antecessoris.


Essonia de malo lecti judicantur ita, s. quod primo
inspicienda sunt brevia originalia de recto, & si in
suo statu remanserint vel per narrationem inceperint
esse alterius naturse, & desierint esse brevia de recto,
vel si ab initio no fuerint brevia de recto & p nar-
rationem inceperint esse ut pdictum est, vel p speci-
ficationem. Item si plures sint ibi tenentes participes
& p indiviso, fiat de omnibus mentio. Eodem modo
de warranto vocato. Ite si plures sint ibi participes,
& plures dies pterierint & plura essonia, videndum erit
quid actum fuit ad quemlibet diem, per inspectionem
rotulorum, tam de essoniis, quàm de placitis, ut sciri
poterit quis habuerit essoni& & quot & quis non.
Item videre oportet quód laguor non prscesserit. Item
videri poterit quód ille qui se essoniavit de malo lecti
priàós habuerit essonium de malo veniendi. Sed esto
q quis se essoniavit de malo lecti, cüm se essoniasse
debuerit de malo veniendi, in utroqué casu vertitur in
essonium de malo veniendi cüm utrumque competat,
sed suo ordine, et qui facit id q majus est, facit id q
minus est, sed non é contrarió. Si quis se essoniaverit
de malo veniendi cüm se essoniasse deberet de malo


OF ESSOINS. 259


be had to a default. And let the same thing be done in
& suit concerning services and customs. Likewise that
it does not lie in & writ of entry, you have & case in St.
Michael's term in the sixth year of the reign of king
Henry in the county of Nottingham, concerning Emma
of the Beautiful Beech Tree, because it is there said that
& writ of entry is equivalent to & writ of mortdan-
cester.


Essoins of bed-sickness are thus judged. "That in the
first place the original writs of right are to be inspected,
and if they have remained in their own nature or
through the counting have begun to be of another
nature, and have ceased to be writs of right, or from
the beginning they have not been writs of right, and
through the counting have begun to be as aforesaid, or
through the specification. Likewise if there be several
there tenant co-parceners, and for the whole estate, let
mention be made of all. In the same way concerning
the vouching à warrantor. Likewise if there be several
co-parceners, and several days and several essoins have
passed, it will have to be seen what has been done on
each day, by an inspection of the rolls, as well concern-
ing the essoins as concerning the pleas, that it may be
known who has had essoins, and how many, and who
not. Likewise it is incumbent to see that languor has
not preceded. Likewise it is incumbent that it should
be seen that he who has essoined himself for bed.sick-
ness has previously had an essoin for sickness on the
way. But let it be that & person has essoined hiinself
for bed-sickness, when he ought to have essoined him-
self for sickness by the way, in each case it is turned
into an essoin for sickness by the way when he is en-
titled to both, but in their proper order, and he who
does that which is the greater, does that which is the
less, but not the converse. If any one has essoined
himself for sickness by the way, when he ought to have
essoined himself for bed-sickness, it does not avail nor

R Z


2
In what
wüy an
essoin of
bed-sick-
ness i8 to


be judged,


f. 351.


J.
Qualiter
redduntur
essonia de
malo lect
et de malo
veniendi
per or-
dinem.


260 DE ESSONIIS.


leetà, non valet nee exeusat non veniente. Et eodem
modo (ut videtur) si quis se essoniaverit de Terra
Sancta vel de ultra mare cum se essoniasse debuerit
de malo veniendi, vertitur essoniu de ultra mare in
essoniü de malo veniendi, eüm copetierit. Ite esto q
quis se essoniaverit de Ibernia quasi de ultra mare,
attornatur essoniu illud ad simplex essonium de malo
veniendi, ut corà M. de P. in banco anno regis Hen-
rici sexto de Gilberto Marescallo & Cecilia uxore ejus,
& Allanu de Hyda qui vocavit ad warrantum Wilhel-
mum Marescallum in coii Pembrook, et qui se essoni-
&vit de Ibernia, & non fuit allocatum, et postea fecit
de hoc q aliud essonium de malo veniedi ad alium
diem non fuit allocatum.


CA». IX.


dudicatis igitur essoniis tam de malo veniendi qm
de malo lecti, primó reddantur essonia de malo lecti,
hoc modo, & ideo prius redduntur, quia priüs capiun-
tur. Sed si essonium de malo veniendi essonio de
malo lecti adjungatur, essoniü de malo veniendi priüs
reddatur, et vocetur essoniator, & reddgtur essonium,
sive pars tenens se essoniaverit sive ipse petens. Et
si petens et pars tenens simul de malo veniendi, dica-
tur essoniatori petentis q expectet quartum die, si
quide quida forte defaltà fecerit, et breve de videndo
infirmum, sicut expectaret dominus ejus, & postea red-
datur essoniü de malo lecti, ita q si breve fuerit de


OF ESSOINS. 961


excuse his not coming. And in the same way (as it
seems) if any one has essoined hiinself for absence in
the Holy Land, or for absence beyond the sea, when he
ought to have essoined himself for sickness by the way,
the essoin of * ultra mare" is turned. into an essoin of
sickness by the way, when it is available, Likewise let
it be that & person has essoined himself for absence in
Ireland as if for absence beyond the sea, that essoin, is
attorned to & simple essoin of sickness by the way, as
before Martin de Pateshull in banco, in the sixth year of
king Henry, concerning Gilbert Marshall and Cecilia his
wife, and Allan de Hyda who called as & warrantor
William Marshall in the county of Pembroke, and who
essoined himself for absence in Ireland, and it. was not
allowed, and he afterwards did therewith that another
essoin for sickness on the way was not allowed to another


day.


CHAPTER IX.


Upon the essoins as well of sickness on the way as of - y
bed-sickness having been judged, in the first. place let UT
the essoins of bed-sickness be returned in this manner, bed-sick-

: ness and of
and they are returned first for this reason, that. they are sickness by
taken first. But if an essoin for sickness on tho way is the way
added to an essoin for bed-sickness, let the essoin for turned in
sickness by the way be first returned, and let the ?'4er.
essoiner be called, and let the essoin be returned whether
the party holding or the party claiming has essoined
himself. And if the claimant and the party holding
have essoined themselves together for sickness on the
way, let it be said to the essoiner of the claimant that
he should &wait the fourth day, if indeed some one by
chance shall make default, and a writ for viewing the
sick person, just as his principal would have awaited,
and afterwards let the essoin for bed-sickness be re-


turned, so that if there should be a close writ of right,


f, 351 b.


269 DE ESSONIIS.


recto clausum, sive pcipe in capite, q imediate porri-
gitur vicecomiti, & mittitur ad baneum, si essonium
jaceat, ita reddatur.  Primó exigantur essoniatores,
secundó exigatur petens, vel ejus essoniator: et tune si
omnes psentes fuerint, incotinenti ita reddatur.  Dica-
tur public essoniatoribus q eant domum, & sie mani-
festum est q non sunt essoniatores sed nuntii, qui
nullum recipiut die, et postea dicatur: & tu petens N.
vel essoniator, habebis breve de faciendo videre eum.
Et si hoc fuerit. malum transiens, ad tale terminum,
vel tale die certu. Et sic manifestum est g petens
recipit certü die, scilice&. comunem, ut tune veniat &
sequatur. De anno & die apud Turrim in Lond non
fiat aliqua metio: sed adhue in pendenti est, utrum
adjudicari debet languor vel non, & ad visores perti-
net q ei dent die, postqua ipsum viderunt, à die visus
sui in unum annum & unum die apud Turrim Lond.
Si aute bre de recto apertum fuerit, & translata fuerit
loquela ad magna curià à comitatu, & q semper rema-
net penes petente: Inprimis exigendü erit bre de recto,
scilicet àd seeundum diem, dum placitum fuerit novum,
& sufficit (quantum ad omnia essonia subsequentia) q
semel ostendatur, & cüm ostensum fuerit & lectum,
reddatur essoniuü. Et si petens illud ad manü non
habuerit, non reddatur essoniü donec fuerit ostensum,
& si infra quartü diem illud no ostenderit, pcedatur
ad defaltam cotra ipsum petente, et essoniatores per
judiciü recedent sine die: ut in rotulo de termino S.
Trinitat aà regis Henrici decimoquinto in coi Wigoriü
de Ada de Thornmarton; & ita fiat irrotulatio, cüm
essoniatores se optulerint versus petente quarto die:


OF ESSOINS. 963


or & precipe n capite, which is immediately handed to
the viseount and is sent to the bench, if the essoin
should lie, let it be thus returned. First let the es-
soiners be called, secondly let the claimant or his essoiner
be called, and then if all should be present, let it forth-
with be thus returned. Let it be said publiely to the
essoiners that they may go home, and so it is manifest
that they are not essoiners, but messengers, who receive
no day, and afterwards let it be said, *and thou the
* elaimant N. or his essoiner shall have & writ for caus-
" ing him to be viewed." And if it be for & transient
illness, * for such a terin," or *to such a fixed day." And
So it is manifest that the claimant receives & certain
day, to wit, & common day, that he should then come and
sue. Concerning a year and a day at the Tower in
London let there not be any mention: but it is still
pending, whether languor or not shall be adjudged, and
it appertains to the viewers that they should give him
& day, after they have seen him, from the day of their
view to one year and one day at the Tower of London.
But if the writ of right has been open, and the argu-
ment has been transferred from the county court to the
great court, and which always remains in the power of
the claimant : in the first place let the writ of right be
called for, to wit, for the second day, whilst the suit is
new, and it is sufficient (as far as regards all subsequent
essoins) that it should be once shown, and when it hae
been shown and read, let the essoin be returned. And
if the claimant has not that at hand, let the essoin not
be returned until it has been shown, and if he has not
shown it within the fourth day, let proceedings be had
for & default against the claimant himself, and the es-
soiners by a judgment shall depart without & day: as
inthe roll of Holy Trinity term in the fifteenth year of
king Henry in the county of Worcester,concerning Ada
de Thornmarton. And thus let the enrolment take place,
when the essoiners have presented themselves against the


f. 351 b.


2.
Qualiter
redduntur
essonia de
malo veni
endi.


264 DE ESSONIIS.


Tales & tales essoniatores talis, optulerunt se quarto
die versus tale, qui petiit versus tale tantà tram, sed
talis petens venit, sed non habuit breve suum de recto,
nec primo, nec secundo, nee tertio, nec quarto die, &
ideo essoniatores sine die de brevi illo, & poterit esse
ratio, quia forte ab initio nullum fuit breve impetra-
tum, nee exhibitum in curia domini capitalis. In red-
dendo vero essonio de malo lecti, exigendi sunt omnes
quos loquela tangit, vir si uxor fuerit essoniata, &
e contrarió. Item participes, ut habeant eundem diem.
Itó quatuor milites electores, vel duodecim milites ad
facienda magna assisam electi, si in tantü sit pceessum.
Item warrantus exigendus erit, donec warrantizaverit.
Cim autem ita redditum fuerit essonium de malo
lecti, statim habebit petens, vel ejus essoniator, breve
de mittendo quatuor milites ad videndü essoniatum, &
judicandu utrum infirmitas qua se essoniaverit languor
sit, vel malum transiens, secundü q inferius dicetur.


Redduntur quide hoec modo: Primó vocetur public?
essoniator sie: ubi est essoniator talis? postea, ubi est
talis, scilicet. contra quem factum est essonium, vel
essonlator, si forte fuerit essoniatus? Et si ambo
psentes fuerint, affidabunt essoniatores de habendo war-
rantos suos, ad certum diein, cotinente in se ad minus
Spaciu quindecim dierum, & secüdum q dictum est de
uno intelliyatur de pluribus, si fuerint essoniati, psen-
tibus vero dabitur ide dies, & omnibus quos causa
tetigerit. Si aute quida eorü defalta fecerint, dicatur


-peteti vel ejus essoniatori, q expectet quartü dió suum


OF ESSOINS. 265


claimant on the fourth day. So-and-so the essoiners of
such a person have presented themselves on the fourth day
acainst so-and-so, who claimed against such person so
much land, but the said claimant came, but he had not his
writ of right, neither on the first nor on the second nor
on the third nor on the fourth day, and accordingly the
essoiners were without & day concerning that writ, and
there might be reason, because perhaps from the be-
ginning. there had been no writ sued out, nor exhibited
in the court of the superior lord. But in returning an
essoin of bed-sickness, all those are to be called whom
the argument touches, the husband if the wife has been
essoined, and the converse. Likewise coparceners that
they may have the same day. Likewise the four
knights the electors, or the twelve knights the elected,
to make a great assise, if proceedings have gone so far.
Likewise & warrantor will have to be ealled, until he
has warranted. But when the essoin for bed-sickness has
been so returned, the claimant or his essoiner shall have
forthwith & writ to the said four knights to view the
party essoined, and to judge whether the infirmity for
which he has been essoined be a languishing disease or &
transient illness, according to what will be said below.


They are returned in this manner. First let the — 2»
essoiner be called publicly thus: where is such an E E
essoiner ? afterwards, where is so-and-so, to wit, azainst fot sicknicós
whom the essoin has been made ? or his e:soiner, if by P
chance he has been essoined ? Ànd if both are present, turned.
the essoiners shall pledge themselves to produce their
warrantors on & certain day, comprising in itself at least
the space of fifteen days, and according to what has
been said of one person let it be understood concerning
several, if they have been essoined, but to those present
the same day shall be given, and to all whom the cause
touches. Butif some of them have made default, let it
be said to the claimant or to his essoiner, that he should


&wait the fourth day with regard to those who have


266 DE ESSONIIS.


versus illos qui non venerunt, ut pcedatur ad defalta,
secundum q inferiíüs dicetur de defaltis. In essonio
vero reddendo (ut supra de essoniis de malo lecti)
exigatur omnes illi quos causa tetigerit, sicut pticeps,
warrantus, & ali, ut supra, recognitores in  assisis,
juratores in juratis, inquisitores in üinquisitionibus,
milites in electionibus faciendis, vel milites in magnis
assisis, ut habeant eunde diem, si psentes fuerint, vel
q attachientur omnes qui absentes fuerint, & si quidà
ilorum mortui fuerint, vel ut inutiles recusati, vel
aliqua forte ratione excusati, loco ipsorum ponuntur
alii per quos negotium melius possit expediri, & non
cotingit ssepius q tales habeant essonium aliquod, vel
excusationem.


3. Non aute omnes essoniatores ad diem recipiendum
Qui essoni- affidabunt, sed illi tantum, qui sunt baronibus inferio-
dabuntet res: barones vero &  baronisse, & eorum superiores,
nie sicut comites, & eorum attornati, non affidabunt, sed
de plegi-  plegios invenient. Martinus in banco anno septimo.
dationo, Et si baro vel baronissa ad diem datum defaltam feco-
Briton,] rit, sumoneantur plegii quód sint ad alium diem ad
$4 ch. vi. audiendum judicium suum, quare non habuerunt eum,

sieut eum plegiaverunt. Ratio vero diversitatis hujus
talis esse poterit (ut videtur) q ita nobiles & digne
f.352. psons in warrantizatione essonii nO per se jurabuni,
sed per pcuratores, scilicet plegios suos. Ite no est
alicui concedendum, q in essonio alterius reddendo,
diem recipiat petes, maximé in absentia sua, vel sui
&ttornati, vel sui essoniatoris, ppter inconveniens q
sequi posset, quia si in absentia talium hzc fierent, &
essoniator tenent ante diem datu de essonio de malo


veniendi à curia recederet, cüm partem ipsius tenentis


OF ESSOINS. 267


not come, that proceedings may be had to & default,
according to what will be said below concerning de-
faults. But in returning an essoin (as above concerning
essoins for bed-siekness) let all those be called whom
the cause will touch, such as & coparcener, & warrantor,
and others, as above, recognisors in assises, jurymen in
juries, inquisitors in inquests, knights in making elec-
tions, or knights in great assises, that they may have
the same day, if they be present, or that they may all
be attached who may be absent, and if some of them
are dead or have been refused as useless, or excused by
chance for some reason, others are put into their places
by whom the business may be better expedited,and it
does not happen repeatedly that such persons have some
essoin or excusation.


But not all essoiners shall pledge themselves to accept —— 3.

a day, but only those, who are inferior to barons, but Mt e*

barons and baronesses and their superiors, such as counts shall

and their attorneys, shall not pledge themselves, but Deeieen

shall find sureties. Martin de Pateshull in Banco, in the snd shall

seventh year [of king Henry.] And if & baron or baro- DE sud.

ness on the given day have made default, let their concerning
: the finding

sureties be summoned that they be present on another of sureties.

day to hear their judgment, wherefore they have not

produced him as they pledged themselves to do. But

the reason of this diversity may be of this character (as

it seems), that persons of nobility and dignity in the f£ 322.

warranting of their essoin should not swear by them-

selves, but by proctors, to wit their sureties. Likewise

it is not to be conceded to any one that in returning

the essoin of another person the claimant should receive

& day chiefly in his own absence or in the absence of

his attorney or of his essoiner, on account of the incon-

venience which might follow, because if in the absence

of such persons these things were done, and the essoiner

of & tenant before the day given for an essoin of sick-

ness on the way should retire from the court, when he


4.
Quid sit
wacranti-
Zare esso-
nium per
saeramen
tum.


2608 DE ESSONIIS.


defendere teneatur, si petens post diem acceptum se
liti. offeret, et judicium de defalta peteret, dies ab eo
acceptus, eujus non interesset, pro non accepto habere-
tur 5i aute ambo essoniatores tam petentis quàm
tenentis hoe fecerint, tüe de defalta non erit multum
curandum, cüm uterq illorum sit in eade causa, nec
sit aliquid, vel quasi quid, q- Judeus Judwo possit
imputare, Cüm auté quis ita essoniatus fuerit de malo
veniendi, & essoniator affidaverit, vel plegios invenerit
de habendo eum ad diem datum p ipsum, essoniator
venire debet, & pducere dominum suum ad warranti-
zandum essonium, quod p eo fecerit.


Est &utem warrantizare, jurare quód ita detentus
fuit zeritudine in veniendo versus curiam, q venire
no potuit p lucrari nee p perdere, & q essonium fecit
secundü legem terre, quod quidem si ita fecerit, esso-
nium suum warrantizabit. Si autem dominus princi-
palis non venerit ad diem sibi datum per essoniatorem
suum, nec etiam essoniator, essoniator se excusare po-
terit (si voluerit) & dominum suum per essonium, quod
venire non potuit nec dominum suum habere sicut
alfidavit, propter malum q ei in itinere veniendo ver-
sus curiam supervenit. Sed quoniam, si de hujusmodi
fieret inquisitio longa, fieri posset loquele protractio,
non est de warrantizatione essonii multum curandum,
quia no vertitur in alicujus praejudicium nisi ipsius
petentis, q quidem est ei dissimulandum.  Ité esto q
tenens postqm diem habuerit per essoniatorem suum,
& anteqm essoniü suum  warrantizaverit, fecerit attor-
natum, & ad diem petatur warrantia de essonio, quz-
riiur quis facere debeat warrantiam ? Et videtur q


OF ESSOINS. 269


is bound to defend the part of the tenant himself, if the
claimant after the day aecepted should present himself
to join issue, and should claim judgment by default,
the day accepted by him who had no interest in the
matter would be held as not accepted. But if both the
essoiners of the claimant as well as of the tenant have
done this, then much care need not be taken concerning
the default, since both of them ave in the same cause,
nor is there any thing or as it were any thing, which
Jew might impute to Jew. But when & person has been
so essoined for sickness by the way and the essoiner has
pledged himself or has found sureties to present him on
& day given through him, the essoiner ought to come
and produce his principal to warrant the essoin, which
he has made on his behalf.


But to warrant is to swear that he has been so de- 4.
tained by illness in coming towards the court, that he M hatiti


could not come to gain nor to lose, and that he had an essoin
made an essoin €— to the law of the land, which ^Y *" ?sth.
indeed if he has done so, he will warrant his essoin.
But if the principal party has not come on the day
given to him through his essoiner, nor even the essoiner,
the essoiner may excuse himself (if he should wish) and
his principal through an essoin, that he could not come
nor produce his principal as he had pledged himself, on
account of & misfortune which has come upon him in
his way when coming to the court. But since, if there
be an inquest into this matter, the prolongation of the
trial might be long, much care is not to be taken con-
cerning the warrantisation of an essoin, because it does
not turn to the prejudice of any one except of the
claimant himself, whieh indeed is to be dissembled to
him. Likewise let 1t. be that the tenant, after he has
had & day through his essoiner, and before he has war-
ranted his essoin, has made an attorney, and on the day
& warranty of the essoin is claimed, it is asked who
ought to make the warranty? And it seems that the


f. 352 b.


270 DE ESSONIIS.


warrantus no, quia se no essoniaverit. Oportet igitur
q tenens veniat, & warrantizet, alioquin non erit esso-
nium warrantizatum. Et quamvis attornatum fecerit,
non ppter hoc se excludit, quin veniat & se defendat
cum possit & velit. Item si quis attornatü fecerit, qui
se essoniaverit, ante diem datum per essonium suum
ipsum amovere velit, & alium substituere, non erit hoc
ei tutum, anteqm dies pterierit, q warrantizatum sit
essoniü, quia nec ipse tenens, nec attornatus amotus
illud warrantizare possunt. Et hzc poterit esse ratio
q attornatus amoveri no debet postqm fuerit essonia-
tus ut in psona principalis domini sequatur essonium
de malo lecti. In essonio de malo veniendi datur dies
multipliciter à justiciariis, quadodQ corà seipsis, quan-
doq coram justiciarüis itinerantibus, & cora se ipsis
quadoq puré, quadoq sub distinctione, hoc est, corà se
ipsis nisi justiciarii prius itineraverint in com, vel corà
justitiariis puré ad certü die vel incertum. In quibus
casibus sequitur essonium coram justiciariis itineranti-
bus, vel non sequitur, secundum q tales diem recepe-
rint corà justiciariis de banco, per se in banco, vel per
essoniatore, eo excepto q si die ita ceperint incer-
tum in baco, ita vz. in advétu justiciariorum, oportet
q sequatur generalis sumonitio, d pcedat advetum jus-
ticiariorü p quindena vel àplius, ex qua suinonitione
sequi poterit essoniu de malo veniedi, sicut in omnibus
brevibus et &assisis, d imediaté ponuntur à cancellaria
in adventu justiciariorU. Si aute dies datus fuerit sic
à justiciariis de banco cora justiciariis itineratibus in


OF ESSOINS. 271


warrantor ought not, because he has not essoined him-
self. It is incumbent therefore that the tenant should
come and should warrant, otherwise the essoin will not
be warranted. And although he has made an attorney,
he does not on that account exclude himself from
coming and defending himself when he can and wishes
so to do. Likewise if any one has made an attorney, who
has essoined himself, and before the day given to him
through his essoin he wishes to remove him, and to sub-
stitute another, this will not be safe for him, before the
day has passed that his essoin should be warranted, be-
cause neither he himself, the tenant, nor the attorney
who has been removed can warrant it. And this may
be the reason why the attorney ought not to be removed
after he has been essoined, that an essoin for bed-sick-
ness may follow in the person of the principal. Inan
essoin for sickness on the way a day is given by the
Justiciaries in many ways, sometimes before themselves,
sometimes before the justices itinerant and before them-
selves sometimes absolutely, sometimes with a distinc.
tion, that is, before themselves unless the justiciaries
have previously made their iter in the county, or before
the justiciaries absolutely on a certain day or an uncer-
tain day. In which cases an essoin follows before the
justices itinerant, or does not follow, according as such
persons have had a day given to them before the justi-
ciaries of the bench, through themselves in banco or
through an essoiner, with this exception, that if they
have had an uncertain day given to them in banco,
thus, to wit, upon the coming of the justiciaries, it is
incumbent that a general summons should follow, which
should precede the coming of the justiciaries by fifteen
days or more, from which summons there may follow an
essoin for sickness on the way, as in all writs and as-
sises, which are immediately appointed by the Chancery
upon the coming of the justiciaries. But if & day has
been thus given by the justiciaries of the bench before


f. 352 b.


5.
Si in die
dato erra-
tum fuerit,
quid sit
faciendum.


279 DE ESSONIIS.


itinere cüm itineraverint, tunc erit ut supradictü est.
In itinere veró justiciarioru essonia in principio itine-
ris, aliquado de communi sumonitione, aliquando de pla-
cito tre, in quib? casib? habebüt essoniati die rationa-
bile ad min? quindenz, sive ira, d petita fuerit, fuerit
infra comitatu, vel extra, dum tamen extra, et visus
petatur vel warrantus vocetur, erit quilibet dies certus
et rationabilis. Si autem terra fuerit infra com, cüm
lites sint potius restringendz, erunt in pdictis casibus
inducie arbitrari? trium dierum, vel quatuor, vel am-
plius, secundum distantiam locorum in quibus terra
fuerit qua petitur.


Cüm dies datus fuerit rationabilis, sive in banco sive
in itinere, & erratu fuerit forte in die dato, ita q ro-
tuli no conveniant sed discordent, ut si in uno rotulo
cotineatur q dies datus fuit in quindecim dies, & in
alio rotulo cotineatur vel in pluribus, quód in tres
septimanas vel ulteriüs, semper psumedum erit de die,
secundum q in rotulo primo, s. pthonotarii, eujus irro-
tulatione sequi debent ones alii rotuli subsequentes,
& inde trahere origine & autoritate. Et licet plures
sint in contrarium, et. càm primus rotulus ita inducat
psumptionem vehementem cotra alios, stari! poterit
psumptio, si recordum ;justiciariorum conveniat cum
primo. $i autem dissentiat à primo & conveniat cum
alis, vincitur psumptio de primo rotulo, & stabitur
eorum recordo. Si autem ab omnibus rotulis discordet,
fiat eode modo, q eorum stabitur recordo. Et quid si
ipsi justiciarii inter se discordes fuerint? stabitur ma-


1 * praestari," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 273


the justiciaries itinerant in their iter, when they are on
circuit, then it shall be done as aforesaid. But on the
cireuit of the justiciaries there are essoins at the be-
ginning of the circuit, sometimes upon & common sum-
mons, sometimes upon & suit for land, in which cases
the essoinees shall have & reasonable day at least of &
fortnight, whether the land which is claimed be within
the county or without, provided however if it be without,
and & view is claimed or & warrantor vouched, there
shall be a certain and reasonable day. But if the land be
within the county, since lawsuits are rather to be re-
strained, there shall be in the aforesaid cases truces at
pleasure for three or four days or more, according to the
distanee of the places in which the land is, which is
claimed.


When & reasonable day has been given, whether at ,,5. |.
. . ere
the Bench or on the cireuit, and there has been by an error in
chance an error as to the day given, so that, the rolls he lay,.-
: PLA given, what
do not acree, but are discordant, as if it should be con- is to be
tained in one roll that a day has been given at the end 19^*
of & fortnight, and it be contained in another roll or
in several rolls, that à day has been given at the end of
three weeks or more, the presumption shall always be
in favour of the day according to the first roll, to wit,
that of the prothonotary, the enrolment of which all the
other subsequent rolls ought to follow, and therefrom
derive their origin and authority. And although there
may be several to the contrary, since the first roll thus
creates & vehement presumption against the others, the
presumption may be abided by, if the record of the jus-
ticiarlies agrees with the first roll. But if it differs from
the first and agrees with the others, the presumption
arising from the first roll is refuted, and their record
shall be abided by. But if it should differ from all
the other rolls, let 1t happen in the same manner that
their record shall be abided by. And what if the justi-


ciaries themselves are at variance with one another, the
Q 6366. S


274 DE ESSONIIS.


jori parti. Si aute wquales numero, tune digniori cum
psuiuptione rotulorum. — Si autem quilibet ab alio, ppter
defeetum | pbationis habebitur ille dies p non dato, &
pcedat loquela de novo.


CAP. X.


l. Postquam essonia de malo lecti & malo veniendi
Er adjornata sint, inprimis & ante omnia fiat bre de vi-
quatuor — dedo essoniatum de malo lecti in hae forma: Mitte
mans quatuor legales milites de cot? tuo apud talem villain
essoniatus. &l. videndum utrum infirmitas, qua A. de N. in curia
e n nostra coram justiciariis nostris apud W. essoniavit se
eum viden- de malo lecti, versus. B. de N. de placito terr vel
mm hujusmodi, sit languor vel non, & si sit languor,

tunc ponant ei diem à die visus sui in unum annum
& unum diem apud Turrim London, quod tunc sit ibi
f.353. inde responsurus, vel sufficiente p se mittat responsale,
& si non sit làguor, tune ponat ei die coram justicia-
riis nostris apud W. in octabis &e. q tunc sit ibi inde
responsurus, vel sufficiente p se mittat responsale. Et
die quatuor militibus illis q sint cora eisdem | justicia-
ris nostris apud West. ad pdictum terminü ad testifi-
candu visum suü, & qm diem ei posuerunt, & habeas
ibi nomina militü, & hoe breve. Si aute terra fuerit in
com uno, et tenens jacuerit in alio, tunc ad vicecomite
illius comitatus, ubi essoniatus Jacuerit, dirigatur breve,
et dicatur in brevi de placito terre in tali coinitatu.
S1 aute plures, qui tenuerit in comuni p indiviso, vel
sicut vir et uxor, se essoniaverint in eode com et jacu-


-


OF ESSOINS, 975


greater part shall be abided by. But if they are equal
in number, then the one of greater dignity with the
presumption of the rolls. But if one differs from another,
then on account of the defect of proof that day shall be
held not to have been given, and let the trial proceed
afresh.


CHAPTER X.


After the essoins for bed-sickness and for sickness on. 1.
. . : A writ to
the way have been adjourned, in the first place and j.p


before anything let à writ be issued for viewing the kuights to
person essoined for bed-sickness in this form : Send four ern

loyal knights of your county to such a vill to see whether He

the illness, concerning which A. de N. has essoined hiin- gickuess, in
self for bed-sickness in our court before our justiciaries ud

at Westminster against B. de N., in a suit for land or
such like, be languor or not ; and if it be languor, then
let them appoint to him a day after the day of their
view of him up to one year and one day at the Tower
of London, that he be then there to make answer or
send a sufficient answerer in his place; and if it be not
languor, then let them appoint a day for him to appear
before our justiciaries a& Westminster in tle octave &c.,
that he be there then to answer, or that he send a
sufficient answerer in his place. And say to those four
knights that tMey should present themselves before our
said justiciaries at Westminster at the aforesaid time
to testify their view and what day they have ap-
pointed to him, and have thou there the names of the
knights and this writ. But if the land be in one county
and the tenant be lying in another, then let & writ be
directed to the viscount of that county, in which the
essoinee shall be lying, and let it be explained in the writ
concerning the. suit for land in that county. But if
several persons who have held that land in common as
& whole, or as husband and wife, have essoined them-

s 2


Í. 353.


276 DE ESSONIIS.


erint in diversis locis & diversis villis, tune fiat breve
hoe modo: Mitte quatuor legales milites de com tuo
apud tale villam ad videndu utrum infirmitas, qua C.
de N. in curia nífa &c. essoniavit se de malo lecti
versus eundé B. de placito terre, sit languor vel non,
& sic fiat de pluribus pticipibus in infinituü qui jacue-
rint in eodé comitatu in diversis villis & locis. Et
tunc sic: Et si sint languores, licet plures judicari
debeat p uno, tune ponant eis dic à die visus sui in
unü annii & uni die apud Turrim Lond q sint tunc
ibi resposuri, ut supra. Et eodé modo dicatur de viro
& uxore, si essoniati fuerint simul et in eode com in
diversis locis. Si autem in eode comitatu et eode
loco, tune fiat breve sic: Mitte quatuor legales milites
de eom tuo apud tale locü ad videndu utru infirmitas,
qua tales, talis & talis (et sic deinceps) in curia nos-
tra &c. essoniaverint se de malo lecti versus talem de
placito terr», sint languores vel non, et si sint laguo-
res &c. ut supra Si aute plures pticipes essoniati
de malo lecti jacuerint in diversis comitatibus, quilibet
habebit bie suü per se ad vicecomitem ubi jacuerint,
secundu q in uno comitatu jacuerint plures vel unus.
Et cu plures pticipes (ut przdictü est) habere no de-
beat nisi unieü languore, cüm unus vel plures simul
essoniati fuerint de malo lecti, et dies datus peteti &
ptieipibus, qui psetes erunt p se vel p essoniatores, si
fuerint essoniati, nó possunt alii pticipes ad aliqm die
se essoniare de malo lecti, donec costiterit utrü primo
essoniatus de malo lecti languore habuerit vel infirmi-
tate traseunte, q si esset et utriq eorü diversis tepori-


OF ESSOINS. oT T


selves in the same county and have lain in divers places
and in divers vills, then let à writ be drawn up in this
manner : Send four loyal knights of your county to such
a vil in order to see whether the illness for which
C. de N. has essoined himself in our court &c. for bed-
sickness against the said B. in a suit for land be languor
or not, and so let it be done concerning several parceners
without end who have lain in the same county in divers
vills and places. And then thus: and if there be lan-
gours, although several ought to be judged instead of
one, then let them appoint for them from the day of their
view of them & day at the end of one year and one
day at the Tower of London, that they be there to an-
swer as above. And in the same manner let it be said
coneerning & husband and wife, if they have been es-
soined together and in the same county in ditferent
places. But if in the same county and in the same
place, then let the writ run thus: Send four loyal
knights of thy county to such & place in order to sce
whether the illness, for which such persons, so-and-so
and so-and-so (and so in succession) in our court &c.
have essoined themselves for bed-sickness against so-
and-so in a suit for land, be languors or not, and if they
be languors &c. &s above. But if several parceners
essoined for bed-sickness shall lie in different counties,
each shall have his own writ by himself to the viscount
where they lie, aecording as one or more lie in one
county. And when several parceners (as aforcesaid)
ought not to have more than a single essoin for languor,
when one or more have been essoined together for bed-
sickness, and & day has been given to the claimant and
his parceners, who shall be present either by themselves
or by their essoiners, if they have been essoined, the
other parceners cannot essoin themselves for another
day for bed-sickness, until it be ascertained whether the
first person essoined for bed-sickness has a languor ora
transient illness, because if it were so and a languor


2.
De officio
vicecomitig,
cum sus-
ceperit
breve.


f. 353 b.


278 DE ESSONIIS.


bus languor esset adjudicatus, et diversus annus & dies
datus, sic essent ibi duo liguores de uno placito, q
esse non debet. Sed cum primo cssoniatus surrexit
per lieentia, vel malü transiens ei per milites adjudi-
catum fuerit, & de co costiterit, statim incipiat parti-
ceps unus vel plures se essoniare de malo lecti, dum
tamen peesserit essonium de malo veniendi, et sic eo-
dem modo (ut predictum est) donec omnes eorum
simul, vel quidá eorum, vel unus tantum unicum habu-
erit languorem. | Cüm autem petens post essonium red-
ditum, et diem certum acceptum, si sit. malum trans-
iens, statim sine mora habere faciat vicecomiti breve
de videndo essoniatum.


Officium vero vicecomitis est cüm susceperit breve
in comitatu, statim mittere quatuor legales milites ad
"videndum essoniatum.  Ássumere aute debet ad hoc
milites presentes, & non sumonere absentes, propter
verba brevis, Mitte. Item non sufficit si mittat ser-
vientes, milites enim esse debent ppter verba brevis,
mitte milites. Item no sufficit mittere tres ppter verba
brevis, mitte quatuor, & quia certus numerus adjicitur,
seilieet quatuor, duo vel tres sufficiunt. Ite no sufficit
si duo vel tres sibi socios assumant usq, ad quatuor,
quia videre no debent nec testificari nisi mittantur
de comitatu suo: ideo dicitur de comitatu, quia si
alios mittere vellet, no habeat coertionem. Item apud
tale locü ideo dicitur, quia si essoniator in loco in
essonio nominato no inveniretur, ita posset esse in
defalta, vel si modo debito se no teneret in languore.
Ite ad videndü utrum infirmitas &c. videre enim debet


OF ESSOINS. 919


should have been. adjudged to each of them at different
times, and a different year and day appointed to them,
theve would thus be two lan;zuors in one suit, which ought
not to be. But when the first essoinee has risen up
throu;rh a licence, or a transient illness has been adjudged
to him by the knights, and his case has been ascer-
tained, forthwith let one or more parceners begin to
essoin himself for bed-sickness, provided an essoin for
sickness on the way has preceded, and. so in the same
manner (as aforesail) until all of them together, or
certain of them, or one only have had a sinyle languor.
But when the claimant after the essoin has been re-
turned and a certain day appointed, if it be a transient
illness let him forthwith without. delay cause the
viscount to reccive à writ to view the essoincc.


But it is the ofliee of the viscount, when he has re- 2.
ceived the writ in his county, to send forthwith four UT
loyal knights to view the essoinee, And he ought to the vis-
assume for this purpose knights whoare present, and not AN
to summon absent knights, on account. of the words of hus re-

. : EC "P . ceived à
the writ, "send." Likewise 1t 1s not sufficient, if he sends «rit.
serjeants, for they ought to be knights on account of the. f. 353 b.
words of the writ, ^send knights." | Likewise it is not
suffieient to send. three, on account of the words of the
writ * send four," and because a certain number is added,
to wit, * four," twoor three do not suffice. Likewise it does
not suffice if two or three assume associates up to the
number of four, for they ought not to view nor to testify,
unless they are. sent from his county, accordingly it. is
said "from the county," because if he wishes to send
others, he would not have eoercion. Likewise *at such
*" & place" is said for this reason, because if the essoiner be
not found in the place named in the cssoin, he. might so
be in default, or if he did not keep himself in the proper
manner in a case of languor. Likewise it is to be. seen
whether the illness &e., for they ought to view the bodies,


280 DE ESSONIIS.


corpora, & diligenter inquirere de qualitate infirinitatis
& cireustantiis, & secundü hoc judicare malum transiens
vel languorem, & rationem inde reddere, si fuerint inde
requisiti, & secundü hoc dare die certum, vel in curia,
vel apud Turrim Lond, & ideo apud Turrim ppter locum
certum, & ubi costabularius semper psens esse debet,
& cotinuus, & qui testificari debet diem apparitionis &
adventus, & hoc quia justiciarii no semper cotinué p
annum in banco sunt residentes. Et cüm ita in curia
& in judicio datus sit dies partibus post annu & diem
apud Turrim, no sufficit si ptes veniant (omisso loco
illo Turris) coram justitiaris apud Westmonasteriu in
banco, si tune ibi fuerint residentes, quia aliud est
dare diem apud Turrim, & aliud in baco Westm, & sic
cüm diem habuerint apud Turrim, à constabulario apud
Turrim debet diem recipere ad bancu, si justiciarii fue-
rit residentes in banco, vel 81 non residentes, tunc cüm
justice. ibi primó venerint, nisi ita sit, q tunc itineran-
tes fuerint in comitatu, quia tunc ibi detur dies, ex
quo omnes loquele, quie in banco fuerint posit», sunt
& remanent sine die p publicam declamatione inde
factam. Si autem justic. residentes fuerint in banco,
& similiter justiciarii itinerantes in comitatu ubi terra
sita est qus petitur, tunc detur dies corà justiciariis
de bàco, & justiciarii de baco diem pr:wfigant cora jus-
ticlaris itineratibus in comitatu quasi ordine obser-
vato. Et de hac materia pleniüs dicetur inferiüs, se-
cundü q partes venerint apud Turrim vel no venerint.
Item bene cotingere poterit q essoniatus apud Turrim
venire non possit ad diem suum, quia forte lagrmuor


OF ESSOINS. 281


and inquire diligently concerning the character of the
illness and the cireumstances, and accordingly to judge
whether it be & transient illness or & tedious disease, and
to render an account thereof if they be required, and
acordingly to appoint a certain day either in the Court
or at the Tower of London, &nd for this reason at the
Tower, as being a certain place and where the constable
ought always to be present and continuously so, and who
ought to testify to the day of their appearance and arrival,
and this because the justiciaries are not continuously
resident throughout the year at the Bench. And when
there has thus been given in the court and in judgment &
day to the parties after à year and & day at the Tower, it
is not sufficient if the parties should come (having omitted
the place of the Tower) before the justiciaries at West-
minster in the Bench, if they should be then resident
therein, for it is one thing to appoint & day at the Tower,
and another at the Bench in Westminster, and so when
they have had a day at the Tower, they ought to receive
from the constable at the Tower & day at the Bench, if
the justiciaries are in residence at the Bench, or if not in
residence, then when the justiciaries have first come
there, unless it so be that they are then itinerant in the
county, because in that case let & day be given there,
since all the trials, which have been placed at the Bench,
are and remain without a day by a public declaration there
made aloud. But if the justiciaries should be resident
in the Bench, and in like manner there are justiciavies
itinerant in the county, where the land is which is
claimed, then let à day be given before the justiciaries of
the bench, and let the justiciaries of the bench appoint a
day before the justiciaries itinerant in the county as it
were order being observed. And on this matter more
will be said below, according as the parties have come
to the Tower or have not come. Likewise it may well
happen that an essoinee cannot coine to the Tower on the
day given to him, because his languor has turned into &


f. 354.


3.
Irrotulatio
8i visores


282 DE ESSONIIS.


vertitur in morbu sonticü, scilicet in morbü . incurabile,
quo casu, cüm venire no possit, mittere debeat suffici-
ente resposalem qui in se suscipiat judicium, & ejus
responsione oportet habere ratà, secundum q inferiüs
dicetur. ltem dicere debet vicecomes militibus q sint
ad diem certum in brevi cotentum corà justiciariis
apud W. ad testificandu visu suu, & dm diem ei posu-
erunt. Si autem petens diligens fuerit in psecutione,
& vicecomes negligens: fuerit cüm bre susceperit, tuc
peipiatur vicecofi (sieut prius) q ipse sit auditurus
judieiu suü, & sic puniatur ejus negligentia. Si aute
steterit p petente, & no p vicecomite, quo minus esso-
niatus visus fuerit, tunc in defectu petentis detur es-
soniato licentia surgendi, si licentia petierit & conva-
luerit de infirmitate, & dabitur petenti alius dies, &
mandetur essoniato q statim veniat ad curiam, ut
habeat eundem die, quia cüm tenens essoniatus fuerit
de malo lecti, postquam in curia semel coparuerit, sine
visu quatuor militum, vel sine licentia impuné surgere
no poterit, secundu « inferiüs dicetur. $i aute nec
petens nec vicecomes negligens fuerit, & milites visum
no fecerint forte, vel ecüm fecerint no venerint ad tes-
tificandü, tunc ad die datum, offerente se liti petete
versus tenente & milites, tunc attachientur milites
secundum q nomina eorum in brevi scribuntur, p tale
bie, & fiat ita irrotulatio si vic. miserit bre.


ÀÁ. optulit se quarto die versus B., & B. no venit,
nec quatuor milites, (vel sic & melius) A. optulit se


OF ESSOINS. 983


malignant disease, to wit, into an ineurable disease, in
which case, since he cannot come, he ought to send a
sufficient representative to take upon himself the judg-
ment, and it is incumbent that his answer should be
ratified according to what will be said below. | Likewise
the viscount ought to say to the knights, that they should
be on a certain day contained in the writ before the
justiciaries at. Westminster to testify to their view, and
as to what day they have assigned to hin. But if the
claimant has been diligent in prosecuting his suit, and
the viscount has been negligent when he has received the
writ, then let it be enjoined to the viscount (as before),
that he himself be present to hear his judginent, and. so
let his negligence be punished. Butif it has been caused
through the claimant and not through the viscount that
the essoinee has not. been viewed, then in the defect of
the claimant let a license of vetting up be granted to the
essoinee, if he has asked for a license and has become
convalescent from his illness, and another day shall be
granted to the claimant, and. let an order be sent to tho
essoinee that he forthwith come to the court, that he
may have the same day, because when the tenant has
been essoined for bed-sickness, after he has once appeared
in court, he cannot rise with impunity from his bed
without & view on the part of the four knights or with-  f.354.
out a license, according to what will be said below. But
if neither the claimant nor the viscount has been negli-
gent, and the knights by chance have not made a view,
and when they have made it, have not como to testify to
it, then on the day granted, the claimant offering him-
self to take issue with the tenant and the knights, then
let the knights be attached according as their names are
written upon the writ by a writ of this kind, and let
the enrolment be made thus, if the viscount has sent &
writ.


A. presented himself on the fourth day against B, ^ 3


and B. has not come nor the four knights, (or thus aud rs


284 DE ESSONIIS.


non ven- quarto die versus tale qui se essoniavit de malo lecti

is versus eunde À. de placito terre, & talis nó venit, nec
milites qui fecerunt visum de eo, nec vicecomes misit
bre, & ideo (sic ut prius) peipiatur vicecomiti q vice-
comes sit auditurus judicium suum &c. Et semp dabi-
tur partieipibus, & parti idem dies. Si &ute vicecomes
miserit breve ad primü die, & milites no venerint,
& vicecomes màadaverit nomina militü, tunc fiat irro-
tulatio sic: A. optulit se quarto die versus B. qui se
essoniavit de malo lecti versus eunde 4A. de placito
terre &c, & B. no venit, nec milites qui fecerunt
visum de eo, s. C. D. E. F,, & vicecomes misit breve,
& ideo milites attachientur q sint ad tale diem ad
testificadum &c., & idem dies datus est tali petenti, &
talibus pticipibus &ce. Forma brevis talis est.


4. Rex vic. saluté. Pone p vadium et salvos plegios
e qo €. D. E. F. visores infirmitatis, qua A. de N. in curia
milite. — nr& corà justic. nris apud Westi essoniavit se de malo

lecti versus À. de N. de placito terre in tali villa,
vel de placito terre in tali vila, vel in tali alio
comitatu, q sint coram justiciariis nostris apud West
&d talem diem ad testifieadum visum suum, & qm
dié ei posuerunt, et ad ostendendum quare no fue-
runt coram eisdem  justiciariis nostris apud W. ad
talem diem sicut eis peeptu fuit, & habeas ibi nomina
plegiorü & hoc bie. Ad qm diem poterit petens se
essoniare si voluerit, & pticipes similiter: vel coparere,
& habere aliu diem p se, vel p essoniatores suos. Et
si vicecom milites attach. & breve miserit ad aliü diem,


!* ve] de placito terre in tali ?* vel in tali in alio comitatu,"
* villa," omitted MS. Rawl. C. 160. | MS. id.


OF ESSOINS. 985


better,) À. presented himself on the fourth day against knights
so-and-so who essoined himself for bed-sickness against "e not
the said À. in & suit for land, and so-and.so hàs not
come, nor the knights who made the view of him, nor
has the viscount sent & writ and therefore (so as before),
let it be enjoined upon the viscount that the viscount
be present to hear his own judgment &c. And the same
day shall always be given to the parceners and to the
party. But if the viscount has sent & writ on the first
day, and the knirhts have not come, and the viscount
has announced the names of the knights, then let there
be an enrolment in this manner: A. has presented him-
self on the fourth day arainst B., who has essoined
himself for bed-sickness against the said. À. in & suit for
land &c., and B. has not come, nor the knights who have
made a view of him, to wit C. D. E. F., and the viscount
has sent & writ, and accordingly let the knights be at-
tached that they be present on such & day to testify
&c. and the same day is granted to the said claimant
&nd to so-and-so his partners &c. "The form of the writ
is of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. Put under bail
and safe sureties C. D. E. F., the viewers of the illness
for which À. de N. in our court before our justiciaries
a& Westminster has essoined himself for bed-sickness
against ÀÁ. de N. in & suit for land in such a vill, or in ,.
such & vill in another county, that they present them. 4 writ fo
selves before our justiciaries aà& Westminster on such e MUR
day to testify to their view, and to the day which thoy knihts
have assigned to him, and to show wherefore they did
not present themselves before our said justiciaries at
Westminster on such a day as was enjoined to them,
&nd do thou have there the names of the sureties and
this writ. At which day the claimant may essoin him-
self, if he shall wish, and his partners in like manner: or
he may appear and have another day through himself or
through his essoiners : and if the viscount should attach


f. 354 b.


986 DE ESSONIIS.


et essoniatus nO venerit, nec milites, tüc petete vel
ejus essoniatore, primo, secundo, tertio, vel quarto die
se liti offerente, attachientur milites p meliores plegios,
et fiat ita irrotulatio: A. optulit se quarto die versus
B. qui se essoniavit de malo lecti versus eunde À. de
placito terr:e &c. (ut supra) et B. no venit, nec milites
qui fecerüt visum de eo, s. C. D. E. F., et vic. man-
davit q attachiati fuerunt, s. C. p tales, & D. per tales,
& sic de aliis, unde ponàtur per meliores plegios q sint
ad talem die. Idem dies datus est parti petenti, et
partieipibus tenentibus. Forma brevis talis est: Pone
p vadiü & salvos plegios C. D. E. F. visores infirmi-
tatis, qua. B. de N. in curia nostra &c. essoniavit se
de malo lecti versus À. de placito terre in tali villa,
q sint coram &e. tali die ad testificandum visum suum,
& quem diem ei posuerunt, et ad ostendendum quare
non fuerint coram justiciariis &c. ad talem diem sicut
attachiati fuerunt. Et summoneas per bonos summo-
nitores tales primos plegios C. & tales primos plegios
D., & sic de aliis, quód sint coram przefatis justic. nos-
tris ad priedictum diem ad audiendum judicium suum
de hoc, quód prefatos C. D. E. F. coram prefatis jus-
tielariis nostris ad. talem diem non habuerunt, sicut
eos plegiaverunt. Et habeas ibi sumonitores, nomina
secundorum plegiorü, et hoe breve. "Teste &e. Et ad
quem diem si milites non venerint, omnes plegii erunt
in inisericordia, et precipietur tunc vicecomiti q habeat
corpora militum ad alium diem, et q sint ad audien-


OF ESSOINS., 987


the knights and shall have sent à writ for another day
and the essoinee shall not have come, nor the knights,
then upon the claimant or his essoiner on the first,
second, third or fourth day presenting himself to join
issue, let the knights be attached by better sureties, and
let the enrolment be made thus: A. has presented him-
self on the fourth day against B. who has essoined
himself for bed-sickness against the said A. in a suit for
land &ec., (as above), and B. has not come, nor the knights
who have made a view of him, to wit, C. D. E. F., and
the viscount has ordered that. they should be attached,
to wit, C. by such persons and D. by such persons, and
so concerning the others, wherehy they should be put
under better sureties that they should present them-
selves on such a day. The same day has been assigned
to the party claiming and to the tenant parceners,— The
forn of the writ is of this kind: Put under bail and
safe sureties C. D. E. F,, the viewers of the illness, for
which B. de N. in our court &c. has essoined himself
for bed-sickness against the said A. in & suit for land. in
such a vill, that they present themselves before &c. on
such & day to testify to their view and as to what day
they assigned to him, and to show wherefore they were
not present before our justiciaries &c. on. such a day as
they were attached. And summon by good summoners
the said first. sureties C. and the said first sureties D.,
and so of the others, that they be present before our
aforesaid justieiaries on the aforesaid day to hear judg-
ment against them upon this, that they have not pro-
duced the aforesaid C. D. E. F. before our aforesaid
justieclaries on the aforesaid day, as they pledged them-
selves to do. And produce there the summoners, the
names of the second sureties, and this writ, Witness &c.
And on which day if the knights have not come, all the
sureties shall be at mercy, and it shall then be enjoined
to the viscount that he produce the persons of the
knights on another day, and that they be present to


f. 354 b.


Cf. fol. 61.


288 DE ESSONIIS.


dum judiciü suum de pluribus defaltis, et si ad diem
illum non venerint, iterum ]pcipietur vicecomiti quód
distringat eos p terras et catalla, quód sint ad alium
diem, et semper idem dies dabitur parti & participibus,
& si tune non venerint, &ggravabitur districtio (secun-
dum q inferiàs dicetur plenius de attachiamentis et
distrietionibus in personalibus actionibus) Item cüm
omnes visum fecerint, tamen non venerint ad testifi-
candum primo die nisi tatum unus, duo, vel tres, quo
casu &ut essoniatus venit aut non venit, & cum non
venerit, petente se liti offerente, fiat sic irrotulatio.
Quia nullus quatuor militü testificari potest, vel recor-
dum habeat sine altero, quia &ut omnes testificantur
&ut nullus. Sed quare non sufficiunt duo vel tres ad
certificandum sine quatuor, secundü illud Evangelium,
q in ore duorum vel triü testium stat omne verbum?
respondeo, q non suffieiunt duo, quia ubi certus nume-
rus adjicitur à lege vel constitutione quacunque ratione,
duo non sufficiunt, sicut hic, e£ ad audiendum quem
quis attornare voluerit loco suo ad lucrandum vel pden-
dum, ubi similiter quatuor sunt necessarii ut infra
pleniüs dicetur. Item in testamentis illud idem, ubi
vil testes sunt necessarii, et alibi in multis locis. Irro-
tulatio: À. optulit se quarto die versus B. qui se esso-
niavit &c. ut supra, et B. non venit, nec milites qui
fecerunt visum de eo, nisi tantum duo, scilicet, C. et
D. et ideo E. et F. qui non venerunt, attachientur q
sint ad talem diem ad testificandum &c. ut supra. Et
dabitur dies parti et pticipibus, et postea attachientur
per meliores plegios, et procedatur (ut supra) ad dis-


OF ESSOINS. 989


heer judgment against themselves for several defaults,
and if they have not come upon that day, let it be &
second time enjoined upon the viscount to distrain them
by their lands and chattels, that they be present on
another day, and the same day shall always be given
to the party and to his partners; then if they have not
come, the distraint shall be enhanced (according to what
will be said below more fully concerning attachments
and distraints in personal actions). Likewise when they
have all made & view, and nevertheless have not come
- to testify on the first day, exeept only one, or two, or
three, in which case the essoinee has either come or not
come, and when he has not come, upon the claimant
offering to join issue, let the enrolment be made thus.
Because none of the four knights can testify or have &
record without the others, because either all testify or
none. But why do not two or three suffice to testify
without four, according to the passage in the Gospel,
that in the mouth of twoor of three witnesses every
word standeth ? I answer that two do not suffice, because
where a certain number is added by the law or by a
statute for whatever reason, two do not suffice, as in
this case, and to hear whom & person has wished to
&ttorn in his place to gain or to lose, where in like
manner four are necessary, as will be explained more
fully below. Likewise the same thing takes place in
the ease of testaments, where seven witnesses are neces-
sary, and elsewhere in many places. The enrolment: A.
has presented himself on the fourth day against B. who
has essoined himself &e. as above, and B. has not come
nor the knights who have made a view of him, except
only two, to wit, C. and D., and therefore let E. and F.,
who have not come, be attached that they should come
on & certain day to testify &c. as above. And & day
shall be given to the party and to his partners, and
afterwards let them be attached by better sureties, and
let proceedings be had as above to a distraint until they
Q 6366. T


5:
Si unus
visorum
infirmus
sit vel
inutilis,
ponatur
alius loco
suo.


f. 355.


990 DE ESSONIIS.


trictionem donec omnes venerint, et. testificentur simul :
et formari poterunt brevia secundü q superius dicitur
per exemplü. Cüm aute quatuor milites simul missi
fuerint ad videndum, anteqm viderint, vel postqm
viderint, anteqm testificentur, contingat q unus vel duo
vel tres morientur, quo casu oportet q alii loco ipso-
rum substituantur, ct q tunc omnes simul videant, et
simul testificentur, p tale breve.


Rex vice. salutem.  Pri:cipimus tibi q loco C. unius
visorü qui mortuus est, vel infirmus, vel ita debilita-
tus, q itinerare no potest, vel sie: loco C. unius visorü
qui mortuus est, in loco D. alterius visorü qui infir-
mus est ac debilitatus, vel inutilis q itinerare no po-
test, visor infirmitate! qua D. de N. in curia nia &c.
ut supra, ponas aliü vel alios milites, et alium vel
alios milites simul cü E. et F. de N. prius missis ad
pdictü D. ad videdü utrü infirmitas quà pdictus B. in
curia nostra &e. essoniavit. se de malo lecti versus
pdietü A. de placito terr in N. sit languor &c. vel
no &ec. ut supra in primo brevi original. Ite si unus
vel duo (secundi q pdictü est) mortui no fuerint, nec
debilitati, sed forte ex aliqua causa necessaria se trans-
tulerint extra com ita q alii p defectu talis visu facere
no possüt, vel testifieari, tüe loco taliü ponitur alii qui
visum faciant, et tunc dicatur q loco C. et D. visorum
uifirmitatis qua &e. ponas alios milites et illos milites
simul cum talibus &e. ut supra &ce. usq ad clausulam,
scilicet, vel sufficiente p se mittant. responsalem, & tunc
addatur in fine ratio, quare illi priüs missi videre in-
firmum nà potuerüt, p defectu C. et D., et dicatur in
fine brevis ita: Et unde pdicti E. et F. in curia nos-


l1 infirmitatis, MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 29]


all have come, and let them testify together, and writs
may be drawn up in accordance with what has been said
above for example. But when the four knights have
been sent together to view, before they have viewed, or
after they have viewed, before they have testified, it mav
happen that one or two or three shall die, in which case
it is incumbent that others be substituted in the place
of them, and that thereupon they should all view, and
testify together by & writ of this kind.

The king to the viscount greetiny. We enjoin you | 5.
that in the place of C., one of the viewers, who is dead de Lm
or infirn or so debilitated that he cannot travel, or beinfirm
thus: in the place of C., one of the viewers, who is dead, x RM
in the place of D., another of the viewers, who is infirm another n
or is debilitated or inefficient so that he cannot travel, od ,
the viewers of the illness whereby D. de N. in our
court &c. as above, you appoint another or other knights,
and another or other knighüs, together with E. and
F. de N. previously sent to the aforesaid D. to view
whether the infirmity for which the aforesaid B. in our
court &c. has essoined himself against the aforesaid A.
in a suit of land in N. be languor &c. or not &c., as
above in the first original writ, Likewise if one or two
(as above said) have not died nor become debilitated,
but by chance from some necessary cause have trans-
ferred themselves out of the county, so that the others
from the failure of so-and-so cannot make a view or
testify to it, then in the place of such persons let others
be appointed to make the view, and then let it be said
in the place of C. and D., viewers of the illness for which
&c. do thou appoint other knights, and those knights  f.355.
together with such &c. as above, up to the clause * to
" wit;" or let them send a respondent sufficient by
hinself, and. then let. there be added at the end the
reason, wherefore those first sent could not view the
sick man from the failure of C. and D., and let thero bc
sald at the end of the writ thus: And whereof the

T 2


202 DE ESSONIIS.,


tra coram justiciariis nostris talibus dixerunt q pr:e-
dieti C. et D. non fuerunt in ptibus illis, & p defectu
eorü no potuerunt visum facere de pdicto B., et dic
predietis militibus q sint cora pfatis justiciariis &c.
simul cum pdictis E. et F. ad predictum terminum ad
testifieandum visum suum, & quem diem ei posuerint,
et si forte vicecomes cotra formam brevis elegerit tales,
qui no fuerint psentes et extra comitatü, tunc dicatur
in fine, et tu ipse sis ibi auditurus judicium tuü, ad
hoc q pdictos C. et D. qui absentes fuerint & extra
comitatu elegisti ad videndu, desicut psentes misisse
debuisti, et ita q loquela illa p hoc cepit tanta dila-
tione, & habeas ibi hoc bre & nomina militum quos
de novo miseris. Teste &c. Si aute contingat q om-
nes moriàtur antequa viderint, vel cü viderint anteqm
testificentur, tie de novo mittatur alii Item s1 ad
primü dié nec milites venerit, nec essoniati, nec vice-
comes miserit breve, offercte se liti petente, quia nesci-
tur quid actü sit, vel quia forte nihil actü est, de novo
'"Deipiatur vicecomiti q mittat quatuor milites, et ipse
sib ibi auditurus judiciü suü, q primü breve nó misit
&c. Si aute ad primu dié no venerint milites, nec
vicecomes misit breve, & essoniatus venerit primo die,
& petens, tüc pcedit inter eos loquela, nisi forte sit q
petens objicere velit tenenti q tenes sine licentia sur-
rexerit, vel sine visu militu, vel si p visum militü sur-
rexerit et petens se tenuerit in defaltam, dixerit q alii


dua MEUS dapuc tmn iu c call uit see i vi B x hcc di cm ne e E A


OF ESSOINS. 203


aforesaid E. and F. in our court before so-and-so our
justiciaries have said that the aforesaid C. and D. were
not in those parts, and from their failure they could not
make a view of the aforesaid B., and say to the aforesaid
knights that they present themselves before our afore-
said justiciaries &c. together with the aforesaid E. and F.
&& the aforesaid term to testify to their view and as to
what day they have assigned to him, and if by chance
the viscount contrary to the form of the writ has chosen
those who were not present and were outside the county,
then let it be said at the end, and do thou be there to
hear judgment against thyself, on this point, that. you
have chosen as viewers the aforesaid C. and D. who
were absent and outside the county, whereas you ought
to have sent those who were present, and so that this trial
has through this cause undergone so much delay, and
do thou produce there this writ and the names of the
knights whoin you have sent afresh. Witness &c. But
ií it should happen that they all die before they have
viewed, or after they have viewed, before they have
testified, then let others be sent afresh. — Likewise if on
the first day neither the knights have come nor the
essoinees, nor the sheriff has sent the writ, upon the
claimant presenting hünself to join issue, because it is
unknown what has been done, or because by chance
nothing has been done, let it be enjoined afresh to the
viscount, that he send four knights, and that he himself
attend to hear judgment against himself, because he has
not sent the writ &c. But if on the first day the
knights have not come nor the viscount has sent the writ,
&nd the essoinee has come on the first day and the
claimant, then the trial proceeds between them, unless
by chance the claimant wishes to object to tho tenant
that he has left his bed without leave, or without the
view of the knights, or if through the view of the
knights he has risen from his bed and the claimant has
placed himself in default, or shall have said tha! other


294. DE ESSONIIS


milites viderut eum qm ad ipsum missi fuerunt, omnes,
vel quida ex illis: vel q surreserit. p. visum alioru,
qua p visum militü, s. liberorü hominü, vel p visum
militu, & similiter p visum liberorü hominu, qui forte
in ipso visu faciedo assupti fuerunt p imperitia ad
videdum eum militibus: ut. de terii S. M. aü. regni
regis. H. ix. incipiente. x. in com Warr. de Rogero
Levelande petcte, et Richardo de Gloc. tenete, et esso-
niato, & ubi assumptus fuit serviens regis p quarto
milite. Et cü petens ita se tenuerit ad defalta, opor-
tebit inquirere veritate. Si aute objecerit petens esso-
niato, q sine licctia surrexerit, si de hoc costiterit,
poterit tenes amittere p defalta, quia post essoniu de
malo lecti redditü no potest essoniatus surgere sine
liectia, nee si lieentia petat, dabitur ei nisi ex causa,
et intra certi tepus, et ultra tepus no, nisi tantum de
voluntate et cosensu petetis. Causa enim esse poterit
q càm covaluerit de infirmitate, e& nodum visus est, p
fraude & malitia petetis forte, qui supprimit breve et
negligeter psequitur, vel p negligetia. vicecomitis, qui
forte no mittit milites, sieut. ei pceptum est, vel p
defectu militum qui visum no faciunt, et in quibus
casibus si cessoniatus covaluerit de infirmitate, et no
dum visus fuerit, habebit liectià surgedi in defectum
predictorum. Et quód licentia surgendi dari debeat
essoniato qui visus fuerit legitime per quatuor milites
sive languorem | adjudieaverint, sive malum transiens,
donee venerint et languorem sive malum trasiens testi-


OF ESSOINS. 295


knights than those who were sent to him, have viewed
him, all or some of them : or that he has risen from his
bed through the view of others rather than through the
view of knights, that is, of free men, or through the
view of knights and in like manner through the view
of free men, who by chance in making the said view
have been assumed through inexperience to. make a
view together with the knights, as in. St. Michael's
term in the ninth and tenth yes of the reign of king
Henry, in the county of Warwick, concerning. Roger
Lavelande the claimant, and Richard of Gloucester the
tenant and the essoinee, and where a serjeant of the
king had been assumed in the place of the fourth knirxht.
And when the claimant has so placed hiiniself. in default,
it will be ineumbent to inquire the truth. — But if the
claimant has objected to the essoinee that he has risen
from his bed without leave, i£ this has been established,
the tenant may lose by default, because after an essoin
of bed-sickness has been returned the essoinee may not
rise from his bed without leave, nor if he asks for leave,
will it be granted to him without a cause and within a
certain time, and beyond the time not so, except with
the will and consent of the elaiinant. | For a cause may
be that wheu he is convalescent from his illness, and has
been not yet viewed, through the fraud and malice of
the claimant by chance who suppresses the writ and
prosecutes negligently, or through the negligenee of the
viscount, who by chance does not send knights as he
has been enjoined, or from the failure of the knights,
who have not made a view, and in which cases if the
esssoinee has become convalescent from his illness, and
has not been yet viewed, he will have lcave to rise from
his bed in default of the afovesaid persons, and that
leave to rise from his bed ought to be granted to the
essoinee, who has bcen lawfully viewed by the four
knights, whether they have adjudgeil it to. be. languor
or & passing illness, until they have come and have ad-


f. 355 b.


296 DE ESSONIIS.


caverint: habetis de terii S. T. anno regis H. xiv. in
com Norf. de priore de Longa Villa, et de teri S. P.
cirea medium rotuli, quia ibi dicitur, q si quis se esso-
niaverit de malo lecti et milites visum fecerunt de eo,
sed tame no venerunt ad testificandü, nec petens se-
quatur versus eos, habebit essoniatus licetiam surgendi
in defectu petentis, sive languor adjudicatus fuerit sive
no, & alibi in multis locis. Si &uté cüm visus fuerit,
et petens negligens fuerit q sequi noluerit versus mili-
tes q sint ad testificadum sive laguorem adjudicaverint
sive malu trasiens, cüm &dhuc sit loquela integra in
curia, si licentia petat surgendi, ppter malitia ipsius
petentis obtinebit licentia, no obstante eo g dicitur in
ipsa petitione licentie, g nodum visus est, quia non
multum operatur videre, nisi visus sit testatus, sed
cüm visus factus fuerit & testatus, sed tamen nullus
dies petenti datus apud Turrim, ante diem datum bene
possit. dari licentia surgendi, secundü quosda, cüm
petens apud Turrim diem no receperit. Cüm autc
diem receperit, jam desinit esse loquela in curia, donec
aliàs per constabularium Turris post annum et diem
iteru ad curia remittatur, et sic obtinebit essoniatus
de malo lecti licentiam surgendi usq ad dié datu apud
Turrim, post tempus vero illud nunquam licentia ob-
tinebit cotra voluntate ipsius petentis. Si auté ad hoc
assensum psüterit, & languidus covaluerit, et licetiam
petierit surgedi, cum coósensu petentis obtinebit, ita q
&d certü diem coveniant tenens & petens, ut suo tra-


OF ESSOINS. 207


judged it to be languor or & passing illness, you have &
case in Holy Trinity term in the fourteenth year of
king Henry in the county of Norfolk, concerning the
prior of Longa Villa, and in Easter Term about the
middle of the roll, because it is there said, that if any
one has essoined himself for bed-sickness and the knights
have had a view of him, but have not come t5 testify to
it, nor does the claimant sue against them, the essoinee
shall have leave to rise from his bed in the default of
the claimant whether languor has been adjudged or not,
and elsewhere in many places. But if when he has
been viewed, and the claimant has been negligent from
being unwilling to sue against the knights that they
should be present to testify whether they have adjudged
languor or & transient illness, since the trial is still
entire in the court, if he asks for leave to rise from his
bed, on account of the malice of the said claimant he
shall obtain leave, notwithstanding that it is said in the
sald petition for leave, that he has not yct been viewed,
for it does not much import to view him, if the view
has not been testified, but. when the view has been
made and testified, but nevertheless no day has been
appointed to the claimant at the Tower, leave to rise from
his bed may well be granted before any day is appointed,
according to some, since the claimant has not obtained a
day to be granted to him at the Tower. But when he
has had & day granted to him, the caüse then ceases to
be in the court, until it is otherwise reinitted by the
eonstable of the Tower to the court after à year and a
day, and so the essoinee for bed-sickness shall obtain leave
to rise from his bed up to the day granted to him at the
Tower, but after that time he shall never obtain leave
without the consent of the said claimant. — But if he has
given his consent to this, and the invalid has become
convalescent, and has asked for leave to rise from his bed,
he shall obtain leave with the consent of the claimant, so
that the tenant and the claimant shall agree on a certain


f. 355 b.


6.
Qualiter
petenda sit
licentia
surgendi.


208 DE ESSONIIS.


mite peedat loquela. Sed quid si, ante visum factu et
testificatu, ppter iter justitiariorü facta fuerit publica
declamatio, 4 omnes loquele qu» atterminato fuerüt
cora justiciariis. de baco, & no terminat» remaneat
sine die, cü adhuc loquela inter petente et essoniatu
integra sit in báco, bene poterit essoniatus sine licetia
surgere ppter tale declamatione. $i aute visus factus
fuerit & testatus, & dies datus apud Turrim ptibus
ulteriüs, no possit essoniatus surgere, nec cum licentia
nec sine, quia loquela non fuit in banco die declawa-
tionis fact:e.


Vidédum erit qualiter hcentia surgédi peti debeat,
& sciendu q ad petenda licetia surgedi debet essonia-
tus mittere qm voluerit qui dicat, q talis qui essonia-
vit de malo lecti convaluit de infirmitate sua, et petit
licetiam  surgendi, et sic irrotulabitur cora justiciariis,
qui illius loquele habuerit cognitione. 'Tahs qui se
essoniat de 1nalo lecti versus tale de placito terre in
tali com màadavit per tale, q covaluit de infirmitate
sua, & q nodum visus est, et petit licentia surgedi, et
habet, et dicatur nutio q scire faciat essoniato, q sta-
tim & sine mora veniat ad curia, et ibi dicetur ei q
observet die suü, et ideo dicetur ei q statim veniat:
ne cü petens inveniat eum vagante, ignorans sibi datà
esse licentia, ipsum ceperit et in prisona detinuerit, q
si fecerit, succurritur essoniato per tale breve.


OF ESSOINS. 200


day, so that the cause may proceed in its due course.
But what if, before a view has been made and. testified,
on account of the //er of the justiciaries à publie. pro-
clamation has been made, that all the causes which have
been set down before the justiciaries of the Bench. and
not terninated shall be remenets. without. à day, when
the trial between the claimant, and the essoinee. is. still
entire in tlie Bench, the essoinee. may well rise from | his
bed without leave on account of such à proclamation.
But if a. view has been made and testified and. a day
further granted at the Tower to the parties, the essoinee
cannot rise from his bed, neither with leave nor without,
because the cause was not in the Bench on the day of
the proclamation being made.


We must see therefore how leave to rise from his hed 6.
ought to be asked for, and it is to be known that the Wo dd
essoinee ought to send for the purpose of asking for leave bed i5 to be

; . asked for.
to rise froin his bed some one whom he may choose, who
shall say that so-and-so who has essoined himself for bed-
sickness is convalescent from his infirmity, and he asks
for leave to rise from his bed, and it. shall be thus en-
rolled before the justiciaries, who have had corznisance of
the said cause. 53o-and-so who essoins hinmself for bed-
sickness against so-and-so in a suit for land in such a
county has sent. word by such a person that he has &ot
well of his sickness and that lie has not yet been viewed,
and he begs leave to rise from his bed and he has leave,
and let it be said to the messenger that he make it known
to the essoinee that he should come forthwith and. with-
out delay to the court, and it shall be there said to him
that he should observe his day, and. aecordingly it shall
be said to him that he should forthwith come, lest when
the claimant finds him at large, ignorant that leave has
been granted to him, he should seize him and detain him
in prison, which if he should do, aid is afforded to the
essoinee by a writ of this character.


7.
Breve,
sj post
licentiam
petitam et
obientam
arrestatus
fuerit per
adver-
sarium,


f 356.


8.
Si in curia
baronis vel
nlterius
denegetur
licentia
surgendi,
dominus
rex licen-
tiam dabit
in defectu
talium.


300 DE ESSONIIS.


Rex vie. salute. Si talis fecerit te securu &c. sumo-
neas tales &e. quód sint cora justieiariis &ce. ad tale
terminu, ad respondendü tali, quare cotra pace nostrà
ceperunt ipsum, et ipsum captu in prisona detinet, in
domo ejusde talis, apud tale locü, occasione placiti
quod est in curia nostra corà justiciariis nostris &c.
inter ipsum tale petente & eundem tale tenentem, de
tanta terra cum pertinentiis in tali villa, unde idem
talis in curia nostra &c. essoniavit se de malo lecti
versus eundem tale petentem, & unde iidem justiciarii
nostri dederunt eide licentiam surgendi per defaltà
ipsius talis petentis, eo quód de ipso visum fieri non
fecit, u& idem B. dicit. Et interim ipsum B. delibe-
rari facias, nisi ex aliqua alia causa captus fuerit
quare secundu legem terre deliberari non debeat, &
habeas ibi hoe breve. Teste &c. 5Si in curia baronum
vel alterius düi in placito de recto denegetur licetia
surgendi essoniato, vel petens malitiose supprimat breve
ne essonlatus videatur, tunc fiat seneschallo curism breve
düi regis in hac forma.


Rex tali seneschallo salute. Ostensum est nobis ex
parte À. q cüm B. in curia tua vel talis dni tui pete-
ret tantü terre versus ipsum Á. per breve nostrum
de recto, & idem À. essoniasset se de malo lecti ver-
sus eundé B. extra feodu dii tui, ita q tu non potu-
isti eum facere videri, nec ide B. sibi perquisivit, ut
deberet, q idem A. secundü consuetudine regni nostri
videretur per iv. milites, imó malitiosé ipsum detinuit
per lógum tempus inclusum, & predictus A. mitteret
ad te ad pdietà curiam, & peteret licentia sibi dari


OF ESSOINS. 301


The king to the viscount greeting. If so-and-so has — 7.
given you surety &e. summon such persons &c. that A "rit if
they be present before the justiciaries &c. at such & term having
to make answer to so-and-so, wherefore aprainst our reed
peace they have seized him and detain him after seizure tained
in prison, in the house of the said so-and-so, at. such & dad
place, on oceasion of à cause which is in our court, before arrested hy
our justiciaries and between so-and-so the said tenant wary.
and so-and-so the said claimant, concerning so much land
with its appurtenances in such & vill, whereof the said f. 356.
80-and-so has essoined himself in our court. &c. for bed-
sickness against the said claimant, and. whereupon our
said justiciaries have granted to the said so-and-so leave
to rise from his bed in the default of the said claimant,
on the ground that he had not caused a view to be mae
of him, as the said B. avers And in the meanwhile eause
the said B. to be set free, unless he has been seized for
some other cause, wherefore he ought not in accordance
with the law of the land to be sct free, and produce there
this writ. Witness &c. If in a court of à baron or of
some other lord in a plea of right leave to rise from his
bed has been denied to an essoinee, or the claimant
maliciously suppresses the writ, lest the cssoinee should
be viewed, then let à writ of the lord the king issue to
the steward of the court in this form.

The king to such steward greeting. It has been shown ,,, &.

. . If in the
to us on the part of A., that when B. in your court or in court of a
the court of your lord claimed so much land against the baron or of
said À. by our writ of right, and tho said A. had essoined ses
himself for bed-sickness against the said B. outside the there hg
fee of your lord, so that you could not cause him to be eiie do get
viewed, nor did the said B. request, as he ought to have de dd P
done, that the said A. should be viewed according to the shall grant
custom of our realm by four knights, nay has detained Pe 5».
him maliciously for a long time locked up, and the afore- such per-
said À. has sent to you at the aforesaid court,and has "^


requested leave to be granted to him to rise from his


309 DE ESSONIIS.


surgendi & comparendi in eadem curia tua, ad respon-
dendü eide B. de eode placito secundü legem & con-
suetudine regni nostri tu ei in eadem curia tua licen-
tii surgendi denegasti, & quia in denegatione! pdicto
À. manifeste injuriatü est, ei in defectu tui ipsi? liec-
tiam surgendi dedimus, ad respodendü pdicto A. de
pdieta terra seeundü lege & cósuetudine regni nostri,
& hoc tibi & pfat» curie significamus. T. &c. Et p
hoe videri poterit q dominus curim & ballivus dare
possunt lieetiam surgendi essoniato, & si talis, multo
fortius vieecomes & comitatus.


CAP. XI.


Seofüicis Quatuor milites legitimé missi post multas dilationes
quatuor — factas, vel statim infra primum diem veniunt ad locü
DR ubi essoniatus jacuerit, vel jacere debuerit, ad videndü
endo. De &c. & tüc aut inveniüt eum aut non inveniunt. $i
Sun mu,; &uté ipsum omnino nó invenerint, & hoc omnes ad
venerint ad dic. datü simul testati fuerint, tunc ipse qui essoniari
locum ubi - . . el e '
essoniatus debet, aut psens est in curia aut no est psens. $i
jacere autem [sens non fuerit, tune capiatur terra in manü
dd dii regis, vel per magnum cape, vel per parvum cape,
secundum quod essonium factum fuerit antequàm tenens
in curia comparuerit vel post, & secundum hoe proce-
datur contra ipsum ad defaltam, & secundum quod in-
feriüs dicetur plenius de defaltis. Si autem prwsens
fuerit, e£ essonium omnino dedixerit, tune. refert. utrum
omnino essonium factum fuerit ante apparitionem in
curia, vel post. Si autem ante, bene potest defendere
inprimis summonitionem & sursisam, & quód nunquàm
summonitus fuit. Item utrum essoniatus de malo ve-
niendi, an de malo lecti, ut supradictum est de sum-


!* denegatione illius licentize ? ** tyi ipsius," MS. id.
^ predicto A.," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 303


bed and to appear in your said court to make answer
to the said B. concerning the said cause according to the
law and custom of our reali, you have in your said court
denied to him leave to rise from his bed, and. because in
such denial manifest. injustice. has been done to the
aforesaid À., we have granted to him in your default leave
to rise from liis bed to make answer to the aforesaid A.
eoncerning the aforesaid land according to the law and
custom of our realm, and this we signify to you and to
the said court. Witness, &c. And by this it. may be
seen that the lord of the court and the bailiff may grant
to the essoinee leave to rise from his bed, and. if sueh a
person, much more the viscount and the county court.


CnaPTEn XI.


The four knights, who have been lawfully sent, after l.
many delays have taken place, or forthwith within the e
first day, come to the place where the essoinee lies, or the four.
ought to lie, to view &c., and then they either find. him xcd "
there or they do not find him there. But if they have view. Of
not found him there at all, and all have together testified qp, those
to this on the day appointed, then he who ought to he sent have

. E . . come to tlie
essoined is either present in court or is not present. But yi.
if he be not present, then let his land be taken into the where the
hand of the lord the king, either through a great cepe or pubbl be
a little cape, according as the essoin has been made before lying.
the tenant has appeared in court or afterwards, and. ac-
cording thereto let proceedings be had against him for a
default, and according to what will be said below con-
cerning defaults. But if he be present, and has altoge-
ther denied the essoin, then it is of importance whether
the essoin has been made before his appearance in court
or after it. Butif before, he may well contest in the
first place the summons and the adjournment and that
he had ever been summoned. | Likewise whether he has


been essoined for sickness on the way or for bed-sickness,


f. 356 b.


304 DE ESSONIIS.


monitionibus. Si autem essonium factum fuerit post-
quàm comparuerit in curia & diem habuerit, diem
datu no poterit dedicere cotr& recordü curie. Et unde
si postea dedixerit essoniü de malo veniedi post dic
datum in curia, cocedit p cosequens defalta esse factà,
et sic amittet seysina p judicium ppter defaltam, et
multo fortius si dixerit! utrumq essoniü tam de malo
veniedi, qm de malo lecti. Item veniunt milites ad
videdum & inveniunt eum vaganté p curia, et per rura,
et tunc ad eorum testificatione fiat ut in pximo supra.
Item veniunt milites ad videdum, & inveniüt eü in
lecto sicut decet taliter essoniatü, decalceatü, et sine
braecis, & decinctü, vel forte nudum q plus est, cim
fuerit interrogatus, aut confitetur se esse essoniatü, aut
omninó dedicit essoniü. Si auté essoniu dedixerit, tunc
ad eorum testificatione fiat ut supra. Si aute essoniü
cofiteatur, tune diligeter inquirant milites de qualitate
infirmitatis, e& de ejus circüstantiis, & utrum latens &
intrinseca, vel in aperto et extrinseca, ut inde respo-
dere possint si forte fuerint requisiti, & secundum q
viderint et judicaverint, dabunt ei malum transiens vel
languoré, Si aute adjudicaverint ei malum traàsiens,
forte in psentia petétis dabunt ei die certum in brevi
cophensum, q tunc veniat vel sufficiente p se mittat
resposale. Ad qm die si milites venerint, et petes et
tenens, peedat loquela debito modo. Si aute petens &
tenes coparuerint, et milites tatum unus vel duo, vel tres
et no quartus, vel forte nullus, si petens cofiteatur
visum rite esse factü, sufficit ejus testimoniü et p hoc


! * gi dedixerit," M8. Rawl. C.


OF ESSOINS. 305


as above said concerning summonses. But if an essoin
has been made after he has appeared in court and has
had & day, he cannot deny the appointment of à day
against the record of the court. And hence, if after-
wards he has denied the essoin for sickness on the way
after & day appointed in court, he concedes as a con-
sequence that he has made default, and so he shall lose
seysine by & judgment on account of his default, and
much more $0, if he has denied both essoins for sickness
by the way and for bed-sickness. | Likewise the knights
come and they find him wandering about his court and
his grounds, and then upon their testification let it be
done as in the passage immediately preceding. — Like-
wise the knights come to view him, and they find him in
bed as becomes & person so essoined without his shoes
and without his breeches and ungirt, or by chance naked
which is more, when he has been interropgated he. either
confesses that he has been essoined or he altogether
denies the essoin. But if he has denied the essoin, then
upon their testification let it be done as above. But if
he confesses the essoin, then let the knights make dili-
gent inquiry as to the quality of his illness, and con-
cerning its circumstances, and whether it is latent and
internal, or open and external, that they may answer
thereupon, if by chance they should be required, and
according to what they have seen and judged let them
grant to him either a transient illness or languor. But
if they have adjudged to him & transient illness, they
shall by cbance in the presence of the claimant assign to
him & certain day comprised in the writ, that. he should
then come or send a sufficient person to answer for him.
At which day, if the knights have come and the claimant
and the tenant, let the trial proceed in due manner. But
if the claimant and the tenant have appeared, and. only
one or two knights or three and not the fourth, or per-
haps none of them, if the claimant admits that the view
has been duly made, histestimony is sufficient, and thereby
Q 6366. U


f. 356 b.


306 DE ESSONIIS.


nó multü operatur testificatio militum. té si petens
venerit ad comune die, et visores no, et cognoverit q
essoniatus de malo lecti visus fuerit certo die, & q
visores dederint ei làguoré et dié apud Turrim Lond
in unü annum et unum dié à die visus sui. Ite dies
dabitur petenti ppter suà ptestatione apud Turrim, et
se essoniatus tüc no venerit, tüc revertatur ad judi-
cium, et. peedatur cótra milites q veniant ad testificadu,
& si venerit forte essoniatus, peedatur in placito prin-
cipali, & de hae materia inveniri poterit de teri P. aü
regis H. xiv. in eoi Nott. et Linc. de Wv. thesaura-
rio! Eborum et Wilhelmo de Camera et Letitia uxore
ejus. Si aute ad dié illü venerint milites, et testificati
fuerint visum, & petete se offerete liti no veniat tenes,
expectato quarto die capiatur terra in manuü dni regis
p defalta, per pvum cape, quia no poterit tenens esso-
niü dedicere cotra recordü militü, sive in curia copa-
ruerint sive no. Si aute milites coparuerint et tenens,
.et petens no, tunc offerente se liti tenente recedet
quarto die tenens quietus de brevi illo. Ite si milites
coparuerint in prima die, & petens no, nec tenes, sed
in crastino uterd, vel tertio die uterj, vel quarto die
uterd, càm pares sint ptes hinc inde quoad defaltàa, nec
sit quod aliquis eorum alterius possit imputare defec-
tui, copesetur defalta cum defalta, & pcedat loquela,
quia paria delicta mutua copensatione tolluntur. 5i
autem impares sint in defaltis, q si unus cóparuerit in


1 « Wilhelmo thesaurario," MS. Rawl. C. 160,


OF ESSOINS., 307


the testification of the knights is not of much importance.
Likewise if the claimant has come to the common day
and the viewers not, and he has acknowledged that
the essoinee for bed-sickness has been viewed on a certain
day and that the viewers have assigned languor to him
and a day at the Tower of London for à year and a day
after the day of their view. Likewise a day shall be gran-
ted to the claimant on account of his protestation at thc
Tower, and if the essoinee has then not come, then let &a
return be made to the judgment, and let proceedings be
had against the knights, that they should come to testify,
and if the essoinee has by chance come, let proceedings be
had in the principal suit: and concerning this matter à
case will be found in Easter term in the fourteenth year
of king Henry in the counties of Nottingham and Lincoln,
concerning Wv. the treasurer of York and William de
Camera and Letitia his wife. But if before that day
the knights have come and have testified their view, and
upon the claimant being present to join issue the tenant
does not come, after the fourth day has been awaited let
the land be taken into the hand of the lord the king
through default by a little cepe, because the tenant can-
not deny the essoin against the record of the knights,
whether they have appeared in the court or not. But if
the knights have appeared and the tenant, but the claim-
ant not so, then upon the tenant offering himself to join
issue the tenant shall retire on the fourth day quit from
that writ. Likewise if the knights have appeared on
the first day, and the claimant not, nor the tenant, but
both of them on the morrow, or both on the third day,
or both on the fourth day, since the parties on either
side are on & par as regards their default, and there is
nothing which one of them ean impute to the other by
way of failure, let the default be compensated by the
default, and let the trial proceed, because like offences
are got rid of by mutual compensation. But if they
&re unequal in their defaults, because one has appeared
U 2


905 DE ESSONIIS.


primo die, & alius in crastino, tertio, vel quarto die,
procedatur ad defaltà secundum quod inferius dicetur
de defaltis.


"M Item milites! cüm visum fecerint, examinata infirmi-
(um "- tate adjudieant essoniato languore, & dabunt ei diem
rint ad tes- i die visus sui in unum annum & unum diem apud
Meteo Turrim London, quód tune sit ibi inde resposurus vel
f.357. sufficlente p se mittat responsalem, et ad diem in brevi
cotentü veniant cora justiciariis & testatur q viderüt

eum essoniatü tali die, & q dederunt ei die à die visus

sui in unum annum & unü die apud Turrim Lond,

quo casu si forte milites discordes fuerint in die dato,

iterum mittantur ad videdum, & ad dandum certum

diem, & iterü ad certificandum visum. Si auté cocor-

des fuerint in die dato, diligéter examinentur à justi-

claris utra dies datus à militibus rationabilis sit &
legitimus vel non, ut si forte annus fuerit bissextilis,

et quo casu si illegitimus fuerit dies, facta examina-

tione mittantur iterü ad laguidü, ut dent ei die legi-

timü secundü cósilium justiciariorü, et iterü veniat &

, testetur. Sed sive infirmitas sit laguor sive no, quare

no possunt milites capere attornatum, ut p attornatü

pcedet loquela, sicut fieri poterit si post annü et dic

venire n possit, potest mittere resposale. Respodeo q

no possunt, quia ad hoc no sunt missi, et ideo nullam

habet potestate etià si essoniatus hoc vellet, nec esso-

niatus ad hoc arctari poterit q faciat attornatum nisi

, velit, Et si justiciarii no examinaverint, erit hoc eis


! ** Item $1 milites," MSS. ltawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 309


on the first day and the other on the morrow or on the
third day or on the fourth day, let proceedings be had
for a default according to what will be explained below
on the subject of defaults.


Likewise if the knights, when they have made a view, E 2.

, . « . en the
after a&n examination of the illness adjudge languor to knizhts
the essoinee, and shall grant to him a day from the day rer
of their view for à year and & day at the Tower oft, jauvuor.
London, that he be there in order to answer or that he f 357.
should send & sufficient person to answer for him, and
on the day contained in the writ let them come before
the justiciaries and let them testify that they have seen
the said essoinee on such a day, and that they have
granted to him a day from the day of their view for a
year and & day at the Tower of London, in which case
if by chance the knights are at discord as to the day
cranted, let them be sent a second time to view, and to
erant a certain day, and to certify à second time their
view. But if they are in accord upon the day granted,
let them bé diligently examined by: the justiciaries
whether the day granted by the knights is à reasonable
day and & lawful day or not, as if by chance the year
should be Leap Year, and in which case if the day
shall be unlawful, after an examination has been made
let them be sent & second time to the languid person,
that they may grant to him & lawful day according to
the advice of the justiciaries, and let them come again
and testify. But whether the illness be & languor or
not, why cannot the knights accept an attorney,so that
the trial may proceed through an attorney, as may be
done, if after à year and a day he cannot come, he may
send & person to answer for him. Ianswer that they
cannot do 80, because they are not sent for that purpose,
and therefore they have no power even if the essoince
should wish it, nor can the essoinee be constrained to
this, that he should appoint an attorney unless he wishes
it. And if the justiciaries have not examined into it,


310 DE ESSONIIS.


inputandü si essoniatus surrexerit die illegitimo sibi
p milites dato, militibus vero non, ppter simplicitate
& imperitiáà suam, essoniato no, quia obtéperat judi-
catis. Si aute justiciarii càüm examinaverint, ite-
rum  miserint, & milites no viderint, nec petens
versus milites fuerit psecutus, tunc nec justiciarüs im-
putari poterit, nec essoniato, sed militibus tàtü, &
peteti. Si autem judex examinaverit, & miserit, &
milites missi viderint, & die dederint, tune si essonia-

,ius tardiüs venerit, vel si forte erraverit essoniatus in
die suscipiendo, quia male intellexit dié suum, hoc sibi
imputare debet, càm quatuor milites inde habent re-
cordü. Et q recordum habeat pbatur, cüm sint quasi
justiciarii in hoe casu, nee eótra assertionem eorum
admittitur aliqua testificatio in eotrarium, cüm petens
se tenuerit ad defaltà, ex resposo W. de Ralegh & G.
de Segrave facto Richardo Duket, qui expetiit eorum
cosiliü in hoc casu. Vel si maturiüs venerit gm debe-
ret, hoc sibi poterit imputari cüm ipse solus sit in
culpa, licet aliquando actum fuerit in contrarium, ubi
essoniatus obtemperat judicatis, & ppter errore milituin
in expressione diei, dinum sentiat, eàm no sit in culpa,
ut si in die dando dicát essoniato.


3. Damus tibi die à die isto visus tui in unum annum

ali 2 - LOL . - ^ . .
qualter, € unum dià, hoc sufficit. Si aute dió expresserint, sic
dies et sub dicendo: damus tibi die à die isto & ita q tali die
quibus 2 . € 03 . VIS .
verhis,  €Opareas apud Turrim, si diem dederint legitimum in
utroque casu erit eis obtemperandum, scilicet q ad die


expressum veniat apud Turrim, & erit talis dies esso-


* OF ESSOINS. 311


it will have to be imputed to them, if the essoinee has
risen from his bed on an unlawful day assigned to him
by the knights, but not to the knights, on account of
their simplicity and inexperience, not to the essoinee,
because he obeys what is adjudged. But if the justi-
claries when they have examined into it, have sent &
second time, and the knights have not made & view,
and the claimant has not sued against the knights, then
it cannot be inputed to the justiciaries, nor to the
essoinee, but to the knights alone, and to the claimant.
But if the judge has examined into it, and has sent
them, and the knights, who have been sent, have viewed
and granted a day, then if the essoinee has come later,
or if by chance the essoinee has erred in selecting a day
because he has badly understood the day appointed to
him, he ought to impute this to himself, since the four
knights have a record thereof. And that they have &
record is proved, since they are as it were justiciaries in
this ease, nor is any testification: to the contrary admis-
sible against their assertion, when the claimant has put
himself in default, [as appears] from the reply of Wil-
liam de Ralegh and Gilbert de Segrave made to Richard
Duket, who requested advice from them in this case.
Or if he has come earlier than he ought, this may be
imputed to him, since he alone is in fault, although it
has sometimes been done to the contrary, where the
essoinee obeys what has been adjudged, and on account
of an error of the knights in their expression of the day
suffers damage, since he is not in fault, as if in granting
a day they should say to the essoinee :


We grant to you à day from this day of your view — 83.
for & year and & day,this is sufficient, But if they UA ian
have expressed the day, in saying thus: we grant to granted
you à day from this day, and so that on the said day eris
you should appear at the Tower, if they have granted words.

& lawful day in either case they must be obeyed, to wit,


that on the express day he should come to the Tower,


f. 357 b.


312 DE-ESSONIIS. 5 *


niati legitimus. Si autem in diei expressione errave-
rint milites, no est necesse essoniato q ipse erret, quia
p hoc posset ,CS9e in defalta ppter errorem militum,
quavis ipse no esset in culpa. Et ideo copareat ad
diem legitimum ppter verba generalia, p quas» datur ei
dies à die visus sui ad unum annum & unum diem,
& expressio diei habeatur pro nulla. Sed quid si es-
soniatus obtemperaverit militibus errantibus, de gratia
& consilio curie poterit ei subveniri.  Cüm autem
venerint coram justiciariis ad testificandum languorem,
oportet quód omnes veniant simul (ut praedictum est)
ad testificandum, nisi ita sit q petens prsesens sit, &
concedat visum factum legitimé & diem datum. Quo
casu sufficit testifieatio duorum vel triü, cum testifica-
tione ipsius petentis, & sic fiat irrotulatio, C. D. E. F.
quatuor milites missi ad talem, qui se essoniavit de
malo lecti versus talem de placito terre, veniunt &
testificatur q viderunt eum tali die, & dederunt ei
languorem ex certa causa ppter talem infirmitatem,
scilicet, si super hoc fuerint requisiti, & etiam dederüt
ei diem à tali festo in unum annum & unum diem,
vel à tali die ante tale festum vel post, vel tertio
vel quarto die kalendas Aprilis, vel quarto kalendas,
vel quarto idus in unü annum sine expressione et
unum diem, et sutBcit, vel cum expressione secüdum
q supradictum est. Et quo casu, facta sic testificatione,
dabitur idem dies petenti si presens fuerit, vel per
essoniatorem suum si fuerit essoniatus. Et eodem
modo participibus si presentes fuerint, & sic erit tota


OF ESSOINS. 313


and such day shall be the legitimate day for the essoinee.
But if the knights have made an error in the expression
of the day, it is not necessary for the essoince to make the
same error, because he may thereby be in default on
account of the error of the knights, although he be not
himself in fault. And accordingly let him appear on
the legitimate day on account of the general words,
whereby there is granted to him a day from the day of
his view up to one year and one day, and let the ex-
pression of & day be held to be null. But if the essoinee
has obeyed the knights in their error, by the grace and
upon the advice of the court he may have succour
afforded to him. But when they have come before the
justiciarles to testify to languor, it is incumbent that
they should all come together (as above said) to testify,
unless it be that the plaintiff is present and that he
admits that & view has been made legitimately and a
day granted. In which case the testimony of two or of
three is suflicient. with the testimony of the plaintiff
himself, and let the enrolment be thus: C. D. E. F., four


f. 3


knights sent to so-and-so, who has essoined himself for.


bed-sickness against so-and-so in & suit for land, come
and testify that they saw him on a certain day, and
granted him languor on account of a certain infirmity,
to wit, i£ they have been required to speak upon this
matter, and they have granted to him a day from such
& festival up to à year and a day, or from such a day
before such & festival, or after, or on the third or the
fourth day before the kalends of April, or on the fourth
before the kalends, or on the fourth before the ides for a
vear without expression and a day, and it is sufficient,
or with expression according to what has been said
above. And in which case, upon the testification having
been thus made, the same day shall be granted to the
plaintiff, if he be present, or through his essoiner, if he
has been essoined. And in the same manner to par-
ceners, if they be present, and thus the whole cause will


7 b.


311 DE ESSONIIS.


loquela in suspenso usd ad annü & diem, & sic desi-
net loquela esse in judicio, & in curia, donec post
annü & diem p constabularium à Turn iterum ad
curiam remittatur, nec iterum revocari poterit ad cu-
riam à justiciariis aliquo casu, sine utriusq partis vo-
luntate. $i autem participes in testificatione languoris
forte presentes no extiterint, vel cüm essoniati fuerint,
forte essoniü non jacuerit, quia priüs se essoniavit!
(offerente se liti petente quarto die) pcedatur cotra
eos ad defalta, sicut infra dicetur de defaltis, cüm sint
pücipes, & quia res petita patitur divisione, licet ab
initio no fuerit divisa. Et ide erit si fuerit divisa
inter cohasredes.  Amittere enim poterunt participes
per defaltam sine participibus, quavis sine pticipibus
non teneantur respodere. Si aute vir & uxor implaci-
tentur, qui simul & in solidum tenent unicam rem,
cüm sint quasi unum corpus, quamvis diverse animse
& no pticipes, quia res inter eos non patitur divisio-
nem, càüm unus eorü essoniatus fuerit de malo lecti, &
alter defaltam fecerit, peedi poterit statim ad defaltam
contra absentem, sed ad judicium pcedi non possit ante
psentiam utrius]. Suspeditur igitur judiciü quousg
essoniatus iterü in judicio & in curia coparuerit, quia
unius ipsorü defalta utriq erit damnosa. Item esto q
petens psens non fuerit die quo fit testificatio, nec per
se, nee p essoniatorem ut die suü recipiat, nec primo
die nee secundo, nec tertio, nec quarto, nec ulterius,
sufficit tamen si aliquo die infra annü & die. Sed
quid si post annü & diem petat tenens judicium de


——— —ÓMÁÀ ———M——— 9 ——————


! * se essoniaverint," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


LJ


-


. OF ESSOINS. 315


be in suspense for & year and a day, and so the cause
will eease to be in judgment and before the court until
after & year and & day it be remitted again to the court
by the constable at the Tower, nor can it be recalled to
the court by the justicilaries in any case without the
willingness of both parties. But if the parceners have
not been present at the testification of languor, but
when they have been essoined by chance the essoin has
not held good, because they have essoined themselves
previously (the claimant presenting himself to join issue
on the fourth day) let proceedings be taken against
them for & default, as shall be said below concerning
defaults, when there are parceners, and because the thing
claimed admits of division, although it has not been
from the beginning divided. And the same shall be
done, if it has been divided amongst coheirs. | For par-
ceners may lose by default without their parceners,
although they are not bound to answer without their
parceners. But if à man and his wife are impleaded,
who hold together and in a lump a single thing, since
they are as it were one body, although different souls
and not parceners, because the thing does not admit of
division between them, when one of them has been
essoined for bed-siekness and the other has made de-
fault, proceedings may be had forthwith for a default
against the absent one, but cannot go on to judgment
before the presence of both. The judginent therefore is
suspended until the one who has been essoined has
appeared again in judgment and in the court, because
the default of one of them will be damaging to both.
Likewise let it be that the plaintiff has not been present
on the day, on which the testifieation is made, neither
by himself, nor by an essoiner, to have à day appointed
to him, neither on the first nor on the second nor on
the third nor on the fourth day nor on a further day, it
suffices however if on. some day within & year and &
day. But if after à year and & day the tenant claims


l.
Qualiter
essoniatus
custodire
debeat
languorem
et qualiter
fe tenere.


f. 358.


2.
Si essonia-
tus inven-
tus faerit
vagiuns,
qualiter
debet
arrestari.


316 DE ESSONIIS.,


defalta petentis, nihil capiat per defaltam, facta com-:
pensatione ut predictum est.


CAP. XII.


Qualiter autem essoniatus custodire debeat languorem
videndum, & sciendum quód (secundum quód supradictum
est) decinctus, & sine braccis, & discalceatus se tenere
debet inlecto. Alicubi tamen poterit indui vestimentis
si voluerit: non debet exire cameram vel domum in
qu& jacuerit publicó, nec vagari per curiam suam in
cospectu populi, nec exire de curia ut vagat! per rura,
vel longius incedat, ne à petente interceptus seysinam
suam amittat per defaltam, quia si petens scit eum
extra curiam suam, vel in curia sua forte ipsum inve-
nerit, immittere poterit in eum manus, cum hae tamen
discretione.


Debet tamen petes secum assumere si fieri possit
servientem dii regis simul cum probis & legalibus
hominibus vicinis, & cum clamore ipsum arrestare, ita
quód nullam faciat ei violentiam. | Et quo casu, habeat
serviens domini regis recordum simul cum testimonio
legalium & proborum hominum. $i autem tales secum
statim non habuerit, veniat petens cum suis & essoni-
atü arrestet. cum utesio et clamore, ut ad hoc conve-
niant probi homines vicini, ut si opus fuerit, testificari
possunt quid viderunt. Mittere etia debet ppter coro-
natores, & servientem domini regis, ut simul cum pro-
bis hominibus testificari possint qualiter fuerit inter-
ceptus, quorum recordo stabitur, donee essoniatus per
manifestas pbationes docuerit contrarium. Poterit enim


——— áÀ à —


! '* ut vapet,"? MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. o17


judgment from the default of the claimant, let him take
nothing through the default, compensation having been
made as aforesaid.


CHAPTER XII.


But we must see in what way an essoince ought to ——!.
Ep : In what
observe languor, and it is to be known (as said above) way an
he ought to keep hiinself in bed ungirt and. without his essoinee
à : ought to
breeches and. without his shoes But he may occa- observe
sionally put on his clothes if he wishes; he ought not, in pes
. L)
however, to go publiely out of the chamber or out of wayto
the house in which he lies, nor wander about his court i him-
in the sight of the people, nor go out of his court to [35a
wander about the fields or to take a longer walk, lest
upon being intereepted by the claimant he should lose
his seysine by default, because if the claimant knows
that he is outside his court, or has found him by chance
in his court, he may lay hands upon him, with this
discretion however:


The claimant ought to take with himself, i£ possible, — 2.

& kings serjeant, together with some honest and loyal pum
neighbours, and with à cry arrest him, so that he do hcen found
no violenee to him. And in which case let the king's PE
serjeant have & record together with the testimony of may be
the loyal and honest men, But if he cannot have forth- REIMEMS
with such persons to accompany him, let the claimant

come with his own men and arrest the essoinee with

hue and cry, that the honest men of the neighbourhood

may assemble thereupon, and if it should be necessary,

may testify what they have seen. But he ought to

send besides the coroners and a serjeant of the lord the

king, that they may be able to testify with the honest

men, in what manner he was intercepted, by whose re-

cord the matter shall stand, until the essoinee has shown

the contrary by manifest proofs. For the serjeant of


318 DE ESSONIIS.


serviens dii regis simul cum testimonio pborum homi-
num testifieari qualiter essoniatum, & in quo loco
arrestatum invenerit, sed utrum sponte ibi venerit, vel
contra voluntate adductus, testificari nó possunt. Po-
terit enim essoniatus docere contrariü sie, & dicere
quód eüm esset tali die in domo sua tali, apud tale
locum & in lecto suo sicut ille cui fuit languor adju-
dieatus, & in pace domini regis, venit ibi ipse talis
petens, & nequiter & in felonia extraxit eum à domo
sua, & à lecto suo, & in roberia abstulit ei tantum,
contra pacem dii regis, & sic offert &c. Et quo casu,
peedendum erit in modum appellati, & terminabitur
negotium per duellum, vel per inquisitionem, & secun-
dum quod judicium fecerit p uno vel pro alio, amittet
unus eorum imperpetuum.  Tenens, quia stulte surrexe-
rit, vcl petens, quia malitiose essoniatum extraxerit, et
eade ratione qua lucrari voluerit, eade ppter malitiam
amittat. Cüm autem quis essoniatus ita per legem
terra arrestatus fucrit, & non p malitia, si petens se
tenuerit ad defaltam, & judiciü petierit de defalta, fir-
miter se teneat ad defaltam, ne defalte tacité renun-
ciat p consensum.  Tacitó enim renunciare poterit ita:
si diem amoris ceperit cum tenente, sive datus fuerit
dies pce tenentis, vel prece petentis, vel pce utriusq.
Dabitur enim dies sic. Dies datus est tali petenti, &
tali tenenti, de placito terre usque talem diem prece
partium. Et ex quo petens per hoc innuit quód pla-
citum sit inter eos, & sic videtur tacité renuncelasse
defaltz, & videtur placitum redintegratum quod fuit ex


OF ESSOINS. 319


the lord the king may testify together with the testi-
mony of the honest. men in what manner and in what
place he found the essoinee arrested, but whether he
came there spontaneously or was brought thither against
his will they cannot testify. For the essoince may
show the contrary thus, and say that when he was on
such à day in his own house at such & place and in his
own bed, as a person who has been adjudged to have &
languor, and in the peace of the lord the king, the said
claimant himself came and wickedly and feloniously
dragged him out of his house and out of his bed, and
in robbery took so much from him against the peace of
the king, and so he offers &c. And in which case pro-
ceedings will have to be taken after the manner of a
criminal charge, and the business will be determined by
& duel or by an inquest, and according as judgment
shall have been for the one or for the other, one of them
shall lose in perpetuity. The tenant, because he has
foolishly left his bed, or the claimant because he has
maliciously dragged out of bed an essoinee, and in the
same way in which he wished to gain, let him in the
same way lose on account of his malice. But when a
person essoined has been thus arrested by the law of the
land and not by malice, if the claimant has kept himself
to à default and has requested judgment for a default,
let him hold fast to a default, lest he should renounce it
tacitly by consenting. Forhe can tacitly renounce in this
manner: if he has taken & day of love together with
the tenant, or if such & day has been given with the
assent of the tenant or at the prayer of the claimant or
with the assent of both parties. For & day shall be
given in this manner. A day has been given to so-and-
80 the elaimant and to so-and-so the tenant, concerning
a suit for land up to such & day at the prayer of the
parties. And since the claimant hereby implies that
there is & suit between them, and so he seems to have
tacitly renounced a default, and the suit seems to have


f. 358 b.


320 DE ESSONIISN.


parte tenentis desertum. Eodem modo videtur tacite re-
nunciasse tenens defalte, si sibi perquisiverit de amo-
venda loquela ab uno judicio ad alium per pone. Con-
tinetur enim ibi, pone coram justiciariis, &c.  Loquelam,
qua est in comitatu vel coram nobis vel coram talibus
justieiariis, per hoe enim quod dicitur in impetratione
propria loquela qua» est, videtur per hoc innuere quód
loquela sit redintegrata ut prius, & sic esse poterit in
pluribus causibus consimilibus. Et si ad hoc autem
agat petens, quód judicium transferatur de defalta ab
uno juditio ad aliud, vel hoc sit factum judiciü! et
no petentis, vel q dies datur de audiendo judicio suo
de defalta, ppter difficultate judicii, & ita q ibi sit
factü Justiciarii & no ptis, aliud erit, quia per hoc no
renüciat petens defaltz| tacite ned expressé,  Cüm au-
tem sic arrestatus fuerit tenens essoniatus cum testi-
monio suffcienti, ut pdictum est, non erit ulteriüs
ducendus ab aliquo, nec ad comitatum nec ad castrum,
nec alibi, sed statim dimittendus abire liberé quo volu-
eri, qui ciun dimissus fuerit abire, ubicunq divertit
iterü ad lectum vel alibi, statim ad querela petentis
sumoneatur venire ad curiam, ubi loquela priüs fuit, ad
audiendum judiciü suü de defalta, & quare surrexerit
postqm languor fuerit adjudicatus ei p tale bre dc
judicio. In suma vero notandü, q postgm quis esso-
niatus fuerit de malo lecti, postqm in curia dii regis
coparuerit q essoniü dedicere no possit, no possit im-
puné, q no sit in defalta, surgere sine visu legitimo


! * judicis," MS. Rawl, C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 321


been renewed, which had been abandoned on the part of
the tenant. In the same way the tenant seems to have
renounced tacitly à default, if he has made application
on his own behalf to remove the cause for argument
from one judgment to another by a pone. For it is
contained therein,—Put before the justiciaries &c. the
cause which is in the county court, or before us, or
before certain justiciaries, for inasmuch as in the suing
out a cause which is existing is spoken of, he seems
thereby to imply that the cause has been renewed as
before, and so it may be in several similar cases. But
if the claimant works for this, that the judgment be
transferred concerning the default from one judgment to
another, or if this be the act of the judge and not of the
: claimant, or that &a day is given for hearing his judg-
ment concerning the default, on account of the difficulty
of the judgment, and so that it be the act of the justi-
ciary and not of the party, it will be different, for the
claimant does not thereby renounce & default either
tacitly or expressly. But when the tenant essoinee has
been thus arrested with a sufficient. body of witnesses,
as &aforesaid, he will not have to be further conducted
by any one, neither to the county court nor to the
castle, nor elsewhere, but he is forthwith to be dismissed
to go away freely wherever he may wish, who when he
has been dismissed to go away, wherever he lodges him-
self whether again to go to bed or elsewhere, let him be
forthwith summoned on the complaint of the plaintiff to
come to the court, where the cause has first been spoken
to, to hear his judgment concerning the default and
wherefore he has risen from his bed after languor had
been adjudged to him, by such & writ for judgment.
But in sum it is to be noted, that after a person has
been essoined for bed-sickness after he has appeared in
the court of the lord the king so that he can not gainsay
his essoin, he cannot rise from his bed with impunity so
as not to be in default without a view has been legiti-
Q 6866. P.


f. 358 b.


9.
Breve, si
essoniatus
surrexerit
sine licen-
tia, quod
milites
mittantur
ad ipsum
videndum,
si ita sur-
rexerit vel
non post
languorem
ei adjudi-
catam.


329 DE ESSONIIS.


facto, s. p tales qui visum facere possunt, ut supra,
vel sine licétia: & generaliter licetià habere poterit,
sive visus fuerit sive nó, & sive languor ei adjudicatus
fuerit sive nó, quousq visus legitime? testatus fuerit, &
ita q petens die receperit apud Turrim Lond. Et ex-
tune nulla dari poterit licentia surgédi, quia justiciarii
jurisdietioné nó habent, nee reverti poterit loquela
iterü &d judicium, nisi per officium constabularii. Coó-
tingit quandod q ille qui à làguore surrexit, non est
inventus in loco in quo se essoniavit nec extra ubi
possit arrestari, quo casu, ad querelam petetis fiat
breve vicecomiti q assumptis secum quatuor militibus,
vel quibusdam ex illis qui eum viderunt, in ppria
persona sua accedat ad locum, in quo pdictus essonia-
tus jacuisse debuit, & si ipsum in languore suo inve-
nerit, sicut. fuit ei adjudicatus vel no, & secundü q
eum invenerit vel no, fiat breve vicecomiti sub tali forma.


Rex vicecomiti salutem. — Ostensum est nobis ex
parte A. q. cüm B. in curia nostra apud West. vel
coram justiciariis nostris itineratibus vel in comitatu
tali essoniasset se de malo lecti versus tale de placito
terre apud tale loci in comitatu tali. Et ibide làguor
esset adjudieatus ei p quatuor milites per pceptum nos-
irü &d ipsum videnduü transmissos, idem B. infra lan-
guorem suum contra consuetudine regni nostri surrexit,
& à domo sua in qua languidus jacuisse debuit, exivit,
& à ptibus illis recessit, et. se transtulit ibi vel ad
alium comitatü. Et ideo tibi peipimus q statim visis
literis istis omni occasione &c. assumptis tecu pdictis
quatuor militibus, vel duobus ex illis, si omnes habere


OF ESSOINS. 229


mately made, that is, through such persons who may
make a view, as above, or without a license: and gene-
rally he may have a license, whether he has been viewed
or not, and whether languor has been adjudged to him
or not, as long as the view has been legitimately tes-
tified, and so that the claimant has received a day at
the Tower of London. And from that time no license
to rise from his bed can be given, because the justi-
ciaries have not jurisdiction, nor can the cause be re-
stored again to the court for judgment, except through
the office of the constable. It happens sometimes that
he who has got up after a languor, is not found in the
place where he essoined himself, nor outside it in a place
where he can be arrested, in which case at the complaint
of the plaintiff let à writ go to the viscount that he
having associated with himself four knights or some
of those who have viewed him, should go in his own
person to the place, where the essoinee aforesaid ought
to have lain, and if he shall find him in his languor,
whether it has been adjudged to him or not, and ac-
cording as he has found him or not, let à writ in this
form go to the viscount.


The king to the viscount greeting. It has been shown uM
to us on the part of A. that when B. in our court at a t
Westminster, or before our justiciaries itinerant, or in sionee has
gueh a county court, has essoined himself for bed-sickness 895" P.
against so-and-so in a suit for land at such a place in licence,
such & county, and a languor was there adjudged to kn be
him by four knights sent to view him through our pre- sentto

, "T : « : view him
cept, the said B. within the time of his langruor against if he has so
the custom of our realm has got up from his bed, and eo Des
has gone out of his house, in which he ought to have languor
lain languid, and has withdrawn from those parts, and pe beiin |
has transferred himself there or to another county. And to hiui.
accordingly we enjoin you that immediately upon seeing
these letters on every occasion &c., having associated
with you four knights, or two of them, if you cannot


x 2


f. 359.


l.
Qualiter
essoniatus
venire de-
bet ad
Turrim
London. et
quando,
vel mittere
responsa-
lem.


3241 DE ESSONIIS.


non possis, in ppria persona tua accedas apud talem
locü, & videas si idem B. ibi sit in lecto & in làguore
suo sieut ei fuit adjudicatus, vel no. Et si ibi eü
inveneris, hoe scire facias justiciariis niis apud West.
per literas tuas sigillatas. Et si ibi inventus no fue-
rit, tunc venire facias predictos milites, qui ibi tecum
interfuerint, cori prefatis justiciariis nostris tali die
ad certificandum inde justiciarios nios. Et interim p
legales & discretos homines, tam ballivos tuos qm p
alios, insidiari facias eidé B. si redierit de ptibus tali-
bus vel no. Et si redierit, & invétus fuerit extra tale
loeu ubi languor fuit ei adjudicatus, tüc facias eum
arrestari, ità q habeas corpus ejus coram pr:wfatis jus-
tieiariis niis ad tale terminum ad respondendü eidem!
quare &ec. vel ad audiendü recordum vel judiciu suu
de loquela quie fuit coram eisdeé justiciarüis nostris
inter pdictos A. & B. de tanto terre cum pertinentiis
in tali villa. Et unde idem talis essoniavit se de
malo lecti versus predictum talem, & ita q languor ei
fuit adjudieatus, & sine licetia surrexerit à làguore, ut
idem talis dicit, & habeas ibi &e. "Teste &c.: & ita
possunt iste ultime clausule vel adjungi brevi de in-
quisitionibus? vel fieri per se.


CAP. XIII.


In fine anni post languorem, cüm essoniatus conva-
luerit de languore, videndu erit qualiter venire debeat
apud Turrim, & quando, vel mittere responsalem, eo
forte q jam languor versus sit in morbum sonticü, &
incurabilem, q venire non possit per sc. Ité quando
debeat surgere à lecto :egritudinis, & qualiter, & per


! «eidem A," MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ? * inquisitione," MS. id.


OF ESSOINS. 3235


have all, you should go in your own person to such &
place, and see if the said B. is there in bed, and in his
languor, as was adjudged to him, or not. | And if you
shall find him there, make this known to our justiciaries
at Westminster by your sealed letters. And if he has
not been found there, then cause the aforesaid knights,
who were present there with you, to come before our
said justiclaries on such & day in order to certify our
said justiclaries. — And meanwhile cause certain loyal
and discreet persons, as well your bailiffs and others, to
hne in wait for the said B., if he shall return to those
parts or not. And if he shall have returned and has
been found outside such place in which a languor was
adjudged to him, then cause him to be arrested, so that
you present his body before our aforesaid justiciaries at
such a term to answer to said À. wherefore &c., or to
hear the record or his own judgment in the cause which
was before our said justiciaries between the said A. and
B. concerning so much land with its appurtenances in
such a vill; And whereon the said so-and-so has es-
soined himself for bed-sickness against so-and-so afore-
said, and so that a languor was adjudged to him, and he
has risen up from his languor without a licence, as
so-and-so says, and have there present &c. Witness &c.:
and so these short little clauses may be either added to
& writ for an inquest or be inserted by themselves.


CHAPTER XIII.


At the end of the year after the languor, when the
essoinee has got well of his languor, it is to be seen how


f. 359.


In what
way an


he ought to come to the Tower of London, and when, or essoinee


else to send a responsible person, on the grounds perhaps


ought to
come to


that the languor has already turned into a fatal or an RUNE


ndon


incurable malady, so that he cannot come in person. or to send
Likewise when he ought to rise from his bed of sickness, sien


and in what manner, and by what days-journeys he


e person.


9


Qualiter sit
annus bis-


sextilis.


320 DE ESSONIIS.


quas dietas venire debeat ad "Turrim. Et sciendu q
cüm essoniatus à languore convaluerit & in propria
persona venire possit, primó debet coputare dietas
rationabiles secundü q plené convaluerit, vel secundum
quod per languore extenuatus fuerit & debilitatus, ita
q commodé venire non possit. Sed postqm.à lecto
surrexerit£, non moretur in domicilio suo ultra unam
nocte, & sic inde pficiscatur per rationabiles dietas ad
Turrim, ità q per viam nusqm moram faciat ultra
unam noctem, & q sit apud Turrim ultimo die anni
naturalis, qui dicitur dies excrescens, & hora cogrua
placitandi.


Sed videndu erit qualiter dies ille sit accipiendus
tempore bissextili, ppter duos dies qui sub eodé signo
& eadem litera coputantur, quoru unus (qui dicitur
dies excresces) determinat & finit tempus quatuor an-
norü peedentium, & in eo computabilis est inter dies
ejusde teporis pteriti qui sunt mille & quadrigenti, &
faciüt quatuor annos minores, & quibus adjicitur unus
dies qui colligitur ex quatuor quadrigetis, ut faciat
pdietos quatuor annos plenos & majores, & dicitur dies
excrescens, & coputandus erit inter tepora & dies pdic-
torü quatuor annoru prwcedentiu, & qui dieitur dies
legitimus cóparendi quolibet anno apud Turrim. Et
codé modo in anno bissextili sicut in aliis tribus annis
peedentibus. Est etiam alius dies sub eade litera qui
est eaput & principium aliorü quatuor annoru subse-
quentiu, qui si coputandus esset infra tempora predic-
toru quatuor annorum prwcedentium, ratione alicujus
quadrantis sive quartz, sublato de medio & non com-
putato die exerescente, sic esset dies comparendi apud
Turrim in sexagesimo septimo die, q esse non debet,


.cüm ille dies exeresens coputabilis sit infra tempora


OF ESSOINS. 327


ought to come to the Tower. And it is to be known
when the essoinee has got well of his languor and can
come in his own person, he ought to compute reasonable
days' journeys according as he has got thoroughly well,
or according as he has become thin and weak by the
languor, so that he cannot conveniently come. But
after he has risen from his bed, let him not delay in his
domicile beyond a single nirht, and so let him proceed
by reasonable days' journeys to the Tower, so as not to
delay on the road any where longer than a single night,
and that he be at the Tower on the last day of the
natural year, which is called the excrescent day, and at
the usual hour of hearing suits.


But it is to be scen in what manner that day is to — 3.
be accepted in a bissextile time on account of two days, I
which are computed under the same sign and under the year be-
same letter, of which one. (which is called the exereseent C9 met bie-
day) determines and finishes the time of the four pre-
ceding years, and therein is computable ainongst the
days of the said past time, which are one thousand and
four hundred, and make four minor years, and to which
i8 added one day which is collected from the four four
hundred days in order to make the aforesaid four years
full and major, and it is called the excrescent day, and
will have to be computed amongst the times and the
days of the aforesaid four preceding years, and which is
called a legitimate day of appearing in every year at the
Tower. And in the same way in a bissextile year as in
the other three preceding years. "There is also another
day under the same letter, which is the head and com-
mencement of the other four years following, which if it
were to be computed within the tiines of the four years
preceding by reason of & certain quarter or fourth part,
the excrescent day having been taken out of the midst,
and not being computed, the day of appearing at the
Tower would thus be on the sixty-seventh day, which
ought not to be, since the excrescent day is computable


f. 359 b,


3928 DE ESSONIIS.


quatuor annoru peedentiu, ratione illius quadvantis sive


quartz, & sic in anno bissextili erit ille dies legitimus


coparendi. Et ita quód in anno bissextili plures dies
non contineantur qm trecenti & sexaginta sex, sicut
in aliis annis non bissextilibus. Et ita uterj dies suh
eadem litera sit comprehensus, quia sie subductus!
sicut in anno bissextili sicut in anno minori terminat
tempus quatuor annorum precedentium, & principium
dat tempus quatuor annorum subsequentium, & ita
eodem die desinit annus precedens propter sex horas,
& incipit eodem die annus sequens propter octodecim
horas, quarü unus? terminat & etiam idem principium
dat, & computabiles sunt & non sunt computabiles,
diversis tamen respectibus. Ille vero dies excrescens,
qui non est computabilis ea ratione propter necessita-
tem ad vitandum illud inconveniens, ne festum Natalis
Domini celebretur in estate & Nativitas Sancti Jo-
hannis Baptistze in hyeme, quod contingere posset infra
quingentos vel sexcentos annos, & etiam ita continge-
ret intemperies hyemalis in signis estivalibus. Et ad
majorem evidentiam aliquid dicamus de anno, scilicet
quid sit annus, & quis dicatur major annus, & minor.
Et ratio quare dies adjungatur anno minori, Annus
est mora motus quo summus planeta pervolvat circu-
lum. Annorum autem quidam sunt majores, quidam
minores, secundum brevitatem vel productionem circu-
lorum, & secundum velocitatem planete in suo circulo.
Item annorum alius solaris, alius lunaris, alius artifi-
cialis, alius naturalis, alius usualis.. Naturalis est illud
spatium quo suum sol pervolvat circulum, & fit ex
trecentis sexaginta & quinque diebus & uno quadrante
sive quarta unus diei, scilicet ex sex horis. Hora au-


!'«quia sic subductus," down to **octodecim horas," omitted MS.
Rawl. C. 160.
? * quorum unus," MS. id.


OF ESSOINS. 329


within the times of the four years preceding by reason
of the quarter or fourth part, and so in & bissextile
year that day will be the lerzitimate day of appearing.
And so that in & bissextile year there are not contained
more than three hundred and sixty-six days, as in other
years that are not bissextile; and so either day becomes
comprised under the same letter, because being thus
subtracted as in the bissextile year, as in à minor year
it terminates a time of four preceding years, and supplies
& commencement of four years following, so on the
same day the preceding year ceases by reason of the
Six hours, and the following year begins by reason of
the eighteen hours, of which one terminates and the
same also supplies à commencement, and they are com-
putable and are not computable, in different respects
however. But the excrescent day, which is not com-
putable for this reason, for the sake of avoiding the
inconvenience lest the festival of the Nativity of our
Lord should be celebrated in the summer and the Nati-
vity of St. John Baptist in the winter, which might
happen within five hundred or six hundred years, and
so that the climate of winter would occur in the summer
signs. And for greater clearness let us say something
concerning the year, to wit, what & year is, and what is
called à greater and what a smaller year. And the
reason why a day is added to & smaller year. A year is
the delay of the motion with which the highest planet
completes & circle. But some years are greater, some
are smaller, according to the shortness or the prolonga-
tion of the circles, and according to the velocity of the
planet in its circle. Likewise of years one is solar,
another is lunar, another is artificial, another is natural,
another is usual À natural day is that space in which
the sun completes its circle of revolution, and it consists
of three -hundred and sixty-five days and a quarter or
& fourth part of one day, to wit, of six hours. But an


f. 359 b.


330 DE ESSONIIS.


tem fit ex quadraginta momentis, & sic fit dies ex
novem millibus & sexcentis momentis!  Usualis annus
qui dicitur annus minor, stat ex trecentis sexaginta &
quinque diebus, ubi ultimus dies non est legitimus
eomparendi secundum quosdam. Major vero constat
ex trecentis sexagenta & sex diebus, ita ut minute
neglectze per tres annos precedentes resumantur cum
minutiis quarti anni ad perficiendum unum diem in-
tegrum, & iste dies sie excrescens appellatur bissextus,
et annus in quo contingit dicitur bissextilis, & qui
quidem omni tempore legitimus est &d coparandum,
scilicet in sexagesimo sexto die in anno bissextili, sicut
in aliis annis, sed in sexagesimo septimo (sicut dicunt
quidam, sed non bene ut videtur) Dicitur etiam bis-
Sextus eo quód inseribitur sexto kalendas Martii, ubi
duo dies computantur super unam literam, scilicet F.,
quia colligitur iste dies ex minutiis quatuor annorum.
Et ne putet illum quis incipere in uno anno & termi-
nari in quarto anno, proponatur annus incipiens mane,
ille terminabitur revoluto eireulo anni in meridie, ubi
incipiente secundo anno ille secundus dies terminabitur
ad noctem eadem ratione, tertius ad mediam noctem,
quartus ad auroram, ita quód  bissextus constat ex
quatuor quartis simul sumptis, & ita computatur nox
sequens cum die procedente pro uno die artificiali.
Si autem fiat computatio anni lunaris recte dicendo
per literas à contrario, semper dies prscedit et nox
subsequitur. Et ideo vice versa per talem computa-


! «constat ex ix. et 1x. momen- | * vem centum et lx, momentis,"
* ts," MS. Hawl. C. 160, et MS. | MS. Crewe. See Introduction.
Regium 9. E. xv; * constat ex no-


OF KSSOINS. 331


hour consists of forty moments, and so à day consists of
nine thousand and six hundred moments! The usual
year is that which is called the sinaller year, it eonsists
of three hundred sixty and five days, where the last day
i8 not a legitimate day of appearing according to some.
But à greater year consists of three hundred and sixty-
six days, so that. the minutes neglected during the thrce
preceding years be resumed with the minutes of the
fourth year to make up one whole day, and this day
thus exerescent is called bissextus, and the year in which
it occurs is called bissextilis, and which is at all times
legitimate for appearing, to wit, on the aixty-sixth day
in the bissextile year, as in other years, but in the sixty-
seventh (as some say, but not rightly as it seems). For
the day is called bissextus because it is inserted in the
sixth of the calends of March, where two days are com-
puted under one letter F., because that day is made up
of the minutes of four years. And lest any person
should suppose it to begin in one year and to be ter-
minated in the fourth year, let à year be proposed
commencing in the morning, it will be ended upon a
revolution of the circle of the year in the middle of the
day, when at the commencement of the second year
that second day will terminate at nipht in the same
way, and the third day at midnight, and the fourth day
in the morning, so that the day termed bissexrtus consists
of four quarters taken together, and so the following
night is computed with the preceding day as one arti-
fiial day. But if & computation be made of a lunar
year, strictly speaking, through letters contrariwise, the
day always precedes and the night follows. And there-
fore conversely through such à computation the natural


! This is evidently a misinterpre- | artificial day by forty moments,
tation of the numerals in the MS. | the equivalent of one hour, results
which the editor of Tottell's text | ina day of nine hundred and sixty
had before him, as the multiplica- | moments, instead of nine thousand
tion of thetwenty-four hours of the | &ix hundred moments.


f. 360.


332 DE ESSONIIS.


tionem incipiat dies naturalis in aurora, & terminetur
viec versa (ut supra) Ex precedentibus igitur mani-
festé liquet q in sexagesimo sexto die debeat essonia-
tus comparere apud Turrim & non maturiüs, ne sit in
defalta eo q languorem rite non observaverit. Item
non tardiüs qm in sexagesimo sexto die secundu eosde
ne sit in defalta, eo quód diem suum sibi datum apud
Turrim non observaverit. Igitur secure poterit com-
parere sexagesimo sexto die, scilicet primo post annum
naturalem, qui sub se continet annu minore usualem,
& unu diem tam in anno bissextili qm aliis tribus
annis pcedentibus, quia in hoc no differunt in aliquo.
Cireulus vero anni usualis sive solaris fit ad modum
et ad similitudine eolubri sine cauda, nec erit annus
integer, nec capiti adjungi poterit corpus q est annus
usualis et constat ex trecetis et sexaginta quinq die-
bus, nisi adjungatur ei cauda. Cauda vero dici poterit
sex hore q deficiunt, ut ex anno usuali qui sub se
continet trecétos & sexaginta quinq dies et sex horas,
scilicet quartà ptem diei, fiat annus naturalis, qui sub
se cótine£ annum usualem & unum die ratione pdic-
tarum sex horarum, & sic erit circulus anni naturalis
ad modu & similitudine colubri habetis cauda in ore,
sieut videri poterit per lunaré computationem literarü
& signoru, quibus dies anni signatur. Videamus igitur
omne tépus quatuor annoru, ui sciri possit qualiter
quilibet annus naturalis incipiat per se, & qualiter ter-
minetur. Incipit enim sub eodé signo, vel sub eade
litera, & sub eode signo terminatur, quod dici poterit
in ore colubri: ut si inceperit quis cóoputare à litera B.
facta coputatione trecentoru et sexaginta quinq dieru,


OF ESSOINS. 333


day would begin in the morning and would be ter-
minated conversely (as above). From that which pre-
cedes it is manifesily clear that the essoinee ought to
appear &t& the Tower on the sixty-sixth day, and not
sooner, lest he be in default, inasmuch as he has not
observed duly his languor. | Likewise not later than the
sixty-sixth day according to the same persons, lest he be
in default, inasmuch as he has not observed his day
assigned to hin at the Tower. He may therefore in
security appear on the sixty-sixth day, to wit, the first
day after the natural year, which contains under itself à
minor usual year and one day as well in bissextile year
as in ihe three other preceding years, because in this
matter they do not differ in any respect. But the circle
of the usual or solar year is made after the manner and
after the likeness of à serpent without a tail, nor will
the year be entire, nor can the body, which is an usual
year and consists of three hundred and sixty-five days,
be joined on to the head, unless a tail be joined on to it.
But the six hours which are wanting may be called &
tail, so that out of the usual year, which contains under
itself three hundred and sixty-five days and six hours,
to wit, the fourth part of à day, there results & natural
year, which contains under itself an usual year and onc
day in respect of the aforesaid six hours, and so the
circle of & natural year will be after the manner and
after the likeness of & serpent having its tail in its
mouth, as may be seen by a lunar computation of the
letters and the signs by which the days of the years are
marked. Let us see, therefore, all the time of the four
years, that it may be known in what way each natural
year begins by itself, and in what way it ends. For it
begins under the same sign and with the same letter,
and it ends under the same sign, which may be termed
in the mouth of the serpent, as if one should have
begun to compute from the letter B., after having made
a computation of three hundred and sixty-five days,


f. 360.


334 DE ESSONIIS,


et adjuncta un& quarta, quia sumi debet de die con-
tento sub signo B., efficientur annus & dies quas dicu-
tur annus naturalis. Ite facta computatione anni
secundi ppter tres quartas que adhuc remanet de tem-
pore futuro, iteru assumatur queda quarta sub signo
B, et erit secundus annus naturalis. Item cüm adhuc
remaneant du:e quartz, incipiat annus tertius naturalis
sub eodé signo B, & fiat computatio ut supra ad hoc
q fiat annus naturalis. Item cüm adhuc remaneat una
quarta, incipiat annus naturalis sub eodem signo, et
facta coputatione terminetur in eode ratione ejusdem
quarte. Et sic erunt eode quarto anno bis sex hore
& exinde duo dies quales sub eode signo B, unus sci-
licet incipiés, & alius annu terminans, & ppter illas
bis sex horas dici posset annus bissextilis, & sic totü
tópus quatuor annorü continet sub se mille et quad-
ringetos et unum diem, qui colligitur ex quatuor quar-
tis quatuor aüorum pracedentiü, & terminat totü tem-
pus quatuor annorum, et dicitur excrescens, et nihil
sibi vendieat ex tépore quatuor annorü usualiü subse- ,
quentiü. Ne igitur subsequatur inconveniens de quo
supradictum est, remanente die exerescente de tempore
praeterito sub eadem litera B. sive F., de necessitate
retrotrahitur primus dies quatuor annorü subsequen-
tium, ut exinde fiat computatio totius temporis qua-
tuor annorum subsequentium in forma supradicta, &
sie de tempore in tepus in infinitum. . Observare debct
igitur essoniatus diligenter annü et die, ne maturiüs
vel tardiüs compareat quàm deberet. Si autem die no
legitimo comparuerit, & petens eodem die, tenens erit


OF ESSOINS. Q32


and after adding & fourth part of & day, because it
ought to be taken from the day contained under the
sign B., there will be effected à year and a day, which
&re called a natural year. Likewise upon a computation
having been made of a second year, on account of the
three quarters which still remain of future time, let &
certain fourth be again assumed under the sign B., and
there wil be & second natural year. Likewise since
there still remain two quarters, let à third natural year
begin under the same sign DB., and let & computation
be made as above for the purpose of making & natural
year. Likewise since there still remains & quarter of &
day, let the natural year commence under the saine
sign, and upon a computation having been made let it
end in the same sign by reason of the said fourth part.
And so there wil be in the said fourth year twice six
hours and thereupon two days as under the sirn B., to
wit, one beginning and the other ending a year, and on
account of those twice six (bis sex) hours the year may
be called bissextile, and so the entire time of four years
contains under itself one thousand and four hundred
days and one day, which is collected from the four
quarters of à day in the four preceding years and termi-
nates the whole time of four years, and is termed ex-
crescent, and claims for itself nothing out of the time of
the four usual years following.  Lest, therefore, the
inconvenience, which has been mentioned above, should
follow upon the excrescent day remaining from the time
past under the same letter B. or F., of necessity the first
day of the four following years is drawn back, so that
thereupon à computation should proceed of the whole
time of the four years following in the form above-
mentioned, and so from time to time without end. An
essoinee ought therefore to observe diligently the year
and a day, that he may not appear sooner or later than
he ought to do. But if he has appeared on a day not
the legitimate one and the claimant on the same day,


f. 360 b.


3.
De appari-
tione es-
soniati


336 DE ESSONIIS.


in defalta, facta protestatione et recordo costabularii.
Bi &uté petens die legitimo ecomparuerit, et tenens
maturius ut przedictü est, idem erit ut supra. Quia
licet tenens defaltam fecerit, petens tamen diem suum
observabit. $i autem petens die legitimo comparuerit
& tenens in crastino, tenens erit in defalta, quia diem
suum non observavit.


Si autem die legitimo nec petens nec tenens com-
paruerit, tunc uterque facit defaltam, quia diem legi-
timum non observaverunt, & unde si ambo in crastino
comparuerint fiat hine inde compensatio defaltarum,
quia paria delicta mutua compensatione tolluntur. $i
&utem unus in crastino & alius in die tertio vel quarto,
lieet ex toto non sint pares in delicto, tamen hinc
inde erunt in defalta, & fiat copensatio ut supra.
Item si unus illorum die legitimo comparuerit apud
Turrim, et alius coram justiciariis in curia, ille qui in
curia comparat! defaltam facit, quia nullum diem in
euri& habuit, sed apud Turrim. Et ideo licet magis
sit apparere in curia quàm apud Turrim, non defendi-
tur, cüm oporteat eum reverti ad judicium per eandem
viaia per quam divertit à judicio. Item esto q ambo
compareant in curia die legitimo quo apud Turrim
comparuisse debuerunt, fiat hinc inde compensatio
defaltarum, secundum q supra paulum antedictum est.
Cum autem ambo die legitimo apud Turrim comparu-
erint, aut comparet petens per seipsum, vel per attor-
natum, vel per essoniatorem, & tenens aut coparet per
seipsum, vel per responsalem, cüm per seipsum venire
non possit.


! * comparet," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 337


the tenant will be in default, upon & protest having

been made and & record by the constable. But if the
claimant has appeared on the legitimate day and the
tenant sooner as aforesaul, 1. will be the same as above.
Because although the tenant has made a default, the f.360 v.
claimant nevertheless shall observe his own day. But

if the claimant has appeared on the legitimate day and

the tenant on the morrow, the tenant will be in default,
beeause he has not observed his own day.


But if on the legitimate day neither the claimant nor — 8.
the tenant has appeared, then each makes default, be- E eun
eause they have not observed the lecitimate day, and ot the es-
hence, if both should appear on the morrow, let there. be "9^
made compensation on either side, because equal offences
are taken &way by mutual compensation. But if one
should appear on the morrow and the other on the third
or on the fourth day, although on the whole they are
not equal in offence, nevertheless they will be on the
one side and on the other side in default, and let com-
pensation be made as above. Likewise if one of them
has appeared on the legitimate day at the Tower, and
the other before the justiciaries in court, he who has
appeared in court makes default, because he has no day
assigned to him in court, but at the Tower. And there-
fore, although it is more to appear in the court than at
the Tower, it is not allowed, since he ought to return to
judgment by the same way by which he turned. aside
from judgment. Likewise let it be that both should
appear in court on the legitimate day on which they
ought to have appeared at the Tower, let there be on
the one and the other side & compensation of defaults
according to what has been said a little above. Dut
when both shall have appeared at the Tower on the
legitimate day, either the claimant appears by himself
or by an attorney, or by an essoiner, and the tenant
appears either by himself or by an agent to answer on


his behalf, when he cannot come in person.
Q 6366. Y


4.
De officio
constabu-


lIaru.


998 DE ESSONIIS.


Qualiter vero venerit vel quo die, officium costabu-
larii est omnia per ordinem irrotulare, recordum enim
habet de iis quie viderit, judicare tamen non poterit,
quia apud. Turrim. non est judicium cüm ibi deficiat
tertia pars judicii, seilicet judex & jurisdictio, habet
enim constabularius recordum in hiis quas sunt facti,
& non in hiis quie sunt judicii sive juris. Irrotulare
enim debet sie, quód talis qui se essoniavit de malo
lecti versus talem in tali comitatu de placito tere,
venit tali die apud Turrim London, & optulit se versus
talem petente, & petens no venit sed in crastino. Et
dixit quód ad legitimum diem venit et tenens non, &
petiit judicium de defalta. Et é contrario si tenens
dieat q ad legitimü diem venit & petens non, et tenens
petit judicium de defalta, mittantur partes ad judicium
in banco ut ibi judicetur de defalta. Eodé modo si
petens se essoniaverit apud Turrim, & attornatus ! suus,
mittantur tenens & essoniator cora justiciariis ut ibi
judicetur essonium. Sed videamus cui copetat essoniü
apud Turrim. Et sciendü q nullum competit essonium
tenenti qui se essoniavit de malo lecti, quia ex quo
in judicio omnia habuit essonia sua tam de malo
veniendi quàm de malo lecti, nullum habebit essonium
antequàm iterum comparuerit in judicio. Judicium
vero est coram justiciarüis in banco & non apud Tur-
rm: nullum essonium sequitur. Item videndum an
petenti competat essonium vel ejus attornato apud
Turrim, vel ad bancum, quo casu videndum erit cüm
visus testatus fuerit coram justiciariis de banco, utrum
diem habuerit per se, vel per essoniatorem suum, quia


! € vel attornatus suus," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 339


But in whatever manner he may have come and on 4.
whatever day, it is the office of the constable to enroll P
every thing in order, for he has & record of the things the con-
which he has seen, but he cannot judge, for at the Tower "Pe
there is no judgment, since there is wanting there the
third part of à judgment, namely, the judge and the
jurisdiction, for the constable has à record in matters of
fact, but not in matters of judgment or of law. For he
ought to enroll in this manner, that. so-and-so, who has
essoined hinself for bed.sickness against so-and.so in
such a county court. concerniny & suit of land, caine on
such &à day to the Tower of London and. presented. him-
self to join issue with so-and.so the plaintiff, and. the
plointitf has not coine, but on the morrow. | And he has
alleged. that. he came on the lesitimate day and the
defendant not so, and he has claimed judgment for a
default. And on the contrary if the defendant says that
he came on the legitimate day and the plaintiff not so,
and the defendant claims jud;nnent for à default, let the
parties be sent. to judgment in the Bench, that 1t may
there be adjudicated upon the default. In the same
manner if the plaintiff or his attorney has essoined himself
at the Tower, let the defendant and his essoiner be sent
before the justiciaries that the essoin be judged there.

But let us see who is entitled to an essoin at the Tower.
And it is to be known, that the defendant who has
essoined himself for bed.sickness is not entitled to any
essoin, because since he has had in judgment all his
essoins as well for sickness on the way as for bed-
sickness, he shall have no essoin before he has again
appeared in judgment. But judgment is before the
justiciaries in the Bench, and not at the Tower. No
essoin follows. Likewise we must see whether the
plaintiff or his attorney is entitled to an essoin at the
Tower, or at the Bench, in which case it is to be seen
when & view has been testified before the'justiciaries of
the Bench, whether he has had a day through himself or
Y 2


f. 361.


340 DE EESSONIIS.


Siepius se essoniare poterit coram justiciariis in banco,
si wepius coparuerit, post qualibet apparitione, si forte
milites visores plures fecerint defaltas antequam com-
paruerint ad testificadum. Et si p essoniatore die
receperit in banco, nullü habebit essoniü apud Turrim,
no maris quà tenens antequa cóparuerit interim in
curia, quia omnia essonia su& in judicio habuit corau
justieiariis sieut ipse tenens.  Ité nec essonium habebit
iterum cora justiciariis in judicio, quia apparitionem
apud Turrim nullun sequitur essonium, nee maris
datur ei essoniü qm tencti, quia si ei daretur, eadem
ratione dari posset tenenti, q esse no debet. $i auté
p seipsum vel attornatü! die receperit in bàco apud
Turrim, unicü habebit essoniü, si voluerit, anteqm in
judicio cora justiciariis coparuerit. Et sine essonio
bene potest coparere apud Turri & in judicio si volu-
erit. Si aute &pud Turrim se essoniaverit, ibi no
judieabitur essoniü, sed mittetur ad curia? corà justi-
ciariis judicandum. Et nihilominus si voluerit nó ob-
stante essonio comparere poterit impune? cora justicia-
ris in judicio, & per essoniü factü apud Turrim
salvabitur tempus medium, quousq in judicio coparu-
erit, Si autem apud Turrim coparuerit, & diem rece-
perit in banco per constabularium, bene poterit se
essoniare coram justiciariis in judicio. Non tamen ex
die sibi dato apud Turrim sed ex die prius recepto
coram justiciariis in baco.  Cüm aute uterd, tam petens
qm tenés, psonaliter coparuerint apud Turrim die leri-
timo, dabitur utriQq parti dies coram  justiciarüis in
baneo si tune ibi fuerint residentes, vel si no, tunc


! * per attornatum," MS. Rawl. ?« mittetur ad judicium," MS.
C.160, id.


OF ESSOINS. 241


through his essoiner, because. he. may . repeatedly essoin
hiniself before the justiclaries of the Bench, if he has
repeatedly appeared, after each appearance, if by chance
the knights, who are the viewers, have 1nade several
defaults before they have appeared to testify. And if
ho has received through an essoiner à day in the Bench,
he shall have no essoin at the Tower, no more than the
defendant, before he has appeared in court, because he
has had all his essoins in judgment before the justiciaries
just as the defendant. Likewise he shall not have a;ain
an essoin before the justiciaries in. jud;zment, because no
essoin follows his appearance at the Tower, nor is an
essoin allowed to him any more than to the defendant,
because if it were allowed to him, for the same reason 1t
might be allowed to the defendant, which ou:ht not to
be. Dut if he has received in person or by his attorney
& day in the Bench at the Tower, he shall have a single
essoin, if he wishes, before he shall appear for. judzment
before the justiciaries. And he may well appear without
an essoin at the Tower, and in jud; ment, if he wishes.
But if he has essoined himself at the "Tower, his essoin
shall not be judged there, but it shall be sent to the
court before the justiciaries to be judged. | And never-
theless if he wishes, notwithstanding the essoin, he may
appear with impunity before the justiciaries in judyz-
ment, and through the essoin made at the Tower the
intermediate time will be saved, until he has appeared
for judgment. But if he has appeared at the Tower
and has received & day in the Bench through the con-
stable, he may well essoin hiniself. before the. justiciaries
at the judgment. Not however upon the day given to
him at the Tower, but upon the day previously received
by him before the justiciaries in. the Dench. But
when both the plaintiff as well as the defendant have
personally appeared at the Tower on the legitimate day,
there will be given to them both a day before the justi-
ciaries in the Bench, if they shall then be there resident,


f. 361.


342 DE ESSONIIS.


cüm redierint, si in brevi reversuri fuerint, vel post
tempus. Non autem dabitur dies coram  justiciariis
itinerantibus, sive itinerates sint in eode com, ubi terra
fuerit quie petitur, sive in alio, sed primo corà justi- -
ciariis de banco, si qui tunc fuerint residétes in banco,
& ali itinerantes in comitatu, ubi terra fuerit que
petitur. Et justiciarii de banco exinde dabunt diem
corà justieiariis itinerantibus, ut sic per ordine pcedat
judicium. | Et ideo à Turri mittuntur partes in bacum
"ut loquela in eodem judicio finem accipiat, in quo
sumpsit initium.


Car. XIV.


1. Redeamus iterü ad visum quatuor visorü, & videa-
Cum visus mus quid sequatur, si visores legitimi no sunt ad
fieri debeat  . iet " à "T à
vel factus. Videndü, & per hoc visus illegitimus, de quibus supra-
n dietü est. Quo casu, si essoniatus per visum talium
suntlegi-  Visorü surrexerit, ut. si ei surrectionem dederint, erit
Fa iron in defalta, seeundum q superius dictum est, Melius
betes- — est igitur q se teneat in lecto, vel quód licentiam
"OU. petat  surgendi, antequàm visus testatus fuerit pe

tales, quam si obtinuerit, & sic comparuerit, excusatur
à defalta, non propter visum, cüm sit illegitimus, sed
propter licentiam si forte petens visum calumniaverit
& visores. Si autem non, tunc procedat loquela in
utroque casu, ac si visus legitimé factus esset. 5i
autem essoniatus forte licentiam surgendi petere volu-


erit, tune ad diem sibi datum per visores tales tutius


OF ESSOINS. 343


but if not, then when they have returned, if they are
about to rcturn shortly, or after some tine. But a day
shall not be assigned to them before the justiciaries
itinerant, whether they be itinerant in the same county,
in which the land which is claimed is situated, or in
another county, but in the first place before the justi.
ciaries in the Bench, if any be then resident in the
Bench, and the others are itinerant in the county, where
the land is, which is clainied. And the justiciaries in
the Bench shall thereupon assign à day before the. justi-
ciaries itinerant, that the judzment may thus proceed in
due order. And therefore the parties are sent from the
Tower to the Bench, that the cause may receive. its
termination in the same court in which it had its
commencement.


CirAPTER. XIV.


Let us return to the view of the four viewers, and let T: 1. |
e ira jn the
us see what follows, if the viewers are not the legitiiiate n one
persons to make the view, and. thereby the view is ille- to - nds
"P . . or nas been
citimate, concerning which we have spoken above. In qq., it
which case, if the essoinee has got up from his bed the M
. . . . are no
through the view of such viewers, as if they have given jeeitimate,
him leave to get up, he will be in default, aecording to hat the
. . essoniec
what has been said above. It is better therefore that oughtto do.
he should keep himself in bed, or that he should request
a licence to get up, before his view has been testified by
the said viewers, which if he has obtained and has thus
appeared, he is exeused from default, not on account of
the view, which has been illegitimate, but on account of
the licence, if by chance the plaintiff has impeached the
view and the viewers. But if not, then let the cause
proceed in either case, as if the view had been legiti-
mately made. But if by chance the essoinee has wished
to apply for & licence to get up, then upon the day


assigned to him by such viewers it will be safer for


f. 361 b.


SET DE ESSONIIS.


erit quód mittat pro se responsalem. Et quo casu, si
petens velit visum ecalumniare, iterum fiat visus legi-
timé, si primus suffieiens non fuerit. Si autem non,
tune pcedat loquela inter petentem  & responsalem.
S1 autem prwdieti tales, qui ad visum faciendum sunt
inutiles, languorem adjudicaverint essoniato, cüm visü
testifieati fuerint in psentia petentis, & petens contra
visores nihil exceperit, sed diem receperit apud Turrim
sine calumnia, licet visus ab initio fuerit illegitimus,
effieitur legitimus per consensum petentis, & ita quód
ulteriàs nihil objicere potest cotra visores, nec cótra
visum, Et idem erit si absens fuerit in testificatione
visus, cüàm psens esse debet, & hoc suse debet impu-
tare negligentize, & in quibus casibus necesse erit q
tenens essoniatus se teneat ad languorem, & ulterius
licentià surgédi no habebit. Si a&utem visus (quàvis
legitimus) nondü testatus fuerit forte infra annu & die,
lieet. languor adjudieatus, semper infra annü & post
annü quandodq poterit tenens habere licentia surgendi,
donee visus testatus fuerit. Et quamvis post annü &
die petens apud Turrim obtulerit se cotra tenente
essoniatum, hoe tenenti non nocebit, quia nullus dies
datus est ei in judicio apud Turrim. Et si forte co-
stabularius madaverit q petens certo die venerit, &
tenens essoniatus no, si ad querelà petetis sumoneatur
tenens q sit apud Turrim ad respondendü cora justi-
ciariis, quare diem sibi datu apud Turrim non serva-


OF ESSOINS. 945


him to send a person to answer on his behalf. And in
which case, if the plaintiff wishes to impeach the view,
let à view be made & second time legitimately, if. the
first has not been sufficient. But if not, then let the
cause proceed between the plaintiff and the respondent
on behalf of the defendant. But if the aforesaid persons,
who have been useless to make & view, have adjudgzed
languor to the essoinee, when they have testified their
view in the presence of the plaintiff, and the plaintiff
has made no exception against the viewers, but has
received, à day at the Tower without any impeachment
of the viewers, although the view may have been ille-
gitiiate from. the commencement, it is rendered legiti-
mate through the consent of the plaintiff, and so that
he can make no further objection azainst the viewers or
acainst the view. | And the same will happen, if he has
been absent at the testification of the view, when he
ought to be present, and this he ought to impute to his
own negligence, and in which cases it will be necessary
that the defendant essoinee should. keep himself in lan-
guor, and he shall not have a licence any further to get
up. But if the view (although lezitimate) has not yct
been testified by chance within a year and a day,
although languor has been adjudged, tho defendant may
always within the year and after the year at any time
have & licence to gct up until the view has been testi-
fied. And although after & year and a day the plaintiff
has presented himself at the Tower to join issue with
the defendant essoinee, this shall not prejudice the de-
fendant, because no day has been appointed to him at
the Tower for judgment. And if by chance the con-
stable has issued an order that the plaintiff should come
on & certain day, and the defendant essoinee not so, if
upon the complaint of the plaintiff the defendant be
summoned that he should present himself at. the Tower
to answer before the justiciaries, wherefore he has not
kept the day assigned to him at the Tower, if the


f. 361 b.


3406 DE ESSONIIS.


vit, si petens se tenuerit ad defalta, respondere poterit
tenens, q visus non fuit legitime factus, & perinde no
visus, & sic q nee potuit nec debuit ibi cóparere, &
sie oportebit q hoc p visores (cüm coóparuerint) termi-
netur. ltem dicere poterit, q nó necesse habuit ibi
cóparere, quia tenens diem apud Turrim non habuit,
cui deberet vel posset respondere, & sicut videtur, se
defendere poterit à defalta.


e ONE Cüm aute p tales (ut prwdictü est) fuerit languor
vertatur in &djudicatus, & visus testatus sine calumnia, & dies
da datus petenti apud Turrim, tunc necesse erit essoniato
bilem,quod q se teneat ad languore, & observet annü & die apud
Ht Turrim, & q in ppria psona sua veniat (si possit)
venire, tune modo quo supradictü est, vel q pro se sufficiente mit-
icum tat responsalem, qui p eo litem susciprat & defendat.
Et tunc aut mittit responsale aut non mittit, Si autem
nec venerit nec responsalem miserit, erit in defalta.
5i aute responsalem miserit apud Turrim, qui sit. ibi
diem recepturus & in judicio cüm coparuerit corà
justiciariis responsurus, audietur ejus responsio quicunq
sit ille, dü tame sit major. Et si forte nullü miserit,
dü tü sit aliquis apud Turrim qui dicat se esse mis-
sum & diem recipiat ac si in judicio ut responsalis
respondeat, si de ejus responsione judicium faciedü sit
sicut de duello vadiando & de magna assis& sumonenda,
vel de aliquo q sit de substatia negotii & p q loquela
debeat terminari, judicium illud debet poni in respectu


OF ESSOINS. 347


plaintiff has kept himself to the default, the defendant
may answer, that the view has not been legitimately
made, and is equivalent to no view at all, and so that
he neither could nor ought to have appeared, and thus
it will be necessary that this should be determined by
the viewers (when they have appeared). Likewise he
may say that he did not deem it necessary to appear
there, because the defendant had not a day appointed to
him at the Tower, to which he could or ought to have
answered, and he will be able, as it seems, to defend
himself from a default.


But when through such viewers a languor has been
adjudged, as aforesaid, and the view has been testified


Ifa languor
is turned


without any impeachment, and a day has been given to into an in-


the plaintiff at the Tower, then it will be necessary for
the essoinee to keep himself to the languor, and let him
observe the year and a day at the Tower, and that he
come in his own person (if he can) in the manner as
above said, or send a sufficient representative on his
behalf, who can undertake and defend the lawsuit.


curable
disease, 80
that the

ssoinee
cannot
come, then
let him
send a per-
son to


answer for


And then he either sends or does not send à represen- him.


tative. But if he shall neither come himself nor send a
representative, he will be in default. But if he shall
send a representative te the Tower, who shall be present
there in order to accept & day and in order to make
answer for him in judgment when he has appeared
before the justiciaries, the answer of him, whoever he
may be, provided he be of full age, shall be heard. And
if by chance he has sent no one, provided there be at the
Tower some person, who will say that he has bcen sent,
and who will accept à day as if he were answering as
& representative im the judgment, if à judgment has to
be made concerning his answer as concerning a wager of
battle and concerning the summoning of a grcat assise,
or concerning anything which is of the substance of the
affair and which ought to be terminated by a trial, that
judgment ought to be respited, until through four knights


3.
Breve de
mittendo ad

f. 362.
languidum
ut sciatur,
«1 ratam
habuerit
responsio-
nem quam
responsalis
pro eo fecil.


948 DE ESSONIIS.


quousq| per quatuor milites missos ad languiduü sciatur,
si talem miserit p se responsalem, & si ratam habuerit
responsionem quam idem talis p eo fecerit: & quód
ita fieri debeat, pbatur in rotulo de termino S. M.
anno regis H. xv. incipiente xvi in comitatu Salop.
Breve de mittendo iv. milites ad languidum ad audi-
edum &c. tale erit.


Rex vic. salutem. Mitte iv. legales milites de comi-
tatu tuo apud tale locü ad A. qui se in curia nostra
corà justiciariis vel cora nobis essoniavit de malo lecti
versus B. de placito terree ad audiendum si ide À. p
se misit C. cora pfatis justie. nostris corà nobis &c. ut
resposalem suü ad audiendü vel ad respondendü eide
B. de eadé terra, & si rata habuerit resposioné quà
idem C. p eo fecit in eode placito, & similiter ad
audiendum si velit eunde C. in pdicto placito attor-
nare in pdicto loco suo ad lucradum vel pdendi, et
venire facias corà pfatis justie. nostris vel cora nobis
&c. ad tale terminü pfatos quatuor milites ad testifi-
candü ea quz à pfato ÁÀ. super pmissis audierint. Et
habeas ibi nomina militü & hoc breve. "Teste &e. Qui
ad diem venerint, audiatur eorum  testificatio, si aute
no venerint, peedatur cótra eos ad defalta quousq, có-


paruerint, sicut pceessü est supra, cotra quatuor milites


missos ad languidum. Ille vero qui sic essoniatus est
ratam habeat responsione si voluerit, & cocedat q tale
miserit respósale, & ita sub nomine ipsius resposalis
pcedere possit, & terminari loquela. Si aute ratam no
habuerit responsione, adjudicabitur in defalta. Necesse
est igitur ei q ratam habeat responsalis responsione,


OF ESSOINS. 349


sent to the languid man it may be known, whether he
has sent such person to answer for him, and if he ratifies
the answer, which the said person has made in his
behalf, and that this should be so done is proved in the
roll of St. Michael's term in the fifteenth and sixteenth
years of king Henry in the county of Salop. A writ
for sending four knights to a languid person to hear &c.
will be of this tenor.


The king to the viscount greeting. Send four loyal
knights of your county to such à place to A, who has
essoined himself in our court before our justiciaries or
before us for bed-sickness against B. in & suit for land,
in order to hear if the said A. has by himself sent C. to
present himself before our said justiciaries or before us


3.

A wnt to
send to a
lan;ruid

[. 362.
person, that
it may be
known, if
he ratifies


&e. as his representative to hear and to answer to the the answer,


said B. concerning the said land, and if he has ratified


which his
representa-


the answer which the said C. has made on his behalf in tive has


ade on


. . e . . . m
the said suit, and in like manner to hear if he wishes yis pcnatr.


to attourn the said C. in the aforesaid suit in his afore-
said place to gain or to lose, and cause to eome before
our aforesaid justiciaries or before us &c. at such a term
the aforesaid four knights to testify those things which
they shall have heard from the aforesaid A. coneerning
the premises. ÀÁnd have there the names of the knights
and this writ. Witness &c. Who if they have come
on the day, let their testification be heard, but if thoy
have not come, let proceedings be taken against them
for their default until they have appeared, just as pro-
ceedings have been taken above against the four knights
sent to & languid person. But the person who has been
thus essoined, let him ratify the answer made on his
behalf (if he wishes), and let him admit that he sent
such & representative, and thus the trial may procecd
under the name of his representative and be terminated.
But if he does not ratify the answer, he shall be ad-
judged in default. It is necessary, therefore, for him
that he should ratify the answer of his representative


390 DE ESSONIIS.


& cocedat q talem miserat responsale, & sie poterit
nomine ipsius responsalis tota pcedere loquela & ter-
minari, & post quamlibet apparitione cü dominus litis
rata habuerit responsione suà, poterit se cssoniare no-
mine pprio de malo veniendi, sicut ae si esset in curia
attornatus. Si autem ratam non habuerit responsionc,
adjudieabitur in defalta. Oportet igitur de necessitate
q illà rata habeat, nihilominus tamen si in ppria psona
venire voluerit & respondere, bene poterit si voluerit,
& tempus mediü & apparitio apud terminü salvabitur
per psentem .responsale. Si aute milites forte non
venerint ad diem sumonitionis, nec essoniatus respon-
salis, seiiper sequatur versus inilites, & irrotuletur sic
defalta militü. Talis qui se facit responsale talis op-
tulit se quarto die versus A. B. C. D. milites missos
&c. et si. poterit terminari negotium &c. Et notandü
in fine q si resposalis apud Turrim coparuerit matu-
riis quà deberet, non nocebit languido, dum tamen
responsalis eoparuit die legitimo. 5i autem tardiüs,
hoe nocebit essoniato. Si aute responsalis maturiüs se
obtulerit quàm deberet, & essoniatus die legitimo, sive
responsalis venerit die legitimo, sive non, tenens sal-
vabitur à «defalta sive responsalem advocaverit sive
non. $1 autem resposalis venerit die legitimo, & esso-
niatus in crastino die, vel tertio, vel quarto die p
responsalem, salvabitur tenens à defalta, ut paulo ante
dictum est. Et circa responsalem multa sunt dicenda,
licet. ista ad presens tempus dieta sufticiant.


OF ESSOINS. 351


and admit that he has sent the said representative, and
so the whole trial may proceed and be terminated in
the name of his representative, and after each appear-
ance, since the lord of the suit has ratified his answer,
he will be able to essoin himself in his own name for
sickness on the way, just as if he was attourned in court.
But if he has not ratified the answer, he will be ad-
judged to be in default. It is ineumbent therefore of
necessity that he should ratify it, nevertheless, however,
if he has chosen to come in his own person and to make
answer, he may well do so, if he wishes, and the inter-
mediate time and the appearance at the term will be
saved by the representative then present. But if by
chance the. knights have not come on the day of sum-
mons nor the essoined representative, let proceedings
always follow against the knights, and let the default of
the knights be thus enrolled. So-and-so who makes
himself the representative of a certain person presented
himself on the fourth day against A. B. C. D. the knights
sent &c., and so the affair may be terminated. And it
is to be noted at the end, that if a representative has
appeared at the Tower sooner than he ought to have
done, it will not prejudice the languid person, provided
always that the representative has appeared on a legiti-
mate day. But if he has appeared later than he ought
to have done, this will hurt the cessoince. But if the
representative has presented himself sooner than he
ought to have done, and the essoinee on his legitimate
day, whether the representative has come on a legiti-
mate day or not, the defendant will be saved from a
default whether he has avowed the representative or
not. But if the representative has come on a legitimate
day, and the essoinee on the morrow of it, or on the
third or on the fourth day through a representative, the
defendant will be saved from a default, as has been ex-
plained above. And concerning a representative many
things are to be said, although these sayings for the
present time are sufficient.


].
81 plures
sint par-
ticipes te-
nentes uni-
cum jus
habentes
qualiter
proceden-
dum in
essonio de
malo lecti.


f. 362 b.


352 DE ESSONIIS.


CAP. XV.


Dietü est supra si unus tenés p se se essoniaverit de
malo lecti qualiter peedendü sit in essonio, vel q si
pluries se essoniaverit de malo lecti & semel lango-
rem habuerit cessabit essonium de malo lecti, & q-in
toto placito no habebit nisi unicum essoii nec habebüt
nisi unicum languorem. Nüc aute videdü, si plures
sint pticipes tenctes unicü jus habentes, qualiter sit
peedendü in essonio de malo lecti post essoniü «e
malo veniendi, et quoties se essoniare possent, et. quado
cessabit essoniü de malo lecti. Quoties ? et sciendü q
sepius, post qualibet apparitione & «die legitime im
euria datü, simul si voluerit, vel vicissim post unicá
apparitione donec omnes habuerint sua essonia, s. qui-
libet unieü de malo veniedi, & aliud de malo lecti, et
tunc simul cópareant ad respodendü, eüm auto aliü
die receperint post diem datü de cosensu ptium, vel
post visum petitü, vel warratü vocatum, habere poterit
omnia eade essonia, & eodem modo, et sic ad quam-
libet apparitione donee terminetur loquela, & ita q
nullus languor interveniat. Ite cüm sic se essoniave-
rint de malo lecti omnes simul, omnibus poterit adju-
dieari làguor vel omnibus surrectio vel quibusdam sur-
rectio & quibusdam languor: si omnibus surrectio,
tune veniant omnes simul et respondeant, 8i &utem
non venerint omnes vel quidam, tunc fiat de omnibus
sicut. supradictum est de uno, seeundü q coparuerint
vel non. $i aute omnibus simul adjudicatus fuerit


OF ESSOINS. 39253


CHAPTER XV.


It has been explained above, if one tenant by himself , l.
has essoined himself for bed-sickness, in what way pro- pe TS
ceedings are to be had in an essoin, or that, if he has corarce-
repeatedly essoined himself for bed-sickness and has once ctae
had languor, the essoin for bed-siekness will cease, and UU M
that in the whole suit he will not have but & sin;le procecdings
essoin nor will he have more than a single languor. But sd be
now we must see, if there be several co-parcener tenants essoin for
having a single right, in what manner proceedings must; P Biete
be had in an essoin for bed-sickness after an essoin for ;- m b.
sickness by the way, and how often they may essoin
themselves, and when an essoin for bed-sickness will
cease. How often? and it is to be known that re-
peatedly after each appearance and day assigned legiti-
mately in court, together if they choose, or in turns
after & single appearance, until all have had their
essoins, to wit, each has had one for sickness on the
way, and another for bed-sickness, and then let them all
appear together to make answer, but when they have
received another day after the day given with the
assent of parties, or after a view has been requested or a
warrantor vouched, each may have all the same essoins
and in the same manner, and so upon each appearance
until the trial be terminated, and so that no lanzuor
intervenes. Likewise when they have thus essoined
themselves for bed-sickness all tozether, languor may be
adjudged to them all, or licence to get up from bed to
them all, or to some licence to get up from bed and to some
languor ; if licence to get up be granted to all, then let
them all come together and make answer, but if they do
not all or some come together, then let it be done with
them all as above said concerning one, according as they
have appeared or not. But if languor has been adjudged
to them all together, let it be done with all as above said
concerning one, according as all or some have langour

Q 6366. Z


354 DE ESSONIIS.


languor, fia& de omnibus ut supradictum est de uno,
seeundü q omnes vel quidà languore et diem suü ser-
vaverint vel no servaverint. 5i aute post unà appa-
ritione et diem datü vicissim coparuerint omnes et
vicissim se essoniaverint de malo lecti et vicissim p
eosde vel diversos milites fuerit eis laguor adjudicatus,
si plures ibi videantur esse languores, tam in primo
easu qm in secundo, chm omnes tenétes sunt quasi
unieü jus habétes, erunt omnes languores accipiendi
pro uno languore ppter juris unitatem. Et cüm sic
omnes languore habuerint simul vel vicissim, sicut
praxdietü est, vel salte ex pluribus unus, extunc no
ante cessabit essonium de malo lecti in psonis omnium
usque in finem litis, sicut. supradictum est de uno
tenente. Si autem quidam ex pluribus, vel unus se
primó essoniaverit de malo veniendi, & quidam psentes
sint. & quidam fecerint defaltam, essoniati diem habe-
bunt per essonium suum. Illis aute qui psentes fue-
rint dabitur idem dies, contra absentes vero pcedendum
erit ad defaltam, secundum 4 inferius dicetur de de-
faltis. Illi vero qui essoniati fuerint ad alium diein,
si voluerint essoniare se, poterunt de malo lecti. Et
ili qui primo die die ceperunt in judicio, ad diem
suum se essoniare poterunt si voluerint, vel comparere.
Si autem copareant, bene possunt alium diem recipere,
& sic de die in diem donec eis constiterit de surrec-
tione essoniatorum vel de languore, ut si languor fuerit
adjudieatus & testatus, q tunc eunde die recipiant
cum petente, e£. apud Turrim ut videtur, ne si ad
baneum et in judicio die receperint p hoc dividentur
causm continentia. Et cüm sic die receperint coram
justiciariis in. banco apud Turrim cum essoniato, cope-
tit eis unicum essonium de malo veniendi apud Tur-


OF ESSOINS. 353


and have observed their day or have not observed it. But
if after one appearance and a day given to them they have
all appeared in turns, and have in turns essoined them-
selves for bed-sickness, and languor has been adjudged
to them in turns by the same or by different knights, if
there are seen to be there several languors as well in the
first case as in the second, since all the tenants have as
it were & single right, all the languors will have to be
taken as one languor on account of the unity of right ;
and since all have had languor together or in turns, as
aforesaid, or at least, one out. of many, from that time
forward an essoin for bed-sickness will not cease in the
persons of them all until the end of the lawsuit, as said
above concerning & single tenant. But if some out of
many or one has in the first place essoined himself for
sickness by the way, and some are present and some
have inade default, the essoinees shall have a day
through their essoiner. But to those who are present
the same day shall be assigned, but against the absent
proceedings shall be taken for a default, according to
what will be said below concerning defaults. But those
who have been essoined to another day, if they wish to'
essoin themselves they will be able to do so for bed-
sickness. And those who on the first day took a day in
the court, upon their day may essoin themselves, if they
wish, or may appear. But if they appear, they may
well receive another day, and so from day to day until
they have ascertained concerning the convalescence of
the essoinees or concerning their languor, so that, if
languor be adjudged and testified, they may then receive
the same day with the plaintiff, and at the Tower as it
seems, lest if they shall receive & day at the bench and
in the court, the continuity of the cause should be broken
off And when they have thus received & day before
the justiciaries in the bench at the Tower with the
essoinee, they are entitled to & single essoin for sickness
on the way at the Tower, or before the justiciaries in
Z2


f. 363.


350 DE ESSONIIS.


rim, vel coram justiciariis in judicio, q si ibi no vene-
rint nec se essoniaverint poterüt esse in defalta, sicut
ipse petes. S1 aute adjudicetur g infirmitas fit in
malum transiens, et q certus dies detur essoniato q
compareat in judicio ad diem illum, possunt alii qui
priüs essoniati non fuerint incipere tuno primó essonia
sua unus vel omnes simul vel vicissim, ut supradictum
est in principio. Et poterit unus vel quidam amittere
essonium suü per tacità renuntiatione, Esto q A. co-
paruerit, & B. se essoniaverit de malo veniendi, & ad
alium diem comparuerit, & A. se essoniaverit, cüm B.
ab initio electione habuerit veniendi vel essoniandi se
de malo lecti, eligendo viam veniendi, tacite. renuntia-
vit essoniü de malo lecti. Et unde cüm ita coparuerit
& diem receperit, ad alium diem non habebit essonium
de malo lecti ratione essonii precedentis de malo veni-
endi, propter interuptione, eo q comparuit & ppter
tacitam renuntiationem. Et quia essonium de malo
lecti imediaté non sequitur essonium de malo veniendi.
Et de essonio de servitio domini regis interposito pos-
sit disputari. Ite nec essonium habebit ille sic. com-
parens de malo veniendi antequam omnes in juditio
comparuerint, quia habet omnia essonia sua vel q tan-
tunde valet, ratione supradicta. JDefaltam autem pos-
sunt facere omnes vel quidam illorum secundum q de
uno supradictum est. Et poterit unus ptem suam
amittere per defaltam ppter suam negligentiam, & alius
salvare se à defalta per suam diligentiam, quia res
quse petitur, licet. comunis sit, patitur sectionem et
divisionem. De viro aute & uxore implacitatis no est
ita, quia res uxoria divisionem non patitur inter virum


OF ESSOINS. 957


court, but if they have not come there nor have essoined
themselves, they may be in default, just as the plaintiff
himself. Butif it be adjudzed that the infirnüty has
become & transient malady, and. that & certain day is
given to the essoinee that he should appear in court on
that day, others who have not been essoined hitherto
may commence then for the first time their essoins, one,
or all together, or in turns, as has been above said at
the beginning. And one or some of them may lose
their essoin by & tacit renunciation of it. Let it be that
A. has appeared and that B. has essoined himself for
sickness on the way, and has appeared on another day,
and A. has essoined himself, when B. from the beginning
has had his election of coming or of essoining himself
for bed-siekness, by choosing à way of coming, he has
tacitly renounced his essoin for bed-sickness. And hence
when he has so appeared and has received & day, he
shall not have an essoin for bed-sickness for another
day by reason of his previous essoin for sickness by the
way on account of the interruptior inasmuch as he has
appeared and on account of his tacit renunciation, and
because an essoin for bed-sickness does not immediately
follow an essoin of sickness by the way. And con-
cerning an essoin for the king's service being interposed
it may be disputed. Likewise & person so appearing
shall not have an essoin for sickness by the way before
all have appeared in judgment, because he has all his
essoins, or what is equivalent, for the reason above said.
For all or some of them may make a default, according
.to what has been said above concerning one person.
And one person may lose his part through his own
negligence by default, and another may save himself
from default by his own diligence, because the estate
which is claimed, although it be common, admits of
section and division. But in the case of & man and his
wife being sued it is not so, because the estate of the
wife does not allow of division between man and wife.


f. 363.


l.
Si quis
essoniatus
fuerit in
comitatu
de malo
lecti, qua-
liter debeat
essoniatus
apparere,
et quando.


358 DE ESSONIIS.


& uxorem. Tota est enim utriusque in solidü, et non
in comuni, cüm sit una caro vir et uxor, quàvis anime
diverse. Et ideo,si unus ipsorum defaltà fecerit, utri-
que erit damnosa. Et cüm defalta facta fuerit, capia-
tur terra in manum domini regis p parvum cape. Et
ille, qui defaltam fecerit, sumoneatur q sit ad alium
diem auditurus judicium suum, nulla facta mentione
de eo sive sit vir sive sit uxor qui defaltà non fecit
Si &ute unus de pluribus moriatur antequam omnes
comparuerint, cadit tota loquela. Si autem unus infra
statem, sic remanebit loquela in suspenso usque ad
setate. Si aute furiosus & dilucidis non gaudeat inter-
vallis, sic remanebit loquela usi ad morte: quia ex
quo semel animo & corpore incepit possidere, super-
veniente furore nunquàm desinere poterit animo pos-
sidere. Si autem dilucidis gaudeat intervallis, expec-
tabitur tempus quo se melius habuerit, De fatuo vero
& stulto aliud erit, seeundum q inferius plenius dicetur
in tractatu de exceptionibus.


Cap. XVI.


Si quis vero in cof essoniatus fuerit de malo lecti,
illud idem observari videtur in comitatu quod in curia
domini regis. Et cüm languor ei fuerit adjudicatus
infra annum & diem venire debet ad aliquem certum
locum ad hoc deputatum per comitatum, s. castrum
aliquod, & ibi ostendere castellano quo die venerit,
sieut, constabulario Turris ostenderet si placitum esset
apud West. in curia domini regis. Sed petens (ut
videt) non habet necesse aliquem diem observare in


»


OF ESSOINS. 359


For the entirety of it belongs to both in the lump, and
not in common, since man and wife are one flesh,
although different souls. And accordingly if one of
them makes default, it will be prejudicial to both. And
when a default has been made, ct the land be taken into
the hand of the lord the king by the little crpe.. And he
who has made default let him be sunmnoned to present
himself on another day in order to hear his judgment,
no mention being made thereof whether it be the man or
his wife who has not made default. But if one out of
several dies before they have all appeared, the whole
cause is at an end. But if one of them be under age,
the cause shall remain in suspense until he has come of
ace. Butif he be & madman and does not enjoy lucid
intervals, the cause shall be stayed until his death,
because since he has once begun to possess with tho
mind and with the body, madness having overtaken
him he can never cease to possess mentally. But if he
enjoys lucid intervals, the time shall be waited for when
he will be better. But concerning a fatuous and foolish
person it will be otherwise, üccorditie to what will be
said more fully be!ow in the Treatise on Exceptions.


CHAPTER XVI.


But if any person have been essoined in acounty court —— 1.
for bed sickness, it seems that the saine thing should be u da


observed in the county court as in the court of the lord essoined in
the king. And when languor has been adjudged to him, [he connty
he ought within a year and a day to come to some bed-sick-
certain. place assigned for that purpose by the county what E
court, to wit, some castle, and there show to the cas- the es-
tellan on what day he has come, just as he would show m. to
to the constable of the Tower, if the suit should be in SEIN and
the court of the lord the king at Westminster. But


the plaintiff (as it seems) is not under the necessity of


360 . DE ESSONIIS.


com, eàüm languor fuerit adjudieatus & testatus, sed

observet diem suum apud castrum, sicut faceret apud

Turrim, si. placitum esset in euria düi regis. Et viden-

dui est inter eztera utrum essoniaret se de malo lecti

f.363b. in eode com, ubi terra est quz petitur vel in alio. Si

aute in eode com, tune abet vic. potestate mittendi

quatuor milites ad videndü, etiam sine brevi, qui vide-

ant & testificent, & ita pcedant in omnibus, secundü

q superius dietum est de curia dii regis de defaltis,

& licentia surgendi, & omnibus alis, Si aute extra

comi fuerit essoniatus, tunc non habet viec. potestate

mittendi milites de coi suo in alium coi, nec. multo

fortius milites de alio comitatu ad videndü, quia ad

hoe non extenditur su& jurisdictio. Habet igitur pe-

tens necesse q sibi perquirat per bre quód essoniatus

videatur per tale breve vic. directum ubi essoniatus
jacuerit.

Bresrqe Rex vie. saluté, Mitte quatuor legales milites apud

videndo — talem locum, ad videndum utrum talis infirmitas, qua

eonun A- eSsoniavit se de malo lecti versus B. de placito

in comitatu terr:xe in comitatu tuo vel in alio com tali, sit. languor

iem^5 vel non. Et si sit languor, tune ponant ei diem à die

visus sui in unum annum & unü diem, q tunc sit ad

pximü com. Et si convaluerit antequa visus factus &

testatus fuerit, bene poterit coài dare licentia surgendi

essoniato, secundü q in curia dfi regis observatur.

Quam quide si com essoniato denegaverit, ad querela

ipsius poterit dominus rex in defectu cof licentia sur-

gendi dare. Et eodé modo, si loquela fuerit in curia


OF ESSOINS. 961


observing any day in the county court, when languor
has been &adjudged to him and testified, but let him
observe his own day at the castle, as he would do at the
Tower, if the suit were in the court of the lord the king.
Ánd it is to be seen amongst other things whether he
has essoined himself for bed-sickness in the court of the
same county where the land is which is claimed, or in. f. 363 b.
another county. Butif it be in the same county, then
the viscount has power to send four knights to view,
even without a writ, to view and testify, and so let them
proceed in all respects according to what has been
said above concerning the court of the lord the king,
concerning defaults and a license to get up, and all
other matters. But if he has been essoined outside the
county, then the viscount has not the power of sending
knights from his own county into another county, much
less knights of another county to make & view, because
his jurisdiction does not extend to this. The plaintiff
therefore is under the necessity of applying for & writ
that the essoinee may be viewed through & writ of this
kind directed to the viscount of the county, where the
essoinee may be lying.

The king to the viscount greeting. Send four loyal , 2.
knights to such a place to see whether a certain in- hind
firmity, for which A. has essoined himself as for bed. him, who
sickness against B. in a suit for land in your county, or ih Epid
in another county, be a languor or not. And if it be e courtfor

: ed-sick-
languor, then let them appoint a day from the day of ness.
the view for & year and & day, that he may then present
himself in your county court. And if he shall have re-
covered before the view has been made and has been
testified, the county court may well grant to the essoinee
& license to get up, according to what is observed in the
court of the lord the king, which if the county court has
denied to the essoinee, upon his complaint the lord the
king may in the defect of the county court grant him a


license to get up. And in the same way, if the cause has


362 DE ESSONIIS.


baro vel alterius qui curiam habet, poterit dis rex
licentiam dare surgendi in defectu curie per tale bre.
Forma brevis supra, ubi petitur licentia suvgendi, &
sic incipit: Ostensum est nobis. In fine notandü, q
si essoniatus ad diem sibi datü p visores non venerit,
exeusari poterit à defalta ppter casus fortuitos, & legi-
tima impedimenta intervenientia, si pbentur, secundü
q supra tactü est in parte, & inferius dicetur plenius
de defaltis.


Car. XVII.


1l. Est etiam inter alia essonia essoniü anomalü, eo q
Ade no sequitur regulam aliorü essoniorü, q dicitur essoniü
ville. de malo ville, ubi quis primo die in curia coparuerit
ER. vk & se obtulerit, & sine responso eodé die recesserit, si
4. ppter infirmitate aliqua superveniente, à loco ubi hos-

pitatus fuerit & receptus se transferre non possit, nec
ad curià venire, mittere debet ad curiam duos essonia-
tores qui re vera essoniatores dici non possunt, quia
die non recipiunt, sed nuntii & excusatores, qui in
curia publice ptestantur, q talis tali infirmitate deten-
tus est in eade villa, vel in alia tali ubi pnoctavit,
quód ad curià venire non possit pro lucrari nee pro
pdere, & sic recedant, & eode modo mittat secundo die
duos, sed alios à duobus primis, & eode modo tertio
die sed diversos à primis, & sic excusatur usq ad
quartü, & quarto die mittantur ad infirmü ex parte
justice. quatuor milites, si in curia vell in villa inveni-
antur, ad audiendü qm talis loco suo attornare voluerit


OF ESSOINS. 363


been in the court ofa baron or of another person who holds
& court, the lord the king may grant a license to get up
on the failure of the court by & writ of this kind. The
form of the writ as above when a license to get up is asked
for, and it begins thus: It has been shown to us. In
the end it is to be noted, that if the essoinee on the day
appointed to him by the viewers has not come, his de-
fault may be excused on account of fortuitous accidents
and legitimate impediments intervening, if they are
proved, according to what has been &bove touched upon
in part, and what will be explained more fully below
in treating of defaults.


CHAPTER XVII.


There is amongst essoins an anomalous essoin, inas- |.
much as it does not follow the rule of other essoins, which ud eta
is called an essoin for vill-sickness, where a person has vill-«ick-
appeared on the first day in the court and has presented P***
himself, and. has withdrawn on the first day without an
answer, if on account of some supervening infirmity he
cannot transport himself from the place where he has
been lodged and entertained, nor come to the court, he
ought to send to the court two essoiners, who cannot be
termed properly essoiners, because they do not receive &
day, but messengers and excusers, who bear witness
publiely in the court, that. so-and-so is detained in the
said vill by a certain infirmity, or in à certain other vill
where he has passed the night,so that he could not
come to the court, to gain nor to lose, and so they may
retire, and in the same way let him send on the second
day two persons, but different persons from the two first,
and in the same way on the third day two persons,
but different from the preceding persons, and in this
manner he is excused up to the fourth day ; and on the
fourth day let there be sent on the part of the justi-
eiaries four knights, if they can be found in the court or
in the vill, to hear what person so.and-so wishes to


9.

f. 364.
Ubi non
jacet es-
sonium de
malo ville.


964 DE ESSONIIS.


ad lucrandü vel pdendü in loquela quz est inter ipsum
& tale petente. Si aute ipsum ibi invenerint, capietur
attornatus si ipse psonalitér venire non possit. Si aute
in villa tali no inveniat & hoc testet per quatuor mili-
bes, erit. tenens in defalta, ac si essoniatus esset de
malo lecti. Sed nec oni copetit essoniü istud neo oni
loco.


In coii &utem. non jacet essoniü de malo ville,
propter brevitatem temporis de die comit, & ubi non
expeetatur quartus dies, ut de termino Sancti Hilarii
anno regni regis Henrici sexto in comitatu Buck., de
Alicia de Jarpmille & Petro de Imnere. Ite nec coram
justiciariis assignatis a&d aliquam assisam vel juratam
capiendam, vel aliquid tale faciendü ad certum die,
ubi non expectatur quartus dies. Ité nee in persona
alicujus attornati sive in comitatu sive in curia diii
regis factus fuerit attornatus, quia licet milites mittan-
tur ad cum, ipse attornatü facere nO possit non magis
quàm peurator pcuratorem: ut de teriüi Pasch:e anno
regni regis H. nono in comitatu Buck. de attornato
Henry de S. Warerico, qui se essoniavit apud West
de malo ville p tres dies, et in quarto die (habito
eonsilio & traetatu inter justiciarios) non fuit ei esso-
nium de malo ville allocatum, quia non potuit facere
attornatum, etsi quarto die venire posset personaliter,
tamen salvare non posset tres dies pteritos, et, unde
dominus suus fuit in defalta, & capienda esset terra
in manü dii regis per parvum cape, eo quód in curia
optulit se pro domino suo, & à justie. qui recordum
habent visus fuit in curia. Ite esto quód post esso-
nium de malo lecti & languore testatum per quatuor


OF ESSOINS., 365


attourn in his place to gain or to lose in the cause which
is between him and so-and-so the plaintiff. But if they
shall find him there, an attorney shall be taken, if he
cannot come himself personally. But if so-and-so can-
not be found and this is testified by the four knights,
the defendant will be in default, as if he had been es-
soined for bed-sickness. But not every person is entitled
to such an essoin, nor at all times.


But an essoin of vill sickness does not lie in the
county court on account of the shortness of the time m eA
from the day of the county court, and where the fourth essoin ot
day is not waited for, as in St. Hilary term in the sixth Mine cur
year of the reign of king Henry in the county of Bucking- not lie.
ham, concerning Alice de Jarpmille and Peter de Imnere.
Likewise not before the justiciaries assigned to hold any
assise or jury, or to do anything similar by a certain day,
where the fourth day is not waited for. Likewise not
in the person of an attorney, whether he has been ap-
pointed attorney in the county court or in the court
of the lord the king, beause although knights are sent
to him, he himself cannot appoint an attorney any more
than an agent can appoint an aczent, as in Easter term
in the ninth year of the reign of king Henry in the
county of Buckingham, concerning an attorney Henry
de S. Warericus, who essoined himself &t Westminster
for vill-siekness for three days, and on the fourth day
(upon a consultation and a discussion amongst tho jus-
ticiarles) an essoin for vill-sickness was not allowed to
him, because he could not appoint an attorney, although
he might have come personally upon the fourth day,
nevertheless he could not save the past threc days, and
hence his principal was in default, and the land was to
be taken into the hand of the king by a little cape, in-
asmuch as he had presented himself in the court on
behalf of his principal, and had been seen in the court
by the justiciaries, who have & record. Likewise let it
be that after an essoin for bed-sickness and a languor


Tempore
regis
Johannis.


366 DE ESSONIIS.


milites, fecerit quis defaltam antequam in curia com-
paruerit, eodem modo capienda erit terra in manum
domini regis per parvum cape, ac si priüs in curia
coparuisset, quia diem sibi datum per quatuor milites
dedicere non potest non magis quàm si ei daretur in
curia, quia in hoc habere debent recordum, nee man-
dabitur dies captionis sicut per magnum cape, quia
nunquam dicetur, quia non servavit die sibi datü per
quatuor milites. Et q habent recordum, & q contra
ipsorum recordum defendi non poterit, nec p legem,
nec per unum audiente & unum intelligente, quin ste-
tur eorum recordo: habetis de itinere M. de Pateshull
in comitatu Leycesti de tempore regis Johannis, sed
hoc fuit, quia essoniatus coram quatuor militibus cog-
novit se esse essoniatum, quod quidem defendere non
potuit per legem contra eorum recordum, cüm ipsum
in lecto invenerint essonium non dedicentem. Si autem
sic eum non invenerint, aliud erit. Eodem modo si
quis extra judicium coram justiciariis attornatum fece-
rit, licet in curia, si comparuerit! & defaltam fecerit,
capienda est? terra in manum domini regis p parvum
cape, ac si in curia comparuisset, quia sumonitionem
defendere non potuit contra recordum justic. & eo q
fecit attornatum, p consequens eognovit se esse suino-
nitum, & secundum quod dicetur infra plenius de
defaltis.


! *]icet in curia non coimparu- | ? ** eapieuda erit," MS. id.
* erit," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF ESSOINS. 367


testified by four knights, à person has made default be-
fore he has appeared in the court, in the same manner
his land will have to be taken into the hand of the lord
the king by a little cape, just as if he had not previously
appeared in the court, because he cannot deny the day
assigned to him by the four knights any more than if it
were assigned to him in the court, because in this they
ought to have & record, nor shall a day of caption be
commanded as by a great. cape, because it shall never be
said, because he has not observed the day assigned to
him by the four knights. And that they have a record, -
and that their record cannot be disputed, neither through
the law nor through one person hearing and one person
understanding, so that the matter should not abide by
their record, you have a case in the iter of Martin de
Pateshull in the county of Leicester in the time of king
John, but this was because the essoinee had acknowledged
before the four knights that he had been essoined, which
he eould not dispute through the law against their
record, since they found him in bed not denying the
essoin. But if they have not so found him, it will be
otherwise. In the same manner if any person has extra-
judicially appointed an attorney before the justiciaries,
although in the court he has not appeared and has made
default, the land will have to be taken into the hand of
the lord the king by the little cape, just as if he had
appeared in the court, because he cannot dispute the
summons against the record of the justiciaries, and inas-
much as he has appointed &n attorney, he has conse-
quently acknowledged that he had been summoned, and
according to what will be said below more fully concern-
ing defaults.


TRACTATUS TERTIUS
LIBER QUINTI,


IN QUO TRACTATUR DE DEFALTIS.'


Ca». I.
" l. Redeamus igitur ad diem sumonitionis in actione
e con- . . * .
tumaeibus Te2li. — Dietum est supra qualiter quis excusatur p
et non a, onia, si ad judicium non venerit cüm fuerit sumoni-
venientibus eq . .
ad judi. tus legitimé: Nune autem dicendum est de contumaci-


edm bus & no venientibus ad judicium, qualiter peedendum
summoni. Slt contra eos in actione reali sccundü q fuerit simplex,
Poo mixta, vel duplex. Et ideo videndum quis dici debeat
" eontumax & qua poena sequat, cum, quando res aliqua
petitur imobilis per actionem in rem (contumax dici

poterit sive reus latitet sive non) ad judicium sum-
monitus sui copiam no fecerit nec defensus fuerit.
Latitare autem est si quis se turpiter occultaverit, &

copiam sui non facere est, quando reus id agit ne
adversarius potestatem sui habeat, licet  prwsens fuerit

in euria. Et sive reus contumax fuerit sive non,

sufficit &d hoe quód pcedatur contra ipsum, q simpli-

citer absens sit ex quacun(q causa. Et unde si primo

die non venerit, nec secundo, nec tertio, nee quarto,

tune offerente se liti petente, quocund die venerit ante


l'The text is continued in MS. | simply with the title * De Contu-
Rawl. C. 160 without any notice of | ** macibus &c." prefixed to it as in
its being a distinct treatise, but | the side note.


THE THIRD TREATISE


OF THE
FIFTH BOOK,
WHICH TREATS OF DEFAULTS.


CHAPTER I.


Let us return to the day of summons in a real l.
action. It has been explained above in what manner & Vale:
person is exeused through essoins, if he has not appeared cious and
for judgment, when he has been legitimately summoned. Er
We must now speak of persons who are eontumacious desc dpm
and do not appear for judgment, in what manner pro- mate sum-
ceedings are to be had against them in a real action, P,
according as it may be simple, mixed, or double. And
accordingly it is to be seen who ought to be called con-
tumacious, and what penalty attends him if on an
occasion when some immovable thing is claimed by an
«ctio 4n ven (he may be called contumaeious whether he
lies hidden or not), having been summoned to judgment,
he has not made himself available, nor has been de-
fended. But a person is said to lie hidden, if he has
basely concealed himself, and he is said not to make
himself available, when as & defendant he does that
which prevents his adversary having any power over
him, although he be present in the court. And whe-
ther the defendant shall be contumacious or not, it is
sufficient for proceedings to be taken against him, that
he is simply absent from whatever cause. And hence if
he has not come on the first day, nor on the second, nor
on the third, nor on the fourth, then upon the plaintiff
offering himself to join issue, on whatever day he may

Q 6366. A À


2,
Compen-
satio de-


faltarum.


f. 365.


39/0 DE DEFALTIS.


quartum diem, capiatur terra sive res petita in mani
düi regis propter defaltam non venientis, quam quidem
captionem modiea sequitur pcena, vel etiam nulla. Et
unde! si reus venerit infra xv. dies post captionem &
illam p plevinam petierit, si ad diem sibr datum in
curia defendere se possit de defalta, si petens inde
judiciü petierit, reformabitur ei possessio, ut de princi-
pali respondeat. Sed quid si primo die non venerit
tenens, & petens primo die se obtulerit & visus fuerit
à justice. in euria qui habent recordum, si petens in
crastino se obtulerit, si defaltam sanare non possit,


amittere poterit seysinam. Et eode modo si tertio die
vel quarto.


Sed quid si neuter ipsorum coparuerit primo die,
sed uterque in crastino, tune fiat compensatio defal-
tarum, cüm pares sint in culpa: ut supra dicitur. Et
sic fiat de alis diebus usque ad quartum diem. Si
autem impares fuerint, ut pdictum est, q aliquo die
compareat petens, & tenens non, vel e contrario, tune
fat eodem modo ut supra. Si auté primo die com-
paruerit petens, & tenens non, et in crastino tenens,
et petens non, si tertio die comparuerint ambo, fiat
inter eos ut supra dictum est compensatio, & sic
semper usq ad quartum die, & in quarto die, &
ulterius non, nisi petens voluerit. Poterit tamen
tenens, & eodé modo petens, exeusare se usq ad quartü
die,.multis modis. Tenens s. antequam in curia co-
paruerit, si sumonitionem defenderit & sursisam, &
essoniü tam de malo veniendi qm de malo lecti, si
forte fuerit? interjecta, secundü q supradictu est in


1* unde? omitted MS. Rawl ? « fuerint," MS. BRawl. C. 160.
C. 160.


OF DEFAULTS. 2071


have come before the fourth day, let his land or the thing
claimed be taken into the hand of the lord the king on
account of the default of his not. coming, which caption
a moderate penalty or none at allfollows. And hence
if the defendant shall have come within fifteen days after
the caption and has claimed it by & plevin, if on the day
given to him in the court he can defend himself concern-
ing the default, if the plaintiff shall claim judgment
thereupon, the possession shall be restored to him, that
he may answer on the principal point. But what if the
tenant has not come on the first day, and the claimant
has presented himself and has been viewed by the jus-
ticiaries in the court who have a record, if the claimant
has presented himself on the morrow, if he cannot cure
his default, he may lose the seysine. And in the same
manner on the third day or on the fourth day.


But what if neither of them shall have appeared on
the first day, but both of them on the morrow, then let
there be & compensation of defaults, since they are alike
in fault, as has been said above, And so let 1t be with
other things up to the fourth day. But if they shall
have been unlike, as has been said above, that on &
certain day the claimant should appear and the tenant
not, or contrariwise, then let it be done in the same man-
ner as &bove. But if on the first day the claimant shall
have appeared, and the tenant not, and on the morrow
the tenant shall have appeared and the claimant. not, if
on the third day both shall have appeared, let there be
as above said & compensation between them, and so up to
the fourth day and on thefourth day, but no further, unless
the claimant is willing. But the tenant may, and in the
same manner the claimant may excuse himself up to the
fourth day in many ways. The tenant for instance, before
he has appeared in the court, if he has denied the summons
and the adjournment, and if essoins as well of sickness in
coming as of bed-sickness have by chance been interposed,
according to what has been said above in the treatise con-

A A 2


$2.
ÁÀ con
pensation
of defaults.


f. 365.


3.
De exeusa-
tionibus
non veni-
entis.
Britton, vi.
ch. vi. 8 1.


3972 DE DEFALTIS.


tractatu de suionitionibus. Ite excusare se poterit
usq in quartü die, & in quarto die, p rationabilia
impediméta intervenientia, si fuerint pbata: & ctia
post quartum dié, si infr& quartum die p nuntium
legitimé fuerit excusatus, qui impedimentü ostenderit
cora justiciarüs in juditio, qu:e talia esse possunt.


SI quis per vim majore detentus fuerit, cui resistere
nó possit, ut si captus fuerit & in prisona detentus,
non tamen ob sui culpa. Ite si inciderit in latrones
qui eu ligaverint, & spoliaverint, & detinuerint forte,
q nuntiu mittere no possit infra quartü die, quo casu
post quartü die excusabitur, dum tame impedimentü
pbetur. Ite excusari poterit p inundatione aquarü &
tepestatem. Item si pons solutus fuerit, vel navigium
subtractü per fraude petentis, dum tame ei objici no
potest q ire possit p circuitum, vel q alii eade die
qua transire debuit comode & sine difficultate & absQ
periculo transierunt. Secus autem erit si cum periculo,


quia no debet quis se in periculis & infortuniis ex-


ponere. Eode modo poterit impedimentü intervenire
de nivibus, & glacie, & aliis multis modis Si vero
infra quartü die non venerit nec se excusaverit, ut
pdietum est, sive ita fuerit impeditus sive no, capiatur
terra vel res petita in manu diii regis, ppter defaltà,
per visum legalium hominum, & fiat talis irrotulatio
petente se liti offerente: A. optulit se quarto die versus


B. de placito q reddat ei tantum terr» cum ptinentiis


dn tali villa vel advocationé talis ecclesie, vel comu-


OF DEFAULTS. 313


cerning summonses, Likewise he may excuse himselt up
to the fourth day, and on the fourth day on aceount of
reasonable impediments intervening, if they shall have
been proved, and even after the fourth day, if within the
fourth day he has been legitimately excused through a
messenger, who shall have shown an impediment before
the justiciaries in court, which may be of this kind.

If any one shall have been detained by vis nor, which
he could not resist, as 1f he has been taken captive and 3.
has been detained in & prison, not however from any E
fault of his own. Likewise if he has fallen into the of a person
hands of robbers, who have bound hiin and stripped him E
and by chance detained him, so that he could not send a
messenger within the fourth day, in which case he will
be excused after the fourth day, provided however the
ünpediment be proved. Likewise he may be excused
through an inundation of waters and bad weather. Like-
wise if à bridge has been loosened, or a ferry boat with-
drawn through the íraud of the claimant, provided
however it cannot be objected to him that he might
have come by & cireuitous road, or that on the same
day on which he ought to have passed others have
passed conveniently and without ditliculty and. without
peril. But it wil be otherwise, if with peril, because
& person oucht not to expose himself to perils and mis-
fortunes. In the same way an impediment may inter-
vene from snow or ice and in many other ways. But if
he shall not have come nor excused himself within thc
fourth day, as said above, whether he has been so im-
peded or not, let the land or the thing claimed be taken
into the hand of the lord the king, on account of default,
by the view of loyal men, and let there be an enrolment
of this kind upon the claimant presenting himself to join
Issue: À. has presented himself on the fourth day against
B. in & suit that he should restore to him so much land
with its appurtenances in such a vill, or the advowson of
such & church, or common of pasture for so many beasts,


374 DE DEFALTIS.


niam pasturz ad tot averia qus clamat ut jus suu
versus eum: vel, ut dote sua, et sie de alis rebus
omnibus d petuntur ex tali actione, & B non venit,
& suimoneas &ce.  Judiciu &e. Terra vel talis res
capiatur in manu düi regis, & dies &c., et sumoneatur
q sit ad talem die inde responsurus & ostensurus,
quare no fuit corà justic. nostris ad talem die &ce. per
tale bre. Forma brevis talis est, q dicitur magnum
cape.


m Rex vic. salute. Cape in manü niam p visü legaliu
muon" hominü de comitatu tuo tant terrà cü ptinentiis in
summoni hominu de comita uo cu p
tus defa- tali villa, vel pastura ad tot oves, vel tale advocatione,
tam fecerit, : "EMEN E. LA , x M
breve, qm ÀÁ. de N. in euf nia cora justice. nris apud West.
DRAKE clamat ut jus suum versus talem p defectu ipsius
num eape. talis, vel si dos petita fuerit, tune dicatur ita: scilicet
quam ÀÁ. (d fuit uxor B.) in curia nostra &e. clamat
in dote versus C. p defectu ipsius C. vel tertià parte
tante terr; eum ptinentiis &c., et ita de singulis rebus
quie petuntur per actionem in rem, secundum formam
brevis originalis, & tunc ibi sic: Et diem captionis
scire facias justice. nostris apud West. per literas tuas
sigillatas, Et sumoneas per bonos sumonitores pre-
dietü C. q sit coram eisdem justice. nostris apud West.
inde resposurus, & ostensurus quare no fuit corà eisde
justie. nostris apud West. ad tale diem, sieut suimoni-
tus fuit, vel quare non observavit dié sibi datum p
[365 b. esson suü ad talem terminü (si forte fuerit essoniatus
& die habuerit p essoniatoró suü) Et habeas ibi
sumonitores, & hoc breve, & nomina eorü p quoru
visum hoc feceris. Teste &c. Et notandum q captio ista
in manu dii regis p magnu cape locu habet ubi quis


OF DEFAULTS. Syd


which he claims as his right apgainst him: or as his
dower, and so concerning all other things which are
claimed from such an action, and B. has not come, and
summon &c. Judgment&e. Let the land or such thing
be taken into the hand of the lord the king, and a day
&c., and let him be summoned that he be present on such
à day to answer thereon, and to show cause wherefore he
was not present before our justiciaries on such & day &c.
through a writ of this kind. The form of the writ is of
this nature, which is called à great cape.


The king to the viscount grectinp. "Take into my 4.
hand by the view of loyal men of thy county so much aA ea |
land with its appurtenances in such & vill, or pasture for summoned
so many sheep, or such an advowson, which A. de N. in ips de-
our court before our justiciaries at. Westminster claims fault, a.
as his own right against such. an one on account of his ms
default: or if dower be claimed, then let it be stated thus reat epe.
to wit, which A. (who was the wife of B.) in our court &c.
claims for dower acxainst C. on account of the default
of the said C., or a third part of so much land with its
appurtenances &c., and so concerning the particular things
which are claimed by an action 29, rem, according to the
form of the original writ, and then there thus: and cause
the day of the caption to be made known to our justici-
aries a& Westminster by thy sealed letters. And dothou
summon by good summoners the aforesaid C. that he be
present before our said justiciaries at Westminster on
such a day according as he has been summoned, or where-
fore he has not observed the day given to him through
his essoin in such a term (if by chance he shall have been f. 365 b.
essoined and had a day appointed through his essoiner).

And cause the summoners to be there present and this
writ and the names of those through whom thou hast
made this view. Witness, &c. Anditis to be noted,
that the caption into the hand of the lord the king
through & great cape has place, where & person has made


5
Natura et
effectus
brevis
magnum
eape juxta
virtutem
vocabulo-
rum con-
tentorum
in brevi.


3976 DE DEFALTIS.


defalta fecerit anteqm in curia coparuerit, vel attornatu
fecerit, q tantunde valet.


Et quia scire no poterit quid sequatur ex tali cap-
tione in manü dii regis, nisi sciatur de virtute brevis
et vocabulorü in brevi contentorü, inprimis videndu
est, quid sequatur ex tali vocabulo sive dictione, cape
in manü nostrü &c.; et quid inde sequatur perpendi
poterit manifeste ex pmissis pauló ante. Ad hoc auto,
q dicitur, per visum legalium homini, ut ppendi possit
& testificari (si opus fuerit) si capta fuerit in manum
düi regis, et per eoru visum. Et si capta fuerit per
eoru visum, tune quo die, quia in hoc habent recor-
dum cui cótradici no poterit, quantü ad hoc, secundum
q defalta facta fuerit ante apparitione vel post, et
secundum quod sunmonitionem testati fuerint vel non.
Ite continetur, pro defectu talis, sine aliqua pbatione,
quia sufficit sola absentia, licet non pbetur ex qua
eausa, & licet exeusatione habuerit, tamen de excusa-
tione costare no poterit justice. anteqm tenens ap-
paruerit excusatione suam jptendedo, premittendo! et
pbando, ut supra de exeusationibus. Item dies cap-
tionis indorsari debet in tergo brevis, ut per hoc &
attestatione militü sciri possit quo die terra capta
fuerit, & per consequens si ad horam petita fuerit p
plevinam, quia peti debet per plevinam infra quinde-
nam postqm capta fuerit in manum dii regis: q si
antequam capiatur in manum dii regis petatur per
plevinam, vel post quindenam, no petitur ad horam:


-— — —— — —— — — 20€ -- n—— — — —— S — -————— — o ———— —— —  —


! * p'mittendo," omitted MS. Raw C. 160.


OF DEFAULTS. 3T


default before he has appeared in the court, or has con-
stituted an attorney, which is equivalent.


And because it cannot be known what follows upon EE
such & caption into the hands of the lord the king nd
unless it be known concerning the virtue of the writ of the writ
and of the terms contained in ihe writ, we must see in pe dc:
the first place, what follows from such a term or phrase, t?rding to
" take into our hand," &c.; and what ensues thereon ofthe
may be clearly inferred from what has been preimised Medie
shortly previously. the writ.
But in regard to this, which is said, *through the

view of loyal men," that it may be understood and
testified (if it be necessary) if it has been taken into

the hand of the king, and through their view. And if

it has been taken through their view, then '* on what

" day," because they have in this & record, which cannot

be contradicted as far as this is concerned, according as

default has been made before appearing in court or

after, and according as they have testified to the sum-

mons or not. Likewise it is contained, * for the failure

* of so-and-so," without any proof, because his absence

alone is sufficient, although it be not proved from what

cause, and although he may have an excuse, nevertheless

it cannot be established before the justiciaries concerning

his excuse, before the tenant has appeared holding forth

his excuse, premising and proving it, as above concerning
excusations. Likewise the day of the caption ought to

be indorsed on the back of the writ, that thereby and

by the attestation of the knights it may be known on

what day the land was taken, and consequently if it

has been claimed by a plevin at the proper hour, because

it ought to be claimed by a plevin within the fifteenth

day after it has been taken into the hand of the lord

the king, because if it be claimed by a plevin before it

has been taken intothe hand of the lord the king, or

after the fifteenth day, it is not claimed at the proper


«€


378 DE DEFALTIS.


et ideo peti poterit maturiüs, vel tardiüs quàm deberet.
Debet petitio sic irrotulari. "Talis petiit per talem (si
per alium petierit, quàm per seipsum) tali die terram
suam p plevinam, d capta fuit in manü dii regis per
defaltam quam fecit versus talem, coram justic. nostris
talibus tali die: et bie non habebit, nec aliud fet,
nisi q dicetur ei, quód observet diem suum in brevi
de captione contentü.


6. Videtur igitur per hoc q p tale plevinam & diem

i sg en receptum p se, cüm in ppria psona petierit & diem

in manum receperit secundü sumonitione p breve de captione,

ie sive suimonitus fuerit, sive non, q ulterius dedicere non

defaltum — poterit suinonitionem, si postea in judicio defaltà fecerit,
peti debeat . . x .

perple-  $. post captionem. Si auté per alium quàm per semet-

vinum. — jpsü, videtur q fieri debet contrarium, q defendi possit

per legem, si primam & ultimam defenderit suimoni-

tionem. Captio vero simplex esse debet. Non enim

debet per hoc tenens impediri, quin omnium rerum &

tenemétorü illorü libera habeat administratione, sive

jus habuerit in eisde sive no, quia si sic non esset,

potius dieeretur disseysina quàm districtio. Et unde,

si tempore quo res sie fuerit in manu dii regis con-

tingat eeclesiam aliquam vacare q sit de ptinentiis, ad

tenentem spectabit collatio, et non ad rege. Cüm aute

sic petatur per plevinam, non erit statim replegianda

tenenti, antequam in judicio comparuerit, & tunc

sciatur utrum petens se tenere voluerit ad principale

placitü vel ad defalta, Cüm autem ad principale pla-


f 366. citum se tenuerit, sie renunciat defalt:e, et erit. defalta


OF DEFAULTS. 94)


hour, and therefore it may be claimed sooner or later
than it ought to be. The claim ought to be enrolled in
this manner: * So-and-so claimed through such & person
* (if he has claimed through another than himself) on
such a day through a plevin his land, which had been
* taken into the hand of the lord the king, through the
" default which he made towards so-and-so before our
* justiciaries on such a day": and he shall not have à
writ, nor shall anything else be done, except that it
shall be said to him, that he should observe his day
contained in the writ of caption.


It seems therefore through this, that through such a
- plevin and a day received by himself, when he has
claimed in person and received a day according to a
summons through a writ of caption, whether he has been
summoned or not, that he cannot any further deny the
summons, if he has afterwards made default in court, to
wit, after the caption. But if [he has claimed] through
another than himself, it appears that. the contrary ought
to be done, that it may be contested by law, if he has
disputed the first and last summons. But the caption
ought to be simple. For the tenant ought not to be
thereby impeded from having ihe free administration of
all the estates and the tenements, whether he has the
right in them or not, because if it were not so, it would
be rather termed a disseysine than a distress. And
hence, if during the time in which the estate has thus
been in the hand of the lord the king it has happened
that à church which is amongst its appurtenances be-
comes vacant, the collation to it will belong to the
tenant, not to the king. But when it is thus claimed
through & plevin, it will not have to be forthwith
replevined to the tenant, before he has appeared in
court, and then let it be known whether he wishes to
hold himself to the principal plea or to the default. But
when he holds himself to the principal plea, he thereby
renounces the default, and the default will be null and


6.

Iow land
taken into
the hand
of the lord
the king
through
default
ought to be
claimed
through a
plevin.


f. 366.


7.
Quid fieri
debet in
placito ad-
vocationis
post de-
faltam.


380 DE DEFALTIS.


nulla, et res replegianda. Si autem se tenuerit ad
defaltam, adhuc non erit replegianda, donec sanaverit
defaltam, q si sanare non possit, extunc erit seysina
petenti adjudicanda.


Dicitur in pceedenti, quód res petita capi debet in
manum dii regis. Esto igitur, q in placito advoca-
tionis fieri debeat eaptio in manum düi rezis, sed ciun
jus advocationis incorporale sit & invisibile, nec tangi-
bile, qualiter ergo capi poterit in manum dii regis q
videri non poterit nee tangi? Erit igitur officium
vicecomitis in hac parte, quód, assuptis secum pbis &
legalibus hominibus vicinis, accedat ad ecclesia cujus
&advocatio petitur, & ibi publice ptestetur cora pbis
hominibus  seysiat in manu dni regis ecclesia illa,
et p consequens jus advocationis quod est in corpore
ecclesize, licet illud jus sit incorporale. Et cüm ceperit
corpus in manum dii regis quod est visibile & tangi-
bile, per consequens capit id quod est incorporale,
lieet invisibile & non tangibile. Jus enim sine sub-
jecto vel corpore cui insit esse non poterit. Et vul-
cariter dicitur, talis habet vel petit jus advocationis
talis eeclesite, & non talis manerii: et ideo non est
necesse q maneriu capiat, licet ecclesia sita infra
aliquod manerium sit de ptinentiis ejusdem mamnerii.
Continetur etiam in brevi de captione, quod tenens
sumoneatur quód sit resposurus de principali placito,
et ostensurus &c. Ad quod sciendü, quód ad tale
sumonitioné nunqm sequatur essoniü, quia priüs oporte-
bit tenente respondere de defalta. Itc nec dies rationa-


OF DEFAULTS. og]


the estate will have to be replevined. But if he has
held himself to the default, it will not have to be re-
plevined, until he has cured his default ; but if he cannot
eure it, thereupon the seysine will have to be adjudged
to the claimant.


It is said in the preceding paragraph that the estate
claimed ought to be taken into the hand of the lord the
king. Let it be therefore that in a plea of advowson &
caption into the hand of the lord the king ought to be
made; but since the right of advowson is incorporeal
and invisible, and not tangible, how therefore can that
which cannot be seen nor be touched be taken into the
hand of the lord the king? It will therefore be the
office of the viscount in this part, that having associated
with himself honest and loyal men who are neighbours,
he should proceed to the church, of which the advowson
is claimed, and should there publicly protest in the pre-
sence of the honest men that he seizes into the hand of
the lord the king that church, and consequently the
richt of advowson, which is in the body of the church,
although that right be incorporeal. And when he has
taken into the hand of the lord the king that body
which is visible and tangible, he consequently takes that
which is incorporeal although invisible and not tangible.
For the right cannot be without the subject or body in
which it is inherent. And it is commonly said, so-
and-so has or claims the right of advowson of such &
church, and not of such & manor, and therefore it i: not
necessary that he should take the manor, although the
church being situated within & manor is of the appur-
tenances of the said manor. It is contained also in the
writ of caption, that the tenant be summoned in order
to answer in the principal plea and to show, &c. as to
which it is to be known, that upon such à summons an
essoin never follows, because it will be incumbent that
the tenant should first answer concerning the default.
Likewise not à reasonable day on account of contumacy,


7.
What
ought to
be done
in a plea
of advow-
son after
a default.


8.
Qualiter
defenditur
sunimoni-
tio et sur-
sisa per
legem.


382 DE DEFALTIS.


bilis ppter contumacià s. xv. dierum, non mazis quàm
ad disseysina propter roberia. —|Suinonitores tamen
venire debent coram justice. si opus fuerit ad testifi-
candam sumonitionem.


Ad diem vero suinonitionis p breve de captione, aut
venit tenens aut non venit, si aute venerit, tunc in-
primis queratur à petente utru se tenere voluerit ad
principale placitü, vel capitale, vcl ad defalta. Si aute
ad capitale placitü, tüe quasi renütians defaltz, statim
et eode die ad capitale placitü petenti respodebit. Si
aute se tenuerit ad defalta, tuc habet tenes necesse
defedere suimonitione & sursisam, et similiter aliquado
tam essonia de malo veniédi qm essonia de malo lecti,
si fuerint interjecta, ubi oportet q diliges fiat examina-
tio ad cautela. Si aute simpliciter defendat sumoni-
tioné & sursisi, & appareàt sumonitores qui sumoni-
tione testetur, ubi priüs fuerit sufficienter testificata,
& qui more testiu diligeter & separati examinati, &
in Oibus covenientes, sufficieter pbaverint suionitione,
tue demüu necesse erit teneti ppter psumptione testifi-
cationis sumonitorü, sumonitione defedere p lege, cu
nulla sit sumonitio nisi cü sit testificata et pbata.
Nec erit (ut pdietu est) tra replegianda anteqm tenés
lege fecerit, vel in lege facieda defecerit. Dabitur
igitur ptib? ali? dies de lege facieda, cü tenes plegios
invenerit de lege faciéda. Nec etia poterit tenes attor-
natü facere ad lege facicda, cu ipse tenes lege vadia-
verit, qd si fecerit, nisi illa fecerit in ppria psona,
defalta facit. Ad die vero sibi datu ad lege facienda,
poterit tenes se essoniare si voluerit, & petes eode
modo, eode die, & vicissi, si voluerit, quia no licet i


OF DEFAULTS. SR


to wit, of fifteen days, not more than upon a disseysine
on account of & robbery. But the summoners ought to
come before the justiciaries, if it should be necessary, to
testify to the summons.


But on the day of the summons by & writ of caption,
the tenant either comes or he does not como, but, if he


has come, then let it be first questioned by the. plaintiff


whether he wishes to hold himself to the principal or


capital plea or to the default, But if to the capital plea, |


then as it were renouncing the default, he shall answer
to the claimant forthwith and on the same day upon the
capital plea. But if he sball hold himself to the default,
then the tenant must of necessity contest the summons
and the neglect, and in like manner sometimes as well
essoins of sickness by the way as essoins of bed-sickness,
1f they have been interposed, where it is incumbent that
there should be a diligent examination for caution's sake.
But if he simply contests the summons and the neglect,
and the summoners should appear to testify to the sum-
mons, where it has previously been sufficiently testified,
and who having been diligently and separately examined
in the manner of witnesses, and agreeing in all matters,
have sufficiently proved the summons, then it will be
necessary for the tenant on account of the presumption
arising on the testification of the summoncrs, to contest
the summons at law, since there is no summons unless it
has been testified and proved: nor will the land (as
above said) have to be replevined before the tenant has
made his law, or has failed in making his law. | Another
day will therefore be given to the parties for making their
law, when the tenant has found sureties that he will
make his law. Nor will the tenant be able to constitute
an attorney to make his law, since the tenant himself
has wagered his law, which if he has done, he makes
default if he does not make his law in person. But on
the day given to him to make his law the tenant may
essoin himself, if he will, and the claimant in the same
manner on the same day, and in turns, for that is not


8.
Iow tlie
sunmmnoins
aud the
neglect arc
to be con-
tested at
aw.


f. 366 b.


3384 .DE DEFALTIS.


hae pte teneti q'd peteti no licet nec ecoversó. Ad
die vero legis, aut tenes facit lege su&, aut deficit in
lege facieda. Si aute lege fecerit, tanqua excusatus à
defalta eode die ad placitum principale respondebit.
Sufficit enim ad dilatione & p rationabili sumonitione
tenentis, tempus intermedium inter legem vadiatam
& legé facta. Si aute in lege defecerit tenens, tunc
amittet seysina, & petens seysinam recuperabit, &
tenens in misericordia. Et habeat ille tale recuperare,
quale habere debebit, & plegii de lege, secundu quos-
dam, quieti erunt de misericordia, quia sufficit q eum
habuerunt ad lege facienda in curia, licet in lege
facienda deficeret, ad similitudine plegioru de psequendo.
Sed secundü alios (& melius) omnes in misericordia,
quia no sunt plegii inventi solümodo ad veniendü ad
curià, nisi plegiatus id fecerit, ad q faciendü plegios
invenerit. Queri possit inter alia, cüm tenens p legem
facta se defenderit à defalta, quare petens jactura
cause sus non incurrat, s. bie vel actione, sicut ipse
tenens seysinam suam si de lege, deficeret. Respondeo.
Sufficit ei p comodo pprie seysin» reformatio. Esto
etiam q tenens primo die sumonitionis post defalta et
captione terre in manü dii regis no venerit, sed
secüdo, tertio vel quarto die, & petens primo die
venerit, & se optulerit, & petat judicium de utraque
defalta, tunc habet tenens necesse utramq defendere,
nisi forte it& sic! g personaliter post captione terram
petierit per plevinam, quo caso de facili defedere
no possit secundam sumonitionem et diem à justic.
datü in ipsa replicatione, et ab eo recollectum &


1 € sit," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


amem a


OF DEFAULTS. 935


allowed in this part to the tenant which is not allowed
to the claimant, nor conversely. But on the day of the
law, either the tenant makes his law or he fails in mak-
ing his law. But if he has made his law, having been as
1t were excused from his default on the same day he
shall make his answer to the principal plea. Forit suffi-
ces for & delay and for & reasonable summonition of the
tenant, the intermediate time between the wagering of
the law and the making of the law. But if the tenant
has failed in his law, then he shall lose his seysine, and
the claimant shall recover the seysine, and the tenant
shall be subject to amercement. And let him have such
8 recovery, as he ought to have, and the sureties for his
law according to some shall be acquitted from amerce-
ment, because it suffices that they presented him to make
his law in the court, although he might fail to make
his law, after the likeness of sureties to prosecute. But
according to others (and it is the better opinion) they are
&ll subject to amercement, for they are not sureties found
only to cause him to appear in the court, unless the per-
son pledged by them has done that, for which he has
found them as sureties. It may be asked amongst other
questions, when the tenant has defended himself from &
default by making his law, why the claimant does not
incur the loss of his cause, to wit, vhe writ or the action,
&s the tenant himself would lose his seysine, if he had


f. 366 b.


failed in his law. Ianswer. Itsuffices to him for his -


advantage the reformation of his proper seysine. Let it
be also that the tenant on the first day of the summons
after the default and the caption of the land into the
hand of the lord the king has not come, but on the
second, third, or fourth day, and the claimant has come
on the first. day, and has presented himself, and claims
judgment on both defaults, then the tenant is under the
necessity of contesting both, unless by chance it be so
that he has personally after the caption claimed the land
by a plevin,in which case he cannot well contest the
second summons and the day given to him by the jus-
ticiaries in his very replication, and recollected and rece
Q C2t6. B B


9,
$i defulta
facta fue-


rit, qualiter


sit proce.
dendum.


10.
Irrotulatio
post de-
faltam.


386 DE DEFALTIS.


receptum. Si aute nihil ipsorü! intervenerit, vel per
alia petita fuerit quam p ipsum, tunc utramd poterit
defendere sumonitionem, si utraq, fuerit testificata &
pbata. Si a&uté neutra, tune liberatur à defalta. Si
autem una tantum, tune oportet q, illam defendet
eode modo quo supra. Si auté utrad, & in pbatione
uiriusi defecerit, erit in defalta. Et eodem modo si
in pbatioue unius, & adjudicabitur seysina petenti. Si
autem utramque legem fecerit, reformabitur ei seysina,
ut incontinenti respondeat. Si aute prima summoni-
tionem defenderit & cognoverit secundam, erit in
defalta nisi impedimentum illegitimum  allegaverit &
pbaverit. Et quo casu, quavis impedimentü pbatum
fuerit ut legitimum, si terra capta in manum dii regis
legitim? non fuerit ad horam petita per plevinam.


Redeamus ad judicium post secundam defaltam, &
captionem terre, sive alterius rei, in manum dfi regis,
ubi tenens omninó non coparuerit, nec ad primum
diem, nec secundum, nec tertium, nec quartü, p seip-
sum nec per nuntium, ut pdietum est, quo casu non
poterit excusari defalta, & ideo sequitur judicium sub
hiis verbis.


ÀÁ. qui presens est s. petiit versus DB. tantam terram
cum pertinentiis in tali vill ut jus suum, & B. non
venit & sumonitus fuit aliàás & summonitio fuit testata
vel non dedicta, & ita quód terra capta fuit in manum
domini regis per defaltam, quam idem B. fecit tali
die & ipse iterum summonitus qg esset ad hunc diem,
& non venit, & mandatum fuit vic. quód mandaret
die eaptionis, et vic. mandavit diem captionis, et quàd


! * horum," MS. Haw]. C. 160.


OF DEFAULTS. 387


ceived by himself. But if none of these things have in-
tervened, but his land was claimed by another than him-
self, then he may contest both summonses, if both have
been testified and proved. But if neither, then he is re-
leased from the default. But if one only, then it is in-
cumbent that he should contest that in the same way as
above. Butif both, and he has failed in the proof of
both, he will be in default; and in the same manner in
the proof of one, and the seysine will be adjudged to the
claimant. But if he has made his law in both, the sey-
sine will be reformed to him that he may forthwith an-
swer. But if he has contested the first summons and has
acknowledged the second, he will be in default unless he
has alleged and proved an illegitimate impediinent. And
in which case, although the impediment has been proved
to be legitimate, if the land taken in the hand of the lord
the king has not been legitimately claimed at the proper
hour by a plevin.

Let, us return to a judgment after à second defaultand |,
the caption of the land or other thing into the hand of fault ha«
the lord the king, where the tenant, has not appeared at j**P den
all, neither on the first day, nor on the second, nor on the ceeding:
third, nor on the fourth, by himself nor by a messenger, j^^ de
as above explained, in which case his default cannot be
excused, and therefore judgment follows in these words.


A. who is present, to wit, has claimed against B. so — 1v.
much land with its appurtenances in such & vill as his Eun
right, and B. has not come and has been summoned else- a defaut
where, and the summons has been testified or has not
been denied, and so that the land has been taken into
the hand of the lord the king through the default, which
the said B. has made on such a day, and he himself has
been again summoned that he should attend on this day,
and he has not come, and & mandate has been sent to the
viscount that he should announce the day of caption, and
he has announced the day of caption and that he was

B B2


3589 DE DEFALTIS.


suimonit? fuit, nec terra petita fuit p plevinà, vel si
petita fuerit, non fuit petita ad hora, et ideo con-
sideratum est g À. recuperet seysinam suam, et B.
f.367. in misericordia, & fiat postmodü irrotulatio juditii sub
eisdem verbis, À. optulit se quarto die versus B. de
placito tali &c. ut supra, & breve de facienda seysina


" tale erit.
ids Rex vice. salute. Scias quód A. de N. in euria nostra
habenda Coram justiciariis nfis apud tale locum, p c5sideratione
EEUU: ejusdé eurie nostre recuperavit seysinam suam de
peravit per tant& terra cum ptinentiis in tali villa, ut de jure suo,
4cfalt"m. vel ut do dote sua, versus B. de N. per defaltà ipsius
B. et ideo tibi precipimus q ipsi Á. de pdicta terra
sine dilatione plenarià seysinam habere facias. Teste
&ec, Et ita fit missio in seysinam quasi ex secüdo
decreto post captioné terre in manü dfi regis, cüm illa


captio sit quasi prima missio.


CAP. II.
l.


Quale com- — Cum autem tenens ita amiserit per defaltam, viden-
petat reme- " . . P . is
dium te- dum si q remedium competat ei qui sic amisit, & quale.
nenti post- Et sciendum q competit ei remedium, & recuperare
quam amis . . . .
en pr per breve de recto omni tempore si placitare voluerit,
M tt quousque tenens posuerit se in magnam assisam, ita
quod q quatuor milites summoniti fuerunt ad eligendum
temPU$. duodecim secundum quosdam, & secundum alios quous-
que duodecim electi fuerint. De hoc autem contentio
fuit inter veteres, & eodem modo (ut videtur) donec
tenens duellü vadiaverit, si duellü elegerit: ad paria
enim judicatur in multis magna assisa et duellü, &
tunc vero deinceps non habebit quis aliud recuperare,


quia abjudicabitur sibi & hsredibus suis seysina üm-


OF DEFAULTS. 359


summoned, and the land was not claimed by a plevin, and
therefore i& was resolved that À. should recover his sey-
sine and B. should be amerced, and let the judgment be f. 367.
afterwards enrolled in these words : A. presented himself
on the fourth day against B. in such & plea &c. as above ;


and the writ for giving seysine will be of this kind.

The king to the viscount. greeting. Know thou,that 11.
A. de N. in our court before our justiciaries in. such à baviug E
place, by the resolution of our said court has recovered sine utter
his seysine of so much land with its appurtenanees in LIT"
such & vill, as of his own right, or as of his dower, covered
against B. de N. through ihe default of the said p,, rough a
and accordingly we enjoin you that you cause the said À.
to have plenary seysine without delay of the said land.
Witness &c. And so mission into seysine is made as it
were upon & second decree after the caption of the land
into the hand of the lord the king, since that caption


has been as it were the first mission.


CHAPTER II.


But when a tenant has lost through default, it is to be E WOR
seen if any remedy is allowable to him, who has so lost, red
and what sort of remedy. And itis to be known, that aie to «
he is entitled to & remedy and to recover through a writ ocn
of right at all times, if he should wish to sue, until the has lost


tenant has put himself upon a great assise, so that four UE
knights have been summoned to Choose twelve according and up to
to some, and according to others until twelve have been SOrne
chosen. But respecting this there has been & contention
amongst the older men, and in the same manner (as it

seems) until the tenant has wagered a duel, if he has

chosen a duel: for in many things à great assise and &

duel are judged alike, and then indeed from that time he

shall not have another recovery, because the seysine will

be judged away from him and his heirs for ever. But


£ 56; b.


2390 DE DEFALTIS.


perpetuum. Propter dissensum vero antiquorum non
poterit teneri aliquod certum quid fieri debeat, si
defalta facta fuerit cüm quatuor milites sumoniti sint
ad eligendum, cum quidam dicant sie, quidam  contra-
rium. Sed tamen q recuperare suum debeat habere
in hoc ultimo casu, pbatur in rotulo de termino P.
anno regis H. decimo sexto in com Oxonü, de Fray
Pinchard, ubi ipse nec hzredes sui precise fuerint
abjudicati, sed quód haberent tale recuperare, quale
habere deberent. Sed quód nullum habere debent
postquàm duodecim electi fuerint, sed ex toto abjudi-
cantur, probatur in rotulo de termino Sancti Michaelis
anno regis Henrici quarto incipiente quinto in comitatu
Buck. de Johanne filio Rowlandi. Et ad hoc concor-
dant alii plures casus. Ite habere poterit remedium
tenens qui amisit, si fraudulenta deceptio petentis
intervenit, ubi nulla omnino summonitio facta fuit,
mentitur tamen fieri, & hoc detecto nec captio aliqua
nec &bjudicatio per defaltam. Et si judicium reddatur
in hoe casu pro petente, quiequid actum fuerit revo-
eabitur secundum quod superius dicetur; Item habebit
ienens suum recuperare, ubi in absentia sua cum
peregre profecturus fuerit abjudicata fuerit ei seysina,
eum summonitione preventus non fuerit, ut supra-
dictum est. Sed per quale breve videndum, quia
justice. non sunt in culpa, nec etiam petens, cüm hoc
faetum sit per imperitiam summonitorum, qui testati
sunt legitimam esse summonitionem. "Via igitur melior
est (ut videtur) q tenens dicat se esse injuste dissey-
situm quamvis cum judicio, quia injuste, eo q per
injustum judicium. Et unde cüm petens qui recupera-


! * Punchard," MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ? * dicitur," MS. id.


OF DEFAULTS. 391


on &ccount of the dissension amongst the ancient authori-
ties nothing certain can be maintained as to what should
be done, if the default has been made, when the four
knights have been summoned to choose [the twelve],
since some say so, and others the contrary. But never-
theless, that he ought to have his recovery in this last
case is proved in the roll of Easter term in the sixteenth
year of king Henry in the county of Oxford, concerning
Fray Pinchard, where neither he nor his heirs were pre-
cisely adjudged to be out of court, but that they should
have such à recovery as they ought to have. But that
they ought not to have any recovery after the twelve
knights have been elected, but should be adjudged totally
out of court is proved in the roll of St. Michael's term in
the fourth and fifth years of king Henry in the county of
Bueks, concerning John the son of Rowland. And with
this many other cases accord. — Likewise the tenant, who
has lost, may have & remedy, if & fraudulent deception
has intervened on the part of the claimant, where no
summons at all has been made, but he falsely says
that it has been made, and upon this having been
detected there is neither any caption nor abjudica-
tion through default. And if judgment be rendered in
this case for the clannant, whatever has been done will
be revoked, according to what has been explained above.
Likewise the tenant will have his recovery when in his
absence, if he has gone on & journey abroad, his seysine
has been adjudged away from him, when he has not been
anticipated by a summons, as explammed above. But by
what writ is to be seen, because the justiciaries are not
in fault, nor even the claimant, when this has been done
through the inexperience of the summoners, who have
testified to & legitimate summons. The better way there-
fore is (as it seems), that the tenant should say, that he
has been unjustly disseysed, although with & judgment,
because he has been unjustly disseysed, inasmuch as he
has been so through an unjust judgment. And hence
when the claimant who has recovered shallanswerto the f.367 b.


l,
Qualiter
sanatur
defalta per
servicium
domini
regis.


z.
Brevia,
qua ex-
cusant per


^ servitum


domini
regis.


392 DE DEFALTIS.


vit responderit ad assisam & seysinam, vocare poterit
curiam regis ad warrantum, q quidem decepta fuit,
per quam quidem poterit talis processus & tale judi-
cium revocari.


Car. IIT.


Ante judicium vero poterit defalta sanari mulus
modis, sieut judicium cüm factum fuerit revocari.
Inprimis per servicium domini regis, si in servicio
suo fuerit, ita quód mittere non possit nec venire,
quia servicium domini regis nulli debet esse damnosum,
nec etiam ei ita &d commodum, quód alteri sit in-
juriosum. Brevia autem de warrantia de servitio domini
regis, sub hace forma concepta sunt. "Varia sunt enim
genera defaltarum. Aut fit defalta coram justic. itine-
rantibus, aliquando pro communi summonitione, & ali-
quando pro placito terre, quo casu fiant brevia in
hac forma.


Rex dilectis & fidelibus suis justiciariis itinerantibus
in tali comitatu salutem. Sciatis quód talis fuit in
servitio nostro tali die apud talem locum, ita quód in
itinere vestro coram vobis esse non potuit tali die
pro communi summonitione. Et ideo vobis mandamus,
quód occasione communis sive generalis summonitionis
coram vobis factee de militibus & liberé tenentibus &
alis in itinere vestro, ipsum talem non ponatis, nec
poni permittatis in defaltam, quia absentiam suam
quoad hoc ei warranti-zamus, vel aliter: quód talis
fuit in servitio nostro &c. ut supra, ita quód coram
vobis esse non potuit in loquela, qure est inter ipsum
& talem de tanto terre cum pertinentiis in tali villa.
Et ideo vobis mandamus, quód propter &bsentiam suam
ad diem illum coram vobis non ponatur in defaltam
nec in aliquo sit perdens, quia diem illum ei war-
rantizamus. Et eodem modo quo dies warrantizantur,


- GM Waco s RR ERR tal
"


OF DEFAULTS. 303


assise and the seysine, he may vouch the court of the kin
to warrant, that it has been deceived, through which in-
deed such & proceeding and such à judgment may be re-
voked.


CHAPTER lII.


But before judgment & default may be eured in many |
ways, as & judgment when it has been made may be re- addis
voked. In the first place through the service of the lord through
the king, if he has been in his service, so that he could not tbeserrice
send nor come, because the service of the lord the king the king
ought not to be damaging to any one, nor on the other 7? i
hand so advantageous to him that it should be injurious
to another person. But writs of warranty concerning the
service of the lord the king are drawn up in this form.

For there are various kinds of defaults. A default is
either made before the justiciaries itinerant, sometimes
for a common summons, sometimes for & plea of land;


in which ease let the writs be in this form.


' The king to his beloved and faithful justiciaries itine- —— 2.

: : Writs,
rant in such & county greeting. Know ye that so-and- «Ai ek.
s0 was in our service on such & day at such a place, so cuse for


that he could not appear before you on your iter on such D re ree
& day for à common summons. Ánd accordingly we com: the king.
mand you, that on the occasion of à common or general
summons made before you of the knights and free tenants

and others in your iter, you do not place him nor allow

him to be placed in default, because we warrant his ab-

sence as regards this matter, or otherwise: that so-and-

so was in our service &c. as above, so that he could not
appear before you in the trial which is between him and
so-ànd-so concerning so much land with its appurte-

nances in such & vill. And therefore we command you,

that on account of his absence on that day before you he

be not placed in default,nor be a.loser in any respect,
because we warrant that day to him. And in the same


f. 368.


asi DE DEFALTIS.


poterit terminus warrantizari ex causa, scilicet à tali
die usque ad talem diem, & sic majoris cause occupa-
tio excusat aliquem et defendit à poena contumacic,
sicut. facit adversa valitudo, poenam enim contumacie
non patitur quem adversa valitudo, vel majoris causze
occupatio defendit. Item sicut locum habet warrantia
per breve domini regis in minoribus curis coram
justiciariis de curiis domini regis, ita locum habebit
de curiis domini regis in comitatu, vel in curiis
baronum, vel aliorum qui curias habent de placitis
et sectis, et aliis qua in comitatibus vel in curiis
placitari possunt vel terminari, et tunc sic: Scias
quód A. de N. fuit in placito, vel in quadam assisa
vel jurata (vel alia de causa, secundum quod necessitas
exigerit) in curia nostra coram justicia? nostris apud
talem locum tali die per preceptum nostrum, it& quód
ad diem illum coram te in comitatu tuo esse non
potuit pro loquela, qua» est in eodem comitatu tuo
inter ipsum talem et talem de tanto terre, vel de
qualicunque alia re, vel aliter si terminus warrantizari
debeat: Scias q talis &c. fuit coram nobis in placito
tali die, et in crastino et tertio et quarto die, vel à
tali die usque ad talem, vel tali die ita quod tali die
coram te esse non potuit, nec in crastino, ita quód
totum tempus computetur, quo fuit coram justice. in
curia domini regis, et omnes diete in veniendo versus
patriam, ut sciri possit q ita legitima sit excusatio de
toto tempore illo, et tunc dicatur: et ita q infra ter-
minum ilum coram te in comitatu tuo in tali placito
esse non potuit. Et ideo tibi precipimus quód propter
absentiam suam infra terminum illum coram te in
comitatu tuo non ponatur in defaltam, nec in aliquo


OF DEFAULTS. 995


manner in which the day is warranted, & term may be war-
ranted from a cause, to wit, from such a day to such a day,
and so the occupation of a more important cause excuses
8 person and defends him from the penalty of contumacy,
as does adverse health, for & person does not suffer the
penalty of contumacy, whom adverse health or the occu-
pation of a more important cause defends. Likewise just
as à warrant by à writ of the lord the king has place in
the minor courts before the justiciaries of the courts of
the lord the king, so it will have place from the courts of
the lord the king in the county court and in the courts of
the barons, or of others who hold courts of pleas and sects,
and of other matters which may be pleaded and terminated
in the county courts or in the other courts, and then thus:
Know thou, À. de N. was in a plea, or in & certain assise
or jury (or for some other cause, aecording as necessity
has required) in our court before our Justiciaries at. such
& place on such a day through our precept,so that on
that day he could not be in thy court before thee for the
trial, which is in thy said county court between the said
s0-and-so and such a person concerning so much land, or
concerning any other thing whatsoever, or otherwise if &
term ought to be warranted : Know thou that so-and-so
&c. was present before us in & plea on such a day, and
on the morrow, and on the third day, and on the fourth
day, or from such a day up to such a day, or on such &
day so that on such day he could not appear before
you, nor on the morrow, so that the whole time be com-
puted in which he was in the presence of the justiciaries
in the court of the lord the king and all the days' jour-
. neys in coming towards his country, that it may be
known that thus the excuse for the whole time is legiti-
mate, and then let it be said: and so that he could not
be within that term before you in your county court in
such & plea, And therefore we enjoin you that he be not
placed in default on aecount of his absence within that
term before you in your county court, nor be a loser in


f. 368.


396 DE DEFALTIS.


sit perdens, quia terminum illum ei warrantizamus.
Vel aliter, quód propter absentiam suam ad diem illum
vel infra terminum non ponant eum in defaltam, nec
in aliquo coram te occasionetur per quod sit perdens,
quia die illum sive terminum illum ei warrantizamus.
Teste &c. Et eodem modo scribatur ballivis euriarum.
Et qualiter formari debeat breve satis perpendi poterit
ex pramissis Item possunt justiciarii scribere eodem
modo vicecomitibus et ballivis curiarum nomine proprio,
sed tamen ex parte domini regis hoc modo: Scias vel
sciatis &c. ut supra. Et ideo tibi vel vobis mandamus
ex parte domini regis, quód propter absentiam suam
&c. ut supra. Et sic excusat magis magis adjutorium ! -
aliquem à defalta in juditio minori. Et eodem modo
excusat consimile adjutorium? vel squale, ut si justic.
de banco suo nomine scripserint justic. itinerantibus,
vel é contrario: licet par in parem non habet imperium.
Et tunc dieatur, A. B. et socii sui itinerantes in
tali com. vel justic. de banco dilectis &micis et sociis
suis À. B. et sociis suis '"itinerantibus in tali cofü
(secundum quod se ipsos velint preponere vel post-
ponere in inandato) & tunc, sciatis ut supra Et
notandum quód düs rex nec alius poterit aliquem sic
warrantizare, vel defaltam sanare, quód quis aliquid
lucretur &b adversario per absentiam, sed quód in-
dempnis observetur. Item nec quód judicium differe-
tur? de aliquo quod sit contra pacem domini regis,
sicut de utlagaria, & hujusmodi, sicut de Richard
Syward in comitatu Gloc. inter placita qua sequuntur
regem, anno regni sui tricesimo tertio, & ita obtinet


! * excusat majus auditorium," MS. Rawl. C. 160 & 159.
? * consinile auditorium," MSS. eadem.
3* dimeratur," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF DEFAULTS. 397


any respect, because we warrant to him that term. Or
otherwise, that they should not on account of his absence
on that day, or within that term, place him in default,
nor that he should be prejudiced before you in any way
that he should be a loser, because we warrant to him that
day or that term. Witness &c., and in the saine way let
writings be sent to the bailiffs of the courts. And in
what manner the writ should be drawn up may be suffi-
ciently understood from the premises. Likewise the jus-
ticiaries may write in the same manner to the viscounts
and bailiffs of the courts in their own name, but never-
theless on the part of the lord the king, in this manner.
Know thou or know ye &c., as above. And accordingly
we command thee or you on the part of the lord the
king, that on account of his absence &c. as above. And
30 & superior auditory excuses a person from & default
in an inferior court. And in the same way a similar or
equal auditory excuses, as for instance if the justiciaries
of the bench have written in their own name to the jus-
ticiaries itinerant or eontrariwise, although equal has no
empire over equal. And then let it be said, À. and B.
and their associates itinerant in such a county, or the
justiciaries of the bench to their beloved friends and. as-
sociates À. and B. and their associates itinerant in such
a county (according as they wish to place themselves
first or last in order in the mandate), and then know ye
as above. And it is to be noted that neither the lord the
king nor any other person can so warrant any one or cure
a default, that any one should gain anything from his
adversary through his absence, but only that he should
be kept from loss. Likewise nor that à judgment should
be deferred on any matter which is against the peace of
the lord the king, as concerning an outlawry and such
like, as concerning Richard Syward in the county of
Gloucester, amongst the pleas which follow the king in
the thirty-third year of his reign, and so it prevails that


j.
Qualiter
exceusatur
absentia
multis
motlis.


f. 368 b.


39S DE DEFALTIS.


quód major curia et :sequalis exeusat et defendit à
defalta, minor autem nunquam in majori.


In fine notandum, quód sola absentia facit contuma-
eem, nee probari debet, licet sufficit sola absentia, nisi
fuerit rationabiliter excusata quód necessaria fuerit, et
non voluntaria, secundum quod necesse ponitur pro
inevitabili, et ideo necessitas excusat, non voluntas,
seilicet, non nolle, sed impotentia per necessitatem.
Necessitas autem aliquando praecedit summonitionem et
excusat à defalta, quandoque concomitatur summonitio-
nem et quandoque sequitur et evenit post summonitio-
nem, et quandoque provenit excusatio non ex necessitate.
Procedit! aliquando sumonitionem necessitas et excu-
sat, ubi licet sumonitus fuerit quis legitime, ad domi-
cilium tamen venire non potest, nec mittere, nec sibi
providisse poterit propter necessitatem  precedentem
summonitionem, ut si se cessoniare posset vel facere
attornatum, ut si ante sumonitionem captus fuerit quis
et imprisonatus, & ita in prisona arctatus quód venire


.non possit, nec mittere, secundum quod causa fuerit


civilis vel criminalis. Item nec sibi providisse ut
supradictum est. lIté eodem modo si ante sumonitio-
nem effectus sit non sanc, mentis q summonitioni con-
sentire non possit nec sumonitionem recipere. Item
si tam gravi infirmitate detentus sit ante sumonitio-
nem q discernere non possit, nec aliud cogitare nisi sit
dolor & poena? Item si in servitio düi regis detentus
fuerit, non affectans fraudulenter illam necessitatem
serviendi, nec procurans, cüm sic commode venire non
possit, nec mittere nec sibi providisse, excusatur ex
tali necessitate,? et talis necessitas multotiens concomi-
tatur summonitionem & precedat, & ista necessitas


1 * Praecedit," MS. Rawl. C. 160. 5 * a tali necessitate," MS. id.
2* pisj quid sit dolor et pena," 1 * preecedit," MS. id,
MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF DEFAULTS. 399


the superior and the equal court excuses and defends a
person from a default, but the inferior never so in the
superior court.


In the end it is to be noted that absence alone
makes & person contumacious, nor ought it to be proved,
although absence alone suffices, unless it has been rea-
sonably excused that it was necessary, and not volun-
tary, according as necessary is used to signify what is
inevitable, and accordingly necessity excuses, not the
wil, to wit, not unwillingness but want of power
through necessity. But necessity sometimes precedes &
summons and excuses from default, sometimes it accom.
panies it, and sometimes it follows it and happens after
the summons, and sometimes the excusation proceeds
not from necessity. "The necessity sometimes precedes
and excuses the summons, where, although & person has
been legitimately summoned, he cannot come nor send
to his domicile, nor will he be able to provide for himself
on account of some necessity preceding the summons, as
if he might have essoined himself or have constituted
an attorney, as for instance, if before the summons a
person has been captured and imprisoned, and so closely
confined in prison that he cannot come nor send, accord-
ing as the cause be civil or criminal. Likewise nor to
have provided for himself as aforesaid. Likewise in the
same manner, if before the summons he has been ren-
dered of unsound mind, so that he could not consent to
the summons, nor receive the summons. Likewise if he
be detained by so grievous an infirmity before the sum-
mons that he could not discern, nor think of anything
else unless it be suffering and pain. Likewise if he has
been detained in the service of the lord the king not
affecting fraudulently the necessity of serving him, nor
proceuring it, when thereby he could not conveniently
come, nor send, nor provide for himself, he is excused
upon such necessity, and such mecessity very frequently
&ccompanies the summons and precedes it, and that ne-


J.
In what
manner
absence in
many ways
is ex-
cused.


f. 368 b.


400 DE DEFALTI(s.


exeusat à defalta, si probetur, & à poena, & impedit
judicium. Et si eontinum fuerint hujusmodi necessi-
tates, ita quód infra quartu diem post defaltam pponi
non possint nee pbari, & peedat judicium contra ten-
entem, si post, judicium pponantur et pbentur, judicium
et quiequid acetum fuerit revocabitur.

Eodem modo exeusatur, si quis peregré pfectus fuerit
ante sumonitionem q sibi providere non potuit ut supra.
Item est qusdam necessitas superveniens & sequens
suimonitionem, ut si summonitus legitimé post summo-
nitionem inciderit in casus fortuitos, qui previderi non
poterunt, de quibus pauló ante dictum est. Et in qui-
bus casibus omnibus, si petens docere possit impedi-
mentum esse illegitimum & necessitatem non legitimam
vel nullam, vel aliter esse quàm tenens proposuerit:
ex tali insinuatione sive negatione fit res dubia, quo
casu oportebit quód veritas requiratur, & secundum
hoe fiat judicium vel non defaltarum, vel si forte fac-
tum fuerit, revocabitur vel tenebit. Sed quid si ante
judicium de defalta vel post, ostenderit tenens breve do-
mini regis de warrantia, quód fuit tali die in servitio
suo in forma supradicta, quód esse non potuit coram
justieiariis eodem die in judicio, cüm forte in nullo
servitio domini regis extiterit, quia visus fuit eodem
die coram justiciariis suis qui habent recordum, & inde
contumaciter recessit, ità q judicium  prwcessit contra
ipsum de defalta, vel q alibi fuit longe à loco ubi esse
debuit in servitio, quod petens sit statim paratus pro-
bare. Item etsi in servitio fuerit, potuit sibi ante ser-
vitiü pvidisse, vel si in servitio fuerit nec potuit venisse


OF DEFAULTS. 4Ul


cessity excuses from default, if it be proved, and from
punishment, and impedes & judgment. And if neces-
sities of this kind have been continuous, so that within
the fourth day after the default they cannot be pro-
pounded nor proved, and judgment should proceed
against the tenant, if after judgment they should be
propounded and be proved, the judgment and whatever
has been done shall be revoked.

In the same manner he is excused, if any one has
set out on & journey &broad before the summons,
so that he could not provide for himself. Likewise
there is à certain supervenient necessity, which fol-
lows the summons, as if à person legitimately sum-
moned has after the summons fallen into some for-
tuitous casualties which could not be foreseen, con-
cerning which we have spoken a little above. And
in all of which cases, if the claimant can show that
the impediment is illegitimate and the necessity not
legitimate or null, or otherwise than the tenant has pro-
pounded, by such an insinuation or denial the matter is
rendered doubtful,in which case it will be incumbent
that the truth should be sought out, and according to
this let there be à judgment or not of the defaults, or if
by chance it has been made, it shall be recalled or it shall
hold good. But if before the judgment concerning the
default or after it the tenant shall have shown the writ
of the lord the king concerning warranty, that he was
on such & day in his service, in the form above stated,
so that he could not be before the justiciaries on the
same day in court, when by chance he has not been in
any service of the lord the king, because he was seen on
the same day before his justiciaries who have & record,
and he has thenee contumaciously withdrawn, so that
judgment has proceeded against him through his default,
or because he was elsewhere at à distance from where
he ought to have been in service, which the claimant is
forthwith prepared to prove. Likewise although he
may have been in the king's service he might have

Q 6366. Cc


f. 269.


402 DE DEFALTIS.


nec sibi providisse, tamen potuit misisse, quia presens
fuit tota die cum ipso rege, quero an tale testimoniü
ipsius regis admittat probationem in contrarium, cüm
petens excipiat (ut predictum est) & paratus sit pbare
exceptionem ? videtur quód sie, quamvis tale testimo-
nium ipsius dii regis maximam inducat preesumptionge,
vera tamen pbatio debet vincere illum, que nulla alia
erit, nisi quód probetur dominum regum & consilium
suum per falsam suggestionem esse deceptum, rex enim
decipi possit cüm sit homo, Deus autem nunquàm, cüm
sit Deus. Et quo casu cüm dominus rex super hoc
fuerit interpellatus in eadem perstiterit voluntate quód
velit tenentem esse defensü injuria, cüm teneatur jus-
ticiam totis viribus defensare, extunc erit injuria ipsius
domini regis, nec poterit ei necessitatem aliquis impo-
nere quód illam corrigat & emendet nisi velit, cüm.
superiorem non habeat nisi Deum, et satis erit illi pro
poena quód Deum expect — ultorem. Et si justiciar sui
necessitatem imponant reg ! quód judicium reddant, in
hoc casu vel consimilibus ita reddant juditium, q non pro
juditio, sed quia diis rex ita vult, et inde sequitur, quód
juditium potius voluntarium sit quàm justum, si dici
debeat juditium. Et quicquid dicatur de facto regis in
eo quod est rex, & perinde factum juditium disputari
non debet, nee factum à quoquam judicari nec revocari
poterit, cüm sit justum. Si autem factum injustum
fuerit, perinde non erit factum regis. Et cüm non sit
factum regis quia injustum, inde disputari poterit, et
faetum judicari, sed idem emendari non poterit, nec


! *et sj justiciariis suis necessitatem imponat rex," MS. Rawl. C.
160 et 159, et Reg. 9. E. xv.


SU mI.


OF DEFAULTS. 4C3


provided for himself before the service, or if he should
have been in his service and could not have.come nor
provided for himself, nevertheless he could have sent,
because he was present during the whole day with the
king himself, I ask whether such testimony of the king
himself admits of proof to the contrary, when the
claimant excepts (as aforesaid), and is prepared to prove
his exception ? It seems in the affirmative, although
such testimony of the king himself induces the strongest
presumption, but à true proof ought to overcome it,
which will be nothing clse than the proof that the lord
the king and his council have been deceived by a false
suggestion. For the king may be deceived since he is
a man ; but God never, since he is God. And in which
case when the lord the king having been interpellated
in this matter has persisted in tho same desire that he
wishes the tenant to be defended from injury, since he
is bound to maintain justice with all his power, it will
be henceforth an injury of the lord the king himself,
nor can any one impose upon him the necessity to cor-
rect and amend it unless he wills it, sinee he has no
superior except God, and it is sufficient for him as pun-
ishment that he should expect God as the avenger. And
if the king should impose upon his justiciaries a necessity,
that they should render judgment, in this case or in con-
similar eases they should so render judgment, that it. be
not taken for a judgment but because the king so wills
it, it follows hence that the judgment is rather wilful
than just, if it ought to be called à judgment. And
whatever may be said of the act of the king inasmuch
as he is king, the judgment accordingly made ought not
to be disputed, nor can the act be judged nor revoked
by any one, when it is just. But if the act shall be
unjust, it will be accordingly not the act of the king.
And sinee it is not the act of the king because it is
unjust, it may thenceforth be disputed, and the act may
be judged, but the said act cannot be amended nor re-


cc 2


f. 369.


4.
Si post
defaltam
capiatur
dies
amoris.


404 DE DEFALTIS.


revocari sine eo. Item notandum in fine quód excusa-
tur contumacia et defalta sine necessitate, sola volun-
tate, cüm sumonitus à non suo judice venire non
teneatur. Et excusatur à defalta ante juditium & post,
cüm fuerit probata. Et eodem modo si pcedat juditiü
cum falso procuratore, quia eum non suo judice, vel
falso procuratore, juditium nullum, controversia nulla.
Item quia venire non tenetur, càüm nullam habeat
sumonitionem, vel minus legitimam. | Et quo casu non
habet necesse venire ut respondeat de placito, sed ut
alleget & probet summonitionem nullam vel minus
legitimam. Et eodem modo si peregre profectus fuerit
ante summonitionem sumonitione non praeventus ut
supradictum est.


In fine notandum quód, si post. defaltam factam ante
juditium capiatur dies amoris, vel translata sit loquela
ab uno juditio ad aliud, ad instantiam et pcurationem
petentis, qui lucrari deberet per  defaltam et hoc
sinpliciter, nulla facta mentione de defalta, videtur
per hoc quód petens tacité renunciat defaltz, et ideo
&d defaltam ulteriüs regressum non habebit. Et si
hoe non fuerit per petentem sed per officium judicis
vel ex voluntate regis, vel ex necessitate aliqua, vel
forte ad procurationem tenentis, aliud erit. Et si dies
amoris capi debeat, expedit petenti quód mentionem
faciat de defalta, & q diem amoris capiat sub tali
protestatione, q si amor se non capiat, salvus sit ei
regressus ad defaltam, et durante placito & defalta in
eodem statu in quo fuit die quo dies amoris captus
fuit, & si talis forte non fiat protestatio, et dies amoris


OF DEFAULTS. 405


voked without him. Likewise it is to be noted in the
end that contumacy &nd default without necessity are
excused, though wilful, when a person upon & summons
from one who is not his proper judge is not bound to
come, And he is excused from default before judgment
and after it, when it has been proved.  Ánd in the same
way if judgment proceeds with & false proctor, because
with & judge who is not the proper judge or with & false
proetor there is no judgment, there is no lawsuit. Like-
wise because he is not bound to appear, since he has
had no summons or not & legitimate one. And in
which case he is not under the necessity of coming to
answer concerning the plea, but to alleze and prove that
the summons is null or not legitimate. And in the
same manner, if he has set out on & foreign journey
before the summons, not anticipated by the summons as
above said.


Finally it is to be noted that, if after a default has been —— 4.
made a day of love be taken before judgment, or the I after a
cause be transferred from one court to another court, at day of love
the instance and procuration of the claimant, who ought "* '^ke-
to gain through the default, and this simply, no mention
having been made of the default, it seems: thereby
that the claimant tacitly renounces the default, and
therefore he cannot have any further recourse to the
default. And if this be not done through the claimant,
but through the office of the judge and from the will of
the king, or from some necessity, or by chance at the pro-
curation of the tenant, it will be different. Andif aday
of love ought to be taken, it is expedient for the claimant
that he should make mention of the default ; and that he
should take the day of love under such a protest, that if
love shall not take him, a recourse to the default may be
open to him, the plea and the default continuing in the
same state in which it was on the day on which he took
& day of love ; and if such protest by chance be not made,
and the day of love has not taken effect, if the tenant


4006 DE DEFALTIS.


effectum non habuerit, si tenens ad alium diem defal-
tam fecerit, vix illam salvare poterit. Item erit si
petens post defaltam se essoniaverit.


^ ., Et querendum quis possit remittere defaltam ? do-
aer uu minus principalis, vel ejus aiítornatus, vel warrantus
defalum.  e(m warrantizaverit? Et sciendum quód ille dominus
principalis qui lucrari possit per defaltam: de attornato

vero & warranto dubitari posset. Sed si remiserint,

videtur quód tenet remissio, et sibi imputari poterit


qui tales clegit.


CAP. IV.
ds Si autem actio mixta fuerit, & tenens defaltam
im fecerit sicut in partitione hwreditatis, ubi participes


actione ENG NL
mixta facta & cohseeredes agunt ad divisionem horeditatis inter se,


sit defala. & Quilibet getor, & quilibet reus, licet talis actio sit

f.369b. tam in personam qua in rem, nullun fiat attachia-
mentum de persona, quamvis hoc fieri posset quadam
ratione, eo quód est mixta & in persona; sed capietur
terrà in manum domini regis per magnum cape, ut
supra, sieut in proparte sororum, vel alibi, ubi res
patitur divisionem inter participes.


"M Si actio fuerit duplex in uno brevi & ubi due con-
Me aco CUürrunt actiones, scilicet in personam & in rem, primó
duplex. — quód quis sit ad respondendum quo warranto teneat
aliquam rem, & postea addatur in fine, quam rex
clamat ut jus suum, vel eschaetam suam, vel de
antiquo dominico suo, vel de hujusmodi, lieet. utraq


actio inutilis sit in se, si subtiliter inspiciatur, quoad


OF DEFAULTS. | 407


has made default upon another day, he can scarcely save
that default. The same thing will happen if the claimant
after a default has essoined himself.

And itis to be asked who can remit a default? the |... 5.

Who can

principal party in the suit, or his attorney, Or à warrantor remit a
when he has warranted? | And it is to be known, default.
that the principal party in the suit, who may gain by
the default, but. concerning an attorney or & warrantor
it may be doubted. But if they have remitted it, it
seems that the remission holds good, and he must im-
pute it to himself, who has chosen such persons. —


CHAPTER IV.


But if there be a mixed action and the tenant has 1.
made default, as in the partition of an inheritance, where seram
coparceeners and coheirs sue for the division of an in- a mixed
heritanee amongst themselves, and each party is a plain- **!9?-
tiff and each isa defendant, although such an action is f. 369 b.
as well.against the person as against the thing, let there
be no attachment of the person, although this may be
done in & certain manner, inasmuch a8s the action is
mixed and against the person, but let the land be taken
in the hand of the lord the king by a great cepe as above,
as in & suit for the proportionate share of sisters, or
elsewhere, where the estate admits of division amongst
the parceners.


If there shall be & double action in one writ, and when 2.

two actions coneur, to wit, against the person and against If there be
a double

the thing, in the first. place that & person be called on to action in

answer by what warrant he holds any estate, and it bo 9n* writ.

afterwards added at the end * which the king claims as

* hisright, or as his escheat, or as of his ancient domain,"

or such like, although either action is useless in itself if it


be inspected with subtlety, as regards the obtaining the


108 DE DEFALTIS.


seysinam — consequendam, tamen si tenens defaltam
fecerit & concurrat utraque districtio, scilicet attachia-
mentum, eo quód una actio personalis est, & alia rea-
lis, tamen tenenda est illa districtio quze magis ligat,
& qui litem & litis protractionem magis restringit,
seilicet, quód capiatur terra in manum domini regis
per magnum cape, secundum quod superius dicitur.


" Esto etiam quód petens defaltam fecerit, & tenens
5i petens venerit, & breve, offerente se liti tenente quarto die,
S4Al47 recedet tenens quietus de brevi illo, & petens in
tenens — misericordia. Sed si defaltam fecerit ante quartum
venerit, si . ; ; ; NS
petens pos. dlem, in quarto die, ve] post, ante judicium defalto,
sit salvare. bene poterit sanare defaltam suam, excusationibus

supradictis, & etiam si juditium factum fuerit, revoca-
bitur, probata excusatione, & etiam quousque in mag-
nam assisam se posuerit ita quód quatuor milites
sumoniti sunt ad eligendum, ut supra de tenente, no
enim licet in hae parte reo, quod actori non liceat
Et quód tenens remedium habere poterit de defalta &
antequam duodecim eligantur, & post judicium, pro
batur de termino Pasche anno regis Henrici decimo
quarto, de Paulino de Wychelesse & Stephano de
Fredewyle in comitatu Oxoiü in presentia Stephani
de Seygrave & Radulphi Cicistrensis episcopi tunc
cancellarii, & unde Paulinus fuit petens, & sanavit
defaltam postquàm quatuor milites summoniti fuerunt
ad eligendum duodecim prstextu servitii domini regis.


4. Item si petens non venerit, nec breve ad primum


3! petens, diem, &j tenens se essoniaverit, cüm non sit cui re-
nonvenent,


nee tenens Spondeatur, nec autoritas, nec warrantus procedendi,


weit mon absolvetur tenens omnino à juditio, sed dicatur


|
i
OF DEFAULTS. 409 |


seysine, nevertheless, if the tenant has made default and
both distraints concur, to wit, an attachment inasmuch
as one action is personal and the other real, nevertheless,
that distraint is to be maintained which is the more
binding, and which restrains the more the suit and the
protraction of the suit, to wit, that the land be taken
into the hand of the lord the king by a great c«pe, ac-
cording to what has been said above.


Let it be also that the claimant has made default, 3.
and the tenant has come, and the writ, upon the tenant e
offering hiinself on the fourth day to contest the suit, has made
the tenant shall retire aequitted from that writ, and quud.
the claimant shall be amerciable. But if he has made has come,
default before the fourth day, upon the fourth day or, m
after it, before sentence of default, he may well cure his can save it.
default by the exeuses aforesaid, and even if judgment
has been pronounced, it shall be recalled on proof of his
excuse, and even until he has put himself upon & great
assise so that four knipghts have been summoned to elect,
as above concerning a tenant, for what in this part is
not allowable to a plaintiff is not allowable to a
defendant. And that a tenant may have & remedy
upon & default, and before the twelve are chosen, and
after & judgment, is proved in Easter term in the four-
teenth year of king Henry, concerning Paulinus de
Wychelesse and Stephen de Fredewylle in the county
of Oxford, in the presence of Stephen de Segrave and
Ralph, bishop of chichester, then Chancellor, and
. wherein Paulinus was the plaintiff and cured his default
after four knights had been summoned to elect twelve
upon the pretext of the service of the lord the king.

Likewise if the elaimant has not come nor the writ ,, 4
: ; If the
on the first day, and the tenant has e-soined himself, claimant
when there is no one to whom an answer should bene
made, nor any. authority nor warrantor for proceeding, the tenant
the tenant shall not be absolved altogether from a h*es-


scined
himself.


f. 370.


2.
Si unus ex
pluribus
tenentibus,
qui tenent
in com-
mune, de-
faltam
fecerit, et
alius es-
soniatus
fucrit, et
tertius
comparu-
erit,


110 DE DEFALTIS.


el quod eat sicut venit. Et eodem modo fiat de
essoniatore suo, si forte fuerit essoniatus. Et eodem
modo si petens venerit vice versa, & non breve, nec
tenens: dieatur ei illud idem q dicitur tenenti &
essoniatori suo in casu consimili Si aute petens &
tenés venerint vel se essoniaverint ambo vel unus
eorum, tunc dari poterit alius dies, etiam si breve non
venerit, & dicatur petenti vel essoniatori suo, quód ad
alium diem faciat venire breve suum, & mandabitur
vieccomiti ex parte regis &c. Presumitur enim eo
quód ambo apparent vel se essoniant, q vicecoti sus-
ceperit breve, & q tenens sumonitus fuit, eo tamen
excepto à pmissis, q si ambo psentes fuerint petens &
tenens, & bre non venerit, si tenens se offerat, & petat
juditium, si debeat sine bie respondere, quietus recedet
de brevi illo, si di& suum bene intellexerint. Si autem
ambo erraverint et maturiüs venerint quàm deberent,
nihilominus tenebit sumonitio & breve.


Item esto quód unus petens plures implacitaverit
tenentes, duos, vel tres, vel plures qui tenuerint in
coinuni, & unus eorum defaltam fecerit, & alius essonia-
tus fuerit, & tertius comparuerit, nullus sine alio
respondebit. Dabitur igitur alius dies ei qui przesens
est personaliter, ei vero qui* essoniatus est per essonia-
torem suum, contra ipsum vero qui defaltam fecerit
procedatur ad defaltam per magnum cape, vel parvum,
seeundum q ante de defalta comparuerit in curia vel
non. Et ita q non tota res que petitur capiatur in
manum domini regis pro defalta unius, sed quatenus
cotingit portionem suam, scilicet medietas rei petite,


! * ante defaltam comparucrit,"? * ** et ei qui," MS. id.
MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF DEFAULTS. 411


judgment, but let it be said to him, that he should go £37».
away as he came. And in the same way let it be done

in regard to his essoiner, if by chance he has been
essoined. And in the same way if the claimant has
come vice versd, and not the writ, nor the tenaht: let
there be said to him the same as is said to the tenant

&nd his essoiner in à similar case. But if the claimant

and the tenant have come, or both have essoined them-
selves, or one of them, then another day may be given,

even if the writ has not come, and it may be said to the
claimant or his essoiner that he should cause his writ to

come on another day, and a mandate shall be sent to

the viscount on the part of the king, &c. For it is pre-
sumed, inasmuch as both appear or essoin themselves,

that the viscount has received the writ, and that the
tenant has been summoned, with this exception from

the premises, that if both should be present, the claimant

and the tenant, and the writ has not come, if the tenant

has presented himself and claims judgment, if he ought

to answer without a writ, he will retire acquitted from

that writ,if they have well understood their day. But

if both have erred and come sooner than they ought,

neve rtheless the summons and the writ shall bind them.

Likewise let it be, that one claimant has impleaded |, 5.

several tenants, two or three or more, who hold in com- 5 ed
mon, and one of them has made default, and another tenants,

. ] who hold
has been essoined, and a third has appeared, none shall in common
answer without the other. Another day shall therefore ha^ made
be given to him who is present personally, and to him and ano-
who has been essoined by his essoiner, but azainst him por
who has made default let proceedings be had to à default soined, ana
by & great cape or a& little cape, according as he has E
before appeared upon his default in the court or not.

And so that not the whole estate which is claimed should
be taken into the hand of the lord the king on account
of the default of one, but as far as 1t touches his portion,
to wit, the moiety of the estate claimed, or the third


119 DE DEFALTIS.


vel tertia pars, vel quarta, sive in propria persona
litigaverit sive per attornatum, quia per defaltam
attornati amittit dominus litis, sive omnes attornatum
fecerint sive unus, & bene poterit unus ex pluribus
per defaltam partem suam amittere sine participibus
suis, licet sine eis ab initio non teneatur respondere.
Et si omnes tenentes unum fecerint attornatum, per
defaltam | unius attornati poterunt omnes amittere.
Item esto quód unus ex pluribus participibus petenti-
bus defaltam fecerit, & alii omnes in propria persona
comparuerint, vel essoniati fuerint, qusritur qualiter
erit procedendum versus absentem ? Respondeo, omnes
qui presentes sunt vel essoniati habebunt alium diem,
& ille qui absens est summoneatur quód sit ad eundem
diem ad sequendum cum talibus participibus suis, si
voluerint, per tale breve.


6. Rex vicecomiti salutem. | Summoneas per bonos
PER E summonitores A. quód sit coram justic. &c. tali die
inbrei  àd sequendum cum B. C. participibus suis in. placito
Mestve] Quod est inter predictos A. B. C. petentes & D. de N.
non ven- (tenentem de tanta terra eum pertinentiis in tali villa
ew Si voluerit. Et unde idem D. dicit, quód non vult
ad sequen- eisdem B. C. respondere sine przdicto A., & habeas &c.
PAM Teste &e. Et si predictus À. ad pradictum diem non

venerit, nihilominus procedant B. & C. de parte sua,
si voluerint. Et quod de uno dicitur fieri poterit de
pluribus, si sequi voluerint. Sed quid dieitur de uno
partieipe & cohsrede, qui petit versus participes &
cohszredes suos partem suam cüm nihil habeat, & alii
f.3:0b. totum teneant, et secundum quod res partibilis fuerit
Britton, ii. ratione tenementi vel ratione rei tantum, vel ratione
9-3 ^ personarum, habere poterit tale breve de proparte
versus participes suos et petere partem suam, quia


actio dicitur mixta, et ita consequetur partem suam,


OF DEFAULTS. 113


part, or the fourth part, whether he has contested the
suit in his own person or through an attorney, because
the principal party in the suit loses through the default
of his attorney, whether all have constituted an attorney
or only one, and one out of several may well lose his
part by default without his coparceners, although he is
not bound from the commencement to answer without
them. And if all the tenants have made one attorney,
they may all lose by the default of that. one attorney.
Likewise let it be that one out of several coparceners
has made default, and all the others have appeared in
their own person, or have been essoined, it is asked how
shall proceedings be had against the absentee ? I answer,
all who are present or who have been essoined shall
have another day, and let him who is absent be sum-
moned, that he be present on the same day to sue with
his coparceners, if he wishes, by & writ of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good ,,. in
summoners À. that he be present before our justiciaries, cener
&c., on such a day to sue with B. and C. his coparceners, irs ut 2
ina plea which is between the aforesaid A., B., C., as willing to
claimants against D. de N. as tenant, concerning so much S6 or has
land with its appurtenances in such a vill, if he wishes. let him be
And wherein the said D. says that he does not wish eiu
to answer without the aforesaid À., and have, &c.  Wit- he wishes
ness, &c. And if the aforesaid À. has not come on the " d
aforesaid day, nevertheless let B. and C. procced on
their own part, if they wish. And what is said of onc
may be done with several, if they wish to sue. But
what is said of one coparcener and coheir, who claims
against his coparceners and coheirs his own part, when
he has nothing and they hold the whole, and according f. 370 b.
as the thing is partible in regard of the tenement, or in
regard of the thing only, or in regard of the persons, he
may have such a writ for his proportionate share against
his coparceners, and may claim his part, because the


action is called mixed, and so he will obtain his part,


414 DE DEFALTIS.


quia assisà mortis antecessoris, nec alia actio locum
habebit, nisi actio de proparte, qua inter cohsredes
jus terminat et distinguit. Et quia ad quemlibet
ipsorum participum statim & in momento post mortem
antecessoris descendit jus merum, quod quidem non
erit inter alios coh:wredes, cüm non sint partem capi-
entes, quàmvis coharedes, cüm totum jus merum
tantum uni ex pluribus descendat, cüm hereditas talis
divisionem vel partitionem inter coheredes non patia-
tur, et ideo semper unus prefertur omnibus aliis, cum
sit heres propinquior multis rationibus ut supra. Et
cüm in tali actione mixta plures sunt qui teneant,
sive unus petat sive plures, nullus eorum qui tenentes
sunt respondebit sine aliis propter contributionem. $i
autem plures sunt qui petant versus participes, quilibet
petere debet per se, & non in communi cum participe
suo petente, quia nullus eorum petit nisi rationabilem
partem suam.

z Si autem vir petierit cuin uxore rem uxoriam, ipsi


é.

Si viret participes dici non poterunt ratione supradicta, & de-
uxor simul . . . : .

petant, t. falta unius utrique erit damnosa, sive teneant sive

E petant. Et si tenentes fuerint, & per defaltam utrius-

fecerit, ^ que vel alterius terra capta fuerit in manum domini

regis, et ita quód fieri debat judicium de defalta, si

uxor dieat virum suum mortuum esse, licet probationem

vel sectam ad manum suam non habuerit, judicium

remanebit in suspenso donec de veritate constiterit, et

dabitur utrique. eorum dies, ct tune probet uxor mor-

tem et petens vitam : ut de itinere abbatis de Radinge

& Martini de Pateshull tam in comitatu Surrey quàm

Leycester, de Hugone filio Wilhelmi. Sed quare recur-


ritur ad duas probationes cüm una sufficeret ? Quia


OF DEFAULTS. 415


because neither an assise of mortdancester will have
place, nor any other action except an action for & pro-
portionate share, which determines and distinguishes the
right between coheirs,. And because the mere right
descends at once and in a moment after the death of
the ancestor to each of the parceners, which will not be
the case amongst other coheirs, when they are not
taking & part, although coheirs, when the entire mere
rieht descends to one only out of several, when such
an inheritance does not admit of division or partition
amongst coheirs, and therefore one is always preferred
to all the others, since he is the next heir in many ways
as above. And since in such an action there are several
persons who hold, whether one only or several claim,
none of those who are tenants shall answer without the
others on account of their contribution, But if there
be several who claim against parceners, each ought to
claim by himself, and not in common with his parcener
claimant, for none of them claim anything but his
reasonable part.

But if a husband claims with his wife a thing belong- ,,, 7:
. ; . usband
ing to his wife, they cannot be called coparceners for ana wife
the reason abovesaid, and the default of one will be uo
hurtful to both, whether they are tenants or claimants. and one of
And if they have been tenants, and. through the default RUE is
of both or of one of them the land has been taken into faut.
the hand of the king, and 5o that judgment ought to be
made concerning the default, if the wife should say that
her husband 3s dead, although she has not a proof nor &
sect at hand, the judgment shall remain in suspense
until it has been ascertained concerning the truth, and
& day shall be given to both of them, and the wife
shall prove the death and the claimant the life [of the
husband]; as in the iter of the abbott of Reading and
Martin de Pateshull, in the county as well of Surrey, as
of Leicester, concerning Hugh the son of William, But
why is recourse made to two proofs when one would


416 DE DEFALTIS.


cüm uxor dieat uxorem esse mortuam, ex tali protes-
tatione non oritur nisi levis presumptio, & si statim
contra ipsam non excipiatur quód vivat, tenetur in hoc
casu probare dietum suum. Et si in probatione defe-
cerit petens recuperabit, & uxor postea tale habeat
recuperare quale habere debebit. Si autem petens
contráà dictum uxoris excipiendo dicat, quód vivat,
propter levem prasumptionem quz oritur ex dicto uxo-
ris, probet petens contrarium, scilicet exceptionem suam,
scilicet vitam. Et in qua si defecerit. cadit breve, &
tenebit actio in persona uxoris. Et unde videtur quód,
cüm una probatio sufficiat, non est recurrendum ad
duas.


Videndum est inter csetera quando locum habere
Siquis — debeat breve quod dicitur magnum cape, & breve quod
Mese dicitur parvum cape eodem modo. Et rezulariter ve-
antequam rum est, quód in omni casu ubi quis summonitionem


eub el sibi faetam dedicere poterit, & defendere per legem,
ioqueia seilicet antequàm quis in curia comparuerit, scilicet in
tra - ta e. . . * [I e. . . * . e. "

ad GIU principio litis, si loquela fuerit in curia domini regis,


curiam. — velalibi in comitatu vel in curia baronum, vel aliorum
qui curiam habent. Item si loquela à comitatu trans-

(37;, feratur ad curiam domini regis, licet quis in com se
prius posuerit in magnain assisam, ita quód quatuor
milites sumoniti sunt ad eligendum xii & tenentes in

curia dii regis defaltam fecerint post suinonitionem eis
factam per pone, tune capiatur in manum domini regis

per magnum cape: ut de ultimo itinere M. de P. in
comitatu Kanc. anno regis H. xii, de Ingeriano de
Shoford, qui placitavit in curia per breve de recto.

Et ideo quia diu placitasset in comitatu, quz est una

curia, nunquam tamen coóparuit in curia domini regis,


-—— — ——— — —— — —— ——— M MM — — —— M ——— —— i ita — — —— M — ——


* virum esse mortuum," MS. Rawl. C. 160 et 159.


OF DEFAULTS. 417


suffice. Because when the wife says that the husband
is dead, from such & protestation nothing but a slight
presumption arises, and if forthwith an exception is
raised against her that he is alive, she is bound in this
case to prove her assertion. And if she should fail in
the proof the claimant shall recover, and let the wife
have afterwards such & recovery as she shall deserve to
have. Butif the claimant against the assertion of the
wife shall say by way of exception, that he is alive, let
the claimant prove the contrary, to wit, his exception,
to wit, his life. And in whieh if he should fail, the
writ falls, and the action in the person of the wife will
hold good. And hence it appears that when one proof
shall suffice, recourse is not to be had to two proofs.

It is to be seen amongst other things when the writ "s
has place which is called the great cape, and the writ bus EN H
which is called the little cepe in the same manner. And ieri Pes
itis regularly true, that in every case, where & person appeared,
can deny a summons made to himself, and contest it by Put ue
his law, to wit, before he has appeared in court, to wit, transferred
at the commencement of the suit, if the cause should be ER
in the court of the king, or elsewhere in the county court, court.
or in the eourt of barons, or of others who have a court.
Likewise if the cause be transferred from the county
court to the court of the lord the king, although & person
in the county court has put himself previously upon à  £3;1.
great assise, so that four knights have been summoned to
choose twelve, and the tenants in the court of the king
have made default after a summons has been made to
them by a pone, then let it be taken into the hand of
the lord the king by a great cape, as in the last iter of
Martin de Pateshull in the county of Kent, in the
twelfth year of king Henry, concerning Ingerianus de
Shoford, who sued in court by & writ of right. And
therefore because he had sued a long time in the county
court, which is one court, he had nevertheless never
appeared in the court of the lord the king, which is

Q 6366. DD


41S DE DEFALTIS.


quie est alia curia, & 1deo defendere poterit. sumonitio-
nem & sursisam, & diem datum eontra recordum comi-
tatus per legem. Sed quid si à curia baronis vel
alterius propter defaltam, quia forte rectum tenere
nolunt vel non possunt, sed pbata defalta vel concessa
dederit serviens dfi regis partibus diem ad comitatum,
s) tenens defaltam fecerit, capietur terra eodem modo
in manum domini regis quasi per maenum cape, quia
testata sumonitione per servientem, poterit tenens illam
defendere per legem. | Idem (ut videtur) servari
poterit, ubi omnes loquele in banco ppter iter jus-
ticiariorum vel alia de causa  positÉe fuerint sine
die, & iterum resumoneantur, si tenens post resum-
monitionem defaltam fecerit, videtur, q captio fieri
debeat per magnum cape, quia talem summonitionem
defendere poterit tenens per legem, ex quo in curia
diem non habuerit postquim loquela posita fuerit sine
die, & ita observetur in omni casu ad quamlibet novam
resummonitionem. Sed videtur quasi contrarium, ut
si eui bastardia sie objecta fuerit, quód transmittatur
inquisitio de bastardia vel legitimitate ad curiam
Christianitatis, & facta inquisitione remittatur inquisitio
statim ad curiam regis, partes & loquela qu:e posita
fuit sine die ppter objectionem bastardiw», resummone-
antur q sint ad audiendum judicium, quo casu si
tenens non venerit, capiatur in manum dii regis p
parvum cape, scilieet & q ptes sint auditure judicium
suü, & poterit esse ratio diversitatis q ex quo quis se
pbaveri& legitimü vel adversariü suü ad bastardü, nihil


OF DEFAULTS. 419


another court, and therefore he might contest the suin-
mons and the neglect, and the day given against the
record of the court by his law. But what if the cause
be transferred from the eourt of the baron or another on
account of the default, because by chance they are un-
wiling or they cannot entertain & plea of right, but
upon the proof or the admission of the default the ser-
jeant of the lord the king has given to the parties à
day at the county court, if the tenant has made default,
let the land be taken into the hand of the lord the king
in the same manner as it were by a great cepe, because
upon the summons having been testified by the serjeant,
the tenant may contest it by his law. "The same (as it
seems) may be observed, where all causes in banco on
account of the iter of the justiciaries or some other cause
have been put off without à day, and the parties are
again re-suinmoned, if the tenant after the re-summons
has made default,is seems that & caption ourht to be
made by a great e«pe, because the tenant may contest
such & summons by-:his law, since he has not had a day
assigned to him in the court, after the cause has been
put off without a day, and let it be so observed in every
case at every new re-summons. But it seems as it were
the contrary, as if bastardy has been so objected to any
one, that the inquest concerning bastardy or legitimacy
should be transmitted to a court of Christianity, and
upon the inquest having been held the inquest should
be remitted forthwith to the court of the king, let the
parties and the cause which was put off without a day,
on account of the objection of bastardy, be re-summoned
that they attend to hear judgment, in which case if the
tenant has not come, let 1t be taken into the hand of the
lord the king by a little c«pe, and that the parties should
be present to hear their judgment, and the reason of the
diversity may be this, that from the time when a person
has proved himself to be legitimate or his adversary to
D D 2


9.
J'urvum
cape, &c.
quis de-
faltam
fecerit,
portquam
in curia
compa-
ruerit.


f. 311 b.


420 DE DEFALTIS.


superest faciendü nisi tantü judiciü, q non est in aliis
casibus.


Parvu cape tunc locum habet, càüm quis in judicio
semel eoparuerit & diem habuerit corà  justiciariis
quocundq tepore vel quacüq ratione, ita q die & sumoni-
tionem sequentem) dedicere non possit nec defendere
por legem, vel si fecerit tenens aliquid per q priesumi
possit quód susceperit summonitionem, ut si, cüm
sumonitus fuerit, attornatum fecerit in loquela per
quam ad curiam summonitus fuerit, vel quid tale, ex-
inde vero summonitionem dedicere non possit, secun-
dum quod inferius dicetur de defaltis post apparitionem.
Et generaliter verum est, quód locum habet captio in
manum domini regis per parvum cape, ubi quis defal-
tam fecerit in placito postgm in curia cóparuerit, sive
unus implacitatus fuerit sive plures, cum hac tamen
distinctione, q si plures implacitati fuerint coheredes,
vel alii participes qui tenuerint in cómuni, si omnes
simul defaltam fecerint postqm simul & semel in
judicio coparuerint, vel vicissim omnes, omnes amittit,
& fiat parvü cape de omnibus. Si aute unus ipsorü
tantü, duo vel plures essoniati fuerint primo die
sumonitioni, & quidam eorum defaltam fecerint, &
quidam eorum comparuerint, capiatur terra in manum
dii regis de terra quam tenent in comuni pro defalta
absentium, pro rata cujuslibet qui absens est per
magnum cape, & dabitur presentibus dies, & ad quem
diem si no venerint cüm diem habuerint in juditio
qm dedieere no poterunt, capiatur de terra comuni in
manum dii regis per parvum cape p rata, scilicet pro
ea pte qua singulos eorum qui absentes sunt contingit,
& non tota, quia hereditas & res comunis recipit parti-


OF DEFAULTS. 421


be a bastard, nothing remains to be done except to
pronounce judgment, which is not so in the other cases.


À little c«pe has place then when a person has onec ,
appeared in court and has had a day assigned to him before A little
the justiciaries at any time or for any reason, so that Man
he cannot deny the day nor the following summons, nor made de-
contest it by his law, or if the tenant has done anything ME
whereby it may be presumed that he has received the appeared
summons, as if, when he has been summoned, he has" ?""*
appointed an attorney in the cause for which he has
been summoned to the court, or something of that kind,
thenceforth he cannot deny the summons, according to
what will be said below concerning defaults after an
appearance. And generally it is true, that & caption
into the hand of the lord the king by a little cape has
place, where a person has made default in a suit
after he has appeared in court, whether one has been
sued or more, with this distinction however, that if
several coheirs have been impleaded, or other copar-
ceners who have held in common, if they should all
make default after they have appeared together and at
one time in court, or all in turns, they all lose, and let a
little cape issue against them all But if one only of
them or two or more have been essoined on the first
day of the summons, and some of them have made de- f. 371 b.
fault, and some of them have appeared, let the land
which they hold in common be taken into the hand of
the lord the king for the default of the absent, accord-
ing to the proportion of each who is absent, by a great
ctpe, and to those present a day shall be given, and on
which day, if they have not come when they have had
a day in court, which they cannot deny, let there be
taken into the hand of the lord the king by a little
cupe 8 proportionate part of the common land according
to that share of it which belongs to each of the ab-
sentees, and not the whole, because the inheritance and
common estate admits of partition and division between


422 DE DEFALTIS.


tionem & divisione inter participes & cohsredes. Sed
de viro & uxore non sie, cüm res uxoria partitionem
vel divisionem non recipiat, cüm vir & uxor sint quasi
unus sanguis & una caro & unum corpus, nihil enim
habet uxor q non sit viri. Et unde cüm implacitaüi
fuerint primo die sumonitionis, antequam coparuerint
uterque fecerit defaltam, tota terra capiatur in manum
dii regis per magnum cape, & idem erit si unus
eorum defaltam fecerit, licet. alius. comparuerit vel se
essoniaverit. Si autem uterq defaltam fecerint post-
quam cóparuerint, capietur terra in manum diüi reris
per parvum cape, & idem erit si unus eorum defaltam
fecerit, quia defalta unius utrij erit damnosa. tem
esto q uxor antequam cóparuerit primo die defaltam
fecerit, & vir comparuerit, capietur terrà in manum
düi regis per magnum cape, & ipsa suinoneatur quód
sit ad alium diem, & vir habebit eundem diem, ad
quem diem si vir defaltam fecerit & uxor venerit,
tune primó videdum an uxor sanare possit defaltam p
lege vel alio modo. Si autem defaltam sanare non
possit, tune amittet uterque p defalta mulieris statim,
nec erit vir sumonendus q sit auditurus juditiü; si
aute defalta sanaverit, non obstante absentia virl resti-
tuetur ei terra, q capta fuit in manum dii regis per
magnum cape p defaltam suam. Et si vir suus infra
quartum diem non comparuerit, offercte se liti petente
quarto die versus eü, iterü capietur ira in manü dii
regis per defalta viri p parvü cape, & ipse sumoneatur
q sit auditurus juditiü suü, & uxor habeat eundeé dic.
Forma brevis talis est.


OF DEFAULTS. 423


the eoparceners and the coheirs. But with regard to à
husband and wife it is not so, since the wife's estato
does not admit of partition or division, since man and
wife are one blood and one flesh and one body, for the
wife has nothing which is not her husband's; And
hence when they have been impleaded on the first day
of the summons, and before they have appeared both
have made default, let their whole land be taken into
the hand of the lord the king by à great c«pe, and the
same thing will happen if one of them has made default,
although the other has appeared or been essoined. But
if both have made default, after they have appeared,
the land shall be taken into the hand of the lord the
king by a little cepe, and the same thing shall be done,
if one of them has made default, because the default of
one will be damaging to both. But let it be that the
wife before she has appeared has on the first day made
default, and the husband has appeared, the land shall
be taken into the hand of the king by a great c«pe,
and let her be summoned to appear on another day, and the
husband shall have the same day, on. which day, if the
husband has made default, and the wife has come, then
let it in the first place be seen whether the wife can cure
her default by law or in any other manner. But if she
cannot eure her default, then both shall lose by the
default of the woman forthwith, nor will the husband
have to be summoned to hear the judgment, but if she
can cure her default, notwithstanding the absence of
the husband the land shall be restored to her, which has
been taken into the hand of the lord the king by a
great cope through her default. And if her husband
has not appeared within the fourth day, the tenant pre-
senting himself to join issue with him on the fourth
. day, the land shall be taken again into the hand of the
lord the king by a little cepe, and let him be sum-
moned that he be present to hear his own judgment, and
let his wife have the same day.


10.
Forma
brevis,
quod dici-
tur par-


vum cape.


f. 372.


494 DE DEFALTIS.


Rex vie. salute. Cape in manu nostra tanta terrà,
vel advocatione talis eeclesie, vel pastura ad tot oves,
cü ptinentiis in tali villa qm A. de N. in curia nia
cora justiciarüis nis clamat ut jus suü versus B. p
defectu ipsius D., vel sic: clamat ut jus suü versus DB.
& C. uxor ejus p defectu ipsius B. vel p defectu ipsius
C., vel sic, si plures sint pticipes veluti tres: capiatur
tertia pars terr: quas tenetur 1 coiuni, & dicatur,
itia ptem qm talis clamat &c. ut supra. Ite si dos
petatur, tune sie: tertià parte ire cü ptinentiis in N.
qm À. dq fuit uxor B. clamat in curia nia &c. ut dote
suam versus C. p defectu ipsius C, & hujusmodi,
secundü diversitate placitorü, & tunc dicatur: Suinoneas
p bonos sumonitores predictu C. q sit &c. ad tale die
auditurus inde Judiciü suü, & habeas ibi sumonitores
& hoc bre. Teste &c. Et ad qm die si omnino non
venerit, expectabitur quartus dies, & quarto die adju-
dicetur petéti seysina, ita q efheiatur verus possessor,
& tenens habeat tale recuperare quale habere debebit,
& ide erit si tenens venerit & defaltam sanare non
possit. Cüm autem non venerit, sic fiat irrotulatio,
A. obtulit se quarto die versus B. de tali placito &c.,
& B. no venit & alias fecit defalta in curia postqm
coparuerit in curia, vel postqm diem habuerit in banco,
vel postqm petiit visü vel vocavit warratü, & ita q
tra capta fuit in manu diü regis & ipse sumonitus
q esset ad hunc die auditurus juditiü suü, ideó co-
sideratum est q AÀ. recuperet seysina sua & B. in
misericordia. Si aute ille qui defalta fecit psens fuerit


OF DEFAULTS. | 125


The king tothe viscount greeting. Take into our D
hand so much land, or the advowson of such & church, or te writ,
or & pasture for so many sheep with its appurtenances NI. is
in such a vill which A. de N. in our court before fiue ides
our justiciaries claims as his right aceainst B., through fail-
ure of the said B.: or thus, which he claims as his right
against B. and C. his wife through failure of the said B.
or through the failure of the said C.; or thus, if there be
several coparceners as for instance three, let a third part of
the land which is held in eommon be taken, and let 1t be
said, the third part which so-and-so claims &c. as above.
Likewise if dower be claimed, then thus: the third part
of the land with its appurtenancees in N. which A. who
was the wife of B. claims 1n our court, &c. as her dower
against C., through failure of the said C., and such like,
according to the diversity of pleas, and then let it be
said: Summon by good summoners the aforesaid C.,
that he be &e. at such a day in order to hear thereon
his judgment, and have there the summoners and this
writ. Witness &c. And on which day if he has not
come at all, the fourth day shall be waited for, and on
the fourth day let seysine be adjudged to the claimant,
so that he be constituted the true possessor, and let the
tenant have such a recovery as he will deserve to have,
and the same thing will happen if the tenant has come
and cannot cure his default. But when he has not come,
let the enrolment be made in this manner: A. presented
himself on the fourth day against B. in such a plea, &c, f. s72.
and B. has not cone and otherwise has made default in
the court after he has appeared in the court, and after he
has had a day in the bench, and after he has claimed a
view or has called a warrantor, and so that the land has
been taken into the hand of the lord the king, and he
himself having been summoned that he should attend
on this day to hear his judgment, therefore it has been
resolved that A. should recover his seysine, and B. should
be amereed. But if he who has made default has been


] 1.
S] quis de-
faltam
fecerit in
actione
mixta.


1206 DE DEFALTIS.
primo die & excusatione no habuerit, nee warratu, tüc
variatur irrotulatio sie, Á. petit versus B. tanta terra
cum pertinetiis in tali villa, ità q B. habuerit die
postgm in curia coparuecrit, ad qm die no venit, nec
se essoniavit, & ita q terra capta fuit in manu dii
regis & ipse suinonitus q esset ad hune die auditurus
inde juditia. Et ipse nüe venit, & no potest sanare
defaltam. Ideo eósideratum est q A. recuperet seysinà
sui, & B. in misericordia, & fiat breve de seysina
habéda in coiiuni forma breviü de defaltis: Sed quid
si ille tenens! qui recuperare deberet p tale defaltaà
in curia no coparuerit ad die suu, sed defaltam fecerit,
primo, seeundo, tertio, quarto die, & tenens psens
fuerit, petens amittet breve suü p defaltà sua, & tenens
retinebit terrà suá qm amissurus esset p defalta sua,
ut de teri. S. M. anno regis H. iii. incipiente iv. circa
mediü rotuli Si aute neuter illorü venerit, tunc (facta
copensatione defaltz€e ad defalta) petens ad aliü «lie
quado voluerit p defalta tenentis obtinebit.


Actiones vero mixte q sunt tam in rem qm in psoná,
& ubi uterq actor uterq reus, sed ille actor qui primó
pvoeaverit ad judieiü sicu inter cohcredes & pticipes,
ubi pticeps petit rationabile ptem suà versus cohzredé
& ptieipem, sieut ubi hereditas partibilis sit, vel
ratione rei vel ratione psonarü. Item ubi res comunis
pübus sit inter alios pticipes qui non sunt cohzwredes,
& unus agat versus pticipe q rcs comunis dividatur.


1 * gj ille petens," MS. Rawl. C. 159.


OF DEFAULTS. 497


present on the first day, and has made no excuse, nor
has vouched & warrantor, then the enrolment is varied
in this manner: A. has claimed against B. so much land
with its appurtenances in such a vill, so that B. has had:
a day after he has appeared in the court, on which day
he has not come nor has essoined himself, and. so that
the land has been taken into the hand of the lord the
king, and he himself has been summoned that he attend
on this day to hear judgment thereon. And he himself
now comes and cannot eure his default. It has there-
fore been resolved that A. should recover his scysine, and
B. should be amereed, and. let & writ issue for having
seysine in the common form of writs for defaults. But
what if the claimant who ought to recover through such
default has not appeared in the court on his day, but
has made default on the first, the second, the third, and
the fourth day, and the tenant should be present, the
claimant shall lose his writ through his default, and the
tenant shall retain his land which he was about to lose
through his own default, as in St. Michael's term in the
third and fourth years of king Henry, about the middle
of the roll. But if neither of them has come (then com-
pensation for the one default having.been made by the
other default) the claimant shall have an adjournment
to another day when he pleases through the default of
the tenant.


But mixed actions which ave directed as well asainst — 11.
a thing as against a person, and where either party is & E Lon ue
plaintiff, and either party & defendant, but he is the deiíault in
plaintiff who has first applied to a court, as between co- duebe
heirs &nd coparceners, where a coparcener claims his rea-
sonable share against a coheir and coparcener, as where
the inheritance is partible, cither by reason of the thing
or by reason of the persons. Likewise where the thing
common to the parties is between other parceners who
are not coheirs, and one brings an action against à par-


cener that the common estate should be divided.  Like-


l


Si duae
aetiones,
quaruin
una per-
sonalis et
alia realis,
eurrant


2.


versus


unum in
nno brevi.


498 DE DEFALTIS.


Ite si inter vicinos cótentio sit de finibus aerorü, &
unus vieinorü petat q fiant rationabiles divise inter
ipsü & vicinü suü, omnes iste actiones mixte co-
ünumerari debet inter actiones ( sunt in rem, & no q
sunt in psona. Et ideo si quis 1n lis tribus actionibus,
vel consimilibus, defalta fecerit, peedatur cotra ipsum
sieut pcessum est supra cotra eos qui defaltà fecerint
in actione reali. Et ideo in omni actione ubi duse
cocurrat distrietiones, videlicet in rem & in psonam,
illa districtio teneda est qd magis timetur et magis
ligat.


Cum aute dua actiones sub uno brevi coprehedantur,
quarü unà in psonaà & alia in rem, ut si quis sumonea-
tur q sit ad ostendedü «quo warranto tenuerit talem
terra, & postea adjungat, quam diüs rex clamat esse
eschaetam suam vel de antiquo dominico suo, cium hic
duc concurrant districtiones, illa tenenda est d magis
ligat, secüdum & supradictum est, scilicet q terra
capiatur in manum dii regis, (licet quida faciant con-
trariü). Si aute in diversis brevibus de qualibet istarü
fieret mentio p se, si in brevi quo warranto fieret
defalta, pceederetur ad attachiametum, & non ad cap-
tionem terre, & de alio brevi é conversó. Si quis
igitur impetraverit breve quo warranto, vel quo jure
quis terram tenuerit sine aliqua adjectione, nihil poterit
petens consequi per tale breve vel per talem actionc,
quamvis warratum non habuerit tenens nec jus aliquod,
nihil consequi poterit petens per tale breve, quia pro-
bato quód tenens nihil juris habeat, non tamen pro-
batur p hoe quód petens jus habeat, & antequam


OF DEFAULTS. 429


wise if there should be between neighbours a contention
concerning the boundaries of fields, and one of the neigh-
bours claims that there should be reasonable divisions
between himself and his neighbour, all these mixed
actions are accustomed to be comprised amongst actions
which are against the thing, and not which are against
the person. And accordingly if any person in sec
three actions or similar ones has made default, let pro-
ceedings be taken against him as they have been above
taken against those who have made default in a real
action. And therefore in every action where two dis-
traints concur, to wit, against the thing and against. the
person, that distraint is to be maintained which is most
feared and is most binding.


But when two actions are comprised under one writ — 12.
of which one is against a person and the other against vba of
a thing, as if a person be summoned that he be present which one
to Blow "hy what warrant" he holds such a land, and it AM
afterwards adds, * which the lord the king claims to be other real,
" his escheat, or of his ancient demesne;" since here two one B
distraints concur, that one is to be maintained, which is !1 one writ.
the most binding, according to what has been said above,
to wit, that the land should be taken into the hand of the
lord the king (although some do the contrary). But if
in different writs there should be mention by itself of
either of them, if there be a default in the writ ' quo
* 4paranto, proceedings should be had for an attach-
ment, and not for the caption of the land, and concern-
ing the other writ conversely. If ;therefore any one has
sued out à writ of quo av«rvanto or of quo jure. against
& tenant of land without any addition, the claimant
cannot obtain anything through such & writ or such an
action, although the tenant may have no warrantor nor
any. right, the tenant cannot obtain anything through f. 3:2 b.
such à writ, because if it be proved that the tenant has
no right, it is not therefore proved that the claimant has


any right, and before the claimant can acquire anything


430 DE DEFALTIS.


petens aliquid sibi perquirat, alio brevi et alia actione
opus erit. Sed tame quamvis incivile sit coci posses-
sorem titulum suze possessionis dicere per breve quo
Jure, vel quo warranto; tamen valet ad hoc ut petens
scire possit utrum tenens teneat pro h:rede vel p
possessore, & p hoe qua actione debet experiri: pro
herede autem possidet, qui putat se hwredem esse, pro
possessore vero, qui nullo jure rem hwreditariam vel
totam h:ereditatem, sciens ad se non pertinere, pos-
sidet.


Car. V.


" Post essonia & dilationes, vel ad primum diem sum-
Partibus in monitionis per breve de recto in juditio comparentibus
Jua dm tam petente quàm tenente, petens actionem qua agere
übus qua- velit & intentionem suam proponere debet coram justi-
liter petens .  .. , T
proponere Clàrlis, ut per hoe speciem future litis demonstret.
ie Et audito brevi de recto, secundum quod fuerit clau-
suam. sum vel apertum, dicat sic petens vel ejus advocatus,
RA 2 in presentia justiciariorum pro tribunali residentium:

Hoc ostendit vobis A. quód PB. injusté ei deforciat
tantum terre cum pertünentüis in tali villa, & ideo
injusté, quia quidam antecessor suus nomine C. fuit
inde vestitus & seysitus in dominico suo ut de feodo
& in jure tempore H. regis avi domini regis, vel
tempore regis Richardi avunculi domini regis, vel
tempore Johannis regis patris domini re;is, tempore
H. regis! qui nunc est capiendo inde expletia ad va.
lentiam. quinque solidorü vel dimidii marce, sicut in
bladis, pratis, redditibus, & aliis exitibus terre, & de
predicto C. descendit jus terre illius, vel descendere


! * vo] tempore H. regis," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


Or DEFAULTS. 431


for himself, he will require another writ and another
action. Dut although it be against the civil law that
a possessor should be compelled to disclose the title of
his possession through a writ of quo juve or of quo acav-
ranto, nevertheless it is effective for this purpose that
the elaimant may know whether a tenant holds as an
heir or as à possessor, and thereby by what action he
ought to proceed ; but. he possesses as an. heir, who be-
lieves himself to be an. heir, but he possesses as a posses-
sor, who possesses by no right an hereditary estate or an
entire inheritance, knowing that it does not belong to
himself.


CHAPTER V.


Upon the parties as well the claimant as the tenant, 1!
appearing in court after essoins and adjournments, or on mtd
the first day of the summons under à writ of right, tho bearing iu

. . . court, in
claimant ought to propound the action by which he «nitway
means to proceed and his declaration before the justici- the elaim-

. : : . ant ousht
aries, that he may thereby make known the'species of his to pro--
future suit. And upon the writ of right havine been read Mine d
aloud, according as it has been a close writ or an. open Ofthe man-
writ, let the claimant or his advocate in the presence of Hua
the justiciaries sitting on the tribunal say thus : A. shows :
this to you that. B. unjustly deforees him of so much
land with its appurtenances in such a vill, and on these
erounds unjustly, because & certain ancestor of his by
name C. was clothed and seysed thereof in his own
domain as of fee and in right in the time of king Henry
the grandfather of the lord the king, or in the time of
king Richard the uncle of the lord the king, or in the
time of king John the father of the lord the king, or in
the time of king Henry who now is, by taking thereof
profits to the value of five shillings or of half a mark, for
instance in grain, meadows, rents, and other produce of


the soil, and from the aforesaid C. the right in that land


432 DE DEFALTIS.


debuit (seeundum quosdam) cuidam D. ut fiho &
heredi, & de predicto D. cuidam E. ut filio & hzredi,
& de predicto E. isti À. qui nune petit ut filio &
heredi, & quód tale sit jus suü, offert disrationare
per corpus talis liberi hominis sui, vel alio modo sicut
curia consideraverit. Non enim sufficit simpliciter pro-
ponere intentionem suam sic dicendo, Peto tantam
terram ut jus meum, nisi sie illam fundaverit, quód
doceat ad ipsum jus pertinere, & per quam viam &
per quos gradus jus ad ipsum debeat descendere.


2. Item cüm agat per breve de recto ad utrunque jus

De arie" consequendü, scilicet, tam jus possessionis qm pprietatis,
un dibot in de seysina talis antecessoris, non sufficit si dicat q
narratione. talis antecessor suus fuit seysitus in dominico suo ut
de libero tenemento tantum, vel in dominico suo ut

de feodo tantum, nisi doceat g in dominico suo ut de

feodo, q sub se continet liberum tenementü & totu jus
possessoriu, nisi dicat & adjiciat, & jure, quod sub se

cotinet jus pprietatis. Ite no sufficit ista duo jura

simul coprehendere, scilicet jus possessorium & pprie-

tatis, sicut. dreit. dvcit, nisi antecessor talis tenuerit

terram illam in dominico suo, quia no sufficit, si tantum

f.373. in servitio ad hoc quód ille qui petit de seysina tali
alhquid per tale breve acquirere sibi possit in dominico,

quia talem seysinam petit hzres, qualem habuit ante-

cessor, nec variare poterit, licet contingat aliquando

quód quis per breve de recto partim possit petere in
dominico & partim in servitio quod non erit de sey-

sina & facto antecessoris, sed de facto & feoffamento

injuste deforciantis, vel alicujus sui antecessoris. Et

quo casu, eüm petens petat in servitio quod habere

possit in dominico, sibi possit imputari, secundum


OF DEFAULTS. 433


has descended or ought to descend (aecording to somo)
to acertain D. as the son and heir, and from the afore-
said D. to à certain E. as the son and heir, and from the
aforesaid E. to the said A. the present claimant as the
son and heir, and that such is his right he offers to
prove by the body of so-and-so his free man, or in
any other way as the court may resolve. For it is
not sufficient to propound simply his declaration by
saying, I claim so much land as my right, unless he has
so grounded it, as to show that it belongs to his right,
and through what way and by what degrees the right
ought to descend to him.


Likewise when he seeks by & writ of right to obtain DUE
both rights, to wit, the right of possession as well as the articles,
right of property, from the seysine of such an ancestor, big vi
it is not sufficient if he should say that so-and-so his iu in-Nis
ancestor was seysed in domain as of a freo tenement declara
only, or in his domain as of fee only, unless hestatesthat  —
he was seysed in his domain as of fee, which implies
the free tenement and all the possessory right, unless
he says and adds *' and of right," which implies the right
of property. Likewise it is not sufficient to comprise
those two rights together, to wit, the possessory rigk.
and the right of property, as dreit dreit, unless the said
ancestor held that land in his domain, because it 1s not
sufficient, if he has held it only under service, for the  f.373.
purpose that he who claims it upon such seysine should
acquire for himself any thing in domain by such a writ,
because the heir seeks such a seysine, as his ancestor had,
nor can he vary it, although it may happen sometimes
that & person by a writ of right can claim partly in do-
main and partly under service that which will not be of
the seysine and the act of his ancestor, but of the act
&nd the feoffment of an unjust deforccor, or of some
ancestor of his own. And in which case when the
claimant claims under service what he may have in
domain, it may be imputed to himself according to what

Q 6366. E E


3.
Qualiter
breve de
recto limi-
tetur.


cf. Stat.
Merton, 20
H. iii.


434 DE DEFALTIS.


quod inferius dicetur plenius. Item non sufficit, si
dieat quód antecessor suus fuit seysitus ut de feodo &
jure & in dominico suo, nisi adjiciat quód expletia
ceperit, quia licet quis liberum tenementum habere
possit & feodum sine expletiis in causa possessionis,
secundum quod videri poterit superiüs in intentione
querentis & petentis in assisà novio disseysine, &
mortis antecessoris; non tamen debet esse ita momen-
tanea seysina proprietatis, quin capiantur expletia.
Et ideo si non fiat mentio de expletiis, cadit actio
petentis. Item adjicitur in narratione, tempore talis
regis, certum enim oportet exprunere tempus, & certum
regem de cujus tempore loquatur. Et de tenera sey-
sina & momentanea sine usu & expletüs nunquàm
competat actio per breve de recto super proprietate:
sed tantum assisa novice disseysine de disseysina pro-
pria, vel assisa mortis antecessoris de seysina ante-
cessoris, & qui assisas omiserit in hoc easu & proces-
serit ad breve de recto super proprietate, omnino
amittet sine recuperatione.


Quia breve de recto sicut alia brevia infra certum
tempus limitatur, non enim excedit tempus regis Hen-
rici avi domini regis. Et est ratio, quia ultra tempus
illud non poterit quis aliquid probare, licet jus habeat
in re: cüàm nullus aliquid pbare possit ultra tempus
illud, ex quo loqui non poterit de visu suo proprio,
vel de visu patris sui, qui ei injunxit quód testis
esset si inde audiret loqui Et unde si quis loqueretur
de tempore Henrici regis senis, amittere possit propter
defectum probationis. Item ideo fit mentio de tempore
certi regis, quia si nunquàm tempore talis regis fuit
antecessor in seysina, quamvis tempore alterius regis,
amittere posset petens per errorem ac si antecessor
talis nunquàm inde esset in seysina. Et unde cu


OF DEFAULTS. | 435


shall be said more fully below. Likewise it is not sufli-
cient, if he should say that his ancestor was seysed as
of fee and of right and in his own domain, unless he
should add that he has taken profits, because although
& person may have a free tenement and a& fee without
profits in & cause of possession, according to what may
be seen above in the declaration of a plaintiff and claim-
ant in an assise of novel disseysine and of mortdan-
cester, nevertheless the seysine of the property ought
not to be so momentary, that he has not had any profits.
And therefore if there is no mention of profits, the
action of the claimant falls. Likewise there is added
in the declaration *in the time of such & king," for it
ought to express a certain time, and a certain kinz con-
cerning whose time it should speak. And an action by
& writ of right concerning property would never be
allowable upon & tender and momentary seysine with-
out the use and profits, but only an assise of novel dis-
seysine concerning one's own disseysine, or an assise of
mortdancester concerning the seysine of an ancestor, and
he who has omitted the assises in this case and has pro-
ceeded to à writ of right concerning the property, wil!
lose it altogether without recovery.

Because & writ of right, like other writs,is limited | 3-
within & certain time, for it does not exceed the time of dem
king Henry the grandfather of the lord the king. The vfrieetie
reason 1s because no one can prove anything beyond |
that time, since he cannot speak of his own sight, nor of
the sight of his father, who enjoined him to be a wit-
ness, if he should hear speak of it. And hence if any one
should speak of the time of king Henry the elder, he
may lose through failure of proof. Likewise for this
reason mention is made of & certain king, because if. his
ancestor never was in seysine in the time of such a king,
although in the time of another king, the claimant may
lose by the error, as if his said ancestor had never been
in seysine thereof. And hence when any one after such

E E 2


Quod


4


tenens
poterit
mutare


intentio-
nem suam
in parte,


€e—0N


436 DE DEFALTIS.


quis post. talem errorem inde se posuerit in magnum
assisam, dat aliquando tenens de suo pro habenda
mentione de tempore. Velideo fit mentio de tempore
quia talis. antecessor tempore talis regis non fuit in
rerum natura, vel quia prius mortuus, vel tunc non
natus,

Cüm autem per errorem aliquando fiat mentio de
tempore indebito, si ipse petens erraverit, poterit in-
tentionem suàm mutare & errorem revocare, & loqui
de tempore alterius regis usque ad litis contestationem,
scilicet quousque fuerit precisé responsum intentioni
petentis, & ita quód tenens se posuerit in magnam
assisam, vel defenderit per duellum. Ulterius autem
nequaquàm, cüm facta fuerit mentio de tempore. Et
de hac materia inter placita quiz sequuntur regem
anno vicesimo quarto de diio rege & W. de S. Johanne
in comitatu South. Item non multum refert, si de
quantitate expletiarum fiat mutatio intentionis. ltem
fiu mentio de tépore pacis p aliquo tempore guerrino,


.sicut de tempore regis T., quia de seysina antecessoris


tali tempore acquisita loqui non convenit, quia post
guerram recuperaverunt ill, qui per guerram fuerint,
disseysiti, talem seysinam qualem habuerunt in initio
guerre, cüm per vim & injuste essent disseysiti. Per
vim & injuste dico, quia multi ab hostibus capti sunt
in bello, & terram dant pro redemptione sua, & talibus
non subvenitur, nisi per actionem quód metus causa,
Si forte metus intervenerit. Et etiam sunt plures, qui
tali tempore gratis dant sine aliqua violentia vel
metu, et talis donatio non revocatur. Item non sufficit
q petens intentionem suam sie proponat et fundet,


Au.


a ducam MC cL mL Ec DC I etre mm i as mm - T MMIL MP Iu -—---—e oc cM e —


OF DEFAULTS. 437


an error has put hiinself upon a great assise, the tenant
gives something of his own to have mention of the time,
or for this reason mention is made of the time, because
the said ancestor in the time of such & king was not
in rerum n«twra, or because he was dead beforehand,
or at that time was not born.


But when through error there is sometimes made —— 4.
mention of an undue time, if the said claimant has wee
made an error, he may change his declaration and roe- change his
voke his error, and speak of the time of another king up P d
to the time of the contestation of the suit, to wit, until
a precise answer has been given to the declaration of
the claimant, and so that the tenant has put himself
on the great assise or will defend himself by battle.

But beyond this by no means, when mention has been
made of the time. And on this matter there is a case
amongst the pleas which follow the king in the twenty-
fourth year concerning the lord the king and William
St. John, in the county of Southampton. Likewise it
does not matter if an alteration of the declaration has
been made concerning the quantity of profits, Like- f.3:3 b.
wise mention is made of *a time of peace" instead of
"& time of war" as in the time of king John, because
it is not suitable to speak of the seysine of an ancestor
acquired in such à time, because those, who have been
disseysed through & war, have recovered after the war
such seysine as they had at the commencement of the
war, since they were disseysed by force and unjustly.
I say by force and unjustly, because many persons are
taken captive by the enemy in war and give land for
their ransom, and such persons are not aided unless by an
action quod 4etás causa, if by chance fear has in-
tervened. And likewise there are more persons who
give their land at. such a time gratuitously without any
violence or fear, and such a donation is not revoked.
Likewise it is not sufficient that & claimant so pro-
pounds and grounds his «declaration, unless he has


438 DE DEFALTIS.


nisi sic fundatam probaverit, et dicatur in fine inten-
tionis fundatze: Et quód tale sit jus suum, offert
disrationare per corpus cujusdam talis liberi hominis
sul, et talis nomine, qui hoc paratus est disrationare
per corpus suum, sicut ille qui hoc vidit, vel de visu
patris sui (ut supradictum est), cui pater suus cüm
esset agens in extremis injunxit in fide, qua filius patri
tenebatur, quód si inde loqui audiret, quód inde testis
esset, et hoe per corpus suum disrationaret, sicut illud
quod idem pater suus vidit et audivit. Si autem in
narratione facienda aliquis articulorum praedictorum
omittatur, et narratio à petente advocetur, ita quód
error revocari non possit, et petens clameum suum
pro se et heredibus suis amittet imperpetuum.


Car. VI.


t Fit etiam quandoque narratio descensus &b anteces-
dad Üí&ore usque petentem per plures personas et plures
deseensus. c&radus, et ad plures personas qui sunt quasi unus
nies heres, sicut ad plures filias et earum hzeredes, et quo
persingu- casu sic fiet! narratio: | Et à tali antecessore descendit
^ Er 1* jus terre illius tali ut filio e& hzeredi, et de tali duabus
filiabus suis vel pluribus, scilicet B. primogenite, et
C. postnatze Et hic fiat in narratione divisio descensus
pro virili portione que singulas carum contingit, et
ita quód narratio descensus prosequatur lineam singu-
larem, et dicatur sic: Et de prwdicta D. descendit
jus medietatis ilius terre cuidam tali ut filio vel


filie et heredi Et de predicto tali descendit jus


" ! *fiat," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF DEFAULTS. 439


proved it to be so grounded, and it be thus said at
the end of the declaration so grounded, and that
such is his right he offers to deraign by the body of
. & certain so-and-so his free man, and so-and-so by name,
who is prepared to deraigzn this by his body, as one
who has viewed it, or upon the view of his own father
(as aforesaid), to whom his father when he was in his
last moments enjoined upon the faith whereby a son is
bound to his father, that if he should hear it spoken of,
that he should be a witness thereof, and that he should
deraign it by his body, as & thing which his eaid father
had seen and heard. But if in making the declaration
any of the aforesaid articles is omitted, and the decla.
ration is argued by the claimant, so that the error
cannot be recalled, the claimant shall lose his claim
for himself, and for his heirs in perpetuity.


CHAPTER VI.


À declaration is sometimes made of the descent. from
the ancestor to the claimant through several persons,
and several degrees, and to several persons who are as it
were one heir, as for instance to several daughters and
their heirs, and in which ease the declaration should be
made thus: *and from such an ancestor the right to
* that land descends to so-and-so as the son and heir,
'" and from so-and-so to his two daughters or more, to wit,
" to B. the elder born and to C. the younger born." And
here there should be made in the declaration a division
of the descent of the particular portion which belongs
. Vo each of them, and so the declaration of the descent
follows the singular line and may be stated thus: * and
" from the aforesaid D. the right to the mediety of that
* Jand descends to a certain so-and-so as the son or the
* daughter and heir; and from the aforesaid so-and-so


In what
way the
declaration
is made of
the descent
down to the
claimant
through
single de-
grees.


440 DE DEFALTIS.


illius medietatis duabus filiabus ipsius talis, seilicet. D.
et E, et ita quód fiat subdiviso! $Sed cauté* per- *
spieendum ne in reversione facienda ad superiores
parentes in linea transversali, quód computatio ex-
cedat tempus regis avi, et infra eodem. Et de pre-
dicta A. descendit jus illius quartze tali ut filio et
heredi. Et de predicta E. tali ut filio et hzeredi, et. sic
per divisiones in infinitum perveniri poterit de hsrede
in heredem usque ad minimam partem unius uncis; si
h:ereditas per uncias dividatur. Item fiat reversio ad
aliam medietatem et reincipiatur narratio descensus
sic: Et de predicta C. descendit jus alterius medie-
tatis tali ut filio et heredi, vel tali ut filie et hsredi,
vel ut filiabus et heredibus, et ita quód fiat subdivisio
(ut supra) de gradu in gradum, persona in psonam,
usi ad illos qui petant, vel aliter: Et unde talis
antecessor fuit seysitus, &ec. ut supra. Et quia talis
obiit sine hzrede de se, descendit jus terre illius tribus
sororibus suis, À. B. C. vel filiis sicut de Gavelkynde,
vel alibi ubi terra partibilis est ratione terre, vel
ratione plurium personarum d sunt quasi unus heres,
et sic fiat divisio ut supra. Item fit narratio descensus
aliquando à linea recta descendente usi ad lineam
transversalem ad unum gradum, vel ad plures, secun-
dum q jus descensus recipit divisionem vel non recipit.
Et sieut dividitur aliquando jus successionis ad plures
personas qus succedunt, ita conjungi poterunt plur&
jur& successionis per mortem earundem personarum,
ratione quarum facta fuit divisio in unum jus, et in
unicam personam haeredem per jus accrescendi, quia
cohzredes et participes mortui sunt sine hzrede de
se.


! ** fiat subdivisio," MS. Raw]. C. 3 Uncia, modus agri, Sc. duo-
160. decima pars jugeri, Ducange
7 * Sed caute " down to ** eodem ^ Gloss.


omitted, MS. id.


OF DEFAULTS. 441


* the right to that mediety descends to his two daughters,
* to wit, D. and E," and so that a subdivision be made.
But it is to be cautiously observed lest in tracing the
reversion to the ascendants in the transverse line the
computation should exceed the time of the grandfather
of the king, and downwards in the same manner:
" Ànd from the aforesaid À. the right to that fourth
share descends to so-and-so as the son and heir,
and from the aforesaid E. to so-and-so as the son
and heir" and so by divisions without end one
may arrive from heir to heir down to the smallest
part of & single ounce, if the inheritance be divided
by ounces. Likewise let & return be made to the
other mediety, and let there be recommenced the
declaration of the descent thus: *and from the aforesaid
* C. the right to the other mediety descends to so-and-so
* as the son and heir, or to so-and-so as the daughter and
" heiress, or to such as daughters and heiresses," and so
that & subdivision be made (as above) from degree to
degree, from person to person, down to those who claim,
or otherwise. ^" Ánd whereof such an ancestor was
"* seysed," &c. as above. And because so-and-.so died
without an heir of his own, the right in that land
descended to his three sisters, À., B., and C., or to his
sons as in gavelkind, or elsewhere where the land is
partible by reason of the land or by reason of several
persons who are as it were one heir, and so let a division
be made as above. Likewise a declaration is made of
the descent sometimes from a right line descending down
to & transverse line for one degree or for more, according
as the right of descent receives a division or not. And
like as the right of succession is sometimes divided
amongst several persons who succeed, so through the
death of the said persons in regard of whom the division
has been made many rights of succession may be con-
joined into one right, and in & single personal heir through
the right of aceretion, because coheirs and parceners have
died without an heir of themselves.


««


f. 371.


2;
Si fieri
debeat
narratio a
linea recta
usque ad
transver-
salem.


3.
Si antena-
tus in vita
patris
communis
moriatur.


Britton, vi.


ch. ii. & 4.


443 DE DEFALTIS.


Cüàm vero fieri debeat narratio descensus à linea
recta usq ad lineam transversale, tune dicatur, & à
tali antecessore descendit jus terre illius tali vut filio
et heredi et de tali tali ut filio et hzeredi, et quia
idem talis obiit sine herede de se, revertebatur jus
ire illi? tali ut avunculo vel amite vel matertera et
heredi vel pavuneulo vel pamitz vel pmaterterze ut
hzredi, vel pluribus amitis vel materteris vel proamitis
vel promaterteris. Et de talibus facta divisione juris
usque ad suos haeredes et heredes hwredum per divi-
siones, &c. ut supra, vel sine. Et quo casu, si unus
ex pluribus participibus petat per se solus sine aliis,
et objieiatur ei quód participes habeat qui veniunt ex
eodem stipite, & petens dicat quód nihil possunt tales
clamare per descensum illum, summoneantur nihilo-
minus &d ostendendü quid juris clamant in terra
petita: ut de termino Sancti Hilarii anno regmi regis
Henrici decimoquinto in comitatu Buckingham de
Walter de PBosco. Et illud generaliter observatur
ubique, ubi presumi poterit quód quis jus habeat in
re petita, qui non nominatur. Et quód talis sum-
moniri debeat, habetis de termino Sancti Hilarii anno
regni regis Henrici nono in comitatu Berks. de Regpi-
naldo Morin.


Si antem in vita patris moriatur, dicunt quidam
quód nulla de eo fieri debet mentio ac si nunquàm
esset in rerum natura (secundum quosdam), quód non
est verum, quia nulli haredi descendit jus aliquod ab
antecessore, nisi per mortem antecessoris. Sed sunt
quidam qui dicunt (& verum est) quód de filio mortuo
in vita patris oportet facere mentionem secundum
Wilhelmum de Eborum, & unde dicere oportet quód


OF DEFAULTS. 443
But when there ought to be made & declaration of à — 2.

descent from the right line to à transverse line, then. let If decr

it be said * and from such an ancestor the right in that ought to he

land has descended to so-and-so as the son and hoir, ia

and from such person to' so-and-so as the son and. heir, line to a

and because the said so-and.so died without any heir mo ^

of his body, the right in that land reverted to so-and-

so as the uncle or aunt by the father's side or aunt. by

the mother's side and heir, or to several aunts. by the

father's or the mother's side, or to several grand-aunts

by the father's or the mother's side. And from such

persons on & division having been made, to their right

heirs and the heirs of such heirs through divisions, &c.

* as &bove, or without them." And in which case, if

one out of several parceners claims by himself alone

without the others, and it be objected to them that he

has coparceners who come from the same stock, and the

claimant says that they cannot claim anything through

that descent, nevertheless let them be summoned to

show what right they claim in the Jand so claimed, as in

St. Hilary's term in the fifteenth year of the reign of

king Henry iin the county of Buckingham, concerning

Walter de Bosco. | And that is generally observed every-

where, when it can be presumed, that & person who is

not named has a right in the thing claimed. And that

»uch a person ought to be summoned you have & precc-

dent in St. Hilary's term in the ninth ycar of the reign


of king Henry in the county of Berks, concerning Regi-
nald Morin.


But if he dies in the lifetime of the father, some say a.
that no mention ought to be made of him, as if he had e tumen
never been 22; rerum natura (according to some), which dies in the
is not true, for to no heir doesany right descend from an dd
ancestor, except through the death of &n ancestor. But father.
there are some who say (and it is true) that. concerning
& son who has died in the lifetime of the father mention


ought to be made according to William of York, and


f. 374 b.


444 DE DEFALTIS.


de tali antecessore descendit jus vel descendere debuit
tali nepoti vel nepti vel fratri tali si heredes de
corpore defecerint. Et unde cüm filius moriatur in
vita patris relicto filio hsrede vel filia, cüm sint in
potestate a&vi, statim descendit eis jus. Et unde si
fiat narratio descensus, oportet quód fiat mentio de
gradu vacuo per mortem filii, ne fiat saltus gradu pre-
termisso, & dicatur sic: Et unde talis antecessor fuit
seysitus &c.,, et de tali antecessore decendere debuit
jus tali, ut filio & haredi, & de tali ei qui nunc petit
ut nepoti vel nepti & hszredi, quasi aliter esset, et
ile qui in vita patris moreretur fcloniam faceret, eo
in descensu non computato, sic posset hzereditas et
jus possessionis et successionis imediate  descedere
nepotib? vel neptibus ab avo, non obstàte felonia
patris, q esset incóveniens. Sed cüm primogenitus
moriatur in vita patris nullo hide de corpore suo
relicto, sed fratribus, nó oportet de fratre antenato,
qui in vita patris mortuus est, facere metione in
narratione descensus, licet jus ei descedere deberet,
tum quia fratres superstites sunt adeo ppinqui hzeredes
in gradu quoad seysina, sicut ille fuit qui mortuus est,
tum etià quia primogenitus eorü qui superstites sunt
statim post morte fratris pmortui incipit esse loco
ipsius hasres ppinquior patri comuni: & unde quavis
primogenitus pramortuus feloniàm faceret, hoc non
nocet fratribus superstitibus cüm non essent ipsius
heredes dum pater viveret, nec ejus hsredes esse


L. d


OF DEFAULTS. 4435


whence it ought to be stated that. from such an ancestor
the right descended or ought to have descended to such
à grandson or grand-daughter or such a brother, if heirs of
his body have failed. And whence when & son dies in
the lifetime of his father leaving & son and heir or a
daughter, since they are under the authority of the
grandfather, the right descends forthwith to them.
And hence if & declaration is made of the descent, it
is incumbent that mention should be made of the
degree which is vacant through the death of the son,
lest there should bea jump through a degree having
been omitted, and let it be stated thus: and whereby
such an ancestor was seysed &c., and from such ancestor
the right ought to have descended to so-and-so as the
son and heir, and from so-and-so to the person who now
claims as the grandson or the grand-daughter and heir, as
if it were otherwise, and he who should die in the life-
time of the father should have committed felony, if he
is not computed in the descent, the inheritance and the
right of possession might immediately descend to the
grandsons or the grand-daughters from the grandfather,
notwithstanding the felony of the father, which would
be inconvenient. But when the first-born dies in the
life of the father without leaving any heir of his own
body, but leaving brothers, it is not incumbent to make
meniion in the declaration of descent concerning the
elder-born brother, who has died in the life time of the
father, although the right ought to have descended to
him, as well because his surviving brothers are as near
heirs in degree as regards the seysine as he was who
is dead, as well also because the eldest born of those
who survive immediately after the death of his pre-
deceased brother begins to be in his place the nearest
heir to the common father, and hence although the pre-
deceased first-born son has committed felony this does
not hurt his surviving brothers, since they were not his
heirs, whilst the father was alive, nor can they be his


f. 374 b.


4.
$1 abbas
vel prior
petant per
breve de
recto.


446 DE DEFALTIS.


possunt, ecüm esse desierit in vita patris comunis, &
antequa ei aliquod jus descenderet. Sed revera foris-
faciat talis quicquid habuit tempore feloni» perpetrate,
si fuerit de felonia convictus, & quiequid ei accidere
posset heredibus suis tune existétibus, & futuris, et
omnibus qui esse possunt haeredes sui; perquisitü vero,
si quod frater mortuus habuit, hzredibus suis de
carne sua venlentibus, & etiam fratribus vel hzredibus
remotioribus forisfacit. Poterit etiam in narratione
descensus de seysina alicujus antecessoris tempore
unius regis fieri mentio et de tempore cujus et narrari
usq &d tempus alterius regis, et fieri de eo mentio, &
sicut fit. narratio descesus de seysina antecessoris à
triavo usq ad trinepote, ita poterit é converso à trine-
pote & de seysina ejus usq &d avunculum et amitam
et ulterius ascendendo et eorü heredes ppinquiores
descendendo in infinitü. Et qualiter & ad quos firi
debeat deseesus in linea recta descendente, vel lines
trasversali ascendente, cüm jus recta linea reascendere
non possit, p qm descendit, videri poterit inferius de
suecessionibus, dum tame si p defectu hzredü recta
linea descendentiu fieri debeat narratio descensus rever-
tendo ad linea trásversalem ad aliqm qui multis retro
teporibus mortuus fuerit, inquiratur, tépore cujus regis,
ut si obierit tepore regis H. avi vel citra, tenebit
descensus, quia de tali tepore poterit quis pbare jus
suum et descensum. Si autem ante tempus talis regis
obierit. quandocund, inutilis erit actio ppter defectum
pbationis,


Si abbas vel prior vel alii viri collegiati, petant
terram vel advocationem vel quid tale nomine ecclesise
sue, de seysina pdecessorum suoru dicedo: Et unde
talis abbas pdecessor suus fuit seysitus in dominico
suo &e, Non fiat narratio de abbate in abbate, vel


OF DEFAULTS. 447


heirs since he ceased to exist during the life of their com-
mon father, and before any right descended to him. But
in truth such à person forfeits whatever he had at the
time of the felony, if he was convicted of the felony, and
whatever could fall to him and to his heirs then existing
or future, and to all who could be heirs to him, but ac-
quisitions of his own, if the dead brother had any, he
forfeits for his heirs coming from his own body and even
for his brothers and more remote heirs. Mention may
also be made in the declaration of descent concerning the
seysine of an ancestor in the time of one king and from
the time of. what king, and the declaration may be con-
tinued to the time of another king, and mention may be
made of him, and just as a declaration of descent is made
from the seysine of an ancestor from the great-grand-
father down to the great grandson, so it may be made
conversely from the grreat-grandson and from his seysine
up to the uncle and aunt and further in the ascent, and
to their next heirs in descentto infinity. And in what
way and to whom the descent ought to be made in a
right descending line, or in à transverse ascending line,
since the right cannot reascend by a straight line, by
which it has descended, may be scen below concerning
successions, provided however if from failure of heirs de-
scending in & right line the declaration of descent ought
to be made in reverting to the transverse line to some-
one who has been dead & long time back, let it be in-
quired, in the time of what king, as if he died in the
time of king Henry the grandfather or since that time
the descent shall hold good, because a person may prove
his right and descent from such a time.  Dut if he died
at any time before the time of that king, the action will
be unavailing on account of the failure of proof.


If an abbot or prior or other collegiate men claim land
or àn &dvowson or anything of a like kind in the name
of their church, upon the seysine of their predecessors by
saying *and whereof such an abbot his predecessor was
"* seysed as in his own domain &e." The declaration


4.
If an ubbot
Or a prior
claim by a
writ of
right.


$45 DE DEFALTIS.


de priore in priorem, nee de abbatibus vel prioribus
mediis fiat mentio, quia in collegiis & capitulis semper
ide corpus manet, quamvis successive omnes moriantur,
& alii loco ipsoru substituantur, sicut dici poterit de
gregibus ovium, ubi semp idé grex, quavis omnes oves
sive capita successive decedàt, nec succedit aliquis eorü
alteri jure successionis, ita qg jus descendat hereditarie
ab uno usq ad aliu, quia semp jus ptinet ad ecclesia,
& cu ecclesia. remanet: seeundum q videri poterit in
chartis religiosorum de feoffaméto, ubi manifeste videri
poterit, g donatio est facta primó et principaliter Deo
et eeclesie tal, & secudarió monachis vel canonicis
ibidem Deo servientibus. Et ideo si abbas vel prior,
monachi vel canonici successive obierint, domus in
eternu permanebit. Et unde cüm abbas vel prior vel
alii viri collegiati petierint terram vel advocationem
versus aliquem per breve de recto, pposita intentione
et fundata (secundum q supradictum est) & nomine
ecclesie, fiat sie irrotulatio: Talis abbas vel prior, vel
alius petit versus talem tantam terram cum perti-
nentiis &c. ut supra. Vel talem advocationem, scilicet
&advocationem talis ecclesi: cum pertinentiis ut jus
ecclesire sus; Et unde talis abbas vel prior vel alius
pdecessor suus fuit seysitus in dominico suo ut de
feodo et jure tempore pacis, &c. ut supra. Et ita
quód presentavit ad eandem ecclesiam talem clericum
nomine R. & qui ad presentationem suam fuit admissus
&d eandem ecclesiam, & inde recepit expletia ad valen-
tiam quinque solidorum & plus, sicut in decimis,
oblationibus, & alis obventionibus. Et quód tale sit
jus suum & eeclesie sure offert &c. Et ita q nulla


OF DFFAULTS. 4149


should not be from abbot to abbot, or from prior to prior,
nor should there be mention of the intermediate abbots or
priors, because in colleges and. in chapters the same cor-
poration always remains, although they all die successively
and others are substituted in their place, as may be said
of flocks of sheep, where there 1s always the same flock,
although all the sheep or heads suecessively depart, nor
does any individual of them succeed to another by right
of succession, in such & manner that the right. descends
by inheritance from one to another, because the richt
always pertains to the church, and remains with the
church, according to what may be seen in the charters of
feoffinent of religious orders, where it may be manifestly
seen, that à donation is made in the first place and. prin-
cipally to God and such a church, and in the second place
to the monks or the canons therein serving God. And
accordingly if the abbot or the prior, the monks or the
canons suecessively die, the house remains to eternity.
And hence when the abbot or the prior or the other
collegiate men claim land or an advowson against any
one by & writ of right, the declaration having been pro-
pounded and grounded (aecording to what has been said
above) and in the name of the church, let the enrolment
be made in this manner: * Such an abbot or prior or
* other person claims against so-and-so so much land
* with its appurtenances " &e.,, as above. Or "* such an
* advowson, to wit, the advowson of such a church with
* its appurtenances, as the right of his church. And
"* whereof such an abbot or prior or other his predeces-
* Sor was seysed in his domain as of fee and of right in
* time of peace " &e., às above. '" And in such a manner
* that he presented to the said ehurch such a clerk by
* name R., and who upon his presentation was admitted
* to the said church, and received. profits therefrom up
* to the value of five shillings and more, as in tithes,
* oblations or other obventions" And that such is his
right and the right of his church he offers &c. And in
Q 63€6. FF


f. 375.


450 DE DEFALTIS.


fi&& mentio de aliquo descensu, nec de abbatibus nec
de prioribus mediis, eun. non sint heredes nee aliquod
jus descendat psonis ipsorum, sieut esset si jus heeredi-
tario descenderet ad h:eredes. Item erit observandum
in personatibus, vel przebendis, si persona vel eanonicus
plaeitaverit per breve de recto, & tune dicatur, peto
tantü terre cum pertinentiis &c, ut supra, ut jus
ecclesi; mes, vel ut jus prebende mes, & unde talis
persona vel eanonieus (predecessor meus) fuit seysitus
in dominieo &e. ut de jure ecclesie, vel pbend:ze sum
&e. ut supra. Et de hae materia inveniri poterit de
teri Pasch:, anno regni regis Henrici decimo quarto
in eoi Hunt, de W. archdiacano Wellésis.


5. Si vero petat quis seysinàá antecessoris sui p bre de

Si plures yoeto, uhi terra vel aliud. datu fuerit pluribus simul,
sint peteri-.., ! TER : e

tes, omnes Sicut, pluribus legitimis vel bastardis, pticipibus, h:ere-

VAL dibus, vel extraneis. Ite coiunctim sicut in maritagiü

«velegi- viro et uxori vel alio modo, in narratione desccsus,

inii. de omnibus oportebit faccre motioné ita. Et unde

siveservi.. À.. D. C. D. fuerüt seysiti in dominico suo &c. ut

supra. Et ita, q tales mortui fuerüt sine herede de

se, &accreverüt eoru ptes supstitibus, et ita q jus irm

ilius deseedit howredibus eorum, qui fuerüt supstites,

scilicet. tales, Et quia unus illoru, scilicet talis, obiit

sine hzrede de se, descedit totu jus tre illius tali, et

de tali illi. qui nüe petit, ct q tale sit jus suü offert,

&c. S1 aute petatur de seysina viri & uxoris, quibus

data est tra in maritagiü, vel alio modo, tüc dicatur

sic: Et unde A. & B. uxor ejus fuerüt seysiti in


OF DEFAULTS. 451


such manner that there be no mention of any descent
nor of intermediate abbots or priors, since they are. not
heirs, nor does any right descend from their persons, as
would be the case if the right descended by inheritance
to heirs. For it will have to be observed in parsonships
or prebends, if the parson or the canon has sued by &
writ of right, and it be then said, * I claim so much land
* with its appurtenancees &c. as above, as the right of
* my church, or as theright of my prebend, and. whereof
* such a parson or canon (my predecessor) was seysed
* jn domain &e. as by right of his church or of his pro-
* bend" &e. as above. Ànd on this matter & case will be
found in Easter term in the fourteenth year of the reign
of king Henry in the county of Hunts, concerning William,
archdeacon of Wells.


But if any one elaims the seysine of his ancestor by & ton be
writ of right, where the land or other estate was given several
to several persons together, as to several legitimate or pamabts.
bastard persons, parceners, heirs or strangers in blood. he named
Likewise conjointly, as for à marriage portion to à man S
and his wife, or in some other manner, in the declaration legitimate,
of the descent it is ineumbent, to make mention of all in 4, bords
this manner: * And whereof A., B., C. and D. have been
" seysed in their domain &e." as above. And so, because
guch persons have died without heirs of their bodies, their
shares have accrued to the survivors, and so that the
right in that land has descended to the heirs of those
who were survivors, to wit, so-and-so. And because one
of them, to wit, so-and-so, has died without an heir from
his body, the whole right in such land has descended to
so-and-so, and from so-and-so to him who now claims,
and that such is his right he offers &e. But if it bo
claimed from the scysine of a man and his wife, to whom
the land has been given as & marriage portion orin some
other manner, then let it be said thus: And whereof A.
and B. his wife were seysed in their domain as of fce


FF


$52 DE DEFAILTIS.


dominico suo ut de feodo & jure, & ut de maritagio
ipsius B. tépore talis regis, & tempore pacis &c. ut
supra. Et de pdictis A. & B. descendit jus terrie
illius tali, ut filio & heredi &c. ut supra. Et de hac
materia inveniri poterit in rotulo de termino S. T.
anno regis H. iv. in comitatu Wilt, de W. de Luste-
shille & Wilhelmo de Conelesfend.


6. Et nisi de omnibus fiat métio cadit actio. Item si
Qualiter et nb eo incipiatur narratio qui nunqm fuit in seysina,
quibus . *. * . *. *. . . p *

similiter cadit actio, & petens amittit si hoc fuerit


modis
cadit 86ti0. pocoonitum: ut de teri S. T. aii regis H. tertio circa fine


fal.
bou rotuli. Ité eode modo, si erratum fuerit in persona
narratione, €]us de eujus seysina petitur, ut si quis petat de sey-
f.3:5b. sina matris ubi petere deberet de seysina patris, vel
e conversó, et. idem erit si erratum sit in nominibus
pDpriis, ut si antecessor vocetur uno nomine & nomi-
nandus esset alio, et idé diei poterit de omnibus aliis
nominandis in descesu. Ite ide erit si aliquis omit-
tatur qui nominari deberet, vel si aliquis gradus
ptermittatur. Ite ide erit si erratü fuerit in re petita,
ut si una res petatur p alia. Item si quis omiserit
aliquem in narratione descensus, qui plus juris habuerit,
vel tantundé quantum habet ille qui petit. Et de hac
materia inveniri poterit de terin S. Hilarii et de terii
P. anno regis H. quinto circa finó rotuli. Item si
petatur de seysina alicujus per descensum qui villanus
fuit, et si excipiatur ipsum esse liberum, pcedit mac na
assisa inter petetem et tenentem per verba inferius


exprimenda.


! Et sciendum q liberis hominibus h:wredibus à recta
Quibus jus linea descendentibus, tam masculis. quàm feminis,


descendere. — us . , TM ; | r.
Voies psentibus et absentibus, tam illis qui plene setatis


OF DEFAULTS. 453


and of right, and as of the marriage portion of the said
D. in the time of such a king and in the time of peace
&e.as above. And on this matter a case will be found on
the roll of the term of Holy Trinity in the fourth year of
king Henry in the county of Wilts, concerning William
de Lusteshille and William de Conelesfend.


And unless mention be made of all, the action falls. 6.
Likewise if the counting begins from him, who was enne.
never in seysine, in like manner the action falls, and and in
the claimant loses, if this has been recognised, as in the t
term of Holy Trinity in the third year of the kiny falls
about the end of the voll. Likewise in the same manner UR
if an error has been made in the person of him, from error in
whose seysine the claim is made, as if any one claims 26 o"
from the seysine of his mother instead of the seysine of. t. 3:5 v.
his father, or conversely; and the same will result, if
there has been an error in the proper naines, as if the
ancestor was called by one name, and he would have to
be named by another name, and the same may be said
of all the others to be named in the descent. — Likewise
the same will result if any one be omitted, who ought
to be named, or if any grade, be passed over. Likewise
the same will result if there has been an error in the
thing claimed, as if one thing be claimed instead of
another. Likewise if one has omitted any one in the
counting of the descent, who had more right, or as much
right as he, who claims, has. And on this matter will
be found & case in the teri of St. Hilary and in Easter
term in the fifth year of king Henry about the end of
the roll Likewise if the claim be made by descent
from the seysine of any one who was a villein, and if it
be excepted that he was & free man, à great assise. pro-
ceeds between the claimant and the tenant by words to
be expressed below.


And it is to be known that to free men heirs de- 7


: : : ! : To whom
scending by the right line, male as well as female, fichbindy
present and absent; as well to those who are of fullaescena.


454 DE DEFALTIS.


sunt quàm illis qui sunt infra :etatem. Item tam
ideotis quàm discretis. Ite tam mente captis quàm
ilis qui sunt san: mentis, q quide dici posset de
furiosis, sive gaudeant dilucidis intervallis sive no, ot
hoe, quia desecsus juris non requirit consensum hzre-
dis, sed consensum requirit aditio hzreditatis juris
descensus, quia absenti & ignoranti descedit jus, sed
seysina sine cosensu non acquiritur: tales enim, ceüm
animü no habuerint acquiredi in tali statu, acquirere
no possut seysinà, si furor sit perpetuus, sed si no
perpetuus, tüc poterut retinere sicut quilibet minor,
tutore tame autore vel per se. Et cü semel possidere
ineeperint furiosi et méte capti, nüqm in tali statu
desinef possüt possidere durante furore, no magis qm
minor infra state. Sed hoc facere non possüt stulti
et ideote, quia habét cosensum et dissensum, qd quide
no habet supradicti. Sed de surdo et muto naturaliter,
si oino audire no possüt nec loqui, si aute tarde, illud
ilo dici poterit, q acquirere poterüt et retinere et ad
alios trasferre, quia ad minus cosetire poterit p signa
ct p nut?. Sed naturalit surd? et mutus p se nec p
peuratores acquirere possüt seysinà, nec dare possut,
nee sibi aliquid stipulari, quia mutus verba pferre no
potest stipulationis, nec surdus verba stipulatis audir,
sed p alios sicut tutores vel curatof, quia animo alieno
et corpore. In fine notadü, q nulli poterit jus desce-
dere, cujus pater vel mater vel alius antecessor, p
qm fieri debeat descensus, vivus fuit et sanus, bonse
memorie vel no, quavis antecessor suus se dimiserit
et hzreditate hsoredi suo dimiserit. Ex hoc auté non


OF DEFAULTS. 452


aco as to those who are under age. Likewise to idiots
as well as to discerning persons. Likewise as well to
persons of unsound mind as to persons of sound mind,
whieh may be said of madmen, whether they enjoy
lucid intervals or not, and this, because the descent of
& right does not require the consent of an heir, but. the
acceptance of an inheritance of a right by descent re-
quires consent, because a right descends to & person who
is absent and ignorant of it, but the seysine is not
acquired without consent: for such persons when they
have not had the intention to acquire, cannot in such &
state acquire the seysine, if the madness be perpetual,
but if it be not perpetual, then they may retain like
any minor, his tutor giving authority, or by himself.
And when once madmen and persons of unsound. mind
have begun to possess, they can never in such a state
cease to possess during their madness, not more than a
minor whilst he is under age. But fools and idiots
cannot do this, because they have consent and dissent,
which the aforesaid have not. But concerning à person
deaf or dumb by birth, if they cannot at all hear or
speak, but if slowly, the same thing may be said, that
they can acquire and retain and transfer to others, be-
cause they can at least consent by signs and by nos.
But & person who is by birth deaf and dumb cannot
acquire seysine by himself nor by his agents, nor can
he give it, nor can he stipulate anything for himself,
because & dumb person cannot utter the words of a
stipulation, nor can a deaf person hear the words of a
stipulator, but he may do it through others as through
tutors or curators, because it is done through the mind
and body of another person. Finally it is to be noted,
that & right cannot descend to any one, whose father
or mother or other ancestor, through whom the descent
ought to be made, is alive and sound, of good memory
or not, although his aneestor has discharged himselt
and has dismissed the inheritance to his heir. But
thereby the heir shall not have an action for the


8.
f. 376.


Quod do-
natorio nl-
hi! juris de-
scendere
potest de
sevysina
donatoris
vel ante-
cessoris.


450 DE DEFALTIS.


habebit h:res aetioü hzreditaria, q jus possit ei de-
scedere in vita antecessoris, lice&. antecessor in seculo
remaserit, vel habitu religionis assupserit, ut de terii
S. H. aü regis H. vii. Ite poterit jus descedere feloni
post felofi sieut ante, & cum eo remanebit & ad
h:eredes desecdet jus, donec cóvincant! de felonia. Sed
quo eovieto nügm descedet ad hzeredes, sed reaseedet
ad capitales düos à quibus primó pcessit, et seper
sequetur seysina jus merü, & erit tenemetü eschaeta
dominor.


Eode modo, si donatio facta fuerit ab aliquo ante-
cessore qui noiat in descesu, nügm fiet descesus ad
heredem donatorii de seysina illius antecessoris dona-
toris: ut si dicatur, Et unde talis antecessor fuit sey-
situs &c. et de tali descendit jus terre illius tali ut
filio & hzredi, qui terrà illam dedit tali antecessori
petentis. Et unde jus terre illius descendit ad illum
qui nunc petit, ut filio et heredi, et sic impedit
donatio descensum ad petente, per q denegabitur ei
actio hzreditaria ex tali descensu. Poterit enim donare
quis id q habet, scilicet. seysinam & jus, actione vero
hzreditariàà cedere no poterit alicui, ubi necesse erit
petere p descensum. te nee psentatione. Et de hac
materia inveniri possit de term S. Hilarii aii regis H.
vii. in eom Cant, de Alano de Bassingborne et Roberto
de Insula de advocatione ecclesie de Wynpol, & unde
idé Alanus petiit advocationem illam de seysina ante-
cessorü pdicti Roberti donatoris. Item descedat jus
nlieui per modum donationis, exclusis penitus à succes-
sione veris primis & pximis hzredibus donatoris, ut


— —— — ——— ——


.! * convineatnr " seems to be required by the context.


OF DEFAULTS. 457


inheritance, for the right may descend to hin in the life
of his ancestor, although his ancestor may have re-
mained in this world, or have assumed the halit of a
relicious order, as in the term of Saint Hilary in the
seventh year of king Henry. Likewise the right may
descend to a felon after his felony as before, and shall
remain with him, and the rizht may descend to his heirs,
until he is convicted of felony. | But upon his con-
vietion it shall never descend to his heirs, but shall
reascend to the chief lords from whom it first proceeded,
and the seysine shall always follow the absolute right,
and the tenement shall be an escheat of the lords.


In the same manner, if a donation has been made by — g.
some ancestor, who is named im the descent, there shall f. 376.
never be à descent to the heir of the donatory from the iul Ben
seysine of that ancestor of the donor, as if it be said : deseeud to


and whence the said ancestor was seised &c., and from fon
so-and-so the right to that land has descended to so- the seysine
and-so as his son and heir, who gave that land to douce ot
so-and-so an ancestor of the Cio And from y MOSCA
whom the right to that land has descended to him, who
now claims it, as his son and heir, 2nd so the donation
impedes the descent to the claimant, wherefore an action

of inheritance from such a descent shall be denied to

him. For à person may give that which he has, to wit,

the seysine and the right, but he cannot cede an action

for the inheritance to another, where it shall be neces-

sary to claim by descent. Likewise neither a presenta-

tion. And on this matter there will be found a case in

the term of St. Hilary in the seventh year of king
Henry, in the county of Kent, concerning Alan de Bas-
singbourne and Robert de Insula, respecting the advow-

son of the church of Wynpol, and wherein the said Alan
claimed that advowson from the seysine of the ancestors

of the aforesaid Robert the donor. Likewise & right

may descend to any one by means of a donation to the
exelusion altogether of the true, first, and next heirs of


458 DE DEFALTIS.


supra de advocationibus, sed non per descesum sed
per modum donationis.


Car. VII.


1l. Proposita sie intentione petétis & fundata (ut pdictum
l'roposita est) à petente, inprimis videat tenens an sit ibi judi-


intentione. ja ; WE b e uS AR
actoris, — Clü, seilicet justiciarii qui judicare possunt, & juris-
videat dictione habent ordinariam vel delegata, quia ex hoc


tenens an : , B : ! Fo AO OSEE
sit juris aliquando poterit copetere ei exceptio jurisdictionis


dietio et iA : : - : 2n. L2 onll
Sustefirius pereptoria. Postea. vero an i actor ibi, petes scilicet
quijudi- an querens, et tüc si actione habeat, & si actione
care pos- . E : aT
it. ItO habeat, tune statim  peedere possit, vel ad tépus
an sitibi remanere debeat in suspenso. Ex hoc enim copetere
teutda. * poteri& tenenti exceptio dilatoria, vel toria, -
cautely — poteri nenti exceptio dilatoria, vel peremptoria,
cirea res-. secüdum q exceptio pposita fuit cotra ipsam actione
onsionem . . - Zu . JD
tod vel contra psonam agentis. Sài aute nihil sit q excipi
np uug poterit cotra pdicta, tune videndü an libellus conven-
andum, et .. xs D : " ; NET à
de visu. tionabilis, breve seilicet sit coveniens actioni et in nulla
Peéndo. sui parte vitiosum, cüm ex hoc dari possit tenenti
exceptio. Qu: quide si per omnia coveniant, tunc
demüm videndü an tenens totam rem teneant q petitur,
cüm certa res debeat in juditium deduci, vel si ejus
ptem, tunc quotà, vel si omninó nihil, & similiter si
res petita pertineat ad jurisdictione judieantis, & ideo
petitur visus rei petite, quia ex hoc cópetere poterit
exceptio tenenti ne sit actio inanis eü tenéte, cüm
rem restituere non possit vel totà, secundü q petitur.


P"


Ok DEFAULTS. 459


the donor, as above concerning advowsons, but not by
descent, but by way of the donation.


CHAPTER VII.


Upon the declaration of the claimant having been Upon ds
thus propounded, and having been supported (as aforo- declaration
said) by the claimant, let the tenant first see whether d ud
there be there a judgment, to wit, of justiciaries who DEDE.
can judge, and who has ordinary or delegated jurisdic- founded
tion, for sometimes on this ground he may be entitled Su MM
to & peremptory exception arainst the jurisdiction. if there be
Afterwards whether the party proceeding be there, the Je LE ;
claimant, to wit, or the complainant, and then if he has justiciary
& right of action, and if he has & right of action, then iu
he may proceed forthwith, or it ought to remain in Likewise it
suspense for a time. For on this ground the tenantj5/^9e |


may be entitled to a dilatory or à peremptory exception, whether
according as the exception should be taken against the ME
action itself or against the person of the party proceed- there, and
ing. But if there be nothing which can be objected dou
against the aforesaid, then it is to be seen whether the about the
libel be conventional, the writ forsooth suitable to the hpc
action and in no part defectlve, since on. this ground aM
the tenant may take an exception. Which things indeed claiming a
if they are in all respects suitable, then at length it is "'*V-

to be seen whether the tenant holds the entire estate

which is claimed, since a thing certain ought to be
brought into court, or if à part of it, then. how much,

and if none at all, and in like manner if the estate

claimed appertains to the jurisdiction of the judge, and
accordingly & view is claimed of the estate claimed,

because on this ground the tenant may be entitled to an
exception, lest the aetion should be fruitless with the

tenant, when he cannot restore the estate, or not the

entire estate, according to what is elaimed. And when


all these things thus concur, then. let the tenant answer


460 DE DEFALTIS.


Et cüm hse omnia sie cocurrant, tunc respondeat


'tenens de principali per se vel per attornatum, nisi


f. 376 b.
l,
De visu
petendo, et
quare
faciendus
est visus.


warrantü habuerit qm vocare voluerit, qui cüm war-
rantizaverit ut infra dicetur plures cópetunt ei excep-
tiones, principali tenenti non copetunt. Et vice versa
plures copetunt tenenti principali, d no copetunt war-
ranto, si ordinate pponant & rite, quas quidé si tenes
principalis omiserit in initio litis anteqm warrantü voca-
verit, p waranti vocatione tam p se quim p warranto
suo ille videbitur tacité  renunciasse, sicut sunt ones
fere exceptiones pvenientes ex pparatoriis juditiorü.


Cap. VIII.


Cum auté onerosum esset de singulis exceptionibus
tractare suo loco & per se, utilius & facilius erit (ut
videtur) omnes quasi in unum fasciculum colligere, &
de omnibus simul tractare per ordine, Ideo omisso
hie tractatu de exceptionibus, tractetur de visu petendo,
ut certa res in juditium deducatur, scilicet ut. petens
ostendat & tenétem certum reddat de qua re ipsum
velit convenire. Fit autó visus aliquando parti, ali-
quando juratori sicut in assisis in causa possessionis,
& aliquando in inquisitionibus de rebus, de quibus
habetur cóotentio inter partes, & de loco, etiam de facto
sieut in transgressionibus, nec refert utrum quis pti
adverse visum faciat de re petita, vel q tantunde


valeat, & ita q res per metas certas & p designatione


locorü & nominü, q res certa designetur. Sed re vera
si rectus ordo pponedi exceptiones servetur, primo


OF DEFAULTS. 161


concerning the principal question either by himself or
bv his attorney, unless he have à warrantor whom he
would wish to call, who when he shall have warranted
a$ shall be explained below, he is entitled to several
exceptions, to which the principal! tenant is not entitled.
And eonversely the principal tenant is entitled to
several, to which the warrantor is not entitled, if they
be propounded in due order and manner, which indeed
if the principal tenant has omitted at the commencement
of the suit, before he has called a warrantor, by the
calline à warrantor he will seem 'to have tacitly rc-
nounced them as well on his own behalf as on behalf
of the warrantor, such as are alinost all the exceptions
arising from the preparatory proccedings in court.


1 Y
CuaArPTER VIII. f. 376 b.


Dut since i& would be irksome to treat of the sevcral TM
exceptions in their own place and by themselves, it will ing the
be more useful and more easy (as it seems) to collect Neid e
all as i&, were into one bundle, and to treat of them «ud where-

. . . . fore a
alltogether in order. Accordingly having omitted here ye, is to
the treatment of exceptions, let us treat of making a be made.
view, that & thing certain may be brought into judg-
ment, to wit, that the claimant. may show and
may render the tenant certain concerning what thing he
wishes to convene him. JPBDut the view is sometimes
made by the party, sometimes by the Juror, as in. assises
in & cause of possession, and sometimes in inquisi-
tions concerning which there is à contention between
the parties, and concerning the place, likewise con-
cerning the fact as in trespasses, nor does it matter
whether & person affords to the adverse party & view
of the estate claimed, or what is equivalent to it, and
so that the estate shall be deseribed by certain. metes
and by a description of the plaees and. naines as an estate
eertain. But indeed if à. just ordev of propounding ex-


2.
De visu
faciendo,
et eui non
visus,
seilicet vel
quod tan-
tundem
valeat.


169 DE DEFALTIS.


oportet pponere illas d copetunt super jurisdictione
judieis, & postea cofirmare psonas partiü, & alias i
dilatori:ee sunt, sicut de sumonitione & vocatione ad
judieiu, & hujusmodi, & tunc sup editione! facienda, et
tune demü ut res certa in juditium deducatur, & de
visu faciendo.


Videamus inprimis cui faciendus sit visus, & cui
denegetur, & ubi no jacet visus. Et sciendum q viso
co ubi non jacet, & cui denegetur, per cosequens videri
poterit cui copetat visus. Denegabitur quide teneti
visus in placito de pparte sororum, quavis in brevi
nominentur maneria cum ptinentiis, quia soror petens
versus sorore nescit designare nec specificare potest
per quas ei accidere debeat in pparte, et ppterea nihil
aliud petet nisi rationabile ptem suam qua eam cotingit
de tota terra qm sorores participes tenent de hzredi-
tate communi, de qua pater vel alius antecessor comunis
obiit seysitus ut de feodo, & quamvis objici potest (ut
videtur) quód alii tenent partem de h:sreditate de qua
ille qui tenens est nihil habet in dominico nec in
servitio, & est ratio quód visus non jaceat in hac
parte, quia si plures petant, nulla scire potest per se
quae pars ei accidere debeat ad partem suam. Et ad
hoe facit quod habetis inter prima placita post guerram
in comitatu Buckingham, de Wilhelmo de Abruncis &
Matilda uxore ejus. Contrarium tamen videtur, &
quód visus jaceat, de termino S. Michaelis anno regni
regis Henrici secundo post guerram in comitatu Essex,


de Matilda de Say & Wilhelmo de Maundevill, quod


—


! editio, Declaratio, qua actor de sumptibus et litis expensis solvendis
sese obligat. Ducange, Gloss.


OF DEFAULTS. 4603
ceptions be observed, it is incumbent to propound those
in the first place which may be advanced upon the
jurisdiction of the judge, and afterwards to confirm the
persons of the parties, and others which are dilatory, as
concerning the summons and the calling into judginent,
and such like, and then upon making a declaration as to
costs, and then at length that an estate certain be brought
into judgment, and concerning the making a view.


Let us see in the first place to whom & view is to

be granted, and to whom it is to be denied, and where Of making

a view does not lie. And it is to be known that upon ? "ie ad

its having. been. seen. where. it does not lie, and to is not to be
. | . . granted, to

whom it should be denied, it. may be consequently seen ii or an

who is entitled to & view. A view shall be denied to equivalent.

a tenant in & suit for partition amongst sisters, although

there be named in the writ the manors with their ap-

purtenanees, because & sister claiming against & sister

knows not how to describe, nor can she specify by

what parts her allotment. ought to be mae in the par-

tition, and besides she claims nothing else than her

reasonable share which belongs to her of the entire

estate which the sisters hold as coparceners in the

coinmon inheritance, of which their father, or other

ancestor died seysed as of fee, and although it

may be objected (as it seems) that other persons hold

& part of the inheritance, of which he who is tenant

holds nothing in domain nor in service, and the reason

why & view does not lie in this part is because, if

there are several claimants, no one can know by her-

self which part should fall to her share. And this is

borne out by & case which you have amongst the

first pleas after the war in the county of Buckingham,

concerning William de Abruneis and Matilda his wife.

The contrary however appears, and that a view lies,

from à case in the term of St. Michael in the second

year after the war of the reign of king Henry, in the

county of Essex, concerning Matilda de Say and


f. 371.


164 -c : DE DEFALTIS.


quidem sie solvitur (ut videtur) quia primum breve
loquitur de proparte sororum ubi antecessor nup obiit,
& unde sufficit p visu hoc g dicitur de tàta tra unde
talis qui nup obiit obiit seysitus. In secudo vero casu,
tertia pars hereditatis petita fuit per aliud breve de
recto qua p breve nuper obiit, ubi certa pars no dis-
tringitur, & ideo visus denegandus, quia nescit quie
pars ei accidere debeat certa de recto, & si visum
petat de toto, adhue valere non debet, quia habet q
tantundem valet, s. de hwreditate unde talis fuit sey-
situs qui nuper obiit, & hsc vera sunt, sive cohzeredes
vel participes petant versus participem sive quamvis
extraneà psona. Et quavis petatur terra per breve de
recto ut. de pparte, non erit visus denegandus, cüm
non habeat tenens forte id quód petitur, nee pro visu,
quod tantundem valet. Item denegatur visus in placito
dotis de terra & tenemento de quibus vir mulieris
obiit nuper seysitus, quia habet tenens quod tantun-
dem valet ut infra de eodem. Si autem manerium
aliquod petatur sine pertinentiis, visus denegabitur,
quia &ut tenens statin confiteatur quód illud teneat
vel quód non teneat, & secundum hoe respodeat vcl
quietus recedat, quia manerium satis designatur ex
nomine, si autem dubitetur, fiat inquisitio sub poena
loci petiti. Si autem petatur medietas manerii quod
non sit divisum nec ptitum etiam sine pertinentiis,
denegabitur visus, quia ignorare poterit qu:ze imedietas
pertinet ad tenentem. Si autem manerium partitum
sit & petatur medietas sine pertinentiis, eodem modo
denegabitur visus, si autem €um pertinentis, aliud


OF DEFAULTS. 465


Willam de Maundevill, which is thus explained (as it
seems), because the first writ speaks of & partition
between sisters where the ancestor has lately died, and
it suffices instead of à view that it is said of so much
land of which so-and-so, who lately died, died .seysed.
But in the second case the third part of the inherit-
ance was claimed by another writ of right than & writ
of Nuper ob5t, where & certain part is not dis-
trained, and therefore & view is to be denied, because
he knows not what certain part ought to fall to him
of right, and if he claims a view of the whole, still it
ought not to avail because he has what is equivalent,
to wit, of the inheritance of which so-and-so was seysed
who lately died, and these things are true, whether
coheirs or coparceners claim against a coparcener or any
extraneous person. And although the land be claimed
by a writ of right, as in & suit for partition, a view
will not have to be denied, when the tenant by chance
has not that which is claimed nor instead of à view what
is equivalent. Likewise à view was denied in & plea
of dower from land and & tenement, of which the hus-
band of the woman died lately seysed, because the
tenant has what is equivalent, as below on the same
subject. But if & manor be claimed without the ap-
purtenances, & view shall be denied, because let the
tenant confess either that he holds it or does not hold
it, and according thereto let him make answer or go
&way &cquitted, because the manor is sufficiently de-
signated by its name, but if it be doubted, let an
inquest be held under the penalty of the place claimed.
But if the mediety of & manor be claimed, which has
not been divided nor partitioned even without its ap-
purtenances, & view shall be denied, because he may be
ignorant which mediety belongs to the tenant. But if
the manor has been partitioned and the mediety be
claimed without its appurtenances, in the same manner
& view shall be denied, but if with its appurtenances, it
Q 6366. aa


f. 377.


466 DE DEFALTIS.


erii, ut infra dicetur. Item cüm medietatem petat
quis alicujus manerii, cum sit indivisum cum pertinen-
tiis vel sine, 8i visum petat de toto, non ei denega-
bitur &d similitudinem dotis, secundum quod inferius
dicetur. Denegabitur etiam visus intrusori, cüm res
specificata fuerit in quam se intruserit sine pertinen-
tiis, vel si fiat quod tantundem valet ut supradictum
est: & ideo maxim? si recens fuerit intrusio, recens
dieo unius anni vel minoris temporis, & hoc cüm ille
qui jus habet in re statim post intrusionem sibi per-
quisiverit in crastino vel infra septimanam, nisi rationa-
bili de causa fuerit impeditus. Denegabitur etiam
quandoque visus in petitione dotis, ubi mulier nomine
dotis petierit aliquod manerium sine pertinentiis, unde
nominatim dotata fuit, ut si dicat, Peto tale manerium
ut dotem meam, unde À. quondam vir meus me
nominatim dotavit ad ostium ecclesi: die quo me de-
sponsavit, & hoc casu tenens nullu visum habebit
ratione ptinentiarum d non nominantur ; q quidem aliud
esset si cum ptinentiis, quia posset mulier petens tales
ostendere ptinentias, de quibus tenens nullà ptem advo-
caret. ltem in petione dotis denegatur visus ppter
incertitudinem, ut si nomine dotis petat mulier tertiam
ptem alieujus maneriü cum ptinentiis, vel sine, visum
no habebit, quia nullam certam parte designare potest.
Si gute visum petierit de toto tenemento unde petit
tertià parte, visum habebit. Item si cüm tenens visum
petierit respondet mulier q non petit nisi tertiam


OF DEFAULTS. 467


will be another thing, as will be explained below. Like-
wise when a person claims the mediety of any manor,
when it is undivided, with its appurtenances or without
them, if he claims & view of the whole, it shall not be
denied to him after the likeness of dower, according to
what will be explained below. A view shall also be
dÉnied to an intruder, when the estate has been
specified, into which he has intruded himself, without
its appurtenances, or if there be done what is equiva-
lent as has been explained above; and therefore more
particularly, if the intrusion shall be recent, I mean
recent when it has been for one year or a less time, and
this when he who has the right in the estate forthwith
after the intrusion has made & claim for himself on the
morrow or within & week, except he has been impeded
by & reasonable cause. À view shall also be sometimes
denied in & claim of dower, where & woman in'the
name of dower has claimed some manor without its
appurtenances, wherewith she has been specifically en-
dowed, as if she should say, I claim such à manor as my
dower, wherewith A., formerly my husband, specifically
endowed me at the door of the church on the day on
which he espoused me, and in this case the tenant shall
have no view in regard of the appurtenances which
are not named, which would be otherwise, if with
the appurtenances, because the woman claiming might
point out such and such appurtenances, no part of
which the tenant would avow. Likewise in a claim
for dower & view is denied on account of uncertainty,
às if in the name of dower & woman claims & third
part of any manor with its appurtenances or without
them, she shall not have & view, because she cannot
designate any certain part. But if she has claimed &
view of the whole tenement whereof she claims a third
part, she shall have & view. Likewise if when the
tenant has claimed à view the woman answers that she
does not claim other than the third part of that of which
aa2


f. 377 b.


468 DE DEFALTIS.


partem de eo unde vir suus seysitus obiit ut de feodo,
& tenens totum teneat & vir recenter obiit, tenes
visum non habebit, cüm habeat q tantunde valet,
scilicet unde vir suus obiit seysitus. Ite denegabitur
visus mulieri, si hzres agat cotra eam de dotis amésu-
ratione, cüm ipsa totü teneat de quo petitur amensura-
tio, & ratione prsmissae, quia vir suus nuper obiit
inde seysitus in tali villa, & hoc verum est, nisi ipsa
aliud tenementum teneat in eadem villa. ltem nec
jacet visus ppter incertitudine, sive nominentur per-
tinenti:e. sive non, ut si quis sic petat terram aliqm,
& sic dicat: Peto tanta terrà cum ptinentiis, s. quic-
quid tenens tenet i tali villa ultra x. libratas terre et
de dono talis, quia tra q petitur specificari no potest,
nisi prius facta extetione x. libratarü & viso & pbato
quantum terr; talis teneat in tali villa, tüc primó
peedat sine visu de residuo & pambula erit extensio,
ut inter placita qus sequuntur regem corü S. de
Segrave, de Thoma de Dunholim cive London, et hoc
verum esse poterit nisi visum petat de toto unde petit
residuu ultra x. Plures etiam possunt esse tenentes
successivé quorü nullus visum habebit, si petierit, nisi
tantum primus tenens, verbi gratia, Á. petit versus D.
certam terram cum pertinentiis ut jus suum, si B,
visum petat visum habebit, & nullus alius, quamvis
warrantum vocaverit usq ad x. Item nec tenens nec
warrantus, ub si idem B. antequam visum petat voca-
verit C. ad warrantum, & C. cüm venerit per sumoni-
tionem, antequàm warrantizaverit vel post, visum petat,


OF DEFAULTS. 469


her husband died seysed as of fee, and the tenant holds
the whole and the husband has recently died, the tenant
shall not have & view, since he has what is equivalent,
to wit, that whereof the husband died seysed. Likewise
& view shall be denied to the woman, if the heir pro-
ceeds against her for an admeasurement of dower, when
she holds the whole of which an admeasurement is
claimed, and for the reason above stated, because her
husband lately died seysed thereof in such a& vill, and
this is true, unless she holds another tenement in the
same vill. Likewise no view lies on account of uncer-
tainty, whether the appurtenanees be named or not, as
if à person should thus claim & certain land and should
thus say : I claim so much land with its appurtenances,
to wit, whatever the tenant holds in such a vill beyond
ten pounds worth of land of the donation of so-and-so,
because the land which is claimed cannot be specified
unless upon an extent having been made of the ten
pounds worth, and upon & view having been made and
proof having been given as to how much land so-and.so
holds in such a vill, then let him proceed concerning the
residue, and the extent shall be perambulatory, as
amongst the pleas which follow the king before Stephen
de Segrave, concerning Thomas de Dunbolm, a citizen
of London, and this may be true unless he claims a view
of the whole whereof he claims the residue beyond ten
[pounds worth] There may also be several tenants
suecessively, none of whom shall have a view, if he has
claimed it, except only the first tenant, for instance. A.
claims against B. & certain land with its appurtenances
as his right, if B. claims & view he shall have a view,
and no one else, although he may have called & war-
rantor up to ten. Likewise neither the tenant nor the
warrantor, as if the said B. before he has claimed a
view has called C. to warrant, and C. when he has come
through a summons, before he has warranted or after-
wards claims à view, he shall not have & view, because


f. 3:1 b.


470 DE DEFALTIS.


visum non habebit, quia tenetur warrantus &d chartam
suam respondere, vel ad chartas antecessorum suoru,
in quibus specificatur terra illa petita. Et etiam si
tenens chartas non habeat, scit aut scire deberet war-
rantus quain terrà tenens de eo tenuerit, & de qua
terra cepit. homagium & servitium illius, qui eum ad
warrantü vocaverit, & cüm per juditiu vel alio modo
warrantizaverit, scire debet warrantus q & qualis sit
terrà de qua vocatus sit ad warrantü, & quanta. Et
sie fiet de pluribus warrantis quod de uno dicitur,
quorum nullus habebit visum, donec in placito illo
perventum fuerit ad duellum, si tamen inde contingat
duellum vadiari, & tunc post duellum sie vadiatu, &
post vadia recepta fiat visus campionibus, & quia visus
non processit in toto placito, dicatur eis q infra diem
cis datu terram illam videant, & hoc est p sacramento
suo q inde facient de visu suo, secundüm q inferius
videri poterit de sacramentis campionum. ltem non .
jacet visus postquàm semel terra capta fuerit in manum
düi regis per defalta, quia sufficit quod tantundem.
valet, quia petens designare debet visoribus qualitatem
terre & quantitatem, quid & quantum petat, & per
quas metas, & cüm sic capta fuerit eodem modo & in
eadem quantitate peti debet per plevinam, quod qui-
dem suflicit p visu. Conceditur tamen quandoque visus
post defalta ex abundanti & hoe p sacramento cam-
pionum, ut de term S. T. anno regis H. quarto.


8, Item denegatur quandoq visus, ut si semel conceda-
visum pe. tur & antequam ienens visum habuerit ad diem suum


titum se fecerit se essoniari, cüm calumniare deberet q visum
essoni-


OF DEFAULTS. 471


a warrantor is bound to answer to his own charter or to
the charters of his ancestors, in whieh the land which is
claimed is specified. And even if the tenant has no
charters, the warrantor knows, or ought to know, what
land the tenant holds from him, and concerning what land
he has received the homage and the service of him, who
has called him to warrant, and when he has warranted
it by à judgment, or in some other manner, the warrantor
ought to know what and what sort of land it is which
he is called to warrant, and how much. . Ànd it shall so
be done with several warrantors as is said of one, none
of whom shall have a view until in that plea they have
arrived at a duel; if however it should happen that a
duel should be waged thereon, then after the duel has
been so waged and the sureties have been given, let &
view be granted to the champions, and. because & view
has not preceded throughout the whole plea, let it be
said to them that they should view the said land within
& certain day appointed to them, and this 1s upon their
oath which they shall make regarding their view, ac-
cording to what may be seen below concerning the oaths
of champions. Likewise & view does not lie after the
land has been taken into the hand of the lord the king
by default, because it suffices that it is worth so much,
because the claimant ought to designate to the viewers
the quality of the land and the quantity, what and how
much he claims, and by what metes; and when it has
been thus taken it ought to be claimed in the same
manner and in the same quantity by & plevine, which
indeed suffices instead of & view. A view however is
sometimes allowed after a default as & grace, and this in
the place of the oath of the champions, as in Holy Trinity
term in the fifth year of the king.


Likewise & view is sometimes denied, as if it be granted
and before the tenant has had a view upon his own day
he has caused himself to be essoined, when he ought to
aver by a quirk that he has not had a view, according


9.
Jf after a
view has
been
claimed the
tenant has
e850ined


472 DE DEFALTIS.


averit non haberet, secundum q fit de sumonitionibus cüm
tenens, et . * . . € .
postea (uis se essoniaverit, nisi calumniare deberet brevem


dicat quod sumonitioneim.


visum non
habuerit.
CAP. IX.
l. LJ * - . LJ . . "
Si de Dicitur supra ubi visus non jacet in rebus corpora


rebus in- libus, qua videri possunt, & tangi, & ratio quare.
WR AE Nune autem videndum si de rebus incorporalibus pos-
visus, sieut sit, aut. debeat fieri visus, sicut de juribus qu:e insunt
de juribus. . : ; . "n
in rebus corporalibus, sicut. de jure advocationis, de

jure pascendi, eundi, & agendi, & hujusmodi. Et
quamvis hujusmodi jura videri non possunt cüm sint

f.378. invisibilia, nec palpari sicut corpora, tame cum sine
corpore vel subjecto quibus insunt esse non possunt,

res ille videri possunt & palpari, & unde sufficit p

visu quód res corporatz. in quibus jur& consistunt
designentur, vel per visum vel per quod tantundem

valet. Per visum, ut si cui competat jus pascendi in

fundo alieno, agendi, eundi, vel hujusmodi, sufficit si

loca videantur in quibus jura sunt & consistunt, &
sufficit si visus factus sit juratoribus, & eodem modo

dici poterit de injuriis, sufficit enim si juratores vi-

deant loca & facta, quamvis ipsa injuria congrue lo-
querido videri non possit, non magis quàm jus. Est

enim jus, et ejus contrarium quod est injuria. Est

enim injuria omne illud quod non est jus, & quod no

magis videri poterit quàm ipsum jus. Si quis enim

in terris & tenementis que habuit ad terminum vite

vel annorum, vel nomine alieno, sicut nomine cus-
todie, & hujusmodi, vastum fecerit, non coceditur

visus ei de quo queritur in juditio.. Sufficit enim si

fiat visus inquisitoribus, nec etiam conceditur visus

in actione personali, ut si custodia & maritagium ali-


OF DEFAULTS. 413


to what takes place concerning summonses, when & per- bimsclf,


: ; and after-
son has essoined himself, unless he ought to aver by & wards
. should say
quirk a short summons. dicho his
not had a
CHAPTER IX. IM


It has been said above where a view does not lie of If d
corporeal things, which may be seen and touched, and ies a view
the reason wherefore. Now indeed it is to be seen, if à oer
view can and onght to be made of incorporeal things, things, as
as of rights which are inherent in corporeal things, as of 9f ri£hte.
the right of advowson, of the right of fishing, of going
and of driving, and suchlike. And although these rights
cannot be seen since they are invisible, nor can they be f 378.
handled like bodies, nevertheless since they cannot exist
without the body or subject in which they are inherent,
those things may be seen and handled, and hence it
Suffices instead of à view that the corporeal things in
which those rights exist should be designated either by a
view or by what is equivalent. By & view, as if à person
be entitled to the right of feeding on another's ground,
or of driving, or of going, or such like, it is sufficient
if the places be seen in which the rights are and exist,
and it suffices if & view has been made by the jurors,
and in the same way it may be said of injuries, for it. is
sufficient, if the jurors see the places and the acts, al-
though the injury itself cannot strictly speaking be
seen, no more than a right. For there is a right and its
contrary, which is an injury. Foran injustice is every
thing which is not a right and which cannot be seen any
more than à right. For if any one has caused waste in
lands or tenements which he has had for the term of his
life or & term of years, or in another person's name, as
in the name of guardianship or such like, à view is not
allowed to him of that regarding which complaint is
made in judgment. For it is sufficient if & view is made
by the inquest, nor again is & view allowed in a
personal action, as if the guardianship or maritage of


4 4 .DE DEFALTIS.


eujus petatur, non est necesse specificare vel designare
quantitatem hsreditatis. Si autem quis sic dicat:
custodiam tante terre, videtur quód tunc sit aliud


dicendum.
2. Cum autem jus advocationis petatur, cüm illud jus
CUmjU* videri non possit, sufficit si corpora designotur in qui-


tionis peta- bus hujusmodi jus consistit, & sufficit pro visu, ut si
Plies sinc Quis dicat: peto advocationem ecclesi;! S. Marie de
ecclesie. tali villa cum pertinentiis, & non sit nisi unica eccle-
sia S. Marie in eadem: sufficit pro visu, quia jus
illud esse no poterit in alia ecclesia. Si autem diverse
sint ecclesie, scilicet. S. Petri & ecclesia S. Andres,
tune assignari poterit ex nomine cui illarum insit
illud jus &dvocationis quse petitur. Si autem plures
sint ecclesie costructze sub nomine unius sancti, tunc
oportet ita designare ex loco in qua ecclesià sit illud
jus &dvocationis q petitur, ut si dicat: peto advoca-
tione ecclesie quse sita est in vico tali versus oriente,
vel versus occidente. Si autem sit qui dicat quód ra-
tione ptinentiarum copetat visus, cüm dicatur peto
&dvocationem illius ecclesi; cum ptinentiis: sciendu
est quód no fit relatio pertinentiarum ad ipsum jus,
imo ad ecclesiam, secundum quod costruitur lignis &
lapidibus, & non secundum g ingressus & egressus
ptinet ad jus pascendi et hujusmodi, & restitutio ad
jus eundi, nec obstat quod dicitur q in assis& ultimze
psentationis juratores. videre debeant ecclesiam illam
ad qua fit psentatio, quia nihil hie agitur de jure,
sed q ecclesia ad quam preesentatur designetur, secu-
dum quod lignis & lapidibus construitur, et qus qui-
dem omnino sunt diversa, licet quodammodo sint con-


OF DEFAULTS. : YE]


any one is claimed it is not necessary to specify or de-
signate the quantity of the inheritance. But if some
one should thus say, the guardianship of so much land,
it seems that something different ought to be said.


But when the right of advowson is elaimed, since — 2.
that right cannot be viewed, it is sufficient if the bodies ura
be designated in which & right of this kind consists, advowson
and itsuffices for & view, as if & person should say, [oec
claim the advowson of the church of St. Mary in such are several
& vil with its appurtenances, and there is but one RIMIS
church of St. Mary in the said vill: it suffices instead
of & view, because that right cannot exist in any other
church. But if there be divers churches, to wit, of
St. Peter and the church of St. Andrew, then it can be
assigned by name to which of the churches that right
of advowson which is claimed applies. But if there
are several churches constructed under the name of one
saint, then it is incumbent to designate by the place to
which church that right of advowson which is claimed
applies, as if he should say, I claim the advowson of the
church which is situated in such a street towards the
east or towards the west. But if there be some one
who says that & view is appropriate in regard of the ap-
purtenances, since it is said, I claim the advowson of
that chureh with its appurtenances: it is to be known
that there is no relation of the appurtenances to the right
itself, but to the church according as it is constructed
of timber and stone, and not according as the entry or
the exit pertains to the right of pasture and such like,
and restitution to the right of going, noris it an ob-
stacle that it is said in an assise of last presentation
that the jurors ought to view that church to which the
presentation is made, for there is no question here of
right, but that the church to which a presentation is
made should be designated, according as it is constructed
of timber and stone, and which things are altogether
diverse, although they &re somehow connected. And


476 DE DEFALTIS.


nexa. Et aliquando petitus fuit visus de advocatione
ecclesi:e, quia diverse fuerunt ecclesi* in eadem villa,
sed postea per juditium revocatus, & ita quód breve
de visu remansit, quia ecclesia in qua advocatio pete-
batur alio modo designari potuit per hoc quod tantü-
dem valuit, seilicet &advocationem eccelsie beati Petri:
de hac materia de term Sancte T. a3. ii. post guer-
ram, in cornitatu Cant, de abbate de Nutlegh.


e Sed cüm jus advocationis ecclesi: incorporale sit, &
Si jus ad- . . P ; :
vecationis per defaltam tenentis aliquando precipiatur vic. quód
capidebeat illam capiat in manum domini regis, cüm sit incom-
in manum
regis. parabile, invisibile, inpalpabile. ^ Et q palpari non
f.378 b. potest, qualiter potest in inanuimn dotnini regis capi, q
videtur esse impossibile ? Responsio. Revera nullum
jus esse poterit sine corpore & subjecto cui adh:ereat.
Si autem dicatur g adhaereat fundo vel tenemento in
quo ecclesia sita est, tune videtur prima facie quód
capi debeat fundus & p coósequens jus advocationis
eeclesie illius, sed fundus non capitur, quia jus advo-
cationis fundo non adhsret imediaté, sed per medium,
quod est ecclesia talis, seeundum quod costruitur lignis
& lapidibus, & secundum quod superius dictum est;
Jus advocationis talis ecclesie, & non jus advocationis
talis fundi, & ideo cüm jus advocationis adh:ereat
ecclesi;e dicatur vicecomiti quód capiat ecclesia in
manum dii regis simplici captione, & per cosequens
capit id quod inest corpori, sicut videri poterit de
jure pascendi & hujusmodi.


OF DEFAULTS. j 411


sometimes the view of the advowson of & church
was claimed, because there were divers churches in the
same vill, but afterwards it was revoked by a judgment,
and so that the writ for a view was stayed, because the
church of which the advowson was claimed could be
designated in some other manner by this which was
equivalent, to wit, the advowson of the church of the
Blessed Peter. Concerning this matter there is a case
in Holy Trinity term in the second year after the war,
in the county of Kent, concerning the abbot of Nut-
legh.


But since the right of advowson of & church is in- 3.
corporeal and through the default of the tenant it is * pe neht
sometimes enjoined to the viscount that he should take son ought
it into the hand of the lord the king, when it is unap- 12,5 ken
parent, invisible, impalpable. | And what cannot be hand of
handled, how can it be taken into the hand of tho 9" Pine
king, which seems to be impossible? The answer. In
truth no right ean be without a body and a subject to

which it adheres. But if it be said that it adheres to

the land or the tenement in which the church is situa-

ted, then it appears at first sight that the land ought to

be taken, and as & consequence the right of advowson

of that church ; but the land is not taken, because the

right of advowson does not adhere immediately to the

land, but through à medium, which is the said church,
according as it is constructed of timber and stones, and
according to what has been said above: The right of
advowson of the said church, and not the right of ad-
vowson of the said land, and accordingly since the right

of advowson adheres to the church, let it be said to

the viscount that he should take the church into the

hand of the king by a simple caption, and as a conse-

quence he takes that which is in the body, as may be

seen concerning the right of pasture, and such like.


4.
Ubi visus
jacet vel
tantun-
dem.


478 DE DEFALTIS.


Ubi visus jacet? & dico quód jacet generaliter. In-
primis de omnibus terris petitis per breve de recto
aperto, vel per alia brevia clausa in quibus pervenitur
ad duellum, & maxim? propter sacramentum campio-
num (ut predictum est) & eodem modo si ad mag-
nam assisam. Item jacet ubicunque res corporalis
petitur, que aliter designari non possit, quód certa res
deducatur in juditium, nisi videatur direct? vel indi-
recté: directé dico, ut si terra vel aliqua res corporalis
petatur sine pertinentiis ppter certitudinem corporis,
quia tenens per hoc statim scire potest, utrum tale
corpus teneat totum vel ejus partem vel nihil.  Indi-
recté, ut si alio modo designari possit per id quod
tantundem valet quantum valet visus, & per quod
certitudo haberi possit que & qualis sit res quse peti-
tur, ut si dicatur: peto tantà terram cum pertinentiis
unde talis nuper obiit seysitus, vel quam talis. nup
warrantizavit, vel totam terram quam talis tenet in
eadem villa (si plus no tenuerit) vel in com vel in
tali loco, vel talem q capta fuit in manum dni regis,
& per tenentem replegiata, vel tale quam ego vel alius
tibi tradidit, vel de qua disseysina fecisti, vel quas
tenes de dono talis, vel de ballivo dii regis, & hujus-
modi. ltem jacet in placito, quo warranto, ubi actio
datur tam in rem qm in psonam ratione pertinentia-
rum. Et de eschaetis domini regis de terris Norman-
nie. Item jacet de tenementis de quibus aliquis red-
ditus pvenit. Et si de redditu petatur, non jacet,
nec etiam erit redditus liberum tenementum nisi ex
tenementis jus proveniat, quia de camera no, vel
hujusmodi. It& jacet visus de tenemento in quo quis
comuniam petit p breve de recto, & jus pascendi, nisi


OF DEFAULTS. 479


Where does à view lie? AndIsay that it hes gene- "hu
rally. In the first place respecting all lands, which are view iies,
claimed by an open writ of right, or by other close 2 em "
writs in which a duel is arrived. at, and chiefly on ac-
count of the oath of the champion (as said above), and
in the same manner if & great assise is arrived at.
Likewise it hes wherever & eorporeal thing is sought,
which cannot be otherwise designated, so that & certain
thing may be brought into judgment, unless it be viewed
directly or indirectly. I mean by directly, as if & land
or other corporeal thing be claimed without its appur-
tenances, on account of the certainty of the body, because
the tenant may know thereby immediately whether
such & body hold the whole or a part of it, or nothing.
Indirectly, as if it, may be designated in another manner
by that which is equivalent to à view, and whereby &
certitude may be acquired what and of what sort is
the thing which is claimed, as if it be said: I claim so
much land with its appurtenances whereof s0-and-so
died seysed, or which so-and-so lately warranted, or the
whole land which so-and-so holds in the said vill (if
he has not held more) or in the county or in such a place,
or such as was taken into the hand of the lord the king,
&nd replevined by the tenant, or such as I or another de-
livered to you, or of which you have made a disseysine, or
which you hold by the donation of so-and-so, or from the
bailiff of the lord the king, or such like. Likewise it lies
in a plea of Quo wwarranto, where an action is given as
well against the thing as against the person in regard of
the appurtenances. And respecting the escheats of the
lord the king from the lands of the Normans, | Likewise
it lies respecting tenements from which any rent results.
And if the claim be for rent, it does not lie, nor will
rent be à free tenement unless a right results from the
tenement, because 1t. does not lie for à chamber or such
like. Likewise a view lies concerning a tenement in which
& person seeks & community through a writ of right,
and a right of pasture, unless it can be otherwise desig-


f. 379.
l.
De irrotu-
latione


480 DE DEFALTIS.


aliter designari possit ut supradictum est, quia poterit
ille qui cóvenitur tenementum habere, in quo petens
nullam comuniam clamare poterit. Item jacet visus si
secta petatur ab aliquo, si plura habeat tenementa in
eadem villa, ut sciri possit & certificari ratione cuius
tenementi secta petatur, vel cüm plures petat, non
debeat tenens nisi unam, secundum q videri poterit
de term S. T. anno regis H. 2 post guerrà, in coi
Kanc, de magistro militie Templi. Et eodem modo in
juribus quibusdà jacet visus, si res vel loca quib? jura
insunt designari no possüt p id q tantunde valet, sicut
in comuni& pasture & hujusmodi


CAP. X.


Cum aute visus denegari no possit, tunc fiat irrotu-
latio hoc modo, À. petit versus B. tantà terram cum
ptinentiis in tali villa ut jus suu &c., vel tantum red-


post visum ditus, vel talem comuniam pasture, vel q ei faciat


concessum.


sectam, et hujusmodi &c. Et B. venit & petit visum
de tenemento unde talis redditus pvenit, vel de tene-
mento in quo clamat tale pasturam, vel de tenemento
de quo Á. petit sectam & hujusmodi, secundum q
brevia originalia habeat. Dies datus est eis in oct &
interim &c. Et eodem modo si dos petatur vel aliquid
per breve de ingressu, tüc sic: À. petit versus B.
tantam terrà cum ptinentiis in tali villa ut. dotem
suam, vel ut jus suum, et in quam idem B. non habet
ingressum nisi per talem &c. Et sie variatur irrotu-
latio seeundü varietate placitorum, & secundü hujus-
modi irrotulationes variantur brevia quss talia sunt.


OF DEFAULTS. . 481


nated as aforesaid, because he who is convened may have
à tenement in which the claimant cannot claim any
community. Likewise a view lies if & sect be claimed
by any one, if he has several tenements in the same
vill, that it may be known and certified in regard of
which tenement the sect is claimed, or when he claims
several, the tenant owes only one, aecording to what may
be seen in Holy Trinity term in the second year of
king Henry after the war, in the county of Kent, con-
cerning the master of the knights of the Temple. And
in the same manner a view lies in certain rights, if
things or places, in which rights are inherent, cannot
be designated through that which is equivalent, as
in common of pasture and such like.


CHAPTER X. f. 379.


But when & view cannot be denied, then let &n en- " |.
rolment be made in this manner: A. claims against B. the: LE


so much land with its appurtenances in such a vill as ment after
his right, &c., or so much rent, or so much common of Bec gri
pasture, or that he make him a sect, and such like, fed-
&c. And B.comes and claims à view of the tenement
fromwhich such à rent proceeds, or of the tenement in
which he claims such a pasture, or of the tencment
concerning which A. claims a sect, and such like ac-
eording to what the original writs contain. A day
is given to them in the octave, and meanwhile, &c.
And in the same way if dower is claimed or anything
by & writ of entry, then thus: A. claims against B. so
much land with its appurtenances in such a vill as her
dower, or as her right, and into which the said B. has
no entry except through so-and-so, &e. And so the en-
rolment is varied according to the variety of the pleas,
and aecording to enrolments of this kind the writs are
varied, which are of this kind.

Q 6366. HH


482 DE DEFALTIS.


2. Rex vie. salute. Precipinus tibi q sine dilatione
Brevi? dé habere facias B, visum de tanta terra eum ptinentiis
visu facien- pvtne
do, scilicet, in N. quam À. de N. in curia nostra coram justic.
detoto. — nostris apud W. clamat ut jus suum versus preedictü

B., et die quatuor militibus ex illis qui visui illi inter-
fuerint, quód sint cora eisde justic. nostris apud W.
vel coram nobis ubiceund tunc fuerimus in Anglia, tali
die &c. ad testificandum visum illum. Et habeas ibi
nomina militum & hoc breve. "Teste &e.  Variantur
autem hujusmodi brevia multipliciter, & sic s.: habere
facias visum B. de tenemento in tali *villa, unde red-
ditus x. solid cum ptinentiis pvenit, quem redditum
À. de N. in curia nostra &e. clamat ut jus suu versus
pdietu B., et die &c. ut supra, vel sie: visum de tanta
terra cum ptinetiis in N. unde B. que fuit uxor C.
nominatim dotata fuit.


EE Velsi forte aliquam certam ptem & separatam petat
SidePAT^ p diviso tune sie: visum de tanta tra &e. quà A. à
tata fut. fuit uxor D. in curia &e. clamat in dote versus eum.

$i aute clamaverit tertia pte incerta & indeterminatàa
alicujus totius, tunc sie: visü de tanta terra cum
ptinentiis &c. unde À. quas fuit uxor C. in curia nia
&c. clamat tertià ptem in dote versus eum. Et die
&e. Si aute placitetur de comunia pasturz per bre


de recto, Quo jure, tunc sic.


4. Precipimus tibi q sine dilatione habere facias À.
E E eM visum de comuna pasture in tali villa qua B. de N.
quojure clamat ut ptineteó ad liberü tenemétum suü in eadé
en, vila, vel in alia, versus eundé A, & unde ide B.
communia sumonitus est in eadé curia nia ad ostedendü quo jure
PAUU*. tal& comuniam pasture clamat in terra ipsius A., de-


sieut idé A. nullà comuniam habet in terra ipsius D,


OF DEFAULTS. 483


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you $
that without delay you cause B. to have a view of so e d
much land with its appurtenanees in N., which A. de view, to wit,
N. in our court before our justiciaries at. Westminster d
claims as his right against the aforesaid B., and say
to four knights of those who have taken part in that
view, that they be present before our said justiciaries
at Westminster, or before us wherever we may be in
England on such a day, &c, to testify to that view.

And have there the names of those knights and this
writ. Witness, &e. But writs of this kind are varied
in manifold ways, and thus, to wit: cause B. to have &
view of a tenement in that vill, froin which & rent of
ten shillings with appurtenances is derived, which rent
A. de N. in our court &c. claims as his right against the.
aforesaid B., and say as above: or thus, & view of so
much land with its appurtenances in N , Wherewith B.


Who was the wife of C. has been specifically endowed.


Or if by chance a certain separate part, as her divi- — a.
sion, then thus: a view of so much land, &c., which A. d pr
who was the wife of D. in our court claims as her which she
dower against him. But if she claiins & third uncertain dedo
and indeterminate part of a certain whole, then thus :&
view of so much land with its appurtenances, &c., and
whereof A. who was the wife of C., in our court, &c.
claims the third part for her dower against him, and
say, &c. But if the plea be for common of pasture
through a writ of right, quo Jwre then thus ;


We enjoin you that you cause A. without delay to It m "
have & view concerning common of pasture in such a writ of
vill, which B. de N. claims as appurtenant to a hie re
tenement of his in the said vill or in another, against be claimed
the said A., and whercof the said B. has been summoned iomiecuE
in our said court to show by what right he claims pasture.
such a common of pasture in the land of the said A.,
since the said A, has no common of pasture in the land


HH2


f. 379 b.


1l.
Ad diem


484 DE DEFALTIS.


nee ide B. ei servitiü facit, quare ibi comunia habere
debeat, & dic &c, vel sie: visum de comunia pasture
in tali villa, qm B. in curia nfa cor& justice. &c. clamat
versus eunde Á. ut ptinente a&d liberu tentü suü in
eadé villa, vel in alia, & unde ide A. dicit q pdictus
B. nullà comunia ibi habere debet, eo q ide B.
nulla comuniam in tra ipsius habet, nec ide ei servitiü
facit, quare comunia habere debeat & dic &c. Et
sic semp formada erüt brevia de visu secüdü forma
breviü originaliu. Si aute fieri debeat visus in brevi
quo warranto teneat quis terrà aligm dq debeat esse
eschaeta dri regis, tune sic: visum de tanta terra cum
ptinentiis in tali villa, & unde idem talis suimonitus
est ad ostendendu quo warranto tenet tantam terrà
cum ptinentiis in tali villa quam nos in curia nostra
clamamus versus eum ut eschaetam nostram de terris
Normannorum.


CAP. XI.


Ad alum vero die post visum cocessum & factu,


datum post reincipiit partes si voluerint omnia essonia sua, tam


visum
habitum
reincipia-
tur es-
sonium,


petens quàm tenens. Et sive venerint sive non, vic.
dieere dibet iv. militibus, qui visui illi interfuerint, q
sint ad die datum ad testificandum visum illum. Ad
qm diem sive partes venerint, sive se essoniaverint,
cüm visus testatus fuerit per quatuor milites visores,


OF DEFAULTS. 485


of the said B. nor does the said B. do to him any ser-
vice wherefore he ought to have & common there, and say
&ce. or thus: & view of common of pasture in such &
vill, which B. in our court before our justiciaries &c.
claims against the said A. as appertaining to his free
tenement in the said vill or in another, aud whereof
the said A. says that the said B. ought to have no
right of common, inasmuch as the said B. has no com-
munity in his land, nor does he do to hin any ser-
vice wherefore he ought to have & right of common,
and say &c. And writs for making a view are always
to be formulated according to the form of the original
writs. But if & view ought to be made in & writ of 13:79 b.
Quo ^arrento a person holds a certain land which
ought to be an escheat. of the lord the king, then thus:
& view of so much land with the appurtenances in
such a vill and whereof the said so-and-so has been
summoned to show by what warrant he holds so much
land with its appurtenanees in such a vill, which we
claim in our court against him as our escheat of the
lands of the Normans.


CHAPTER XI.


But upon another day after & view has been allowed — 1.
and has been made, let the parties recommence, if they Rem à
wish, all their essoins, as well the claimant as the day after
tenant. And whether they have come or not, the vis- edes
count ought to say to the four knights, who have taken an essoin
part in that view, that they should be present on an P? e —
appointed day to testify to that view. Upon which day ced.
whether parties have come or have essoined themselves,

. when the view has been attested by the four knights


the viewers, reliance shall always be had upon their


Britton, ii.
ex vill.


8 8.


Cf vol. iit.
p. 311.


2.
Si loquela
posita
fuerit ad
magnam
curiam de
comitatu,
et conten-
tio fuerit
de visu
habito vcl
comitatu.


l.
Qualiter
petens de-
bet desig-
nare te-
nenti rem


petitam, ut


sciri pos-


sit, si istam


tenuerit
vel non.


48506 DE DEFALTIS.
semp stabitur eorum recordo, & si forte essoniü inter-
jectü fuerit, fiat mentio semper in essonio q visus
testatus sit, & si forte testatus no fuerit, & tenes ad
die suü venerit, & docere possit q visum no habuerit,
habebit aliü  dié, nisi ipse petens docuerit cotrarium,
sub piculo joci partiti.


Cüm aute placitü à com translatü fuerit ad magma
curià, & eiun visum habuerit in com, objiciatur ei in
magna curia q visum habuerit in cofi, inquiratur de
petente si de hoc ponere se voluerit super recordü
cof, qui de hoc habet recordum, vel non, & quo casu
si petens hoc voluerit, fiat recordü de hoc p com, &
veniat recordu cora justic.; sed raro cotingit q petes
eligat vià istà ad placitum suu differendü, cüm coino-
dius sit ei iterum visum cocedere, quàm de visu habito
ad inquisitionem per comitatum pcedere.


CAP. XII.


In visu aute faciedo, tenenti debet petens designare
rem petità omnibus modis quibus poterit, coram illis
qui ad hoc cóvocantur, tam in corpore ipsius rei quàm


in ejus ptinentiis, cüm difficile sit de incerta re certum


pferre juditium. — Et talis erit designatio, s. ut si
dicatur: Peto tale maneriü p metas & divisas istas &
tales ptinentias, ut per hoc ppendi possit utrum tenens
totum maneriüi eum ptinentiis teneat, vel ejus parte,
vel nihil. Et suffieit si maneriii petierit cum ptinetiis


-


OF DEFAULTS. 4S7


record, and if by chance an essoin has been interposed,
let mention always be made in the essoin that the view
has been attested, and if by chance it has not been at-
tested, and the tenant has come upon his appointed
day, and can show that they have not made a view, he
shall have another day, unless the claimant himself can
show the contrary, under the risk of à jeopardy.


But when a suit has been. transferred from the county — 3.
to the great court, and when he has had a view Tib uen
the county, it should be objected to him in the great transferred
court that he has had a view in the county, let it be nés PR
inquired of the claimant, if he wishes thereon to put from the
himself upon the record of the county, which has M nd
record thereof, or not, and in which case if the claim- there shall
ant wishes this, let a& record thereof be made through bte id
the county, and let the record come before the justici- id iiis
aries; but it rarely happens that the claimant chooses ing been
that way to put off his suit, since it is more advan- eis the
tageous to allow him for a second time a view, than to
proceed to an inquisition through the county concern-


ing à view which has been had.


CHAPTER XII.


But in making a view, the claimant ought to desip- —— 1.


j , . : » , In what
nate to the tenant the thing claimed in every way in way hie


which he can, before those who are econvoked for this claimant
dex TP jn rs. Should
purpose, as well in the body of the thing itself as in its desroa te
&ppurtenances, since it is difficult to pronounce a cer- to the
tain judgment upon an uncertain thing. And of this tior. He
kind shall be the designation, as if it be said: I claim claimed,


that it ma
such à manor by such metes and bounds and such ap- y, fired


purtenanees, so that it may thereby be ascertained, H he ei
whether the tenant holds the entire manor with the
appurtenances, or a part, or none. And it suffices, ifhe


2.

Si conten-
tio habea-
tur quan-
tum terrae
positum
fuerit

in visu,
aliquando
. fit inde
jocus par-
titus.

cf, p. 380.


98.
Si fiat in-
quisitio,
tunc sic.


4388 DE DEFALTIS.


p ecrtas divisas, nec oporiet glebas manerii cireumire,
& ppter hoe no cadit breve, si forte sit aliquis qui
terram tenuerit infra corpus manerii, de qua tenens
nihil habuerit, nec in servitio nec in dominico, dum
tamen fiat ptestatio à petente, q nihil inde clamat in
diico nec in servitio.


Cüm vero de visu facto aliquando inter ptes fiat
cotentio, ut si dicat tenens q petens plus posuit in
visu suo vel minus qm in brevi cotineatur: ut de
teri S. M. ai regni regis H. decimoquarto incipiente
decimoquinto circa principiü, sub pcena amissionis fiat
inquisitio de veritate, & secundü quod inveniri poterit
de termino Sancte "Trinitatis anno regni .regis H.
secüdo post guerra in com Wilt. de Galfrido de Chesse-
wicke: cüm ptes se inde posuerunt in inquisitione
patrie, & gratis se posuerint in certas psonas, quatuor
vel sex, cum quibusdam qui visui interfuerint, tunc
veniat inquisitio ad certificadu de veritate p tale
breve.


Rex vic. salute. Precipimus tibi quód venire facias
coram justic. nostris tali die &e. A. serviente tals, &
attornatum suum in loquela q est inter eundem AÀ. tale
& tale, de tanto terre cum ptinentis &c. Et similiter
cum eo Á. B. C. D, super quos pdicti tales se posue-
runt, & pterea quatuor ex ills qui visui interfuerint,
qm pdictus Á. attornatus talis petentis fecit tali tenenti,
8. de prato vel terra cum ptinentiis in tali villa, quod


OF DEFAULTS. 4S9


has claimed & manor with its appurtenances by certain
boundaries, nor is it necessary to make & circuit of the
glebe of the manor, and on that account the writ does
not fall, if by chance there be any one who has held
land within the body of the manor, of which the tenant
holds nothing, neither in service nor in domain, pro-
vided however there be à publie declaration on the part
of the plaintiff that he claims nothing thereof in domain
or in service.


But since there is sometimes à dispute between the — 2.
parties concerning the view made, as if the tenant EAE
should say that the claimant has put into the view more how much
or less than is contained in the writ, as in the term of sn :
St. Michael in the fourteenth and fifteenth years of the cluded in
reign of king Henry, about the beginning [of the roll], Md: '
under penalty of losing it let an inquisition be made sometimes
concerning the truth, and according to what may be oPicun
found in the terin. of Holy Trinity in the second ycar alternative

. : . risk.
of the reign of king Henry after the war, in the county p. 380.
of Wilts, concerning Galfrid de Chessewicke : when the
parties had put. themselves thereon on an inquisition of
the county, and had gratuitously put themselves on
certain persons, four or six, with certain persons who had
taken part in the view, then let an inquisition come to


certify concerning the truth through a writ of this kind.


The king to the viscount grecting. We enjoin you a.
that you cause to come before our justiciaries on such 1f an i-
; quisition be
& day &c. A. the servant of so-and-so, and his attorney thereon
in the trial which is between the said À. and so-and-so ud PDen
concerning so much land with its appurtenances &c.
And in like manner with him A. B. C. D,, upon whom
the parties aforesaid have put themselves, and besides
four of those who have taken part in the view, which
the aforesaid À. the attorney of so-and-so the claimant has
made for the said tenant, to wit, concerning the meadow
or land with its appurtenances in such a vill, which


490 DE DEFALTIS.


pratum, vel quam terram, idem talis clamat ut jus
suum versus eundem tale, ad certifieandum  pfatos
justie. nostros quid & quantum prati vel terre idem
À., attornatus s. ipsius talis, petentis s, posuit in viso
suo. Et unde idem talis, tenens s, dicit q idem A.
non posuit in visu suo nisi tantu prati vel tantu
terre, & in diversis locis, & tot particulas, & ita se
inde interim certificet, quód pfatos justic. nostros ad
eundem diem pleniàs inde certificare possunt. Et
habeas ibi hoc breve. Teste &c.


Habito sie visu, statim perpendere potest tenens

Habio ^ utrum terram petitam teneat, vel ejus ptem, vel nihil:
warrantum ub si totà teneat, sic statim ad diem suu respondeat,
yo*t- vel si warrantum habeat, illü vocet qui ipsum in sey-
voluerit,si sina sug defendat. Si autem nihil inde teneat, nec in
WarAr" dominieo nec in servitio, vel nisi ejus parte, q de
brevi illo recedat quietus. Sed quoniam quandoque

melius erit & tutius tenenti warrantü vocare, quàm

in psonam suam defensionis perieulum suscipere, cüm

plures forte & alie competant exceptiones warranto

quàm teneti, ideo prius tractandu erit de warranto &


ejus vocatione.


FINIS TRACTATUS TERTII LIBRI QUINTI,


OF DEFAULTS. 491


meadow or which land the said so-and-so claims as his
right against the said so-and-so, to certify our justi-
eiaries aforesaid what and how much meadow or land
the said À. the attorney, to wit, of the said so-and-so
the claimant, to wit, has put in his view. And whereof
the said so-and-so the tenant, to wit, says that the said
À. has only put in his view so much meadow or so
much land, and in different places, and so many small
parts, and let them in the meanwhile so certify them-
selves thereof, that they may be able to certify our
aforesaid justiciaries more fully thereof on the same
day. And do thou have there this writ. Witness &c.


À view having thus been had, the tenant may forthwith —— 4.
determine whether he will keep the whole of the land b e
claimed, or a part of it, or nothing ; that, if he keeps the ing been
whole, he may forthwith answer at once on his ap- made let,
pointed day, or if he have & warrantor, he may call him, then call a
who may maintain him in his seysine.  But'if he holds;zpe ^"
nothing thereof, neither in domain nor in service, or wishes, if
only a part of it, that he may withdraw acquitted iin
from that writ. | But since sometimes it will be
better and safer for the tenant to call à warrantor, than
to take upon his own person the danger of a defence,
since more exceptions by chance and other are avail-
able to & warrantor than to & tenant, for that reason


let us first treat of a warrantor and the calling of him.


HERE ENDS THE THIRD TREATISE OF THE FIFTH BOOK.


Digitized by Google


Digitized by Google


A.


Abbot or prior, not necessary to specify
intermediate abbots or priors in a
writ of entry, 29.

A bruncis, William de, first pleas. after the
war in county of Bucks, 463.
Aecretion, right of, through death of

coheirs, 441.
Actio in rem, 368, 375.
Action:
for property, can only be deter-
mined on proof by sight and hearing,
5.
when there !s a double action ngaiust
the person and the thing under
one writ, the land may be seized
under a little cape, 409.
Actions :
mixed between coheirs and copat-
ceners, for a division of the inheri-
tance, 427.
mixed between neighbours for the
settlement of boundaries, 429.
Action quod metüs causá, may help a
person, who has given land to
ransom himself during war, 437.
Advowson :
of & church, how it is to be seized
into the hand of the king, without
the manor, 381.
right of, how claimed by an abbot or
prior, 449.
right of, the viscount may take the
church into the hand ofthe king
by a simple caption, 477.
Agents, irremovable, of religious houses,
145.


Albyngewerth, Gylbert de,
Surrey, 95.
Assise:
great, when optional to the tenant
in place of a jury upon the entry, 9.
a great, whether it has alike effect
with a duel in adjudging away
seysine for ever, has been disputed
by the older men, 389.
Attornatus ad lucrandum vel perdendum in
distinction from responsalis, 348.
Attorney :
may represent the chief lord before
the serjeant of the king, 95.
when he cam be appointed by the
claimant and by the tenant respec-
tively, 129.
appointment by a tenant, is a confes-
sion of a summons, 129.
should be constituted after à summons,
if it has anticipated the king's ser-
vice, 149.
must swear on the soul of his princi-
pal, if his principal has not appeared
to a summons, 157.
continues until the principal removes
him,.191.
may be appointed disjunctively by a
partv, 193.
death ofan, its effectupon an essoin, 195.
of a party abroad in the Holy Land,
if he dies during his absence, the
suit is stayed until the return of the
principal party, 197.
cannot send a. responsalis, but only a
nuntius in case of bed-sickness, 249.
should be appointed before the justi-
ciaries itinerant, if a person has
essoined himself in a county, 255.


county of


496


Attorney—cont.

if a husband or a wife is theattorney
of the other, an essoin for bed-sick-
ness is not allowed to either in the
character of such attorney for the
other, 255.

should not be replaced after he has
been essoined, 271.

cannot be accepted by the four knights
sent to view an essoinee for languor,
309,

may appear at the Tower for a claim-
ant, 337.

when he may be accepted by the four
knights on a view for vill-sickness,
363.

cannot essoin himself for vill-sickness
as he cannot constitute an attorney,
3635.

doubtful if he can remit a default, 407.

for several persons,if he makes de-
fault, they all suffer, 413.


B.


Bailiff of a baron's court, 303.

Banco, causes in, put off without & day
on account of the iter of the justi-
ciaries, 419.

Barons and their superiors not obliged to
pledge themselves as essoiners, but
may find sureties, 267.

Basings, Robert de, Surrey Iter, 3 and 4
H. 3; 143.

Bassingbourne, Alan de, claimant of the
church of Wynpol, Kent Iter, 7 H.
3 ; 457.

Bastardy, proof of, entails forthwith a
judgment, 421.

Bath, bishop of, his suit against the prior
of Dath, 16 & 17 H. 8; 193.

Battle :

when optional to the tenant in place
of a jury upon the entry, 9.

trial by, may be had in the county
court, 103.

after wager of, the champion may es-
soin himself, 208.


INDEX.


Dench :
justiciaries of the, are to judge of the
essoins at the Tower, 341.
justiciaries of the, may send a writ of
excuse to the justiciaries itinerant,
397.

Bishop, his consent and that of the chapter
necessary, where a canon transfers
an estate, 5.

Dissextile, why leap year is so called, 331.

Bissextile year, how the excrescent day is
to be accepted, 327.

Bissextilis, from bis sex horas, according
to some, 335.

Bissextus, the day inserted in leap year
as à second sixth day before the
kalends of March, made up of four
exerescent quarters of a day, 331.

Blibing, prior of, Sussex Iter, 6 H. 3; 253.

Bosco, Stephen de, Matilda his widow,
Dorset Iter, 14 H. 3; 21.

Bosco, Walter de, Bucks Iter, 15 H. 3;
443

Bovates of land, 81.

Breton, William de, in Northamptonshire,
13.

Brewese, Reginald de, county of Surrey,
95.

Brock, Hugh de, eounty of Bucks, 255.

Broke, Hugh de, Bucks county, 257.

Bridge, breaking down of a, an excuse for
non-appearance in court after sum-
mons, 151,153.

Burgage tenure under the Crown, 87.


C.
Camera, William de, and. Letitia his wife,
14 H. 3; 307.
Cape, Great :
where the tenant has not appeared to
8 writ of entry, 13.
where the visecount has sent 8 writ and
the tenant has made default, 133.
form of the writ, 375.
nature and effect of it, 377.
when the writ has place, and when the
Little Cape, 417.


INDEX.


Cape, Little :
may be issued, where default is made
by the tenant, after he has appeared,
13.
where the tenant has not appeared to
make his law, 133.
second seizure by it, forfeits the sey-
sine of the tenant, 135.
Cape, a little, at the Tower of London, 307.
Cape, Little : i
land taken into the hand of the king
upon default at the Tower of Lon-
don, 359.
land taken into the hand of the king
on default of attorney to appear,
365.
has place upon default after an appear-
ance in court, 421.
form of the writ, 425.
Carucates of land, 81.
Castellan of a castle in a county, 359.
Celerarius clericus of a religious house, 4.
Civil law, writ of quo warranto, to compel
disclosure of title is against the, 431.
Champion after wager of battle may essoin
himself, as well as the principal
party, 203.
Champions in a duel entitled to a view,
471.


Chaneellor, the, when he must take care
for himself, 163.

Chapter's right of descent, appertains to
the church, and not to individual
members, 449.

Charters of feoffment of reljgious orders,
449.

Chessewiche, Galfrid de, WiltsIter, 2 H. 3;
489.

Chirograph, when necessary to support an
enrolment, 33.

Christianity, Court of :

the king may warrant an absentee after
summons, 151.

inquest concerning legitimacy trans-
mitted to, and remitted by, 419.

Church land, alienated, writ of entry to
recover it, 42.

Q 6366.


497


Circuitous road must be used if direct road
be impeded, 153.
Claimant:
if he alone appears, and there is
no writ, may go away as he came,
411.
under an open writ of right may
always transfer the argument from
the county court to the great court,
263.
Colleges, the corporation always exists,
and the right descends to the body,
449.
Comites and their attorneys, not obliged to
pledge themselves as essoiners, but
may find sureties, 267.
Common of pasture, a writ to make &
view, 483.
Coneslesfeud, William de, Wilts Iter, 4
H. 3; 453.
Constable, his office does not excuse him
from appearing in court to a sum-
mons, 149.


Constable of the Tower of London:

ought always to be present there, 281.

may assign a day before the jus-
ticiaries at Westminster, 297.

may remit a cause to the court after a
year and a day, 297.

may remit a cause to the court after n
year and a day has expired, 818.

his office to make & record in matters
of fact as to the appearance of par-
ties, 339.

must send the tenant before the jus-
ticiaries to have judgment upon the
claimant's essoin, 339.

Coparceners from the same stock must be
summoned, where oneof them claims
without the others, 443.

Coroners should attend to arrest an os-
soinee for languor, who is at large,
317. :

Contumacy of a defendant in an actio in
rem may be purged within 15 days
by a plevin, after a caption into the
king's hand, 371.

ITI


498


Council of the Lateran, as to vacant
churches, 127.
Counting, errors in the, which are fatal to
the action, 453.
Court, advice of the, may allow an essoin
from the necessity of the case,
175.
Court of Christianity, the king may war-
rant for non-appearance there after
.8 summons, 151.
Court of the county:
the record may not be denied by &a
tenant who has failed to appear, 97.
mode of enforcing the appearance of
& tenant, 97.
when a claim is to be sent back to the
lord's court, 99.
course of the proceedings, 101. .
a writ of peace for a party who has
put himself upon a great assise,
103.
the tenant may defend himself by bat-
tle, 103.
its record may not be denied of a
public act, 145.
may grant leaveto an essoince for bed
sickness to rise from his bed, 303.
. . dts record of a view, 487.
Court of the lord :
free service in following it, 83.
how pleas may be thence transferred
to the court of the county, 89.
sometimes held by the lord himself,
sometimes by his bailiff, 9.
may fail in coercive power, 91.
may be unwilling to hold cognisance
of a claim, 91.
if it fails, recourse must be had to the
court of the county, not to the court
of a superior lord, 91.
eannot summon & warrautor, who is
beyond its jurisdiction, 91.
cannot send knightsto view an essoinee
beyond its jurisdiction, 93.
ousted by tenant putting himself upon
a great assise, 93.
how claim transferred to the court. of
the county, 93.


INDEX.


Court of the lord—-cont.
must reclaim its jurisdiction from the
county court at the proper hour, be-
fore an argument has been raised in
the county court, 99.


Courteney :
Matilda de, Devon Iter, 6 H. 3;
293.
Robert de, Devon Iter, 6 H. 3;
253.


Cross, privilege of those who are marked
with it, 161, 165.

Cruce signati, 160, 164.

Crown, keepers of the pleas of the, 15.

Custom of the county of Lancaster, 97.


D.
Day:
consists of nine hundred and sixty
noments, 331.
exerescent, the last in a natural year,
327.
a legitimate day for appearing in
every year at the Tower, 327.
not so according to some, 331.
of love, see Love.
Day's-journeys, reasonable, so as not to
delay anywhere longer than a single
night, 327.
Deaf person, may stipulate through a tutor
or u curator, 455.
Deaf or dumb by birth :
such persons may consent by signs
and by nods, if they can hear or
speak slowly, 455.
cannot acquire nor give seysine Ly
themselves, but may do so by a
curator, 453.
Default :
for service of the king, how it may be
cured, 393. :
may be remitted by the principal
party, not by his attorney, 407.
if remitted by an attorney or by a
warrantor, remission holds good,
107. '


INDEX.


Default—cont.
of husband may not prejudice the
wife, if she can prove his death,
415.

Denarii, service of so many, a subdivision
of a scutum, 81.

Deraignment of a right by the body of a
free man upon his own view or
upon that of his father, 439.

Descent of right cannot take place by
waiver of inheritance by a living
ancestor, 455.

Dissension:

amongst the ancient authorities as to
the remedy fora tenant, who has
lost his seysine by default, 389.

do as the effect of a great assise, 389.

Doer, writ of, does not admit a duel or a
great assise, 211.

Domicile:

of a party, service of a summons to
be made there, 121.
or personally, 133.

Domiciles, where a party in & suit has
several,a summons must be served
where he most resides, or where he
has his greater substance, 121.

Domicile:

where a party has none, a summons
may be served where he bas a fee,
123.

in England, 169.

of an essoinee for languor, 327.

Dominion, distinct from property or fee, or
freehold, 4.

Dower land, writs of entry to recover it
when alienated, 41.

Dreit dreit, the possessory right combined
with the right of property, 433.

Duel:

not allowed in a writ of dower, 211.
in many things has the same effect as
a great assise, 389.

Duket, Richard, his consultation of William
de Ralegh and Gilbert de Segrave,
311.

Dumb person may stipulate through a tutor
or a curator, 455.


499


Dunholm, Thomas de, citizen of London


in a plea before Stephen de Segrave
469.


Durham, bishop of, York Iter, 3 H. 3. ; 19,
33.


E.


Editio, declaration of the plaintiff as to


payment of costs and expenses, 462.
Emma de Bella Fago, Nottingham Iter,
6 H. 3.; 259.
Enemies:
an incursion of, may excuse a vis-
count or constable from appearing
in court to a summons, 149.
captivity by, an excuse for non-appear-
ance in court after a summons, 151.
Engayne Vitalis, Church of Ho, 7 H. 3. ;
247.
Eniford, church of, 171.
Enrolment:
without a chirograph will not take
away a wife's right of action after
the death of her husband, 33.
after a default, 387.
Entry, writ of :
when convertible into a writ of right, 7.
when very remote, 9.
Or on account of a grant or feoffment, 9.
when convertible into a writ of right, 67.
when available, where a writ of right
1s not issuable, 69.
may become at once a writ of
right upon the claimant's pleadings,
71.
not convertible into a writ of right,
where the tenant has elected an
entry, 73.
Equal has no empire over equal, 397.
Essoin:
for bed-sickness not allowed, unless
a writ of entry is converted into a
writ of right, 7.
beyond the sea, may not be turned
into an essoin of sickness by the
way, 123.


I12


500


Essoin—cont.
proof of its truth, incumbent on the
essoinee, 155.
Essoins for being beyond the sea, 159.
Essoin:
fora simple pilgrimage to the Holy
Land, a year and a day, 159.
simple, for being beyond the sea, forty
days and one flood and one ebb, 159.
for the service of the lord the eternal
king, 165,167.
discretion of the justieiaries to allow
further time, 167.
for a simple passage to the Holy
Land, how it is aided by other es-
soins, if necessary, 167.
for death by way of precaution, 167.
in respect of a nearer place bars an
essoin in respect of à more distant
place, 169.
for the service of the king does not lie
in an assise of last presentation from
fear of lapse, 171.
for the service of the king not to be
granted except with reasonable
cause, 173.
for sickness in coming in one plea may
be allowed, where languor has been
adjudged in another plea, 173.
by a minor of himself not allowable,
177.
when allowed by the court, mus not
of right, 171.
not allowed to a disseysor, as his
bailiff might appear, 179.
not allowed to a person charged with
criminal] acts, 181.
does not lie where a bailiff is sum-
moned to account, 181.
not where the king has summoned a
viscount or & mayor to render an
account, 181.
Essoin8:
how allowed to co-tenants, 183.
how allowed to tenants in commop,
185.
in respect of several claimants, 189.


INDEX.


| Essoin:


lies in the person of an attorney, when
he has been constituted by & tenant
or by a claimant, 191.

ought not to be rendered until the
fourth day, 195.

made to the court, not to the party,
203.

must be rendered in the judgment hall
before a judge who has jurisdiction
and coercion, 205.

for bed-sickness, 907.


Essoin for bed sickness:
to whom it is allowed after an essoin
of sickness by the way, 211.
after an essoin for sickness by the
way must be made on the third day
iuclusive, 218.
sometimes turned into an essoin for
sickness by the way from necessity,
and upon the advice of the court,217.
aftersickness by the way allowed to
man and wife together, 221.
the name of the county, where the
party is lying, to be written on the
margin of the Roll, 245.
does not lie in an action of quo jure,
257.
does not lie in a suit that a person
should permit a presentation, but
proceedings may be had to a de-
fault, 259.
must be preceded by an essoin for sick-
ness in coming, 259.
Essoins for bed-sickness, how returnable,
265.
Essoin forlanguorallowed for à year and
a day, 207.
Essoin of vill sickness, not allowed in the
case of an attorney, 365.
Essoin of vill-sickness:
by two messengers, 863.
not allowed to an attorney, 365.
Essoins concerning the Ioly Land, 243.
Esgsoin:
of Ultra Mare when turned into sick-
ness by the way, 261.


INDEX.


Essoin—cont.
for absence in Ireland, 261.
allowed to the warrantor for the same
day as to the tenant, 237.
to be made at the Tower of London
when the justiciaries are not resi-
dent at the Bench, 247.
Essoin to be made at the castle of &
county, 247.
Essoin, view of it is sufficient, if the claim-
ant admits it, although the knights
do not appear to testify, 305.
Essoins may be recommenced after a view
has been made, 485.
Essoinee for bed-sickness:
may not leave his bed, until after the
four knights have viewed him,
137. ,
within the kingdom, may not transfer
himself beyond the kingdom, 159.
if his languor turns into an incur-
able disease, should send a respon-
salis to the Tower to represent him,
283.
may obtain leave to rise from his bed
with consent of the claimant, 297.
may rise from his bed, if his cause is


made a remanet by proclamation,


299.

wrongfully seized by his adversary
and cast into prison, 301.

should not make default because of
an error of the four knights, 313.

in a county court or in a baron's
court may obtain from the king a
license to leave his bed, 361.

Essoinee for languor:

shall have a year and a day at the
Tower of London, 215.

cannot appear at the Tower of Lon-
don by an attorney, 309.

may not leave his house, 317.

if he leaves his house, may be arrested
by the claimant accompanied by a
king's serjeant, 317.

arrested for being at large, may show
that he was dragged out of his bed
by the claimant, 319,


901


Essoinee for languor—cont.
may be proceeded against for a de-
fault, after he has been once arrested,
320.
should proceed to the Tower of Lon-
don by reasonable day's journeys,
327.
in a county court should be assigned
to appear at some castle in the
county, 359.
Essoiner:
à person who makes' excuse for
another person's non-appearance in
court, 155.
not to be burdened with findipg
sureties, if of humble station, 155.
if he holds in barony, must find bail
to prove the excuse, 155.
Estotengni, Thomas de, Leicester lter,
8H.3; 69.
Exceptions:
treatise on, 359.
treatise of, omitted, 461.
Excrescent day, for what reason not com-
putable in each year, 329.
Expletia, where mentioned in a writ of
entry as well as the use, an answer
may be made as to a writ of right,
15.
Expletia, must have been taken by an
ancestor to support a writ of right,
434.
Extent, when it should be perambulatory,
469.


F.


Falcon, free service of a, 83.
Fatuous person distinct from a madman,
359.
Felony:
of an elder brother, who predeceased
his father, does not prejudice the
succession of his surviving brothers,
445.
forfeits the acquisitions of an elder
brother for the heirs of his body,
and for his brothers and his more
remote heirs, 447.


502


Feoffment, if contradicted must be inquired
into by witnesses and the country,
3].

Ferry-boat withdrawn by claimant to
prevent tenant from appearing in
court, 373.

Fifteen days:

the normal interval after a summons,
125.
requisite in an assignation beyond the

county, 129.

Firmarius has only the use and the fruiis,
9.

Four knights have a record which cannot
be disputed, 367.

Fourteen years, pleadable age of a tenant
in socage, 177.

Fredavylle, Stephen de, Oxford Iter,
14 H. 3; 409.

Free service implied in the case of military
service, 81.


G.


Goldington, Peter of, in Northamptonshire,
13.

Gayton, Henry de, Northampton Iter,
7&8H.3; 257.

Gavelkind, a writ for preparing & jury of,
111.

Germany, army in, 159.

Gloucester, Richard of, Warwick Iter,
9 & 10 H. 3; 295.

Gloves, a pair of white, free service thereby,
83.

God can never be deceived, 403.

Godfrey, son of Baldwin, Norfolk Iter,
16 H. 3; 221.

Gospel, quotation from the, **in ore duo-
* rum vel trium testium stat omne
* verbum," 288.

Grace of the justiciaries, 18, 102.

Greeks:

sea of the, cssoin within it, 159.
sea of the, pilgrimage within, towards

St. James, 233.

Gylbert of Hendon, Middlesex Iter, 15 &
16 H. 3 ; 221.


INDEX.


H.


Hatechrist, William, in county of Hunting-
don, 113.
Hawk, a sparrow, free service of, 83.
Haynsham, abbot of, record of, 9 & 10
H. 8; 203.
Heir, claim of, where ancestor has de-
mised for a term, 29.
Henry, who now is king, 431.
Henry 3 :
Essex Iter, second year after the war,
463. :
Kent Iter, second year after the war,
481.
Wilts Iter, second year of his reign
after the war, 489.
York Iter, third year, 19, 35.
Surrey Iter, third year, 95.
Trinity term, third year, 453.
Surrey Iter, third and fourth years,
143.
Michaelmas term, third and fourth
years, 427.
York Iter, fourth year, 13.
Warwick Iter, fifth year, 177.
Wilts Iter, fourth year, 453.
Bucks Iter, fourth and fifth years, 391.
Worcester Iter, fifth year, 115.
Holy Trinity term, fifth year, 471.
Easter term, fifth year, 453.
Devon Iter, sixth year, 251.
Sussex Iter, sixth year, 253.
Gloucester Iter, sixth year, 253.
Nottingham Iter, sixth year, 259.
judgment in banco, sixth year, 261.
Bucks Iter, sixth year, 365.
Norfolk Iter, sixth and seventh years,
221.
Kent Iter, seventh year, 27.
Bucks Iter, seventh year, 27.
St. Michael's term, seventh year, 247.
St. Hilary term, seventh year, 247.
Sussex Iter, seventh year, 249.


INDEX.


Henry 3—cont.

Kent Iter, seventh year, 457.

St. Hilary term, seventh year, 457.

Northampton Iter, seventh and eighth
years, 257.

Leicester Iter, eighth year, 69.

Huntingdon Iter, ninth year, 115.

Bucks Iter, ninth year, 365.

Berks Iter, ninth year, 443.

Kent Iter, ninth and tenth years, 203.

Suffolk Iter, ninth aud tenth years,
219.

Warwick Iter, ninth and tenth years,
295.

Suffolk Iter, tenth year, 177.

Kent Iter, twelfth year, 417.

Devon Iter, thirteenth year, 224.

Middlesex Iter, thirteenth year, 241.

Wiltshire Iter, fourteenth year, 13.

Dorset Iter, fourteenth year, 21.

Kent Iter, fourteenth year, 171.

Bucks Iter, fourteenth year, 253.

Norfolk Iter, fourteenth year, 297.

Nottingham and Lincoln, fourteenth
year, 307.

Oxford Iter, fourteenth year, 409.

Hunts Iter, fourteenth year, 451.

Middlesex Iter, fourtcenth and fifteenth
years, 221.

St. Michael's term, fourteenth and
fifteenth years, 489.

Worcester Iter, fifteenth year, 268.

Bucks Iter, fifteenth year, 443.

Kent Iter, fifteenth and sixteenth years,
197.

Salop Iter, fifteenth and. sixteenth
years, 349.

Hilary Term, sixteenth year, 193.

Norfolk Iter, sixteenth year, 221.

Oxford Iter, sixteenth year, 391.

Essex Iter, sixteenth and seventeenth
years, 181.

Bath Iter, sixteenth and seventeenth
years, 193.

Pleas which follow the king, twenty-
fourth year, 437.

Pleas which follow the king, thirty-
third year, 397.


503


Henry, the grandfather of the king, 10,
431.

Henry, the grandfather of the king, limita-
tion of a writ of right, 435.

Henry, the grandfather of the king, 447.

Henry, king, the elder, 435.

Ho, the advowson of the church, 7 H. 3;
247.

Holy Land, a general passage to, 233.

Hour, proper, within the fifteenth day,
377.

Hour of the day consists of forty moments,
331.

House, religious, remains to eternity,
although the monks or canons die,
449.

Hyda, Allan de, in banco, 6 H. 3.; 261.


Ides of April, 313.

Idiots have consent and dissent, 455.

Imnere, Peter de, Bucks Iter, 6 II. 3 ; 365.

In rerum natura :

an ancestor, who is not, 436.

mention should be made of an ances-
tor, although he be not, 443.

Inheritance:

divided into ounces or twelfth parts,
441.

right of, cannot pass by donation to a
third party, 457.

Instrument of demise, if contradicted, may
be proved by witnesses and the
country, 21.

Insula, Robert de, advowson of Wynpol,
Kent Iter, 7 H. 3 ; 457.

Inundation of waters :

may reasonably prevent a person's
appearance in court, 153.
detention of a party by, 378.

Ireland, essoin for absence in, turned into
a simple essoin of sickness by the
way, 261.


904


J.


James, St., pilgrimage to, sce St. James,
233.
Jarpmille, Alice de, Bucks Iter, 6 H. 8.;
365.
Jew might impute to Jew, 269.
Jocus partitus, alternative risk of losing or
winning, 486, 488.
John, king:
our father, a fine made in his court,
49.
the father of the king, 431.
his reign, Leicester Iter of Martin
de Pateshull, 367.
Judgment:
not binding, unless made by the proper
judge, 125.
unjust, rendered by the will of the
king, may be disputed, but cannot
be amended without him, 403,
of a judge not the proper judge, is no
judgment, 405.
Juries, constitution of, under diverse writs
of entry, 55.
Jurors to appear before the justiciaries at
Westminster, 17.
Justiciary:
when of grace he may allow a further
day, 19.
may not substitute a justiciary, 125.
has no power over any person before
the cause is brought before him by
à summons, 129.
Justiciaries:
at Westminster, 17.
their circuit may excuse the viscount
from appearing in a court to a sum-
mons, 149.
their discretion, upon cause shown, to
allow further tine to an essoinee
for absence in the Holy Land, 167.
may not quash anything granted, of
the king's pleasure, but must await
the king's will, 178.


INDEX.


Justiciaries—cont.


record of the, may overthrow all the
other Rolls, 273.

how variance between their records is
to be settled, 275.

may be constraining by the king to
render judgment, 403.


K.


Kalends of April, 318.
Karum, John de, Hilary Term 16 H.3.;


193.
Knight's fee, held under what service, 81.


Knights, twelve, summonable on a writ of


entry, 17.
King. See the king.


L.


Lancaster :
custom of the county, 97.
Alice of, 257.
Land :

held of a soke or of an honour, 85.

alienated by a felon after conviction,
writ for the lord to recover it, asan
escheat, 47.

alienated by the bailiff of the king
against the will of its owner whilst
in prison, writ of entry to recover
it, 47.

alienated by a villein holding in soc-
age, writ of entry for the lord to
recover it, 47.

alienated by a person of unsound
mind, writ of entry for the heir to
recover it, 47.

held by intrusion, writ of entry for the
heir to recover it, 49.

held for & term, writ of entry to re-
cover it upon the death of thetermor,
49.

alienated by a guardian, writ to the
ward, when of full age, to recover
it, 51, 53,


INDEX.


Land—cont.
alienated by the husband, writ to the
heirs of the wife to recover it, 51.
held by & termor, may be claimed
undera writ of entry or under a
writ of right, 65.
of the tenant to be taken into the hand
of the king, if the tenant fails to
appear to a further summons in the
county court, 97.
of tenants forfeited by default to the
claimant, if thetenant fails to appear
toa fifth summons in the county
court, 97.
Holy, pilgrimage to the, simple or
general, 159.
Lateran — Council,
churches, 127.
Law, wager of, by a tenant, 133.
Leap year: -
the day assigned at the Tower of Lon-
don may by accident be unlawful,
309.
how the excrescent day is to be ac-
cepted, 327.
Legitimacy, inquest concerning, remitted
from court of Christianity to the
court of the king, 419.
Letters, sealed, of the viscount addressed
to the justiciaries at. Westminster,
325.
Levelande, Roger, Warwick Iter, 9 & 10
H. 8; 295.


Librates of land, 469.


Licence to rise from bed, how granted after
an essoin for languor, 213.


London, vill of :
essoin of bed sickness does not lie,
as an attorney might bave been
appointed, 258.
essoin of bed sickness does not lie,
where an essoin of sickness by the
way has not preceded, 257.
Longa Villa, prior of, Norfolk Iter, 14 H.
8; 297.
Lord, the, his court; see court'of the
lord.


concerning vacant


505


Love, a day of :
available to the tenant, 127.
taken between the parties, 217.
given with the assent of all parties,
|. 819.
taken after à default under a protest,
405.
Lucrari:
pro, neque pro perdere, 154, 157.
pro, nec pro perdere, 173.
Lucero, pro, neque pro damno, 154.
Lucy, Godfrey de, Sussex Iter, 6 H. 3;
253.
Lusteshille, Wilham de, Wilts Iter, 4 H.
8; 453.


M.


Madman cannot cease to possess, if he has
begun to possess, 455.

Madness of a party in a suit stays the suit
until his death, or until a lucid in- :
terval, 359.

Malo Lacu, Peter de, Yorkshire Pus 13.

Man, the life of, 3.

Man and wife :

their right in respect of the wife's
estate, admits of no division, as they
are one flesh, 187.

one blood, and one flesh, and one body,
423.

Manors, the custom of the king's, to be
maintained by the king's bailiffs,
87.

Marestop, Hugh de Cayel, Warwick Iter,
23.

Marshall :

Gilbert and Cecelia his wife, 6 H. 3;
261.

William, of county of Pembroke, es-
soined himself for absence in Ire-
land, 261.

Mary, St., Church of, 475.

Maundevill, William de, Essex Iter, second
year after the war, 462.


506


Messengers, so-called, who are sent to
make excuse for bed sickness after
an essoin for sickness on the way,
213.

Messenger may be heard concerning a de-
fault up to the judgment, 213.

Military service, implies free service, 81.

Minor :

must be summoned through his guar-
dian, 145.

cannot be essoined in a cause of pos-
session against a minor, 177.

impleaded with his wife, cannot claim
a stay of the proceedings, 177.

ought not to lose in à minor court, if
he is impleaded on the same day in
the king's court, where he may not
essoin himself on account of his
minority, 179.

Moigne, Radulph de, Wiltshire Iter, 13.

Moment, the fortieth part of an hour,
33].

Morbus sonticus:

a disease lasting more than a year, 209,
an incurable disease, 283.

Morin, Reginald, Berks Iter, 9 H. 3; 443.

Mortdancester, assise of, Salop Iter, si
Vincentius, 177.

Murdac, Aghevilda, York Iter, 3 H.83 ; 19.

Murdaker, Reginald, York Iter, 3 H. 3;
19.


N.


Naam:

a great, taken of beasts and chattels
for failure to appear to a third
summons in a county court, 97.

a little, taken in the name of a distress
for not appearing to a second sum-
mons in the county court, 97.

Nobility, persons of, not required to swear
in person, but by their proctors, to
wit, their sureties, 267.

Normans:

the lands of the, eacheats of the king,
419.

land of the, an escheat, 485.


INDEX.


Nuntii:
distinct from essoniatores, 213.
two required to make an essoin for
vill-sickness, 363.
Nutlegh, abbot of, his case in the second
year after the war, 477.


O0.


Obedientary, of a Chapter, 57.

Octave, a day within the, on which to
appear before the justiciaries at
Westminster, 272.

Oliva, the daughter of Andrew, Suffolk
Iter, 9 & 10 H. 3; 219.

Osbert, his case in the county of Kent,
15 & 16 H. 3; 197.


P,


Par in parem non habet imperium, 396.
Parity:
of default of the parties on either side,
307.
of default works mutual compensa-
tion, 387.
Pasture, common of, writ to recover for a
definite number of beeves or of
sheep, 55.
Pateshull, Martin de, Leicester Iter, tem-
pore regis Johannis, 367.
Pateshull, Martin de:
York Iter, 3 H. 3; 19.
York Iter, 3 H. 8; 35.
Worcester Iter, 5 H. 3; 115.
Suffolk Iter, 5 H. 3 ; 177.
Warwick Iter, 5 H. 3; 177.
judgment in Banco, 6 H. 3 ; 2€1.
judgment in Banco, 7 H. 8; 267.
Kent Iter, 12 H. 3; 417.
East Suffolk Iter, 21.
Surrey and Leicester Iter, 415.
custom ef county of Lancaster sp-
proved by him, 97.


INDEX. 507


Peace:
time of, distinguished from a time of
war in a declaration of an ancestor's
seysine, 437.
time of, 453.
writ of, until a great assise, 105.


all such writs must be enrolled in ,


Chancery, 105.

Pepoudrous, courts of, 127.

Peril, an excuse for not appearing in court,
373.

Periculum joci partiti, 486.

Peter the Blessed, his church, 477.

Pilgrimage, simple, to the Holy Land,
essoin allowed for & year and a
day, 159, 165.

Pilgrimage, general to the Holy Land,
trial shall be stayed without a day,
161, 165.

Pinchard, Fray, Oxford Iter, 16 H. 3; 390.

Plevin, land claimed through a, not to be
forthwith replevined to the tenant,
379.

Pocotte, Erimnarda de, Norfolk Iter, 6 &
7 H. 3; 220.

Pone :

mode of transferring a cause from the
county court to the king's court, 99.

to transfer a cause in a writ of right to
the justiciaries at Westminster, 111.

granted, if claimant is connected by
relationship to the viscount, or if
he be the viscount, 113.

notissuable in a plea by a petty writ
concerning the domains of the king,
117.

Pope, the lord the, his decree concerning
erusaders, that all legal proceedings
should be stayed, 161.

Possession cause of, sufficient to have the
freehold and the fee, 435.

Preecipe :

a certain writ of right, 227.

writes, which in no respect touch the
principal right, 229.

in capite, 263.

Prebend, writ of right for, should specify
geysine of predecessor, 451.


Presentation, assise of, respecting the
Church of Eniford, 171.
Prison :
the king's, 47.
detention of a party in, 373.
close confinement in a, may excuse
absence after a summons, 399.
Proctors to conduct causes, 145.
Proctor, a false, judgment so rendered not
a judgment, 405.
Procurator cannot appoint a procurator,
864.
Profits must have been taken by an ances-
tor to support a writ of right, 435.
Prohihition, writ of, 105,
Proof may fail, although the right never
fails, 19.
Property :
a cause of, where there is neither dis-
seysine nor ancestral] right, 2.
cause of, profits must have been taken,
besides having the freehold and the
fee, 435.


- Prothonotary, Roll of the, presumption in


its favour, 273.


R.


Ralegh, William de :
Iter in the county of Northampton, 12.
Warwick Iter, 23, 99,
his advice to Richard Duket, 311.
Ralph, bishop of Chichester, chancellor,
14 H. 3 ; 409.
Reading, abbot of :
Worcester Iter, 5 H. 3; 115.
Surrey and Leicester Iter, 415.
Record of the four knights upon a view of
an essoinee for bed-sickness, 137.


Redham, Philip de, Sussex Iter, 6 H. 3;
253.

Remanets, causes set down before the
justiciaries of the bench may be
made remanets by proclamation on
account of the Iter of the justi-
ciaries, 299.


908


Responsalis :
different from attornatus, 249, 349.
may appear at the Tower sooner than
he ought to have done, if on a legi-
timate day, 351.

Richard, the uncle of the king, 431.
Richard, Alicia the wife of, Kent Iter, 7
H. 3; 27.

Right, writ of :

how it may become a writ of entry, 9.
various forms of, 81.
in the court of the lord, 81.

Right,a close writ of, proceedings under
it before an essoin is allowed, 261.

Right,an open writ of, should be shown
and read before an essoin is re-
turned, 263.

Right, writ of,

necessary statement in the declaration,
433.

declaration must state in the time of
euch a king, 435.

limited within the time of king Henry,
the grandfather of the king, 435.

on behalf of an abbot or prior, 449.

Right incorporeal may be seized into the
hand of the king, 381.

Right, unity of, in several coparceners, as
one heir, 185.

Roches, Peter de, formerly bishop of Win-
chester, his ease, when on a general
pilgrimage to the Holy Land, 197.

Robbers :

faling amongst, an excuse for non-
appearance in court after summons,
151.

detention of a party by, 373.

Roll of the prothonotary ought to be fol-
lowed by the other Rolls, 273.

Rolls of the court of the king may be
inspected to prove against a widow
her ratification of her husband's
grant of her marriage-portion during
his lifetime, 31.

Rowlandson, John, Bucks Iter, 4 & 5 H. 3;
39.


INDEX.


S.


Say, Matilda de, Essex Iter, second year
after the war, 463.
St. Andrew, church of, 475.
St. Edmund, Solomon of, Suffolk Iter, 9
10 H. 3; 219.
St. George, Alan de, 7 H. 3; 249.
St. James :
pilgrimage to, 159.
pilgrimage to, warrants an essoin for
absence beyond the sea and ífor
Sickness in coming, 167.
pilgrimage to, death of an attorney
pending it, 197.
pilgrimage towords, 233.
St. John:
prior of, at Northampton, 7 & 8 H.
3; 257.
William, county of Southampton, 34
H. 3; 437.
Robert of, Church of Eniford, 171.
St. Mary church, 475.
St. Oswald, prior of, 13.
St. Peter, church of, 475.
Scutum, sometimes valued at forty solidi,
sometimes at two marks or twenty
solidi, 81.
Sea of the Greeks, 159, 233.
Sea, beyond the,tenant may pray a ** pone"
to Westminster, 113.
Segrave, Stephen de :
Oxford Iter, 14 H. 3; 409.
Pleas wbich follow the king, 469.
Segrave, Gilbert de, his advice to Richard
Duket, 311.
Seneschal of a baron's court, 301.
Serjeant of the Ring:
his function where a claimant appeals
to the court of the county, 95.
he has a record.
assumed in the place of à fourth
knight as a viewer of an essoinee
for bed-sickness, 295.
gives to the parties a day in the
county court, where the cause is
transferred from a baron's court,
419.


INDEX. 509


Serjeant of the hundred, his record may
not be denied by a party, 99.
Serving horseman, to go to the army in

Wales, 83.
Services:
diversity of free, 83.
customary, enforceable by a writ of
right, 89.
Sheriff, see Viscount.
Shillings, ten, rent of, from a tenement,
48].
Shoford, Ingeriamus de, Kent Iter, 12 H.
3; 417.
Snow and ice, an excuse for a party not
appearing in court, 378.
Socage tenure, 14 years constitutes age to
plead, 177.
Solidi, forty, taken for a shield (de scuto),
8].
Spain, army in, 159.
Spurs, a pair of gilt, free service thereby,
83.


State, business of the, an excuse for non-
appearance to a summons, 149.
Stephen, arcbbishop of Canterbury, church
of Eniford, 171.
Suit, transferred from the county court to
the great court, 487.
Summon, who has the power to, 125.
Summonses, diversity of, 119.
Summons:
aspecial, how itis to be served, 121.
where it has been served on a party,
he cannot transfer himself out of
the realm, so as to essojn himself as
being beyond the sea, 123.
must be made through two persons at
least, who can certify to it, 128.
should be made fifteen days before an
appearance i8 required, 128.
except upon certain legitimate causes,
127.
when,if shorter, it may be objectedto,
127.
if denied by the party summoned,
must be testified by the summoners,
131.


Summons—continued.

absence ofa writ invalidates it, 133.

may be denied against the testimony
of the summoners, and the person
summoned may wage his law, 133.

where it has not preceded an essoin,
all the proceedings are void, 139.

made by only one person, defective,
147.

after a person has appeared in court,
which cannot be contested, 147.

ineffective ex post facto, where sum-
moners are not of accord, 147.

is not binding, if served beyond the
county, 147.

not legitimate, if the day is illegiti-
mate, 147.

lawful excuse for not appearing to a,
149.

what accidents mny excuse non-ap-
pearance to, 399.

party not bound to appear before a
judge, who is not his proper judge,
402.

of husband and wife, wife must prove
her husband's death to save his de-
fault, 415.

testified by the serjeant of the king,
419.

Sun revolves round the earth during a
natural year, 329.

Sureties more easily found by persons of
greater estate and therefore more
justly required, 155.

Syndics of religious houses, 145.

Syward, Richard, county of Gloucester;
pleas which follow the king, 33 H.
8; 397.


T:


Taham, William de, 257.
Temple, the, master of the knights, 2 H.
3 ; 481.
Tenant, after awaiting the fourth day after
. a default of the claimant may go
away quit of the writ, 189.


510


Tenant—econtinued.
who has lost by default, may have a
remedy, where he has received no
summons, or where he has been
absent abroad and was not antici-
pated by 4 summons, 391.
if he alone appears and there is no
writ may go away as he came,
411.
exceptions against the claim, dilatory
or peremptory, 459.
by calling a warrantor, nay forfeit his
right to make certain exceptions,
461.
Term, a, may meau the term of life ora
term of years, 8.
tenant renounces it, b asserting a
feoffment, 21.
Termor :
may call a warrantor, 27.
his right to a writ of entry to recover
his proper seysine, 65.
The king:
himself, jury to be summoned before
him or before four justiciaries as-
signed, 63.
his service, a lawful excuse for not
appearing in court after a summons,
149.
his service not a valid essoin, if the
party summoned could have in time
constituted an attorney, 163.
essoin for his service must be war-
ranted by a writ of the king, ib.
cannot grant anything except what
may be done of right, 173.
his will not to be disputed, where he
has essoined a party, 171.
can only grant an excuse for default,
80 a8 to protect the party from loss,
but not to enable bim to gain any
advantage over his adversary, 397.
may granta license to get up to an
essoinee for bed-sickness in a county
court, or in à baron's court, 861.
The king's warranty may be questioned,
although it induces the strongest
presumption of the fact, 403.


INDEX.


The king:
may be deceived, but God never, 403.
may be interpellated as to his war-
ranty, 403.
must expect God as the avenger, 403.
has no superior but God, 403.
the case of, precludes a judgment
between an uncle and a nephew
under a writ of right, 75, 77.
not so, however, under a writ of entry,
75.
The king's:
court, no compulsions allowed against
the will of a party, 31.
.Serjeant may have a record of the
arrest of an essoince, 317.


Thornmarton, Ada de, Worcester Iter, 15
H. 3 ; p. 263.


Time of peace, ancestor's seysine must
have been acquired in a, 437.


Title, disclosure of, by writ of quo war-
ranto against tenant, how effective
for claimant, 431.

Toniguy, Robert de, Gloucester Iter, 6 H,
3; 2593.


Tower of London :

appearance to be made at, 215.

record of an essoin by the constable
of the, 247.

a day given there in case of languor,
251.

the viewers in a case of languor may
assign a year and a day for an ap-
pearance at the Tower, 263.

writ to the four knights to appoint a
year and & day at the Tower, ina
ease of languor, 275, 277.

chosen for parties to appear at, be-
cause the constable ought always to
be present, 281.

assignment to appear there not satis-
fied by appearing before the justi-
ciaries at Westminster, 281,

when once 8 day is appointed to ap-
pear there, the court cannot grant
leave to an essoinee for bed-sickness
to leave his bed, 297.


INDEX.


Tower of London—continued.

protestation of claimant at, 307.

discord amongst the knights as to the
day assigned, 309.

day unlawful, by reason of leap
year, 309.

form of granting a day at, 311.

assignment to appear there stays the
action of the justiciaries, 323.

legitimate day of appearing there, 327.

essoinee for languor should appear
in leap year on the three hundred
and sixty-sixth day, 333.

party assigned to appear there may
not appear before the justiciaries in
court, 337. :

claimant may appear by'an attorney or
an essoiner, and tenant by a respon-
sulis, 337.

Tyndland, Thomas de, Devon Iter, 13 H.

8; p. 225.


U.


Uncia, the twelfth part of an acre of land,
440.

Unity of blood in man and wife, 187.
Unsound mind may disable a person from
appearing to a summons, 399.
Usufructuary, his right as strong as thatof

the freeholder, 27.


V.
View :

by four knights of tbe tenant who has
essoined himself for bed-sickness,
137.

the making a, to whom to be granted,
463.

denied to a sister in & suit for partition
of a manor, 463.

denied to an intruder where the estate
has been specified, 467.

denied in a claim for a. manor in the
name of dower , 467.


511


View—continued.
also in a claim for a manor without
its appurtenances, 465.
also in a claim for a mediety of a
manor, 465.
allowed in the place of the oath of the
champions, 471.
denied to & warrantor, 471.
after a default allowed as of grace,
471.
not allowed, after land has been taken
into the hand of the king, 471.
of incorporeal things, how to be
made by a view of the places in
which they are and exist, 472.
by the jurors of the places where there
has been an injury, 473.
when it lies in & plea of quo warranto,
419.
Villa Longa; see Longa Villa.
Vill sickness, essoin for, not allowed to an
attorney, 365.
Vincentius, assise of mortdancester, Salop
Iter, 177.
Virgate of land, 81.
Vis major, may prevent a party from ap-


pearing in court, 373.
Viscount :


his excuses for not making a summons,
143.


his office does not excuse him from
appearing in eourt to a summons,
149.

his office to send four knights who are
present to view an essoinee for bed-
sickness, 279.


W.
Wanham, William de, Suffolk Iter, 21.
War:
first pleas after, Bucks Iter, 463.
second year after, Essex Iter, 463.
second year after, case in the county
of Kent, 377.
time of, as in the time of king John,
437.


512 INDEX.
War— continued, Writ of entry :
parties disseysed by force in time of, when convertible into & writ of right,
may recover seysine after the war, 67.


437.

Warerico, Henricus de S., Bucks Iter, 9
H. 3; 365.

Warrantor :

tenant may vary his, 25.

when he is under age, the plea must
stand over, 103.

entitled to thelike essoins with tenants,
199.

may have a single essoin, 237.

. doubtful if he can remit a default,

407.

Warranty from the king for non-appear-
ance to à summons may be dis-
puted as to the fact of the party
being occupied in the king's service,
401.

Washingley, Robert de, in county of Hunt-
ingdon, 115.

Wells, archdeacon of, William, Hunts Iter,
14 H. 8; 451.

Westminster :

justiciaries at, 17.

justiciaries at, summons before them,
where the tenant holds in chief of
the crown, 85.

n cause transferred from the county
court to the justiciaries at, 111.

writ to the four knights to appoint a
day before the justiciaries at West-
minster, when they do adjudge lan-
guor, 275.

Widow, claim where husband during life
has demised her inheritance or mar-
riage portion, 31.

Wife has nothing which is not her hus-
band's, 423.

William, Etho the 80n of, county of Essex,
181.

Williamson, Hugh, Surrey and Leicester
Iter, 415.

Windestone, Guy de, Bucks Iter,7 H. 3;

27.

Writ of dower, does not admit a duel or a

great assise, 211.


turned into a writ of right by election
of the tenant, 257.
sometimes equivalent to a writ of mort-
dancester, 259.
Wit of right :
when barred by the tenant's election
of an entry, 73.
proceedings under it bar any subse-
quent action about the possession,
81. .
turned into a& writ of entry by the
counting, 209.
available to a tenant, who has lost by
& default, 389.
doubts up to what time it is available,
391.
on behalf of an abbot or prior, how
the enrolment should be made,
449.
Writ called a precipe does not always
* touch the principal right, 223.
Writ of Quo warranto :
does not allow an essoin for bed-sick-
ness, 255.
proceedings for an attachment in ease
of a default, 429.
for disclosure of title is against the
civil law, 431.
Writ :
of Quo jure on common of pasture.
209.
to excuse for service of the king
from appearing at the Iter of the
justiciaries, 393.
of excuse for service of the king
has effect in all minor courts,
395.
of recovery for a tenant unjustly dis-
seysed for default, although with a
judgment, 891.
to the seneschal of &a baron's court,
301.
to reverse & seizure of land, wbere
the disseysed tenant has never been
summoned, 141.


INDEX.


Writ-— cont.
where a duel has been waged in a
county court against the custom of
the realm, 117.
on common of pasture changed into
8 writ of right by the counting, 209.
for attaching tho four knights, if they
omit to come to testify their view
of an essoinee for bed-sickness,
285.
Writs appointed by the Chancery upon the
coming of the justiciaries, 27].
Wnt:
of Great Cape, when it has place,
875.
to give seysine to a party upon default
of his adversary, after caption of the
land into the hand of the king,
389.
to make a view of common of pasture,
483.
for a view, to be formulated according
to the original writ of action, 485.
for an inquest may have short addi-
tional clauses, 325.
for preparing a great assise, 109.
for a jury of twelve men who hold in
gavelkind, 111.
of ** Nuper obit," 465.
may contain a double action, both
agaiust the person and against the
thing, 407.
absence of,if both the claimant and
the tenant appear on the proper day
to the summons, not fatal to the
claimant, unless tenant claims judg-
ment, 411.


Q 6366,


518


Wit of peace :
until the coming of the justiciaries,
103.
to the county court, 105.
W rit of prohibition to the bailiff of a manor
court, 105.
WrTrits, carrying the lord's, within the realm
of England, free service thereby,
83.
Wychelesse, Paulinus de, Oxford Iter,
14 H. 3; 409.


Y.


Year, Leap, makes no difference on account
of the excrescent day in regard to
an essoin for languor, 207.

Year, the solar, its circle made after the
figure of à serpent without a tail,
333.

Years, solar and lunar, 329.

Year, the natural :

the period in which the sun completes
its circle of revolution, 329.

after the likeness of a serpent with its
tail in its mouth, 333.

Years, possession for thirty or forty, a pre-
sumption of a just possession, 227.
York :

William of, an authonty, that in &
pedigree mention should be made
of a degree which is vacant through
death, and the reason wherefore,
443.

treasurer of, 14 H. 8 ; 307.

Iter, without & date, 85.


LONDON:
Printed by GEoRgGE E. EvRE and WiLLIAM SPOTTISWOODF,
Printers to the Queen's most Excellent Majesty.


For Ier Majesty's Stationery Office.
[2377—750.—4/82.]


CATALOGUE


Ov


RECORD PUBLICATIONS


ON SALE


BY


Messrs. Longmans & Co., and Mesars. Trübner & Co., London ;
Messrs. James Parker & Co., Oxford and London;
Messrs. Macmillan & Co., Cambridge and London;
Messrs. A. & C. Black, and Messrs. Douglas and Foulis,
Edinburgh ;
and Messrs. A. Thom & Co., Dublin.


Q 6366. LL


CONTENTS.


d


CALENDARS OF STATE PAPERS, &c. — - - - . -


CHRONICLES AND MEMORIALS OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND DURING
THE MiDDLE ÁGES- - z ^" " - :


PunrLiCATIONS oF THE Rkconp ConnissIoNEns, &c.


8
J
L]


Wonks PuBLISHED IN PitoOTOZINCOGRAPHY " . . -
ScorcH REgogonRD PUBLICATIONS . - E - -
Inirsu REeconp PUBLICATIONS - - . - * -


29


31


32


— —— — — —


ENGLAND.


CALENDARS OF STATE PAPERS, &o.


[IwPERIAL 8vo., cloth. Price 15s. each Volume or Part.


As far back as the year 1800, à. Committee of the House of Commons
recommended that Indexes and Calendars should be made to the Public
Records, and thirty-six years afterwards another Committee of the House of
Commons reiterated that recommendation in more forcible words ; but it
was not until the incorporation of the State Paper Oflice with the Public
Record Office that the Master of the Rolls found himself in a position to take
tho necessary steps for carrying out the wishes of the IIouse of Commons.

On 7 December 1855, he stated to the Lords of the Treasury that although
* the Records, State Papers, and Documents in his charge constitute the
* most complete and perfect series of their kind in the civilized world," and
although **they are of the greatest value in a historical, and. constitutional
* point of view, yet they are comparatively useless to the public, from the
* want cf proper Calendars and Indexes."

Acting upon the recommendations of the Committees of the House of
Coinmons above referred to, he suggested to the Lords of the Trensury that
to effect the object he had in view it would be necessary for him to employ a
few Persons fully qualified to perform the work which he contemplated.

Their Lordships assented to the necessity of having Calendars prepared
and printed, and empowered the Master of the Rolls to take sucb steps as
might be necessary for this purpose.

'The following Works have been already published under the direction to
the Master of the Rolls :—


CALENDARIUM GENEALOGICUM ; for the Reignsof Henry III. and Edward I.
Edited by CnaRLEs RonERTS, Esq., Secretary of the Public Record
Office. 2 Vols. 1865.

'This is à work of great value for elucidating the early history of our nobility
and Janded gentry.

CALENDAR Or STATE PaApEnS, DowEsTIO SEn1ES, OF THE lkiGNs or Ep-
WARD VI., Manr, ELIZABETH, and JAMES I., preserved in Her Majosty's
Public Record Office. Edited by RospEnT LEMow, Esa., F.S.A., (Vols.
I. and IL), and Many ANNE EvrenETT GREEN, (Vols. III.-X11.).
1856-1872.


Vol. I.—1547-16580. Vol. VIT.—Addenda, 1566-1579.
Vol. II.—1581—1590. Vol. VIII.—1603-1610.

Vol. III. —1591-1594. Vol. IX.—1611-—1618.

Vol. IV.—1595-1597. Vol. X.—1619-1623.

Vol. V.—1698-1601. Vol. XI.—1623—1625, with Ad-
Vol. VI.—1601-1603, with denda, 1603-1625.


- Addenda, 1547-1565. Vol. XII.—Addenda, 1580-1625.

'These Calendars render accessible to investigation a large and important mass
of historical materials. The Northern Rebellion of 1566-67 ; the plots of the
Catholie fugitives in the Low Countries ; the numerous designs ngainst Queen
Elizabeth and in favour of a Catholic suecession ; the Gunpowder-plot; the


LEr2


4


rise and fall of Somerset; the Overbury murder; the disgrace of Sir Edward
Coke; the rise of the Duke of Buckingham, &c. Numerous other subjects are

illustrated by these Papers, few of which have been previously known.
CanENDAR Or STATE PaPkns, DOMESTIC SERIES, OF THE EEIGN OF
CHARLES L, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office, Edited
by JonN BRucE, Esq. F.S.A., (Vols. L-XIL); &y JouwN BRUCE, Esq.,
F.S.A., and WinLiAM DougLAs HAMILTON, Esq., F.S.A., (Vol. XIIL);


and óy WirLLiAM DouGLAS HawiLTON, Esq, F.S.A., (Vols. XIV.-
X VI.) 1858-1880.


Vol. 1.—1625-1626. | Vol IX.—1635-1686.
Vol. 11.—1627-1628. Vol. X.—1636-1637.
Vol. III.—1628-1629. Vol. XI.—1637.

Vol. IV.—1629-1631. Vol. X11.—1637-1638.
Vol. V.—1631-1633. Vol. XIII.—1638-1639.
Vol. VI.—1633-1634. Vol. X1V.—1639.

Vol. VII.—1634-1639. Vol. XV,—1639-1640.
Vol. V1II.— 1635. Vol. X VI.—1640.


'T'his Calendar presents notices of a large number of original documents of great
value to all inquirers relative to the history of the period to which it refers.
Many of them have been hitherto unknown.
CALENDAR 0r SrATE Parrns, DoMESTIC SERIES, DURING THE COMMONWEALTH,
preserved in Her Majestys Publie Record Office. Edited by MARX
ANNE EvEnETT GREEN. 1875-1881.


Vol. I.—1649-1650. Vol. V.—1652-1653.
Vol. II.—1650. Vol. VI.—1653-1634.
Vol.lIL—1651. . Vol. VII.—1654.
Yol. IV.—1651-1652. | Vol. VIIL—1655.


"This Calendar is in continuation of those during the reigns from Edward VI. to
Charles I., and contains a mass of new information.


CALENDAR OF STATE PAPERS, DoMxEsTIC SERIES, OF THE RkEIGN OF
CHARLES IL, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. Edited
by MARY ANNE EvERETT GREEN. 1860-1866.


Vol. I.—1660—-1661. Vol. V.—1665-1666.
Vol. II.—1661-1662. Vol. VI.—1666-1667.
Vol. III.—1663-1664. Vol. VII.—1667.


Vol. IV.—1664-1665.
Seven volumes ofthis Calendar, between 1660 2nd 1667, have been published.

CALENDAR or Hoar Orrice PaPERs OF THE REIGN OF GEORGE III., pre-

served in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. Vols. I. and IL.
Edited by JosePH REpiNGTON, Esq., 1878-1879. Vol. II]. Edited by
RicHARvo ARTHUR RonrnTS, Esq., Barrister-at-Law. 1881.
Vol. I.—1760 (25 Oct.)-1765. Vol. III.—1770-1772.
Vol. II.—1766—-1769.
'T'heso are the first three volumes of the modern series of Domestic Papers,
commencing with the accession of George III.

CarLENDAR OF STATE PaPrnms relating to ScoTLAND, preserved in Her
Majesty's Public Record Office. Edited by MapkHAM JoBN THORPE,
Esq., of St. Edmund Hall, Oxtord. 1858.

Vol. L, the Scottish Series, of the Reigns of Henry VIII.,
Edward VI., Mary, &nd Elizabeth, 1509-1589.

Vol. II., the Scottish Series, of the Reign of Elizabeth, 1589-1603 ;
an Appendix to the Scottish Series, 1549-1592 ; and the State
Papers relating to Mary Queen of Scots during her Detention in
England, 1568-1587.

'Phese two volumes of State Papers relate to Scotland, and embrace the


period between 1509 and 1608. In the second volume are notices of the State
Papers relating to Mary Queen of Scots.


5


Vol. I.—1171-1251. Vol. 111I.—1285-1292.

Vol. II.— 1252-1284. Vol. IV.—1293-1301.

These volumes contain & Calendar of all documents relating to Ireland,
preserved in the Public Record Office, London ; the work is to be continued
to the end of the reign of Henry VII.

CALENDAR Or STATE PaAPrns relating to IRELAND, OF THE REIGNS OF
HeNRY VIIL, Enwaup VI, Manr, AND ELIZABETH, preserved in Her
Majesty's Public Record Office. Edited by HANs CLAUDE HAMILTON
Esq., F.S.A. 1860-1877.

Vol. I.—1509-1573. Vol. III.—1586-1688.
Vol. I1.—1574-1585.

The above have been published under the editorship of Mr. Hans Claude
Hamilton.

CALENDAR or SrArE PaPrns relating to IRELAND, OF THE REIGN OF
JawEs IL, preserved in Her Majestys Publie Record Office, and
elsewhere. Edited by the Rev. C. W. RUSSELL, D.D., and JouwN P.
PnENDERGAST, Esq., Darrister-at-Law. 1872-1880.

Vol. 1.—1603-1606. Vol. IV.—1611-1614.
Vol. II.—1606-1608. Vol. V.—1615-1625.
Vol. III.—1608-1610.

'lhis series is in continuation of the Irish State Papers commencing with
the reign of Henry VIII. ; but, for the reign of James I.,the Papers are not
confined to those in the Public Record Office, London.

CALENDAR Or STATE PAPERS, COLONIAL SERIES, preserved in Her Majesty's .
Public Record Office, and elsewhere. Edited by W. NoEL SAINSBURIY,
Esq. 1860-1880.

Vol. I. —America and West Indies, 1574-1660.
Vol. II.—East Indies, China, and Japan, 1513-1616.
Vol. IIL.—East Indies, China, and Japan, 1617-1621.
Vol. IV.—East Indies, China, and Japan, 1622-1624.
Vol. V.—America and West Indies, 1661-1668.

These volumes include an analysis of early Colonial Papers in the Public
Record Office, the India Office, and the British Museum.

CALENDAR OF LETTERS AND PAPERS, FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC, OF THE
Rriaw or HeNnY VIIL, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record
Office, the British Museum, &c. Edited by J. S. BREWER, M.A.,
Professor of English Literature, King's College, London, (Vols. I.-IV.) ;
and by JAMES GAIRDNER, Esq., (Vol. V.) 1862-1880.


Vol. 1.—1509-1514. | Vol. IV., Part 1.—1524-1526.
Vol. II. (in Two Parts)—151ó- | Vol. IV., Part 2.—1526-1528.
1518. Vol. IV., Part 3.—1529-1530.
Vol. III. (in Two Parts) —1519- | Vol. V.—1531-1632.
1523. Vol. VI.—1533.


Vol, IV.—Introduction.

These volumes contain summaries of all State Papers and Correspondence
relating to the reign of Henry VIIL, in the Public Record Office, of those
formerly in the State Paper Office, in the British Museum, the Libraries of Oxford
and Cambridge, and other Public Libraries; and of all letters that have appeared
in print in the works of Burnet, Strype, and others. Whatever authentic
original material exists in England relative to the religious, political, parliamen-
tary, or social history of the country during the reign of Henry VIII., whether
despatches of ambassadors, or proceedings of the army, navy, treasury, or
ordnance, or records of Parliament, appointments of officers, grants from the
Crown, &c., will be found calendared in these volumes.


6


CALENDAR OF STATE PaPzns, FonEIGN SERIES, OF THE REIGN OF
Upwanp VI, preserved in Her Majesty's Publie Record Office. 1547-
1553. Edited by W. B. TURNBULL, Esq.,of Lincoln's Inn, Barrister-
at-Law, &c. 18061.


CALENDAR OF SrATE PAPERS, FonEIGN SERIES, OF THE REIGN OF MARY,
preserved in Her Majesty's Publie Record Office. 1553-1558. Edited by
W. B. 'TuRNBULL, Esq., of Lincoln's Inn, Barrister-at-Law, &c. 1861.


The two preceding volumes exhibit the negotiations of the English ambassadors
with the courts of the Emperor Charles V. of Germany, of Henry II. of France,
and of Philip II. of Spain. "T'he affairs of several of the minor continental states
also find various incidental illustrations of much interest.

A valuable series of Papers descriptive of the circumstances which attended
the loss of Calais merits a special notice; while the progress of the wars in the
north of France, into which England was dragged by her union with Spain, is
uarrated at some length. 'The domestic affairs of England are of course passed
over in these volumes, which treat only of its relations with foreign powers.


CALENDAR OrF STATE PaPprns, FoREIGN SERIES, OF THE REkIGN or
ELIZABETH, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office, &c.
Edited by the Rev. Joskeu SrEvENsoN, M.A., of University College,
Durham, (Vols. L-VII.) and ArrAN JawEes CnosBy, Esq. M.A.,
Barrister-at-Law, (Vols. VIII.-XI.) 1863-1880.


Vol. 1.—1558-1559. Vol. VII.—1564—1565.
Vol. II.—1559-1560. Vol. VIII. —1566-1568.
Vol. III.—1560-1561. Vol. IX.—1569-1571.
Vol. IV.—1561-1562. Vol. X.—1572-1574.
Vol. V.—1562. Vol. XI.—1575-1577.


Vol. VI.—1563.
'These volumes contain a Calendar of the Foreign Correspondence during the
early portion of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, deposited in the Public Record
Office, &c. They illustrate not only the external but also the domestic affairs of
Foreign Countries during that period.
CaLENDAR OF 'TnaEAsURY PaPzns, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record
Office. Edited by Josceer: REprNGTON, Esq. 1868-1879.


Vol. I.—1557-1696. Vol. I1I.—1702—1707.
Vol. II.—1697-1702. Vol. IV.—1708-1714.

The above JPapers connected with the affairs of the Treasury comprise
petitions, reports, and other documents relating to services rendered to the State,
grants of money and pensions, appointments to offices, remissions of fines and
duties, &c. "They illustrate civil and military events, finance, the administration
in Irelaud and the Colonies, &c., and afford information nowhere else recorded.

CALENDAR OF TüE CanEWw PaPrEms, preserved in the Lambeth Library.
Edited by J. 5. BREwEn, M.A., Professor of English Literature, King's
College, London ; and WinrtiAM BUuLLEN, Esq. 1867-1879.


Vol. I.—1515-1574. Vol. V.—Book of Howth ; Miscel-
Vol. II.—1575-1588. laneous.
Vol. III.—1589—1600. Vol. VI.—1603-—1624.


Vol, IV.—1601-1603.

The Carew Papers relating to Ireland, deposited in the Lambeth Library, are
unique, and of great importance. 'The Calendar cannot fail to be welcome to
all students of Irish history.

CarrkNpAR or LETTERS, DresPATCHES, AND STATE Parzxms, relating to the
Negotiations between England and Spain, preserved in the Archives at
Simancas, and elsewhere. Edited óy G. A. BERGENROTH. 1862-1868.

Vol. I.—Hen. VII.—1485-1509.
Vol. II.—Hen. VIII.—1509-1529.
Supplement to Vol, L and Vol. II.


7


Mr. Bergenroth was engaged in compiling a Calendar of the Papers relating
to England preserved in the archives of Simancas in Spain, and the correspond-
ing portion removed from Simancas to Paris. Mr. Bergenroth also visited
Madrid, and examined the Papersthere, bearing on the reign of Henry VIII.
The first. volume contains the Spanish Papers of the reign of Henry VII. ; the
second volume, those of the first portion of the reign of Henry VIII. 'The
Supplement contains new information relating to the private life of Queen
Katharine of England ; and to the projected marriage of Henry VII. with Queen
Juana, widow of King Philip of Castile, and mother of the Emperor Charles V.


CALENDAR OF LETTERS, DESPATCHES, AND STATE PaPzns, relating to the
Negotiations between England and Spain, preserved in the Archives at
Simancas, and elsewhere. Edited by Do PaAscuíAL DE GAYANGOS.


1873-18'9.


Vol. III, Part 1.—Hen. VIII.—1525-1526.
Vol. IIL., Part 2.—Héen. VIII.—1527-1529.
Vol. IV., Part 1.—Héen. VIII.—1529-1530.


Upon the death of Mr. Bergenroth, Don Pascual de Gayangos was appointed
to continue the Calendar of the Spanish State Papers. He has pursued a
similar plan to that of bis predecessor, but has been able to &dd much valuable
matter from Brussels and Vienna, with wbich Mr. Bergenroth was unacquainted.


CALENDAR OF STATE PAPERS AND MANUSCRIPTS, relating to ENGLISH
AFFAIRS, preserved in the Archives of Venice, &c. Edited by RAwpoN


BRowN, Esq. 1864-1881.


Vol. I.—1202-1509. | Vol. V.—1534-1554. |
Vol. II.—1509-1519. Vol. VT., Part 1.—16555-1556.
Vol. III.—1520—1526. | Vol. VI., Part II.—1556-16557.


Vol. IV.—16527-1533.


Mr. Rawdon Brown's researches have brought to light a number of valuable
documents relating to various periods of English history ; his contributions to
historical literature are of the most interesting and important character.


SrLLABUS, IN ENaLisH, OF RyMwEkRS FapkRA. By Sir THowas Durrvs
Hanpr, D.C.L., Deputy Keeper of the Public Records. Vol. I. —Will. I.-
Edw. III.; 1066-1377. Vol. If.— Ric. II. - Chas. II.; 1377-1654.
)869-1873. |


'The ** Fadera," or ** Rymer's Federa," is a collection of miscellaneous docu-
ments illustrative of the History of Great Britain and Ireland, from the Norman
Conquest to the reign of Charles IL. Several editions of the '* Federa? have
been published, and the present Syllabus was undertaken to make the contents
of this great National Work more generally known.


RgeoRT or THE DrPuTY KEEPER or THx PunLiC REcomRDs AND THE Rxv.
J. S. BReweR ro THE MasrER or THE RoLLs, upon the Carte and
CarewPapers in the Bodleian and Lambeth Libraries. 1864. Price 2s. Gd.


RgPORT OF THE DEPUTY KEEPER OF THE PuBLIC Reconps TO THE MASTER
or THE RoLLs, upon the Documents in the Archives and Public Libraries


of Venice. 1866. Price 2s. 6d.


In the Press.


SyrLLABUS, IN ENGLISH, or RywER's FagpkRA. By Sir TuowAs Durrus
Hangpr, D.C.L., Deputy Keeper of the Public Records. Vol. III.—
Appendix and Index. | |


8


CALENDAR or LETTERS, DESPATCHES, AND STATE PaPzns, relating to the
Negotiations between England and Spsin, preserved in the Archives at
Simancas, and elsewhere. Edited by Dow PaAscuaAL DE GaAYANGOS.
Vol. IV., Part 2.— Hen. VIII.

CALENDAR OF STATE PaPrms relatinpg to IRELAND, OF THE RkIGN OF
ELIZABETH, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. Edited
by Haus CLAUDE HAMILTON, Esq., F.S.A. Vol. IV.—1588—-1590.

CALENDAR OF LETTERS AND PAPERS, FonEIGN AND DoMESTIC, oF THE REIGN
or HzNRY VIIIL., preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office,


the British Museum, &c. Edited by JaAMxs GarRDNER, Esq. Vol. VII.
—1534, &c.


CALENDAR OF SrATE PAPzns, DoursriC SERIES, DURING THE COMMONWEALTB,
preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office, Edited by Manx
ANNE EvERkTT GREEN. Vol. IX.—1666.


CALENDAR OF STATE PAPERS AND MANUSCRIPTS, relating to ENGLISH


AFFAIRS, preserved in the Archives of Venice, &c. Edited by RAWbDoN
BnowN, Esq. Vol. VI., Part III.—1567—1658.


In Progress.


CALENDAR OF STATE PAPERS, COLONIAL SERIES, preserved in Her Majesty's
Public Record Office, and elsewhere. Edited by W. Nokr Sa1NsBURrY,


Esq. Vol. VI.—East Indies, 1625, &c, Vol. VII.—America and West
Indies, 1669, &c.


CALENDAR OF TREASURY PAPERS, preserved in Her Msjesty's Public Record
Office. Edited by Josee& RrepmNGTON, Esq. Vol. V.—1714, &c.

CALENDAR OF HowE OrrickE PaPERS OF THE RxiGeN or Gronas III,
preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. Edited by RicHAnD
ARTHUR ROBERTS, Esq., Barrister-at-Law. Vol. IV.—1778, &c.

CALENDAR OF STATE PAPERS, FonkIGN SERIES, OF THE REIGN OF ErizABETH,
preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. Vol. XII.—1577.


CavuENDAR or STATE PaPEns, DowEksriC SERIES, OF THE RkEIGN or
CHARLES I, preserved in Her Majesty's Public Record Office. Edited by
WiLLiIAM DovuGLas HawrLTON, Esq, F.S.A. "Vol. XVIL —1640.


CarENDAR Or DOocuMENTS releting to IRELAND, preserved in Her Majesty's
Public Record Office, London. Edited by Hkvnv Savack SwzkTXAN,


Esq. 2 Trinity College, Dublin, Barrister-at-Law (Ireland). Vol. V.
—]1302, vC.


THE CHRONICLES AND MEMORIALS OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND IRELAND DURING THE MIDDLE AGES.


| Roxar 8vo. half-bound,  Príce 10s. each Volume or Part.]


On 25 July 1822, the House of Commons presented an address to the
Crown, stating that the editions of the works of our ancient historians were
inconvenient and defective; that many of their writings still remained in
manuscript, and, in some cases, in a single copy only. "They added, *' that an
** uniform and convenient edition of the whole, published under His Majesty's
* royal sanction, would be an undertaking honourable to His Majesty's reign,
** and conducive to the advancement of historical and constitutiona] know-
* ledge ; that the House therefore humbly besought His Majesty, that He
* would be graciously pleased to give such directions as His Majesty, in His
* wisdom, might think fit, for the publication of a complete edition of the
* ancient historians of this realm, and assured His Majesty that whatever
** expense might be necessary for this purpose would be made good."

''he Master of the Rolls, being very desirous that effect should be given
to the resolution of the House of Commons, submitted to Her Majesty's
Treasury in 1857 a plan for the publication of the ancient chronicles and
memorials of the United Kingdom, and it was adopted accordingly. In
selecting these works, it was considered right, in the first instance, to
give preference to those of which the manuscripts were unique, or the
materials of which would help to fill up blanks in English history for
which no satisfactory and authentic information hitherto existed in any
accessible form. One great object the Master of the Rolls had in view was
to form a corpus Aistoricum within reasonable limite, and which should be
as complete as possible. In a subject of so vast a range, it was important
that the historical student should be able to select such volumes as conformed
with his own peculiar tastes and studies, and not be put to the expense of
purchasing the whole collection ; an inconvenience inseparable from any
other plan than that which has been in this instance adopted.


Of the Chronicles and Memorials, the following volumes have been pub-
lished. They embrace the period from the earliest time of British history
down to the end of the reign of Henry VII.


1l. Tue CunowicLE or ENGLAND, by Jonw CaPGnavE. Edited by the
Rev. F. C. HixcEsTON, M.A., of Exeter College, Oxford. 1868.
Capgrave was prior of Lynn, in Norfolk, and provincial of the order of the
Friars Hermits of England shortly before the year 1464. His Chronicle extende
from the creation of the world to the year 1417. As a record of the language
spoken in Norfolk (being written in English), it is of considerable value.


29. CurgoxicoN MowasTERIH DE AÁBINGDON. Vols. I. and II. Edited by
the Rev. Joseen SrEvENsoN, M.A., of University College, Durham,
and Vicar of Leighton Buzzard. 1858.


(This Chronicle traces the history of the great Benedictine monastery of
Abingdon in Berkshire, from its foundation by King Ina of Wessex, to the
reign of Richard I., shortly after which period the present narrative was drawn
up by an inmate of the establishment, The author had access to the titlc-deeds
or the house ; and incorporates into his history various charters of the Saxon
kings, of great importance as illustrating not only the bistory of the locality
butthat of the kingdom, The work is printed for the first time.


-


10


3. Lives or EDnwanp rHE CoNressoR. I.—La Estoire de Seiut Aedward
le Rei. IL—Vita Beati Edvardi Regis et Confessoris. III.—Vita
JEduuardi Regis qui apud Westmonasterium requiescit. JXEdited by
HENRY Ricuanps LuaRp, M.A., Fellow and Assistant Tutor of Trinity
College, Cambridge. 1858.

The first is à poem in Norman French, containing 4,686 lines, addressed to
Alianor, Queen of Henry IIIL., probably written in 1245, on the restoration of
the church of Westminster. Nothing is known of the author. "The second is
an anonymous poem, containing 536 lines, written between 1440 and 1450, by
command of Henry VIL, to whom it is dedicated. It does not throw any
new light on the reign of Edward tlie Confessor, but is valuable as a specimen
of the Latin poetry of the time. "T'he third, also by an anonymous author, was
apparently written for Queen Edith, between 1066 and 1074,during the pressure
of the suffering brought on the Saxons by the Norman conquest. It notices
many facts not found in other writers, and some which differ considerably from
the usual accounts.


4. MoNUMENTA FRaANCisCANA. Vol. Il .— Thomas de Eccleston de Adventu
l'ratrum Minorum in Angliam. Adsxde Marisco Epistole. Registrum
Fratrum Minorum Londonie. Edited by J. S. BREwER, M.A., Pro-
fessor of English Literature, King's College, London. Vol. II.—De
Adventu Minorum; re-edited, with additions. Chronicle of the Grey
Friars. The ancient English version of the Rule of St. Francis.
Abbreviatio Statutorum, 1451, &c. Edited by RicHAgD Howrxrr, Esq.,
of the Middle Temple, Barrister-at-Law. 1858, 1882.

The first volume contains original materials for tbe history of the settlement
ofthe order ot Saint Francis in England, the letters of Adam de Marisco, and
other papers connected with the foundation and diffusion of this great body. 1t
was the aim of the editor to collect whatever historical information could be
found in this country, towards illustrating & period of the national history for
which only scanty materials exist. None of these have been before printed.
The second volume contains materials found, since the first volume was
printed, among the MSS. of Sir Charles Isham, and in various libraries.


5. FAscICULI ZIZANIORUM MaaisrRI JoHANNIS WicLir cCuM CTuirico.
Ascribed to TunowxAs NETTER, of WALDEN, Provincial of the Carmelite
Order in England, and Confessor to King Henry the Fifth. — Edited by
the Rev. W. W. SuiRgLEY, M.A,, Tutor and late Fellow of Wadhain


College, Oxford. 1858.


This work derives its principal value from being the only contemporaneous
account of the rise of the Lollards. When written the disputes of the school-
men had been extended to the field of theology, and they appear both in the
writings of Wycliff and in those of his adversaries. Wycliff's little bundles
of tares are not less metaphysical than theological, and the contliet between
Nominalists and Realists rages side by side with the confliet between the different
interpreters of Scripture. "The work gives a good idea of the controversies at
the end of the 14th and the beginning of the 15th centuries.


6. TuH& Burk or THE CRoNICLIS OF SCOTLAND ; or, À Metrical Version of
the History of Hector Boece ; by WiLLiAM STEWART. Vols. I., II.,
and III. Edited by W. D. TunNnULL, Esq., of Lincoln's Inn, Barrister-


at-Law. 18958.

'This is a metrical translation of a Latin Prose Chronicle, and was written in the
first half of the 16th century. 'lhe narrative begins with the earliest legends,
and ends with the death of James I. of Scotland, and the ** evi] ending of the
traitors that slew him." Strict accuracy of statement is not to be looked for in
such a work as this ; but the stories of the colonization of Spain, Ireland, and
Scotland are interesting if not true; and the chronicle is valuable as a reflection
of the manners, sentiments, and character of the age in which it was composed.
'The peculiarities of the Scottish dialect are well illustrated in this metrical version,
and the student of language will find ample materials for comparison with the
English dialects of the same period, and with modern lowland Bcotch.


1l


T. JonaNNIs CaprGRavE LisEeR DE IrrzLusTRIBUS HreNmicIs. Edited by the
Rev. F. C. HiNaxsToN, M.A., of Exeter College, Oxford. 1858.


This work is dedicated to Henry VI. of England, who appears to have been, in
the author's estimation, the greatest of all the Ilenries. It is divided into threc
parts, each having a separate dedication. '"l'he first part relates onlyto the history
of the Empire, and extends from the election of Henry I., the Fowler, to the
end of the reign of the Emperor lienry VI. 'l'he second part is devoted to
Englsh history, and extends from the accession of Henry I. in 1100, to 1446,
which was the twenty-fourth year of the reign of Henry VI. "The third part
contains the lives of illustrious men who have borne the name of Henry in various
parts of the world.

Capgrave was born in 1393, in the reign of Itichard II., and lived during the
Wars of the Roses, for the history of which period his work is of some value.


8. HisroRiA. MoNasTERII S. AUGUSTINI CANTUARIENSIS, by 'HoMAS OF
ErLMHAM, formerly Monk and 'lreasurer of that Foundation. Edited
by CuaBLES Hanpwick, M.A., Fellow of St. Catharine's Hall, and
Christian Advocate in the University of Cambridge. 1858.


This history extends from the arrival of St. Augustine in Kent until 1191.
Prefixed is 4 chronology as far as 1418, which shows in outline what was to have
been the character of the work when completed. "The only copy known is 1n the
possession of Trinity Hall, Cambridge. The author was connected with Norfolk,
&nd most probably with Elmham, whence he derived his name.


9. EuLoaiux (HisroRiARUM sivE TEkwPonis) : Chronicon ab Orbe condito
usque ad Ánnum Domini 1366 ; à Monacho quodam Malmesbiriensi
exaratum, Vols. L, II., and III. £dited by F. S. HAxpoN, Esq., B.A.
1858-1863.


This is & Latin Chronicle extending from the Creation to the latter part of the
reign of Edward IlL, and written by a monk of the Abbey of Malmesbury, in
Wiltshire, about the year 1367, A continuation, carrying the history of England
down to the year 1413, was added in the former half of the fifteenth century by
an author whose name js not known. The original Chronicle is divided into
five books, and contains a history of the world generally, but more especially
of England to the year 1366. "lhe continuation extends the history down to
the coronation of Henry V. 'Il'he Eulogium itself is chiefly valuable as contain-
ing a history, by a contemporary, of the period between 1356 and 1366. "The
notices of events appear to have been written very soon after their occurrence.
Among other interesting matter, the Chronicle contains a diary of the Poitiers
campaign, evidently furnished by some person who accompanied the army of the
Black Prince. "The continuation of the Chronicle is also the work of a contem-
porary, and gives a very interesting account of the reigns of Richard II. and
Henry IV. 1t is believed to be the earliest authority for the statement that the
latter monarch died in the Jerusalem Chamber at Westminster.


10, MEMORIALS or lIleNRY THE SEvkeNTH : Bernardi Andrezm "Iholosatis
Vita Regis Henrici Septimi ; necnon alia quidam ad eundem Regem
spectantia. Edited by JawEs GArnpNxm, Esq. 1868.


The contents of this volume are—(1) a life of Henry VIL, by his poet
laureate and historiographer, Bernard André, of 'T'oulouse, with some composi-
tions in verse, of which he is supposed to have been the author; (2) the journals
of Roger Machado during certain embassies on which he was sent by Henry VII.
to Spain and Dritany, the first of which had reference to the marriage of the
King's son, Arthur, with Catharine of Arragon; (3) two curious reports by
envoys sent to Spain in the year 1505 touching the succession to the Crown
of Castile, and a project of marriage between Henry VII. and the Queen of
Naples; and (4) an account of Philip of Castile's reception in England in 1506.
Other documents of interest in connexion with the period are given in an appendix,


1!. MeMoRIALS or HeNnY THE FirrH. I.—Vita Henrici Quinti, Roberto
Redmanno auctore. IlL—Versus Rhythmici in laudem Regis IIenrici
Quinti. IIL—Elmhami Liber Metricus de Henrico V. Edited by
CnanLES ÀÁ. Corre, Esq. 1858.


12


This volume contains three treatises whieh more or less illustrate the history of
the reign of Henry V., viz.: A Life by Robert Redman ; & Metrical Chronicle by
Thomas Elmham, prior of Lenton, a contemporary author; Versus Rhythmici,
written apparently by a monk of Westminster Abbey, who was also & contempo-
rary of Henry V. "These works are printed for the first time.


12, MuNI«ENTA GiLDHaALLAE LoNDONIENSIS; Liber Albus, Liber Cus-


13.


tumarum, et Liber IIorn, in archivis Gildhalle asservati. Vol. I.,
Liber Albus. Vol. II. (in Two Parts), Liber Custumarum. Vol. III.
Translation of the Anglo-Norman Passages in Liber Albus, Glossaries,
Appendices, and Index. Edited by HENRY TnHowAs RiLEr, Esq., M.A.,
Barrister-at-Law. 1859-1862.


The manuscript of the Liber Albus, compiled by John Carpenter, Common
Clerk of the City of London in the year 1419, a large folio volume, is pre-
served in the Record Jtoom of the City of London. It gives an account of
the laws, regulations, and institutions of that City in the twelfth, thirteenth,
fourteenth, and early part of the fifteenth centuries.

The Liber Custumarum was compiled probably by various hands in the early
part of the fourteenth century during the reign of Edward Il. 'The manuscript,
a folio volume, is also preserved in the Record Room of the City of London,
though some portion in its original state, borrowed from the City in the reign
of Queen Elizabeth and never returned, forms part of the Cottonian MS.
Claudius D. II. in the British Museum. It also gives an account of the laws,
regulations, and institutions of the City of London in thetwelfth, thirteenth, and
early part of the fourteenth centuries.


CuHRoNICA JOHANNIS DE OxEeNEDES. Edited by Sir HENRY ELLISs,
K.H. 1869.


Although this Chronicle tells of the arrival of Hengist and Horss in England
in the year 449, yet it substantially begins with the reigu of King Alfred, and
comes down to the year 1292, where itends abruptly. "The history is particu-
larly valuable for notices of events in the eastern portions of the kingdom,
which are not to be elsewhere obtained, and some curious facts are mentioned
relative to the floods in that part of England, which are confirmed in the Fries-
land Chronicle of Anthony Heinrich, pastor of the Island of Mohr.


14. A CorLEcTIoN or PoLiTiCAL PoEMS AND SONGS RELATING TO ENGLISH


HisrORY, FROM THE ACCESSION OF Epwanp III. To THE RxiGN or
HrewnY VIII. Vols. I. and II. Edited by Tnowas WaiGHT, Esq.,
M.A. 1859-1861.


These Poems are perhaps the most interesting of all the historical writings of
the period, though they cannot be relied on for accuracy of statement. "They
are various in character ; some are upon religious subjects, some may be called
satires, and some give no more than a court scandal; but asa whole they pre-
senta very fair picture of society, and of the relations of the different classes
to one another. "The period comprised is in itself interesting, and brings us,
through the decline of the feudal system, to the beginning of our modern
history. "The songs in old English are of considerable value to the philologist.


'The * OPvs TrnTIUM," ** OPvs MiNvs," &c., of RoagR BacoN. Edited

by J. S. BnewEn, M.A., Professor of English Literature, King's
College, London. 1859.

This is the celebrated treatise—never before printed—8so frequently referred

to by the great philosopher in his works. It contains the fullest details we


possess of the life and labours of Roger Bacon : also & . t by the same
author, supposed to be unique, the ** Compendium Studii Theologie."


16. BAgTHOLOMAI DE CorroN, MoNacHi NomwicxNsis, HisroRiA AN-


GLICANA ; 449-1298: necnon ejusdem Liber de Archiepiscopis et
Episcopis Anglie. Edited by Hxwnx RicnaRgvps LvanRD, M.A., Fellow
and Assistant Tutor of Trinity College, Cambridge. 1859.


13


Tbe author, a monk of Norwich, has here given us a Chronicle of England
from the arrival of the Saxons in 449 to the year 1298, in or about which year
it appears that he died. The latter portion of this history (the whole of the
reign of Edward I. more especially) is of great value, as the writer was con-
temporary with the events which he records. An Appendix contains several
illustrative documents connected with the previous narrative.


17. BRuT Y TxwisocioN; or, The Chronicle of the Princes of Wales.
Edited by the Rev. JouN WirLiAMS AB IrHEL, M.A. 1860.


This work, also known as * The Chronicle of the Princes of Wales," has
been attributed to Caradoc of Llancarvan, who flourished about the middle of
the twelfth century. Itis written in the ancient Welsh language, begins with
the abdieation and death of Caedwala at Rome, in the yenr 681, and continues
the history down to the subjugation of Wales by Edward I., about the year 1282.


18. A CorLLECTION or RoxvaAL AND HisroRiICAL LETTERS DURING THE
REieN or HeNRY IV. 1399-1404. Edited by the Rev. F. C. Hix-
GESTON, M.A., of Exeter College, Oxford. 1860.


This volume, like all the others in the series containing a miscellaneous selec-
tion of letters, is valuable on account ofthe light it throws upon biographical
history, and tbe familiar view it presents of characters, manners, and events,
''he period requires much elucidation; to which it will materially contribute.


19. THE RrEPRESSOR OF OVER MUCH BraMiNG OF THE CLrnGx. By
REGiNALD PECOCK, sometime Bishop of Chichester. Vols. I.and II.
Edited by CuvRcuiLL BanBiNGTON, B.D., Fellow of St. John's College,
Cambridge. 1860.


The ** Repressor " may be considered the earliest piece of good theological dis-
quisition of which our English prose literature can boast. 'The author was born
about the end of the fourteenth century, consecrated Bishop of St. Asaph in
the year 1444, and translated to the see of Chichester in 1450. While Bishop of
St. Asaph, he zealously defended his brother prelates from the attacks of those
who censured the bishops for their neglect of duty. He maintained that it was no
part of a bishop's functions to appear in the pulpit, and that his time might be
more profitably spent, and his dignity better maintained, in the performance of
works of a higher character. Among those who thought differently were the
Lollards, and against their general doctrines the ** ltepressor ? is directed. T'ecock
took up a position midway between that of the Roman Church and that of the
modern Anglican Church; but his work is interesting chiefly because it gives a
full account of the views ofthe Lollards and of the arguments by which they were
supported, and because it assists us to ascertain the state of feeling which ulti-
mately led to the Reformation. Apart from religious matters, the light thrown upon
contemporaneous history is very small, but the '* Repressor" has great value
for the philologist, as it tells us what were the characteristics of the language in
use among the cultivated Englishmen of the fifteenth century. Pecock, though
an opponent of the Lollards, showed a certain spirit of toleration, for which he
received, towards the end of his life, the usual medisgval reward—persecution.


90, ANNALES CaMBRLE. Edited by the Rev. JouN WiLLIAMS AB ITHEL,
M.A. 18060.


' These annals, which are in Latin, commence in the year 447, and come down
to the year 1288. Theearlier portion appears to be taken from an Irish Chronicle,
which was also used by Tigernach, and by the compiler of the Annals of Ulster.
During its first century it contains scarcely anything relating to Britain, the
earliest direct concurrence with English history is relative to the mission of
Augustine. Its notices throughout, though brief, are valuable. "The annals
were probably written at St. Davids, by Blegewryd, Archdeacon of Llandaff,
the most learned man in his day in all Cymru.


2]. Tug Wonks or GrRALDUS CAMBRENSIS. Vols. I., II., IIL., and IV.
Edited by J. 8. BRewEn, M.A., Professor of English Literature, King's


College, London. — Vols. V., VI,and VII. Edited by the Rev.JaAMES
F. Di«ocx, M.A., Rector of Barnburgh, Yorkshire. 1861-1877.


14


These volumes contain the historical works of Gerald du Barry, who lived
in the reigns of Henry IL, Richard I., and John, and attempted to re-establish
the independence of Wales by restoring the see of St. Davids to its ancient
primacy. His works are of a very miscellaneous nature, both in prose and
verse, and are remarkable chiefly for the racy &nd original anecdotes which
they contain relating to contemporaries. He is the only Welgh writer of any
importanee who has contributed so much to the medieval literature of this
country, or assumed, in consequence of his nationality, so free and independent
atone. His frequent travels in Italy, in France, in Ireland, and in Wales, gave
him opportunities for observation which did not generally fall to thelot of mediseval
writers in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and of these observations Giraldus
has made due use. Only extracts from these treatises have been printed before,
and almost all of them are taken from unique manuscripts.

'The Topographia Hibernica (in Vol. V.) is the result of Giraldus' two visits to
Ireland. "The first in the year 1183, the second in 1185-6, when he accompanied
Prince John into that country. Curious as this treatise is, Mr. Dimock is of
opinion that it ought not to be accepted as sober truthful history, for Giraldus
himself states that truth was not his main object, and that he compiled the work
for the purpose of sounding the praises of|Henry the Second. Elsewhere, how-
ever, he declares that he had stated nothing in the Topographia of the truth of
which he was not well assured, either by his own eyesight or by the testimony,
with all diligence elicited, of the most trustworthy and authentic men in the
country ; that though he did not put just the same full faith in their reports as
in what he had. himself seen, yet, as they only related what they had themselves
seen, he could not but believe such credible witnesses. A very interesting portion
of this treatise is devoted to the animals of Ireland. It shows that he was a very
accurate and acute observer, and his descriptions are given in à way that a
scientific naturalist of the present day could hardly improve upon. The Expug-
natio Hibernica was written about the year 1188 and may be regarded rather
as & great epic than a sober relation of acts occurring in his own days. Ne
one cau peruse it without coming to the conclusion that it is rather a poetical
fiction than a prosaic truthful history.

Vol. VI. contain3 the Itinerarium Kambrige et Descriptio Kambrim: and
Vol. VII., the lives of S. Remigius and S. Hugh.


229. LETTERS AND PAPERS ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE WaRs Or THE ENGLISH
IN FRANCE DunING THE Rki:GN or HeNnY THE SrxTim, KiNG or ENcG-
LAND. Vol. I., and Vol. IT. (in Two Parts). | Edited by the Rev. JoskP1I
STEVvENSON, M.A., of University College, Durham, and Vicar of Leighton
Buzzard. 1861-1864. )


The letters and papers contained in these volumes are derived chiefly from
originals or contemporary copies extant in the Bibliothéque Impériale, and the
Depót des Archives, in Paris. They illustrate the line of policy adopted by
John Duke of Bedford and his successors during their government of Normandy,
and such other provinces of France as had been acquired by Henry V. We
may here trace, step by step, the gradual declension of the English power, until
we are prepared to read of its final overthrow.

23. THE ANGLO-SaAxoN CHRONICLE, ACCORDING TO THE SEVERAL ORIGINAL
AvuTHORITIES. Vol. I., Original Texts. Vol. II., Translation. JEdited
and translated by BrN3AMIN TuonPre, Esq., Member of the Royal
Academy of Sciences at Munich, and of the Society of Netherlandish
Literature at Leyden. 1861.

This Chronicle, extending from the earliest history of Britain to the year
1154, is justly the boast of England ; for no other nation can produce any history,
written in its own vernacular, at all approaching it, either in. antiquity, trathful-
ness, or extent, the historical books of the Bible alone excepted. "There arc at
present six independent manuscripts of the Saxon Chronicle, ending in different
years, and written in different parts of the country. In this edition, the text
of each manuscript is printed in columns on the same page, so that the student
may see at a glance the various changes which occur in orthography, whether
arising from locality or age.


24. LETTERS AND PAPERS ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE RriaNs or Ricnanp III.
AND HENRY VII. Vols. I. and I. Edited by JAuEs GarngpNER, Esq.
1861-1863,


15


The Papers are derived from MSS. in the Public Record Office, the British
Museum, and other repositories. 'Ihe period to which they refer is unusually
destitute of chronicles and other sources of historical information, so that the
light obtained from these documents is of special importance. The principa!
contents of the volumes are some diplomatic Papers of Richard III. ; correspon-
dence between Henry VII. and Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain; documents
relating to Edmund de la Pole, Earl of Suffolk; and a portion of the corre-
spondence of James IV. of Scotland.


25. LETTERS or BistoP. GROSSETESTE, illustrative of the Social Condition
of his Time. Edited by HEexnY Ricuanps Luanp, M.A., Fellow and
Assistant Tutor of Trinity College, Cambridge. 1861.


The Letters of Robert Grosseteste (131 in number) are here collected from various
sources, and a large portion of them is printed for the first time. "They range in
date from about 1210 to 1253, and relate to various matters connected not only
with the political history of England during the reign of lienry III, but with
its ecclesiastical condition.  'l'hey refer especially to the diocese of Lincoln, of
which Grosseteste was bishop.


26. DEkscRIPTIVE CATALOGUE OF MANUSCRIPTS RELATING TO TüuE HisTORY
or GnEAT BRiTAIN AND InELAND. Vol. I. (in Two Parts) ; Anterior
to the Norman Invasion. Vol. II.; 1066-1200. Vol. III. ; 1200-132".
By Sir THoMAs Durrus Ianpr, D.C.L., Deputy Keeper of the Public
Records. 1862-1871.


The object of this work is to publish notices of all known sources of British
history, both printed and unprinted, in one continued sequence. "The materials,
when historical (as distinguished from biographical), are arranged under the
year in which the latest eventis recorded in the chronicle or history, and not
under the period in which its author, rea! or supposed, flourished. Biographies
are enumerated under the year in which the person commemorated died, and not
under the year in which the life was written. 'This arrangement has two
advantages ; the materials for any given period may be seen at a glance ; and
if the reader knows the time when an author wrote, and the number of years
that had elapsed between the date of the events and the time the writer flourished,
he will generally be enabled to form a fair estimate of the comparative value of
the narrative itself. A brief analysis of each work has been added when deserving
it,in which the original portions are distinguished from those which are mere
compilations. When possible, the sources are indicated from which such com-
pilations have been derived. A biographical sketch of the author of each piece
has been added, and a brief notice has also been given of such British authors as
have written on historical subjects.


21. RoxAL AND oTHER lIlisronicAL LETTERS ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE RkEIGN
or HieNnx III. Vol. IL, 1216-1235. Vol. IL, 1236-1272. Selected
and edited by the Rev. W. W. SuimrEv, D.D., Regius Professor in
Ecclesiastical History, and Canon of Christ Church, Oxford. 1862-
1866. |


The letters contained in these volumes are derived chiefly from the ancient
correspondence formerly in the Tower of London, and now in the Public Record
Office. They illustrate the political history of England during the growth of
its liberties, and throw considerable light upon the personal history of Simon de
Montfort. "The affairs of France form the subject of many of them, especially
in regard to the province of Gascouy. "The entire collection consists of nearly
700 documents, the greater portion of which is printed for the first time.

28. CnunoNICA MoxasTEnII S. ArpaANI.—1. Truoxx WarsiNGHAM HisTOnIA
ANGLICANA ; Vol. L, 1272-1381: Vol. II., 1381-1422. 2. WiLLELMI
RisHANGER CunoNiCA ET ANNALES, 1259-1307. 383. JoHANNIS DR
TROKELOWE ET HeNRiICI bkE BLANEFORDE CHRONICA ET ANNALES,
1259-1296 ; 1307-1324 : 1392-1406. 4. GxsrA ApBATUM MONASTERII
S. ALBANI, A TuHowxA WALSINGHAM, REGNANTE lucaARDo SECUNDO,
EJUSDEM EÉccLEsLE PRAECENTORE, COMPILATA ; Vol. I., 793-1290 :
Vol. IT., 1290-1349 : Vol. 111., 1349-1411. 5. JOHANNIS AMUNDESHAM,
MoNacu): MoNasTERH S. ALBANI, UT VIDETUR, ANNALES; Vols. I.


16


and II. 6. REGISTRA QUORUNDAM ÁBBATUM MoNasrERH S. ÁLBANI,
QUI SAECULO Xv?9 FLORUERE; Vol. l, REGaiSTRUM ÁBBATLE JOHANNIS
WHETHAMSTEDE, AnBATIS MoNasTERU SANCTI ALBANI, ITERUM
SUSCEPT.E; RoBERTO BLAKENEY, CAPELLANO, QUONDAM ADSCRIPTUM :
Vol IL, REGisTRA JOHANNIS WHETHAMSTEDE, WILLELMI ÁLBON, ET
WiILLELMI WALINGFORDE, ABBATUM MoNaAsTERH SANCTI ÁLBANI, CUM
APPENDICE, CONTINENTE QUASDAM EPISTOLAS, A JOHANNE WHETHAM-
STEDE CoNscRIPTAS. 7. YPODIGMA NEUSTRIE, A THOMA WALSINGHAM,
QUONDAM MoNacHo MowasTrERH S. ALBANI, CONSCRIPTUM. — Edited
by HENRY TnHowas RirEgr, Esq., M.A., Cambridge and Oxford ; and
of the Inner Temple, Barrister-at-Law. 1863-1876.

In the first two volumes is a History of England, from the death ot
Henry III. to the death of Henry V., by Thomas Walsingham, Precentor
of St. Albans, from MS. VII. in the Arundel Collection in the College
of Arms, London, a manuscript of the fifteenth century, collated with MS.
13 E. IX. in the King's Library in the British Museum, and MS. VII. in the
Parker Collection of Manuscripts at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge.

In the third volume is à Chronicle of English History, attributed to William
Rishanger, who lived in the reign of Edward IL, from the Cotton. MS.
Faustina B. IX. in the Briüsh Museum, collated with MS. 14 C. VII.
(fols. 219-931) in the King's Library, British Museum, and the Cotton M8.
Claudius E. IIL, fols. 306—331: an account of transactions attending the
award of the kingdom of Scotland to John Balliol, 1291-1292, from MS8.
Cotton. Claudius D. VI., also attributed to William Risbapger, but on
no sufficient ground: a short Chronicle of English History, 1292 to 1300,
by an unknown hand, from M3. Cotton. Claudius I, VI. : a short Chronicle
Willelmi Rishanger Gesta Edwardi Primi, Regis Anglis, from MS. 14 C. I.
in the Royal Library, and MS. Cotton. Claudius D. VI., with Annales Regum
Anglie, probably by the same hand: and fragments of three Chronicles of
English History, 1285 to 1307.

In the fourth volume is a Chronicle of English IDstory, 1259 to 1296,
from MS. Cotton. Claudius D. VI. : Annals of Edward II., 1307 to 1323, by
John de Trokelowe, a monk of St. Albans, and a continuation of Trokelowe's
Annals, 1323, 1324, by Henry de Blaneforde, both from MS. Cotton. Claudius
D. VI.: a full Chronicle of English History, 1392 to 1406, from MS. VII. in
the Library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge; and an account cf the
Benefactors of St. Albans, written in the early part of the fifteenth century,
from MS. VI. in the same Library.

The fifth, sixth, and seventh volumes contain a history of the Abbots of
St. Albans, 793 to 1411, mainly compiled by "Thomas Walsingham, from
MS. Cotton. Claudius E. IV., in the British Museum : with a Con-
tinuation, from the closing pages of Parker MS. VIL, in the Library of
Corpus Christi College, Cambridge.

The eighth and ninth volumes, in continuation of the Annals, contain &
Chronicle, probably by John Amundesham, a monk of St. Albane.

"rhe tenth and eleventh volumes relate especially to the acts and proceedings
of Abbots Whethamstede, Albon, and Wallingford, and may be considered as 2
memorial of the chief historical and domestic events during those periods.

The twelfth volume contains a compendious History of England to the reign
of Henry V.,and of Normandy in early times, also by Thomas Walsingham,
and dedicated to Henry V. "The compiler has often substituted other authorities
in place of those consulted in the preparation of his larger work.

99. CunoNicoN ABBATLE EvESHAMENSIS, ÁUCTORIBUS DoMiNICO PRIORE
EvgsHAMIE ET THOMA DE MARLEBERGE ABBATE, A FUNDATIONE AD
ANNUM 1213, uNA CUM CONTINUATIONE AD ÁNNUM 1418. Edited by
the Rev. W. D. Macnar, M.A., Dodleian Library, Oxford. 1863.

The Chronicle of Evesham illustrates the history of that importaut monastery
from its foundation by Egwin, about 690, to the year 1418. Jts chief feature is
an autobiography, which makes us acquainted with the inner daily life of a
great abbey, such as but rarely has been recorded. Interspersed are many
notices of general, personal, and local history which wil be read with much
interest. This work exists in 8 single MS., and is for the first time printed.


17


30. RriCcARDI DE CinEeNCESTRIA SPECULUM HisTORIALE DE (GrsTris REGUM
ANGLLE, Vol.lL, 447-871. Vol.II., 872-1066. Edited by Jonuw E. B.
M Avon, M.A., Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge. 1863—1869.


The compiler, Richard of Cirencester, was a monk of Westminster, 1355-
1400. In 1891 he obtamed a licence to make a pilgrimage to Rome, His
history, in four books, extends from 447 to 1066. He announces his intention
of coptiuuing it, but there is no evidence that he completed any more This
chronicle gives many charters in favour of Westminster Abbey, and a very full
account of the lives and miracles of the saints, especially of Edward the Con-
fessor, whose reign occupies the fourth book. A treatise on the Coronation, by
William of Sudbury, a monk of Westminster, fills book iii. c. 3. ]t was on this
author that C. J. Bertram fathered his forgery, De Situ Brittanie, in 1747.


31. YrAR Books or THE REriGgN or EpwaRD THE Finsr. Years 20-21,
21-22, 80-31, 32-38, and 33-35. Edited and translated by ArvrnED
JouN Hongwoop, Esq., of the Middle Temple, Barrister-at-Law. 1863-
1879.


The volumes known as the ** Year Books" contain reports in Norman-French
of cases argued and decided in the Courts of Common Law. "They may be con-
Sidered to a great extent as the **lex non scripta? of England, and have been held
in the highest veneration by tlie ancient s2ges of the law, and were received by
them as the repositories of the first recorded judgments and dicta of the great
legal luminaries of past ages. "lhey are also worthy of the attention of the
general reader on account of the historical information and the uotices of public
and private persons which they contain, as weil as the light wüicn they throw
01 ancient manners and customs,

32. NARRATIVES OF THE ExPULSION OF THE ENGLISH FROM NORMANDY,
1449-1450.—Robertus Dlondelli de Reductione Normannis: Le Re-
couvrement de Normendie, par Berry, Hérauit du Roy : Conferences
between the Ambassadors of France aud Englond. Edited, from MSS.
in the Imperial Library at Paris, by the Rev. JosePu STEVENSON,
M.A., of University College, Durliam. 1863.

This volume contains the narrative of an eye-witness who detnils with con.
siderable power and minuteness the circumstances wiich attended the final ex-
pulsion of the English from Normandy inthe year 1450. 'Tue hisiory commences
with the infringement of the truce by the capture of Foug?res, and ends with
the battle of Formigny and the embarkation of the Duke of Somerset. 'The
whole period embraced is less than two years.

33. HisroRIA ET CARTULARIUM MoNasTERII S. PETRI GrLovcksTRLE. Vols.
L, IL, aud III. Edited by W. H. Hanr, Esq., F.S.A., Meinbre corre-
spondant de la Société des Antiquaires de Normandie. 1863-1867.

This work consists of two parts, the History and the Cartulary of the Monastery
of St. Peter, Gloucester. 'The history furnishes an accovnt of the monastery
from its fouudation, in the year 681, to the eaily part of the reign of Richard II.,
together with a calendar of donations and benefactions. It treats principally of
the affairs of the monastery, but occasionally matters of geneial history are
introduced. Its authorship bas generally been assigned to Walter Froucester,
the twentieth abbot, but without any foundation.


34. ALEXANDRI NECKAM DE NaTUuRIS RERUM LIBRI DUO ; with NECKAN'S
Po£M, Dre LaupiBus Divi SAPIENTLE. Edited by 'THoMAS Wnianr,


Esq., M.A. 1863.

Neckam was & man who devoted himself to science, such as it was in the
twelfth century. Inthe * De Naturis Rerum" are to be found what may be
called the rudiments of many sciences mixed up with much error and ignorance.
Neckam was not thought infallible, even by his contemporaries, for Roger Bacon
remarks of him, * this Alexanderin many things wrote what was true and useful ;
** but he neither can nor ought by just title to be reckoned among authorities."'
Neckam, however, had sufficient independence of thought to differ from some
of the schoolmen who in his time considered themselves the only judges of litera-
ture. He had his own views in morals, and in giving us a glimpse of them, as
well as of his other opinions, he throws much light upon the manners, customs,
and general tone of thought prevalent in the twelfth century. "The poem entitled
* De Laudibus Divine Sapientie" appears to be a metrical paraphrase or
abridgment of the * De Naturis Rerum." Tt is written iu the elegiac metre;


Q 6866. )i ! M M


18
and though there are many lines which violate classical rules, it js, as a whole,
above the ordinary standard of medieval Latin.

35. LEkcHDOMS, WORTCUNNING, AND STARCRAFT OF EARLY ENGLAND; being
a Collection of Documents illustrating the History of Science in this
Country before the Norman Conquest. Vols. L, II, and IL. Collected
and edited by the Rev. T. Oswarp CockaAxNEe, M.A,, of St. John's
College, Cambridge. 1864-1866.

This work illustrates not only the history of science, but the history of super-
stition. In addkion to the information bearing direcily upon the medical skill
and medical faith of the times, there are many passages which incidentally throw
light upon the general mode of life and ordinary diet. "The volumes are interesting
not only in their scientific, but also in their social aspect. 'The manuscripts from
which they have been printed are valuable to the Anglo-Saxon scholar for the
illustrations they afford of Anglo-Saxon orthography.

36. ANNALES MowasriCci. — Vol. l.:—Annales de Margan, 1066-1282;
Annales de T'heokesberia, 1066-1263 ; Annales de Buiton, 1004-1263.
Vol. II. :—Annales Monasterii de Wintonia, 519-1277; Annales Mo-
nasterii de Waverleia, 1-1291. Vol. III.:—.Annales Prioratus de
Dunstaplia, 1-1297. Annales Monasterii de Dermundeseia, 1042-
1432. Vol. IV. :—4Annales Monasterii de Oseneia, 1016-1347 ; Chroni-
con vulgo dictum Chronicon Thome Wykes, 1066-1289; Annales
Prioratus de Wigornia, 1-1377. Vol. V. :—1ndexand Glossary. Edited
óy HENRY RicHíARps LuaRD, M.A., Fellow and Assistant Tutor of
Trinity College, and Registrary of the University, Cambridge. 1864-
1869.

The present collection of Monastic Ánnals embraces all the more important
chronicles compiled in religious houses in England during the thirteenth
century. These distinct works are ten in number. The extreme period
which they embrace ranges from the year 1 to 1432, although they refer more
especially to the reigns of John, Henry III., and Eáward I. Some of these narra-
tives have already appeared in print, but others are printed forthe first time.

37. MAGNA VirA S. Hucouis EpPiscoer LiNcorNiEeNsIs. From Manuscripts
in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, and the Imperial Library, Paris. Edtted


by the Rev. JAMES F. Drxock, M.A., Rector of Barnburgh, Yorkshire.
1864.


This work contains a number of very curious and interesting incidents, and
being the work of & contemporary, is very valuable, not only as a truthful
biography of a celebrated ecclesiastic, but as the work of a man, who, from per-
sonal knowledge, gives notices of passing events, as well as of individuals who
were then taking active part in public affairs. The &uthor, in all probability,
was Adam Abbot of Evesham. He was domestic chaplain and private confessor
of Bishop Hugh, and in these capacities was admitted to the closest intimacy.
Bishop Hugh was Prior of Witham for 11 years before he became Bishop of
Lincoln. His consecration took place on the 21st September 1136 ; he died on
the 16th of November 1200 ; and was canonized in 1220.

38. CuRoNICLES AND MEMORIALS OF THE REiGN or RicHARD THE FinsT.
Vol. I.:—IriNERARIUM PEeREGRINORUM ET GExsTA Kxcis RiCcanmpr.
Vol. II.:—ErisToL& CANTUARIENSES ; the Letters of the Prior and
Convent of Christ Church, Canterbury; 1187 to 1199. Edited by
WiLLIAM STUBBS, M.AÀ., Vicar of Navestock, Essex, and Lambeth
Librarian. 1864—1865.


The authorship of the Chronicle in Vol. IL., hitherto ascribed to Geoffrey
Vinesauf, is now more correctly ascribed to Richard, Canon of the Holy Trinity
of London. "The narrative extends from 1187 to 1199; but its chief interest
consists in the minute and authentic narrative which it furnishes of the exploits
of Richard I., from his departure from England in December 1189 to his death
in 1199. "The author states in his prologue that he was an eye- witness of much
that he records ; and various incidental circumstances which occur in the course
of the narrative confirm this assertion.

The letters in Vol. IL, written between 1187 and 1199, are of value as
furnishing authentic materials for the history of the ecclesiastical condition of
Fngland during the reign of Richard I. "They had their origin in a dispute which
arose from the attempts of Baldwin and Hubert, archbishops of Canterbury, to


19


found a college of secular canons, a project which gave great umbrage to the
monks of Canterbury, who saw in it a design to supplant them in their function
of metropolitan chapter. 'lhese letters are printed, for the first time, from a MS.
belonging to the archiepiscopal library at Lambeth.

39. RgcUuEIL Dks CRONIQUES ET ANCHIENNES IsTORIES DE LA GRANT BnE-
TAIGNE A PRESENT NOMME ENGLETELRE, par JEHAN DE WaAunIN. Vol. I.
Albina to 688. Vol. 1I., 1399-1422. Vol. IIL, 1422-1431. Edited by
WirzLiAx Hanpr, Esq., F.S.A. 1864-1879.

40. À CoLLEkCTION OF THE CHRONICLES AND ANCIENT HisroRIES 0F GREAT
BRITAIN, NOW CALLED ENGLAND, by JouN pz WavniN.  Álbina to 688.
(Translation of the preceding Vol. IL.) — Edited and translated by


WiLLIAM HaRDY, Esq., F.S.A. 1864.

This curious chronicle extends from tie fabulous period of history down to the
return of Edward IV. to Englaud in the year 1471 aíter the second deposition of
Henry VI.  'l'he manuscript from which the text of the work is taken i8 pre-
served in the Imperial Library at Paris, and is believed to be the only complete
and nearly contemporary copy in existence. "The work. as originally bound,
was comprised in six volumes, siuce rebound in morocco in 12 volumes, folio
maximo, vellum, and is illustrated with exquisite miniatures, vizaettes, and initial
letters. It was written towards the end of the fifteenth century, having been
expressly executed for Louis de Bruges, Seigneur de la Gruthuyse and Earl of
W inchester, from whose cabinet it passed into the library of Lou's XII. at Blois.

41. PoLycnunRoNiICOoN ltANULPHI HiGbN, with 'Trevisa's Transletion. Vols. I.
and II. JFdited by CtuuncuiuL DBasivaToN, B.D., Senior Fellow of
St. John's College, Cambridge. Vols. III., IV., V., VI., and VII.
Kdited by ihe Rev. Jose?&H RAwsoN LuMsr, D.D., Norrisian Professor
of Diviniy, Vicar of St. Edward's, Fellow of St. Catharine's College,
and late Fellow of Magdalene College, Cambridge. 1865-1879.

This is one of the many medizval chronicles which assume the cliaracter of &
history of the world. It begins witb the creation, and is brought down to the
author's own time, the reign of Edward III. Prefixed to the historical portion, is
8 chapter devoted to geography, in which is given a description of every krown
land. '"l'o say that the Polychronicon was w.itten in the fourteenth century is to
say that it is not free from inaccuracies. It has, bowever, a value apart from ite
intrinsic merits. It enables us to form a very fair estimate of the knowledge of
history aud geography which well-informed readers of the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries possessed, for it was then the standard work on general history.

The two English translations, which are printed with the original Lotin, afford
interesting illustrations of the gradual change of our lanjruage, for one was made
in the fourteenth century, the other in the fifteenth. "The differences between
"Trevisa's version and that of the unknown writer are often consicerable.

42, Le LiveRE pk Reis pz. BnuirraNiE E Le LivengE pk Ris pe
ENGLETERE. Edited by Jon GrovEn, M.A., Vicar of Brading, Isle cf
Wight, formerly Librarian of "Trinity College, Cambridge. 1865.

''hese two treatises, though they cannot rank as independent narratives, ure
nevertheless valuable as careful abstracts of previous historians, especially ** Le
Livere de Reis de Engletere" Some various readings are given which are
interesting to the philologist as instances of semi-Saxonized French.

It is supposed that Peter of Ickham must have been tle author, but no certain
conclusion on that point has been arrived at.

43. CirgoNICA MoNaAsTERU bE MEkLsSA, AB. ANNO 1150 USQUE AD ANNUM
1406. Vols. L, IT., and III. Edited £y Epwanp AvausTus DoNp. Esq.,
Assistant Keeper of the Manuscripts, and Ezerton Librarian, Dreitish


Museum. 1866-1868.
The Abbey of Meaux was a Cistercian houre, and .be wo.k of :1.s abbot is both

curious and valuable. It is a faithful and often riinute record of tue establishnient

of a religious community, of its progress in forming an ample revenue, of its
struggles to maintain its acquisitions, and of its relations to the governing
institutions of the country. In addition to the private affairs of the monastery,
some light is thrown upon the public events of the time, which are however kept
distinct, and appear at the end of the history of each abbot's administration. The

text has been printed from what is said to be the autograpa of the original
compiler, Thomas de Burton, the nineteenth abbot.


M M2


20


4i. MarTrit kr PanRisreNsIS HisTORIA ANGLORUM, SIVE, UT VULGO DICITUR,
HisronrA Miog, Vols. L, IL, and III. 1067-1253. Edited by Sir


FuzpERIC MapDpEN, K.H., Keeper of the Department of Manuscripts,
British Museum, 1866-1869.


The exact date at which this work was written is, according to the chronicler,
1250. "The history isof considerable value as an illustration of the period during
which the author lived, and contaius a good summary of the events which followed
the Conquest. This minor chronicle is, however, based on another work (also
written by Matthew Paris) giving fuller details, which has been called the
* Historia Major." 'lhe chronicle here published, nevertheless, gives 80me
information not to be found in the greater history.


45. LiseER. MoNasTERU DE HpA: A CHRONICLE AND CHARTULARY OF
Hp£g AunEy, WiNCHESTER 455-1023. Edited, from a Manuscript in the
Library of the Earl of Macclesfield, by EpwARD EpwARps, Esq. 1866.


The * Book of Hyde"' is a conipilation from much earlier sources which are
usually indicated with considerable care and precision. In many cases, however,
the Hyde chronicler appears to correct, to qualify, or to amplify—either from
tradition or from sources of information not now discoverable—the statements,
which, in substance, he adopts. He also mentions, and frequent!y quotes from
writers whose works are either entirely lost or at present known only by fragments.

There is to be found, in the ** Book of Hyde," much information relating to the
reign of King Alfred which is not known to exist elsewhere. 'The volume
contains some curious specimens of Anglo-Saxon and Medizval English.


46. CunoxicoN ScoroRUM : A CHRONICLE OF Inisu ArraAins, from the
EanLrEST "TragS to 1135 ; with à SuPPLEMENT, containing the Events
from 1141to 1150. Edited, with a Translation, by WiLLIAM MAUNSELL
HeNNrssYy, Esq., M.R.I.A. 1866.


There is, in this volume, a legendary account of the peopling of Ireland and of
the adventures which befell the verious heroes who are said to have been con-
nected with Irish history. "The details are, however, very meagre both for this
period and for the time when history becomes 1inore authentic. '[lhe plan adopted
in the chronicle gives the appearance of an accuracy to which the earlier portions
of the work cannot have any claim. "Tl'he succession of events is marked, year by
year, from A.M. 1599 to A.D. 1150. "The principal events narrated in the later
portion of the work are, the invasions of foreigners, and the wars of the Irish
among themselves. "The text has been printed from a MS. preserved in the
library of Trinity College, Dublin, written partly in Latin, partly in Irish.


47. THE CHRoNICLE or PreRRE DÀ LaNGTOFT, IN FRENCH VERSE, FROM
THE EARLIEST PERIOD TO THE DEATH OF Epwaxp I. Vols. I. and II.
Edited by 'THoMAs WnianT, Esq., M.A. 1866-1868.


It is probable that Pierre de Langtoft was & canon of Bridlington, in Yorkshire,
and that he lived in the reign of Edward I., and during a portion of the reign of
Edward IJ. This chronicle is divided into three parts; in the first is an
&bridgment of Geoffrey of Monmouth's '* Historia Britonum," in the second, a
history of the Anglo-Saxon and Norman kings, down to the death of Henry III .,
and in the third a history of the reign of Edward I. The principal object of the
work was apparently to show the justice of Edward's Scottish wars. The
language is singularly corrupt, and a curious specimen of the French of Yorkahire.


48. THE WAR or THE GAEDHIL WITH THE GaAILL, or, Tu& INvASIONS or
InkeLAND BY THE DANES AND OTHER NonmskMEN. Edited, wcith a
Translation, by JauEs HeNTHORN Topp, D.D., Senior Fellow of
Trinity College, and Regius Professor of Hebrew in the University,
Dublin. 1867.


The work in its present form, in thecditor's opinion, isa comparatively modern
version of an undoubtedly ancient original. That it was compilcd from contem-
porary materials has been proved bv curious incidentalevidencc. It is stated in
the account given of the battle of Clontarf that the full tide in Dublin Day on the
day of the battle (23 April 1014) coincided with sunrise; aud that the returning
tide in the evening aided considerably in the defeat of the Danes. The fact has
been verified by astronomical calculations, and tbe inference is that the author of
the chronicle, if not bimselfan eye-witness, must have derived his information
froin those who were eye-witnesses. "Che contents of the work are sufficiently
described in its title. The story is told after the manner of the Scandinavian
Sagss, with poems and fragments of poems introduced into the prose narrative.


21


49, GrzsTA REeac18 HEeNRICI SECUNDI BENEDICTI ÁBBATIS. Tux CHRONICLE
or THE RExiaNs or HNvnx II. ANp RicHangp IL, 1169-1192, known
under the name of BEeNEDICT or PrrERBOROUGH. Vols. l. and Il.
Edited by WirvtiAM STruBBs, M.A., Regius Professor of Modern His-
tory, Oxford, and Lambeth Librarian. 1867.


This chronicle of the reignsof Henry 1I. and Richard L, known commonly
under the name of Benedict of Peterborough, is one of the best existing speci-
mens of a class of historical compositions of the first importance to the student.


50. MuNIMENTA ÁcADEMICA, OR, DOCUMENTS ILLUSTRATIVE OF ÁCADEMICAL
LirE AND STupiES AT Oxronp (in Two Parts). Edited by the Rev.
Hrewnv AwsTEY, M.A., Vicar of St. Wendron, Cornwall, and lately
Vice-Principal of St. Mary Hall, Oxford. 1868.


This work will supply materials for a History of Academical Life and Studies
in the University ot Oxford during the 13th, 14th, and 15th centuries.


561. CunoxicA MaarsrRI RoceRI pz HovEpENE, | Vols. L, IL, IIL,, and IV.
Edited by WitLiAM STuBBs, M.A., Regius Professor of Modern History,


and Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. 1868-1871.

'This work has long been justly celebrated, but not thoroughly understood until
Mr. Stubbs! edition. "The earlier portion, extending from 732 to 1148, appears
to be a copy of a compilation made in Northumbria about 1161, to which
Hoveden added little. From 1148 to 1169—4a very valuable portion of this
work—the matter is derived from another source, to which Hoveden appears to
have supplied little, and not always judiciously. From 1170 to 1192 is the
portion which corresponds with the Chronicle known under the name of
Benedict of Peterborough (see No. 49); but it is not a copy, being sometimes
an abridgment, at others a paraphrase; occasionally the two works entirely
agree; showing that both writers had access to the same materials, but dealt
with them differently. From 1192 to 1201 may be said to be wholly Hoveden's
work : itis extremely valuable, and an authority of the first importance.


59. WiLLELMI MALMESBIRIENSIS MoNaACHI DE GEsTIS PoNTIFICUM ANGLO-
RUM LiBRI Quique. — Edited, from William of Malmesbury's Auto-
graph MS., by N. E. S. A. HawiLTON, Esq., of the Department of


Manuscripts, British Museum. 1870.
William of Malmesbury's ** Gesta Pontificum " is the principal foundation of
English Ecclesiastica! Biography, down to the year 1122. 'The manuscript
which has been followed in this Edition is supposed by Mr. Hamilton to be tho
author's autograph, containing his latest additions and amendments.


83. HisroRic AND MuniCiPAL DOCUMENTS OF IRELAND, FROM THE ÁRCHIVES
or THE Cirr or DupLIN, &c. 1172-1320. Edited by Jonw T. GirBEnr,
Esq., F.S.A., Secretary of the Public Record Office of Ireland. 1870,

A collection of original documents, elucidating mainly the history and condition
of the municipal, middle, and trading classes under or in relation with the
rule of England in Ireland,—a subject hitherto in almost total obscurity.
Extending over the first hundred and fifty years of the Anglo-Norman
settlement, the series includes charters, municipal laws and regulations, rolls of
names of citizens and members of merchant-guilds, lists of commodities with
their rates, correspondence, illustrations of relations between ecclesiastics and
laity ; together with many documents exhibiting the state of Ireland during the
presence there of the Scots under Robert and Edward Bruce.


54. THE ANNALS Or Locu Cf. A CrrRONICLE or InisH APrFAiRS, FROM
1014 to 1590. Vols. L. and IL. Edited, with a Translation, by
WiLLiAM MauNsELL HrNNEssYy, Esq, M.R.LA. 1871.

'The original of this chronicle has passed under various names. The title of
« Annals of Loch Có? was given to it by Professor O'Curry, on the ground that
it was transcribed for Brian Mac Dermot, an Irish chieftain, who resided on the
island in Loch Cé, in the county of Roscommon. It adds much to the materiale
for the civil and ecclesiastical history of Ireland ; and contains many curious
ceferences to English and foreign affairs, not noticed in any other chronicle.


22


$65. MoNuMENTA Junrmp:CA. Tug BraAck BooK or THE ÁDMIRALTY, WITH
APPENDICES, Vols. L, lI, JIL, and IV. Edited by Sig 'RAVERS
T wiss, Q.C., D.C.L. 1871-1876.


This book contains the ancient ordinances and laws relatinz to the navy,
and was probauly compiled for the use of the Lord High Admi,al o£ Enzland.
Selden calls it he ** jewel of the Admiralty Records." Prynne asciibes to the
Black Book the same authority in the Admiralty as the Black and Red Books
have in the Court of Exchequer, and most English writers on maritime law
recognize its importance.


66. MEMoRIALS or THE REiaN or HeNnY VI.:—OrriciAL CORRESPONDENCE
or Tuoxas ErkrNTON, SkcRETARY TO HeNRY VI, AND BisHoP
or DArH AND WkrLLs. Edited, from a MS. in the Archiepiscopal
Library at Lambeth, with an Appendix of Illustrative Documents, by the
Rev. GEorneE WirLIAMs, B.D., Vicar of Ringwood, late Fellow of King's
College, Cambridge. Vols. I. and II. 1872.


These curious volumes are of a miscellaneous character, and were probably
compiled under the immediate direction of Bekynton hefore he had attained
tothe Episcopate. 'They contain many of the Bishop's cwnletters, and several
written by him in the King's name ; also letters to himself while Royal Secre-
tary,and others addressed to the King. "This work elucidates some points in
the history of the nation during the first balf of the fifteenth century.


67. MATTHAEI PanisizNsIS, MoNACHI SaNcTI ÁLBANI, CuRoNICA MAJORA.
Vol. I. 'The Creation to A.D. 1066. Vol. IIl. A.D. 1067 to A.D. 1216.
Vol, III. A.D. 1216 to A.D. 1239. Vol. IV. A.D. 1240 to A.D. 1247.
Vol. V. A.D. 1248 to A.D. 1259. Edited by HENRY Ricnanps LuUARD,
D.D. Fellow of Trinity College, Registrary of the Universiiy, and
Vicar of Great St. Mary's, Cambridge. 1872-1880.

This work contains the **Chrorica Majora" of Matthew Paris, one of the
most valuable and frequently consvlted of tne ancient Enolish Chronicles, It


is published from its commeacement, for the first cime. "l'he editions by Arch-
bishop Parker, and William Wats, severally begin at the Norman Conquest.


58. MEMORIALE FRATRIS WarnTERI DE CovENTRIA.— THE  HisTORICAL
CorrLkcrioNs OF WALTER OF CovENTRY. Vols. I.and II. Edited, from
the MS. in. the Library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, by
WiLLIAM Srun2s, M.A., Regius Professor of Modern History, and Fellow
of Oriel College, Oxford. 1872-1873.

This work, now printed in full for the first time, has long bcen a desideratwm
by Historical Scholars. "The first por.ion, however, is not of much importance,
being only & compilation from earlier writers. "The part relating to the first
quarter of the thirteenth century is the most valuable and interesting.


59. Tue ANgcLo-LamIN SaTiRICAL PoEkTS AND EPIGRAMMATISTS OF TBE
Twrrrru CENTURY. — Vols. I. and II. — Collected and edited by
'HoMAs Wmicur, Esq., M.A., Corresponding Member of the National
Institute of France (Académie des Inscriptions et Delles-Lettres). 1872.

The Poems contained in these volumes have long been known anc appreciated


as the best satires of the age in which their authors flourished, an were deservedly
popular during the 13th and 14th centuries.


60. MATERIALS FOR A HisroRy or THE RxioN or HxNnzY VII. rnow
oRIGINAL. DocuUMENTS' PRESERVED IN THE PusaLic [Pteconp Orricr.
Vols. T. and II. Edited by the Rev. WiryiaM CAMPEELL, M.A., one
of Her Majesty's Inspectors of Schools. 1873-1877.


These volumes are valunbleas illastrating the acts and proceedings of Henry VI1.
on ascending the throne, and shadow out the policy he afterwards adopted.


28


61. HisromcaL PaPrEns AND LETTERS FhOM THE NonTHERN RroisTERS.
Edited by JauEgs ItA1NE. M.A., Canon o? Yoik, and Secretary of the
Surtees Society. 1873.

The do-uments in this volume illustrat^, for (be most part, the general history
of the north of England, particularly in its relaiion to Scotland.


62. RgaisTRUM PaALATINUM DUNELMENSE. Tug LraisTER or R1CcHARD DE
KELLAwE, Lonp PaAraTINE AND BrsuoP or DungmHaw; 7311-1316.
Vols. I, IL, IIL, and IV. Edited by Sir THowaAs Durrvs Hanpy,
D.C.I.,Deputy Keeper of the Public Records. 1875-1878.


Bishop Ke'lawe's I:egister contains the proceedings of his prelacy, both lay
and ecclesiastical, and is the earliest Itegister of the Palatinate of Durham.


63. MEMOon1IALS Or SaiNT DuNSTAN ÁnCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY. Edited,
Jrom various MSS., by WirLriAM SrusBss, M.A., Regius Professor of
Modern History, and Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. 1874.

This volume contains several lives of Archbishop Dunstan, one of the most


celebrated P.imates of Canterbury, "They open various points of Historical
and Literary interest, without which our knowledge of the period would be


more incomplete than it is at present.


64. CunouicoN ANGLLE, AB ANNO Dowiwi 1928 UsQUE AD ANNUM 1388,
AUCTORE MoNACHO QUODAM SANCTI ALBANI Edited by EDwARD
MauNDE TmuoxrsoN, Esq. Barrister-at-Law, and Assistant-Keeper of
the Manuscripts in the British Museum. 1874.


This chronicle gives a circumstantial history of the close of the reign of
Edward III. which has hitherto been considered lost.


65. TróMAs SAGA EnkiBYsKkUPS. A Lirre or ÁncuBisHoP 'TnoMAs Breckrr,
IN IckLANDIC. "Vol. I. Edited, with English Translation, Notes, and
Glossary, by M. EiRíkR MaaN(ÜssoN, Sub-Librarian of the University
Library, Cambridge. 1879.

This work is derived from the Life of Becket written by Benedict of Peter-
borough, and apparently supplies the missing portions in Benedict's biography.


66. RApuLPII DE CocGGESHALL CmHRoNICON ÁNGLICANUM. Edited by the
Rxv. JosePH SreveNsoN, M.A. 1875.
This volume contains the ** Chronicon Anglicanum," by Ralph of Coggeshall,
the * Libellus de Expugnatione Terre Sancte per Saladinum," usually
ascribed to the same author, and other pieces of an interesting character.


67. MATERIALS FOR THE Hisrony or 'Tuowas BEckreT, ÁRcHBISHOP Or
CawTERnBURY. Vols. L, II., III., IV.,and V. Edited by the Rev. JAMES
CRAicr1E RorERTSON, M.A., Canon of Canterbury. 1875-1881.

This Publication will comprise all contemporary materials for the history of
Archbishop Thomas Becket. "The first volume contains the life of that cele-
brated man, and the miracles after his death, by William, a monk of Canter-
bury. The second, the life by Benedict of Peterborough; John of Salisbury ;
Alan of Tewkesbury; and Edward Grim. The third, the life by William
Fitzstephen; and Herbert of Bosham. The fourth, Anonymous lives, Quad-
rilogus, &e. "'Plho fifth, the Epistles, and other known letters.


68. RApuULE1 o£ Dickro Drecawu1 LuNpoNiENSIS OPERA HrisTORICA. THE
HisrognicAL Wonks or Masrken RarpeH pk DickTo, DEAN or LoNpox.
Vols. I. and II. — Edited, from the Original Manuscripts, by Witr1AM
SrunBs, M.AÀ., Regius Professor of Modern History, and Fellow of
Oriel College, Oxford. 1876.

The Historica] Works of Ralph de Diceto are some of the most valuable
materials for British History. The Abbreviationes Chronicorum extend from
the Creation to 1147, and the Ymagines Historiarum to 1201.


24


69. Ron, or Tü& PRocEkEUINGS OF THE KriNG'8 CouNcIL IN IRELAND, FOR
A PonrioN or THE l6TH Yrg4AnR oF THE REkiGN or RicnanRp II. 1392-
93. — Edited by the Rev. JaAuES GnRavEs, A.B. 1877.

This Roll throws considerable light on the History of Ireland at a period
little known. It seems the only document of the kind extant.

70. HENuicG: DE BRAcrTON DE LEcinUs ET CONSUETUDINIBUS ÁNGLLIA.
Lisnr QuiNQUE 1N Vanros TnRAcTATUS DisriNCTI. ÁAp DivERSORUM ET
VEgTUsTIssIMORUM CopicUwM CoLLATIONEM Tris Vurcarr. — Vols. I.,
IL, IIL, IV.and V. Edited by 81g TnavEns Twiss, Q.C., D.C.L.
1878-1882.

This is a new edition of Bracton's celebrated work, collated with MSS. in
the British Museum ; the Libraries of Lincoln's Inn, Middle Temple, and Gray's
Inn ; Bodleian Library, Oxford; the Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris ; &c.

71. TuEe HisroRiANS or THE ÜCuunceu or YORK, AND ITS ÁRCHBISHOPS.
Vol. l. Edited by JAwurs ltAiNE, M.A., Canon of York, and Secretary
of tho Surtees Society. 1879.

This will form a complete ** Corpus Historicum Eboracense," a work very
much needed, aud of great value to the Historical Inquirer.

72. REGISTRUM MALMESBURIENSE. Tur REGISTER OF MALMESBURY ÁBBEY ;
PRESERVED IN THE PunLic RecoRD Orrice. Vol. I. and Il. Edited
óy J. S. BREWER, M.A., Preacher at the Rolls, and Rector of Toppes-
ficld, and CrAnLEs Tmick Manris, Esq., D.A. 1879, 1880.

This work throws light upon many eurious points of history, and illustrates
the growth of society, the distribution and cultivation of land,the relations of
landlord and tenant, and national history and customs.

T3. Hisromcarn Wonxzs or GERVAsE OF CANTERBURY, Vols. I. and II. Tux
CuRoNICLE OF THE ligiGNs or STEPHEN, HxNnYy IL, AND RiücHARD I,
BY GERVASE, THE MoNK or CaNTERBURY. — Edited by WiLLIAM STUBBS,
D.D.; Canon Residentiary of St. Pauls, London; Regius Professor of
Modern History, and Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford; &c. 1879, 1880.

The Historical Works of Gervase of Canterbury are of great importance,
as regards the questions of Church and State, during the period in which he
wrote. This work was printed by Twysdepn,in the ** Historic Anglicanae
Scriptores X.," more than two centuries ago. "l'he present edition has received
critical examination and illustration.

74. HENRICI AncHiDiACONI HuNTENDUNENSsIS llisrORIA ANGLORUM. 'Tnx
Hisronr or Tug ENGLISH, BY HENRY, AncnupDkACON OF HUNTINGDON,
from A.C. 59 to A.D. 1154, in Eight Books. Edited by 'TnowAs ARNOLD,
M.A., of University College, Oxford. 1879.

, Henry of Huntingdon's work was first printed by Sir Henry Savile, in 1596,

in his **Seriptores post Bedam," and reprinted at Frankfort in 1601. Both

editions are very rare and. inaccurate. Tho first five books of the History were

published in 1848 in the ** Monumenta Historica Britannica," which is out of print.

The present volume contains the whole of the manuscript of Huntingdon's

Vlistory in eight books, collated with a manuscript lately discovered at Paris.
7ó. Tur Hirsromican Wonks or SywroN or DunmaM. Voll. Edited by

Tuoxas AnxNorb, M.A., of University College, Oxford.

The first volume of this edition of the Historica] Works of Symeon of
Durham, contains the *'ITistoria Dunelmensis Ecclesim," and other Works.
'The second volume will contain the * Historia Regum," &c.

(46. CunoxicLES or TünE RkrGNs or Enwanp IL AND Epwanp II. Vol. I.
Edited by Wirriaw Srunss, D.D., Canon Residentiary of St. Paul's
London ; Regius Professor of Modern History, and Fellow of Oriel College,
Oxford ; &c.


These Clironicles will be comprised in two volumes ; the first i
| ; volumc contains
the ** Annales Londonienses " and the * Annales Paulini."


- EE D e CM


— —À c -.A-— — —— --


25


In the Press.


CuRoNICLE or RoBERT or BnuwNE. Edited by FnEpERICK JAMES Fun-
NIVALL, Esq., M.A., of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, Barrister-at-Law.

Tug MErTRICAL CHRONICLE Or RoBERT OF GLOUCESTER, — Edited by WILLIAM
Arpis WnaiauT, Esq., M.A.

A. CorrEcTION oF SAGAS AND OTHER HisrOoRICAL DocuMENTS relating to the
Settlements and Descents of the Northmen on the British Isles. Edited
by Sir GEoncE WEBBE DasENT, D.C.L., Oxon., and M. GUDBRAND
ViarussoxN, M.A.

TuoxAs SAGA EnkiBYsKUPS. À Lirk oy AncnuBisrOP TrHnoMAs DECKET, IN
IcELANDIC. Vol. II. Edited, with. English Translation, Notes, and
Glossary, by M. EtiníkR MacN(éssou, M.A., Sub-Librarian of the
University Library, Cambridge.

REkCcUEIL bEks CnRoNiQUES ET ANCHIENNES lsTORIES DE LA GmnANT Bnr-
TAIGNE A PRESENT NOMME ENGLETERRE, par JEHAN DE WAURIN.
Vol. IV., 1431-1448. Edited by WirtLiAM Hanpr, Esq., F.S.A.

LEsrogikE nes ENaLES SoLUM GkrrFREI GariMAR. Edited by Sig "THOMAS
Dvrrus Hanvr, D.C.L., Deputy Keeper of the Public Records.

'Tuk HisroRiANSs or THE Cuuncu Or YORK, AND ITS ARCHBISHOPS.
Vol.II. Edited by JawEs RaiNE, M.A., Canon of York, and Secretary
of the Surtees Society.

PorrcnnoNicoN RANULPHI HIGDEN, with Trevisa's Translation. . Vol, VIII.
Edited by the Rev. Josze?aH. RAwsoN LuxBr, D.D., Norrisian Pro-
fessor of Divinity, Vicar of St. Edward's, Fellow of St. Catharine's
College, and late Fellow of Magdalene College, Cambridge.

YraAn Books, 11—16 Edward III. — Edited and translated by ArraExD
JoBN Honwoop, Esq., of the Middle Temple, Barrister-at-Law.

MarTHnAI PanisreNSIS, MoNACHI SaNcTI ALBANI, CnHnoNICA MaAJonRA.
Vol. VI. Additamenta. Edited by HENRY RicHARps Lvanp, D.D,,
Fellow of Trinity College, Registrary of the University, and Vicar of
Great St. Mary's, Cainbridge.

MaTERIALS FOR THE Hisrony or TnuoMAs BEkckxkT, AmncHBISHOP Or
CawxTERBURY, Vol. VI. Edited bythe Rev. JAwEs CRA1GIE ROoBERTSON,
M.A., Canon of Canterbury.

REGiSTRUM EPISTOLARUM FRATRIS JOHANNIS PECKHAM, ÁRCHIEPISCOPI
CawTUAmIENSIS.  Vol.l. Edited, from MS. in All Souls College,
Oxford, by CnAnLES TRicE ManriN, Eso, D.A.

Tuge HisroRicCAL Wonks or SywEoN or DungHAM. Vol.II. Edited by
TnHoMAs8 ARNOLD, M.A., of University College, Oxford.

CaunoNicLEs or THE RriaNs or EnwAnpDI. AND Epwanp II. Vol.II. Edited
by WirLIAM SrUBns, D.D., Canon Residentiary of St. Paul's, London ;
Regius Professor of Modern History, and Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford ;


In Progress.


DrescRIPTIVE CATALOGUE OF MANUSCRIPTS RELATING TO THE HisTORY op
GnrAT BnrramN AND InkLAND. Vol.IV.; 1327, &c. By Sir THoxAS
Durrvs Hanpr, D.C.L., Deputy Keeper of the Public Records.

HENRICGI DE DBnacroN Dk LEGIBUS — ET CONSUETUDINIBUS ANGLLE
LiBR QuiNQUE IN Vanios TnacrATUS DisriNcTI.. AÁAp DrivknsoRUM ET
VzxTUsTISSIMORUM CoDpiCcUM COLLATIONEM Tyrrs VuLGATL — Vol VI
Edited by Sim 'TRAvEns Twiss, Q.C., D.C.L. :


26


PUBLICATIONS OF
THE RECORD COMMISSIONERS, &c.


[In boards or cloth.]


RorTULORUM OR1aIWALIUM IN Cumiá Scaccarm AnnREVIATIO. Henry 111.
—Edward III. Edited by HNkny PrAxrorp, Esq. 2 Vols. folio
(1805—1810). 2ó5s., or 12s. 6a. each.

CALENDARIUM ÍINQUISITIONUM PosT MorTEM SIVE EscAETARUM. Henry III.
—Rhichard III. Edited by JonN CarEv and Jonw BarvrEev, Esqrs.
Vols. 3 aud 4, folio (1821—1828): Vol. 3, 21s.; Vol. 4, 24s.


LisRoRuUM  MaNuUuscRIPTORUM  BiBLi0TuEOX€  HARLEIANA& | CATALOGUS.


Vol.4. Edited by the Rev. T. HanrwELL HonmNE. Folio (1812), 185.


ABBBEVIATIO PrLAciTORUM. Ricbard I.—Edward II. Edited by the Right
Hon. Gxo&GE Rosk and W.ItrLiNGwoRTH, Esq. 1 Vol. folio (1811), 185.


LisRr CENSUALIS vocati DowEspAY-Book, IwpicEs. Edited by Sir HekRY
Erris. Folio (1816), (Domesday-Book, Vol. 3). 215.


LisRi CENsUALIS vocati DowEspAY-Book, ÁDDITAMENTA EX CopiC. AN-
TIQUISS. Edited by Sir HexRY Erris. Folio (1816), (Domesday-Book,
Vol. 4). 21s.

STATUTES OF THE RrALM. Edited by Sir T. E. TourrNs, JonN Bairusr,
JouN CALEY, and WM. ErL1ioTT, Esqrs. Vols. 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11,
including 2 Vols. of Indices, large folio (1819—1828). 315. 6d. each ;
except the Indices, 30s. each.

VALOR ECCLESIASTICUS, temp. Hen. VIII. Auctoritate Regia institutus.
Edited by JonN CarE, Esq. and the Rev. JosgPH HuNTER. Vols.
3 to 6, folio (1817-1834). 25s. each.

*,* The Introduction, separately, 8vo. 2$. 6d.

RoruLi Scor1t& iw Tongni LoNbDiNENSI xkT IN Dowo CarrruLARI WzsT-
MONASTERIENSI ÁSSERVATI. 19 Edward I.-—Henry VIII. Edited by
Davi» MacPHERSON, JouN Carzr,and W. IrL1INGWORTH, Esqre., and
the Rev. T. HanTWwELL HonNx. Vol. 2,folio (1819). 215.

Fe«prRA, CoNvENTIONES, LirrERE, &c. ; or, RywEemg's Fapxna, New
Edition,folio. Vol 3, Part 2, 1361—1377 (1830) : Vol. 4, 1377—1383
(1869). | Edited by Jonw Carkey and FRED. HorsRookKr, Esqrs.
Vol. 3, Part 2, 21s. ; Vol. 4, 6s.

DocATus LaNcasTRLE CALENDARIUM INQUISITIONUM POST MORTEM, &c.
Part 3, Calendar to the Pleadings, &c., Henry VIL-——193 Elizabeth.
Part 4, Calendar to the Pleadings, to end of Elizabeth. (1827—1834.)
Edited ày R. J. HARPER, JonN CALEY, and Ww. MiNcniN, Esqrs. Folio.
Part 3 (or Vol. 2), 31s. 6d.; Part 1 (or Vol. 3), 215.

CALENDARS OF THE PROCEEDINGS IN CHANCERY, ELIZABETH ; with Ex-
amples of earlier Proceedings from Richard II. Edited by Jonxw
BaxLEev, Esq. Vol. 3 (1832), folio, 215.

PARLIAMENTARY WmiTS AND WnirS or Mirrrany SuMMONS, with Records
and Muniments relating to Suit and Service due and performed to the
King's High Court of Parliament and the Councils of the Realm. Edited
by Sir FnANCIS PALGRAVE. (1830— 1834.) Folio. Vol. 2, Division ],
Edward II., 21s. ; Vol. 2, Division 2, 21s. ; Vol. 2, Division 3, 42;.


- -—— — — 8 mon


21


RoruLi LrrTERARUM CLAUSARUM IN TuRRI LONDINENSI A88ERVATI. 2 Vols.
folio (1833, 1844). Vol. 1, 1204—1224. — Vol. 2, 1224—1227.
Edited by 'THoMAs Durrvus Hanpy, Esq. — 815. ; or separately, Vol. 1,
63s. ; Vol. 2, 18s.


PRocEEDINGS AND OnmnprNANCES OF THE Pnivy CouNciL oy ENGLAND.
10 Richard II.—33 Henry VIII. Edited by Sir NicHorAs Hannis Nr-
coLAsS, 7 Vols.royal8vo.(1834—1837). 985s.; or separately, 14s. each.


RoTrurri LirrTERARUM PATENTIUM IN TunRI LONDINENSI ASSERVATI. 1201
—1216. Edited by T. Durrus Hanpr, Esq. 1 Vol.folio (1835) 31s. 6d.
9," The Introduction, separately, 8vo. 95s.
RorvuL.i CugL.& Rrcis. Rolls and Records of the Court held before the
Kine's Jus.iciars or Justices, 6 Richard I.—1 John. Edited by Sir
FRANCIS PALGRAVE. 2 Vols.royal8vo.(1835). 285.


ItoruuNi NoRMANNLE& IN TunRI LONDINENSI ASSERVATI. 1200—12056 ; also,
1417 to 1418. Edited by 'TRHoMAs Dvurrvus Hanpy, Esq. 1 Vol.royal
8vo. (1885). 125. 6d.


RoTUuLI bE OBLATIS ET FiNIBUS IN TunRI LONDINENSI ASSERVATI, tempore
Regis Johannis. Edited by 'THoMAs Durrus Hangpy, Esq. 1 Vol.
royal£vo.(1835). 185.


ExqEeRPTA E lLoruLIS FiNIUM IN Tun&Ri LoNDINENSI ASSERVATIS. Henry
III, 1216—1272. Edited by CnanrtEs RoBrnTs, Esq. 2 Vols. royal
8vo. (18365, 1896), 32s. ; or separately, Vol. 1, 14s. ; Vol. 2, 185.


FiNEs, SIVE PEDES FiNIUM ; siVE FiNALES CoNcORDLE IN CumiÀ DowiNI
REecGis. ^7 Richard I.—16 John, 1195—1214. — Edited by the Rev.
JosePH HvuNTER. In Counties. 2 Vols. royal $vo. (1835—1844), 115. ;
or separately, Vol. 1, 8s, 6d.; Vol. 2, 2s. 6d.


ANCIENT KALENDARS AND INVENTORIES OF THE TREASURY Or His Ma-
JESTY's EXCHEQUER ; together with Documents illustrating .he History
of ihet Repository. Edited by Sir FnANcIs PALGRAvE. 3 Vols. royal
8vo. (1836). 425.


DocuMENTS AND RhEconps illustrating the History of Scotland, and the
Transactions between the Crowns of Scotland and England; pre-
served in the Treasury of Her Majesty's Exchequer. Edited by Sir
FRANCIS PALGRAVvE. 1 Vol.royal8vo.(1837). 18s.


Roruui1 CHARTARUM IN "longi LoNDINENSI ASSERVATI. 1199—1216.
Edited by 'THnowAs Durrvus Hanpy, Esq. 1 Vol.folio (1837). 305.


REPORT OF THE PRocEEDINGS OF THE REcoRD CoxwissioNERS, 1831—
1837. 1 Vol.folio (1837). 85.


REeGISTRUM vulgariter nuncupatum ** The Record of' Caernarvon," e codice
MS. Harleiano, 696, descriptum. ..Edited by Sir HeNRYx ErLis. 1 Vol.
folio (1838). 31s. 6d.


ANCIENT Laws AND INsTITUTES OF ENGLAND; comprising Laws enacted
under the Anglo-Soxon Kings, from ZEtheloirht to Cnut, with &
Translation o; the Saxon ; the Laws called Edward the Confessor's ;
the Laws of William the Conqueror, and those ascribed to Henry the
First ; Monumenta Ecclesiastica. Anglicana, from 7th to 10th century ;
and Ancient Latin Version of the Anglo-Saxon Laws. Glossary, &c.
Edited by BeNJAMIN TnHonPE, Esq. 1 Vol. folio (1840), 40s. Or,
2 Vols. royal 8vo., 30s.

ANCIENT LAWS AND INsTITUTES OF WALES ; comprising Laws supposed to be
enacted by Howel the Good, modified by subsequent Regulations prior
tothe Conquest by Edward the First ; snd anomalous Laws, consisting
principally of Institutions which continued in force. | With Translation.


28


Also, Latin Transcripts, containing Digests of the Welsh Laws, princi-
paly of the Dimetian Code. Glossary, &c. Edited by AwEURIN
OwrN, Esq. 1 Vol. folio (1841), 44s. Or, 2 Vols. royal 8vo., 365.

RoTULI DE LiBERATE AC DE Muisis ET PnsTITIS, Regnante Johanne.
Edited by 'Tnoxas Durrus Hanpy, Esq. 1 Vol. royal 8vo. (1844). 65.

Tug GnEAT RoLLs or rite Pieg, 2, 3, 4 HN. IL, 1155—1158. Edited by
the Rev. JoserH HuNTE&R. 1 Vol.royal 8vo. (1844). 4s. 6d.

Tur GnEAT Rorr or rux Pire, 1 Ric. L., 1189—1190.— Edited by the Rev.
JosePH HuNTER. 1 Vol. royal8vo. (1844). 65.

DocuxENTs IrrLUsTRATIVE OF ENGcGLIsH HisroRY in the 13th and 14th
centuries, from the Records of the Queen's Remembrancer in the Ex-
chequer. Edited 0y HENnY Corx, Esq. 1 Vol. fep. folio (1844). 45s. 6d.

Mopus TENENDI PARLIAMENTUM. An Ancient Treatise on the Mode of
nolding the Parliament in England. Edited by TnHowaAs Durrus
Hanpyr, Esq. 1 Vol. 8vo.(1846). 2s. 6d.

REGisTRUM MacN1 S:aiLLI ReGUM ScoTORUM in Archivis Publicis asser-
vatum. 1306—142-. Edited by Tnowas TnowsoN, Esq. Folio (1814).
10s. 6d.

THk Acrs or THE PARLIAMENTS OF SCOTLAND. Folio (1814—1875).
Edited by 'TrtouAs THowsoN and Coswo INNEs, Esqre. Vol. 1,
49s. "Vols. 5 and 6 (in three Parts), 21s. each Part ; Vols. 4, 7, S, 9,
10, and 11, 10s. 6d. each; Vol. 12 (Index), 63s. Or, complete, 12
Volumes in 13, 127. 125.

THE AcTs or TBE Lonps AuniTORS OF CAUSES AND CouPLAINTS (ÁcTA
DouiNOoRUM AUDITORUM). 1466—--1494. Edited by 'THoMASs 'THOMSON,
Esq. Folio (1889). 1065. 6d.

Tug AcTsor T&E Lonps or CouNciL IN Civit, Cavusxs (AcrA DOMINORUM
CowciLI). 1478— 14985. Edited by THoMAs THowsoN, Esq. Folio
(1829). 10s. 6d.

[sscE Ron, or THowas pE BnANTINGHAM, Bishop of Exeter, Lord High
'Treasurer or Englend, containing Payments out of His Majesty's
Revenue, 4$ Edward IIL, 1370. Edited by FREDERICK DrvoN, Esq.
1 Vol. 4to. (1835), 35s. Or, royal 8vo., 255.

Issuks or THE EXCHEQUER, James I.; extracted from the Pell Records.
Edited by FrEpERICK DrevoN, Esq. 1 Vol. 4to. (1836), 30s. Or, royal
8vo., 215.

[ssugs oF THE EXCHEQUER, Henry III.—Henry VI. ; extracted from the
Pell Records. Edited by FREDERICK Dxvow, Esq. 1 Vol. 4to.
(1837), 40s. Or, royal 8vo., 30s.

HawpBook Tro THE PusL10 REconRps. By F. S. TnowAs, Esq., Secretary
of the Public Record Office. 1 Vol.royal8vo. (1853). 125.

HisroRICAL NoTES RELATIVE TO THE HisTORY oF ENGLAND, Henry VIII.
—Anne(1509—1714). Designed as & Book of Reference for ascer-
taining the Dates of Events, By F.S. TnHowas, Esq. 3 Vols. 8vo.
(1856). 40s.

STATE PAPERS, DURING THE REIGN Or HENRY THE LEianmBh : with Indices
of Persons and Places. 11 Vols, 4to. (1830— 1852), 51. 15s. 6d. ;
or separately, 10s. 6d. each.

Vol. I. —Domestic Correspondence.

Vols. II. & III.— Correspondence relating to Ireland.

Vols. IV. & V.— Correspondence relating to Scotland.

Vols. VI. to XI.—Correspondence between England and Foreign Courts.


^.


29


WORKS PUBLISHED IN PHOTOZINCOGRAPILIY.


DouEspAY Book, or the GREAT SunvEY or ENGLAND OF WILIIAM THX
CoNQvERoR, 1086 ; fac-simile of the Part 1elaüing to each county, sepa-
rately (with a few exceptions of double counties). — Photozincographed,
by Her Majesty's Command, at the Ordnance Survey Office, Southampton,
Colonel Sin HENRY JawEes, IE. F.R.S., &c., Direcior. 35 Parts,
imperial quarto and demy quarto (1861-1863) boards. ^ Price 8s. to
1l. 3s. each Part, according to size ; or, bound in 2 Vols., 207. (The
edition in two volumes is out of print.)


This important and unique survey of the greater portion of England* is the
oldest and most valuable record in the national a1chives. It was commenced
about the year 1084 and finished in 1086. Iis compilation was deterzined upon
at Gloucester by William the Conqueror, in council, in order that he might
know what was due to him, in the way of tax, from his subjects, and that each
at the same time might know what he had to pay. It was compiled as much
for their protection as for the benefit of the sovereign. "The nobili.y and people
had been grievously distressed at the time by the king bringing over large num-
bers of French and Bretons, and quartering them on his subjects, '* each accord-
* ing to the measure of his land," for the purpose of resisting the invasion of
Cnut, King of Denmark, which was apprehended. 'The commissioners appointed
to make the survey were to inquire the name of each place ; who held it in the
time of King Edward the Confessor; the present possessor; how mony hides
were in the manor ; how many ploughs were in demesne ; how many homagers ;
now many villeins ; how many co.tars; how many serving men; how many free
tenants ; how many tenants in 80ccage ; how mucu wood, meadow, and pasture ;
the number of mills and fish-ponds ; what had been added or taken away from
the place; whst was the gross value in the iime o? Edward the Coníessor ; the
present value ; and how much each free man or soc-man had, and whether any
advance could be made in the value. 'Thus coulá be ascertaineG who held the
estate in the time of King Edward; who then held it ; its value in the time of
the late kinz; and its value as it stood at the format;on oí tue svrvey. fo
minute was the survey, that the writer of the contemporary poition of the Saxon
Chronicle records, with some asperity—*' So very narrowly he caused it io be
** traced out, that there was not a single hide, nor one virgate o7 land, Lor even,
* it is shame to tell, though it seemed to him no shame to do, an ox, nor a cow,
* noraswine was left, that was not set down."

Domesday Survey is in two parts or volumes. "The first, in 7olio, contains the
counties of Bedfori, Berks, Bucks, Cambridge, C'esier and Lancaster, Corn-
wall, Derby, Devon, Dorset, Gloucester, Hants, Hereford, Herts, Huntingdon,
Kent, Leicester and Rutland, Lincoln, Middlesex, Northampton, Nottingham,
Oxford, Salop, Somerset, Stafford, Surrey, Sussex, Warwick, Wilts, Worcester,
and York. The second volume, in quarto, contains the counties of Essex,
Norfolk, and Suffolk.

Domesday Book was printed verbatim et literatim during the last century, in
consequence of an address of the House of Lords to King George III. in 1767.
It was not, however, commenced until 1773, and was completed early in 1783.
In 1860, Her Majesty's Government, with the concurrence of the Master of the
Rolls, determined to apply the art of photozincography to the production of a
fac-simile of Domesday Book, under the superintendence of Colonel Sir Henry
James, K.E., Director of the Ordnance Survey, Southampton. The fac-simile was
completed in 1868.


* For some reason left unexplained, many parts were left unsurveyed ; Northumberland, Cu
Westmoreland, and Durham, are not descri in the survey ; nor does Lancashire ap E
proper name ; but Furness, and the northern part of Lancashire, as well as the south of M estmoreland
Pita t of Cumberland, are included within the West Riding of Yorkshire. 'l'hat part of Lancashire
which lies between the Ribble and Mersey, and which at the time of the survey comprehendced €88


mannors, is joined to Obeshire.'Part of Rutland is described in the counties of Northempten and Lincolr.,


id


30


FAo-sruiLES of NATIONAL, MANUSCRIPTS, from WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR t0
QuEEN ANNE,selected under ihe direction of the Master of the Rolls,
and Photozincographed, by Command of Her Mnjesty, by Colonel SiR
HENRY JAwEs, R.E., Director of the Ordnance Survey. rice, each
Part, with translations and notes, double foolscap folio, 165.


Part I. (William the Conqueror to Henry VII.). 1865. (Out of print."
Part IT. (Henry VIII. and Edward VI.). 1866.

Part III. (Mary and Elizabeili). 1867.

Part IV. (James I. to Anne). 1568.


The first Part extends from William the Conqueror to Henry VII., and contains
autographs of the kings of Eagland, as well as of many other illustrious per-
sonages famous in history, and some inteiesting charters, letters patent, and
state papers. "The second Part, for the reizns of Henry VIII. and Edward VI.,
consists principally of holograph leiters and autographs of kings, princes, states-
men, and otüer persons of great historical interest, who lived during those
reigns. "The third Part contains similar documents for the reigns of Mary and
Elizabeth, including a signed bill of Lady Jane Grey. "The fourth Part con-
cludes the series, and comprises a number of documents taken from the originals
belonging to the Coustable of the Tower of London ; also several records illus-
trativeof the Gunpowder Plot, and a woodcut containing portraits of Mary Qucen
of Scots and James VI., cireulated by their adherents in England, 1580-8.


FAC-SIMILES OF ÁNGLO-SAxoN MaNcscmiPrs. — Photozincographed by the
DinEecrong-GENEnAL of the OngbpNANCE SunvkY, with translations by
W. BasEvr SANDERS, Assistant Keeper of H.M. Records. Part I.
Price 2l. 10s.

Tue Anglo-Saxon MSS. represented in this volume form the earlier portion
of the collection of archives belonging to the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury,
and consist of a series of 25 charters, deeds, and wills, commencing with &
record of proceedings at the first Synodal Council of Clovesto in 742, and
terminating with the first part of a tripartite cheirograph, whereby Tburstan
conveyed to the Church of Canterbury land at Wimbish, in Essex, in 1049, the
sixth year of the reign of Edward the Confessor.


Public Record Offwe,
April 1882,


SCOTLAND.


CATALOGUE OF SCOTCH RECORD PUBLICATIONS


PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF
THE LORD CLERK REGISTER OF SCOTLAND.


On Sale by—
Mzssns. LONGMANS & Co., AND Mxssns. TRÜBNER & Co., LoNDpoN ;
Mxssns. JAMES PARKER & Co., Oxronp AND LoNDOoN ;
Mressns. MACMILLAN & Co., CaugnIbpGE AND LONDON ;
Mxrssns. A. & C. DLACRK, ANp Mrssns. DOUGLAS & FOULIS, EpiNBURGH;
AND Mxssns. A. THOM & Co., DunriN.


CHRONICLES OF THE PicTs AND ScoTS, AND OTHER EANLY MEMORIALS OF
ScorrisH  Hisrony, Royal 8vo. hal/bound (1807). Edited by
WiLLiAM F. SkENE, LL.D. Price 10s.

LrepcER or ANpREW HALYBURTON, CoNsERvATOR OF THE PRiVILEGES OF
THE ScorcH NaTiON IN THE NxrnüERLANDs (1492-1503) ; TockTHER
wirH THE Books or CusrOMS AND VALUATION OF MEHCHANDISES IN
SCOTLAND. Edited by Cosxo IwNxkEs. Roynl8vo., half bound (1867).
Price 10$.

DOCUMENTS ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE HisrORY OF ScoTLAND FROM THE DrgATH
OF KiNG ALEXANDER THE Trump TO THE ÁAccEkssION or RonEnT
Dnucr, from original and authentic copies in London, Paris, Brussels,
Lille, and Ghent. In 2 Vols. royal 8vo., half bound (1870). Edited by
Rev. JoscePH STEVENSON. Price 10s. each.

AccouxTS or THE Logp HicH TnEAsURER OF SCOTLAND. Vol. 1, A.D.
1473-1498. Edited by 'Tnowas Dicksow. 1877. Price 10s.

RrGisTER OF THE Pnivy CouxciL or ScorLAND. Edited and arranged by
J. H. BunTOoN, LL.D. Vol. 1, 1545-1569. Vol. 2,1569-1578. Vol. 3,
A.D. 15/9-1685. Vol. 4, A.D. 1585-1592. Edited by DAvip MASS8ON,
LL.D. 1877-1880. Price ló5s. each.

RoruLI ScAcCARHn REcuM ScoroRUM. Tur ExcuEequkER RoLLs or ScoT-
LAND. Vol.1, A.D. 1264-1359. ' Vol. 2, A.D. 1359-1379. — Edited by
JouwN SruanT, LL.D., and GreoRgcr BunwrrrT, Lyon King of Arms.
1878-1880. Vol. 3, A.D. 1379-1406. Vol. 4, A.D. 140€ -1436 (1880).
Edited by GEoncE BunNETT. Price lOs.each. Vols. 5 and 6 in the
press.

Fac-siuiLEs Or THE NaTrroNAL MSS. or ScorLANp. (Out of print.)

Parts I., II, and III. Price 21s. eacA.

CALENDAR OF DOCUMENTS RELATING TO SCOTLAND. Edited by Joskrn BAN.

Voll. Price l5s.


m om o um MM Mun m. dm eom m uu e e o HE o ui tai inl


Stationery Office,
March 1882.


IRELAND.


-—


CATALOGUE OF IRISH RECORD PUBLICATIONS,


On Sale by—
Mzssns. LONGMANS & Co., AND Mxssns, TRÜDBNER & Co., LoNDoN ;
Mrssns, JAMES PARKER & Co., Oxronp AND LoNDON ;
Mxssns. MACMILLAN & Co., CAMBRIDGE AND LONDON ;
Mxssns. A. & C. BLACR, AND Mzssns. DOUGLAS & FOULIS, EpriNBUnCII;
AND Mkxssns. À. HOM & Co., DusBLIN.


CALENDAR OF TIIE PATENT AND CLosE Rorrs or CuaNcEnY IN InELAND.
HEwuRY VIIL, Epwanp VI, Many, AND ErizaskETH. — Edited by
JAMES MonmiN. Royal8vo.(1861-3). Vols.1,2, and 83. rice 1lls.


each.
ANCIENT LAWS AND INSTITUTES OF IRELAND.
Senchus Mor. (1865-1880.) Vols. 1, 2, 3, and 4. Price 105. each.


Vol. 5 in the press.


Fac-sidiLES of NATIONAL MawuscniPTs of InkLAND. — Edited by JonN
T. GirsemT, F.S.A., M.R.L.A. Parts L, IL, III., IV. Price 42s. each.
Part 1 is out of print. Part IV. is in the press.

This work is intended to form a comprehensive Paleographie Series for
Ireland. It will furnish characteristic. specimens of the documents which
have come down from each of the classes which, in past ages, formed principal
elements in the population of Ireland, or exercised an influence in her affairs.
With these reproductions will be combined fac-similes of writings connected
with eminent personages or transactions of importance in the annals of the
country to the end of the reign of Queen Anne.

'l'he specimens are reproduced as nearly as possible in accordance with the
originals, in dimensions, colouring, and general appearance. Characteristic
examples of styles of writing and caligraphic ornamentation are, so far ns
practicable, associated with subjects of historic and linguistic interest.
Descriptions of the various manuscripts arc given by the Editor in the Intro-
duction. "'lhe contents of the specimens are fully elucidated and printed in the
original languages, opposite to the Fac-similes—line for line—without contrac-
tions—thus facilitating reference and aiding effectively those interested in
palaographie studies.

Part l. contains upwards of seventy coloured specimens, commencing with
the earliest Irish MS3. extant.

Part II. extends from the Twelfth Century to A.D. 1299, and contains ninety
specimens in colours.

Part III., from A.D. 1300 to end of reign of Henry VIII., contains upwards
of one hundred specimens.

In Part IV.—now in the Press—the Work will be carried down to the
eighteenth century.

( This workis sold also by Letts, Son, & Co. Linited, 88, King William Strect ;
E. Stanford, Charing Cross; J. Wyld, Charing Cross; B. Quaritch, 15,
Piccadilly; W. & A. K. Johnston, Edinburgh ; and Hodges, F'iggis & Co.,
Dublin.)

AccouuT OF FaAc-siMILES OF NATIONAL MANUSCRIPTS OF IRELAND. Parts


I. and Il.together. Price 2s. 6d. Part IT. Pricels. 6d. Part II.
Price ls.


Stationery Office,
March 1882.


Digitized by Google


Lnd a


da e aime t A n d


e —
*"o- m


5 o mE RE d Tn
»
* LEJ
. LI
dc ai


i


* « -m edi- 9e a
-— —


"


!
'


|


-——
tia. —


l


"


n
|


E - -—
- C
A RM era eres s
