Essays on Truth and Reality (F. H. Bradley, 1914)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/india.history.resource.118302). Bradley's late essays defending absolute idealism against pragmatism and the new realism.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

TTL GUL
00059804


NVM DAU YUL LY AAO a
00059804


Digitized with financial assistance from


Mrs.Padma Barve
on 13 March, 2020


ESSAYS ON
TRUTH AND REALITY


BY


F. H. BRADLEY
LL.D, GLASGOW
FELLOW OF MERTON COLLEGE, OXFORD


59804


OXFORD
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS


1o0t4.


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE BOMBAY


HUMPHREY MILFORD M.A.
PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY


TO THE FRIEND
WITHOUT WHOSE UNFAILING SYMPATHY
ITS DEFECTS WOULD HAVE BEEN EVEN GREATER


THIS VOLUME IS DEDICATED


PREFACE


THE present volume consists mainly of articles
which have appearedin Mind. Ihave added a paper
first printed in the Philosophical Review, and there
are also some essays which have not before been
published. With three exceptions the whole belongs
' to the last five or six years. The parts of this work
have been called chapters mainly for convenience
in reference, but also because most. of them represent
more or less the chapters of a book which I once
- intended to write. |
The. title indicates, I think, the principal subject

and aim of the contents. I am not offering a formal
treatise on the nature and criterion of knowledge,
truth, and reality, and yet this main problem recurs
and in some form is perhaps present throughout.
The imperfection and incompleteness, too evident
to the reader, may, I hope, be forgiven if these pages
serve to emphasize the need and possibly even to
stimulate the pursuit of the above inquiry. There
has seldom, I imagine, been a time when the general
question as to the criterion was more pressing, or
when the answer, attained or attempted, promised
better results. But I have myself little to contribute
here beyond that which I have urged in former years.
For the inner connexion which, I hope, unites’ the
various parts of this volume, I would refer to- the
remarks appended to the closing chapter.


vi PREFACE


I have been unwilling to include so many pages
on Pragmatism. The subject certainly does not
occupy a corresponding space in my mind. But the
reader perhaps will recognize that, having been in
a manner forced here to write in self-defence, [I am
no longer free merely to consult my own wishes.
He will find, I trust, that the discussion, if too long,
throws light on some points of interest ; and in any
case the remedy remains in his power. On the other
hand, I should be sorry if the examination of ‘ Radical
Empiricism’ were left unread.

It is a satisfaction to me, when approaching the
end of my own career, to note (whatever school or
tendency may from time to time be in fashion) the
increasing devotion amongst us to metaphysical
inquiry.. There has been, I think, a rise in the
general level of English philosophical thought such as
fifty years ago might well have seemed incredible.
I am the. more resigned to add that the best which
I can now myself expect to-do is to collect some
other scattered writings, as well as perhaps to repub-
lish those early volumes which I can no longer hope
to re-write. .


TABLE OF CONTENTS


CHAPTER I


INTRODUCTORY é j : oad . PAGES 1-18


Everything is subordinate to the Good, if that is taken in the
widest sense, but no partial aspect of life is good perfectly (1-4).
This shown, (a) of pleasure (5), (6) of practical activity (6-7), (c) of
beauty, (d) of intelligence (8), (e) of social and other unions of
individuals (9-10).

On the other hand, every partial aspect has its own sphere of
relative supremacy (10). This shown of philosophy with regard to
morality and religion (10-15). How philosophy must in a sense
rest on faith (15-17).


CHAPTER II


FaitH . : : ‘ . : : : - 19-27


Faith, relation of to knowledge and doubt (19-20). It does not
always originate in action (21-2), and whether it must always
issue in action seems very doubtful (23-4). The above illustrated
in detail (24-6). Philosophy and faith (26-7).


CHAPTER III
On FLOATING IDEAS AND THE IMAGINARY . - .« 28-64


Object of this Chapter (28). I. Floating Ideas. An idea, what
(28-9). No ideas float absolutely. More worlds than what we call ~
our ‘real world’, and to these worlds ideas are referred (30-2).
Explicit judgement not necessary (32-4). ;

Imaginary ideas (34-6). Ideas in imperatives and questions ~
(36~7), and in supposition. Hypothetical Judgement, what (37-40).
Ideas in Negation. On Contradictory Ideas (40~2).

If. Real and Imaginary, difference between them said not to lie
in content (43). This doctrine is untenable (43-6). The Imaginary,
what. It involves reference to the ‘ real world’, and that world
depends on content (46-9). No hard and fast line between ‘ real’
and ‘imaginary’. Degree of reality is degree, of value (49).

III. Play, what, implies sense of earnest. Earnest, what (50-2).


Vili CONTENTS


But no hard division between the two. This shown in detail (52~7).
Play and make-believe-—no necessary connexion between them (57).
The sense of restraint in play need not involve contrast with the
‘real world ’ (58-63). General Result (63-4).


CHAPTER IV


On TRUTH AND PRACTICE : : ‘ : . 65-106


Occasion of the following Chapter. Personal Idealism and
_ Pragmatism (65). Claim made for the latter (66). What Prag-
matism might have meant (66-7). Pragmatism and Humanity
(67-8). Pragmatism and Instrymentalism (68-9). On Will and
Knowledge... On idle truths and verification (69-70).

Bain’s doctrine recalled. Professors James and Dewey repeat
Bain’s mistake (7o-1). Pragmatism and the Individual. Appar-
ently it has no principle here, and on the question of Instrumentalism
Pragmatists appear to differ radically (71-2). Pragmatism and the
genetic or historical view (72-3).

General character of Pragmatism (73). Truth is not in any case
the mere practical working of an idea (75-82). Practice, what.
Truth cannot consist in mere alteration of existence (82-5). What
practice for practice’ sake really means (85-6). Relation of practice
to life. Truth and Beauty, how far practical. Though in one sense
subject to practice, they are in another sense free (86-92).

Attempts to subordinate truth to practice are of various kinds,
These stated and discussed in detail. Primacy of Will untenable
(92-9). General Result (99-101).

Note. On practical and non-practical activity (101-6).


CHAPTER V


On TRUTH AND COPYING : ’ : : . 107-26


Truth as copying. This idea is suggested necessarily, but is
untenable (107-9). You cannot separate truth, knowledge, and
reality (110). Truth as mere external means (110-12). The identity
of truth, knowledge, and reality. This is a necessary claim made
by truth, but cannot be fully satisfied (113-15). Still, if truth .
made good its claim, truth would be reality (115-18).

Partial truth contained in the copy-theory of truth. The more
complete view (118-22). On the ‘ subjective ’ (119).

Note. On truth and working ideas. On Consistency (122~4).
On some questions as to Pragmatism and Humanism (124-6).


CONTENTS ix


CHAPTER V. APPENDIX I. ON THE AMBIGUITY OF
PRAGMATISM . : * : : : . 127-42


I. Professor James. Pragmatism and practice most ambiguous
(127). Does Pragmatism degrade truth and beauty to mere means ?
Professor James now seems to say, No {128-9). And success as the
test of truth does not now seem to mean more than success ‘ on the
whole’. But the meaning of this with Professor James is doubtful
(129-30). And he appears also to teach an opposite doctrine.

A more consistent Pragmatism, what (132-4).

' {I. Professor Dewey. Instrumentalism, what (134). ‘ Prac-
tical’, ambiguity of (135-6). Truth may be practical in various
senses. Ambiguity of Frofessor Dewey’s position (136-42).


CHAPTER V. APPENDIX II. ON PROFESSOR JAMES’S
“MEANING OF TRUTH’ . ; : ‘ - 142-49


Was, Professor James a relativist, and in what sense? His
doctrine is too ambiguous to warrant any answer (142-5). Some
critical remarks on his Meaning of Truth (145-0)..


CHAPTER V. APPENDIX III. ON ProFESssoR JAMES’S
“RADICAL EMPIRICISM’ . . . : . 149-58


Professor James identifies Reality and Experience, but what
Experience? If actual experience—then how as to past and
future? The dilemma which arises is not met by Professor James
(149-50).

Then—as to what is Experience—are terms and conjunctive
relations immediately experienced, as such, or are they abstrac-
tions ? Professor James seems committed to both these views at
once (151). A difficulty as to Change is not noticed by him (152).
He probably preferred the view that immediate experience is non-
relational, but is mistaken as to its history (152-3). It does not
follow, if immediate experience is the beginning, that it is also
the end, and is all reality (153).

What according to Professor James is knowledge? View of
knowledge which he had ready to hand. Why he could not accept
this view (153-4). His own theory, what. Its inconsistency and
failure (154-6).

Professor James’s view of Reality. The whole fact of the ideal
world is left outside his reality, or is included in it by something
which will not bear scrutiny. And in any case he cannot meet the
dilemma as to past and future experiences (156-8).


CONTENTS


CHAPTER VI
On ouR KNOWLEDGE OF IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE . 159-01


Immediate Experience, the fact of. But how can I make it an
object ? (159-60). The answer in general given (161).

I. Difficulty as to Attention. How, when I attend to a change,
can I ever know that the change was not made by my attention ?
This problem is insoluble, unless you assume that apart from atten-
tion I can feel change, and that this feeling can be reproduced (161-6).

II. Introspection, problem of (166). Introspection is not mere
remembering, but is making an object of the actually felt. And the
felt agreement or jar of the object with what is actually felt is
here the main criterion (166-8). And the unity of the object and
the merely felt explains how the former can be further enlarged
from the latter (169). On the other side, if actual feeling cannot
be used as a criterion of the object, no sufficient account can be
given of the fact of Introspection, or suns of the fact of know-
ledge in general (169-71).

III. But how can immediate experience make an object of itself ?
Immediate experience in what sense unconscious or subconscious
(171-3). Was and is experience or feeling ever merely immediate ?
(173-4). In any case immediate experience is no mere stage which
ean be passed. However much transcended, it remains as funda-
mental (174-8).

(1) Immediate experience can serve as a criterion, because that
which is felt about an object tends itself to be objectified in the
object. And the object itself now can be felt to correspond, or not,
to immediate experience (178-81).

(2) How can immediate experience know about itself? That it
does so is obvious, but how ? (181-2).

(i) We can form the idea of an object which is the all-inclusive
Reality (182-3).

. (ii) We can perceive in actual experience how incomplete objects
change, and are increased—and that the sources of the added —
element differ, And in some cases, by exclusion of other possible
sources, we are led to derive the addition made to the object from
what was previously only felt in me (183-8). Illustration from
Volition (188-9). The recognition of immediate experience, or
feeling, is all-important for metaphysics (189-91). ~


CuapTER VI. APPENDIX. CONSCIOUSNESS AND EXPERI-
ENCE . : : : : ; ‘ - 192-8
Consciousness is not co-extensive with experience (192). Con-
sciousness is inconsistent with itself (192-4). And it is based on


-


CONTENTS _ » - a


Feeling (194). Feeling is not a stage of mind which passes, but it
remains throughout as a necessary foundation and background,
Importance of this doctrine, and necessity of recognizing and
discussing it (194-8).


CHAPTER VI. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE. é - 199-201


On the importance of the above for metaphysics (199-201).


CHAPTER VII
On TRUTH AND COHERENCE . : ; ; . 202-18


Judgements of perception and memory are all faljible. ’ The test
is system. What this means (202-4).

(1) Ultimate facts of perception and memory cannot be shown
to exist. You cannot put, as such, into your judgement the deliver-
ance of feeling (204-7). :

(2) Nor is their existence to be assumed (207). My real world,
what (208). For this I depend on the world of sense, but still no

‘ datum there is fundamental in sense of absolute. The test is relative
contribution to system (209-12). So with historical facts (212-14).
A possible objection answered (214-16).

Certainly some judgement or judgements might be infallible for
me in the sense that otherwise my personal identity would be
destroyed, but this infallibility is not absolute (216-17), Con-
clusion (2 17-8).


CHAPTER VIII
COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION. ; : - 219-44


The criterion is the satisfaction of a want, but of a special want.
Philosophy is not a mere collection of useful ideas (219-20). In
what sense I can philosophize with my whole nature (220-2).

Two characters of the criterion—are they aspects of one prin-
ciple of non-contradiction ? A possible answer not accepted, but
the answer is still, Yes. (1) Any object short of the whole can be
experiénced as a defective appearance of a wider whole (223-6).
(2) How qualification of Reality by any predicate implies diversity
and contradiction, and a process aiming at harmonious and com-
plete comprehension (226-9).

No remedy for this to be found in ‘And’. Judgement starts
with and in a sense rests on the immediate unity and totality of
feeling, but cannot completely reconstitute this whole ideally.
There is no completely conditioned, and therefore no absolutely
true judgement (230-3).


xii CONTENTS


No theoretical remedy forthe above is to be found in Designation
(233-6). Nor in Pluralism and external relations. This doctrine
seems based on a false alternative (237-40). Imperfection of our
ultimate ideas, such as subject and predicate, and again identity
(240-1).

Result—System has two aspects. In what sense we can say that
what satisfies us is real (241-4).


CHAPTER IX
On APPEARANCE, ERROR, AND’ CONTRADICTION . . 245-73


Introductory; on the Absolute and the finite self (245-50).
Appearance, idea, and truth (250-2). Two main views of Error,
the absolute and relative view. The absolute view is to be rejected
(252). The difference between error and truth is in the end one
of degree (252-8). The absolute view involves Pluralism and is
indefensible, both with regard to abstract truths and to matters
of fact. The latter imply. but cannot reach uniqueness (258-65).

" The absolute view ofserror has relative truth, and must be used in
life and in the special sciences (266-7). On Common Sense and
consistency (268).

On the self-contradictory, how, being unreal, it can exist (269-72).
In what sense the Absolute really appears and has degree (272-3).


SUPPLEMENTARY NoTE I. ‘ : : F . 274-6


Professor Stout’s view of Error. It is hard to say how it differs
from that of Professor Bosanquet and myself, and further explana-
tion on his part is wanted.


SUPPLEMENTARY Note II ¢ : ; : . 276-88


I. Professor Royce argues that Number can be created a priori
_ and is self-consistent, But neither of these contentions is really
tenable (277-80).

II. Mr. Russell’s fundamental principles. How are ‘Unities’ to
be reconciled with Pluralism ? (281-2). Difficulty as to certain ideas
(282), and especially Class (283-6), Negation and Zero (286-8).


‘SUPPLEMENTARY Note III. ; . : . 288-92


Mr. Russell’s explanations seem unsatisfactory. On ‘ unities’,
‘facts’, ‘ implications ’, related terms without diversity, externality,
&c. (288-91), Are Mr. Russell’s views really in accordance with
science and common sense ? (291-2).


CONTENTS . xiil


CHAPTER X
A DISCUSSION OF SOME PROBLEMS IN CONNEXION WITH
Mr. RuSSELL’s DocTRINE . : : » 293-309


I. Mr, Russell’s view of judgement and truth—difficulties with
regard to it (293-4).

II. Relations without terms are not conceivable, and cannot
be inferred (295). Mr. Russell’s arguments examined. Our con-
sciousness of universals involves negation. Its ultimate nature
(295-9). On analysis—its nature (299-301). Ideality, what (301).
How impossible ideas are thinkable (302-3).

III. Multiple relations. (a) No whole can in the end be merely
relational (303-6). And (bd) there really are no multiple telations.
Instance of ‘ between ’ (306-7). Series, problem of (308-0).


CHAPTER XI
On SoME ASPECTS OF TRUTH . ‘ . . 310-52


The general view (310). The method of ane ‘Axioms (311-
14). Truth, experience, and reality (314-17). The theoretical
criterion. It cannot be taken as satisfaction in general (317-21).
Darwinism and the Criterion (321-3). Meaning of ‘Only’ or
‘Merely * (323-4). Meaning of Qualification (324).

Does truth refer to something other than itself? .The question
is unanswerable if you take the soul or self as a separate thing
(325-8). The ‘subjective’, what (328-9). Sense in which all
judgement passes beyond itself. Reality in the judgement,
how (329~34).

Has every or any truth been thought before I think it? And
does knowledge alter reality ? (334-7). Can Truth be ‘ made’?
Does it depend on me? (338-42). What is the relation between
reality and truth, and can truth copy reality ? (343-5). What is
the good of Truth ? This question rests on a mistaken view (346~9).

In what sense the view which I advocate involves ‘ subjectivism ”
and ‘ relativism ’. A Note on Nature (349-52).


CHAPTER XII
Some REMARKS ON MEMORY AND INFERENCE . - 353-80


Ambiguity of Memory (353-4). We think of the past by an ideal
construction, which involves the degradation of the present (354-7).
How, when we think forwards, we can remember backwards. No
merely successive Association (357-62).


xiv CONTENTS


Difference between Fancy, Memory, and Inference. . Defect of
internal necessity in mere fancy. Thought not always ‘ abstract’
(362-5). How Memory and Inference agree and differ, but infer-
ence is implied in memory (365-70).

How is memory in a given case to be distinguished from mere
imagination? There is no test which is not fallible (370-2). Veracity
of memory—how far to be assumed (372-5). On Memory and
Belief (376-7). On the meanings of ‘ matter of fact’ (377-80).


CHAPTER XIII


On MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT . . . j ‘ 381-408


My present judgement must be taken as infallible (381-2), Some
objections answered (383). Memory has no independent validity,
and any such claim must lead to scepticism (384-6). Some mis-
understandings removed. Further explanation of the doctrine
that my present judgement must be treated as infallible (386-92).

What is a single judgement? Unity of judgement (392-6).
Omission of irrelevancy permissible (396—7).: Continuity of the
subject in judgement. Some difficulties discussed (397~402). The
question is not in the end psychological (403). Duration of a judge-
ment, what (403-6). ;

How far does a judgement, once made, remain true for me ?
Postulate as to memory’s general correctness (406-8).


CHAPTER XIV


WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR?. . . -. 409+27


The main point, what. Preliminary warning. Necessary distinc-
tions (410-11). Finite centres, their nature, duration, identity,
and plurality (410-12). Digression on transcending finite centres
(41214). Soul, what (414-16). Self, what (416-18). How my self
is mine only, and its importance (418-20). Self and Soul—how
related (420-1). ,

Return to the main question. The real Caesar cannot be limited
to the Caesar as directly experienced (422-3). The individual is
real so far as he works in any sense, even in mere knowledge (423-5).
Ideal and real experience are not separable (425-7). Our main
result may be indefinite, but is necessary (427).


CONTENTS. =


CHAPTER XV


On GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE . . ‘ , . 428-47


.The Absolute not God and why (428-9). Inconsistency in religion.
Attempt to avoid this by making God finite (429-30). But religion
has not to be consistent theoretically, and it has to use the ideas
which best serve its main interest (430-2).

The personality of God is certainly not necessary for all religion,
but is a valid idea (432-3). In personal religion the personality is
not all on one side (433-4). God has reality in the religious con-
sciousness, apart from which an Individual Person would not really
be God. Theoretical consistency must be sacrificed (434-8).

Continued personal existence after death is certainly not the
main interest of religion. But, if and so far as really demanded
in that interest, it may be accepted as true. Mere hope, fear, and
curiosity as to the spirit-world are not religious (438-40).

Morality and Religion—difference between them (441-2). This
chapter will not be satisfactory to the reader who holds to what he
calls Common Sense.. The defects of this last. Are they irremedi-
able? In general by Metaphysics, Yes. And otherwise ? (442-7).


e
SUPPLEMENTARY* NoTE A. ON THE REALITY AND


PERSONALITY OF GOD F ‘ . : . 448-51
SUPPLEMENTARY NoTE B. ON ouR FEAR OF DEATH
AND: DESIRE FOR IMMORTALITY . : ; . «451-9


«What I myself feel actually (451-2). And generally the nature of our
interest in a future life is most ambiguous (453). Identity in feel-
ing is the basis, and, beyond this, memory seems implied in indi-
‘vidual personal interest (453-6). On this subject our imaginations
are confused. But fear of death is not wholly irrational (456-9).


CHAPTER XVI


ON My- REAL WORLD. 4 i . : . 460-9


Familiar doubts as to dream and reality (460). My ‘ real’ world
is the world of my ‘real’ body, and what is that? Merely my
present waking body (460-2). But is this world more real than
others, as being more systematic? The known facts do not show


xvi CONTENTS


this conclusion, nor can we infer it otherwise (462-5).. We are
right to call ‘abnormal’ states irrational and their deliverance
unreal, if we make a certain assumption. This assumption we must
make, but still it is not true (465-7). How the above bears on
Death (467-8). General Result (468-0).


CONCLUDING REMARKS... «s,s 470-3


INDEX . ‘ : 3 sf : ; . 474-80


CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY


1Every aspect of life may in the end be subordinated to
the Good, if, that is, we understand the Good in a very wide
sense. Everywhere in life we seem forced, sooner or later,
to ask the question Why. And the answer to that inquiry
seems everywhere to be found in the fact of contentment and
absence or suppression of unrest. .We may appeal from one
thing to another thing, but it is to this aspect of things,
and it is to things as more or less possessing this aspect,
that we are brought at last. And we are led to conclude
that, so far as anything in the above sense is good, there
is nothing else in the world which can pretend to stand
above it. :

The claim of reason and truth to be an exception here will
not hold. For, if you ask what is truth, you are ied to
answer that it is that which satisfies the intellect. The
contradictory and the fneaningless fail to be true because
in a certain way they do not satisfy. They produce a special
kind of uneasiness and unrest ; and that on the other side
which alters this unrest into an answering contentment,
is truth. It is truth, we may say, where the intellect has}
found its good.

Whatever a man is engaged in, whatever he feels or does
or apprehends or pursues, this, so far as it satisfies him, is

’ This chapter was written, in December 1906, as an introduction to
-a book which I then had in contemplation (see the Preface), and, though
with some hesitation, I venture now to publish it. It has been altered by
certain additions and by much larger omissions, but on the whole it


remains in its original character.
1874 « B


2 INTRODUCTORY CHAP.


good in itself. It possesses what you may call, if you please,
the ultimate quality of goodness. So far as anything satisfies,
there is no possible appeal beyond it, and nothing has any
rational claim against that which in itself is fully satisfied.
‘With regard to philosophy, for example, it is now an old
saying that it must presuppose the will to think, and that
if any one is ready to contradict himself, philosophy can
have no concern with him.
' All thinking, in brief, rests on the agreement, tacit or
expressed, to accept a certain test. It consists, in other
words, in the pursuit of one kind of satisfaction, and its
arguments appeal to no one except so far as he is engaged in
this pursuit. And, as in philosophy, so everywhere through-
out life the same principle holds. Whether it is an affair
of mere enjoyment and liking,*or a matter of moral and
religious conviction and preference, or again of aesthetic
perception and taste, throughout these differences we find
everywhere in one point the same thing. So long and so
far as that which occupies you is able to give you rest and
contentment, that thing, whatevér it is, has goodness.
And there is. nothing which from the outside has against
this thing any claim upon you. So long as remaining there,
wherever you are, you find yourself satisfied and at ong. with
your own being, so far, apart from mere violence ?, -you


* Goodness, worth, and value, are of course all the same thing., The
definition of the Good given in my Appearance I have now for some time
ceased in one point to consider cortect. I do not think that desire should
be included in the definition, Wherever, and so far as, I feel myself
positively affirmed, there, so far, is goodness, Desire, at least in the
ordinary course, will necessarily supervene, but it is wrong te take it as
being from the first essential ; and indeed so much as this was admitted
in my volume, pp. 403-4. We can realize this truth perhaps most plainly
if we consider the case of beauty. As to the inclusion of pleasure in the
Good, I willsay nothing here. And the question, how far, and in what sense,
an idea is implied there, I wish at some time to reconsider. Perhaps at
a future date I may be able to deal more fully with the general nature of

_ Goodness.

* I do not here enter into the question whether in the end there can
be any mere external force. But, so far as the individual is concerned,
this, for practical purposes, obviously exists. :


INTRODUCTORY - 3


‘are secure in. yourself. ‘Here, if in the camp there is no
division, the enemy will not penetrate, A man, we all
know, should not be shamed out of his reason, and he cannot
rationally, we also know, be argued out of his feelings.

-But on the other hand it is an old experience that nowhere
is perfect good. Goodness does not really reside where
perhaps we tend first to place it. There is nothing, in other
words, in life which, taken in and by itself, completely
Satisfies. Our life has several main aspects, and, even
within each aspect, we are led for ever in some point to desire
something better and beyond. And we find in the end that
no one aspect by itself can have goodness and. be unmixed
good. Evetything in life is imperfect and seeks beyond
itself an absolute fulfilment of itself. And thus everything
in life, we may say in the end; is subordinate, and subordinate
to the Good.

We have been led in the above pedestion to a twofold
result. On the one hand every side of life, so far as it is
good, is justified in itself, while on the other hand the
perfect good is found in none of them. We are hence mis-
taken when we attempt to set up any one aspect of our
nature as supreme, and to regard the other aspects merely
as co..ducive and as subject to its rule. And it is worth
while perhaps to deal at some length with this error.

The Good, we agreed, was satisfaction ; and satisfaction,
wherever found, we agreed was, so far, the Good. But if
any one goes on to urge, ‘ Well then, here is satisfaction ;
T have, for instance, found it here in my practical activity.
And therefore this is the supreme good to which alt else

4 With regard to anything which claims to be good we may ask these
questions, (i) Does this thing possess nothing but goodness? Is its
goodness in this sense unqualified ? (ii). Does it, so far as it is good,
possess goodness simply in its own right, or through a qualification more
or less external to itself? Is its possession in this sense unqualified ?
(iii) Does it possess all goodness? Is anything else good? The above


three questions are to my own mind different aspects of the same question,
ie, Is the thing of which we speak identical with the Good ?


B2


4 INTRODUCTORY _ CHAP.


is subordinate,’ we cannot accept this. Such an argument
would illustrate the error we have mentioned. For, in the
first place, what has been found is certainly not altogether
and ‘completely good. And in the second place, beyond
this, there certainly are other aspects of life, where satisfac-
tion and the Good are no less to be found. The perfect
Good resides in each, but in each it exists imperfectly, and
none therefore is supreme. On the one hand we can experi-
ence and feel our nature as a whole, and, as against this
whole, we can realize the inadequacy of any one side of life.
And, because this is so, we cannot identify our whole being
with one of its aspects, and take everything else as subject
to a one-sided supremacy. On this point the verdict of
those who know most of life has been passed long ago, and,
later or sooner, this finding must at some time have come
home to us as true. We can feel that life has failed if it is
all inactive pleasure or contemplation, or if it consists solely
in moral struggle or religious emotion, or again in mere
labour or in any activity without rest and enjoyment. We
can be sure that our truth is not the full possession of reality,
we can know that there are ends beyond aesthetic achieve-
ment and joy, and something again of value beyond life
in society and in the family. Such things, we feel, are good,
but there is not one of them which includes all the rest.
There is none of them which possesses unqualified goodness,
and hence there is not one of them to which all the others
can be subject.

I will go on from this to consider briefly the various
aspects of life, and to show the imperfection inherent in each.!

(a) If first we take pleasure, we are impressed at once
by its claim to be the Good, From whatever source it comes,
so long and so far as it is intense and pure, it seems to give
us a sense of absolute reality. But on the other side, apart -


1 In what follows I am to some extent repeating what has been said in
Appearance, pp. 458 ff.


i 3 INTRODUCTORY 8


from any doubt as to pleasure’s purity, it is the commonest
experience that life cannot be taken as included in -one
moment, or comprised within a single feeling. And, again,
mere pleasure i is an abstraction which we make from what is_
pleasant. ‘Hence we scem unable in the end to say anything
about pleasure, unless the pleasant, unless, that is, other.
things, are brought into the account. And it seems impossible
to show either that, or how, these other things are really
dependent on and subject to pleasure. And if any one
replies that he for his part has chosen so to take them, that
is no proof, I apprehend, that his choice need be considered.
Weare forced in reason to distinguish between pleasure and
that which is pleasant, and, so far as I see, we cannot in
reason make the second of these to be subject to the first.
We may put it otherwise by saying that, where pleasure
exists, it is the whole man who feels the pleasure, the whole
man with all his practical and other activities and the
complete range of his emotions. The Hedonist puts on one
side this rich complexity, and on the other side he puts
pleasure by itself, and he tells us that the entirety of the
first exists for the sake of the second, and that nothing
in the world excepting pleasure is good at all. But this
assertion, unreasonable and arbitrary in itself, would appear
to lead in the end to afurther consequence, Forifeverything, -
as we have seen, in the end is subject to the Good, the Good
(it seems to follow) must be the one and supreme Reality, and
there will therefore be in the end nothing real but pleasure.

But to any such consequence the ordinary Hedonist is
blind. He has not seen that, in denying value to all other
aspects of life, he is from the first in collision with common
sense, and he does not understand that to make the whole -
of life subordinate to pleasure as the Good, results in the end
ina position which is incapable of defence.


1 Cf. Appearance, pp. 373-4, and Chap. XI of the present volume. It
will, of course, be understood that the remarks in the text do not apply


6 INTRODUCTORY CHAP,


(b) In practical activity, to take that next, a man may
feel that certainly here at last is both goodness and reality.
But the attempt to take practice in itself and by itself
as good, must lead us once more to an untenable consequence.
Practice clearly is the alteration of existence by me, and
this alteration, taken by itself, is an abstraction which, I
suppose, no one could desire. To make the Good consist
in mere doing, or in the bare quantity of mere doing, indepen-
dent of and without regard to any quality in what is done,
or to anything which accompanies the doing, is a position
which, when understood, can hardly be maintained. Life,
I presume, we all feel to be in some sense a qualitative
whole, and we therefore cannot subordinate life to the aspect
of bare alteration of existence.!

There is again inherent in practice a well-known incon-
sistency. Practice I take to imply and to depend on an
unrealized idea. It contains the idea of a ‘to be’ and
a ‘not yet’, a something which has to be carried out in fact,
but which, as soon as it is carried out, has ceased forthwith
to be practical. Practice is the perpetual undoing of the
condition which is implied in its own existence, and it
cannot therefore offer by itself'a satisfaction which is
ultimate. The inconsistency is plainly visible from the
side of the idea. The idea, since it is taken as a‘ not here’,
does not qualify ‘my world’, but on the other hand, since
after all an idea qualifies something,? the idea is real in
a world which is other than mine, Either then there is
a world outside practice, and practice does not cover the
whole of things, or on the other side practice is somehow.
a passage and a transportation between two worlds which


to the Hedonism which contents itself with using pleasure merely as the
mark by which to discover goodness, without denying that other things
really are good.,

1 For further explanation on this point see cas IV of the present
volume.

1 This point is discussed hereafter in Chap. TI,


I INTRODUCTORY 7


seem to have no real unity. This difficulty is brought out
in a striking form by the postulate made in religion, in any
religion, that is, which is not imperfect. The Good, which
in religion is the complete Good and the supreme Reality,
must be carried out in practice, and yet, in order to be made
real, it is presupposed. The Good, that is, cannot in religion
be taken as unreal or as merely real elsewhere ; for, if so,
the Good would be no longer supreme. The Good therefore
must be taken by faith as already real here. But, with this,
it has become clear that, while practice opments altera-
tion, the alteration which it makes does not, as such, qualify
the reality. In other words, if you regard the Good as
entire or supreme, the Good ceases before your eyes to be
merely practical. It is idle here to reply that a Good,
however inconsistent with itself, may after all be complete
if it satisfies me fully. For internal inconsistency is sure
by the nature of things to work out into practical discrepancy
and dissatisfaction. And that which really satisfies in the
inconsistent process, so far as it satisfies me, is not the mere
process. It is the realization of ends which, while entering
into the process, are also above and beyond it. :

(c) And to seek in the beautiful for perfect or unqualified
good leads once more to disappointment. A man may
feel assured that, in one form or in many, beauty, as he
would say, is all the world to him. And yet it is too plain
that all the world, if so, is but a part of the reality. The
beautiful, even when attained, is not all beauty, and again
there is toil and anxiety in the pursuit, and the pursuit may
and even must entail more or less of disappointment. And,
if beside beauty there is no other end and joy in life—and
other ends and other joys there surely must be—there is
at least together with beauty more or less of ugliness and
of care and pain in existence, In short there undeniably are
things which are not beautiful, and life has aspects which
are not beautiful and cannot become so. There is perhaps


8 INTRODUCTORY CHAP.


nothing which cannot be made beautiful in art, and in the
artistic vision which abstracts from the crude whole which
it perceives. But in any case the art and the vision, even
if perfect themselves, must leave something outside, and
there are elements which refuse persistently to own their
supremacy. It is only in ‘some world far from ours’
that the consummation is reached, and ‘ music and moon-
light and feeling are one’. And the lover of beauty, like
the lover of morality, is condemned to fall back on faith.
To him the whole after all, if we could see it, is certainly
beautiful. But since on the other hand to be beautiful is
to be an object for some sense, some sense which is other


‘than that which it perceives, this all-inclusive and ideal


beauty could nowhere be realized. Or, if it is at once real
and supreme, it has ceased forthwith to be merely beautiful.

(4) With regard to intellect and the intelligible world
we do not need many words. Science in its widest sense is
a pursuit, and it never becomes wholly an attained object.
It is but one side of life which is entangled with other sides,
and again, as a pursuit, it has a practical aspect, and it
therefore itself is burdened with the inconsistency of practice.
In any case, its object, even so far as that is attained, is the
world of mere truth, and does not include all reality. To
understand, as it is given to us, or given to any one, to under-
stand, is not wholly to possess even in apprehension, and
still less is it the same as to enjoy and to do.

Knowledge, taken apart from being, has no goodness or
reality at all, and, further, a mere knowledge of being cannot
satisfy by itself. For, if it is not to pass beyond knowledge,
it is forced to leave being more or less outside. It is in short
one thing to know and another thing to be, and hence our
knowledge cannot satisfy even itself, and much less the
whole man.

For faith it is true once again that complete knowledge
is realized. What is sought can be found, and it is itself


I INTRODUCTORY 9


waiting there to be found. But, with this, since the pursuit,
as a pursuit, has lost ultimate reality, and since it is in the -
pursuit that philosophy lives, with such an end there is
also an end of mere philosophy.

(e) When we dismiss these abstractions we may be led
finally to place our ultimate good in some higher totality
of life. In the love and friendship between individuals,
and in the social union which we find in the family and
in wider wholes, we may claim to have reached at last
the concrete and all-inclusive good. But, though in this
position there is much truth, it seems impossible to accept
it as final. For, if we judge by what we can perceive, the
individual members, in whatever higher unity, are more or
less the sport of change and accident. And the whole, in
which they are united, has itself the defects of finitude.
Its existence seems more or less precarious and subject to
chance, and on the other side its inward being more or less
suffers from narrowness. When you consider even our
human aspiration in its breadth and in its intimacy, it is
difficult to set this ddwn as owned entirely by any common
life that we know. And it is hard to see how its satis-
faction could be merely the fulfilment’ of any known

‘higher unity. And hence our common life and our supreme
good escapes once more to take its place in an invisible
world, It is in some city of God, in some eternal church,
that we find the real goodness which owns and satisfies our
most inward desire. But on the other side such a reality
exists only for faith. This does not mean that we cannot
know at all the supreme good and reality. It means that we
are ignorant as to the variety of those forms of finite soul
which may make part of its life, and it means that in the
end we do not know how they, together with all their
inward and outer diversities, reach harmony: within it.
I am therefore forced to deny that the chief good is merely


} Later on, p. 15 and elsewhere, I shall return to4he above point.


10 INTRODUCTORY CHAP.


social.1’ Or, from the other side, if I take the Good as the
extension of any common life that I know, I am driven
to admit that the extension is only for faith. And I do not
know, at the point where the desired consummation is
reached, what will, at that point, have become of the
starting-place. I am ignorant, in other words, as to how
far the individuals themselves may have been essentially
modified and transformed.?


We have seen that every aspect of life has goodness and
realizes the Good, and we have seen, on the other hand,
that no one aspect has goodness by itself and that none
is supreme. The various sides of our nature appear to be
connected, and more or less this connexion everywhere shows
itself. But the complete truth as to this connexion seems
not to be within our grasp. And hence the main aspects
of our being must be allowed, each for itself, to have a rela-
tive independence. If I could think that I understood our
essence, throughout and from the bottom upwards, I might
conceivably follow those who judge otherwise here. But
for me, as I am, every aspect within its own realm is in
a certain sense supreme, and is justified in resisting dictation
from without. I do not, however, propose to develop this
main result except in reference to philosophy.

The supremacy of philosophy within its own field might
be assailed from various sides, but.I shall confine myself
here to the attack made on behalf of morality and religion,
The claim of practice, it may be said, will apply to the
whole of life, and must hold good therefore in the case of


1 Here to my mind is the objection to taking love as ultimate. There
is no higher form of unity, I can agree. But we do not know love as the
complete union of individuals, such that we can predicate of it the entirety
of what belongs tothem. And, if we extend the sense of love and make it
higher than what we experience, I do not see myself that we are sure of
preserving that amount of self-existence in the individuals which seems
necessary for love.

* Cf. here my Ethical Studies, pp. 200-3, and Appearance, p. 415.


I INTRODUCTORY IL


philosophy. But this claim, we must reply, though it is
well founded and though it covers the whole of life, is subject
to a very serious limitation.1_ Wherever we have to do with
non-practical activity or enjoyment, the regulation of this
by practice must be external. Morality, that is, can dictate
to me within what limits I am, for instance, to pursue art
or philosophy, but within those limits it cannot dictate
to me the nature of the pursuit. Religion and morality,
we may say, are so far in no better position than are choice
and caprice. You may choose or not choose to philosophize
or to paint, but you certainly cannot altogether paint or
philosophize as you choose. Whether and how far you will
do these things, you may from the outside determine accord-
ing to what youthink moral. But it is only from the inside
that you are able to learn the right method of doing them,
and that method is independent of anything which may
count as right outside. My will and my conscience can in
short no more tell me how I ought to pursue truth, than they
can show me how to ride a horse or to play on a piano.

It.is difficult for morality, and it is still more difficult
for religion, to recognize its own limits with regard to art
or philosophy.? I can enter here no further on this matter
than to express my opinion that to invade the region of
or or religion, Any such Invasion is GRE to lead to a disastrous
conflict within our nature. The independent pursuit of
beauty and of truth feels its own sufficient justification ;
and, if it is forced into a collision with duty and goodness,
there may be a revolt and a rejection of goodness and duty.
_ And we have seen that morality and religion are too incom-
plete, and too much weakened by internal defect, not to
suffer when such a contest has been provoked.

Philosophy aims at intellectual satisfaction, in other


sheneat amveamineceronstmstiten
1 For a further discussion of this matter I must refer the reader to
Chap. IV.
* There is some further discussion of this point in Chap. XV.


12 INTRODUCTORY CHAP.


words at ultimate truth, It seeks to gain possession of
ee ee
Reality, but only in an ideal form. And hence it is the
realization of but one side of our being. Now among the
various aspects of our nature we have seen that not one
is supreme, but that each within its own limits has a relative
supremacy. And hence you cannot carry over conclusions
and results from morality or religion which, as admitted
results, are to be received and accepted by philosophy.
These results for philosophy can be no more than material.
It will recognize them as it has to recognize every species of
fact, but to judge with regard to final truth belongs to itself
alone. Certainly I agree that if philosophy were to contradict
either morality or religion, these, or either of them, would be
fully justified in refusing to give way. Insucha case we should
havea conflict where there is right on both sides. But I do not
think, myself, that a true p true philosophy will conflict with
a sound | morality _or religion. Ti iny Opinion 1a true philo-
sophy ‘certainly does not contradict the postulates required
for conduct. It will or it may understand them otherwise—
as to this I do not’ doubt—but I cannot admit that to
understand otherwise is necessarily to deny. It is surely
possible to take a view as to the principle on which a man acts,
a view with which he would not agree, and yet neither really
to contradict him nor in action to dissociate oneself from
him. So much seems clear; but whether on the other hand
a true philosophy will be able to guarantee and to justify
the postulates of conduct, is another question altogether.
What I desire to insist on here is that neither a different
understanding, nor even a failure to justify, need amount
to anything like a real contradiction. If a man is assured
on the part of philosophy that his religious belief is false,
he is warranted, at least formally, in replying that this-is
so much the worse for philosophy. But the position becomes
different when, without any such assurance, and perhaps
even against a contrary assurance, a man insists that some


I INTRODUCTORY 13


philosophy contradicts his moral or religious belief. He
may doubtless here be right, but, if he is right, it is because
he himself, so far, is the better philosopher. He in any case
has carried the question away from practice into the realm
of theory, and has so far left the limits within which theory
could have no hold against him. There are two questions
in short which it is common but most dangerous to con-
found. The first asks about the sense of a doctrine as
a working belief, while the second investigates the ultimate
meaning. and theoretical guarantee of that doctrine. The
second inquires into the position of something in the
universe at large, while the first asks merely how it stands
to my heart and conscience.

In philosophy we must not seek for an absolute satisfac-
tion. Philosophy at its best is but an understanding of
its object, and it is not an experience in which that object

_is contained wholly and possessed. It is the exercise and
enjoyment, in other words, of but one side of our nature.
I do not forget that philosophy has often been made into
a religion. From time to time it has been taken as the one
thing needful, as the end and rule of our lives, and as-all
the world to its worshippers. But the same thing, we must
remember, would be true again of art and perhaps of other
pursuits. It must be an unhappy world where a man can}
say that, if he had no philosophy, he would be left destitute
of practical belief, And the philosophy that is led to take
up such a burden must be weighted in its course, and tempted
perpetually to lose sight of its main end.! A true philosophy.
cannot justify its own apotheosis. Nay, from the other side
the metaphysician might lament his own destiny. His
pursuit condemns him, he may complain, himself to herd

1 It would be easy to enlarge on thistheme. I will note one Gonsequence
which may follow where a man turns his philosophy into a religion. A
difference in opinion in this case between rival philosophies may more or


less drift into the practical antagonism of conflicting creeds. And in the
interest of philosophy such a situation is not to be desired.


14 INTRODUCTORY | CHAP.


with unreal essences and to live an outcast from life. It
is three times more blessed, he may well repeat, to be than
to think.1_ But in such a mood the man would so far fall
away ‘from philosophy. A true philosophy must accept and
must justify every side e of human nature, including itself.
Like” other t things it has its place in that system where
at once every place and no place is supreme. The mastery
of that system in thought, however far we carry it, leaves
philosophy still the servant of an order which it accepts
and could never have made.

Certainly from its own nature philosophy must be con-
versant with the highest things, and, unless it is false in
itself, it must recognize these things in their proper character.
And such familiarity, it is clear, must have some effect on
the mind. But it is hard to anticipate in any given case
the amount of this force, nor is it easy to foresee its nature
and direction. Familiarity, here as elsewhere, may under
some conditions lead to contempt. And it cannot, I think, —
be denied that even genuine philosophy may be practised
in a spirit which is immoral or irreligious. The same thing
will be true once again of art and of all study of human
nature either from the side of body or mind, If we take.such
instances as the novelist, the poet, the painter or the anthro-
pologist, it is well known that any of them is liable to
immoral inspiration. All that need be said here is that,
while on the one hand every pursuit fixes its own limits,
on the other hand every pursuit is by the same principle
bound to sincerity and single-mindedness. No pursuit
can justify a lapse from its own code of honour, or a search
or a love for alien ends and effects. And thus an immoral


* I may perhaps illustrate this by transcribing one of those notes in
which, some twenty years ago, I used to attempt to fix mypassing moods. .
‘The shades nowhere speak without blood, and the ghosts of Metaphysic
accept no substitute. They reveal themselves only to that victim whose
‘life they have drained, and, to converse with shadows, he himself must
becomé a shade.’


I INTRODUCTORY 15


spirit in the philosopher is, I presume, certain, unless kept
in check, more or less to injure his philosophy. But from
the other side the same thing holds of an unusual gift of
conscientious or religious feeling. Unless such a gift is
controlled and regulated, it may more or less injure or even
ruin the work of the philosopher or artist.

What I have been trying to say comes perhaps briefly
to this. Philosophy like other things has a business of its
own, and like other things it is bound, and it must be allowed,
to go about its own business in its own way. Except within
its own limits it claims no supremacy, and, unless outside
its own limits, it cannot and it must not accept any dicta-
tion. Everything to philosophy is a consideration, in the
sense that everything has a claim and a right to be con-
sidered. But how it is to be considered is the affair of
philosophy alone, and here no external consideration can
be given even the smallest hearing.

I will go on from this to add another preliminary remark.
Philosophy demands, and in the end it rests.on,.what may
fairly be termed faith. It 1 has, we may say, in a sense to:

gee

presuppose its conclusion in order to prove it. It tacitly:
assumes something in general to be true in order to carry
this general truth out in detail. And its conclusion, further, |
is not, and never could be, carried out in detail actually and_
completely. Thus philosophy stops short of a goal see
it takes nevertheless to be Somehow reached. And, i
philosophy has to admit that in the end it fails to see Ree
to understand exactly how this goal is attained, the end of
philosophy is realized outside philosophy and, in a sense,
only for faith. The meaning and justification of this remark
I will not discuss further here, and we may content ourselves
with a more evident aspect of the same truth. Philosophy,
~ we Saw, was a search, a search for that which in the end is

true. And we observed that, so far as a man stands |

of this pursuit, it cannot in the end justify its existence


16 | INTRODUCTORY - CHAP.


against him. He may decline, to some extent at least, to
enter into the pursuit, and, the decision, at least to some
extent, lies with his own choice or caprice. How far in the
end it is possible actually so to remain outside, I shall not
offer to discuss, though on this point self-deception, it is
clear, is both easy and common. I will content myself with
stating the doctrine, which I have to urge, in a hypothetical
form. A man may enter on the pursuit of truth, or he may
abstain from this pursuit ; but, if he enters on it and so far
as he enters on it, he commits himself inevitably to a tacit
assumption.

The want of an object, and, still more, the search for
an “object, imply ina ¢ ject, imply ina ce certain sense” the knowledge of that
object. If a mart supposed that he never could tell when
‘possession i is or is not gained, he surely never would pursue.
In and by the pursuit he commits himself to the opposite
assumption, and that assumption must rest on a possession
which to some extent and in some sense is there. Naturally
I do not mean that at the start the philosopher has proposi-
tions which he lays down in advance! I mean that his
’ action has no sense unless he does assume, or, if asked,
would assume, that, when he has got propositions, he is
able to judge of them, and can then tell whether they do
or do not put him in ideal possession of reality. Negation,
we may remind ourselves, must presuppose and always
must rest on a positive ground?


1 Cf, here Chap. XI. -

* It may be replied here that a rejection need not, in psychology, start
from and presuppose any positive basis which is mental. Without offering
here to discuss the whole matter, I should answer that, at the stage of
reflection which we suppose above to exist, the objection will not hold.
When at this stage I reject an untruth, I feel that I am asserting something
positively, though I could not say what that is. The suggested idea does
not simply disappear after having first perhaps become unpleasant. The
idea, on the contrary, is banished, and in its banishment I feel that I gain
positive assertion, if only for the moment. My natural expression for the
process is not merely ‘ That is gone’, or, again, ‘I will not have that’, My
natural expression here is something like ‘ I know better’.


I ‘ INTRODUCTORY 17


Hence the only scepticism in philosophy which is rational
must confine itself to the denial that truth so far and
actually has been reached.1 What is ordinarily called
philosophical scepticism is on the other hand an uncritical
and suicidal dogmatism. For it undertakes to know and to
judge as to possible knowledge, while really itself assuming
the knowledge which it seeks to deny and to disprove.
This procedure is far too easy and too plausible ever to go
out of fashion, though in principle it has now long ago been
exploded. But, in speaking of philosophical scepticism, we
must remember always that this is a different thing from
mere scepticism about philosophy. The latter scepticism,
however rational it may be, stands oytside of philosophy
itself. It addresses itself, we may say, and it appeals to the
human person, while for the philosopher, so far as he has
engaged himself in his special pursuit, it has no relevant
word.


Passing to another point I would end this chapter by
remarking on at least one advantage possessed by philo-
sophy. We should all agree that, exeept within limits,
doubt is an evil; and one remedy against doubt, we know,
consists in its _extrusi This is the way in which, in
our lives, doabt is banished or controlled, and, while it is
a, necessary way, in principle it is not satisfactory. ‘The
doubt in itsélt and’in its root may remain unattacked, and
all that perhaps has happened is that the ground has been
invaded and overgrown by something else. Certainly this .
counter-occupation may in the end destroy the doubt
through inanition. On the other hand, being temporary,
it itself may die down, and the doubt, undestroyed i in its
root, may appear as before... But in philosophy, so far as
philosophy succeeds, the case is otherwise. The doubt '
here is not smothered or expelled but itself is assimilated


1 Cf, on this point Chap. V.
1874 c


18 INTRODUCTORY CHAP. I


-and used up.! It becomes an element in the living process
-of that which is above doubt, and hence its own development
‘is the end of itself in its original character, And even if
philosophy fails partially, as it may fail, yet still it furnishes,
I think, something of a remedy against doubt. A scepticism
that has tried to be thorough tends, we may say, to weaken
doubt by spreading it and making it more general. The
doubt, if really it is intellectual and not a mere disease of
the will, loses strength and loses terror by losing its contrast.
By widening and extension it may have become so attenuated
and so feeble as in a particular application to have no
working force. But the reader may feel that I have indulged
myself now too long in preliminary reflections.


1 Though the case is not wholly parallel, we may recall here the difference
between attempting to combat a morbid fixed idea from the outside, and
its removal through internal modification under hypnotic suggestion.


CHAPTER II
FAITH?!


THE object of these pages is to inquire as to the meaning
of faith, They will be concerned, not merely with religious
faith, but with faith in general. I will endeavour first to

"fix loosely and within limits the sense of the term, and will
go on next to state and to explain a narrower view which
has much to recommend it. I shall have, however, to point
out, thirdly, that this view is not in accordance with all the
facts. Unless, that is, we take it as a definition more or less
arbitrary, it requires modification. From this I shall proceed
to adduce by way of illustration a number of instances, and
will finally ask how philosophy and faith are connected.
I may, however, add that for myself the inquiry as to the
meaning of our term possesses no great importance. As
long, that is, as some definite sense is attached to the word,
I do not for myself much care how it is defined.


I. It is obvious that faith is in some way opposed to
knowledge proper, but it is obvious also that faith implies
some kind of believing and knowing. If you descend, that
is, below a certain intellectual level, the word ‘faith’ becomes
inapplicable. It is therefore not knowledge but knowledge
of a certain kind which is excluded by faith, or which,


1 This chapter appeared first in the Philosophical Review of March 1911,
It was written, so far as I remember, some four years previously. The’
reader will notice that the scope of the inquiry is limited. Faith is treated
“here merely from what may be called the formal side, The aim has been
simply to define faith so as to enable one to ask, in any particular case,
Is this faith or not ? What may be called the material aspect of faith—
the question as to what truths of various kinds can, and how far they
should, come by way of faith—has been throughout ignored. ;


C2


20 FAITH CHAP.


to speak more accurately, falls outside of that which
constitutes faith’s essence. Mere feeling (I do net ask here
if this is to be called knowledge) is certainly not faith. I do

“not deny that a man may have faith in that which he feels,
but in any case his faith must go beyond mere feeling.
And the same thing must be said once more of sensible
perception. You cannot have faith in what you see, so long
as you have nothing but seeing. And again everything that
can be called intellectual perception must, as such, be
external to faith, The mere apprehension of a principle
or of a logical sequence is certainly not that which, taken
by itself, we should call faith. And we may go on generally
in the same sense to exclude all knowledge so far as that is
grounded in ideas or is verified in facts.

On the one side, the object of faith must be ideal. To
believe in a person, for instance, is, however vaguely, to
believe something about him. In order to have faith I
must, that is, entertain an idea. On the other side, not
every such entertainment is faith. For faith is limited to
that ideal region where, apart from faith, doubt is possible.
Its positive essence lies in the overcoming or prevention of
doubt, actual or possible, as to. an idea. And the doubt
further, as we have seen, must be excluded in a way which
cannot in the ordinary sense be called logical. The non-
logical overcoming from within of doubt as to an idea, or
the similar prevention of such doubt, appears, so far, to
be the general essence of faith.


II. I will now proceed to state a meaning in which faith
may be more narrowly understood. We have here a view
which, except as an arbitrary definition, will not cover all
the facts, but which nevertheless is instructive and in great
part tenable. There are two questions which are naturally
asked as to the nature of faith. How in particular is faith
able to prevent or to overcome doubt, and what is the result


II FAITH aI


of faith’s presence? I have spoken of these two questions
as two, because in the end, as I think, they must be divided.
But for the view which I am about to state briefly, no such
division exists. .
Faith according to this view will exist so far as an idea
is a principle of action, whether theoretical or practical.1
The doubt is not first removed or prevented before we act,
but by and in the process of our acting. And our state in
thus acting remains faith so long as and so far as the idea
is not verified. Thus, to take theory first, an attempt to
reconstruct the world ideally might, and; we may even add,
must begin in faith, but the process ceases to depend
on faith so far as it visibly succeeds. And, if our theory
ever became intelligible throughout, faith would have
ceased wholly to exist in it, since no further doubt as to that
theory’s beginning or end would be possible. On the other
hand, apart from such complete verification, faith must
always ‘remain, since your doubt, actual or possible, is
‘removed only because, and so far as, you resolve to act in
a certain manner. What overcomes your doubt, therefore,
is in,the end action and not vision. And on the practical
side the same account holds good. For practical success
tends to banish doubt as to those ideas on which we act,
and therefore, so far as it goes, tends to remove the condi-
tion of faith. But because neither in theory nor in practice
is a complete success attainable throughout and in detail,
we are left, so far as this aspect goes, still dependent
on faith.

Even on such a view, the reader will have noticed, faith
is not essentially practical, if that word is taken (as above) in


_ 1 The reader is not to identify this view with what is called Pragmatism,
Pragmatism, as I understand it, is merely a one-sided perversion of the
more complete view. Its essence consists in the attempt to subordinate
every aspect of mind’to what it alls practice, the meaning of practice not
having been first ascertained. But, in reprinting the above, I should like
to qualify the statement as to the“ essence ’ by the proviso ‘ if it has any
essence’, For the distinction between theory and practice see Chap. IV.


22 FAITH CHAP.


its more ordinary sense. On the other hand, all faith both
in its origin and its result will (upon this view) be active.
Doubt, that is, will be overcome always by that which
I may be said to do,—to do, if not in practice, at least
theoretically. My contemplation even may be called
active, and must everywhere, so far as doubt is removed
by action, imply faith. So that, if we like to use ‘ practical ’
in the widest sense as equivalent to ‘ active ’, faith (on this
view) will be essentially practical. But the view, however
much truth it contains, cannot in my opinion be defended.
It does not throughout answer to the facts.’ Even in the
widest sense of practice I cannot find that faith is always
practical in its origin or even always in its issue.

(a) The origin of faith, it seems to me clear, may be what
we call emotional; and, even perhaps apart from emotion,
faith can arise through what may be termed a non-active
suggestion. The reason why I have come to believe in an
idea must in some cases be said to be aesthetic, and in others
sympathetic and social; or again it may be found in the
magnetic force of a commanding personality. To maintain
that in every one of such cases I believe because of some-
thing that I do, and that faith arises through action, would
surely be contrary to fact. And the objection that in such
cases there is no possibility of doubt, and that there is. there-
fore no faith, seems once more untenable. To me it seems
clear that I may believe in ideas the opposite of which I am
able to conceive, and that my possible doubt is overcome
by an influence which is not properly intellectual, and yet
which certainly does not consist in action. And I do not
see how to deny that such a process is faith. If and'so far
as I go on to act, the action, I agree, will and must affect
the source from which it arises. But we have here a sub-
sequent reaction, and to conclude from this to the nature
of the first origin seems illogical.

(0) Hence, even in the widest sense of the term, the origin


1 : FAITH 23


of faith is certainly not in all cases practical. And it may be
doubted whether even the result can in all cases be called
action. For example (to take first action which is practical
in the narrower sense). I may believe that to-night it will
rain because some one in whose opinion I trust tells me so.
-And this belief may, so far as I see, in no way influence what
I call my conduct. And to urge that under other conditions
that influence would be there, and that therefore it zs there,
to myself seems not permissible. Hence the issue of faith
need not always be called practical, if that term is to keep
its ordinary meaning.

And even if we extend that meaning so as to embrace every
kind of mental action, a difficulty may stilt remain. If I
believe upon faith that to-night it will rain, my conduct,
we saw, may remain uninfluenced. A difference of some
kind will, however, have been made in what in the widest
sense I may call my mental furniture. And, since I always
in some way am acting theoretically, the difference made
by any belief, however seemingly irrelevant, in my mental
furniture, must affect every subsequent theoretical action,
and therefore may be said to consist in activity. So far as
I really and actually believe that to-night it will rain, so
far any judgement of mine with regard to anything in the
universe will be affected, and the result of my faith will
thus be action. To this extreme contention I may naturally
object that, whether I believe that it will or will not rain,
may make apparently no visible difference. Still I may be
asked, in reply, why and how the idea of'rain is kept before
me at all unless it is connected with some subsequent mental
action ? We should thus be brought to the question, whether,
and if so in what sense, I have faith so long as I do not
exercise it, and so Jong as there is no actual idea before
my mind.

_I do not wish to discuss this here, but must insist on the
conclusion that the first origin of my belief must in some


24 FAITH CHAP


cases be passive. Again, as to the result, it is questionable
how far in some cases we can speak of any actual result at
all. We may infer a result on general grounds, but there
may be nothing that we can verify in detail.’ And, further,
an action resulting from faith need not be practical. We
must therefore conclude that certainly faith does not in all
cases arise from action, and that, whether it issues necessarily,
in act, even a theoretical act, seems highly doubtful.’

If we pass from faith in general to religious faith, this
conclusion must be altered. Religious faith consists, I
should say, in the identification of my wil) with a certain

_ object. It essentially is practical and must necessarily be
exercised in conduct. I do not contend that in its origin
all religious faith must be practical. On the contrary, it
may be generated, I believe, in a variety of manners. But,
except so far as the accepted idea is carried out practically,
*the belief (we should perhaps most of us agree) is not properly
religious. And of course the practical exercise of a belief
must react on its origin. But, unless we wish to lay down
a definitian which is more or less arbitrary, I do not see
that we are justified in arguing from the nature of religious
faith to that of faith in general. For reasons that have been
given I could not agree that everywhere faith involves the
identification of my will with an idea,


‘Tit. It may perhaps help the reader to judge as to the
truth of the docttine we have laid down, if I go on to offer
some applications in detail. And a certain amount of repeti-
tion may perhaps be excused. It is-not, for instance, faith
where I draw deductions from a principle accepted on faith.
So far as the sequence is visible, faith so far is absent.
Further, an unverifiable assumption as to detail—an assump-
‘tion made because a principle demands it—seems hardly ~
to be faith, unless so far as the principle itself is taken on
faith. Wherever a principle is seen and grasped apart from


ir FAITH : 25


faith, my tonfident acting on-this principle should not be
called faith. And from the other side, where through
weakness of will I fail to act on my knowledge, we must hot
everywhere identify this defect with want of faith. In the
first place, the knowledge itself may or may not rest on
faith, and again, thé knowledge itself may still be faith even
if it apparently‘is followed by no action. It is only, we saw,
in the case of religious faith that this must be denied. The
apparent fact of my failure to act upon knowledge will
always, I presume, create difficulty, since the detail in each
instance may vary and is hard to observe correctly. In
some cases my failure may have its origin in doubt, in
doubt, that is, not with regard to the principle but as to
the detail of its application here and now. And, so far as
the right ideas would be secured and the contrary ideas
banished by knowledge or faith, my want of action may be
attributed to a defect in faith or knowledge. But there are,
other cases where such an account of the matter seerns not
to answer to the facts.1 To pass to another point, when we
hear that ‘ the infant, who has found the way to the mother’s
‘breast for food, and to her side for warmth, has made
progress in the power of faith’, we.are at once struck by
the inappropriateness of the phrase. The action in such
a case need not arise from any kind of belief and idea. And
in the second place, where there is an idea from which
the action proceeds, the conditions may exclude the possi- _
bility of faith. Where an idea, suggested By perception or
otherwise, cannot be doubted, faith is obviously inapplicable.
Faith, in the proper sense, cannot begin until the child is
capable of entertaining a contrary idea.

At the risk of wearying the reader I will add some further
illustration. When serving on a jury a man may come to


1 [ have discussed this difficult question in an article in al dai N.S.,
No. 43.
2 Bain, Emotions, Ed. III, p- 506.


26 FAITH CHAP.


a decision in. various ways. If he accepts and rejects testi-
mony, and in the end judges according to probability and
by what he knows of the world, the process so far is not
faith. If he is influenced by another man simply because
he infers that the other man knows better, faith once more
is absent. If he is influenced by the other man otherwise,
let us say morally and emotionally, and in consequence
‘follows the other man with belief, this is certainly faith.
But we cannot call the same thing faith where, and so far
as, the belief is absent. The influence of another person on
my conduct tends, we may say, normally to influence my
this consequence may be absent, and, if so,
we cannot speak of faith proper. Finally, if our juryman
cannot decide rationally, and if he says, ‘Since I must
decide in some way, I will take the plaintiff as being in the
right,’ that again certainly is not faith, The man’s doubt
here is not overcome, nor is there any ptinciple, rational
or otherwise, which he accepts as the ground of his particular
decision.


IV, I will end by asking whether and, if so, in what sense
faith is implied in philosophy. The question how far in
philosophy we can be said to go to work with our whole
nature, and not merely with our intellect, need not here be
discussed.1_ But, to pass this by, philosophy, I should say,
in a sense must depend upon faith. For we do not rest
simply on a datum, on a given fact or a given axiom. On the
conttary, we may be said to depend on a principle of action.
We seek, that is, a certain kind of satisfaction, and we proceed
accordingly. In and for philosophy (I do not ask if this holds
also in the separate sciences) truth in the end is true because
I have a certain want and because I act in a certain manner.
. The criterion may be said in the last resort to involve my
act and choice. And thus in the end truth is not true


1 See Chap. VIII.


ra FAITH ry


because it is simply seen or follows logically from what is
seen. Further, philosophy in my judgement cannot verify
its principle in detail and throughout. If it could do this,
faith would be removed, and, so far as it does this, faith
ceases. But, so faras philosophy is condemned to act on an
unverified principle, it continues still to rest upon faith.

You may indeed object that here there can be no faith
since here doubts are impossible, but this objection, I think, -
will hardly stand. The doubts may be said to be impossible
only because of our principle of action. And, if it were not
for our faith, we have perhaps a right to say that the other
ideas, now meaningless, might at least in some irrational
sense be entertained. But how we are to decide on this
point, and whether we are to assert or to deny that philo-
sophy in the end rests on faith, is to my mind of no great
consequence.


CHAPTER. III
ON FLOATING IDEAS AND THE IMAGINARY 1


In this chapter? I shall attempt to deal briefly with
several subjects or perhaps aspects of one subject. My aim
throughout is to advocate the same main conclusion, but
no satisfactory treatment of the questions opened is possible
within these limits. The first discussion will be about the
existence of floating ideas, the next will examine the difference
in content between the ‘real’ and the ‘imaginary’, and the
third will inquire as to the relation between imagination and
play, together with the distinction between play and earnest.
The conclusion to be urged or suggested in each case is that
a hard division between the real and the imaginary is not
tenable. The true nature and criterion of reality must hence
be sought and found elsewhere.


I. I will take first the question as to floating ideas. This
should be preceded by a discussion of the nature of ideas in
general, but such an inquiry is obviously not possible here.
I must content myself here with referring to the conclusion
which I have advocated elsewhere.? Every idea 4 essentially
qualifies reality, but no idea on the other hand does this
simply and bodily. Every idea has its own existence as
a fact, and with this side of its being it, as an idea and so
far, does not qualify reality. Its essence, we may say, lies
in ignoring or in discounting this side of itself. And thus

1 This chapter was first published in Mind for April 1908.

® The first two divisions of this chapter may be taken as acommentary on
various parts of my book Appearance and Reality. See especially pp. 366 ff.

3 In Appearance (see the Index) and in various articles in Mind (O.S,, |
No. 49, p. 23; N.S., No. 40, pp. §,63 No. 41, p. 17, and No. 44, pp. 27, 28).


Cf. Chapters IX and X of this volume.
‘ This holds even of the idea of ‘nothing ’. See below, p. 41.


m1 FLOATING IDEAS AND THE IMAGINARY 29


everywhere truth and ideas have a double aspect. But every
idea, used as an idea, must so far attach itself as an adjective
to the real, and, hence in the end there will be no such thing
as an idea which merely floats.

This conclusion is very commonly rejected as false. Its
falsehood is at times even silently assumed against those who
maintain its truth. And certainly at first sight any such
doctrine seems open to grave ebjection. ‘An idea’, it may
be said, ‘ always, if you please, refers in some sense to the
real world, and always, if you please, neglects or discounts
its own private existence, if, that is, it possesses any. “But
on the other hand there are ideas which plainly do not
qualify the real. When an idea is taken as false it may even
be repelled and denied. And, apart from this, ideas may be
recognized as merely imaginary, and, taken in this character,
they float suspended above the real world. The same thing
happens wherever we deal with questions, with ideal experi-
ments, and again with those suggestions which we merely
entertain without pronouncing on their truth. And how,
when you do not know that an idea is true, or when you
even know that it is not true, can you say in such a case
that the idea qualifies. reality ? In such cases the idea, it
is plain, can do no more than float.’ There is force in

.this objection, and with myself, I admit, the objection at one
time more or less prevailed. I will now, however, attempt
to show briefly that it rests upon misconception.


1 Principles of Logic, p. 4. There are, besides, various more or less
objectionable expressions used in the account of ideas which is given there.
So far as I know, these expressions have not been used by me since, though
I hardly understand how a careful reader of the yolume could be deceived
by them. The term ‘sign’ or ‘symbol’, for instance, implies strictly,
I suppose, the recognized individual existence of the sign. And obviously
with an idea this aspect may be absent. There are other expressions also
which, if you take them literally, are certainly false, and also*inconsistent
with what may be called the general doctrine of the book. But I hope
that the statements as to ideas, which I kave made several times since 1883,
are less misleading. I should have added that, from the first and through-
out, Prof. Bosanquet has consistently advocated the true doctrine. The
debt which philosophy owes to him here has not been adequately recognized.


30 ON FLOATING IDEAS “CHAP,


The misconception is in short a false assumption as to the
limits of the real world. Reality is identified with the world
of actual. fact, and outside of this world floats the unsub-
stantial realm of the imaginary, And actual fact, when we
inquire, is in the end the world which is continuous with my
body. It is the construction which in my waking hours !
T build round this centre. My body, taken in one with my
present feelings and with the context which in space and
time I can connect with this basis, is regarded by me as
‘actual fact while all else is unreal. Thus my dreams are
' facts so far as they take their place as events in the real
. series, while the contents of my dreams are not real since
they cannot so be ordered. The real world on this view is
a group and series of actual events, and the test in the end
is continuous connexion with my felt waking body. This is
the doctrine which consciously or unconsciously underlies
our common fiew as to the actual world. And it is this
doctrine, I think, which usually is asserted or implied when
the existence of mere floating ideas seems plausible.

I do not purpose here to discuss formally the truth and
consistency of this view of reality’s limits.2 The doctrine is
in trouble at once with regard to the actual existence of past
and future. It fails wholly to explain the position given to
the sphere of general and of abstract ideas. And to say
that, when confronted with the facts of the spiritual world,
with art and science, morality and religion, it proves inade-
quate, is to use a weak expression. The truth is that no one
except for certain purposes really believes in such a view, and
that no one for other purposes can fail, however unawares,
to reject it. And, without pausing to consider any possible
attempts at defence, I will proceed to offer another view
which seems at least more in accordance with fact. —

1 In the end in my present waking moment, The point is. further
discussed later in this chapter. Cf, Chap, XVI.


2 The foundation of this view is exposed in the second part of the
present chapter. Cf. Chap. XVI.


-


raat AND THE IMAGINARY 31


Every man’s world, the whole world, I mean, in which his
self also is included, is one, and it comes to his mind as one
universe. It necessarily does so even when he maintains that
it truly is but plural. But this unity is perhaps for most
men no more than an underlying felt whole. There is, we
may say, an implicit sense rather than an explicit object, but
none the less the unity is experienced as real. On the other
hand above this felt totality there is for the average man an
indefinite number of worlds, worlds all more or less real but
all, so far as appears, more or less independent. There are
the facts perceived by the outer senses, and there is the inner
realm of ideas and intimate feelings and passing moods.
And these regions more or less may correspond, but they do
not correspond wholly. Then there is my present actual
world, and.the ambiguous existence of what has been and is
‘about to be. There are the worlds of duty and of religious
.truth, which on the one side penetrate and on the other side
transcend the common visible facts. And there are the
regions of hope, desire and dream, madness and drunken-
ness and error, all ‘ unreal’, if you please, but all counting
as elements in the total of reality. The various worlds of
politics, commerce, invention, trade and manufacture, all
again have their places. Above the sensible sphere rises the
intellectual province of truth and science, and, more or less
apart from this, the whole realm of the higher imagination.
Both in poetry and in general fiction, and throughout the
entire region of the arts and of artistic perception, we
encounter reality. Things are here in various ways for us
incontestable, valid and ‘ true ’, while in another sense of the
word ‘truth’ these things could not be called true. But this
multiplicity of our worlds may perhaps be taken as a fact
which is now recognized.1 The diversity and even the
division of our various worlds is indefinite and in a sense is
endless, And, without entering further into detail, I will


1 Cf. Prof. James’s Psychology, chap. xxi.


32 ON FLOATING IDEAS: CHAP.


state at once how this diversity bears on our problem.
Because, there are many worlds, the idea which floats sus-
‘pended above one of them is attached to another. There
are in short floating ideas, but not ideas which float abso-
lutely. Every idea on the contrary is an adjective which
qualifies a real world, and it is loose only when you take it in
relation to another sphere of reality.

On the one side the whole Universe or the Absolute Reality
is the subject to which in the end every idea is attached. On.
the other side (and this is the side on which we have to
dwell here) the reality qualified by an idea depends always on
a distinction. The subject in a judgement is never Reality in
the fullest sense, It is reality taken, or meant to be taken,
under certain conditions and limits. It is reality in short
understood in a special sense.1 And hence when an idea
floats above, and is even repelled by, one region of the world,

‘there is available always another region in which it inheres
and to which as an adjective it is attached. And every-
where, where-we seem to find ideas which float absolutely, we
can discover the ground to which really they are fixed.

I will go on to point this out in a variety of instances, but,
before proceeding, I must lay stress on an important distinc-
tion. If‘ judgement ’ is used in its ordinary sense of explicit
judgement, where we have a distinct predicate and subject
taken one as applied to the other, then it certainly is true
that apart from judgement we have ideas. And if the issue
is-raised thus, and if not to be so predicated means to float,
then inevitably we shall be forced to believe in floating ideas.
For in doubt and in denial, to take obvious instances, we
should find the evidence that they exist. But the issue, if so
raised, I must go on to urge, is raised wrongly. We have not
to choose everywhere between an idea which is predicated


1 It is not possible for me to attempt here to explain and justify the
above. I may perhaps in passing point out that, if the subject were the
entire reality, no place would be left for the existence of the idea. Cf. p. 41,
note.


ree AND THE IMAGINARY _ 33


and an idea which simply floats. On the contrary, an
ideal content can qualify and be attached to a subject.apart
from any predication in the proper sense or any explicit
judgement. And.by virtue of such an attachment the ideas
which relatively float are everywhere from another point held
captive. The idea comes before my mind as in suspension
and as loose from a certain subject, and so far it floats. But
none the less as an adjective it qualifies another subject. It
is not predicated of this other subject, but it comes as at-
tached to it or as inhering there. This other subject may be
more or less specialized or more or less vague and general,
and the union again between this subject and the idea may
be more or less implicit. It may amount to little more than
the immediate inherence of one aspect in a felt whole. But
in every case of a floating idea this other subject and its
attachment can be found. The idea in short, held free from
one subject, coalesces more or less immediately with another
subject from which in varying degrees it is distinct.

Thus in negation the idea denied is not in the proper sense
predicated of another subject. But this idea in every case
qualifies an alternative more or less distinct, and hence no-
where floats absolutely. The idea repelled is, in other words,
felt to fall somewhere else. It may qualify another alter-
native more or less specified before the mind, or it may
coalesce with that vague whole which comes to us as the
residue of the Universe. But to existence unsupported
within a void it never attains.

This qualification apart from explicit judgement can by
reflexion everywhere be turned into formal predication.
Whether before that we should speak of judgement I need
not discuss. The point is that apart from predication ideas
can qualify a subject. Hence you cannot conclude that,
where predication fails, ideas, if present, must float, since
the possibility of informal union between ideas and reality
destroys this conclusion, The reader may now have realized

1574 DC


34 ON FLOATING IDEAS CHAP.


the bearing and the importance of the above distinction, and
T will go on to explain and justify it in detail by considering
various instances of floating ideas. We find obvious ex-
amples in negation and supposition, in the use of imperatives
and questions, and in the world of imagination and of mere
idea. I will deal first with the case of imaginary ideas.

The imaginary in general is defined by exclusion from the
real. It is something which positively possesses the character
of this or that real world and hence suggests its inclusion
there, but on the other hand is shut out from the limits of
the world in question. And the world which excludes is
primarily the world of actual fact. This world, we saw
above, is made by construction from my real body. It is
the region, in short, which is taken as continuous with that
basis.1_ Whatever, having more or less the character of this
series, nevertheless falls outside it, is imaginary, or, taken
more generally, the imaginary is whatever is excluded by
actual fact. And in a secondary sense the imaginary is what
in the same way falls outside of any kind of world which is
taken as actual. Now if an idea is admitted to be imaginary
(which we have seen means unreal), how, it will be objected, -
can such an idea be the adjective of reality? And this pro-
blem is solved, we have seen, by the plurality of real worlds.
The idea is repelled from one sphere but qualifies another,
and in this other sphere is real. Reality, we feel, is a whole
which extends beyond any special world. It is something
which comes to us as wider than the distinctions we make
in it. Hence, wherever an idea is repelled by a subject,
there remains another field which in some sense is real. In
this field the idea falls positively, inheres in it and qualifies
it, and, when we reflect, we can express this inherence in a
judgement. The idea, before we so reflect, is not a predicate,
but the idea on the other hand is still not free. It is in the


1 In the second part of this chapter I will further discuss the nature o
the basis mentioned above.


i AND THE IMAGINARY 35


air, if you will, but you must add that it qualifies this air
which is its support and reality.

Consider for example the world inhabited by the characters
in some novel. Things not only here are so or otherwise in
actual literary fact, but beyond this fact we recognize a world
of reality. And this world does not consist in or depend on
the mere event that Balzac or Thackeray chose to write down
this or that detail. It is the same elsewhere and in every
world of the arts. The imaginary, we all say, has its laws,
and, if so, we must go on to add, it has its own truth and own
life, and its ideas, floating in reference to common fact, are
hence attached to this its own world of reality.. Thus again
in abstract science, where we should refuse to say that truth
‘is imaginary, we could hardly assert the existence of any and
every truth as an actual fact. On the other hand, whatever
we might protest, we feel and know that truth somewhere
must be real. Nay, even in the practical relation of desire
and will, ‘ideas are felt somehow to be real. Indeed, their
reality in collision with their non-existence makes the con-
flict in which we suffer. We suffer there most where most
we feel that the idea has reality superior to the existence
which excludes it. Our will is moved by, and it unawares
insists on, the reality in another world of that idea which it
brings here into fact. The star that I desire does not wander
outcast and naked in the void. My heart is drawn to it
because it inhabits that heaven which is felt at once ta be
its own and mine.

In the end and taken absolutely (to repeat this) there can
be no mere idea. Reality is always before us, and every idea
in some sense qualifies the real. So far as excluded it is
excluded only from some limited region, and beyond that
region has its world. To float in the absolute sense is
impossible. Flotation means attachment to another soil, a


1 See on this point Prof. Bosanquet’s Knowledge and Reality, pp. 144 #.,
followed by Prof, James in his Psychology, ii. 292.
D2


36 ON FLOATING IDEAS CHAP.


realm other than that sphere which for any purpose we take
here as solid ground and as fact. Now the region which we
‘oppose to fact may be a distinct world, or may be a residue
more or less unspecified. It may be this or that province of
the ideal, or it may be no more than the undefined space
which falls beyond what we distinguish as fact. But the
province, or the mere residual space or vague background,
is still reality felt as positive, and to this reality the idea is
bound.}

We may deal rapidly with the position of the idea in
imperatives and questions. The nature of an imperative
has been discussed by me elsewhere (in Mind, N.S., No. 49,
pp. 4 and 5), and we have no need to enter on that general
topic. But with regard to reality it is with the idea here
as in the practical relation generally. The idea, ordered to

_ exist in our world, qualifies already the world of ideas and
has reality there. The same thing holds again in interroga-
tives. Ina question we have some known aspect of reality
before us, which we regard, at least here, as actual fact. We
have next the suggestion of an idea, more or less specified
or again undefined, which we assume to be somehow con-
nected with our known fact. We have finally a demand for
further knowledge in this direction. The demand is addressed
to another mind, or even secondarily to our own, or again to
material nature. The further knowledge (of which we have
the idea) is absent from our known fact. But on the other
hand this knowledge, the answer to our question, is not
fetched from nowhere. We take it to be truth which already
is there and which in some sense exists.2 It already, that
is, qualifies another realm of reality, and to this realm it is
attached.


1 The idea again may be excluded from the subject taken simply and
in itself, or again from the subject taken merely as so far known, The
negation in the latter sense may, if we please, be called privative.

® The reader possibly may object that, in the case of the future which
I am to make, the above account will not hold, I reply that it holds


III . AND THE IMAGINARY 37


We may pass from this to consider the case of supposition
and hypothetical judgement. In supposition we use an idea
which in one connexion is true and is real. This ideal truth
we bring into relation with a ‘fact’ taken in another
sphere, in order to discover what result comes in a certain
direction. This result is truth which is considered now, as
before, to qualify and to be rooted in the ideal world. Sup-
position in short presupposes that the actual or real fact is
not the whole of reality. It implies that there are other
spheres, or other provinces of the same sphere, all connected
in a wider Universe. Hence ideas once more never float
except relatively. Their suspension involves a positive
attachment to a point of support taken elsewhere.

I may perhaps be allowed to dwell somewhat longer on the
problem raised by hypothetical judgement. It is obviously
impossible for me here to discuss this fully in regard either
to its psychological origin or logical value, and F must content
myself with calling attention to a point which is essential.
In a hypothetical judgement we have an assertion, and it is
really idle to dispute this. If you suppose something then
something follows, and, unless you know that this is so, you
cannot say it. There is an assertion, but this assertion
(properly) is not of actual fact. On the other side you have
before you a datum which in some sense you take to be fact
and actually real. And there is some connexion, you assume,
between this fact and your ideal truth. But in spite of this
connexion the fact is not the subject of your judgement, or
rather it never is so except improperly and through mere
implication.

In order to understand the hypothetical judgement we
must keep in mind the following essential aspects. (1) The


here unquestionably as it holds elsewhere, and that otherwise the attempt
at prevision would be meaningless, The difficulty is caused by the nature
of a real fact which is future, a construction which is full of radical incon-
sistency. But in any case, if the idea of the future cannot qualify the world
of fact and truth, it still does not float but is attached to the imaginary
world.


38 ON FLOATING IDEAS CHAP.


subject of this judgement is never the actual fact. (2) On
the other hand the actual fact to some extent enters into the
judgement. And (3)in many cases the judgement contains
an unavowed implication. It more or less covertly implies,
that is, a certain connexion between its subject and the
actual fact.

(x) In every hypothetical judgement there is actual fact
to which the subject is opposed. This actual fact may be
a perceived existence, or again it may belong to some ideal or
imaginary world. But in every case the use of ‘if’ marks
a distinction between what we think and what is otherwise
real. If a square could be round then something follows,
which does not follow from an actual square. And ‘if you
attacked that man he would defend himself’ does not make
its assertion about that man. The man is not attacked, the
square is not round, and you do not even suggest that
either is so, And in ‘if he goes there he will succeed’ you
do not say that he will go there. From him, as you know
him, that predicate is absent, and your ‘if’ means that you
are not speaking of the known actual man. In every case
you are speaking of that which you suppose, and whatever
you suppose you ipso facto oppose to what you take to be
real. Otherwise there would be no sense in supposing and no
meaning in ‘if’.

(2) On the other side your assertion clearly in some sense’
refers to the actual fact. For otherwise, and if there were
no connexion, who could think of supposing? If your asser-
tion had positively or negatively nothing to do with your
actual reality, it would be meaningless or at least must
lose its hypothetical form. Thus on the one side you are
dealing in some sense with actual fact. The subject of your
judgement on the other hand is not an actual fact. But the -
actual fact is referred to and to some extent it enters into
the subject of the judgement. We have first the actual man
who is not attacked and who is not the subject, and we have


ur AND THE IMAGINARY 39


next the supposed, the ideal, man of whom the judgement is
true. If these two men are the same, our ‘if’ at least im-
plies that we do not know this, while on the other side our
‘if’ implies that these men are connected, There is in short
enough known identity between the-two men to warrant a
supposition. We thus assert about the ideal man but also
refer to the other man. Our reference assumes that certainly
between the two there is a partial identity, while our
supposition means that, for anything we really know, there
is a difference which on the whole is superior and prevails.}

(3) So much as the above belongs to the essence of hypo-
thetical judgement. Many cases, however, present an
additional aspect, which has given rise to difficulty and to
error. We have often a further implication as to the
amount of identity between the ideal subject and the fact,
and, owing to this implication, the judgement, while hypo-
thetical in form, may assert or deny of the actual. In
st vales bene est there is an implied identity, between the
supposed and the actual, sufficient to justify the use of est.
On the other hand in si tacuisses philosophus esses we assume
a known difference, between the two cases of yourself, suffi-
cient to warrant a denial of the conclusion in fact. This’
implied identity or difference can exist in a variety of degrees,
and the actual meaning conveyed by the judgement may
depend upon this implication. But this implication, we
must not forget, falls outside the hypothetical form. It
is often absent from it, and when present it may even be
said to contradict it, since it involves knowledge: on a point
where the use of ‘if’ assumes ignorance. Hence this acci-
dental meaning conveyed by some hypothetical judgements


2 A hypothetical judgement (to state this otherwise) is itself always
universal, but it implies that there is a question of bringing a designated
case-under.this universal judgement, It implies that this question is worth
considering, and (taken strictly) it implies that the answer is unknown.

I should remind the reader that in the above discussion I assume through-
out the correctness of the account of existential judgements which I have
given elsewhere. See my Principles of Logic.


40 ON FLOATING IDEAS CHAP.


is foreign to the essence of the hypothetical form. And
a want of clearness on this point must everywhere, I think,
preclude an understanding of that essence.
. With these brief but, I fear, too lengthy remarks, I must
pass from the hypothetical judgement. Assuming every-
where, as that does, various realms of reality and truth,
the consideration of it has tended to confirm our main
conclusion. The ideas which float have in every case another
world in which they are based and secured.

When we pass to the alleged existence of floating ideas in
the case of negation, we find a subject too intricate and too
difficult for discussion here. I must content. myself with
a summary statement of the conclusion which I adopt.

- By negation I understand a denial of the intelligible and not
a mere refusal to entertain the unmeaning. And the main
point here is this, that all negation is relative. Negation,
whatever else it is, is repulsion, repulsion not absolute but
from a subject formed by distinction within reality. Reality
therefore is always wider than the subject which negates,
and beyond this subject we have always a region taken in
some sense to be real. And the idea, which is repelled from
the subject, falls within this other world and qualifies it.

I do not mean that in all negation the alternative is dis-
tinct. The alternative on the contrary may be unspecified
in various degrees. Our other world ma amount to no
more than that vague residue whiclf remaihs after the subject
has been selected. But, however undefined this other may
be, it is the region into which the banished idea is sent.
The idea never floats, like Makomet’s coffin, between both
worlds, or somehow hangs nowhere. And the idea once
more belongs to and qualifies that world which it inhabits.
I do not mean that the idea, when repelled from one subject,
must be predicated of another subject. Predication, we’


3 On the subject of negation I would refer the reader to Prof. Bosanquet’s
admirable Logic,


III AND THE IMAGINARY 41


have seen above, is not asserted wherever floating ideas are
denied (p. 33). The union of the repelled idea with the
other world may be no more than a coalescence in feeling,
and in various degrees may be immediate. But this union,
we have seen, is a qualification and amounts to a bond.
And with this summary result I must pass from the claim of
floating ideas to exist in negation,


1 I will deal briefly and in passing with several difficulties, (i) Where
the subject, from which the idea is repelled, is the Universe at large, it
may be objected that we have no longer here a distinction taken within
reality. The answer is that here the Universe as a whole is distinguished
from its own partial contents, What we deny is that the idea, which
qualifies a finite sphere within the Whole, is in the same sense true of the
Whole, (Cf. Chap. XI.) But obviously I cannot here discuss the difficulties
which in the end beset the general doctrine of truth and the ultimate dis-
tinction of subject and predicate. (ii) It may be asked how the idea of
‘nothing ’ can qualify reality. I answer, as before, in general that exclusion
from the Universe admits presence in a field of distinction falling within
the Universe. And I answer further that ‘ nothing ’, being always relative,
can always qualify such a field. If there were a genuine idea of sheer
nothing, the case would be altered. But without entering into further
difficulties and into refinements for which there is no space, I may state
broadly that this is impossible. We cannot have a consistent idea of
nothingness if that is made absolute. (iii) But I may be asked further
how an idea, if self-contradictory, can qualify the real, and whether there»
fore, in asserting that all ideas qualify reality, I am not in conflict with
the Law of Cantradiction. The question is interesting, and to myself it is
even more interesting when followed by another. How, when self-contra-
dictory ideas in some sense exist (as is allowed to be the case), is it possible
that such ideas should not in some sense qualify the real? Such questions
cannot, however, be properly discussed apart from an inquiry into the
ultimate meaning of contradiction. I have undertaken this inquiry else-
where (Appearance, pp. 562-72, and Mind, No. 20, p, 482), and must here
be allowed to take the result reached by it as true. And resting on this
basis I reply as follows to the objection just raised (cf. Chapters IX and X).
The self-contradictory, as it anywhere qualifies the real, is taken so far not
to contradict itself. Incompatiblesgsuch as round and square, if you con-
nect them in another world are not taken as simply united in one subject, -
And, apart from such a union, they are no longer incompatible. You
may suppose a distinction more or less specified in the imaginary subject
to which they belong. Or again, without any such positive supposition,
you have at least by your repulsion from the ‘real’ world removed the
point of identity through which they collide there. The incompatibles
hence falt into and coalesce with the residual mass of unspecified con-
junction, As qualifying this somehow they are compatible, and you can,
if you please, go on to predicate both as true. On the other hand, if even


42 ON FLOATING IDEAS CHAP.


T have now in various instances attempted to justify the
denial of floating ideas. If the principle has been made clear
to the reader, I think that further detail would be super-
fluous. Ideas float, but they float relatively, and there is
another ground always which supports them, and of which
they are adjectives. They need not be predicated of this
ground, and, if such a necessity is assumed, then the denial
of floating ideas, I agree, is untenable. But this necessity
rests, I urge, upon a false alternative. Without predication
an ideal content can qualify more or less immediately a
subject from which it is distinct. And such a qualification
is all that our conclusion requires.

Every possible idea therefore may be said to be used
existentially, for every possible idea qualifies and is true
of a real world. And the number of real worlds, in a word,
is indefinite. Every idea therefore in a sense is true, and is
true of reality. The question with every idea is how far and
in what sense is it true. The question is always whether,
qualifying reality in one sense, the idea qualifies reality in
another sense also. For, true in one world, an idea may be
false in another world, and still more false if you seek to
make it true of the Universe. Fs Weducs dag Athy lau y B28,

é t


II. It may serve to throw light upon the whole subject if
I go on to discuss briefly a well-known doctrine. We often
hear that between an object as imaginary and the same


in an imaginary world you seek to unite round and square simply in one
subject, they once more cease to qualify this ‘ real’ world. They are once
more exiled to a further outlying world of mere imagination, in which, being
again merely somehow conjoined, they can both together be real, The
references given above will, I hope, furnish the explanation of this brief
answer, I would, however, once more remind the reader that in any case,
by even speaking of contradictories, we tacitly assume them to be somehow
conjoined, and I would add that any view of contradiction which fails to
deal with this. aspect of, the case is at best incomplete and is probably
defective. The difficulty raised in connexion with the Law of Contradiction
will I think, when fully considered, tend to confirm on every side the truth
of the main conclusions which I defend.


Ill AND THE IMAGINARY 43


object as real there is no difference in content, or at least
that such a difference, where it exists, is not essential. This
doctrine is often stated as axiomatic or as at any rate in-
contestable, and certainly I do not doubt that it possesses
truth. On the other hand the truth possessed by it seems
partial and limited. And in the end and in principle the
doctrine must even be called false.

About its plausibility there is no question. What is the
difference, we are asked, between a real and an imaginary
shilling, and, if they differ as shillings, how do they differ ?
Suppose that they differ, then take this point of difference,
whatever it is, and in imagination remove it. There will
now no longer be any diversity in content between the two
shillings, which still remain two. This contention obviously
is plausible, and, though there are difficulties—to my mind
insoluble—which result from its acceptance, the proueietice
it has acquired is not surprising.

On the other hand, when we reflect, the counter-doctrine

seems no less plausible. The real shilling, it has been re-
marked, does. things, where the imaginary shilling has no
power. The former is an active and in some sense a per-
manent constituent of the real world. And this difference
appears to be essential and to affect the internal content of
the shilling. You may perhaps deny this, and may attempt
to argue that any such difference falls outside the two
shillings. They are to differ, that is, barely in and through .
their external relations and not at all in themselves ; and of
course continuance will be a mere matter of external context.
But this is to assume that a thing’s relations, which make
‘all the difference to other things, or at least all the differ-
ence beyond itself, make no difference whatever to itself.
And this assumption, if it is tenable, seems at least not free
from difficulty. For in the end the doubt is suggested whether
in the end, when you have removed the relations, there is
any shilling at all left.


44 ON FLOATING IDEAS CHAP.


You may answer perhaps that this abstract difficulty
leaves you unmoved, At any rate, when the ‘ real’ external
relations are cut off, what in fact is left is no more or less
than the imaginary shilling. But this answer, I will go on
to show, apart from any objection based on general principle,
isin practice unavailing. For we have not to deal merely with
two shillings, the one real and the other fancied. There is not
on one side a single ‘ real’ world of fact and on the other
side a single world that I call ‘imaginary ’. On the contrary
a man has, as we saw, an indefinite plurality of worlds.

Now this diversity of worlds, and the presence of the same
object in various worlds, seems to bear on our problem. If,
on the one side you agree that these worlds are diverse, each
through a different content, it seems natural to think that
the object’s quality may be affected in each case by this dif-
ference. But if on the other side all these worlds are to
be diverse without differing in content, such a doctrine, if
tenable, has surely at least ceased to be plausible. It seems
to commit us to the view that there is an indefinite number
of distinctions without any difference, or that there are
differences between things which do not really differ.2. For
myself such a conclusion tends to the dissolution of all things,
whether real or imaginary, and at any rate there will be few,
I think, to whom it commends itself at once as plausible.

If now leaving general considerations we test our doctrine
by applying it to special cases, we discover that at least it
has limits. The whole distinction in short between the
imaginary and the real tends, as we apply it, to become
invalid. The first instance I will take is the case of the
Universe or Reality, for it is better, I think, here not to use
the instance of God. Can we speak of the Universe as being
merely real or as being merely imaginary ? Is it not on the.
other hand plain that such a distinction falls within the


2 In a work of fiction, for instance, we have the imaginary worlds of the
characters over against their real world, and so on indefinitely.
2 On this point and on ‘external’ relations cf, Chapters VIII, IX, and X.


IIE AND THE IMAGINARY 45


Universe? If we oppose the real to the imaginary, then
clearly the Universe is neither or both. Taken as a whole
it falls on neither side of this opposition, and is not com-
prised in either the real or the imaginary world. Both these
worlds on the contrary are contained within the Universe.
So far then as we maintain the hard distinction between
imaginary and real, we can neither say that All is real nor
that All is imaginary. This distinction, and with it the
whole doctrine which we are considering, has proved in-
applicable or mistaken.
Again, let me take the case of my real self. My real self,
-as I am now aware of it, appears to be unique, and in con-
trast with it I have a variety of imaginary selves. Now, if
the doctrine in hand is correct, the difference between my
imaginary selves and my real self does not rest on content.
It must on the other hand somehow consist in mere external
relations. But this conclusion, if in the end it is not sense-
less, seems contrary to what experience here suggests, The
distinction between imaginary and real seems, at least here,
to rest on a felt difference, and, where there is a felt differ-
ence, it is natural to assume a diversity in content. To sup-
pose that my real and imaginary selves are in themselves
interchangeable, and that there issno diversity here except
in that which falls outside each, seems, in the presence
of the actual fact, to be untenable if not unmeaning. Thus,
as applied to the Universe, we found that the doctrine
which we examine proved invalid, while now in the case of
my real and my imaginary self it seems even vicious. +»
But the doctrine without doubt possesses truth, truth not
unlimited but partial. So far as you can abstract from the
diversity of your different worlds, whether real or imaginary,
you can take their contents as merely the same. And toa
certain extent and in many cases it is legitimate and useful
so to abstract. But, while the doctrine taken in this sense
is true, in any other sense it seems not true. It is, first, not


46 ON FLOATING IDEAS CHAP.


true that the content so abstracted is in the strict sense
imaginary. This content on the contrary is so far neither real
nor imaginary. And again it is not true that all the diversity
from which you abstract must consist in something other
than content. You cannot take this diversity as everywhere
something external, which leaves objects unaffected in their
character, For in the end the whole distinction of imaginary
from real fundamentally rests, we shall find, on a difference
in quality. If, to repeat, you abstract from the difference
between the imaginary and the real, you obviously so far
have no difference of any kind between them. But, if on
the other hand the difference between them is to be main-
tained, it must rest in the end on a difference in felt content.

What is the imaginary ?+ This is a question which up to

a certain point we have answered already. The imaginary,
we saw, is not something indifferent, to which reality could
simply be added. The imaginary is qualified by exclusion
from real existence, and apart from that exclusion it loses
its character. And real existence, I have now to urge,
depends on a positive quality.

'. My ‘real world’, we saw, is a construction from my felt
self, It is an inconsistent construction, and it also in the
last resort depends on my present feeling. You may protest
that its basis is really my normal waking self, but in the end
you have no way of distinguishing such a self from the self
which is abnormal. In the end my foundation is and must
be my present self, whatever that happens at the moment to
be. In madness or drunkenness we have the distinction of
imaginary from real, and the distinction seems here to be as.
good as elsewhere. Nay even in dream I may construct

another world which is the environment of my dream-body,
and may oppose to this reality a mere imaginary world.
The basis of the opposition everywhere is, in a word, present
feeling, and one present feeling, if you take reality so, stands


} There are some further remarks in Chap, XII.


Ill AND THE IMAGINARY 47


as high-as another. And the conclusion suggested is that
the above opposition of ‘ real existence’ to ‘ mere imagina-
tion ’ is in the end invalid and breaks down.

But, however arbitrary my procedure, my real world is
taken as that which is continuous with my normal waking
felt self. And it is by exclusion from this real world that
the imaginary is made. Thus if I and a hundred other men
were to dream the same dream, and in somnambulism were
to act from our dreamt world, this world would remain
unreal because not continuous with the world of my self as
normal and waking. By virtue of exclusion from this world
the realm of the imaginary is defined. And it is only at a
stage of mind which is comparatively late that such a division
is made. Thus the gulf fixed between imaginary and real
existence, however necessary and useful it may- be, is at
once arbitrary and novel.

And the points to which I would direct the reader’s atten-
tion are these. (i) The existence of the imaginary depends
upon my real world, and (ii) the existence of my real world
depends on a felt quality.

(i) A content is not made imaginary by mere privation
and through simple failure. If you abstract from all relation
to what is called my real world, you have so far not got the
amine: Abstract truths, for instance, do not express

‘real’ matters of fact, but they fall elsewhere than in the
realm of mere imagination. This realm is made by positive
exclusion from the special world which I call real, And
in a word if you desire to turn ‘imaginary’ into ‘real’,
_you cannot effect this by mere addition. You require also to
subtract the above exclusion, though, this subtraction being
unimportant practically, has been generally ignored.

(ii) And my real world, difference from which and exclu-
sion by which, we have seen, is the essence—on what does
that rest ? It rests on a quality, on a felt content, on that
of which I am aware when I say ‘ this myself which is now ’.


48 ON FLOATING IDEAS CHAP.


I experience this content when I feel the difference between
the mere idea and the actuality of my present self. But it
is intpossible for me to bring this content wholly before me
as an object. With every object I have still the difference
felt between this object and my felt self. And, if this were
not so, the difference and the relation between subject and
object would vanish. And thus what I call my real world,
the world which is made by a construction from my self,
depends in the end on a content, a content not explicit but
positive, not brought before me but felt. If you take away
this content, and the exclusion by this content, then at one
stroke you have removed the characters of both imaginary
and real. And if such a mere felt quality seems but a pre-
carious foundation for our edifice, that is precisely the con-
clusion which I desire to suggest. For what I call my real
world is something other than Reality. It is a-construction,
required for certain ends and true within limits, but beyond
those limits more or less precarious, negligible, and in the
end invalid.1

‘The imaginary then is made by exclusion from my real
world. It rests in the last resort on a felt difference from
a felt unique quality, and this, I apprehend, is a difference


1 It is useless to insist that my real world is real because it is the world
where we all meet really through the real connexions of our real bodies.
For, as was remarked above, in my dreams my own dream-body possesses
its world of things and of other persons; and this order of things, while
I dream, is real to myself. Nay an indefinite number of persons might, for
all we know, dream a world of identical content, in which each with a
difference occupied his proper place. And if you ask for the criterion by
which tq decide between my dreamt and my waking worlds, something
more is required than a mere arbitrary choice. You are led in the end to
find that the superiority of my waking world lies in its character, in the
greater order and system which it possesses and effects. But, with this,
the hard division has turned into a question of degree, and this question
once raised will tend to carry us still further.

I may remark in passing that the real world is by some writers defined
so exclusively, that whatever is perceptible but to one person becomes
unreal, But obviously any man might under individual conditions have.
an experience which would not be shared by others, and which would
yet belong to the order of events in the real world of fact.


ul . AND THE IMAGINARY 49


in content. Such a result, I admit, entails difficulties which
I do not here discuss. But, if we reject it, we seem forced
to conclusions which to my mind are far less tolerable.
For I cannot see how things or orders of things are to be
distinct, if they are not different, or what in the end can be
meant by a relation which is merely external.

The difference between the real and imaginary thus rests
in the end upon content. So far as you abstract from the
difference, the content of both worlds is obviously the same.
For many purposes the abstraction is permissible and useful,
but it is not everywhere valid. And so the doctrine of
_the identity in content between real and imaginary has

but partial truth. When you take the instance of the Uni-
verse or again of my real self, the doctrine proves inapplicable
or vicious.

We have hence been led once more to the main theme of
this chapter. The difference between my world of fact and
my other worlds is important and necessary, but the exag-
gerated value we often tend to attach to it is really illusory.
Its pretensions are in practice refuted incessantly by ex-
perience of other kinds. And, when we examine its theo-


retical claim to possess ultimate truth, we find that this is |


founded on arbitrariness, is built up in inconsistency, and
ends in obscurity. The difference for us between real and
unreal is vital. This can hardly consist in a division founded
on felt quality condemned for ever to be latent, and, while
seeking for another foundation, we found none which is
intelligible. Hence this difference, vital for us, must be
sought and be discovered elsewhere. It must depend on
the internal character of those various worlds which claim
our allegiance. And our impassable gulf and our hard and


fast division will have to give way to degree and to differ- .


ences in value.


? On the nature of the imaginary compare Chap. XII, and on the ‘ real
world ’ see further in Chapters XIV and XVI.
1574 E


c


50 ON FLOATING IDEAS CHAP.


III. { vanlaue teas to discuss briefly the meaning of play
in its contrast With earnest, and to remark on the mistaken
view that play is essentially concétned with the imaginary.
The following pages will be found, I hope, still to be more
or less concerned with our main subject, since the discussion
of these topics will tend once more to break down the divi-
sions erroneously forced into life. We ghall again discover
the mistakes which follow from any attempt to sunder the
human world, to divide things from ideas, to identify the
real with matter of fact, or to set apart somewhere by itself
a superior realm of earnest.

What is play? It is activity, we may say, so far as
that is felt to be unconstrained.1 And hence the activity
must in the first place be pleasant. It must be enjoyed
and exercised for its own sake, and, so far as it is mere play,
it must not be felt as subject to any sort of control. In
play I have nothing which I do or seek because I am forced
from the outside, because I am driven by desire, or because
there is a valuable end which I pursue and which thus is
able to dictate. Play is therefore mere amusement, and,
so far as it remains mere play, it owns no master but
caprice. In playing I realize myself not only apart from
the compulsion of force or appetite, but as free from any-
thing that could define. ard so limit and constrain me.
Play is thus incompatible with foreign control, and again
it is further opposed to earnest. Where you have something
that is valuable and that matters, you have so far no play,
or rather you have no play here except within restraint and
limits. For, wherever I am in earnest, my activity is


*


1 The reader will observe that I am not-attempting to deal with the
subject of play generally. Neither its origin, nor its varieties, nor its
position in the whole of animal and human life can be touched on here.
And again from the point of view of education I am not offering to say
a word. Even if space allowed it, I am not competent to speak on the
whole subject, and the reader must be referred to works such as those

= of Prof. Groos. I am concerned here with the sense of play, and with
play as we experience it in contrast with earnest.


ie AND THE IMAGINARY 51


defined by an end. And, even if there is no end outside the
activity, the control is still present. For where my activity
is valuable, its detail is relative to the whole, and its detail
is therefore moré or less subordinate and subject to restraint.
And, so far as I feel this, I lose the sense of mere play and
caprice. Play is thus activity, spontaneous and agreeable
and qualified by the absende of compulsion or earnest.

It may be asked if this contrast is really inherent in the
sense of play. The opposition to earnest, it may be objected,
need exist nowhere except in the spectator’s mind. There
is natural activity which bursts forth apart from any sense
of limit and restraint. Such activity we can find everywhere
in the young, and we may even imagine it, if we please, as
existing in a perfect mind. And here, it will be said, there
is a sense of freedom and of self-assertion and of play, un-
coloured by any feeling of contrast or restraint. But the
above objection turns, I think, upon a question of words.
I fully agree that there is such a sense of spontaneous
activity, but, apart from a felt contrast, I could not myself
call it an experience of play. And at any rate I propose
here to use the word otherwise. Where there is play, felt
as play, I shall suppose the more or less remote contrast
with a more or less withdrawn earnest. I shall assume the
presence of a more or less specidied sense of something, more
or less prominent or in the background, which is felt as
control or limit. Restraint, whether as what is forced on

_me or as what matters, I shall take therefore as a necessary
element implied in play. But in what follows I shall confine ~
myself to the consideration of play as limited not my force
but by earnest.

If you ask what is earnest and what matters, then in the
end it is life as a whole which matters. Every pleasant
activity therefore is so far good, and all matters because
and so far as it realizes the main end. But on the other

hand within the contents of this whole there are degrees of

E2


52 ON FLOATING IDEAS CHAP,


necessity and of importance. In general or in particular,
against something that either is indispensable or that matters
more, some aspect of life may be unimportant. And any
aspect which thus relatively does not matter, can be felt
here and now not to matter at all. Here is the province of
play in its contrast with earnest. Where there is activity
which as a whole or in its detail is thus relatively of no
moment, we have a limited sphere of caprice and amusement
and, in a word, of play.

But there is no hard division in life between play and
earnest, and there is in short no genuine human end which in
principle excludes play. The absolute separation in life of
optional and necessary, of play and work, leads essentially
to error. And the error is palpable where everything except
maintenance of life is identified with play. Certainly my
bare subsistence is an end which may be said to come first,
because everything in life is lost if there is no more living.
But on the other hand a mere living which is not good itself
or for the sake of something good, is neither necessary nor
desirable. Work for the sake of work and practice for
practice’ sake are, in fact, ends which no one apart from
illusion could accept.?

And generally the sundering of life into spheres of work
and spheres of play is indefensible. It is true that in life
there are things which are everywhere necessary. There is
a certain amount of physical well-being and a certain degree
of mental and moral development which are fundamental.
Human life is impossible except on this basis of individual
and social virtue. But beyond this common basis are those
special stations in social life the occupation of which is more
or less a matter of choice. And further there are non-social


1 What Prof. Taylor has well called ‘the Gospel of Drudgery ’ is still
too much with us. But labour without joy in labour is no moral end. It
is a necessity, tolerable, if at all, only for the sake of something else. And,
preached as in itself a duty, it is nothing short of inhuman nonsense
and cant.


Ili AND THE IMAGINARY 53


modes of human self-realization which in a sense are higher
and in a sense are still more optional. They are optional in
the sense that deprived of them life could be lived, and that
with regard to them the individual has a right and a duty to
choose. But on the other hand to treat these higher functions
as mere play would be obviously absurd.1 We have in the
next place what may be called the minor graces of life,
things the detail of which is more or less variable at our
pleasure. And finally we end in what are called amusements.
Here, where the amusement is mere amusement, the detail
is optional. It has no value in itself, but is desirable solely
for the sake of its effect on human welfare.

Play may be called necessary in the sense that without
play human life is not fully realized, and hence we may
speak of a general duty and obligation to play. But on the
other hand the obligation stops short of prescribing the
details, which in the main are left to our pleasure. Hence
we may find here the merely optional, which we may oppose
to the merely necessary, and may forget that neither of these’
in abstraction and by itself is a human end. In short to
identify the barely necessary with that which matters and
is to be taken in earnest, is in principle indefensible. You
cannot in life make a hard division into separate spheres
of work and play, for play in a word exists everywhere so far
as I am able to play there.

I will point out briefly first how in principle every human
activity admits of play, and in the next place how more or
less all plays? in a sense are serious pursuits. ,

(i) It is possible first to take a serious pursuit and to amuse
myself with it. I may, that is, occupy myself with this
activity just so far as it amuses me, and I may treat it as
something which, for me, falls outside of what really matters.

1 In connecting fine art with the play-impulse it is easy, I may remark
in passing, to fall into serious error,


* This use of the plural is adopted solely for the reader’s convenience
and I hope on that ground may be excused,


54 ON FLOATING IDEAS CHAP,


In comparison with other things the pursuit has no serious
claim on me. I am not in earnest with it, I may do with
it as I please, and in a word I may play with it. But to
distinguish here between mere trifling on one side, and on
the other side interests which are serious though limited, is
often impossible. There are again interests with which, in
the case of this or that man or of every man, no trifling is
permissible. But, without attempting further explanation,
it is safe to conclude that within limits it is possible and
right to play at a serious pursuit. What, however, I here
desire to insist on is this, that in principle every human
activity, however grave and even sacred, admits of some
play. Play is here the expression of certain conquest and of
absolut$ mastery over detail. And this joyous aspect is
wholly absent from work only where, as too often happens,
the.conditions are inhuman. The most serious aspects of
human life admit of play in this sense. In religions, not
one-sided, there is an element of merry-making and sport,
such as comes naturally with a sense of full security and
triumph. And the morality which ignores the charm of
sportive well-doing, has lost sight of the full ideal of
human goodness. To trifle with a principle, to make it
the sport of mere self-will,1 is forbidden. It is another
thing to be filled with an implicit sense of relative value,
and in the service of a higher principle to enjoy its triumph
over the fixed detail and limits of human duties. This is
a gracious element seldom absent from the highest wisdom
and love.

(ii) There is no serious pursuit, we have seen, which in
principle excludes play. And on the other hand play hardly
can maintain complete severance from earnest. Mere amuse-
ments, it appeared, as general amusement are necessary
for our welfare, and in most cases perhaps they are more
than mere amusements. Plays may advance some social


} In other words, to make game of it.


I AND THE IMAGINARY 55


end, or may develop some individual faculty which in its
effects or in itself is really valuable. They tend in other
words, so far, to pass into useful performances, or into ac-
complishments worth having because adding to the sum of
human perfection. And again from another side plays are
something more than mere playing. They are subject in
each case to special restraint by the rule of the game. They
are limited not only by a more or less specified world of -
earnest, but they become in various degrees defined in them-
selves. And so far as in playing you must not trifle with
the rule of the game, your playing has taken on a feature
of earnest.

Plays contain usually a large element of chance and
caprice, but apart from that, as plays, they keep essentially
the following character. They have no individual worth,
their detail in itself does not matter, and one of them: has, -
in itself as against the others, no value at all. You are
therefore, so far, free to choose amongst them at your —
caprice. If one of them is your best way of playing, that
one has special value for you. But, on the other side, its
value is generic merely, and it has worth only as a means to
‘ anend. In this point plays differ from accomplishments,
which have value so far as they each contribute individually
to human perfection. Plays on the other hand, so far as
mere plays, have no end but a general end which falls out-
side of all taken individually. And where this principle is
ignored, and where the rule of the game perhaps gains more
than a conventional value, we are too familiar with the
result, Plays are perverted into the serious pursuits of life)
the moral perspective is distorted or destroyed, and the effect
on life is, according to circumstances, more or less injurious
or even ruinous. The above distinction, however, between
mere plays and accomplishments, though clear in principle,
is often in practice not easy to maintain.

Play is any activity in life so far as that is agreeable, is


56 ON FLOATING IDEAS CHAP.


unconstrained, and is felt here and now not to matter.
Play is not in principle excluded, we have seen, from any
aspect of life, And when we come to mere amusements which
exist for the sake of playing, they tend, as we have seen, to
develop a character, too often perverted, of work and earnest.
There is in short no natural separation of life into spheres
of necessary work and of mere play. And, when we con-
sider these extremes, we find that, differing otherwise, they
share the same essential feature. Neither has its end in
itself, neither contributes, individually and in itself, a special
element to human value. Each on the contrary is desirable
solely for the sake of an effect, particular or general, which
it produces. ,
- The division of human existence into spheres of necessary
work and of optional play leads therefore, when developed,
to confusion and absurdity. The world of play turns out
to be the only world which a man could seriously desire,
and the world of earnest, when you examine it, proves to
be that which by itself has no importance or value. Every-
thing which possesses human interest becomes mere play,
‘while the residue could be an end only for irrational caprice.
Any such view breaks down at once when confronted with
the facts of actual life. Thus a stage-play, to take that
instance, is even to the spectator not mere playing, while to
the actor it is the serious business of life. It is not merely
the work by which he-lives, but it is the main end of his
being, the special function by which he at once contributes
to humanity and realizes himself. On-the other side the
necessity of living is no real necessity, unless the life, which.
in oneself or others it subserves, is really desirable. A mere


1 If I play because I am compelled to play, that, so far, and while the
sense of compulsion lasts, is not playing. And we must even say the same
thing where I play because of a want to play. My playing, that is, to the
extent to which, in general or in particular detail, it is felt to be necessary
to the satisfaction of a want, so far is not mere playing. But of course the
detail of play is seldom felt to be thus necessary, and obviously the feeling
tends, if the activity lasts, to disappear. :


III AND THE IMAGINARY 57


inhuman subsistence and an empty practice are (I would
repeat) things which, except through an illusion, no one
could take in earnest.

Play, we have thus seen, is one aspect of life. It is, or in
principle it may be, everywhere present. The division of life
into spheres of work and play may be most important and
even necessary, but any such division after all is not absolute
but relative. If you take it otherwise it becomes. an error
which even practically may have bad results, and which
theoretically cannot fail to be more or less injurious. It is.
parallel to the separation of the world into real and imagin-
ary, matter of fact and mere ideas. And it proves, when we.
consider it, to be another offshoot of the same fundamental
error. It will, I think, tend further to illustrate the same

‘theme if I add some words on the supposed connexion of
make-believe with play.


Play has been held to contain essentially the presence of
make-believe and illusion. It has been alleged in short to
depend upon a sense of the imaginary in its contrast with the
real. This doctrine to my mind is in such obvious collision
with plain fact, that I think it better to begin by asking how
it can come to be adopted. And there is (i) the undoubted
presence of make-believe in some playing. This feature,
having been wrongly generalized and taken as essential, is
then postulated in spite of appeararice as existing every-
where. We have again (ii) the so-called imitative actions
in young animals, These, or many of these, it is natural to
call playing. And our minds are thus insensibly led to
regard such actions as performed in imitation and with
a consciousness of unreality. And (iii) there is finally the
.more or less specified sense of limitation and restraint,
which, we have seen, is essentially involved in. playing.
Hence, where the erroneous division of the world into im-
aginary and real is accepted, the former of these tends to be


58 ON FLOATING IDEAS CHAP.


taken as that which in playing is limited by the latter. Thus
we conclude that in play we essentially have a sense of the
imaginary as opposed to matter of fact. We shall realize
both the character and the extent of this mistake when we
ask as to the nature of that restraint which, we agree, is
present in play.

But it is better first to illustrate briefly the collision of the -
above doctrine with fact. When two young dogs are chasing
one another or biting, when boys let out of school behave in
much the same manner, when a man aimlessly strikes at this
or that with his stick, or falls into some other trifling activity
where, as we say, he has nothing to do—it seems obvious
that make-believe here has no concern in the matter. And
‘when we take part in the athletic pastimes of boyhood or

“manhood, and play at hockey, football or cricket, or again
".at such games as cards or chess—how can it be seriously
maintained that illusion is present always and essentially ?
The opposite. conclusion, to my mind at least, seems too
clear for argument. When for example I play at cricket,
what am I pretending to do other than the thing which I
do? An outsider doubtless can insist that everywhere we
have a mimic battle of this or that kind, but the mimicry
surely exists only in the mind of the outsider, and for my
mind, as I play, has no existence at all. And if it is objected
that in play we have a sense of limit, and that the restraint
must come from a sense of the real as against the imaginary,
that brings me to the point which I wish to discuss. On the
one hand I agree that in play we have some sense of limit,
but on the other hand I urge the absence in many cases of
anything like make-believe. And I will proceed to show the
real nature of that restraint which seems everywhere present
in play. .

In many cases of play the restraint, we may say in a word,
is not theoretical but moral. Consider the natural sporting of
a young dog or a child. There are certain natural activities


I AND THE IMAGINARY 59


which in themselves are pleasant. To bite, for instance,
or to struggle or run is delightful. But—and here is the
point—with my playfellow I must not bite beyond a limit.
Tf I go too far and hurt my playfellow the result is unpleasant,
unless indeed I am angry and want to fight and am not
afraid to do so. Hence I exercise my delightful activities
so as to stop short of that result. I need not be thinking
of this all the time, but any approach to excess brings on
what is discordant with my pleasant condition, both in my
own mind and perhaps palpably outside my mind also.
Such a result is felt to be incongruous, and, as soon as
it is suggested, it suppresses the excess of the activity. If
the reader will observe a young dog gnawing the flesh of his
hand and watching him to observe if the line is at any time
crossed, he will, I think realize my meaning. There is ab-
solutely no illusion here, but there is restraint, a restraint
which later may be formulated as the rule of the game. On
the other hand when a dog exercises his activity on a stick,,
the rule of the game, we may say, is simply that he is not to
hurt himself.4 .
Tt may be objected that so far we have not the distinction
between play and earnest. But so far, I reply, I am en-
deavouring merely to establish the presence of restraint


1 It is surely only through a course of actual experiment that an animal,
such as a young dog, learns how hard he may bite in play. And I should
have added that, in the case of a dog, part of the course consists in his
biting himself, Dr. McDougall (Social Psychology, p. 111) objects to the
account in the text that it is impossible because it implies ‘ deliberate
self-restraint ’—which in a young animal does not exist. I venture to hope
that to the reader it will be even obvious that nothing of the kind really
is implied, and that the objection rests on the merest misunderstanding.

What Dr. McDougall’s own view is, and whence according to him comes
the difference of a dog’s behaviour when he plays with another dog and
then again with a stick, I have not been able to understand, His whole
account here seems to myself to have fallen to such a low level that
‘I feel bound in justice to him to suppose that on this subject I have failed
to follow him, Whether some such supposition on his side also, where I
am concerned, would not have been prudent, I will leave to the reader
to decide. ;


60 ' QN FLOATING IDEAS CHAP.


without illusion. I am pointing out that the limit to pleasant
activity may be, in a word, not theoretical but moral. And
this result still holds, I now go on to urge, where the specific
. “sense of play is clearly present. In cricket, for example, or
_ in cards I am obviously under restraint, while as obviously,
at least to my mind, there is no trace of make-believe. Un-
less I am a professional or a devotee, I am aware that these
activities are optional. They do not matter in themselves,
and their scope is limited by that in life which really does
matter. And, in the second place, to secure a better exercise
of the activity, it is carried on subject to conventional
restraints. I am, in other words, limited by the rules of the
game, which exclude at once mere trifling and violence, as
well as by the consciousness that, as against what is more
serious, my activity does not matter. This is the nature of
the restraint which, to my mind, is both effective and
obvious. Illusion and make-believe on the other hand I am
unable to discern.

‘ But,’ I shall be told, ‘you are ignoring the play in
which make-believe is obvious. A girl with her doll, a boy
with a wooden sword, are plain instances which confute you.
And the actor in stage-plays, you seem to forget, is called
a player. And to deny here the presence of every kind
of make-believe and illusion is surely irrational.’ To this
TI reply that such a denial is no part of my case. All that
I have been urging so far is that illusion does not belong
essentially or everywhere to play. Playing, on the contrary,
we may now go on to see, is of various kinds. And playing of
one kind undoubtedly involves make-believe. It implies
within limits the treatment of the imaginary as if it were
real. If you take make-believe as the playing at practical
belief, as our acting within limits as if the facts here and now
were qualified, as we know that in fact they are not qualified
—then make-believe, it is obvious, belongs to some play.
But to argue from this that, where I do noé play at believing,


III AND THE IMAGINARY 61


I must pretend in order to play, seems clearly illogical.
Whether in short, and how far, in any play there is iflusion,
depends in each case—that is all I urge—upon the nature
of the play. a3

We have seen that in some play there is no pretence or
illusion. The exercise of the activity involves no excursion
into the imaginary world. But, as can easily be seen
with children, this imaginary element soon appears, and in
playing it occupies a great space, how great I need not
discuss. The perceived facts here do not suffice for the
required activity. They are therefore extended by im-
aginary qualifications, and the activity becomes possible.
And at this point a new kind of restraint and limit can be
observed.

All playing involves a limit, but in some plays this limit,
we saw, was simply what we called moral. Beyond a certain
point, that is, [ must not. But where make-believe comes
in, we find a new sort of control. The child that pretends
in play knows that morally it must not cross a certain line.
But it knows now also that it has an imaginary world, which
is limited by real fact, and again in some cases by con-
ventional suppositions. A schoolboy playing at soldiers
knows first (a) that he must hurt no oné too much, but he
knows also (b) that he is a schoolboy as well as a soldier.
And he knows (c) that, so long as certain conventions are
observed, no consistency is required even in his imaginary
character.

The control, in a word, has become theoretical as well as
moral. The playing dog knows, we may say, that beyond
a certain point he must not. The playing boy knows this
in all his playing, and in some cases he knows no more. But
in other cases he knows also that beyond ’a certain point the
thing is not. He has here a world of imagination, qualifying


1 So of course mutatis mutandis with the girl and her doll, On the above
point the reader may be referred to Prof. Sully’s Human Mind, i. 384.


62 ON FLOATING IDEAS CHAP.


the real world but always subject to and restrained by
that world.t

These two controls, the moral and theoretical, are in
much play so joined and blended that to separate their
several effects would be hard or impossible. In ‘ playing
a part,’ on the stage or again in real life, this intimate
mingling may be observed. We have first of all the letting-
go of certain activities subject to a certain moral restraint.
But we have in addition theentrance, for ourselves or for
others or for both, into the sphere of pretence, make-believe
and illusion. This entrance is limited by our consciousness
of the real fact, and again by conventional rules, wherever
and so far as these exist. And to what extent the control is
before the mind, and how far illusion actually is present, de-
pends in every case upon the conditions and the individual.?

Thus pretence and make-believe do not belong to the
general essence of play. They are obviously present often
where there is no playing and where they are used con-
sciously as means to a serious end. On the other side there


t I do not mean that in playing the moral or theoretical control must
be kept always before my mind. As we saw before, it is enough that
this control should be ready at any moment to come in, and that any
suggestion of excess should at once bring it before me, or at least bring
it into action.

* The amount of actual illusion is said, for instance, to differ widely with
different actors. See Mr. Archer’s well-known collection of facts in his
Masks or Faces. Again flirting, the amatory game, is an instance where
it is not easy to distinguish between the two kinds of control, theoretical
and moral. The amount of illusion or pretence varies widely in various
cases, and in many cases probably amounts to nothing. You may have
simply the letting loose of certain sexual feelings and actions without
pretence or illusion but within a certain moral limit. The beginning of this
is easy to observe, for example, among dogs.

The main essence of the affair is in short not illusion but limit. That is
why (as Prof. Groos rightly observes in The Play of Man, p. 253) we do
not in the same way play at eating, for there short of the satisfaction of
appetite the means are not by themselves sufficiently agreeable. But to
a certain extent, I should say, we may play at eating, for instance at dessert.
And children play thus habitually, I suppose because the real satisfaction

is out of their power. But here of course the i imaginary element comes in
and is important.


11 _. AND THE IMAGINARY 63


are many plays (we have seen) from which illusion certainly
is absent. In other plays again the activity is exercised
within an area more or less qualified as imaginary. Lastly
there are cases where illusion and pretence are not essential,
but where more or less they tend to comein. And the extent
here will be determined. by the individual conditions.


We have found once more that the ready-made division of
our world into matter of fact and ideas, into imaginary and ;
real, has conducted us to error. And we saw that to sunder
life into separate spheres of play and earnest is indefensible.
Life and the world do not admit those compartments which
are blindly fixed by hasty theories. Life and the world
offer us an indefinite number of aspects and distinctions,
and the worth and reality of these is in every case relative,
though, because relative, it may in a given case become
absolute.

This is the general conclusion which, I trust, throughout
this chapter has been suggested as true. That world of fact
which we so confidently contrast with the imaginary, and
which we set up as real, has turned out, when we take it
absolutely, to be false appearance. And in our practice,
_ where we do not sink into convention or worse, we assume

our right to deal freely with such reality, to treat it as of
.secondary moment, or éven, it may be, as illusory. But in
theory this illusion tends to cling to us, to hamper us and
to blind us, when we endeavour to do justice to the various
aspects of life. To be or do anything, we assuredly must
maintain and control our bodies, and we depend on the
world which is immediately continuous with these. Apart
from this foundation we cannot have reality, and with this
foundation we must therefore be in earnest. This is truth,
and it is a truth, I agree, which must not be ignored. But
on the other hand this basis and condition, if you try to take
it by itself, is worthless and in the end it proves unreal. In


64 FLOATING IDEAS AND THE IMAGINARY ci#.u1


truth it is itself a mere imaginary abstraction. The world
of reality, we may say in a word, is the world of values,?
and values are not judged absolutely but are everywhere
measured by degree.


1 T should be willing here to add ‘ of human values ’, so long as ‘ human’
is not understood as ‘merely human’. To use the term ‘humanity’
loosely as covering at once ‘ all finite mind ’ and again ‘ merely some of the
inhabitants of a certain planet’, may, as a support to certain views, be
found convenient or perhaps necessary. But whether such ambiguity is
permissible is of course another question. In this note I find myself
repeating that which in another connexion I had to urge now many years
ago (Ethical Studies, pp. 305-7), and even then, in 1876, the matter was
far from new. On ‘humanity’ see the references in the Index te the
present volume.


CHAPTER IV
ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE


INTRODUCTORY: NOTE


THE following chapter contains the greater part of an article
published in Mind, N.S., No. 51 (July 1904). I have removed
‘the beginning, and later on have made omissions which are noted
each in its own place. Otherwise the article is reprinted unaltered.
What has been left out has been omitted for two reasons. Its
interest in the first place seems to myself to have been ephemeral.
And in the second place, if now republished, it might be taken
as an attack upon writers who at the time were either not in my
mind or who were there more or less incidentally.
The occasion of this paper in Mind was the appearance of
a volume, supposed to represent a movement called Personal
Idealism, together with some periodical writing which I took to
be connected with the same movement. I do not suggest that all
‘the writers in that volume knew beforehand of any movement, '
ot had at any rate much of an idea as to its meaning. And
Personal Idealism, I imagine, if it ever lived, is to-day dead. In
’ its place we have now on one side, I presume, the acceptance,
partial or complete, of Realism and Pluralism, and, on the other
side, we have the tendency to what may be called Irrationalism.
The doctrines which group themselves under the name of Pragma- °
tism will fall: more or less under each of these heads. Their best
exposition is, perhaps, to be found in the-works of Prof. Dewey
and his followers. These writers, as well as Prof. James, I have
never hesitated to criticize ; but I should be sorry indeed to give
_ the idea that I associate any of them in my mind with anything
that is not wholly creditable.

Both in the present chapter and in later pages of this volume
the reader will find some criticisms on Pragmatism. My difficulty
with regard to this doctrine has remained insuperable. And the
difficulty arises, I cannot but think, at least in part from real

1574 F


66 “ ON RUTH AND PRACTICE : CHAP.
+ *
obscurities, obscurities which, if removed; would unmask “radical
incoherence. I cannot, that is, believe that so-called Pragmatists
are really of one mind either as to what they’ assert or as to what
they wish to deny. They are agreed, I suppose, in opposition to
Intellectualism—whatever that may be; but, while some of
them apparently desire to emphasize the importance and the
claim of the individual person as against the Whok, others on
the contrary appear at least to lean in the. opposite Girection.
And even the degradation of theory and of fine grt to the level of
. mere instruments seems not to be, after all, a necessary tenet.
In short, a gospel of Practice where no one knew, and (I had,
almost written) no one was to know, what Practice means, has,
produced its natural result. The disciples fogthe most part see
with different eyes, wherever, that is, they are not simply blind.

A point where all Pragmatists appear to be agreed i is this, that
at least their doctrine is new ; for, whatever else it is, it cértainly
is preached as revolutionary. But agreement is easier where.
one does not know in what a gospel really consists. “I will tleére-
fore proceed to offer some brief remarks both on the meaning of
-Pragmatism and on its asserted novelty. For further explanation

- I would refer the reader to later pages of this volume (Chap. V
and Appendices).

x. Pragmatism might have meant something which, if carried
out systematically, would, so far as Iam aware, be new. It might
have taken truth to be mere working ideas,? and human interests
in their entirety it might have taken as the one end, and as the
criterion of knowledge and reality. It might have set these,

‘2 T am of course aware that Prof. James stated that there was nothing
new about the Pragmatic method. But all I would add is this, that, if the
statement in the text is sof true, the whole attitude of Prof. James, and

tstill more that of some of his followers, seems to have become inexplicable.
But see Chap. V (Appendix 1).

2 Such a position would, however, not entaildownright Instrumentalism, so
long as the pursuit and possession of truth is itself allowed to be an intrinsic
human interest. Allthat such a position is called on to deny, is the existence
of a bitin 2 ef truth which is intrinsic and supreme. The criterion of”
truth, that is, would lie in its contribution to the aggregate of human
interests, and, as so contributing, truth might be allowed a value beyond
that of an external means or instrument. I am not, however, suggesting
that by taking the aggregate of human interests as our end it is possible
to reach a consistent view. So far as we keep to a mere collection we are


without any principle of order. There are some further remarks on
Instrumentalism below, see p. 68. Cf. also Appendix I to Chap. V.


Iv INTRODUCTORY NOTE 67


Co


interests out fully, and not merely at the dictation of prejudice
and caprice, and might have made them, severally and again
collectively, and perhaps evén in an order, the test everywhere
of truth and value, in science, in art, and in morals and religion.

Such a work would-indeed be welcome, and, so far.as E‘know, it
has not been accomplished. But obviously this is not the task
which Pragntatism has even attempted. Obviously Pragmatism,
I should say, has néver even faced the above problem in earnest,
and much less has it, ever applied itself to reach a satisfactory
‘solution. But for a justification of this statement &must refer to
= later part of this volumet , ~

** From this pomt, on which misunderstanding is only too
prevalent, I will pags on to deal with some questions of detail.

2, We find in Pragmatism the conception of Society as an
‘organism, a living body in which and of which the individual i8
a niember and a“function—an organism which of coursesdevelops
in time. And I have been led té suppose that there are Pragma-
tists who believe that we really owe the above idea to Pragmatism.
But such a writer as Prof. Dewéy would, I cannot doubt, inform
such persons (if they exist) that any notion of the kind is baseless.’
And he would teli*them again that there is nothing new in the
same idea of organic development as applied to Humanity.

' But, this being admitted, it may be said that the real point is:
.the position which Pragmatism gives to Humanity. The novelty
achieved by Pragmatism perhaps resides in the way in which it
takes the relation between Humanity and the Universe. This
is, however, a claim which the outsider is hardly in a position to
examine. The question as to exactly how far Humanity is and
is not to be identified with Reality, seems certainly vital. To
discuss, for instance, the nature of truth when you are ignorant.
as to your answer to such a question, appears, to me at least, to
be futile. But the Pragmatist to myself has seemed content to
meet challenges on this point by an attitude of prudent obscurity,
And I must be allowed to conclude that he is obscure, here because
he is insolvent, but that, if he were forced to speak, Whatever


+ Chap. V (Appendix I). So far as I know Prof. James never even raised
the question whether, and how far, truth is compelled to forgo self-
consistency. He appears to have simply assumed that truth must be
consistent. But here surely is a problem that should have met him, and
should have been even obvious, from the first,

F2


68 _ ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE CHAP.


answer he gave would most certainly not be novel. Nor again,
I think, is there any answer which, if stated intelligibly, would
be accepted by all Pragmatists.

3. But the organic evolution of Humanity, it may be said, as
previously understood was teleological, and the banishment of
all idea of End is the novelty brought in by Pragmatism. But
surely, after all these years of Darwinism—not to mention the
earlier preaching of the ‘mechanical’ view—such a claim, if
made, would be monstrous. It would be different if, after having
removed from organic development the aspect of Good or End,
Pragmatism could point to what it offers to set in the place of
that idea. But it cam offer nothing, so far as I see, that is not
old and familiar. The doctrine that there is no end except what

- happens, that whatever happens is true and right and good, or at
least that there is no sense in asking, about anything else that
might have happened, if it really would have been better—such
a doctrine surely, whatever else it is, would not be new. And
to take the old idea of the organic development of Humanity,
and merely to couple this with the old denial of any Human End,
would hardly pass, I should imagine, as an original achievement.

4. Nor, once again, can I find anything new in the idea of
Instrumentalism. The degradation of philosophy, science and
fine art, to the rank of mere means, subserving an end falling
outside themselves, is surely nothing novel. And we do not
even gain a new attitude if, while denying intrinsic value to these
things, we forget to ask what it is that, lying outside them, has
itself intrinsic worth.

There is, indeed, a sense in which Instrumentalism, though
not novel, would, ‘as I think, be tenable. Everything in the
world or in our life can, that is, be regarded as a means. No
element apart from all the rest will retain its value, and each
therefore, we may say, has worth only in so far as it conduces
to the welfare of the Whole. But on the other hand the value of
the Whole is not separable from that of its diverse aspects, and in
‘the end, apart from any one of them, it is reduced to nothing.
In the above sense Instrumentalism, I should say, is true, so long
as you emphasize the fact that everything alike (though not to the
same degree) is an instrument, and so long as you insist that there
is nothing in life which, viewed otherwise, has value. The instru- °
ment in other words is such, only because it is not taken as a means


Iv INTRODUCTORY NOTE 69


to some end which fails to include itself as intrinsic and valuable.
But surely Instrumentalism, asserted in the above sense, would
be equivalent to its own denial. ‘ Instrumentalism’ in other
words, unless it is to be a misleading misnomer, should imply
in principle and throughout the acceptance of Mechanism. But,
so far as I see, considerations of this kind are ignored by
Pragmatism. ;

5. I do not know if any Pragmatist seriously takes his school
to have originated the Primacy of Will. Any such claim would
of course ignore the existence both of Fichte and Schelling,? and
it would be another proof, where unfortunately no other proof is
wanted, that to our general public even such a writer as Schopen-
hauer remains unknown. And as for the idea that the pursuit of
truth and knowledge implies a desire for these objects, it is
a doctrine in which Pragmatists, like the rest of us, were or might
have been brought up. If one had perhaps not learnt it before,
one might at least have learnt it from Hegel.

6. My attitude remains the same in presence of the denial of
idle or useless truths, and the assertion that a truth apart from
its wotking is not true. If this is Pragmatism, then surely Hegel
was long ago the Pragmatist par excellence, and I doubt if any
one who knows the facts would venture to deny this. The general
view, which others and myself may be said to have inherited, is
this—that the criterion lies in the idea of system. An idea is true
theoretically because, and so far as, it takes its place in, and
contributes to, the organism of knowledge. And, on the other
hand, an idea is false of which the opposite holds good. How can
there be any question here of separating an idea from its conse:
quences ? How could a true idea possibly make no difference to

‘anything else? Of course, if, and so far as, consequences are

identified with the consequences which are practical, the case
- is altered. But as long as we do not know what words like
‘ practical’, ‘action’, and ‘ working’ are to mean, any claim
to novelty here must remain ambiguous.

With regard to what is called verification the same remark
holds good. The necessity for, and again the ambiguity of,
verification, were topics for discussion long before any Pragma-
tist began to utter his boasts. What is to verify ? Is it to find
the object of an idea as a sensible event ? Is it to envisage an

1 T refer specially to the latter’s treatise on. Human Freedom.


70 ‘ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE CHAP.


ideal content clearly and convincingly, or to experience coercion
from ideas and their relations? Is it to show that an idea, taken
for true, makes the body of our knowledge at once wider and more
0; sistent, ? To maintain that insistence on verification dn any
of the above senses is a new thing, would be surely to show oneself
grossly misinformed. The only real novelty left to Pragmatism
is the claim to verify truth by its practical results. But here we
‘have’$nce more-on our hands the question as to what ‘ practice’
is tomean. And any serious attempt to define ‘ practice’, would,
or should, rend asunder the Pragmatist church. Such leaders,
at least, as the late Prof. James and Dr. Dewey appear on this
vital point to teach doctrines which are in radical conflict.2

It may perhaps be instructive if we allow ourselves here to
digress and go back to a writer whose work-on certain topics it
is teo much the fashion to ignore. More than half a century
ago Prof. Bain made belief consist in practice. The difference
between, having a mere idea and holding it for true, lay, according
to him, in our practical action on and from the idea. Now if,
starting from Bain’s view, we go on (as he did not) to write truth
for belief, we have what I took to be the essence of Pragmatism.
Judgement and truth are the practical working out of an idea by
me, and they are nothing else at all. Whether in this interpre-
tation I was mistaken or was right, is a point to which I will
return, but with regard to Bain I argued long ago that his doctrine
cannot stand.? It is in conflict with fact, and it is not even held
consistently by himself. And what I find instructive is this, that
Prof. James and Dr. Dewey have repeated Bain’s inconsis-
tency. Unconscious apparently both of his doctrine and of the
objections brought against it, they are forced by the same false
principle to the same vicious precedure.

In maintaining that belief consisted in practical action Bain
had to face the fact that we sometimes believe in an idea on
which we do not act. He answered that here, if we do not act,
we at least, if called on, should do so. This he called ‘ prepared-
ness to act ’, and he considered that by this distinction his theory
was saved. To the obvious objection that one cannot at discretion
identify the possible with the actual, he, so far as I am aware,

idid not attempt to reply. The truth is that unless permitted,


1 For evidence of this the reader is referred to Chap. V (Appendix I),
2 Principles of Logic (1883), pp. 18 fi,


Iv INTRODUCTORY NOTE a


wherever they please, to treat mere possibilities as actual fact,
while never so much as asking what is meant by ‘ possible ’, Bain
and J. S. Mill, together with their whole school, are in principle
bankrpt.t .

And, apparently unaware of this open pitfall, Prof. James
and Dr. Dewey seek to escape from a like difficulty by the same
misleading road. In presence of ideas which do not actually
issue in practice, they take refuge in some prospective or potential
action, assisting themselves with what I must venture to call
mythology or verbiage. The evidence for this fact is given later,”
and I will leave the reader, if satisfied as to the fact, to draw
the appropriate conclusion.

To pass from this inconsistency, I shall be told that Pragma-
tism does not identify truth with the idea which works best for
the individual, and that hence the following chapter, or much of
it, does not bear on Pragmatism. I fully accept the statement,
of fact made on this point by Prof. James,® but in the matter
of principle I remain unconvinced. For, if Pragmatism repudiates
the doctrine that the idea which most works practically in and
for the individual is true, the question is what foundation, and
whether any foundation at all, is left to Pragmatism. On this
essential point I have failed to gain assistance from either
Dr. Dewey or Prof. James. The idea that works ‘ on the whole ’
may, so far as I see, conflict with the idea which works in and for
me. And for the subordination of one of these aspects to the
other I can find no reason in principle. The conflict might indeed
be avoided by an external coincidence which everywhere occurs
between these two aspects. But the assertion or postulation of
such a coincidence I cannot attribute to either of the writers
mentioned. ; :

What on the other hand I find is an apparent difference between
these two leaders, which, if developed, would lead, so far as I can
judge, to open schism. Dr. Dewey, I understand, stoutly holds
to Instrumentalism, to the denial of intrinsic worth to theory,
and he still maintains the principle that the idea which works
practically is the truth. Prof. James on the contrary ended


1 I had to make the same criticism on the same fallacy in connexion
with the doctrine of pleasure taught by Bain, Mind, O.S., No. 47, p. 18.
I have had to return to this same point again later,

2 Chap, V (Appendix I). | 3 Ibid.


92 ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE CHAP.


(however he began) by using ‘ practice’ as a mere general name
for the Good, by the allowing of intrinsic value to theory, and
perhaps also to fine art, and in short he seems implicitly to
repudiate Instrumentalism, however vague and “inconsistent
that repudiation may be.* Even on the word ‘ practical’ he
apparently ceased to lay any emphasis.1 And whether on these
heads there is not an actual split between his doctrine and that
held by Dr. Dewey, the reader must judge. And, like myself,
he may be led to wonder what, if Pragmatism meant no more
than it meant at last to Prof. James, has become of Pragmatism.
If theory after all, as theory, is ‘ practical’, and, as theory, has
intrinsic value, the revolutionary Pragmatic Church seems to
have been built on something like self-imposture. On the other
hand, if strict Instrumentalism remains the orthodox creed, then
apparently Prof. James, and those who follow him, have ceased
really to be Pragmatists. But perhaps Dr. Dewey, who fortu-
nately is still with us, can show how all this is otherwise.

g. Further, Pragmatism, it may be urged, lays an emphasis
on the genetic, on the historical, side of things. The intellectual
aspect of human nature is, it insists, to be understood, like every
other aspect, apart from abstraction. Knowledge is to be viewed
as it arises inseparably intertwined with every other factor in
human development.? Philosophy must be studied, in short, from
the point of view of history or psychology. New I am sure that
such a contention is both useful and welcome, though its claim to be
novel, I confess, surprises me. This is, however, a quéstion which
I will leave to others, better informed, to discuss. But that such
a view is to be identified with Pragmatism to myself seems
incredible. For a doctrine like the above is surely as easy to
understand and to state plainly, as it is difficult to apply and to

‘carry out in detail; while on the other side the inability of
Pragmatism, so far, to make its position generally understood,
seems even admitted. And again, whatever else it is, Pragma-
tism claims to be the denial in principle and the supersession
in practice of the mass of previous philosophy. The real essence

1 The reader is referred specially to The Meaning of Truth, pp. 206-11.
The strength of the language used there by Prof. James suggests to my
mind some awareness on his part of the weakness of his case, Cf, Chap. V
(Appendix I).

2 ‘Tl y aura,’ Balzac has said, ‘toujours de l’homme dans la science
humaine.’ ;


Iv wINTRODUCTORY NOTE 73


then of Pragmatism is perhaps to deny that there is anything
in truth, in beauty, and even perhaps in reality at large, ‘except
its appearance in human development. Nothing, in other words,
is at all except as, and just as far as, it occurs as a human event.
The inconsistency and irrationality tf such a view, when you
-work it out, soon becomes obvious, and Pragmatism has naturally
here preferred to remain obscure and ambiguous. Still that in
such a position, if it were made clear, there would be anything
new is not easily credited.1


I would end by repeating that which I remarked at the begin-
ning. Pragmatism seems a collection of various tendencies, in
part inconsistent one with the other, and to a large extent left
undefined. In the minds of some of its exponents it seems
identified with. blind reaction against other views, themselves
imperfectly understood. Pragmatism, so far as it is positive,
seems to be not so much a doctrine as the expression of a desire,
or rather of two separate desires or half-conscious- drifts. The
one of these seeks perhaps to find a consistent philosophy of
Darwinism, while the other aims perhaps to reach a view which
will be just to every side of man’s nature and will satisfy the
entirety of human interest. But whether these two ends conflict
or are in harmony, Pragmatism does not know, and does not
inquire.

There is an opportunity here, I think a great opportunity, for
the Pragmattst who is willing, and who is able, to go to work
radically and systematically. Such a man will have in the first
place to be in earnest with scepticism, and he must know enough
” to be able to understand what a thorough scepticism means. And
he will have learnt to distrust his own prejudices, even when
directed against that which he is pleased to call Intellectualism
and Absolutism. But whatever else he may discover, such a man
will most assuredly find that he himself is face to face with the old
question, the unavoidable problem, What is Reality ?


The following article, I have. already intimated, if taken as
a. criticism on what is called Pragmatism, is in some points not
defensible. In it Pragmatism is too much identified with Personal


1 For a discussion on Genetic Theory in Logic the reader may be referred
to Prof.-Bosanquet’s Logic (Ed. I1), vol. ii, chap. vii.


hy ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE CHAP. IV


Idealism, as I understood that movement, and is assumed to be
a kind of individualistie voluntarism. But neither individualism
nor’even perhaps voluntarism seems to be a necessary feature
of Pragmatism. I should now doubt if there is a single docjrine
which a Pragmatist is called on to hold, so long at least a® he
abjures Intellectualism—whatever (I once more add) that may
mean. In this introductory note, and in later chapters, the
reader will find, I hope, a more correct treatment of Pragmatism. *
But I have judged it. better (except for omissions mentioned) to
reprint my old article. It’contains matter which, I believe, may
be useful to the reader, and it is even, I still think, a refutation of
the principle of Pragmatism, if,.that is, we are able to suppose
that Pragmatism has any principle. And for various reasons
I have not cared to re-write it. I will add here the greater part
of what was the footnote to its opening sentence:


This paper was written in the early summer of 1903, and has
been ieft much as it was. I have, however; since that date made
acquaintance with the interesting volume called Studies im Logical |
Theory. There is much in the position taken here by Prof. Dewey
and the other writers which seems to me to be suggestive and
valuable. On the other hand that position as a whole has not:
become clear tome. I agree that there is no such existing thing
as pure thought. On the other side, if in the end there is to be
no such thing as independent thought, thought, that is, which in
its actual exercise takes no account of the psychological situation,
I am myself in the end led inevitably to scepticism. And on this
point I have so far failed to gain any assistance from Prof. Dewey.
The doctrine that every judgement essentially depends on the
entire psychical state of the individual and derives from this its
falsehood or truth, is, I presume, usually taken to amount to com-
plete scepticism. This js a matter which doubtless Prof. Dewey
has considered, and a discussion of it by him would I am sure be
welcomed.


CHAPTER IV
ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE ~


-1. In maintaining that truth essentially does not consist
in the mere practical working of an idea, I would first of all
remove a probable misunderstanding. For myself I have
always held that at the beginning of its course the intellect
directly subserves practice, and that between practice and
theory there is as yet no possible division. I have expressed
this belief long ago,1 and I have repeated it since, as I
belieye, unequivocally and plainly. Again I hold that in
the end theory and practice are one. I believe in short that
each i$ a one-sided aspect of our nature. And for me the
ultimate reality is not a mere aspect or aspects, but it is
a unity in which every distinction is at once maintained and |
subordinated. On the other hand, wherever the word ‘truth’

‘has its meaning, that meaning to me cannot be reduced
to bare practical effect. And at our human level, and
throughout at least some tracts of our life, the words ‘true’
and ‘false’ have to me most certainly a specific meaning.
The nature of this I cannot here attempt to point out,?
but I hold that it is other than the mere fact that an idea
works or fails practically. It is on account of this denial,
I presume, that I am to be termed an ‘ intellectualist ’, and
this denial I will now proceed to justify. The view that
truth everywhere subserves practice directly seems to me ,
contrary to fact; but, even where this is the case, truth.
itself is not merely practical. This distinction appears, as
I have said, to be often ignored. At an early and unreflec-
tive stage of mind no idea will be retained uriless it works

_ practically, or unless at least it practically satisfies me.

* Principles of Logic, pp. 459-60. ,On the position of practice in life see


further the note at the end of this chapter.
* [The reader is now referred to other parts of this volume.]


6 ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE CHAP.


We can have at this’level no reflection on disappointment,
failure and falsehood. And hence I agree that here there is
no truth except where an idea works-practically. But to go
from this to the conclusion that truth’s essence even here lies
wholly in such working, is a further step which to me seems
not permissible. The idea works, but it is able to work not
simply because it is there and because I have chosen it. I
is able to work because, in short, I have chosen the right idea.
Everywhere in conation and will there is an idea which
is opposed to existence. And this existence nowhere is
characterless, but it is a determinate being. And the char-
acter of this being again is not something inert. On the
contrary it is an element in the whole-situation, and it
dictates to my idea as well as submits to dictation. If my! .
idea is the right one, and if it works, this, we may say, is
because the nature of the whole situation selected it. My
idea, I agree, then reacts, and I agree that it then makes the
situation to be different. But to speak as if the entire nature
of the situation were first made by the idea seems really
extravagant. If my idea is to work it must correspond to
a determinate being which it cannot be said to make. And
in this correspondence, I must hold, consists from the very
first the essence of truth. I will proceed to show this first
on the positive side, and then again where in failure and in
falsehood we meet the opposite of truth. But I shall take
‘our experience now at a level more removed from its lowest
point, and shall consider it at a stage where reflection is
possible.
- (a) The fact which first offers itself is the case of finding
means to.a positive end. I desire, let us say, to cross a
stream in order to gather fruit. The stream is swollen, and
there is hence a gap between my idea and its reality. On
this let us suppose that I retain my general idea of crossing,
and that other ideas as to the particular manner of crossing
are suggested, This is in the main what we understand by


Iv _ ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE fit fe


finding means to an end. Now these ideas, I agree, may all
_ be said to be practical ideas. My end will remain my cross-
ing somehow, and the-means will probably consist in my
doing something so ‘as to cross. But these means surely
‘must correspond to the actual nature of the stream, and
surely to suggest that my ideas manufacture that corre-
spondence is absurd. The stream is wider lower down, so
that there I may wade. The stream is full of rocks higher
up, so that there I may leap. If I will only wait quietly
the stream is falling of itself. If I will only sit still, my
companion has promised that he will come with a float.
My end is practical doubtless, and my means still are the
idea of myself doing something—if at least you stretch that
so as to include my waiting till something happens of itself
or is done by another. But when you ask what it is which
‘makes each idea right or wrong, you cannot exclude its:
agreement or its discord with fact other than my will. And
to ignore this aspect of the case, or to treat this aspect as if
it were something somehow immaterial, to my mind, I must
repeat, is wholly unprofitable. In selecting my means I am
forced to consider their relation to the facts, and, if my idea
works, it is because of this relation which is not made by my
idea. And it is in this relation that we have to seek the
distinctive nature of truth. Or we may say that the whole
situation, inward and outward, dictates to me the selection
of such an idea as can work, and that hence to treat this
congé d’élive merely as my act on the situation is a foolish
pretence. Let us take again the case where I go hunting
and where my end is the capture of some beast. I obviously
here may have to reflect carefully on the nature of the means,
‘Where the animal is, and what it is likely to do under certain
conditions, all this I may have to infer from a general know-
ledge of its nature and from a variety of indications that
I gather from facts now perceived. And, ‘if others are to
co-operate, I have to take account also of their natures and


98. ON TRUTH AND" PRACTICE * CHAP.


- of their probable conduct. The otiole ot this iswfact to
which my idea has got first to €orrespond. ‘It has, "that is,
first to be true a% a condition of its working. On tlte other
, Side doubtless the idea of the means is dependent on, the
* end, and doubtless, if you remove the end, you remove at
‘one stroke the idea and its truth. But from ‘this you cannot’
logically conclude that the entire trith was made by your
end and your ideas. It would be as rational first to insist
that without the given facts there are in fact no ideas and
no truth, and then go on to infer that in the end truth and
will consist barely in what comes to my mind.

(b) I shall be charged, I do not doubt, with idle insistence:
on the obvious. But where I understand little more than
that there is a denial of what to me are plain facts, no course
is possible to me except thus to insist on the obvious. And
so EF proceed to view the facts from. their negative side.
When, at a certain mental stage, I fail, I do not at this stage
merely try again and again, but I retain my failures and use
them to determine my conduct. My being carried away
by the stream if I attempt to cross here, my falling amongst
the rocks if I try to cross there, my being captured by my
enemies if I remain where I am—these ideas remove possi-
bilities and they qualify the situation by narrowing it. They
are practical ideas, and in the end they may subserve another
idea which actually works. But, taken in and by them-.
selves, you can hardly say that they work directly. On the
other hand, however indirectly, they do seem to make an
assertion about things which are other than my will. And
taken as ideas of my ‘ doing’ they have to fall under the

' head of ‘avoiding’. But that avoidance is based, I submit,
on what things do tome. It depends ona character in things
which hinders me or even actively makes me suffer. For
we are not to say, I presume, that I avoid evils merely
because of my desire to do something in the way of avoid-
ance. We may see this more evidently where I am not


xv ONSERUTH AND PRACTICE ag


engaged in any positive pursuit, but where a danger threatens
tie froni which’ terrified [ desire to escape. It is dusk and
the maneeating tiger will be coming, and I go not know how
to avoid him whether by this course or by that. And surely,
in order to find some idéa which will ‘do’, I must before
all things consider ‘his nature and what he on his side is
likély toedo. The, same thing is evident again where my
enemies are humian. My end is. practical, but surely my
‘ideas about the means must be dictated to me by something
which is elearly not myself. And this forced agreement
of my ideas with a nature other than my volition is, I pre-
sume, that which in general we understand by truth.

And there are moments when nothing works and where
every idea fails. I am starving, but I am helpless for I can-
nol climb to reach the fruit. I am dying of thirst, but my
legs are broken and I cannot move to reach the water. Iam
tortured by an internal pain which I can do nothing to
assuage. And here I need not idly repeat my futile efforts
until exhaustion and stupor supervene. I may realize my
fate and I may become aware that this now is my doom.
The nature of that which is opposed to my will has triumphed.
Or I may see my companion in the jaws of some inevitable,
danger where I am impotent. This to me is true, it has
whatever truth belongs to death, pain and evil, but I hardly;
know in what sense it is an idea which works. You may,
possibly reply that suffering and death are undeniably prac-
' tical, and that my idea at any rate exactly meets the
practical situation. But to me there is more sense in the
‘old view that my idea meets the situation theoretically
and not practically. The idea of a failure in another or
of failure in myself surely here does not itself produce
_ the failure, and, if it did so, surely that would be the worst
failure of all. And to make here the agreement of my idea
with facts into a practical success, would be the mark of
insanity rather than of philosophy or common sense. The


80 ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE CHAP.


idea of avoidance is here an idea which obviously cannot
carry itself out. And the reflection that failure is but the
deferred and assured coming of triumph, if such am idea
were suggested to creatures in these straits, might seem to
them the one idea which above all others neither works
theoretically nor*practically.?

There is indeed an ancient doctrine for which no power
in the end is mere force, and which finds no evil in the world
except for self-will. And the self that can apprehend all
force and all suffering as in the end will and love, does


- 1 It may be said that every idea, even of failure, works successfully in
producing a corresponding attitude or other change in my body or some
part of it. I agree that, to speak in general, an idea tends thus to express
itself emotionally. This in brief is one aspect of an idea’s general tendency
to realize itself. But this way of realization in emotional expression is not
to be confounded with the other specific ways which we call thought and
will, Every one, we may say, in practice would distinguish a gesture or
a blush from a volition or a judgement. The mere emotional expression
of an idea is in short not my act, and you cannot attribute it to my will.
Again this e mal expression of the idea, if for the sake of argument
we assume ig*everywhere to exist, cannot possibly, I presume, be mgre
than generic. It must therefore fail to correspond to the individuality of
theidea. And again it depends so much upon the psychical liveliness of the
idea, that an idea counted false may possibly express itself more forcibly
than an idea which is taken to be true. We should in short here have
a doctrine in principle the same with Hume’s theory of belief, and open
to the objections which seem fatal to that theory. The emotional expression
of an idea or of one aspect of an idea is, we may say, a mere incidental result
from the strength and dominance of that idea or its aspect, Any attempt
to find in it the specific essence of truth and falsehood in the end must break
down. But in any case, so far as what is called Pragmatism is concerned,
to fall back on such a doctrine would be suicidal. For this emotional —
expression is plainly not will. It is the working of an idea on me, and it is
not my working. We have here a psychical effect and not properly an‘act
of mine. It would (to pass to another point) be interesting to know how
our new gospel conceives its relation to Dr. Bain’s theory of belief. It might
seem to have taken that theory, and, without considering the objections to
which it is liable, to have gone beyond it by simply writing ‘truth’ for
‘ belief ’.

Every idea of course works by inhibiting so far the action of other ideas, ©
And, since these other ideas may be practical, every idea, if you please,
is practical negatively. But on the other hand surely it is clear that the
meaning of truth is something positive. Truth surely can never be barely
negative, nor can you find its essence in its mere prevention of the happen-
ing of something else. In fact here, as everywhere, it is in the end nonsense
to take anything as consisting merely in inhibition.


Iv ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE 81


itself thus succeed and does triumph even in its own anguish
and despair. And the way to this end, however hard, is
at leAst familiar, for it is the ‘open secret that has been
revealed by the Teachers of the East, and, whatever you
like to say against it theoretically, it is a faith which cer-
tainly can work. But this is the way which our new gospel
of personal individualism seems to advertise as henceforth
closed. At least if my ideas and my will, or the will and the
ideas of any man or set of men, are to be the measure of
truth, then, so far as I see, the reality cannot lie beyond
the private ends of individuals. And to realize the self
by self-surrender to the supreme will, must, I presume, be
set down as at once irrational and immoral. For there is
not, I understand, and there ought not to be any will which
is supreme, and really sole master of the world, and lord
of suffering and of sin and of death. And again in no possible
case could any will which is quite external, to my own
begpme really and in truth something personal to myself.
But at this point our new gospel, it seems to me, begins to
falter, and it seems evasively to point to an ambiguous way
of escape. If the world and its power which confront me
are the funded accumulations made by striving beings (Mind,
N.S., No. 45, p. 94), then after all the world can be no force -
which is alien to my will. But such a plea to my mind
sounds like trifling or like mockery. For to view ourselves
as insects on a coral reef is hardly a solution which works.
If the world in fact is hostile to my will, then it does not
cease to be hostile because others like myself have had the
same or a different experience before me. They have
altered the world, I know, and they have improved it, if
. you will, but they have not altered it so that it does not
oppose me! No gratitude of mine for past efforts will
transform the living fact, and no belief in some happier


1.1 shall deal lower down with the apparent claim that. my world has
thus been actually made and not merely altered,
1574 G


82. ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE CHAP.


future, when I am past; can serve to change’ the actual
present. If indeed to me there were no force in the world
but the veiled love of God, if the wills in the past were one
in effort and in substance with the ore will, if in*tthat Will
‘they are living still and still so are loving s ‘and if again by
faith, suffering; ,and love my will is made really one with
theirs—hefe indeed we should Have found at once our
answer and our refuge. But with this we should pass surely
beyond the limits of any personal individualism. For this
we must have more than the mere accumulation of several
efforts. We cannot rest in a God who is no more omnipotent
than one of ourselves, and who, though animated, I dare say,
by the best intentions, cannot answer for the unknown force
which confront@himself and us.1 And, as I understand,
‘the remedy is tor us to discard such perverted wants and
such unnatural desires. We shall find our glad tidings in the
unfailing advertisements of the new way in philosophy, where
every doubt and all disease has found its certain cure, and
where at last every tub can stand upright on its own bottom.


II, I will pass on to consider another aspect of the case.
We often hear a cry which seems to set forth the virtues of
practice. But, when before all things I seek to understand
in what this practice consists, then I scarce can apprehend
a word which to me is intelligible. And, since my ignorance
and perhaps my bias is not peculiar to myself, I will venture
without apology once more to lay bare the nakedness of my
mind.

A young man frequently hears it said, why cannot you
take up something practical ? Why cannot you, in other
words, place your first end in what is called a comfortable
life, and seek to eat and to drink and to reproduce your


1 Instead of ‘a God’ I should perhaps have written ‘a God or a set of
gods*, Our new gospel seems not to have decided at present whether
monotheism or polytheism is to be the creed of the future. I should be
inclined to agree that from a religious point of view the difference in this
case has no importance,


Iv ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE 83


species, while enjoying the social consideration and the
amusements of the average man? And the young man.
may reply that, so far ag he sees, this would not bring him
happiness. He prgfers td place-his chief end perhaps in art
or in science, or again in the excitement of. the chase or of
gaming or amours, or possibly, it may even be, in some form
of mystical religion. Antl-to seek my happiness, -he would
exclaim, however far away from what the world calls practi-
cal, how can there be for me any course more préttical than
this ?+ And evidently here there ig a’ failure fo use words
on each side with a common meaning. Our confusion may
be further heightened when we reflect on the one hand that
everything in our lives must be practical. For conduct is
practical, and nothing that we are and do can possibly, it
seems, be external to conduct. But ori the other hand in
at least some men we seem to discover non-practical wants.
We seem to find a desire for the cultivation of truth or
beauty for their own sakes, or even a longing for the con-
templative absorption in the eternal. And thus while on
the one side every desire and every want must be practical,
on the other side some practical aims seem to entail the
subordination of practice.

These familiar doubts, idle to those minds which have
risen far above doubt, to other minds have suggested serious
questionings. And I will go on briefly to state that which
has served as perhaps a sufficient answer. My practice may
be called in general the alteration by me of existence, inward
and outward, and ‘ existence’ we may understand as what
happens or as the series of events.2 And since, whatever
else it is, my whole life certainly is a process in time, certainly
evetything which I am or do has, or may have, this pracucal


1 Cf, Prof, A. E. Taylor, Elements of Metaphysics, p. 317.
’ * (Cf. Principles of Logic, p. 18. The objection that will does not rage
aim at alteration, but sometimes at prevention of change, was long ago
made by Lotze. In Mind for October 1892, pp. 339, 440, I noticed and
discussed this objection, It has been urged against me since, I believe,
and without any reference to Lotze or myself.)


G2


84 ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE ‘CHAP.


aspect. Our being is realized, we know, by maintaining
ourselves and our race against natural accident and decay.
We have to eat and to drink and to multiply our kind.
Then again there is our life in the family and in society.
We are born into and enter into wholes wider than our-
selves, and in these the individual finds his own self in its
connexion with other men, and has his being in their con-
sideration and also their love forhim. But now let us suppose
further that a man is able to go even beyond this. Let us
suppose him capable of pursuing and of enjoying truth and
beauty for themselves, and able to find his own nature
realized in the unselfish love of these objects. Such a
supposition, I am aware, is in principle contrary to indivi-
dualism, but our discordance with individualism (by what-
ever new name it likes to call itself) has begun long before
such a point had been reached. However that may be,
let us suppose that a man can in fact desire and can enjoy
for its own sake what is beautiful and true. These objects
on one side exist for his theoretical activity, and they involve
obviously and necessarily an alteration of his personal
existence. They and their pursuits are therefore practical,
how intensely practical is known to all who have experience
of the facts.2 Alteration of existence is implied inseparably
in the being of truth, but truth, to confine ourselves here


1 [The word ‘ practice ’ lays stress on the alteration of existence, I do
not mean merely outward existence. Now obviously every purpose
carried out must alter the series of events, and every purpose therefore is
obviously from one side practical. But this does not mean that the interest
and the object aimed at are always practical, except incidentally. This
plain distinction the Pragmatist has failed to see, and hence is led at one
time to inveigh against the theoretical interest, and at another time to
admit it, and in each case blindly. Even in the year 1909 Prof. James was
still evidently confused as to what ‘ practical’ means (Meaning of Truth,
p. 209). Prof, James appears to me to be attempting here under the stress
of criticism to carry out an inquiry which obviously should have come first,
and should have been made independently.]}

® There is an admirable passage on this subject in Balzac’s Cousine Bette,
which is, I hope, well known to the reader. The only reference I can give
is to pp. 179-81 of vol, xvii of the edition of 1865.


IV ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE 85


to truth, has another side also. And, when you take in
this side, you cannot say that the essence of truth consists
in a change made in or made by this or that individual.
The angles of a triangle may, if you will, not exist outside
of the geometer’s head, but their equality to two right
angles is hardly nothing but a present change made in him.
The laws of the planets and stars, we believe, in part revealed
themselves truly to Newton, but the revelation, if so, was
something more than a mere personal event. It is only
in poetry that America rose from the waves at the will of
Columbus, and even in poetry the America which appeared
was a thing found as well as done. There is for us no truth,
we may say, save that which discovers itself to us. The
finding of truth is on one side an alteration of the world,
but this alteration on the other side does not } contain the
truth itself which is found. It is impossible to make the
truth a mere deed and a mere outcome and a mere adjective
of the person who discovers or enjoys it. As my theoretical
activity it is a practical change in my existence, but as my
object it has another character and a different purpose.
Its essence cannot lie merely in that which I do either to
myself or to the world.

The gospel of practice for the sake of-practice, and every-
thing else for the sake of practice, makes, I doubt not, a good
cry. But it will satisfy in the end only those who have not
asked what practice is. Practice we have found to consist
in my alteration of existence. Now, if we take this as our
end, we seem to place the end in mere quantity of being and

_change. Our end must be bejng and doing, maintained and
reproduced, without regard to any quality possessed by it,
except of course so far as difference in quality goes to sub-
serve quantity. But such an end is hardly what in general
men seek or can desire, and it will, I think, be obvious to
any one that in his own case he would not care for mere


+ [‘ does not,’ that is, ‘as such,’ See Chap. XI]


86 ON TRUTH AND ‘PRACTICE CHAP.


increase of being apart from quality. We might of course
set up mere pleasure in abstraction as our end, and we might
endeavour to subordinate consistently every other aspect of
our being to this one reality. Truth and falsehood would
in this way become mere increase and decrease of pleasure.
And these characters would be no facts to be ascertained by
an independent intellect, since the whole of their truth and
reality would have to consist in their accordance with my
present feeling. ‘This is a view which, so far as I know, no
Hedonist among us has advocated, and in any case it would
hardly square with the gospel of practice. And hence,
unless I am to take mere quantity of doing as my end, I can
myself find in the end no sense in the cry of practice for
practice’ sake.

And, if I may be allowed to put on one side things which
I-am unable to comprehend, I would venture to state in
a few words how I understand the relation of practice to
life. The end I take to be the fullest and most harmonious
development of our being, and, though I will not deny that
this coincides with the largest amount of mere doing,? the
latter aspect I must regard as but incidental. Now, if our
being is to be realized, its main functions must be regarded
as ends, and every side of our nature in being realized will
thus assuredly be practical. For, to speak in the main,
whatever we are and whatever we acquire, becomes and
remains ours only on the condition that we are active and
doing. Thus everything in life, to speak once more in the
main, is a practical end, and every possible side of our life
is practical. But among these ends and aspects there is
on the other hand an important difference,’ for we are forced
to deny in a sense that some of them are practical. Some of
them, that is, do not involve the alteration of existence except

1 Cf. Appearance, Pp. 374, and Chap. XI of this volume.”

* I wish here neither to deny nor to assert this, The question isa


difficult one.
3 T have further enlarged on this point below, pp. 101-6.


Iv ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE 87


incidentally, while with the rest this alteration is, in various
senses and degrees, essential and vital. Eating and drinking,
and life in the family and in society and the state, may be
called practical essentially. Our actual existence in time
and in space has in various senses to be changed by all of
these functions. And in addition their contents can be
said to fall within the world of what we do and make. Their
product can be said in the main to qualify that existence
which we produce and alter. And further the arts and
sciences which subserve these ‘ practical’ ends, are them-
selves, so far as they subserve these, practical also. But
the attitude of mere theory and of mere apprehension is
on the other hand not practical. It has to alter things,
but, so far as it remains independent, its chief end and main
purpose does not consist in any sch alteration. Truths
must exist in a mind, and, to exist in it, they must come
there, and, to speak roughly and in the main, they must
also be brought there. And so of course, in order to exist,
they must alter that mind. But the truth itself does not
consist in its existence in me. Neither I nor any other man
can make truth and make falsehood what they are. Truth
may not be truth at all apart from its existence in myself
and in other finite subjects, and at least very largely that
existence depends on our wills. But, though I can find in
truth the satisfaction of a want, and though I can recognize
my own being in the possession of truth, yet on the other
side I cannot regard its nature as subject to my will. If
for its realization a change in myself is indispensable, I
cannot on the other hand say that its main being lies in
that alteration of existence. While truth is mere truth,
I do not even carry it out into the world. And to make its
essence a bare quality or a mere deed of our minds is to
destroy that essence. ,
The same thing holds again of what is beautiful in nature


1 [See further in Chap. XI.}_


88: “ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE __cuap.


or in art. The nature of that is in principle not subordinate
to an external end. We can make it to exist or appear, but
we cannot on the other hand make it to be that which it is.
Its character is something which is beyond my power, it is
something which I must recognize and cannot altér. So far
as it is a product it is a product which cannot be taken as
the mere adjective of the function or process. Beauty, in
other words, is from one side independent of our wills. It
is an end the specific nature of which is not subject to our
choice, and cannot consist in a relation to anything else
which is so subject. And if truth and beauty have this
character, and if on the other side truth and beauty are
human ends, then clearly we have ends which are not
practical. They are practical, that is to say, incidentally,
but not in their essence.. Thus on the one side these ends
may be called independent, though on the other side they
must involve human need and desire. And hence, if our
life is to satisfy its desires, these ideal ends should be desired
and be pursued for themselves. And, viewed in this way,
it is clear that, though practical, they are still not subordinate
to practice.

If we take things from another side, then all, as we saw,
can fall under the practical end. For everything in life is
subject to life as a whole, and the end of morality is to
develop, to order and to harmonize, our human existence.
There is no element therefore to which the moral end is
unable to dictate, and even truth and beauty, however in-
dependent, fall under its sway. Beauty and truth therefore
are at once dependent and free. The moral end dictates to
us their pufSuit and it sets limits to that pursuit. The space
which these objects are to occupy in my life, how far and
how long it is right for me to follow them, nay even to some
extent the kind of truth and beauty which I should ignore
or should follow, all this, it is obvious, is or may be the
affair of morality. But the nature of that which is to be


>


Iv ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE 8g -


beautiful or true falls outside of the moral control. It is
the vision, and it is not the object, which is subject to our
wills. The ideal does enter into my life and it makes a part
of my existence, but it is only in one aspect that I can master
it and subject it to my power. And the practical human end
is, in very truth, to follow ends which in themselves assuredly
are not all practical or all merely human.

Any such creed is perhaps as obsolete as it is old and
familiar, and, if we believe the advocate of ‘ pragmatism ’,
it is but foolishness and falsehood. And yet in philosophy,
if error is to be removed, it possibly after all should be
removed by discussion. It is hardly mere darkness to be
dispelled by the rising of some luminary however refulgent.
And yet, since neither of us seems to understand what the
other can be meaning, a rational discussion between the
‘personal idealist’ and any adherent of the old doctrine
seems unattainable. There is a view that the independent
use of the intellect is impossible, that the intellect has neither
freedom nor any being of its own,'and that, except so far as
it consists in practice or again indirectly squints at practice,
the intellect is nothing. This view, to me at least, seems
contrary to the plain facts of human nature,gand to me at
least this view seems to end in nonsense, There is again a
view that the independent use of the intellect is possible but
is undesirable, and this view again, though Jess obviously
absurd, seems to me indefensible. Certainly on my side I
should insist that any one-sided development is not desirable.
I should insist that the realization of any aspect of human


1 We may put it thus, that in the end the practical end “must be the
Good, but that the Good, when you examine it, is plainly more than
mere ‘practice. Or from the other side we may say that in the end there
is no criterion which is not practical, and that the frue and the real will
in the end fall under the Good. But, when we have shown this, we find
ourselves forced on the other hand to make distinctions within the Good,
and to recognize, as before, that the Good consists in more than practice.
And practice itself, when we examine it, will be found even in itself (I cannot
deal with this here) to involve and to depend upon judgement and truth,

*


go ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE CHAP.


nature should, to speak in general, be limited by due regard
for the whole. But to distort this truth into a vicious error,
and to suppress wholly in its specific quality one main
function of my being, this is to me a deplorable and inhuman
mutilation. If you could show that the science and art
which fails to squint at practice is an evil excrescence, and
that like sexual aberration it perverts a desirable function,
the case would be altered. But the loud assertion of the
Personal Idealist 1 will not move those who have learned
otherwise from the facts. And it will move them the less
since they are convinced that the assertor, if he understood
his own doctrine, must hold any end, however perverted,
to be rational if I insist on it personally, and any idea,
however mad, to be the truth if only some one is resolved
that he will have it so.

‘The following of science for the sake of science and of art
for the sake of art is, if I may repeat what I have accepted,
‘to be kept within limits. Like every other side of human
nature jit is thus subordinate to the welfare of the whole, but
on the other hand within its own limits it should be per-
fectly free. This relative freedom is even dictated by the
interest of the spiritual commonwealth ; and hence this
freedom is in the end the most practical course, if we take
‘practice’ in anything but a-limited sense. And it will be
a mistake in practice after all, when you take our world as
a whole, to seek to banish from it the pursuit of unworldly
objects and ends. But you do in effect condemn these
pursuits, you vitiate their nature and you destroy them,
when you sentence them to keep throughout at least one
“eye upon the world. On the one hand obviously our


1 Personal Idealism, p. 85. I shall briefly notice lower down the difficulty
which arises with regard to a knowledge that truth ought not to be inde-
pendent. Clearly this truth also is dependent, but it is hard to say on what.
[In reptinting this paper’I should perhaps add that the particular example

- of perversion, given in the text, does not itself appear in the passage referred
to. It is, however, fully justified by its general statement, and on this point
I should be glad if the reader would satisfy himself.]


‘IV ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE gr


available supply of energy is limited. On the other hand,
if due regard is had to this limit, the independent cultiva-
tion of any one main side of our nature promises advantage,
for it promises (at least to those who hold to the unity of
that nature) to react and to contribute to the general good.!
We believe in short in relative freedom, and we do not
believe in divorce or in one-sided suppression. And we do
not believe that the way to advance our human nature is
to subordinate all of it to one aspect—I do not care what
that aspect is. At the beginning, I agree, there is no distinc-
tion between theory and practice, and again I am clear that
there is none in the end. But on the other hand our human
life is to me assuredly neither all beast-like nor all divine.
And, if I am so far condemned to follow a philosopher who
lived before the coming of the new light, I.am for my part
well content to share in his darkness.

But I shall doubtless be told that the intelligence springs
from and depends upon need and desire. There is no under-
standing, it will be urged, and no truth, except where there
is an interest ; and since interest and want must be admitted
to be practical, we have here a clear proof that all in the end
is subordinate to practice. To myself, however, this proof
adduced by the logic of Pragmatism seems hardly to require
any serious discussion. To me it seems obvious that, if
some function belongs to our nature, there will.be a need
and desire which corresponds to that function. Hence, if
the free use of the intellect is reatly one aspect of our being,
we shall in consequence have a need and a desire for that
use. And how this can prove that no interest is in the end
intellectual, I fail wholly to perceive. There is an attempt

1 I have of course not forgotten that there are ‘developments’ of
human nature which are undesirable and vicious. Why these are un-
desirable is a question which I cannot discuss here, The answer in general
is that such things not only are contrary to the interest of our whole nature,
‘but also are hostile to the realization of that very side of it to which they


belong. They therefore are not in the best sense developments biit are
perversions of our nature.


g2 ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE CHAP.


apparently to pass direct from ‘ my want must be practical ’
to the required conclusion with regard to the object of my
.want. But since the doctrine attacked denies this con-
clusion, and since it holds that interest and want, practical
on one side, may nevertheless be directed on an object
which in itself is not practical, there is literally, so far as I
can see, no argument at all. All that I can find is the sheer
' assumption that a certain view is mistaken, coupled appar-
ently with an entire failure to apprehend in what that view
essentially consists. And you might as well come to me and
offer to argue that I cannot want to look at a star, because
my vision and my want are always terrestrial* And you
might as well demonstrate to me that plainly I can love
nothing beyond me, because my love after all must be a
piece of myself. But the Personal Idealist, I imagine, is
likely to smile at my belated logic.


III. I will now attempt briefly to point out the various
senses in which we may try to subordinate truth to practice.
We have already learnt the ambiguity of any assertion that
truth is practical, but it may repay us to realize this ambi-
guity more in detail, even if that detail is far from exhausting
the subject.

(1) We may affirm that ‘reason is the slave of the
passions’, We may hold that, except to find means to
a foreign end, truth is (a) idle and useless or (6) even
impossible. (a) The first of these statements does not deny
the possibility of a truth which is merely theoretical. It
denies it only so far as to insist that such a truth is worthless,
and that it therefore does not deserve to be called truth.
(0) The second statement on the other hand appears to make
an unqualified denial. But it seems inconsistent with itself
so far as it assumes an independent knowledge of means ;
for any such knowledge would appear to contain truth
which so far is theoretical. Further the doctrine that the


»


‘Iv ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE 93


»world and my nature are of such a kind that all truth must
be practical, appears itself, so far, to be a truth which is
theoretical and therefore is no truth.

(2) We may from this proceed to a position with which we
all are more or less familiar. Truth, we may hear, is after |
all nothing: but working hypothesis. We have truth when
we can say of an idea that it will ‘do’, and an idea will ‘do’
only when, and so far as, it will work. There is, in short,
no meaning in truth other than the idea which works best.
This general statement, however, admits of more than one
interpretation. (a) It might mean that truth is the idea
which works best theoretically. There is in other words
here no truth in the sense of something which is given
as absolute. There are no data which we may assume and on
which we may build as certain each by itself. Allis material,
in short, with which we experiment ideally, and the ideal
experiment which in the end best satisfies itself and us is
what we mean by truth. It is, however, obvious that, with
so much, truth has not become merely practical. Indeed
such a position would be consistent with an extreme intellec-
tualism. And on the other hand the doctrine that truth is
what works, usually means to make truth the mere servant
of something else. We may therefore pass on to consider
another meaning. (5) The order and series of my sensations
may be taken for granted, and truth may be regarded as
a construction which is formed out of these. The end for
which the construction is made may remain unspecified,
and at present at least this point may be ignored, for in any
case the doctrine has failed to make truth merely practical.
Truth is our construction, but truth is forced to start with
an order of sensations. This order is in the main independent
of my choice and my will, and is a given fact which dictates
to me and to my choice of means. It is hence hard to see
how. such a fact can be excluded and left outside of truth,
or how again such a fact is merely practical, ‘ Reality


94 ' ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE CHAP.


which in the outer order confronts me is such, that to’ reach
a certain end I am obliged to hold for true this’or that #—
a truth like this, I agree, is highly imperfect, but I cannot
seé that it has ceased to be so far theoretical. Or, if we
enlarge our doctrine by ceasing to lay a one-sided stress
on what is outer, and if we call truth the ideal construction
based on the entire order of what happens, we have still,
so far as I see, made no advance in principle. Whatever
end we may desire, the means to this end are still dictated
by something which we have to call matter of fact ; and this
knowledge as to matter of fact still remains and must remain
at least in part theoretical. And our knowledge further
with regard to this entire state of things seems once niore
truth which has not itself the character assigned by ps to
all truth. (c) We may go on therefore to seek a remedy in
the removal of our one-sided prejudice. We may reject
the limitation of knowledge to the mere world of events
which happen, and may deny the claim of this world to be
taken as an ultimate foundation. Reality, or the Good,}
will now be the satisfaction of all the wants of our nature,
and theoretical truth will be the perceptions and ideas
which directly satisfy one of those wants, and so indirectly
make part of the general satisfaction. This is a doctrine -
which to my mind commends itself as true, though it
naturally would call for a great deal of explanation. But,
with this, evidently truth is not subordinate to practice.
It has a practical aspect, no doubt, but its whole essence
is not practical. Its end is an element in the general end,
and is in this sense subordinate; but its end is not sub-
ordinate to any other partial aspect of the whole. And
_ practice on its side will be no more than such a partial
aspect. Hence, if truth is to be practical, this whole view
must be given up or else must be modified. And it must,


1 The Good is here taken once more in its highest sense, a sense in which
it has ceased to be merely practical and has ceased to be merely good.


Iv {ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE 95


I presume, be modified by the denial of any want save that.
whith in the'epd is practical in its essence. Truth will there-
fore once more become dependent and subordinate, and will
consist in the ideas which serve as external means to the
practical end. But, with this, we seem thrown back once
more into the midst of our old difficulties. For the nature
of things does not seem to depend upon and to consist in
subserviency to the practical want and choice of myself
or of any set of men. And on the other side truth seems
forced to take account of the whole nature of things. In
other words I may choose to isolate what I call my practical
end, but the means to that end must be prescribed largely by
something other than my choice. And since truth is forced
to express something which thus dictates to practice, the
essence of truth can hardly consist in subservience to the
practical end. We may perhaps put the same thing by asking
how, if truth has no independence, there is in the end any
possibility of real argument or of real error. And our
knowledge of the whole situation and of the nature of truth
seems once more incompatible with the position which we
have thus given to knowledge.4

(3) A more radical view is the doctrine that reality in the
end is will, and that intelligence has somehow a secondary
position. A view of this kind was upheld in the first quarter
of the last century by more than one well-known philo-
‘sopher, and it has naturally been subjected to a good deal
of criticism. This is a point which our new gospel seems to
think calls for little attention, and I could not myself be
expected here to enter into it at length, even were I able
- todoso. I may, however, be permitted to state briefly the


: 1 The question how far anywhere we are to use working ideas the nature —
of which is to be dictated in some sense by a practical end, is a question
I donot discuss. The point, I agree, is both interesting and important, and
it deserves a discussion which would be impossible within the limits of this
paper. Iamconcerned here simply with the assertion that all truth is in the
last resort merely practical.


96 ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE CHAP.


main reasons which have always made it impossible for me
te accept in any form the primacy of will.

(a) Will in my judgement must imply something in the self
or beyond the self which is other than will, and, apart from
this ‘ other ’, I cannot find any sense or meaning in the ‘ will’
either of man or of God. There is to me no thinking with-
out something which thinks and again something which is
thought of—something in either case which is other than
mere thought. And in the sdme way there is no willing
except that which both proceeds from something and changes
something—something again in either case which is other

\than will. And I may add that to me will involves not only
perception but also idea, afd that I find this hard to reconcile
with a secondary position of intelligence.

(0) The necessity for an ‘ other’ may lead to an admitted
plurality of wills, and in any case without such a plurality
the whole doctrine tends in effect to negate itself. But on
the other hand the plurality, if admitted, raises difficulties
which to my mind are insuperable. If will demands a per-
ceived ‘ other’ which it alters, how is this to consist merely
in another will? To me it seems that each will must pre-
suppose in the other will something which is more than bare
willing, My volition, to me, is a process of passage from
idea into existence. Hence, as soon as and as far as that
passage is realized, my volition in the proper sense has
ceased to exist. The outer existence which is the expression
of my will is in a sense tertainly my will, but in the strict
sense it is not my will. Thus I do not understand how the
inner side of another will is to serve as that perceived ‘ other’
which my will demands, while again, if the other will is
taken as a perceived existence for me, I must understand ~
it to be something which is more than and is other than
mere volition. And we have already seen that, if you


1 The fundamental difficulty I take to be this, that will must imply and
must presuppose what is other than itself. Thus on the one hand bare will
is no will, while on the other hand, as soon as will has ceased to be bare,


Vv ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE 97


confine yourself to my will, that demands both an ‘I’ and
an ‘other’ as conditions of the process. Further with an
admitted plurality of wills there is a difficulty with regard
to their relation. The relation (that seems. evident) scannot
be the mere adjective of either of its terms. But, if it falls
beyond each, then neither term by itself is all reality, and
- there is at once a question on our hands with regard to
their ‘ togetherness’ or unity. This again apparently must
be will; but, if it is will, I do not see how it is in the end.
to have an ‘other’. If on the contrary it is not will, then,

since we hardly can take the unity as barely unreal, reality
seems at once to include moré than will.

Will in fact implies all reality, art in this it is like thought,
for in thinking once more you.can find all reality. -You can, _
that is, identify a complex whole with one of its aspects,
and then naturally in that aspect you can go on to find |
everything contained or implied. But for myself I See no
advantage in such a procedure. And I see no advantage in
rushing blindly from the rejection of one extreme to the
acceptance of the other, especially since I have now been
acquainted with both extremes for more years than I care
to recall.


it has become something more than will. This main difficulty is, to me,
at once radical and insuperable, and it shows itself in the relation between
will as inward and as carried out, If you do not here admit an existence
which in some sense is more than mere will, you, so far as I see, make ‘will’
an unmeaning word. .Thus with a plurality of wills, if each will isto have
any known world outside itself, you are on the above ground forced to
admit some existence beyond it which is more than any mere will. For
I cannot see how, if each will has no outside of its own, each is going to
serve as the outside for another. This idea may seem plausible, but I at
least cannot carry it out. And if, leaving this, you assert that will itself is
a whole which possesses in itself both an inward and an outward side, then
I do not understand what you are to reply when some one elsa.chooses to
assert that this same whole is intelligence or feeling.

To find the solution of the world’s problem in a number of wills, which.
serve amongst -themselves, each to the others, as outward existence, is,*
I agree, at first sight a very promising adventure. For myself I have" !
never been able to surmount the obstacles which I have mentioned. But
it would be a pleasure to me to learn that they can be surmounted.


1574 H


98 _ ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE CHAP.


If further we give to intelligence a secondary place, we
have to reconcile this fact with our knowledge that it is so.
We may say that Will possesses an awareness of itself, and
on this awareness we may base our philosophy of Will.
But, not to speak of the difficulty which arises from the
evident or at least the apparent fact of other experience and
knowledge, it is hard to see how this awareness can justify
its position. For we are in a difficulty on one side if we
regard it as secondary.- On the other side if this knowledge
and this truth is to be primary, the secondary place assigned
to all intelligence seems hardly intelligible.

(4) I must pass from this attempt to identify reality in
, the end with will. For the Will, which is reality, is not for
such a view my mere individual will. And it is my individual
will with which, so far as I understand the matter, we have
to do when we come to Prof. James and his followers. At
least, if it is not my will which makes reality and truth to be
what they are, I hardly see what can be left of the gospel
which they preach.1 I have already noticed what to my-
self appears a mere endeavour to compromise. If you take
the world to be a funded accumulation made by striving
beings (Mind, N.S., 45, p. 94), you unite in one creed, it
seems to me, every opening to objection. In-the first place,
since this fact is not your mere individual: will, you either
are confronted with a reality which is other than your will,
or else you must accept a real identity between this existing
will and yours. And what then has become of individualism
and of pluralism and of ‘ personal idealism ’ I am unable
to guess And further your knowledge of the fact of this


1 [And, so far as I can now judge, really nothing in principle isleft, Prof.
James (the evidence is given in Chap. V and its Appendix I) ended
apparently by abandoning every doctrine which can be taken as distinctive
of Pragmatism. When once a Pragmatist allows intrinsic value to theory,
surely the whole bottom of his gospel may be said to have fallen out. This
remark has no application to Dr. Dewey, who, I understand, still remains
consistent.]

2 The self-elected leader of our Personal Idealists seems at times to fall


Iv ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE 99


accumulation, on what does that knowledge rest? Is it
dictated to you by a fact which is other than your will ?
Then, so far as I can judge, the whole doctrine has in prin-
ciple vanished. Does it depend oh and consist in your
individual want and choice, and is it tits which in the end
both is and makes all reality and truth? It is strange, if
so, that you should seem unable to say what you mean, and
should fly for refuge to the unexplained phrase of ‘ condi-
tions’. It is useless again to offer a reference to Aristotle
and to Fichte, for there is more than one reason why such
a reference gives no satisfaction. The preachers of a new
gospel should, in short, be ready with payment in cash,
And, when they seek to put me off with a cheque drawn
on their account with Moses and the prophets, I take it as
a practical admission of insolvency.!

I will recall some beliefs which our new gospel seems
called on to meet. Practice is a necessary aspect of human
nature and of the whole of things, but practice is not the
whole of things nor is it the entirety of human nature. It
is a pernicious error to set up one aspect of our being (I do
not care what that aspect is) as an end by itself to which).
everything else is‘subordinate. Our nature is complex, and
on the other hand our nature has and ought to have a unity,
but its unity is not to be found by setting up one element
as absolute, and by turning all the rest into mere external
means. Further it is true that any one-sided expenditure
of our limited energy is so far hurtful. And it is true that


back on the old and well-known view, that truth is merely what happens
to prevail, merely those sensations and ideas which happen to enforce
themselves among a particular set of men, and that truth has no meaning
which is other than this. He even appears to be under the impression
that this doctrine is new as well as salutary. But, for myself, I could never
see that whatever is the result of a crude interpretation of Darwinism must
therefore be novel. And when the same writer preaches that Man (with
“a capital) i is to be the measure, I should not infer that he has asked himself
vhat in the end this capital is to mean.
1 [About a page of the original article has, after this, been omitted,]


H2


100 ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE CHAP.


in the interest of the whole such expenditure must be
limited. But it is wrong to conclude from this that within!
its own limits no element is to have free play, and that the'
whole in short is best served by the work of slaves, And,/
before a man lays down the law as to practice, it might be

better if he told us what in the end he takes practice to mean.

And before we rush or drift from a rejection of ‘ intellec-

tualism ’ to a setting up of ‘ voluntarism ’, we might perhaps

inquire whether after all we are inevitably condemned to

choose between conflicting abstractions.

The contention that truth and falsehood depend on my
will is to the last degree ambiguous, and it may end in what
is unmeaning or is plainly false. To make the whole essence
of truth consist in a choice made by this or that person
subverts the very nature of truth. On the other hand to
treat the will of others, or to treat the result of any past
volitions as being my will and choice, seems-really a thought-
less attempt at compromise. Finally the essence of will
requires an ‘other’ which is not will, and without this
‘other’ bare will, like bare intellect, ceases to be itself.
Itself is reduced in either case to vacancy and to nothingness.
And the question of this ‘ other’ cannot be disposed of by
unexplained phrases, and still less can it be met by any

1 Personal Idealism, it seems to me, Supplies us with two striking illustra-
tions of the tendency to avoid Scylla and to find a haven in Charybdis.
[An omission has been made here.] The omnipotent and omniscient
infinite God of Christian theology has of course given rise to well-known
difficulties, And an exit from these difficulties may naturally be sought
by the removal of one or more troublesome attributes. If God is made
finite, and, I presume, in part ignorant and in part impotent, and in short
is reduced in principle to the level of one creature among others, certain
objections, it is clear, will at once lose their force. Thus, if you want to
treat God as one person over against others, your readiest course is to
deny that he is infinite. And, if you wish to relieve any person of moral
responsibility, it is a well-known expedient to seek to deprive him either
of knowledge or of power. But there are unfortunately obvious objections
and difficulties on the other side, And these obvious difficulties, I presume,
were present to and moved the minds of the more orthodox theologians,


In any case surely they exist, and surely there can be no excuse for ignoring
them. [Cf p. 124 and Chap. XV.]


Iv ON TRUTH AND: PRACTICE IOL


appeal to authority. And once more, if knowledge is known
to be secondary, the fact of this knowledge itself calls for
explanation. .

It is well to protest against one-sided intellectualism and
to insist on the reality and on the worth of practice. It is
well to lay stress on the defects of Monism and on the
positive claims of Individualism and Pluralism. Such pro-
tests against one-sidedness are perhaps never out of place.
Such criticisms, even where they are not deserved, can per-
haps do no harm; and they can never perhaps fail to be
more or less deserved. But these protests and these criti-
cisms, it seems to me, are one thing, and the setting up and
the preaching of some counter-onesidedness is surely another
thing. And before anything, no matter what it is, is pro-
claimed as a new gospel, it will be better, I think, to ask if
account has been taken of objections, objections which at
least exist, even if they are not old and obvious.


Note.—It may be useful, even at the cost of some
repetition, to add a few words on the- difference between
practical and non-practical activity. The doctrine which I
have advocated is briefly this, that the above difference
exists and that on the other hand it is not absolute.

There is in the first place no activity which in the end is
merely practical, and the merely practical would in the end
be nothing real. It would, so far as I see, be the mainten-
ance and alteration of existence in complete abstraction
from the quality of the existence and the change. Its end
would be to produce the greatest quantity of bare doing.
How far such an ideal is in principle self-consistent, I will
not inquire, for certainly it is an ideal which no one would
accept, no one at least who understood clearly what it means..
And the assumption that such a practical activity exists
anywhere must be rejected. You will find no creature out
of whose life you can strike quality as irrelevant. However
low you descend you will reach no stage where the ‘ what:’,


102 ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE CHAP,


that is sought and done, is subordinate to bare doing, and
except'as a means to bare doing is worthless.

And that at least not everything in life is thus practical
or a mere means to practice seems manifest when we glance
at the facts of life. We need not appeal here to that which
in the. narrower sense is intellectual or aesthetic. The
pleasure of rest after accomplished labour, the song that
gives vent to the joy in being, the heightened self-feeling
from the perceived presence of one’s kind—it seems strange
to insist that these things are barely practical.. For myself
I prefer to think that each creature has its own quality and
its especial delight, and that in the quality of that which -
fills its self it finds and it seeks its own fulfilment.

This is a view which, I admit, I did not learn from philo-.
sophy, and, even if it were refuted by philosophy, I could not
forget what I imbibed in my youth. I learnt that Jehovah
found his work good, and took pleasure in it because it was
so, and not merely because his own activity had been some-
thing extreme, or because (as a Personal Idealist might say)
he had been ‘ young strong and virile’.1 And I learnt from
the poets that every life in its own quality partakes of the
divine. There is nothing so humble or so vile as to have no
nature of its own in which it finds happiness, but every
creature realizes, however strangely, what is at once its
special being and something beyond it. And every creature
rejoices not merely because so much is in doing or has been
done, but because its own need is satisfied or because the
object of its own particular desire has become reality.

Any such doctrine is divided by a chasm from the creed
of the Personal Idealist, the Personal Idealist, that is, who

1 [The reference is toa passage from Humanism (p. viii) which was quoted
in an omitted part of the foregoing. It runs thus: ‘ The ancient shibbo-
leths encounter open yawns and unconcealed derision. The rattling of dry
bones no longer fascinates respect nor plunges a self-suggested horde of
fakirs in hypnotic stupor. The agnostic maunderings of impotent despair


are-flung aside with a contemptuous smile by the young, the strong, the
virile.’]


IV ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE 103


comprehends his own principle. To his mind, when the male
creature is drawn towards its mate, there is no feeling of an
overmastering end beyond self. There is no object to which
passion ascribes, for however fleeting a moment, an infinite
worth. Nor is there a common existence where love, how-
ever imperfect and rude, gives in an object the abiding sense
of an inward contentment. In the view of the Personal
Idealist no object counts for any more than a worthless
means to one’s own mere activity. The object is recognized
as something which is good barely because it serves the turn,
as something which in short has value just so far as it is
found to be practicable (Pers. Id., p. 98). The ideal is, in
short, the abstraction of activity and of function from the
quality of its object. This abstraction represents, perhaps to
‘most of us, the essence of that which is false in theory and
sordid in conduct. And the reason why the Personal
Idealist is unaware of such a radical collision, is that he
has made no attempt to realize the true meaning of his
own doctrine.?

On the one hand no activity is barely practical. There
is in the end no activity which exists for its own sake as
a process, without any regard for its own nature and quality,
and in abstraction from all that can be regarded as a product.
On the other hand we may say that in the end all activity is
practical. For there is nothing which is apart from process
and change in existence. And in one of its aspects it is
possible to view the whole Universe as a will which every-
where asserts itself practically. Between that which is
practical and that which is not practical we thus seem in
the end unable to maintain any difference. .


1 The passage referred to, which deals with Identity, is obviously full
of intellectual confusion, whatever we may think of it otherwise as a sample
of academical literature, [The reader will, of course, bear in mind that the
text speaks of a view, not as it is in fact, while confusedly and inconsistently
entertained, but as it really in principle is, and as it would be if it under-
stood itself.]


“104 ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE _. cnap.


And there is in truth no such difference which is absolute.
. On the other side a relative distinction may be useful and
necessary, and I will point out the principle on which this
may be drawn. If you like to say that the difference in
any given case is a matter of degree, to some extent I am
able to accept that contention.

As against a non-practical activity my activity is practical
when and so far as its product directly qualifies the existence
which is altered. When I am active it is plain that I make
a change in my existence. Now can the product of my
activity be taken as the adjective of my changed existence ?
So far as this can be done my activity is practical, and other-
wise not so. When I dig the ground I make a change in my
world, and it is my world which so far is altered. When I
morally order myself, the moral arrangement becomes the
adjective of my own existence. When I eat and drink, the
result is that food and drink have been consumed, and that
on the other side I am changed by having eaten and drunk. ~

When I unite with other men in supporting axd developing :
a social community, the result of what we do is, at least in
the first instance, an adjective of our organized existence.
Thus and so far the above activities are practical distinc-
tively. On the other side when I perceive a horse that is
present, or think of one that is absent, certainly by my so
perceiving or thinking my existence is changed, but the
alteration cannot be said to consist in the horse. For my
perception or thought has not, on any sane theory, brought
the horse into being. My activity therefore is so far not
practical. And when after digging the ground I contemplate
it, and when I say ‘ My work is good’, my activity here
has ceased to be practical. For I can hardly so far be taken
to have altered the ground or myself, and to have given
to either of them.a new quality not owned before. And,
in short, all apprehension, whether theoretical or in the
widest sense aesthetic, will fail to be practical except


IV ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE 105


incidentally. It is practical only so far as what comes in
it is the adjective of that existence into which it has come
and which it has changed. Thus an activity is not prac-
tical because existence has been changed by it. It is
practical only so far as the changed existence can be taken !
as qualified by the product of the activity. And again in”
a secondary sense anything is practical so far as it is taken’
as subserving a practical change. On the other hand, so

“far as the change made is, in a word, a revelation, to that
extent the change is not practical. Thus the apprehension
of an object is never merely practical. Again when I make
a spade purely for the sake of digging, the end is practical ;
and a perception of the means, though not practical itself,
is subordinate to practice. But, when I adorn the handle
of the spade and so regard it with pleasure, my perception
and my pleasure have ceased to be practical. Forthe spade
has now been revealed to me so far as a joy in itself. And
it is an object which, apart from desire for its possession,
we may call ‘in itself desirable’. Wherever, in short, a
the life of the family or of society, wherever in love morality |
and religion or beauty and truth, I have a product which; |
is more than a mere quality of what is altered, I have some-|
thing which so far goes beyond practice. I so far have
something which is a revelation and is not a mere doing |
or something done. But we have entered here on a theme
which goes far beyond the limits of this Note.

In any case the abstraction of mere doing is not a rational
end, The’good, in other words, so far as it is good in itself,
is so far not merely practical. And as good in itself, we may
believe, it is revealed in some measure even to the humblest.
And as good in itself, which in different senses and in various
degrees is more than the mere adjective of passing events
and of finite existence, it is apprehended by and becomes
clear to the human intellect. On the other hand I must
repeat that no such distinction is absolute. Thus to the


106 ON TRUTH AND PRACTICE CHAP. IV


religious mind everything which is good is but the bringing
to light of God’s perfection and glory ; and yet to the same
religious mind nowhere is God more really present than in
that will for good which in myself and others makes changes
in the world. This double nature and aspect of things will
remain foolishness to the Personal Idealist, and it cannot be
held consistently in human life; but the constant sense of
it together with the endeavour to realize it in thought, may
perhaps be said to make the life of philosophy. And thus
philosophy is hard, while to think one-sidedly and to make
theories which ignore the deepest instincts of our nature,
is not so difficult. Philosophy always will be hard, and
what it’ promises even in the end is no clear theory nor any
complete understanding or vision. But its certain reward
is a continual evidence and a heightened apprehension of
the ineffable mystery of life, of life in all its complexity and
all its unity and worth. And I have not myself cared to ask
if philosophy ‘suffers violence, or lavishes after all its best
gifts on ‘ the young the strong and the virile ’.


CHAPTER V


ON TRUTH AND COPYING!


Mr. JoACHIM in his interesting work on The Nature of
Truth did, I think, well to discuss once more that view for
which truth consists in copying reality. It is a view which,
for myself; I have been accustomed to treat as exploded,
but it is a natural way of taking things, and, I suppose, can’
‘never cease to be popular. And, since from time to time
a discussion of this topic is likely to be useful, J will venture
to offer some remarks on it here.

The idea that truth consists in mere copying is suggested
from many sides. A man through language and ideas has
to convey fact to other men, and how can he do this unless
his ideas copy fact so far as the purpose requires ? And, in
dealing practically with the present or the future situation,
unless I have mirrored in my mind the main features of that
situation, how can I hope to succeed ? And in recalling the
past we are bound above all things not to alter it, and how
can we avoid this unless in some way, however indirect, we
produce a copy? Finally truth implies agreement amongst
the ideas of separate individuals. And, since this agreement
is not made by one or another individual, and so not by all
of them, it therefore seems due to all of them following one
original fact. But unless they mentally repeat this fact, how,
it will be asked, can they follow it ?

The above view is natural, but, even as it stands, seems
hardly consistent with itself, for how the past or future can be
copied is at least not evident. And it is soon in trouble, as is


1 This chapter appeared in Mind for April 1907. On the whole sa
of it, cf. Chap. XI.


108 ON TRUTH AND COPYING CHAP.


well known, with regard to the sensible properties of things.
But, not to dwell on this, the whole theory goes to wreck in
principle and at once on a fatal objection. Truth has to copy
facts, but on the other side the facts to be copied show already
‘in their nature the work of truth-making, The merely
given facts are, in other words, the imaginary creatures of
false theory. They are manufactured by a mind which
abstracts one aspect of the concrete known whole, and sets
this abstracted aspect out by itself as a real thing. If, on
the other hand, we exaggerate when we maintain that all
facts are inferences, yet undeniably much of given fact is
inferential And if we cannot demonstrate that every
possible piece of fact is modified by apperception, the out-
standing residue may at least perhaps be called insignificant.
Or (to put it from the other side) if there really is any datum,
outward or inward, which, if you remove the work of the
_mind, would in its nature remain the same, yet there seems
‘no way of our getting certainly to know of this. And, if
truth is to copy fact, then truth at least seems to be in fact
unattainable.

If the above objection cannot be met (and I do not know
how it can be met) the theory in principle is ruined. In the
end truth is not copying ; but it is possible, while admitting
this, to attempt to save the theory in a modified form.
We may draw a distinction between perceptional and reflec-
tive thinking. As to what is perceived we may allow that
we cannot argue that this is copied, but in any case, we may
go on to urge, our ideas must copy our perceptions. And
thus, after all, our secondary and reflective truth must seek
to mirror reality. But the position taken here, though
founded on a distinction, which in itself is important, for
the purpose in hand seems wholly ineffectual. And, apart
from such difficulties as might opnge more be raised as to


1 I am not assuming here that we have no feelings so elementary as to
be unmodified by apperception. But any assumption on the other side
seems hazardous and could at any rate not extend far. Cf. p. 204.


v ON TRUTH AND COPYING 109


given facts which are past and future, we have only to apply
this view in order to find it break down in our hands.

- Disjunctive, negative, and hypothetical judgements cannot
be taken as all false, and yet cannot fairly be made to conform
to our one type of truth. And in general the moment we
leave perceived facts and seek explanation—which after all
is implied in the desire for truth—we find that we are
moving away from the given. Universal and abstract truths|
are not given facts, nor do they merely reproduce the given, '
nor are they even confined to the limits of actual perception.
And in the end, when we come to general truth about the

>» Universe, it seems impossible to regard this as transcribed
from the given Universe. Our truths in short can all of
them in sore sense be verified in fact, but, if you ask if they
all are copied from fact, the answer must be different. And
we are driven to admit that, at least when we pags from


individual truths, our truth no longer represents fact but


merely ‘holds’ or ‘is valid’. And, asking what these
phrases mean, we are forced-to perceive that both truth and


- reality go beyond the perceived facts. The given facts in


other words are not the whole of reality, while truth cannot


"be understood except in reference to this whole.!


We saw in the first place that given facts are even them- .
selves not merely given, but already even in themselves
contain truth. And secondly we have seen that, even if the
perceived facts were given, truth cannot merely transcribe


“them. And, since truth goes beyond the given, it is impos-


sible to understand how truth can copy reality. For, before
the reality has been reached, there is no original to copy,
and, when the reality has been attained, that attainment
already is truth, and you cannot gain truth by transcribing it.


I will now break off the consideration of that view for
which truth consists in €opying fact, and will endeavour


1 This is the main conclusion which was urged in my Principles of Logic.
It did not occur to me that I should be taken there or anywhere else to
be advocating the copy-theory of truth,


110 ON TRUTH AND COPYING CHAP,


briefly td indicate a better way of resolving the problem.
But I must begin by pointing out the main error which, if
left unremoved, makes the problem insoluble. This error
consists in the division of truth from knowledge and of
knowledge from reality. The moment that truth, knowledge,
and reality are taken as separate, there is no way in which
consistently they can come or be forced together. And
since on the other hand truth implies that they are some-
how united, we have forthwith on our hands-a contradic-
tion in principle. And according to the side from which the
subject is approached, this contradiction works itself out into
a fatal dilemma.

This defect in principle has been illustrated by the view
we have been examining, and it may repay us to notice in
a different case the result of the self-same error. An attempt
is sometimes made to escape from difficulty by insisting that
truth isemerely what ‘holds’, or is what merely ‘ serves’
or merely ‘ works’. But since these phrases are relative
and, I presume, relative to something which is known, we
have at once a division of truth from knowledge. On the
one side is known reality, and on the other side is mere truth,
and in short we have repeated the error of that view which
took truth as a copy. And the fatal result of our proceeding
soon becomes manifest.t Truth is merely to be that which
subserves something else, and I am to know that this is so,
and that this is.so is true. But such a truth about truth
€eems itself to go beyond truth, and our theory is dissolved
in self-contradiction.

Let us consider this more in detail. Weare, it seems, to
take an end, such say as the abstraction of practical success
or of felt pleasure, and we are to understand truth as a_
means, an external means, to this end. And what, we may
hear, can be more plain and intelligible than this? It is,
I agree, almost as clear as the former view for which truth


1 Cf. the note at the end of the article.


v ON TRUTH AND COPYING III


merely copied things, and perhaps this suggestion may be
anomen. But first let us ask as to our end; is this known or
unknown? If it is unknown, how do we know that it is
an end served by means? And, if it is known, then what
are we going to say of this knowledge? Is it true? Can we
discuss it? Have we got a truth about our end, and, if so,
does ‘ about’ mean no more than merely subserving? IJ
do not myself know how these particular questions should
be answered, but in general I cannot see how to defend truth
which is external to knowledge or knowledge which is external
to reality, and with this I must pass to another difficulty
which attaches to the present view. Truth has been‘taken
as being merely the means to an end, and we naturally under-
stand this to say that truth is really the means. But here at
once arises a well-known puzzle. The end, we all agree, in
a sense dictates the means, but on the other hand the end,
we are accustomed to think, must choose those means
which are really possible. We are hence, given the end, in the
habit of discussing themeans. We have to consider, in short,
about suggested means whether they are means really and
in truth. But, with this, we seem to have knowledge and
truth and reality, certainly all in relation with the one real
end, but on the other side all external to it and apparently
more or less independent of it. We started in other words
by saying ‘ Truth is nothing beyond that which subserves ’,
and we have ended in explaining that ‘ Truth is that which
in fact and in truth subserves’. And when in a given cas#
a question is raised as to this fact and truth, it is answered
apparently by appealing to something other than the end.
’ Any such appeal obviously is inadmissible; but, when we
reject it, we seem now to have excluded all truth about our
means, just as before we seemed to have no knowledge nor
any truth about our end.?


1 One is, I presume, naturally led to avoid this difficulty by maintaining
that our knowledge in the end is intuitive. We have, that is to say, an
experience in which reality, truth, and knowledge are one. But, with this,


11z ON TRUTH AND COPYING CHAP.


And a prescribed remedy, if I.rightly understand, is to
throw overboard all preconceived ideas as to truth and
reality. Truth is merely the ideas which are felt in a certain
way, and are felt to dominate in a mind or in a set of minds,
and any further question as to their truth is senseless.1 You
may indeed ask psychologically, if you please, how they have
come to deminate, but, however they have come to dominate,
their truth is the same. If you and I disagree we both so
far have truth, and if you argue with me and persuade me,

“that is one way of agreement But, if you prefer to knock
me on the head, that, so far as truth goes, is the same thing,
except that now there is truth not in two heads but one.
And as to there being any other truth about all this state of
things, or in short any truth at all beyond mere prevalence, _
the whole notion is ridiculous. And, if you deny this, you
.do but confirm it, since your denial (though of course true)
must alse be false, since it is true only because in fact it has
prevailed. And if you want further proof, you can perhaps
' demonstrate all this by a downward deduction. For either
this or the copy-theory must be the truth about truth,
and as the copy-theory will not work, this by inevitable
consequence remains as true. But there is no one, I think,
who is ready apart from some reserve to accept wholly the
above result.


It would be easy, passing on, to point out how the same
fnain error, appeating in other forms, works itself out from
other sides into conflicting dilemmas. But the limits of this
chapter compel me to proceed. The division of reality from
knowledge and of knowledge from truth must in any form


there is an end at once and in principle of the view that truth is an external
means to something else. And on our new ground the problem of Error,
the question how we can hold for true what is false, obviously threatens to
become pressing.

1 For some further discussion on this point the reader is referred to
Chap. XI.


v ON TRUTH AND COPYING 113


be abandoned. And the énly way of exit from the maze is
to accept the remaining alternative. Our one hope lies in
taking courage to embrace the result that reality is not
outside truth. The identity of truth knowledge and reality,
whatever difficulty that may bring, must be taken as neces-
sary and fundamental. Or at least we have been driven to
choose between this and nothing.

Any such conclusion, I know, will on many sides be
rejected as monstrous. The last thing to which truth pre-
tends, I shall hear, is actually to be, or even bodily to possess,

. the real. But though this question, I know, might well be
argued at length, the issue in my judgement can be raised
and can be settled briefly. Truth, it is contended, is not to

_be the same as reality. Well, if so, I presume that there is a
difference between them. And this difference, I understand,
is not to be contained in the truth. But, if this is so, then
clearly to my mind the truth must so far be defective. How,
Task, is the truth about reality to be less or more than reality
without so far ceasing to be the truth? The only answer,
so far as I see, is this, that reality has something which is
not a possible content of truth. But here arises forthwith
the dilemma which ruined us before. If such an outstanding
element is known, then so far we have knowledge and truth,
while, if it is not known, then I do not know of it, and to
me it is nothing. On the one hand to divide truth from
knowledge seems impossible, and on the other hand to go
beyond knowledge seems meaningless.

And, if we are to advance, we must accept once for all
the identification of truth with reality. I do not say that we
are to conclude that there is to be in no sense any difference
between them. But we must, without raising doubts and
without looking backwards, follow the guidance of our new
principle. We must, that is, accept the claim of truth not

-to be judged from the outside. We must unhesitatingly.
assert that truth, if it were satisfied itself, and if for itself it

1574 . T


II4 ON TRUTH AND COPYING CHAP.


were perfect, would be itself in the fullest sense the entire
and absolute Universe. And agreeing to the uttermost with
this claim made by truth, we must attempt, truth and our-
Selves together, to judge truth from its own standard.

I will endeavour first to point out briefly in what this
standard consists. The end of truth is to be and to possess
reality in an ideal form. This means first that truth must
include without residue the entirety of what is in any sense
given, and it means next that truth is bound to include this
intelligibly. Truth is not satisfied until we have all the facts,
and until we understand perfectly what we have. And we
do not understand perfectly the given material until we have
it all together harmoniously, in such a way, that is, that we
are not impelled to strive for another and a better way of
holding it together. Truth is not satisfied, in other words,
until it is all-containing and one. We are not obliged here,
I think, to inquire further how these aspects of the idea of
system are related, and whether, and in what sense, they
have their root in a single principle. It is sufficient here to
insist that both aspects} are essential to truth, and that any
theory which ends in dividing them is certainly false.

But, when we judge truth by its own standard, truth
evidently fails. And it fails in two ways, the connexion
between which I will not here discuss. (i) In the first place
its contents cannot be made intelligible throughout and en-
tirely. A doubt may indeed be raised whether even in any
part they are able wholly to satisfy, but this again is a ques-
tion on which here it is unnecessary to enter. gFor in any
case obviously a large mass of the facts remains in the end
inexplicable. You have perpetually to repeat that things
are so, though you do not fully understand how or why, and


1 We may use a variety of phrases here. We may speak, for instance, of
homogeneity and specification, or again of integration and differentiation.
The main point is this, that truth must leave nothing outside, and, with
regard to what it contains, must not have to ask for further explanation
as to how one part stands to another part,

* The reader is referred on this and other points to later chapters.


Vv ON TRUTH AND COPYING II5


when on the other hand you cannot perceive that no how or
why is wanted. You are left in short with brute conjunctions
where you seek for connexions, and where this need for
connexions seems part of your nature.’ (ii) And, failing
thus, truth fails again to include all the given facts, and
any such complete inclusion seems even to be in principle
unattainable. (a) On the one hand the moment’s felt
immediacy remains for ever outstanding, and, if we feel this
nowhere else, we realize at each moment the difference
between the knower and his truth. (0) And on the other
hand the facts before us in space and time remain always
incomplete. How is it possible for truth to embrace the
whole sensible past and future ? Truth might understand
them (do you say ?) and so include them ideally. Well but,
if truth could do as much as this, which I myself think not
possible, truth after all would not include these facts bodily.
The ideal fact after all and the sensible fact will still differ,
and this difference left outside condemns truth even as ideal.
And in short we are entangled once more in our old dilemma.
We have an element given which in no way we can get inside
the truth, while on the other side, if we leave it out, truth
becomes defective. For there seems really no sense in
endeavouring to maintain that what. remains outside is
irrelevant. ;


With this at first sight we have ended in bankruptcy, but
perhaps we may find that the case is otherwise-and that our
failure has carried us to success. For we were looking for
the connexion between truth and reality, and we discovered
first that no external connexion is possible. We then
resolved to take truth as being the same with reality, and
we found that, taken so, truth came short of its end. But
in this very point of failure, after all, lies the way to success.
Truth came short because, and so far as, it could not become


1 You want in other words to answer the question ‘ What’ by and from
the object itself, and not by and from something else.
12


1x6 ON TRUTH AND COPYING CHAP.


that which it desired to be and made sure that it was. Truth
claimed identity with an individual and all-inclusive whole.
But such a whole, when we examine it, we find itself to be
the Universe and all reality. And when we had to see how
truth fails, as truth, in attaining its own end, we were being
shown the very features of difference between truth and
reality. And in passing over into reality and in thus ceasing
to be mere truth, truth does not pass beyond its own end
nor does it fail to realize itself. Hence, being the same as
reality, and at the. same time different from reality, truth
is thus able itself to apprehend its identity and difference.
But, if this is so, we seem to have reached the solution of
~ our problem.

Truth is the whole Universe realizing itself in one aspect.
This way of realization is one-sided, and it.is a way not in
the end satisfying even its own demands but felt itself to be
incomplete. On the other hand the completion of truth
itself is seen to lead to an all-inclusive reality, which reality
is not outside truth. For it is the whole Universe which,
immanent throughout, realizes and seeks itself in truth.
This is the end to which truth leads and points and without
which it is not satisfied. And those aspects in which truth
for itself is defective, are precisely those which make the

+ On the whole question see my Appearance. From this basis we can
deal with the difficulty as to truth’s being able consistently to pronounce
itself imperfect. The dilemma that arises here was noticed by me (p. 513)
and solved by a distinction (pp. 544-7). On this a sceptical critic (in
Mind, No. 11, p. 336), seizing his opportunity, urged against me this
dilemma which I had noticed, forgetting to mention that I had noiiced it,
and omitting the fact that, having noticed it, I had offered a solution.
This opportunity for criticism I confess that I had not observed, but in
the second edition of my book, desiring always, so far as I can, to be of
use to all.the world, I called attention to this opening, more or less by
way, if I may say so, of invitation (p. 620). And this standing invitation,
I was going to add, has been accepted by Captain Knox, in Mind,
No. 54, p. 212. But in view of this writer’s extensive ignorance of the
work which he came forward to criticize (see Mind, No. 55), I can hardly
suppose that such an assertion would be justified. Still, if I cannot credit


myself here with a successful invitation, I think that at least I may lay
claim to a true prophecy. ;


V ON TRUTH AND COPYING: 17


difference between truth and reality. Here, I would urge,
is the one road of exit from disastrous circles and from inter-
minable dilemmas. For on the one side we have a difference
between truth and reality, while on the other side this
difference only carries out truth. It consists in no more
than that which truth seeks itself internally to be and to
possess. y

Truth, -we thus can say, at once is and is not reality, and
we have found that the difference is not external to truth.
For truth would be satisfied in its own self-sought completion,
and that completion would be reality. And if you ask how
truth after all stands to reality, and whether after all truth is
not a copy, the answer is obvious. Apart from its aspect of
truth the reality would not be the reality, and there surely is
no meaning in a copy which makes its original. In truth and
in other aspects of the Universe we find one-sidedness and
defect, and we may go on to see that everywhere the remedy
for defect lies in the inclusion of other aspects more or less
left out. But as for comparing the Universe, as it is apart
from one aspect, with the Universe as complete, such a
comparison is out of our power. And it is even, when we
reflect, ridiculous to seek to discover by thinking what the
Universe would be like without thought. You cannot take
reality to pieces and then see how once more it can be com-.
bined to make reality. And thus, if we are asked for the
relation of truth to reality, we must reply that in the end
there is no relation, since in the end there are no separate
terms, All that we can say is that, in order for truth.
complete itself into reality, such and such defects in truth
itself would have to be rectified.

That there are difficulties in the way of this solution I
readily admit,! but difficulties and impossibilities, I urge, are


1 On this whole matter see my Appearance. One difficulty, on which
stress has been rightly laid, is that we have no direct experience of any
total experience which comprises in itself finite centres (cf. Chap. KV). Ido
not however myself see that this is more than a difficulty.


118 ON TRUTH AND COPYING CHAP.


not the same thing. And any other exit from our maze is,
I submit, closed impassably. On the one hand we must
not use words that have no positive sense, and, with this, all
reality that falls outside experience and knowledge is, to
my mind, excluded. On the other hand we cannot rest in
that which, when we try to think it, conflicts with itself
internally, and is dissolved in dilemmas. But, in order to
know that the Universe is a whole with such andsuch a general
nature, it is not necessary to perceive and to understand
how such a Universe is possible, and how its various aspects
are held apart and together. We desire to know this, I agree,
but I fail myself to see how we can, and I think that with
less than this we can gain: positive knowledge enough to
save us from mere scepticism.1

If we now return to that view for which truth is a mere
copy of things, we have seen that in the end no such doctrine
is admissible, But from a lower point of view it may be
convenient to speak of truth as corresponding with reality
and as even reproducing facts. In the first place the
individual in truth-seeking must subject himself. He must
(I cannot attempt to explain this here) suppress ideas,
wishes and fancies, and anything else in his nature which is
irrelevant to and interferes with the process of truth-seeking.
And hence in a sense the individuals can have something
in common, correspondence to which is essential for truth.
Secondly, in truth-seeking the individual (once again’ I


«


1 By scepticism I of course do not mean any positive view as to know-
ledge in general, and still less any kind of conclusion supported by proof.
I mean by it denial or doubt with regard to the existence de facto for me.
of that which satisfies intellectually, This denial or doubt rests certainly
on a positive basis, but, so long as the basis is not made explicit and. the
denial remains particular, the basis itself is not denied, and the position
remains consistent. On the other hand the scepticism which itself poses
as a doctrine, which deals in general truth, and in a word claims to be
de jure, to my mind does not understand itself. No consistent scepticism
can, in my opinion, offer a reasoned proof of itself, nor can a consistent
scepticism maintain any general positive doctrine, or indeed any universal
_ thesis of any kind whatever.


Vv ON TRUTH AND COPYING rg


cannot try to explain this) must follow the object. Our
understanding has to co-operate in the ideal development
of reality, and it has not, like will, to turn ideas into existences.
And thus following the object the ideas of the individual in
a sense must conform to it.1 In the third place reflection,
as we have seen, must take up sensible qualities as given
matter, and it must accept also more or less brute conjunc-
tions of fact. Intelligence of itself does not recreate the
given past nor does it procreate entirely the given present
or future. And it may be said to wait on and to follow
a course of events which it is powerless to make. And,
finally, to some extent language and truth must seek even
to copy perceived facts, and, as we saw, to convey them
faithfully, though of course in a partial manner. In the


' So far as concerns ‘ the suppression of the subjective’, as it is some-
times called, that of course belongs alike to everything serious in life.
In this general respect there is no difference between the pursuits of truth
beauty and moral goodness. When, in order to create a work of art, a man
has to keep down (so far as is necessary) what is merely particular to
himself, that does not mean either that the work of art makes itself without
him, or that it is not different because he in particular has made it, So also
in the process of the will for good. When that is called ‘ objective ’, the
meaning is not that the individual’s will makes no difference. The meaning
is that whatever in him is irrelevant to the issue, is suppressed as mevely
‘subjective’, So again in truth-seeking. The ideal development of the
object itself, which I follow, does not make itself. In the first place apart
from individual minds there is no object anywhere. In the second place,
. so far as I in particular am concerned, the process of truth demands my
personal self-realization. If you took that away, the objective process
would not exist in me at all, and, more than that, its nature would to some
extent be modified by my personal failure. On the other side the ‘ objective’ .
development cannot possibly take up into itself then and there everything
that is at the moment psychically present in myself when I seek truth. It
calls therefore for the suppression, so far as is required, of whatever in me.
falls outside of and is irrelevant to this special development,

Any reader who wishes not to criticize but to understand, must try to
bear in mind two things. (i) The suppression of ‘the subjective’ takes
place in regard to truth beauty and goodness alike, and not more in regard
to one than the others. (ii) The merely ‘ subjective ’ does not mean what is
personal, It means that which for the special purpose in hand is irrelevant
and in this sense is merely personal (see Appearance, p. 237): On the other
hand the reader who wishes simply to criticize will, I think, find no difficulty
so long as the above points are ignored.


120 ON TRUTH AND COPYING CHAP.


above senses truth may be spoken of as corresponding to
facts, and it is right and proper as against one-sided theories
to insist on this correspondence.t But, as we have seen,
such a way of speaking is not permissible in the end.

I will ask, in conclusion, how what we may call the copy-
theory of truth is affected by the connexion between thought
and volition. That in some sense thought depends on desire
and will is even obvious, and it is a doctrine in which most
of us perhaps have, we may say, been brought up. But it
is a doctrine on the other hand which can be interpreted in
various ways. If in the first place truth is made wholly to
depend in its essence on the individual’s desire, then in this
case, ‘naturally, since truth itself goes, the copy-theory of
truth goes also, together with every other sane theory of
truth. But otherwise, if you simply take truth to be copying,
the desire for truth will be a desire for copying, and by laying
emphasis on the aspect of desire I do not see that you add
anything.

Further, if you adopt a one-sided intellectual view, and
maintain that reality is an original system of thought which
you try to rethink, or a world of ideal essences whose presence
you desire—it seems useless in such a case to speak about
copying, since copying is excluded. There may be an
original here, but, whatever else you are doing, you do not |
copy that original, since obviously you have no original
before you to copy. The realization in detail of a general
end is clearly in itself not repetition, and on the other side,
as clearly, repetition and reproduction cannot all be called
copying. Hence to ask here why we should desire to copy,
is obviously irrelevant. The rational question to ask is


1 This I myself did.in Mind, N.S., No. 51. I did not refer here to the
fact that I had written elsewhere on the nature of truth, but I took care
to warn the reader (p. 311, now p. 75 of the present volume) that I could
not in that article attempt to point out the meaning of truth and falsehood.
Notwithstanding this my article has literally been taken as a statement of
my view as to the ultimate nature of truth.


Vv "ON TRUTH AND COPYING _ ar


about our desire for reproduction and repetition or for the
presence in or to our minds of a self-existent reality.


But, if we adoptea more concrete view, all such questions
become idle. On such a view my desire and my will to have
truth is the will and the desire of the world to become truth
in me. Truth is a mode of the self-realization of myself and
of the Universe in one. And if you ask why the full reality
cares to spill itself into gratuitous vessels, or whence and why
to me comes this mania for turning myself into a superfluous
receptacle or instance—the answer is ready. Such inquiries
are based on and betray a most stupendous misconception.
The Universe is nowhere apart from the lives of the indi-
viduals, and, whether as truth or otherwise, the Universe
realizes itself not at all except through their differences. On
the other side the individuals, if they are to realize themselves
personally, must specialize this common life of which truth is
oneaspect. And to suppose that the individuals can seek their
end and their reality somehow apart (say in the abstraction
of mere practice or of private pleasure) is in the end really
meaningless. Thus truth, the same in all, is from the other
side not wholly the same, since difference to it is vital and
it gains difference in each. The personal diversity of the
individuals is hence not superfluous but essential For


‘viewed from one side this diversity brings with it fresh


ie


quality, and from the other side, even so far as truth is com-
mon to the individuals, it must be taken none the less as
modified in each case by its. fresh context. But I must
hasten here to add that no such general doctrine can be ~
verified in detail.

The process of knowledge is, on any view like this, not
something apart and by itsel¥. It is one aspect of the life
of the undivided Universe, outside of which life there is no
truth or reality. And to speak here of copying as in a mirror,


- 1 See further in Chap. XI.


22 ON TRUTH AND COPYING eae.


we may once more repeat, is absurd. If you like to add that
the absurdity is heightened when we remember that life in
general, and knowledge in particular, imply will and desire,
to this naturally I make no objection. But for myself I have
always been contented to know that the whole suggestion of
copying is here ridiculously irrelevant. Still, as according
to some critics my destiny is to illustrate what they call
‘intellectualism ’, this chapter, if I could understand it, is
doubtless a blind flutter against the limits of my cage.


Note to page 110.—Compare here Mind, N.S., No. 51, p. 323,
and again Héffding, Problems of Philosophy, pp. 79 foll. (Eng.
trans.), a passage the force of which, it seems to me, Prof. James
. fails to appreciate. I may perhaps use this opportunity to say
something with regard to points really or apparently at issue
between Prof. James and myself. I cannot undertake to criticize
Prof. James’s ultimate view as to truth knowledge and reality,
because that is accessible nowhere, I believe, except in more or
less occasional and fragmentary articles, and I do not think that
justice can be done to it until it is put out in a more complete
and systematic form. But it has been a relief to me to see that,
as I understand him, Prof. James rejects the idea that the
essence of truth consists in nothing but its mere practical results.?
In accepting the standard of clearness and inclusiveness and self-
consistency (Mind, N.S., No. 52), Prof. James apparently adopts
the view in which I at least was brought up, a view for which
of course the notion of any external standard of truth was an.
exploded fallacy. This explanation on the part of Prof. James
seems to me to have removed wholly one supposed point of
disagreement.

Next as to ‘ working’, I of course agree that in proportion
as a truth is idle it is less true, and I again agree that in the
end no truth can be wholly idle. A truth that makes no difference
to truth is to my mind an impossibility. But I cannot agree
that, wherever we fail to see this further difference, it is non-
existent, and the alleged truth therefore not true at all. It is
one thing to say that, so far as we perceive, such or such a truth


1 Chap. IV, pp. 92 foll., of the present volume,
* But on this and other points see the Appendices to this chapter.


Vv ON TRUTH AND COPYING 123


has no importance, and to act accordingly, and it is surely
another thing to insist that such a €uth has no truth whatever.
And I seem in passing to remember that Hegel, rightly or wrongly,
incurred censure for an attitude more or less of this kind towards
some facts or truths of natural science. Next I agree that in the
end all truth has practical and again aesthetic consequences.
I believe in a word in the implication of all aspects of reality with
one another. But once more I cannot believe that we can see this
implication in detail, so as everywhere to use the consequence
(whatever consequence it is) as a criterion. And to my mind it
would be senseless to allege that the several aspects of the whole
are each nothing but their consequences. Further I have no
objection to identifying reality with goodness or satisfaction, so
long as it is clear that this does not mean mere practical or any
other one-sided satisfaction. Again I agree that any idea which in
any way ‘ works ’, has in some sense truth. Only to my mind it
has not on this account ultimate truth. It need not be a way
of expression which gives a theoretical satisfaction in which we
can rest. In the sciences we use working ideas and convenient
mythology, and, while not admitting that these have ultimate
truth, I should think it absurd to deny to them truth altogether.
And surely so it may be again with morality and religion. The
ideas that are really here required, most certainly, I should say,
must be true. But to conclude from this that they have ultimate
truth for metaphysics is to my mind irrational. And if you ask
what I am to say then when these truths are contradicted by meta-
physics, I reply that in my opinion they are not so contradicted,
though certainly in my opinion metaphysics must understand
them otherwise. If however any one believes in this contradic-
tion, he should in my judgement on no account sacrifice or
subordinate his practical truths, though as certainly he should
not offer them as the sole and final truth about the Universe.
But nothing, I fear, that I can say is likely to shake the pernicious
prejudice that what is wanted for working purposes is the last
theoretical truth about things (see my Appearance, p. 451 and
elsewhere). This prejudice tends everywhere to result in one-sided
attempts at consistency. In our moral practice, for instance,
there evidently in fact is involved some element of uncertainty
as to the issue. Hence on this point the Christian religion, cling-
ing to the concrete Whole, on one side maintains this element of


124. ~ ON TRUTH AND COPYING CHAP,


moral struggle, but on the other side completes it (inconsistently
no doubt) by an assurance of final victory. And here from _
both sides comes a protest, and a one-sided cry for clearness and
consequence. Unless really, and as an ultimate fact, there is an
uncertain future, morality, we hear, is destroyed. God therefore,
to save morality, must be made sufficiently ignorant and suffi-
ciently weak for the future really to be doubtful. And apparently
it is hot seen that, with this, there is an end logically of all that
iq theant (and much is meant) by ‘ the peace of God’, Again, on
ithe same principle but from the other side, some fanatic from
time to time insists on the utter supremacy of Good. And hence
he concludes in the older style that morality is irrelevant and
worthless, or to-day in a newer mode that the individual, as such,
is perfect, and that there is no toothache but ignorance. But
for practical purposes surely there is something higher than
theoretical consistency, even if such consistency in practice were
actually attainable. Hence, unless ultimate theoretical truth
itself may be inconsistent, it is better for practice surely not to
identify our working ideas with ultimate truth. For practice you
want ideas which keep hold of all sides of the main substance, and
to sacrifice any part of that substance to theoretical consistency
is practical error. But on the other hand the reader must be
warned that to agree with us here is to incur the peril, whatever
that is, of being called an ‘ Intellectualist ’.

To come now to that which Prof. James would call ‘humanism’,
I am reminded forthwith that an accusation of mere humanism
was ane of the charges long agodsrought against German Idealism.
And since (if I may speak for myself) I do not believe in any
reality outside of and apart from the totality of finite mind,! and
since there is certainly nothing original in my disbeliefs or beliefs,
ofice more here I fail to perceive the chasrn which separates the
new ‘humanism’ from what went before. And I am again
relieved to find that on the whole Prof. James himself takes this
view, and regrets an attitude of hostile criticism on our side as
due largely to mistake. Prof. James doubtless here does not
remember that on our side nothing was said until we found our-
selves judged and sentenced. The philosophic world, ostensibly


1 This statement (with others) is liable to be misunderstood, and perhaps
‘as it stands, is one-sided. The reader is referred to the footnote on
Pp. 350-1, in which a question as to Nature is discussed.’ . e


y ON TRUTH AND COPYING 125


in Prof. James’s behalf, was divided into sheep and goats, and
_the trumpet was blown, and Plato and Aristotle summoned from
the dead to witness the triumph of the one philosopher and the
confusion of the sophists.1 But for my part I have no wish to
recall such extravagances, if Prof. James will not forget that it
was his fortune, however ill-merited, to inspire them. And if
I can do anything to remove or to throw light on any issue between
Prof. James and those who cannot follow him, it will be a pleasure
to me to attempt this.

(x) In the first place as to ‘ pragmatism’, we want to hear
definitely from Prof. James whether the practical side of our
nature is to be made supreme, or whether there is anything else
which has value and rights of its own. Even now I ask myself
in what sense, or whether at all, mutilation is advocated. I still
do not know if I am called on to enter into life halt and maimed,
to say nothing of being blind of one eye. . And a reassuring state-
ment in general terms is, I think, not sufficient. But if Prof. James

_ would explain to us how in the end he understands the human
Good, and how its elements are related to one another, this point
perhaps would become clear. We might at last know whether we
all should or should not call ourselves Pragmatists. (2) Next as
to ‘humanism’, surely we should be informed, first, whether
‘ finite mind ’ is to stand merely for some of the inhabitants of
a single planet, or is to have a far wider meaning, and, if the
latter, we should be told what that meaning is. This is not a new
question (it might even be called an old and familiar one), and
in some aspects the difference herg between various views may be
really enormous. It seems, to myself at least, imperative that
such a point should not be left in darkness. And (3) in the process
of Humanity (however Humanity is understood) we have to ©
inquire how the individuals stand to the whole. Have both sides
of the process equal reality, or, if this is not so, what is the
alternative ? If the individuals are the final realities, what in the
end are we to say of the ‘ together ’ and of the whole process ?

’ These are well-known problems, and they surely call for systematic
treatment. (4) Then, to say nothing of questions about know-
ledge—a subject with which Prof. James has in some degree
dealt—what in the end is the meaning of and the truth about
Progress ? Endless progress as an ideal is itself hardly above

@ The reference is to Mind for Avril 1902. N.S.. No. 42.


126 ON TRUTH AND COPYING CHAP. V


criticism, but is there in the end any meaning in progress at all ? -
Is mere prevalence and survival to be the same as progress, and, if
not that, then what else is progress to mean ? And is the temporal
process of the Universe (which process is apparently the one
reality) to be taken as a progress, and if so, on what grounds ?
We have once more here an old problem which calls for solution.
(5) Finally I need perhaps say nothing as to the difficulty with
‘regard to ‘a condition’ outside of finite minds, except to point
out that any obscurity on this head must naturally — the
entire view.

The above questions, and others, can hardly be eee
satisfactorily unless they are dealt with all together and as
connected parts of one inquiry. Prof. James’s answer to them,
when it comes, will not altogether, I imagine, meet all our diffi-
culties, but most assuredly it will be welcome. Even at Oxford
we have not yet been so deafened by periodical manifestoes and
by prophetic outcries as to be incapable of hearing. And there,
as indeed everywhere else, Prof. James may count upon willing
and respectful attention.


APPENDIX I TO CHAPTER V
ON THE AMBIGUITY OF PRAGMATISM !


tJ 5
Like other readers of Mind I have been occupying myself lately
with Prof. James’s lectures on Pragmatism, and with these I have
‘been reading the defence of Pragmatism offered by Prof. Dewey
in a late number of Mind (No. 63). Their account of the matter
strikes me as in certain points calling for further explanation, and
Tamventuring to offer some remarks on this head. If Profs. James
‘and Dewey do not yet know what Pragmatism means, there is
no one, I imagine, who is likely to be in a better case. For this
reason I ave felt justified in confining my attention here to
these acknowledged leaders, and in ignoring other Pragmatists.
In what follows I am concerned solely with Profs. Dewey and
James, and I will begin ‘with the latter.


I. While reading the lectures on Pragmatism, I, doubtless like
others,.am led to ask myself, ‘Am I and have I been always
myself a Pragmatist ?’ This question I still find myself unable to
answer.” The meaning of ‘practice’ and ‘practical’ is to my mind
with Prof. James most obscure and ambiguous. On the one side
he insists on a doctrine acceptable perhaps only to the minority.
On the other side he extends so widely the limits of his creed that
few indeed would in the end be left outside the fold. I will
remark first on the wide and next on the narrow sense given to
Pragmatism.

(i) One of the objections raised against Pramaterh has been
its alleged degradation of truth. All value except of a borrowed
kind has apparently been denied to theory." What it is wine in


2 This paper appeared first in Mind for April 1908.

* Cf. Mind, No, 62 (Chap. V of this volume). For the ambiguity of
- Pragmatism I would refer the reader to Mr. McTaggart’s admirable review
in Mind, No. 65. I saw this only after the whole of what follows had
been written.


128 APPENDIX I TO CHAPTER V


the end has ultimate worth for the Pragmatist, has remained to
myself a matter of mere inference and conjecture. But what has
seemed certain is that theorizing has been condemned as worthless
except as a means, while that which has value in itself has been
left undetermined. Whether for instance the Pragmatist takes
the world of art to belong to the region of the worthless-in-itself,
T at least could not learn. This situation, surprising to myself,
has on one understanding of Prof. James ceased, so far as he is
concerned, to exist. For he takes the Good as a genus of which
truth is one species. He denies or subordirfates the distinction of
theoretical and practical. Theory is one kind of practice, and so
apparently is theoretical enjoyment (p. 217). And I suppose that
fine art and the beautiful once more fall under this same head of
‘practice’. And I conjecture that Prof. James would also include
under ‘ practical’ all human enjoyment. And, if this is so, who;
except perhaps some narrow Hedonist, would wish to dissent ?
Life in all its main aspects is allowed to be the end, and none of
these aspects is excluded and degraded to the level of a mere
external means. Theory, besides its use in altering the course of
events, may be pursued independently within certain limits,1 may
be allowed to satisfy its proper want, and to use its own criterion.
‘And the same thing again will hold good in the case of fine art.
I indeed may wonder what purpose is served by torturing every-
thing that is good and valuable under the head of ‘practice’. But,
if the substance of all for which I have fought is conceded, I should
think it unreasonable to dispute about a word.

In the ordinary sense of the word ‘practice’ therefore, according
to Prof. James, truth need not be directly concerned with practice.
Truth indeed must not become transcendent. It must not turn
itself to some other world out of relation with the world of our
perceptions and actions. But, so long as truth maintains its
connexion, however indirect, with the sphere of our doing and
suffering, the Pragmatist is satisfied. “‘ Any idea that helps us to
deal, whether practically or intellectually, with either the reality.
or its belongings . . . will hold true of that reality ’ (p. 213). This
denial of transcendence, this insistence that all ideas, and more
especially such ideas as those of God or again the Absolute, are


+ T have endeavoured to define these limits elsewhere, . See Mind, N.S.,
No. 51 (pp. 86-91 of this volume).


ON THE AMBIGUITY OF PRAGMATISM 129


true and real just so far as they work, is to myself naturally most
welcome. Most of us have’ I think, now for some time accepted
and tried to act on this principle. It hardly appears to me to be,
at this time of day, revolutionary ; but still, if this is what
Pragmatism means, so much the better for Pragmatism.

And there is a further point on which Prof. James seems once
more to endorse our ideas. I had been,-I confess, led to think
that, where the Pragmatist took successful practice as the test

of truth, he meant this to hold of the individual agent. The idea
that worked best in the furthering of my individual existence,
I thought, was truth for me. I understood in short that good for
the individual and true for the individual were much the same
thing, and that further the individual could apply this criterion,
And naturally I found that this led to difficulty. We speak, for
instance, of a man’s life being ruined by the useless discovery of
some truth, say of his deceased wife’s infidelity, and we hardly see
our way to set down a truth of this kind as error. But the whole
difficulty, we now learn from Prof. James, was manufactured by
ourselves. It is a living witness to our blindness, our incompe-
tence and injustice, not to use terms still more abusive (p. 233).
For Pragmatism, I now understand Prof. James to say, does not
pretend to hold of the individual. The idea that in a man’s case.
does not work, or that works to his ruin, may for all that be true..
For the true is ‘ the expedient in the long run and on the whole
(p. 222). And, this being understood, the whole difficulty so far
disappears.

It is succeeded, however, I would urge, by fresh troubles. For
what is ‘the long run’ and ‘the whole’, and how does the
individual.get to know about things like these, which seem really
beyond him ? On this vital matter Prof. James, it seems to me,
leaves us without much assistance. We may conjecture that ‘ the
long run’ is the process that leads (if it really does lead) to the
final victory of Good. We are reminded perhaps of that


One far-off divine event,
To which the whole creation moves,


But I am very far from sure that we are reminded rightly. And
what ‘ the whole ’ is to mean seems, to my mind, beyond probable
conjecture. Is it this or that set of beings inhabiting our planet,
or is humanity but a small, a microscopical and an inconsiderable
1574 . «K


T30 APPENDIX I TO CHAPTER V


element among the beings that have value? In speaking of that
which he terms ‘humanism’ Prof. James would have felt himself
compelled, we might have supposed, to deal with such dangerous
ambiguities and such distressing uncertainties. But another
course unfortunately seemed to him more desirable. The result,
however, so far as I see, is that ‘ the expedient in the long run
and on the whole ’ remains unknown and unknowable. And yet
it is this apparently by which the individual has to regulate
his life, .

And possibly Prof. James holds that the individual must walk
here by faith (p.296). The individual does not know and he cannot
see that truth and goodness now are one, or how they ever will
become one. But he must do what seems to him to be best, and
again accept what seems to him to be true, and he must trust and
believe that truth and goodness in the end will not be divergent.
But, with this, the relative independence for us of truth, beauty
and practical goodness, seems fully justified, and, so far as the
practice of the individual is concerned, Pragmatism seems in
short admitted not to work.

And with such a result I, in the main, naturally find myself in
accord. To me, as to many others, it seems that in the end truth,
fact and goodness are one, though I am forced to admit that we
cannot perceive and verify this unity in detail, and that therefore
in and for the individual a relative divergence must be recognized.
Hence between Prof. James and myself the difference in the end
would be practically trifling. But, on the other hand, theoretically,
as soon as Prof. James attempts to deal with first principles, the
case, I think, will be altered. For, as against our principle of
immanent Reality, he seems to have adopted a transcendent Ideal.
And that, I imagine the history of philosophy has tended to show,
is a thing which, as an ultimate principle, will not work.


(ii) If the above interpretation of Prof. James is correct, Prag-
matism is no militant creed. It is in harmony with views against
which it is commonly understood to protest, and to imagine that
it portends a new dawn of philosophy (p. 6) would be obviously
ridiculous. And I hasten to add that I have not imagined that
Prof. James would accept his doctrine as it is above interpreted.
I think it at least possible that he takes the whole theoretical side
of mind to be an instrument worthless in itself, used to gain


ON THE AMBIGUITY OF PRAGMATISM — 131


a valuable end which he finds it convenient to leave in darkness.
I am sure that the common antithesis of intellectual or theoretical
and practical appears in his pages (e.g. pp. 186-8),! and that the
former of these words is used derogatorily. The conclusion that,
at least for the practice of the individual, Pragmatism is untrue,
seems to me contrary to the whole tendency of Prof. James’s
teaching. And, if I rightly understand him, Pragmatism, far
from being a view which tends to reconcile extremes, is committed
to the denial of anything contrary to pluralism. It is committed
to the assertion of the absolute mutability of the Universe and
the absolute reality of individual disaster and evil. With regard
to Prof. James’s doctrine of human Freedom, here, as elsewhere,
I find it impossible to decide what it means.2 But the pragmatic


1 In his Meaning of Truth (1909), pp. 206 ff., Prof. James not only seems
to recognize the validity of the theoretic interest, but also to condemn in
unmeasured terms the critics of Pragmatism for having failed to see that
this recognition was taught from the first as the doctrine of Pragmatism.
I submit that Prof. James here did these critics a serious injustice.

What are the facts? Is it true that from the first Pragmatism stated
clearly that theory has an intrinsic value of its own, and that Instru-
mentalism—if you take that in the sense of making theory a mere means
to practice—is a false doctrine ? Is it true that from the first ‘ practical ’
was not opposed to ‘theoretical’, and that, in making the test of truth
practical, it was never said or meant that the appeal was to be to practice
as distinct from theory ? Is it the case that all that in fact was insisted on
was that the test is to be empirical ? Of course, if all this is so, the crities
‘of Pragmatism have been greatly to blame. But I submit that any such
account of the matter would be quite untenable.

Not only was the fact otherwise, but, further, if it had not been otherwise,
I suggest that Pragmatism could hardly have preached itself as a new
gospel, have talked about a new dawn of philosophy and a turning-point in
the history of philosophy (Pref. vii, viii), And I must doubt whether even
now Prof, Dewey would accept the position apparently taken by Prof. James,

The real fact, I presume, is this, that Prof. James and some of his

followers (for we have not to do merely with Prof. James) believed them-
selves to have in Pragmatism a new and revolutionary doctrine, but, on the
other hand, had never realized exactly what ‘Pragmatism ’ and ‘ practical’
were to mean. Then, under the pressure of criticism, being forced to
‘discuss the sense of their battle-cry, that sense, in becoming more or less
realized by them, became, I submit, seriously altered, though of course
without their knowledge. And then the critics are abused for their failure
to understand and accept a statement, supposed now, in the teeth of facts,
to have been put clearly before them. But I have little doubt as to the
judgement which will be passed on all this by the reader who is acquainted
with what really has taken place. ,

* T remarked on this point some years ago in Mind, No. 43, pp. 296-8.

K2


132° APPENDIX I TO CHAPTER V


doctrine of Free Will, as it appears in this volume, seems to
myself to be repeating that which I, for instance, under Hegelian
influence sought to urge, in my Ethical Studies, more than thirty
years ago. And Prof. James’s view of Freedom, whatever else it
may be, must, I assume, be something which leaves him at
liberty to denounce Hegel and his followers.

The conclusion then which I would submit to the reader is that
Prof. James’s Pragmatism is essentially ambiguous, and that he
throughout is unconsciously led to take advantage of its ambiguity.
It can at discretion be preached as a new Gospel which is to bring
light into the world, or recommended as that old teaching of
common sense which few but fools have rejected. The reader
may, I think, be helped to appreciate this attempt to make the
most of both worlds, if I sketch briefly for him another and, as
I think, a better working creed.

T perhaps may here recall the fact that I have advocated else-
where certain views on first principles. But on the other hand
I have seen, if I may say so, far too much of metaphysics to think
of staking vital issues on the result of speculative inquiry. And
for practical purposes I hold in reserve a belief, in common,
I imagine, with an increasing number of persons, a belief, the
advantages of which Pragmatism would, it seems, like to appro-
priate surreptitiously. According to this practical creed there is
in the end no truth for us save that of working ideas. Whatever
idea is wanted to satisfy a geniine human need is true, and truth
in the end has no other meaning. Our sense of value, and in the
end for every man his own sense of value, is ultimate and final.
And, since there is no court of appeal, it is idle even to inquire if
this sense is fallible. It is this which in the end decides as to
human interests, and whatever ideas are needed to serve those
interests are true, however much these ideas are in contradiction
with one another or even with themselves. The one question in-
the end is whether the ideas work. But there are degrees of truth,
because ideas may work better or worse, and because again the
interests which ideas subserve are more or less valuable. The
above is scepticism, if you please, but it is not the stupid scepti-
cism which offers itself as positive theoretical doctrine. It is the
intelligent refusal to accept as final any theoretical criterion which
actually so far exists. And there is here no mutilation of human
nature, since evef¥ side of life, practical, aesthetic and intellectual,


ON THE AMBIGUITY OF PRAGMATISM 133.


is allowed its full value. We are emancipated once and for all
from the narrowness of all one-sided attempts at consistency.

, When a man, holding to this less one-sided Pragmatism, says
that he for instance believes in God, not @ God but a God through
whom perfect goodness in spite of appearance is real—how futile
in the case of such a man are Prof. James’s findings! Prof. James
will tell this man that he is a quietist, that he wants to ‘ give up’
and to ‘ lie back ’, and to avoid paying the just price of salvation
through individual sacrifice and effort (pp. 276, 289, 292, 295).
But the man will answer that, while he believes in the reality of
perfect goodness, he believes also that nothing is more intensely
real than individual action for good, and that he believes in these
two things not one in spite of the other, but one even because of
the other. And he will regret that Prof. James should be so
wanting in experience as to be unable to perceive obvious facts,
and should be in such bondage to the traditional worship of
theoretical consistency. And as against such a position, which
T do not suppose Prof. James will call novel, what has he to offer
and to object in the name of Pragmatism? He has offered at
present nothing, so far as I see, beyond one-sided prejudices, and
a blind appeal to theoretical consistency, and an uncritical faith
’ in the ultimate validity of some undiscussed Law of Contradiction.

But that Prof. James could accept the position I have sketched
above to myself seems impossible. I do not suggest that the
result is too sceptical for a Professor to endorse, but beyond this
there are other obstacles which seem insurmountable. For, if
the above is accepted, there is at once apparently an end of the
new Gospel, with all its promises and all its boasts about a new
dawn of philosophy, together with its anticipatory outbreak of
dithyrambic ecstasy (p. 257). And something perhaps even worse
than this would follow. For Prof. James would forfeit all right
to emphasize as ultimate truth the absolute mutability and
incoherence of the world, and the absolute value of this or that
individual success or disaster. In short all those prejudices on
which he rides to the attack on Absolutism would have to be
forgone. These ideas could, none of them, claim more than
a relative worth, and their opposites would also and at the same
time possess truth.

But if Prof. James cannot be content with so broad a

1 Cf, Chap. IV.


134° APPENDIX I TO CHAPTER V


‘pragmatism ’, his alternative, I submit, is to develop his theory
of first principles. Assuredly I am not alone in the desire that he
would turn his back for a time on sporadic articles and on popular
lectures, with their incoherence and half-heartedness and more
‘or less plausible ambiguities, and would work in the way in which
a man who seriously aims at a new philosophy is condemned to
work, and with a result which I at least feel sure would repay his
labour. And perhaps in the meantime he might remind his
followers on this side of the Atlantic that, of course without
prejudice to the future, it is not yet true that the crowing of the
cock brings the sun above the horizon.


- IE. I pass on now to consider the account of Pragmatism given

by Prof. Dewey in Mind, No. 63, and here, as with Prof. James,
I find much which to myself seems ambiguous. I am again left
uncertain whether in the end I also am a Pragmatist, or where and
how on the other hand I fail to deserve that title. But I have to
begin by putting on one side what to my mind are sheer irrele-
vancies. I myself long ago (1883) pointed out that theory takes
its origin from practical collision, and again for myself theory
implies a theoretical want and its satisfaction. And it is obvious
that, if Pragmatism means no more than this, I, as I presume
Prof: Dewey is aware, have been for many years a Pragmatist,
and, however well he preaches, he is preaching here to one long
ago converted.

Certainly I must suppose therefore that for Prof. Dewey more
than this is wanted for Pragmatism, and I must go on to inquire
how much more is wanted. In the first place Prof. Dewey, I
understand, insists that theory is only an instrument.1_ Now we
all know that there are instruments and activities which have no

-value but a borrowed one. They may be necessary, but still in
themselves they may be valueless or even worse. Hence we
naturally ask if this is to be the case with theory, and again with
fine art. And, if this is to be the case with one or both, we naturally
want to be informed as to the ultimate source of the value which
is transferred to them. But, so far as I see, Prof. Dewey leaves
us here without any answer. And I do not myself understand
how any thinking person is justified in accepting a doctrine left
in this ambiguous state. Iii philosophy surely one has no right

1 On Instrumentalism see the references in the Index.


ON THE AMBIGUITY OF PRAGMATISM 135


to teach that something is only a means, unless one is prepared
to state the end to which it conduces and by which it is measured.!
And I must even be allowed to set this down as to my mind
elementary.

Passing on then unsatisfied from this point let us ask what is
meant by the practical nature of thinking and truth. Let me say
here at once that I have failed, I am sure, to understand what
practical means for Prof. Dewey.? But an idea, it appears, is true
only so far as it issues in behaviour. Now, as applied to the early


1 Prof. Dewey (p. 328) certainly denies that the end is the abstraction
of ‘ mere practice ’, but such a denial is obviously no positive answer, And
when he adds that he cannot believe that ‘ any empiricist has ever enter-
tained ’ ‘ such a thoroughly intellectualistic construction ’, I confess that
he amazes me, The ‘empiricist’ in my own experience is precisely the
man who more than others takes mere abstractions for realities. In any
case if the Pragmatist cannot even attempt to state his own doctrine o:
ultimate value, that, it seems to me, is something like an admission of
bankruptcy.

3 ‘By practical’, he says, ‘I mean only regulated change in experienced
values ’ (p. 328). But, if Prof. Dewey means no more than this, his whole
article is surely one long ignoratio elencht. Yow does such a definition
exclude the existence of pure theoretical activity and practice? And, if
it does not, what becomes of Prof. Dewey’s polemic ? Pragmatism on this
understanding is in agreement with even an extreme one-sided intellec-
tualism, so long as that asserts an intellectual need and activity. The
reason, I venture to think, why Prof. Dewey fails to realize this, is that
he uses ‘ practical’ in a further sense and passes unconsciously from one
sense to another. In this further sense there is the usual opposition
between practice and mere theory, and it is, I presume, with this sense
in his mind that Prof. Dewey asserts (p. 335) that the truth of a mechani-
cal idea is inseparable from the construction of a working-model. In
short, Prof, Dewey seems to define practice in one sense and.then to slide,
wherever it is convenient, into another sense. Either this, or he fails
wholly to realize the nature of the position which he believes himself to be
attacking. :

Another point which I may notice is the connexion, according to Prof.
Dewey, between having an idea and holding it.for true. There are state-
ments as to ‘assumption’ (p. 328) and ‘hypothetic’ (p. 341) which I probably
have failed to understand. They look to myself, however, as if Prof. Dewey
was assuming the reality of ‘ floating ideas’ when in controversy with
persons some of whom at least regard these ideas as a delusion untenable
both in psychology and logic. And it seems to me further that the rejection
of floating ideas tends to raise difficulties, the existence of which Prof. Dewey
fails to recognize, I cannot but think that here, as elsewhere, a reference
to Bain’s views would have been useful. But in any case the existence and
possibility of mere ideas, Prof. Dewey should remember, is denied, and _


cannot in controversy be assumed (see Chap. III).
¥


136 APPENDIX. I TO CHAPTER V


life of the soul, I am prepared for the sake of argument to accept
this statement unreservedly. It is not, I think, even as applied
.to the beginnings of intelligence, entirely correct. But I need not
here enter on any reservation which seems to me to be required.
Let.us for the sake of argument agree that early soul-life (as I, for
instance, urged some twenty-five years ago) has no ideas about
things except the ideas of its own practical attitude towards
them. And let us agree that, except so far as an idea actuall¥
issues in practical behaviour, it cannot be retained. Still, does it
follow from this that later on a theoretical need and satisfaction
is not in fact developed ? Apart from such a hazardous conclusion
the entire argument from origin appears to me to be worthless.
And I presume therefore that Prof. Dewey’s main contention ‘is
this, that there is not now in fact any theory which is not practical
and practical essentially. .

I would repeat that I have failed to understand Prof. Dewey’s
real position. And I have remarked above on the fatal ambiguity
that attaches to the word practical. But if we take practical in
the sense in which it is opposed to theoretical—and if we do nof
take it so the whole controversy seems to vanish—objections to
such a position present themselves at once. (1) Suggested ideas
—some of them apparently remote from anything which I am to
- do or could do—are accepted as true. And not énly this, but in
many cases these ideas appear to coalesce with and to qualify my
world, without any experienced collision and apart from anything
which I myself seem to do. This account holds good of a large
amount of actual present beliefs. And, though Prof. Dewey fails
' to recognize the extent to which this takes place, he appears to
admit that in the case of ‘tested’ ideas (p.341) we have judgements
not issuing in actual behaviour. Further, even where ideas do
concern my conduct, I would submit that even here they need
not be entertained practically and need not in this sense be
practical. But in any case, as we have seen, a large number of
ideas appear in no sense to relate to my behaviour either in
themselves or in their results. (2) I have so far dealt with cases
where no actual preceding want or desire for the result can be
shown to exist. But, even where the attained truth is the satis-


1 J do not discuss here the doubt which might be raised with regard to
the ideas of suffering as apart from doing. If you go back far enough
I should not suppose that such ideas exist.


ON THE AMBIGUITY OF PRAGMATISM 137


faction of an actual desire, that desire and that want may be, in
a word, a desire for truth itself. Knowledge here, practical in
one sense, will still not be practical in the sense of being concerned
merely with my behaviour. And ‘concerned’ is not the word,
for according to Prof. Dewey, if I rightly understand him, truth
consists merely in my practical behaviour and is itself nothing
otherwise. And, when I apply such a description to the solution
of every possible historical or abstract problem, I appear to
- myself to have arrived somewhere out of contact with actual
facts. I can keep hold of them only when I admit that practice
itself may be essentially theoretical.

Prof. Dewey to some extent seems to be aware of these objec-
tions, but how he considers himself to meet them I am unable
except in part to understand. I can therefore do little more than
set down what seems to me to be possible ways of reply. The
reader will understand that in what follows, except where this is
stated, I am not pretending to criticize Prof. Dewey’s account.
I am detailing some points on which it seems to me that clearness
is essential and has not been secured. (i) The first answer to
the above objections would consist in urging that truth is the
behaviour of an idea rather than that of aman. When an idea
acts and works in me in a certain manner, that is truth, and
therefore truth in this sense is practical. I mention this view
though I do not suppose that Prof. Dewey would accept it.
(ii) Another way of showing that an idea is practical, although
I really do not act on it, is to urge that I should act on it if
the conditions were otherwise, or shall act on it perhaps in the
future (p. 339). This is the position taken long ago by Bain, who,
for some reason that I do not understand, is here ignored. It is
of course open to the obvious reply that the question is about
‘the actual and not about the possible or future, and that to
identify these is not permitted.1_ We may perhaps put the sante
point otherwise by asking in what my knowledge that con-
ditionally or in the future I should or shall act, itself now actually
consists. To answer for instance that with an idea there is a more
or less tentative struggle to act, and that therefore there 7s an act


2 This point was dealt with by me many years ago, I have ventured to
remark that the uncritical identification of the real and the possible is
a leading characteristic of English empiricism, On this subject the
reader is referred to the Index, s.v. Possible.


138 APPENDIX I TO CHAPTER V


—seems unsatisfactory. We do not always seem concerned with
any struggle, and as to what ‘ tentative’ is to mean we require
information. Any such phrase we recognize as an old device for
going on saying that a thing is so, when obviously and visibly it
is not so. But whether, and, if so, how far any of the above is
applicable in the case of Prof. Dewey I am unable to say. (iii) Let
us then pass from the view that thought implies essentially an
issue in external behaviour. Let us suppose that thought is
always an act, and implies therefore of course a psychical altera-
tion of myself. But let us suppose that this psychical alteration,
though necessary, is not the main essence of thought. And let us
take that main essence to lie in a qualification of reality which is
ideal. If this is the view urged by Prof. Dewey, as I can hardly
imagine it is, I must lament that he has so failed to express it
clearly. With such a view it is obvious that in the main I agree,
and how it should be urged against myself I am unable to under-
stand. (iv) And yet, agreeing in the main with such a view,
I cannot wholly endorse it. For in the word ‘ act’ there is still
too much ambiguity or else downright mistake. There are truths
suggested and at once accepted where certainly there seems
no act, in the sense of my will or of my act. The idea seems to
coalesce with, or, let us say, to be apperceived by my world or
oné of my worlds. In this case I am altered of course, but in
what sense do I act ? And can we even say here that, so far, the
idea’s truth for me lies in its working and in its theoretical conse-
quences ? Have we not got in such a case, so far as I am con-
cerned, something like passive acceptance.of the idea? I agree
that, when we reflect and when we come to the criterion of truth,
the truth of an idea is inseparable from its theoretical results.
And, if you like to add that here I always act, I am not concerned
to deny this. But how this is to hold in the case of all acceptance
of truth I am unable to see. Prof. Dewey seems to perceive the
above difficulty, not wholly but so far as it applies to ‘ tested
ideas’ (p. 341). But his answer is, I regret to say, to myself unin-
telligible. What is ‘permanent status’? What is ‘ energy of
position ’ (p. 341)? To my mind these phrases seem to be no
better than mere mythology. And to me they come as a tacit
admission that the theory will not work when applied to
facts. And I have already dealt above with the apparent


1 Cf. Prof, James’s ‘ cold storage’, Why not ‘ hibernation * or ‘ slumber ’


ON THE AMBIGUITY OF PRAGMATISM — 139


attempt to revive Bain’s method of escape. (v) Finally (to
pass on) the issue of the idea in behaviour may be admitted
not to hold now and here, at this time or of this agent. No
more may be meant than that at some time the true idea will
also ‘be true practically. I hesitate, however, to understand
Prof. Dewey in this sense even more than I hesitated in the case
of Prof. James. With such a conclusion I should agree, if for
‘at some time will’ I may be allowed to write ‘ somehow does’.
Still in neither case, I submit, can such a criterion be used in
detail. To some extent obviously therefore, I urge, we must
remain content with mere theory. And really this is all for which
I myself have contended and contend. And if you insist that
such a state of things is only provisional, then, so far as I see,
the provisional state of things will last as long as there are finite
beings.? _

Against the preceding it may be urged, though I do not say by
Prof. Dewey, that the question is about the main and general
tendency of things. That general tendency is that the true idea |
is the idea which works best even externally. And it may be
added that this general tendency justifies the ultimate definition,
although we cannot verify this definition in detail and in the case
of all ideas. But such a position, if occupied by Prof. Dewey,
would to my mind be wholly untenable, if at least he is committed
to the doctrine that nowhere for us in our experience can truth
be other than that which works practically. For such a denial
is not only (as we have seen) out of harmony with fact, but in the
end it would itself destroy the general conclusion and the ultimate
definition. ,

For how, I ask, are we to arrive at ultimate knowledge of the
main tendency of things ? Take this very question which seems to
be at issue between Prof. Dewey and myself. We each of us are
face to face here with a colliding situation, and as to this and so
- far we are agreed. Now what are we trying to do with this
situation ? I on my side say that we seek primarily a theoretical
solution. We are each of us attempting to find an idea which will


or ‘on half-pay ’ or any other mythological metaphor, whichever for the
moment seems to bring most conviction ?

1 The above, of course, justifies the distinction in practice between the
idea which is really true and the idea which works best practically (p. 337,
note). :


140 APPENDIX I TO CHAPTER V


work, work in the sense of qualifying reality ideally in such a way
that the collision so far is at an end. And I urge that this true
idea does not in respect of its truth or falsehood imply a passage
into any practical behaviour on my part. The idea involves
a psychical change in me certainly, but that, I contend, is not the
essence. If Prof. Dewey replies (as I think probably he does not),
* that this aspect of psychical change in me is the essence of truth
and of falsehood, then I would ask him to state this plainly and to
attempt to face the problem on this basis. And J would ask him
to remember that the question is wof whether with belief and judge-
ment there is a psychical change in me. The question is what we
are to say about this psychical event, and how otherwise it must
be qualified, so that it-is not merely a psychical event but is
specially a true or false belief and judgement., But if Prof. Dewey
falls back upon practical result and non-theoretical behaviour,
then I would invite him here to say what this is. What is it that
IT do here and what is it that he does here, each of us, I presume,
differently in the case of the diverse ideas which we accept ?
I myself am unable to verify this issue in practical behaviour, and
in any case the contention that this issue makes truth’s essence
remains to my mind untenable.

If however in this ultimate appeal to fact we are forced to
recognize theoretical truth, then to go on from this basis to deny
such truth would be suicidal. To upset by knowledge about the
main tendency of the world something for us more ultimate than
such knowledge, seems to destroy knowledge altogether. To
build further upon the foundation on which we stand is of course
legitimate. To insist that truth, to reach perfection, must_also in
every case somehow issue in act, does not deny that truth for us,
at least to some extent,. must be sought and found otherwise.?
On the other hand to insist on the practical result of the idea
everywhere as the criterion of truth, and wholly to deny truth
as existing otherwise, is, Isubmit, to ensure disaster. But I must
end as I began, both in the case of Prof. Dewey and of Prof. James,
by deploring their ambiguity or my blindness, which in the end


1 On p, 330 Prof. Dewey appears to traverse this statement directly.

* In the same way when a too ardent Darwinian teaches that the true
idea is the idea which prevails, his position so far is consistent. But, when
he goes on perhaps to insist that truth is nothing but prevalence, he falls
into inconsistency if he now offers at least his truth as more,


ON THE AMBIGUITY OF PRAGMATISM  1r4r


leaves rhe- uncertain. what it is that they mean to affirm and
to deny.

So much indeed of what Prof. Dewey urges seems to me so true
and so admirably stated, that I can only applaud and regret that
it should seem to be directed against views which I hold. I agree
that practical collision is the origin of truth, and I agree that for
truth to pass into a new practicalwesult may be called (if we speak
at large) truth’s natural and normal end. But that by us men
theoretical truth, as well as fine art, must be cultivated, at least
to some extent, independently, I am no less assured. The denial
of this appears to me to violate facts and to threaten us with the
mutilation of our human ideal. And if theory and fine art, or
either of these, is to have no worth of its own, let us at least be
informed what in the end it is which really possesses value. On
such a point to state no positive doctrine, and to leave it to
opponents to lose themselves in more or less mistaken conjec-
tures, is a course, I would submit, unworthy of such writers as
Profs. Dewey and James.

Prof. Dewey’s article raises a number of interesting questions
which would well repay discussion. Among these the appatent
contention (p. 334) that truth is nothing but that which I do with,
an idea, and that truth therefore is made by me, could hardly be
dealt with except at length. That contention would become less‘
ambiguous and more instructive, if the problem of falsehood were
included, and again that of beauty and ugliness. The question
whether and in what sense I can bring into being truth an
beauty, ugliness and error, good and evil, and in one word value,
has of course the highest interest. The answer that not only do
I bring all this into existence, but that the distinctive essences
of all these things are nothing beyond what I do and make,
T hesitate to attribute to Prof. Dewey. And his isolated treatment
of this question so far as regards truth, ignoring even the diffi-
culties caused by falsehood, seems to me obViously insufficient.
But to deal with this and other interesting issues raised in Prof.
Dewey’s article, is here clearly impossible..

I propose again to say nothing here in reply to Prof. Dewey’s
discussion of certain views held by me. It is not that I do not
value his criticism, or again that in most cases I should find it
difficult to make an explanation or a reply which, to myself


? See Chap. XI.


142 APPENDIX II TO CHAPTER V


perhaps, would be satisfactory. But I think it far better to defer
anything which I have to say to another opportunity.1_ Pragma-
tism proclaims itself, I understand, as a great new way in philo-
sophy. Hence, if it is true, it is not true because those particular
views with which I for instance am identified, are demonstrably
false. Such an alternative might be convenient, but it is, of course,
indefensible, and with the injustice which it would offer to other
views I could not associate myself. Pragmatism is true, if at all,
because it can successfully deal with all ultimate issues. It may
indeed be shown otherwise to be invalid, but it cannot otherwise
be shown to hold good. And I will venture to add that in my
opinion some such reminder as this (though perhaps not in the
case of Prof. Dewey) seems desirable and necessary.


APPENDIX II TO CHAPTER V?
ON PROF. JAMES’S ‘MEANING OF TRUTH’


I Hap written, some months before Prof. James’s lamented
death, a criticism of some of the views set forth in his Meaning
of Truth. My purpose in writing this was to invite Prof. James
to furnish certain explanations. And now, especially as the fol-
lowing remarks are not a general estimate of his work, and as
they give no expression to my feeling of admiration and genuine
respect, I have hesitated to publish them. But for the reader
who will take them merely for what they are, I think it better to
do so, And I will begin with the question of Relativism.

We must here understand relativism in two senses. (a) In
the first of these, truth and reality are simply for this or that
finite individual, while (4), in the second meaning of the term,
it is some set of individuals on which everything depends. (a) In
the first sense Prof. James certainly did not advocate relativism.
What he calls Pragmatism and Humanism are obviously com-
patible even with an undue disregard of the individual person,
and with an exaggerated emphasis laid on the universal side.
With regard to Humanism, the tendency of what may be called

1 See Chap, IX.


? These pages appeared originally in Mind for July 1911. A few slight
alterations have been made. ~


ON PROF. JAMES’S ‘MEANING OF TRUTH’ 143


Humanism to depreciate the aspect emphasized by ‘ Personal
Idealism,’ may be called historical, for it appeared years ago in
one part of the Hegelian school. In other words there is no
connexion in principle between ‘ Personal Idealism’ and the
doctrines of Pragmatism and Humanism. Certainly, then, Prof.
James did not intend to teach relativism in this first sense,
though whether his doctrine, when worked out, would have led
to that result, I am unable to judge.

(5) In the second meaning of relativism truth and reality are -
something merely for this or that set or collection of persons.
And, in inquiring how far Prof. James-was in this sense a relati-
vist, we are brought up short by the ambiguity, which (though
invited to do so) he, so far as I know, made no attempt to remove. .
The only thing, I would submit, which lends plausibility to Prof.
James’s doctrine of Humanism, is the equivocation by which
Humanity stands, at discretion, either for the inhabitants of a
certain planet or for the whole of finite mind, however and
wherever and whenever finite mind appears. If we take Hu-
manity in the first sense, as being merely one set of creatures,
then relativism seems to follow. How am I to deny that our
truth, owr goodness and beauty, may be utterly false and bad
and ugly to another race of beings, and that this other race is,
notwithstanding this, as good as ourselves—if indeed there were
any sense in such a comparison? And, if I cannot deny this, am
I not really a relativist ? What is the ground (I ask once more)
on which the human race is to dictate to the Universe? (Cf.
Chap. VIII, p. 243.) What is the value of our inference to the
nature of reality at large simply from what we happen to know
of the history of one set of creatures? Prof. James’s doctrine,
I would repeat, to myself seems plausible merely so far as he
succeeded (I do not of course mean intentionally) in keeping it
ambiguous.”


x The words quoted by Prof. James from myself (Meaning of Truth, p. 71)
as applying to the ‘ humanist ’, were used by myself of Personal Idealism.
See Mind, No. 51, p. 322 (p. 90 of the present volume).

® Prof. James, in Pragmatism, p. 30, inveighs against the monstrousness
of holding that, given certain hideous crimes, good on the whole is realized.
He insists, that is, on taking the crime in its abstraction as absolutely real.
And then he goes on (Hegel would have smiled) to denounce ‘ abstrac-
tionism ’. But, apart from that, on what ground could Prof. James have
denied that a crime, however hideous, is no crime at all except for certain


"144 APPENDIX II.TO CHAPTER V


Possibly Prof. James really held that our race on this planet
is the same thing as all finite mind, or as all the finite mind, at
least, that anywhere counts. His Humanism, if so, would have
meant nothing new. He would have been in company which
to myself is respectable, but, in attempting to make good this
thesis, his hands, I think, would have been more than full. And

_ such a conclusion, so far as I know, he never endorsed unequivo-
cally. But, apart from somte such conclusion, is it not futile to
speak of getting to absolute truth by ‘ simple inductions from the
past extended to the future by analogy’? (Meaning, p. 267).

I am not saying that Prof. James’s doctrine really consisted
in a blind oscillation between two meanings of the word ‘ human ’.
He had, I must imagine, a view with two aspects, the connexion
between which he did not, and perhaps could not, work out.

. On the one side this view seems much the same as that made
popular by J. S. Mill. It differs, so far as against J.S. Mill Prof.
James insisted on continuity. The difference, certainly, is real,
but a question remains as to how far it will carry you ? Continuity
takes you, in some sense doubtless, beyond the present, but can
it take you, and on what ground can it take you, to a real past
and a real future ? I will return to this point, and will merely
say at present that Prof. James seems to myself to follow here
J. S. Mill to a common bankruptcy.

But Prof. James’s teaching presents another and a very diverse
aspect. . It suggests to my mind that in a great measure he really
shared that view of the world which in the main I, for instance,
inherited from Hegel. Prof. James desired to insist that there
is much more in human society and in its history, and, I presume,
in the Universe at large, than the changing accidents of a mere
collection. And he held, I think, that in our own experience we
touch intimately, and to a certain extent know, the real character
of the whole Universe which there is immanent. Naturally
I do not suggest that the difference between asserting and deny-
ing the ultimate reality of change, is a trifling difference. But

- the necessary consequences, as regards the value of the individual
person and his place in the Universe, are surely far from being
evident. And in short the radical opposition which Prof. James


persons, while for other persons (for anything that he really knew) it might
be a virtue? And what other aspect is there in his doctrine to save it
from relativism in the extremest sense ?


ON PROF. JAMES’S ‘MEANING OF TRUTH’ 145


took to exist throughout between his own doctrine and that of
monistic Absolutism, rested, I venture to think, on what I must ~
call his partial ignorance about the latter. There are certain
points in Absolutism which he did not like, and I myself could
not say that I like everything in Absolutism. Clearly it is a
‘hard’ doctrine. But to expect to get in detail all that you
want just precisely as you want it, is to take a position which
seems to myself justifiable only when stated with the very last
degree of honesty and explicitness. And, apart from such a
position, the real question is this, How, if you reject Absolutism,
are you going to secure that which you must have, any more cheaply-
elsewhere ? 1 This second aspect of Prof. James’s teaching, in
which emphasis is laid on the universal side, appears to myself
joined to the former aspect of individualism by no intelligible
bond. The connexion in his mind between these two characters
of the Universe was, so far as I know, never clearly set forth.

I will proceed now to offer a few critical remarks on some of
the doctrines contained in Prof. James’s Meaning of Truth. The
misunderstandings which these remarks are likely or certain to’
involve, may even, themselves, I hope, lead to the removal of
what, I submit, is real obscurity.

(rz) Prof. James calls his own view the ‘ pragmatic’ view.
If by this he means {as he sometimes seems to mean) merely
that view which works best, we have here an attempt to beg
the question at issue. The objection taken to Prof. James’s
account of truth is taken precisely on the ground that this
account fails to work theoretically. And practically (cf. pp. 67
and 133) Prof. James seems never really to have faced the problem
- of a genuine working creed. He never, I think, saw what is -
involved in treating all ideas, without exception, as merely
useful. He, so far as I know, never even inquired whether
truth in.the end has to be consistent with itself. With regard
. to the Practical character of all truth I will say no more here,
as Prof. James himself seems willing (pp. 206 foll.) to treat the
matter as of no moment. If this is really so, he would be at
issue, I presume, with Prof. Dewey, and little or nothing of
Pragmatism would, I imagine, be really left but the name.


* 1 Prof, James’s idea as to Absolutism, that it is a way of getting what

you want without paying anything for it, is surely (to any one who knows)

a striking revelation of the limits of his knowledge (cf. Chap. V, p. 133). -
1574 L +


146 APPENDIX II TO CHAPTER V


(2) To pass to another point—judgement really, on my view,
involves mediation. This aspect of the matter has not escaped
Prof. James, but he has, in my opinion, turned truth here into
ruinous error, For he has taken intermediation to consist in
a temporal process from the idea to a perceived object. To this
conclusion, in spite of much obscurity, he seems committed.
Where an idea merely leads to an object, we, according to
Prof. James, have knowledge. Whether there is a relation of
identity in difference between the idea and the object, a relation
which is also for the knower, Iam unable to say. The importance
-of both these questions is obvious, but the answer, if there is an
answer, remains to me obscure. Apparently we have truth
wherever an idea leads to an object.

Any such doctrine is liable to objections which, I think, can
never be fairly met. I recognize that I have now my chronic
pain for which nothing can be done. I notice that a tree is
about to fall upon the head of a distant person. The suggested
idea of some action leads in me to its performance. In the third
of these cases we have the definition without truth, while in the
two former cases we have truth without the definition.? With
abstract truths, again, the verification in every instance by a
process of events leading to a particular object cannot be shown.
Or consider truths about the past. Is there a real past, and, if
there is such a thing, can it turn into a perception? Or have our
ideas about it, if it is there, really nothing to do with it? Or,
again, is the reality of the past merely ideal? I shall have to
return to the difficulty raised by these questions. But even with
regard to the future Prof. James’s view will not work. Suppose
that I foretell an earthquake to happen next year or after my
death, how does my idea lead to the earthquake, and where
does the process of truth fall? The doctrine that there is no
truth apart from the action of some person here and now, if

* Tam of course prepared to give references throughout, but (since I admit
that I do not understand) I think it useless to trouble the reader with
them. And J confine myself here to the teaching of the volume mentioned.
I can now, in republishing these pages, refer the reader to what follows in
this volume.

* In the second case (it may be said) there is a continuous process of
fulfilment from the idea to the object, and this is truth. The doctrine
here stated will be examined later, pp. 154-6. For the present I would


reply that the judgement, ‘ this tree is about to fall there,’ may be complete
before the ‘ object ’ exists in fact.


ON PROF. JAMES’S ‘MEANING OF TRUTH’ 147


‘action’ is taken broadly, I accept, while { reject the view that
truth’s essence is limited to that action. And this latter view
seems hardly even to coincide with Prof. James’s teaching.

If what Prof. James meant was merely this, that truth, to
be true, must be in vital connexion with the world of particular
feelings and perceptions, and in some sense is verifiable in this
world, I am of course fully in accord with him. But to offer
such a doctrine as something new, and as something which is
to make a revolution in philosophy, would be to my mind
ridiculous.

(3) I will notice now one method by which Prof. James appears ”
to have thought that at least some troubles could be met. This
is the old device by which at discretion the potential or virtual
is substituted for the actual. As a good ‘empiricist’ Prof.
James here kept to the tradition of his school. I could not say
that he has here done nothing more than blindly follow his
blind leaders, but I at least have not been able to discover what
more on this point he has done. What has to be proved is, for
instance, the existence of actual intermediaries in time. The
possibility of such intermediaries does not assert their existence.
It asserts something else, and what it really asserts is not a lapse
of events.? :

(4) I will return now to a point of extreme importance. Prof.
James is of course against transcendence, but in this very matter
he (so far as I can perceive) is threatened with ruin. The question
is whether the object-reality, which he has to know, is not often
in a world which should be beyond his knowledge. Take once
more the instance of a past or future event. What are we to
say with regard to the existence of such a fact? Does it tran-
scend, is it outside of and beyond, the present Reality now im-
manent in my knowledge? To this question, as I have already


1 Cf. here, p. 129. I cannot venture to attribute to Prof. James the
doctrine that the earthquake is a social event to_which my idea leads by
a human process,

2A fact virtually pre-exists when every condition of its realization
-save one is already there’ (Meaning, p. 93). An explosion therefore has
pre-existed whether I have, or have not, gone on to apply the match or
pull the trigger. But the real question surely is as to what in every such
case it is which does actually exist and pre-exist. And here the reader is
of course put off with mere phrases. And I ask myself whether this really
is to be taken as a great advance in philosophy ?


L2


148 APPENDIX II TO CHAPTER V


explained, I myself reply with an emphatic negative, but Prof.
James’s answer to it remains to my mind unintelligible. And
any intelligible answer, I submit, must ruin his theory. Let us
say, first, that the reality of dead Caesar is nothing beyond that
which is immanent in what I know xow—then what, if so, be-
comes of the absolute reality of time and particular events ?
How does this latter doctrine agree with the idea that the past
is only ideal? But take a different view, and then what for me
now is the past object ? It has become a Thing-in-itself which for
knowledge is nothing. And the intermediaries, which lead to
this nothing, what are they forme? Obviously, through nearly
all their extent, they again for me are nothing. And to speak of
approximating where you can know neither the goal nor the road,
appears really to be senseless. The above dilemma, I urge,
entails ruin if left unmet, and I cannot believe that it ever was
steadily faced by Prof. James.

We obviously are here concerned with the relation of truth
to knowledge and of both to reality. Have they any essential
connexion at all? Can reality be a something outside which
makes no difference ? Can truth have no relation to it, or again
a relation which is merely external? On the other hand, are
we ready to bring reality within truth and knowledge, and both
within ourselves, and to do this in earnest ? After the criticism
of now a century back one might expect that questions such as
these could not be ignored. And it certainly would not be true
to say of Prof. James that he ignored them. But, if any one can
understand his answer, I cannot.

In a succession of volumes, perhaps too hastily ae
and too hurriedly published, Prof. James wrote, I must believe;
from a central point of view from which these essays were thrown
out. But for a reader to discover this centre by following the
opposite direction is far from easy, more especially when the
reader stands outside and is perhaps not sympathetic. And if


1 The question of truth about the past has been discussed by Prof, Dewey
in his interesting volume, Influence of Darwin, pp. 159 ff. The result to
my mind is failure. If Prof. Dewey would remember that the person whom
he calls the ‘ intellectualist ’ has been long ago refuted, and that the real
question is as to the nature and truth of his own view, the issue, I think,
would become clearer. But nothing, I am sure, can fully clear the issue
except a definite statement by Prof. Dewey as to what he means by reality.
Why we cannot have this I do not understand,


ON PROF. JAMES’S ‘MEANING OF TRUTH’ 149


the central point of view has never really been worked out, have
we, after all, any right to say that in a proper sense it was there ?
It is, I think, for those who believe that Prof. James made a
revolution in philosophy, to justify that belief by an explanation
of his doctrine as to the ultimate nature of reality and truth.
And if the mistakes, which I doubtless have here made, serve
to contribute to this result, then, however great they are, I shall
not regret them. If on the other hand I am told that I have no
right to ask for metaphysical doctrine where none was ever
offered, I shall content myself with a smile. If there is anything
in philosophy of which I am fully assured, it is this, that to seek
to discuss the nature of truth apart from a theory of ultimate
reality ends and must end in futile self-deception. And I can
hardly suppose that the answer suggested above would have
satisfied Prof. James. But, however that may be, and even
though I fear that they may have robbed us of something better,
the later works of Prof. James will have profited philosophy. To
have excited inquiry and to have stimulated interest in the
highest problems of life, is to have succeeded where, I suppose,
most philosophers have failed, and where it can always be
doubted if any further success ‘is possible. But Prof. James’s
contribution to psychology will remain, I believe, indubitable.


APPENDIX III TO CHAPTER V


ON PROFESSOR JAMES’S ‘RADICAL EMPIRICISM’


HavinG read once more Prof. James’s article, ‘A World of Pure
Experience,’ as republished in the Essays on Radical Empiricism,
I am tempted to add here some remarks on his ultimate meta-
physical views. These remarks, though made by one who does
not profess to understand, may perhaps be useful, For I arn in
agreement with so much of Prof. James’s premisses that my
criticism, however wrong, can hardly be quite external.

With Prof. James (so much seems plain) there is no reality but
experience, and that which falls outside of what is experienced is
not real. But is experience the same as that which we should
call actual experience, or are there regions of the possible and


150 APPENDIX III TO CHAPTER V


ideal which also are real? Can an intellectual construction
claim to be an experienced reality? Prof. James at first sight
seems bound to reject any such suggestion, but to me his view
is not clear. What (to go for the moment no further ') are we to
say of past and future experiences ? Are these, or either of these,
to be called actual facts ? For Prof. James the series of events
in time seems to be ultimately real and not a mere construction.
If so, this series (it seems) is actually experienced, and, if so,
I presume ‘iis experienced as present. But then we have to ask,
‘ experienced by whom and when?’ The dilemma which con-
fronts us is evident and is old. If the real temporal order exists
only in a succession of actual experiences, then how is this succes-
sion and order itself experienced actually? If, on the other
hand, the whole series is ever present now, then how can its past
and future be, as such, ultimately real ? 2

Did Prof. James hold, or suppose, that there is, or perhaps
some day will be, an actual experience in which the whole time-
sequence is given as the content of one immediate ‘now’, a
present in which the succession of our lives and events is at once
a passage and yet is all there? If possibly this was his thought,
he never, so far as I know, faced the danger or the ruin with
which it threatens the ultimate reality of time. For, if the
whole temporal series is nothing but one aspect of the actual
‘ now ’, we are far on our way to deny that this aspect is, as such,
ultimately real, or more than a relative appearance. But the
reader will, I think, seek help here from Prof. James in vain,
unless he can find it in what to me is some obvious conjuring
with delusive terms such as ‘ possible’ and ‘ virtual ’.


Leaving for the present this unsolved dilemma, I will notice
next an ambiguity with regard to the nature of what is ex-
perienced. Have we terms and relations given as such, and
therefore, as such, ultimately real? Or is what we actually


1 See pp. 148, 156, and Index, s.v. Time. :

* You.do not, it seems to me, touch -the above difficulty by making
consciousness separable from experience. The dilemma, I should say,
can be met only by denying, or else by subordinating, the fact of change
and succession as it appears in immediate experience. The latter way
(that of subordination) is the course which I myself adopt. But neither
way, so far as I see, is open to Prof. James. He, apparently, has both
(a) to identify the experienced present with all reality, and (b) to keep
past and future experiences ultimately rea] in their character of events.


ON PROF. JAMES’S RADICAL EMPIRICISM — 15x


experience, on the contrary, a non-relational whole, a continuous
flux, with relative emphases of its diversities, but with no actual
relations or terms ? Are terms and relations, in a word, abstrac-
tions and mere ideal constructions, or are they given realities ?
The above two views to myself are irreconcilable, and to myself
Prof, James seems committed to both of them.

In arguing for Pluralism and against Monism he urges habitu-
ally that terms and mete conjunctive relations, are, as such,
immediately experienced ; and indeed any contention short of
this would leave his arguments baseless. But while he identifies
himself thus with the first view, the second view, that immediate
experience is non-relational, seems essential to his doctrine. And
yet how to combine these contrary views we are, I think, no-
where informed.

The doctrine of Pluralism and of external relations may of
course be advocated otherwise. It may be offered as an inference,
as a true construction from what is given, and as the one rational
account of the world. But this is a different thing from a direct
appeal to immediate experience, and a claim to find there terms
and conjunctive relations as given facts. Still this is the claim
and the appeal which, whenever it suits his purpose, seems made
by Prof. James.?

There is a point here which it is instructive to notice in passing.
Not only is Prof. James concerned to advocate Pluralism and
external relations as directly given, but he is concerned no less


1 In arguing against myself for the ultimate reality of external relations
(Radical Empiricism, Essay III, or Pluralistic Universe, Appendix A),
Prof. James assumed me to hold that terms are, as such, ultimately real,
while relations are not so. He at that time apparently had no idea that
the view to which he opposed himself was that both terms and relations
are alike, as such, mere abstractions, and neither ultimately real, though
of course for certain purposes we use these ideas as true. How could
I reply to such an argument? And what can I say now when I read
(Rad. Emp., p. 52), ‘ Throughout the history of philosophy the subject
and its object have been treated as absolutely discontinuous entities ’ ?

® The reader will not, I hope, take me to suggest that, in order to estab-
lish such Monism as I accept, no more is wanted than the rejection of
Pluralism (I use this word of course in the proper sense). With the
rejection of Pluralism I understand that forthwith Monism follows; but, as
to the further character of this Monism, nothing follows forthwith. The
One may, so far, be irrational and in a sense incoherent and even discordant.
We are, so far, only at the beginning, and, to advance, must make use
(as I have shown elsewhere) of a further argument.


152 APPENDIX III TO CHAPTER V


to maintain the ultimate reality of change as an experienced
fact. ‘And, so far as I know, it did not occur to him that these
two contentions are apparently in conflict. For, if in change
something really is altered, and, if the alteration can consist
merely in difference of position, and if in this difference the
terms and the relations are neither of them altered—then either
we have an alteration where nothing is changed, or else our
premisses have been wrong. Something, if so (we shall have
to allow), is concerned in the change, which something is more
than and other than the elements admitted by Pluralism. If (to
repeat). you hold to reality in the form of external terms and
relations, you must deny the ultimate reality of change as actually
given. If, on the other hand, you affirm this latter, you must
insist that the experience of change is a non-relational totality.
And, if so, terms and relations become, as such, abstractions,
constructions, true perhaps or perhaps vicious, but assuredly in
neither case things, as such, actually experienced. How it is
possible to avoid this dilemma and simply to maintain both
theses at once, I myself do not know, but apparently nothing
less is required for the position taken by Prof. James.

The doctrine which Prof. James would, I think, have pre-
ferred is the view that given experience is non-relational, that
it is an unbroken fluid totality containing in one ‘now’ an un-
divided lapse, and is in itself foreign to any terms or relations as
such. This I also have taken to be the true account of the
matter; and what I would notice here is the fact, that, while
urging this view as a fatal objection ignored by Absolutism
and Idealism, Prof. James might, like others, have himself learnt
it at the very source where according to him it is most unknown.
The doctrine in question, Prof. James stated very candidly, has
been advocated by myself since 1883.1 He seems even to give
me the credit of having broken-away here from the tradition of
my school, and of having, conjointly with M. Bergson though at
perhaps an earlier date, originated in modern times the true view
ignored by and fatal to idealistic Monism. Now for myself (Iam
of course not concerned with M. Bergson’s attitude) I at once, in
the same journal, disclaimed, and I now again emphatically dis-
claim any such originality. When it was that the view in question
was first advocated in modern philosophy, I cannot, I regret to

* See The Journal of Philosophy, &¢., for January 1910.


ON PROF. JAMES’S RADICAL EMPIRICISM 153


- say, inform the reader. But that I myself derived it from Hegel
is perfectly certain. If I had ever been asked if it was Hegel’s
teaching, I should have replied that so much at least was in-
dubitable. And the feelings of the ‘ idealist ’, forced to hear it
proclaimed aloud that this position not only is his ruin, but is
also something of which he has lived totally unaware, may be
left undescribed. The fact, I presume, is this, that Prof. James,
like his public, failed to realize the wealth, the variety and the
radical differences, which are to be found in that outburst of
German philosophy which came after Kant.

What is the true issue between Prof. James and those who
here follow Hegel? There is agreement on both. sides that
immediate experience is the beginning, and the vital question is
whether this experience is also the end. Is immediate experience
real in the sense that it is all there is which is real? To this
question I will return, but I will first ask as to Prof. James’s view
of knowledge. For knowledge itself is a fact.


We have had, so far, the reader will recall, reality taken as
immediate experience. We saw indeed that the fatal dilemma
as to past and future experience was left unmet. But, leaving
this, we have to take reality as being a succession of immediate
experiences, and, if so, where in such a world can ideas and
knowledge fall ?

It is better, I think, to oe by asking what, in dealing with
this problem, Prof. James had supplied by others and ready to
his hand. He had, in the first place, the identity of reality and
experience. He had, next, the doctrine that ideas are what may
be called ‘ symbolical ’. _ While on the one side they are psychical
events, on the other side they are self-transcendent and refer
to a reality other than themselves. This reality is, on one view,
viewed as being, at least in somecases, beyond experience, but
on another view, also lying before Prof: James, any such tran-
scendence is denied. The actual experience, on this view, is
transcended, but transcended only as immediate. The reality,
referred to by the content of the idea, is the Universe itself,
which Universe is immanent in the immediate experience, and
always itself is actually experienced. A past event, for instance,
is on one side present, while on the other side its content ideally
qualifies Reality taken in the character of a temporal series


184 APPENDIX III TO CHAPTER V


beyond the present—this same Reality being also actually present
here and now in, and as, immediate experience.

Now why could Prof. James not adopt a conclusion worked
out from premisses so near akin to those which he took up?
‘The reason is that, if so, reality could hardly be no more than one
immediate experience or a succession of such experiences ; and
this, on the other hand, Prof. James is bound to maintain. But,
then, what according to Prof. James is to become of the fact of
knowledge and truth, a fact apparently not included in mere
immediate experience ? His answer, however unsatisfactory, will,
I think, up to a certain point be found to be instructive and
interesting.

Since only particular events are real, Prof. James denies that
an idea can be more, and can be self-transcendent (Rad. Emp.,
p. 57). The psychical fact must know, without itself referring
beyond itself. And what is it to know? The answer obviously
is ‘ other events’, for there is nothing else to know. And, in
order for these events to be veal, they (the logic is not mine) must
be future. I£ now, following the same logic, we ask what know-
ledge is and where it falls, the answer is that knowledge is essen-
tially a temporat process of facts. It falls in, and it is, the
mere series of experienced events, beginning with the idea and
ending with the object.t

This conclusion at first sight seems no more than a paradox,
but, as advocated by Prof. James, it became more or less plausible.
But the plausibility is gained by two expedients, neither of which
will bear the light. The first of these (i) is the covert rein-
statement in the idea of that symbolical character, that very self-
transcendence, which the doctrine denies. And (ii) the second
means to making plausible the view that in knowledge the object
is nothing but an experienced future event, is to bury the true
issue under a cloud of misleading ambiguities.

(i) Suppose that I know that somewhere near there is a spring
of water. Does my present knowledge consist in my actually


1 I may remind the reader that the view, that explanation consists
merely in showing intermediate sensible detail, is not new. See my
Principles of Logic, pp. 490-1. How far in Prof, James’s mind his doctrine
of knowledge was connected with, and due to, such a view as that held
by Bain with regard to the practical character of all belief, I am unable
to say.


ON PROF. JAMES’S RADICAL EMPIRICISM 155


finding this water? Has it, in order to be knowledge now, got
to wait for this future event ? Such a contention seems obviously
absurd, and it forthwith is covertly modified. With regard to
the relation of similarity between the image and the object,
I will say no more than that there arise at once well-known,
and perhaps fatal, difficulties, nowhere, I believe, faced by
Prof. James. What I wish to emphasize here is the point that,
while the self-reference of the idea beyond itself is explicitly
denied by Prof. James, he uses, and is forced to use, words which
re-affirm it. The present idea of water, he says, leads to the
finding. There is a continuous advance to the object, with an
experience of developing progress, and therefore the object was
meant (Rad. Emp., pp. 57, 60, 62). But is it not, I ask, obvious
that such language implies at the start, and before the finding,
a self-transcendent idea of the water ?

Let us suppose first, for the sake of argument, that the water
happens to be found. The finding of course must be taken, not
as one sensibly present experience, but as a series of such ex-
periences. And at the start we have, according to Prof. James,
nothing which refers beyond itself. But, if so, for ‘leading ’ you
are, I submit, bound to write ‘ mere priority in succession ’, and,

_as to any experience of progress developing to an end, so far as
I see, it is excluded. If the starting-place really leads, it is
because that place points, and, if it really points, then, at once
and now, it refers beyond itself. From the very first it plainly
is self-transcendent and qualifies an object beyond itself, and it
needs no process of waiting for something else to happen to it
in the future. Knowledge of what is now is not, we may say,
what it is, just because something comes later to make the fact
that it was.

It would be useless for me to labour a point which, as I under-
stand it, is obvious. But take the experience of a pain decreasing
gradually over a space of some minutes. Even this experience
is, on Prof. James’s view, I should say, impossible. But, in any
case, could we say here even plausibly that the beginning knows
the end, and that the end, when it comes, makes the knowledge ?
Or think of a desire, say for water, which later is satisfied. Here
we have, first, an idea qualifying an object beyond itself, which,
according to Prof. James, is impossible. And next, when the
end is fulfilled in fact—is it not monstrous to contend that our


156 APPENDIX III TO CHAPTER V


desire now has been, and was, the knowledge of this fact’s
existence ?

(ii) But suppose that, in looking for the spring which I know
to exist, I do mot happen to find the water. How, again, if the
object is, not merely no future event, but no particular event
at all? What in all such cases (we ask) has become of that inter-
mediate series of actual events in which alone knowledge can
consist ? Clearly the series is not there; and, if so, apparently
in the whole of these cases there can be no such thing as know-
ledge. From this inevitable conclusion, and from the open
bankruptcy which follows, Prof. James seeks to escape. But
the means which he adopts are (so far as I see) merely the old
inherited devices now long ago exposed. Attempts to conjure
by the substitution at discretion of ‘ virtual’ and ‘ possible’ for
“actual ’, are neither profitable, nor, when once the trick is known,
are they even interesting. And in the ingenious discussions, by
which Prof. James seeks to recommend his view, I have failed
really to find anything more than such attempts. Hence we
must conclude that the greater part of our knowledge obviously
falls outside of what Prof. James takes to be the essence of all

_ knowledge, while even the residue can be included only by covertly
importing that self-transcendent idea which we have been
ordered toexclude. It would be difficult, I submit, for any account
of the fact of knowledge to break down more completely.


Passing from this we come to the final question about the
nature of reality. Reality, according to Prof. James, appears
to be one stream of immediate experiences, and nothing beyond
this is real. And Prof. James seems even to wonder how any
one like myself can in the main agree with him at the start, and
yet leave him in the end (Journal of Philos., January 1910). The
explanation is, however, very simple. In the first place, if this
stream is to be one, there is the doubt about its real unity. Is
the whole of Reality, with its past and future, a single actual
. immediate experience, or pot ? We have seen above that in this
dilemma Prof. James does not help us, and this one difficulty, to
go no further, to my mind is enough.

But we are here only at the beginning. We have on our hands
the whole intellectual sphere of terms and relations, the world
of abstractions and ideal constructions, and the wide region of


ON PROF. JAMES’S RADICAL EMPIRICISM 157


mere possibilities and fancies and illusions. All this is fact of
a kind, and no phrases can banish its existence. Now, is all this
mass to be simply predicated of immediate experience ? Ob-
viously, in my judgement, this cannot be done, and yet, if I do
not do this, there is at once something in reality beyond my
reality. And, if you reply that I am not to predicate, but am
to use an ‘ and’ or ‘ together’, with this surely there is an end.
You have now admitted, beside and beyond immediate experience,
another reality ; and still to persist that immediate experience
is all there is that is real, seems plainly perverse.

In one sense I agree that we never can break out and pass
beyond feeling. Everything that is real must be felt (cf. Chap-
ter VI). But, on the other side, I urge that our felt content is
developed in such a way that it goes beyond and conflicts with
the form of feeling or mere immediacy. And it is in the character
also of this ideal content that we must, I submit, seek to find
the full nature of the Real. We must conclude to a higher
Reality which at once transcends, and yet re-includes, the sphere
of mere feeling.

The above result, if we start from the ground accepted by
Prof. James, can, so far as I see, be avoided only in one way.
The sole remedy is flatly and utterly to deny what I should call
the entire fact of the ideal world. Urge that the reality at first
is a mere flux diversified by sensible emphases,’ and insist further
that, beyond these emphases, there is at any stage absolutely
nothing ideal, nothing even in appearance. Hold to this, and,
whatever else you may be, you are so far consistent. But, even
so, against the dilemma of the flux itself, which you know to
exist beyond the actual flux felt now—you have still to seek
a further medicine, or else to admit that the disease is not curable.
And to say that Prof. James would have seriously accepted even
the first partial remedy, is more than I myself could affirm.
I can imagine no task more interesting to, and more incumbent


1 In Mind, for July 1887, I myself wrote, ‘In the beginning there is
nothing beyond what is . . . felt simply. .. . There are in short no relations
and no feelings, only feeling. It is all one blur with differences, that
work and that are felt, but are not discriminated.’ But of course, follow-
ing Hegel, I was always clear that this beginning is not the whole of our
actual world, and cannot possibly be the end.

? As long, that is, as you succeed in maintaining that your own assertion
also is no more than a mere sensible emphasis.


158 APPENDIX III TO CHAPTER V


on, the disciples of Prof. James, than to make an attempt in
earnest to explain and to develop his doctrine of Radical
Empiricism.

Judging so far as I can judge, I must doubt that claim, to take
high rank as a metaphysician, which has been made not by, but
on behalf of, Prof. James. I cannot find in his metaphysical
views (as I understand them) much real originality, and what
I miss, perhaps even more, in his metaphysics is the necessary
gift of patient labour and persistent self-criticism. With all his
merits as a philosopher, and assuredly they are great, I cannot
think it is as a metaphysician that Prof. James’s name will hold
its place in the history of thought.


CHAPTER VI


ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF IMMEDIATE
EXPERIENCE


In this chapter! I am to treat of a difficulty which arises
in connexion with immediate experience. The scope of the
discussion must however be limited. Problems will be raised
on all sides with which here I shall be unable to deal. And —
even on the main point I must be satisfied, if I have shown
how the question presses for an answer.

I have had occasion often? to urge the claims of immediate
experience, and to insist that what we experience is not
merely objects. The experienced will not all fall under the
head of an object for a subject. If there were any such
law, pain and pleasure would be obvious exceptions ; but
the facts, when we look at them, show us that such a law
does not exist. In my general feeling at any moment there
is more than the objects before me, and no perception of
objects will exhaust the sense of a living emotion. And the
same result is evident when I consider my will. I cannot
reduce my experienced volition to a movement of objects,
and I cannot accept the suggestion that of this my volition

- [have no direct knowledge at all. We in short have experi-
ence in which there is no distinction between my awareness
and that of which it is aware. There is an immediate feel-
ing, a knowing and being in oné, with which knowledge
begins > and, thougtr this in a“iidnner is transcended, it


1 First published in Mind, January 1909.
' * See, for instance, Mind, N.S., Nos. 6 and 33. The reader is also re-
ferred to the Index of Appearance, s.v. Feeling. The article in Mind, No. 6, is
now reprinted as an Appendix to this chapter. Cf. Chap. V, pp. 152, 157.


160 ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF CHAP.


nevertheless remains throughout as the present foundation
of my known world. And if you remove this direct sense
of my momentary contents and being, you bring down the
whole of consciousness in one common wreck. For it is in
_ the end ruin to divide experience into something on one side
experienced as an object and on the other side something
‘not experienced at all.

The recognition of the fact of immediate experience opens
the one road, I submit, to the solution of ultimate problems.
But, though opening the road, it does not of itself supply an
answer to our questions. And on the other side in itself it
gives rise to difficulties. With regard to these there are
some points which I have dealt with elsewhere, and other
points which perhaps I have failed wholly to see. There
are again questions which have come before my mind, but
have been passed over, or at most have been touched on by
the way. It is one of the latter which in these pages I shall
attempt to discuss. The problem was noticed by me years
ago, and Prof. Stout in my opinion did well to insist on its
urgency.! This difficulty may be stated by asking, How
immediate experience itself can become an object.. For, if it
becomes an object, it, so far, we may say, is transcended, and
there is a doubt as to how such transcendence is possible.
On the one hand as to the fact of immediate experience being
transcended we seem really certain. For we speak about
it, and, if so, it has become for us an object. But we are
thus led to the dilemma that, so far as I know of immediate
experience, it does not exist, and that hence, whether it
exists or not, I could in neither case know of it. And with
such a result the existence of immediate experience becomes
difficult to maintain, and the problem which has been
raised calls urgently for treatment and solution.

The solution, if I may anticipate, is in general supplied


1 In the Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1902-3. I had called
attention to the problem and the general mode of its solution in Appear-
ance, Pp. 93, footnote.


vI IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE 161


by considering this fact, that immediate experience, how-

ever much transcended, both remains and is active. It is

not a stage which shows itself at the beginning ‘and then

disappears, but it remains at the bottom throughout as

fundamental. And, further, remaining it contains within
itself every development which in a sense transcends it.

Nor does it merely contain all developments, but in its own’
way it acts to some extent as their judge. Its blind uneasi-
ness, we may say, insists tacitly on visible satisfaction. We
have on one hand a demand, explicit or otherwise, for an
object which is complete. On the other hand the object

which fails to include immediate experience in its content, is
by the unrest of that experience condemned as defective.

We are thus forced to the idea of an object containing the
required element, and in this object we find at last theoretical

satisfaction and rest.

This may be stated in general as the solution of our
problem, and we might proceed forthwith to work out this
solution in detail. I have however thought it better to begin
by examining two difficulties well known to psychologists.
My object in thus digressing is to show that our problgm is
not merely metaphysical, recondite and negligible, but that
the principles applied in treating it cannot elsewhere be
ignored. The reader can, however, if he pleases, omit this
whole digression as irrelevant. Of the two difficulties just
mentioned the first concerns Attention and the second
Introspection.


I. With regard to the effects of attention there is a
familiar puzzle. I am going here to take attention in the
sense of noticing, without entering into any inquiry as to its
nature.! We all, when our attention is directed to our ex- -
tremities or to some internal organ, may become ‘aware of
sensations which previously we did not notice. And with


1 On this I have written elsewhere, Mind, N.S., No. 41, and O.S., No. 43.
1574 M


162 - ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF CHAP.


regard to these sensations there may be a doubt whether
they were actually there before, or have on the other hand
been made by our attending. And, though this question may
seem simple, it really is difficult. Can we directly compare
attention’s object with something to which we do not at all
attend? To answer in the affirmative appears not easy.
Can we then recall what we have not noticed, and, now at-
tending to this, compare it with some other object? If
reproduction necessarily depended on attention, any such
process would seem impossible. But, since in any case this
view of reproduction must be rejected as erroneous, we may
reply confidently that the above comparison is a thing which
actually happens. Still, asserting the possibility and the
general principle, we have not removed all doubt as to the
special fact. For how do I know in a given case that my
present attending has not vitally transformed its result ? Am
I to postulate that in principle attention does not and cannot
alter its object ? Such an assumption, so far as I see, could
hardly be justified. Certainly, apart from such an assump-
tion, we may argue that any effect of attention requires time,
and that hence, if the sensation appears as soon as we attend,
the sensation must have preceded. And this inference is
strengthened when we are able to pass thus repeatedly and
with the same result from inattention to its opposite. Still
at its strongest an argument of this kind seems far from
conclusive. And in any case I cannot think that no more
than this is the actual ground of our confidence when we
refuse to believe that attention has made the thing that we
feel. I agree that in some cases we recollect our state before
attention supervened, though such a recollection in most
cases, I should say, is absent. And again usually, and if
you please always, we have the persisting after-sensation or
after-feeling of our previous condition. But, all this being
admitted, the question as to the actual ground of our confi-
dence remains. In order to compare our previous state we


VI IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE 163


ex hyp. are forced now to attend to it, and there is a doubt
whether we can assume generally that attention does not
alter. We have therefore to ask whether we are in a maze
with no legitimate exit, and whether such a result, if accepted,
does not throw doubt on the whole subject of this chapter.
I will state briefly what I take to be the real way of
escape. (a) We must first assume that anything remains
the same except so far as I have reason to take it as altered.
This assumption is everywhere necessary, and may be called
fundamental.! (6) Next we must hold that apart from any
attention we may be aware of a change in our condition.
Without anything which could in any ordinary sense be
called attending, we can experience a difference when
a change takes place in our general or special felt state.
(c) There is again an experienced change when attention (say
to a feeling B) supervenes, and this particular experience is
felt otherwise than as a mere change, say from A to B. Hence
from the absence of this special feeling, as well as from the
presence of the ordinary feeling of change to B; we infer that
our sensation B does not depend on attention, but was
previously there. We have, that is, on one side a mode of
feeling when one sensation, A, merely changes to another
sensation, B, while on the other side, when I attend to B,
though that attention brings a change of feeling, it does not
bring the same mode as goes with such a mere transition as
from A to B. I therefore assume that the change made by
my attending is not a change to B itself. And we may
1 I do not mean by this that it is ultimate and self-evident (cf. Appear-
ance, pp. 601-2), for, if a thing remains, there must ex hyp. be some change
about it. We therefore have to abstract from this change. We find
a certain connexion of content in the thing, or between the thing and its
context, and we take this connexion as true, and as hence not to be made
false by any mere circumstance. Such a truth, like all truth, is an ab-
straction, and“a doubt may be raised as to its ultimate legitimacy. But
this is the principle which underlies and justifies our practical assumption
and procedure whenever we assume that something remains the same


amid change. 3
M2


164 ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF CHAP.


perhaps add that when, while already attending to B, I go on
to observe it more specially, I may still fail to gain any feeling
of change either to or from B, though on the other hand
I am of course aware of a change in myself. Now I am
not suggesting that in the above we have a demonstrated
conclusion, but it furnishes, I think, the ground for our
view as to attention’s limits. Further this view, once
suggested, justifies itself in working. And it leaves us with
this main result that we have feelings, such as those of change
from A to B, and that, though these feelings have not been
attended to, they are both real and reproducible. In any
case apart from this assumption there seems to be no way
of exit from disastrous puzzles.

I will now fill out this general sketch with further detail,
which the reader who does not require it may omit. I feel
a change, and that something has happened, say, to my
finger. On attending I find that it is bitten by an insect.
Of the previous sensation I have possibly enough remaining
or reproducible to enable me to know that before the change
my finger felt much like the others, and to enable me to
repeat the change in idea.t I now attend to my other
fingers, but they do not, on this, become bitten. There has
hence been, I can argue, a felt change of my finger and an
ensuing attention, the latter being felt as a different change.
And by attending to my other fingers I cannot get the same
result. I have neither the recalled felt change nor the
present effect. My attention always gives me a felt change,
but it will not give me these other special feelings, which
therefore, I infer, have come to me otherwise. My present
attention is in my power, but there are certain things, I find,
that will not follow from my present attention. And,
generalizing this, I conclude that, prima facie and apart from
special evidence, attention does not alter its object. On the


1 There is, we must remember, an identical basis of feeling in all my
fingers. tte :


vi IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE 165


other side I tend to assume that, where the felt change from
A to B cannot be recalled, there, so far and apart from other
evidence, it was absent. We obviously in all the above have
no demonstrative proof. For on the one side we cannot
prove that attention did not under some unknown conditions
in a given case produce the entire result. And on the other
side we must admit that, where the felt change of sensation
was weak, its existence may now be for us irrecoverable.
In arguing therefore from present defect to past absence we
may well be deceived. And hence there are many cases
where we have to remain doubtful. But generally where,
beside the change I feel in attending, there is another
recalled felt change ending continuously in the object, I
conclude that the attention did not make this. And this
conclusion is strengthened by repetition under varying con-
ditions. And it is confirmed by a mass of experience which
becomes intelligible through the doctrine that, in general,
attention does not make its object. On the other hand,
where the above felt change cannot be verified directly or
again on sufficient evidence be inferred, I may conclude, to
speak in general, that it was absent, and that the attention
has more or less produced its object. If, for instance, in my
finger certain sensations follow and follow gradually when-
ever I attend, and, further, cease as I cease to attend, and if
.with this there is no other change recalled or to be inferred,
I argue that attention is at least in part the cause. And this
conclusion is strengthened and is generalized by experiences
the same in principle which can be multiplied at pleasure.
And once more, though not incontestable, the conclusion is
found to serve. But my object here is not to enter into
detail and in consequence to provoke discussion on points
intricate and difficult and on which I have no special
competence. What I am here concerned with is to urge
merely one main result. .This problem with regard to atten-
tion must prove insoluble except on a certain assumption,


166 ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF CHAP.


the assumption of a felt change not noticed but effective
and more or less reproducible.


II. We may pass now to a kindred difficulty attaching
to what is called Introspection. Can I observe my own
present state, and, if not that, what in the end can I observe ?
And, putting on one side all reference to attention, let us
attempt to deal briefly with this puzzle. To say that my
present state is not observed and that I depend wholly on
memory, leads us (as in part we have already seen) into a
position which is not tenable. Let us agree, rightly in my
opinion, that I can reproduce that which at the time of its
occurrence was not an object, yet where is the warrant that
my reproduction is accurate? I can hardly postulate that
here there are no errors, and how are the errors to be cor-
rected? And on the other side, if I can thus remember my
past state, it seems strange that I am unable to make it an
object while present. The appeal to memory seems there-
fore in any case inadmissible ; and further for myself I am
unable to verify in introspection this constant presence of
‘memory. To myself, when I try to observe exhaustively,
_ $ay, some internal sensations, the idea that I] am struggling
to remember them seems even ridiculous. To myself I
appear to be observing something which és, and, apart from
certain unsound views, I have found no reason to discredit
this appearance. What I feel, that surely I may still feel,
though I also and at the same time make it into an object
before me. And any view for which this is impossible
begins, I think, by conflict with fact, and ends, I am sure, in
inability to explain facts.. That I cannot make an object
of the whole of my felt self-all at once, so much is certain in
fact, and the principle seems clear.1 But that I can observe
nothing of what I now feel, seems the false inference of
a perverse theory.


1 The principle involved is this, that, in order to have an object at all,
you must have a felt self before which the object ‘comes,


vi IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE 167


But with this we are left face to face with a difficulty like
the former one. Introspection is the attempt to observe my
actual contents, and thus to take them as qualifying a con-
struction called my self. To do this without residue, we
agreed, was impossible, but that limitation need not trouble
us. The difficulty and the problem arise in connexion with
the general mass that at any moment is felt but certainly is
not throughout an object before me. Take an emotional
whole such as despondency or anger or ennui. A part of this
doubtless consists in that which, whether as sensation or
idea, is before my mind. Any such object or objects we can
-observe, and, when we cannot keep them in view, we can
postulate that they remain unaltered except so far as we
have reason to suppose a change. But in an emotional
whole there are other felt elements which cannot be said to
be before my mind. And now I desire both to bring these
before me and to know that I have accomplished this task
correctly.

With regard to the second of these points we must recall
some results already reached. We have to assume that a
change in feeling is felt, not in general merely, but as a change
of this or that character. When my mood alters I feel, not
a mere difference, but my mood to be different. And, on the
other side, observation of my mood is felt as a difference but ©
not as an alteration of my mood. We may take it in general
to be the case that observation does not alter. Thus, when
for instance in despondency I observe my visceral sensations,
these feelings are translated into objects, into perceptions
and ideas, but none the less, though translated, the original
feelings remain. Hence (and this is the point) the persisting


1 This is a mere application of the general postulate which we noticed
before. It is unnecessary to discuss here our various special grounds for
~ supposing the presence or absence of change. ;
* On the other side it is true that observation of my feelings may,
according to the conditions, go on to increase or to suppress them. But
I think that this point may be ignored here.


168 ON OUR KNOWLEDGE CF CHAP.


feelings can be felt to jar or to accord with the result of
observation. For we have seen that generally in feeling we
may experience the disagreement of elements. We have seen
that a fresh fact, such as observation itself, must become
an element contained in a new felt whole. And thus, when
I pass psychically from despondency to despondency
observed, I have not only a general sense of change to some-
thing new, but I feel more specially the presence or absence
of novelty and an agreement or a jar with the object before
me. When to my felt emotion, that is, its translation is
added, I am aware of a harmony or discrepancy between that
addition and what went before and still remains.4- Apart from
theory we should all agree that, when despondent or angry,
a man can feel that a description of such states is right or
wrong, though he may be unable to compare this description
with another object. Again we should agree that, when not
despondent, a man may assent to a description of despon-
dency, because he feels himself, as we say, into it, or may
. dissent because he cannot do so—and this though in neither
case he could assign a special ground. And what happens
here, I presume, is that the description excites feelings which
tend to fill themselves out to the content of the usual felt
state. And between this content and the description offered
there is then experienced, as above, the sense of agreement
or jar. I have not forgotten that, in order to test the truth
of a description, a man may appeal to the usages of language,
or again possibly may recall some definite action or other

1 Iam in a certain felt state which I go on to observe. The description
which results from the observation is an object added to my former felt
state, and is now itself an element in a new felt state. This object gives
me (a) a feeling of change, but (b) not a change of my special felt mood,
say, anger. The description further, if correct, brings (c) a sense of har-
monious addition without change, and if incorrect, (d) a feeling of incon-
gruity. If the incongruity is positive (a), I feel a jarring new element.
If it is negative (8), there is still a sense of discord, since defect has:a posi-
tive quality. And there is, in this latter case especially, an instability in


the object induced by ideal supplementation. ‘This instability is largely
the work of that which is merely felt. :


VI IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE 169


“symptom, or set of symptoms, from the past of himself or
another. But, apart from an appeal to present feeling,
nothing of this kind, however important it may be, is suffi-
cient by itself, I would submit, to account for the facts.

I will now in passing touch briefly on the question of
means. By what means and how am I able in, say, despon-
dency to make an object of that which I feel? I am not
inquiring how we come to have an object at all, nor am
T even asking as yet how feeling in general can come to be
an object. The question is limited at present to the above
case of an emotion, but it has a more general bearing which
will show itself later. And the point of importance is this.
In any emotion one part of that emotion consists already of
objects, of perceptions and ideas before my mind, - And, the
whole emotion being one, the special group of feeling is
united with these objects before my mind, united with them
integrally and directly though not objectively.1 And this,
I think, supplies us with an answer to our question. For
when the object-part of our emotion is enlarged by further
perception or idea, the agreement or disagreement with
what is felt is not merely general and suffused, but is located
through the object in one special felt group. And this special
connexion and continuity with the object explains, I think,
how we are able further to transform what is observed by
the addition of elements from what is felt. There are features
in feeling (this is the point) which already in a sense belong”
to and are one with their object, since the emotion contains
and unites both its aspects.

Finally if we reject the idea that what is felt can serve to
judge of what is before us, let us consider the position in which
we are left. The attempt to fall back on memory, we have
seen, resulted in failure, and what else remains to us? You
may say, ‘ The object satisfies me or not, and that is the


1 Again even on the object-side of the emotion there will of course be
a greater or less extent of non-analysed content.


170 ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF CHAP.


whole of it and the end of it.’ But assenting to this very
largely, if not in the main, I cannot agree that no more is
to be said as to the special satisfaction. The object, you may
reply, in the end is found to be self-contradictory or har-
monijous ; but once more here, while agreeing in principle,
I cannot sit down content with such a mere generality.
Why, when my mood is incompletely or wrongly described,
does the object go on to jar with itself and to be found self-
inconsistent ? There is more at work here, we saw, than the
associations of language, and there is more even than any
redintegration, ideal or active, merely from the object by
itself. For, with merely that, there is no accounting for the
whole of the agreement or jar that I feel. You may appeal
here to ‘ dispositions ’, and may argue that in one case my
dispositions are satisfied and in the other case are restless.
But if the disposition is not felt or in any way experienced,
and to me is absolutely nothing but its effects, such an
explanation once more seems insufficient. For in observing
my mood I do not seem to be satisfied with the result, or
to reject it, for no reason except that I find myself moved,
I know not how, in this direction or the opposite. I seem
on the contrary to myself to be engaged throughout and to
be face to face with actual fact, and, wherever I dissent
from or agree to an observed result, I seem to have a reason
in this actual fact. And further I do not seem to have a mere
general reason, but on the contrary something specific
which I directly know and experience. The object before
me is unstable and it moves so as to satisfy me; and in
this point and so far we are perhaps all agreed. “Where
I go on to differ is that I insist that, in addition to other
influences (whose working I admit), the object is moved
also by that which is only felt. There are connexions of
content now actually present in feeling, and these are able
to jar with the object before me. And they are able further
to correct that object by supplementation from themselves.


vi IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE YI,


And this, I submit, is the one account of the matter which
on all sides is satisfactory.

We have now considered the problem offered both by
Introspection and by Attention, and we have been led in
each case to the same main result. These puzzles are
insoluble unless that which I feel, and which is not an object
before me, is present and active. This felt element is used,
and it must be used, in the constitution of that object which
satisfies me, and apart from this influence and criterion
there is no accounting for the actual fact of our knowledge.
We must go on now to deal more directly with the main
question of this chapter. We must ask how immediate
experience is able to make a special object of itself. The
principles which we have laid down and have hitherto applied
will furnish us, I trust, with a satisfactory answer.


I must however, before proceeding further, try to explain
what I mean by immediate experience. And I will begin by
pointing out a possible sense of this term which I desire to
exclude. The Unconscious or the Subconscious may stand
merely for that which I do not notice or notice specially,
and it may stand again merely for that which, though I am
aware of it, is no object before me. But these words on
the other hand may bear a more extreme meaning. The
Unconscious may signify something which is more than
anything which at any moment I actually feel or in any
sense actually am aware of. The Unconscious, in this sense,
is still psychical, and it is continuous with my psychical
contents, but it is outside all that at any moment I experience
as mine. The matter contained in these two compartments,
of the Unconscious and Conscious, may itself be to any
extent one and indivisible, and may itself thus constitute
a single world. But across this matter a line of demarcation
is drawn, and while on one side of this line I feel and am
aware, on the other side I have no actual experience at all.


172 ' ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF CHAP.


Across this opaque barrier may come to me influences or
even messages, but the barrier can never be transparent. The
influences or messages, to be anything for me, must take
their place as elements in the region of my feeling and con-
sciousness, and outside that region I do not experience
them. They belong in a word to the Unconscious. On the
other hand the barrier, though opaque, is shifting. It may
from time to time be moved so as to include elements which
before were outside it. And this inclusion does but embrace
what before was somehow psychical, though not experienced
as mine. In something like this sense the Unconscious,
whatever its previous history, has been used very widely
and in varying applications by German philosophy since
the beginning of the last century. It attained popularity
in the well-known work of von Hartmann (1869), and has
lately threatened to invade our literature under the specious
title of the Subliminal Self.1

Against any. interpretation here of immediate experience
in the above sense I would desire specially to warn the
reader. Outside that of which a man is aware there is, I
agree, a larger world of experience. The content of this
world, I again agree, is in a sense continuous with that

3 Any one who can suppose that Mr. Myers’s Subliminal Self was any
discovery of his own, must, I think, either be ill informed or else unable to
recognize the identity of ideas where the language is modified and the
ultimate intention not the same. The term ‘Subliminal’ is, I presume,
the translation of a Herbartian phrase which has long been current, and
with regard to the matter of Mr. Myers’s book, while his industry and
literary power are both unquestionable and admirable, it would be diffi-
cult, I imagine, to produce from it a single new idea. His capacity for
philosophical thought can, I think, be easily estimated. Mr. Myers by
his own showing was acquainted with von Hartmann’s work. And yet
he failed to perceive that, with regard to my subliminal] self, the vital
question is whether it is really my self at all, and, if so, then how far. He
could not see that the problem which most pressed on him was not as to
the existence of my self after death, but as to the existence and reality
of my self at any time and at ali. The conclusion to which I at least am
forced is that in Mr. Myers’s work there is a collection of everything and any-


thing which seemed to him usable prima facie as evidence for his foregone
result, and that of inquiry in any other sense there is as good as nothing.


VI IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE 173


which directly fills his consciousness. But he cannot experi-
ence the former content immediately, and, were he to do
so, then (as it seems to me) the man’s self would be de-
stroyed. The position of the line dividing these two worlds
no doubt may fluctuate. More and less of content. may
come from time to time within the man’s feeling centre.
But so long as that centre exists, there is a world within it
which is experienced immediately, and a world without it
which is not in this sense experienced at all, To call this
world the region of the Unconscious, if this merely means
that the man cannot be directly aware of it, to myself would
be misleading. But in any case this world is outside his
immediate experience. Whether tracts of a man’s conscious-
ness can under any conditions be wholly split off and so
‘exist independently, I am unable to say.*_ If, however, this
takes place, the principle remains unaffected, for we have
forthwith two or more centres of immediate experience not
directly connected. I use, in brief, immediate experience to
stand for that which is comprised wholly within a single
state of undivided awareness or feeling. As against anything
“unconscious ’, in the sense of falling outside, this is im-
mediate as being my actual conscious experience. And
further it is immediate as against those other special and
mediated developments which throughout rest on it, and,
while transcending, still remain within itself. I will now,
dismissing all further reference to the Unconscious, attempt
briefly to explain this difficult and most important sense of
immediacy.


Questions at once arise on some of which we may first
touch in passing. (a) Was there and is there in the develop-
ment of the race and the individual a stage at which experi-
ence is merely immediate ? And, further, do we all perhaps

1 The part split off may still be united in feeling with the rest (see


Prof. James, Psychology), and, if so, is not split off wholly. But I do not
suggest that an absolute division is impossible.


174 ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF CHAP.


at moments sink back to such a level? We all (at least
usually) have in what we experience the distinction of sub-
ject and object, or at any rate (it may not mean the same
thing) the awareness of an object as a not-self. If we like
to take ‘ consciousness ’ as the state in which we experience
a not-self, we may thus ask if there ever was or ever is an
experience which is in this sense wholly subconscious. In
such a state there would be feeling, but there would not be
an object present as an ‘ other’. And we should so far not
be aware of any distinction between that which is felt and
that which feels. For myself I think it probable that such
a stage of mind not only, with all of us, comes first in fact,
but that at times it recurs even in the life of the developed
individual. But it is impossible for me to enter further on
the matter here (see Mind, O.S., No. 47). What I would
here insist on is the point that feeling, so understood, need
not be devoid of internal diversity. Its content need not in
this sense be simple, and possibly never is simple. By feeling,
in short, I understand, and, I believe, always have under-
stood, an awareness which, though non-relational, may
comprise simply in itself an indefinite amount ‘of difference.
There are no distinctions in the proper sense, and yet there
is a many felt in one. We may thus verify even here what
we may call, if we please, an undeveloped ideality. And,
not only this, but such a whole admits in itself a conflict and
struggle of elements, not of course experienced as struggle
but as discomfort, unrest and uneasiness. We may, I think,
go on to add that the whole in feeling can feel itself present
in one part of its content in a sense in which it does not so.
feel itself in another part. And of course change in its con-
tents will be felt, though not experienced properly as change.
Nor do I see reason to doubt that the laws of Redintegration
and also of Fusion (if we admit such a law) will hold in
this field.

(b) Ihave thought it better to deal so far with the stage,


vI IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE 175


real or supposed, where experience is merely immediate.
But, in order to avoid controversy, I shall in this chapter
consider this no further. And for our present purpose we
need not assume that such a stage of mere feeling is even
possible. I shall here take experience to exist always at the
level where there is the distinction of object and subject,
and a theoretical and practical relation holding between
them. I do not mean of course that this relation itself
always exists for consciousness in the form of a relation
proper uniting and dividing two terms. On the contrary
‘we have no such object, I must insist, except so far as we
have reached self-consciousness; and to suppose that we
are always self-conscious would to myself seem absurd. It
is however impossible for me here to discuss these questions,
on which I have entered elsewhere (Appearance. Cf. Mind,
N.S., No. 46), and I must pass on to emphasize a further
point which seems here all-important.

(c) Whether there is a stage where experience is merely
immediate I have agreed to leave doubtful. Feeling is tran-
scended always, if you please, in the sense that we have
always contents which are more than merely felt. But on
the other side at no moment can feeling ever be transcended,
if this means that we are to have contents which are not
felt. In a sense, therefore, we never can at any time pass
beyond immediate experience. The object not-self, and
again the object and subject related before my mind, all
this is more than mere feeling. But again the whole of it
would be nothing for me unless it came to me as felt ; and
that any actual experience should fall somewhere outside of
feeling seems impossible. At every moment my state, what-
ever else it is, is a whole of which I am immediately aware.
It is an experienced non-relational unity of many in one.?

1 We may, as was noticed above, speak of this stage as ‘ consciousness ”
in contrast with mere feeling.


* I need not ask here if it is possible for my experience to consist of
one single feeling.


176 ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF UnAP,


And object and subject and every possible relation and term,
to be experienced at all, must fall within and depend vitally
on such a felt unity.

At any moment my actual experience, however relational
its contents, is in the end non-relational. No analysis into
relations and terms can ever exhaust its nature or fail in
the end to belie its essence.4_ What analysis leaves for ever
outstanding is no mere residue, but is a vital condition of the
analysis itself. Everything which is got out into the form
of an object implies still the felt background against which
the object comes, and, further, the whole experience of both
feeling and object is a non-relational immediate felt unity.
The entire relational consciousness, in short, is experienced
as falling within a direct awareness. This direct awareness
is itself non-relational. It escapes from all attempts to
exhibit it by analysis as one or more elements in a relational
scheme, or as that scheme itself, or as a relation or relations,
or as the sum or collection of any of these abstractions. And
immediate experience not only escapes, but it serves as the
basis on which the analysis is made. Itself is the vital
element within which every analysis still moves, while, and
so far as, and however much, that analysis transcends
immediacy.

Everything therefore, no matter how objective and how
relational, is experienced only in feeling, and, so far as it is
experienced, still depends upon feeling. On the other side
the objective and the relational transcend the state of mere
feeling and in a sense are opposed to it. But we must beware
here of an error. We cannot speak of a relation, between
immediate experience and that which transcends it, except
by a licence. It is a mode of expression found convenient
in our reflective thinking, but it is in the end not defensible.
A relation exists only between terms, and those terms, to
be known as such, must be objects. And hence immediate


1 C£._Chap. X.


vI IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE 177


experience, taken as the term of a relation, becomes so far
a partial object and ceases so far to keep its nature as a felt
totality.

The relation (so to express ourselves) of immediate —
experience to its felt contents, and specially here to those
contents which transcend it, must be taken simply as a fact.
It can neither be explained nor even (to speak properly)
described, since description necessarily means translation
into objective terms and relations. We possess on the one
side a fact directly felt and experienced. On the other side
we attempt a description imperfect and half-negative. And
our attempt is justified so far as the description seems true,
so far, that is, as though inadequate, it does not positively
jar, and again is felt positively to agree with our felt ex-
perience. —

(d) There are several points which I cannot discuss here,
but may notice in passing.t The felt background, against
which the object comes, remains always immediate. But,
on the other hand, its content may to some extent show
mediation. Parts of this content may have at some time
been elements included in the object, and may have been
internally distinguished into relations and terms. However,
none the less now, this relational content forms part of the
felt background. Again in the object not-self, on the other
side, we may find tracts the contents of which have never
been analysed. They are, so to speak, nebulae in which the
non-relational form still persists internally, and in which.
the complexity does not go beyond simple sensuous co-
inherence. And, as we saw in the case of an emotion, the
matter contained in these nebulae, and in the not-self
generally, is continuous as to its content with that. matter
which remains merely felt. It is impossible, however, here
to enlarge on these questions. And I cannot ask here
how far the not-self both in its origin and its essence is


1 Ci, Appearance, chapters ix and x.
1574 N


178 ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF CHAP.


distinctively practical. Nor can I point out how far and
in what sense we have special not-selves depending on
various relations, permanent and transitory, to special selves.
IT must hasten onwards to attempt to deal directly with
the main problem of the present chapter.

I will, however, before proceeding, venture to repeat and
to insist upon this main conclusion. Immediate experience
is not a stage, which may or may not at some time have been
there and has now ceased to exist. It is not in any case
removed by the presence of a not-self and of a relational
consciousness, All that is thus removed is at most, we may
say, the mereness of immediacy. Every distinction and
relation still rests on an immediate background of which we
are aware, and every distinction and relation (so far as ex-
perienced) is also felt, and felt in a sense to belong to an.
immediate totality. Thus in all experience we still have
feeling which is not an object, and at all our moments
the entirety of what comes to us, however much distin-
guished and relational, is felt as comprised within a unity -
' which itself is not relational.


We may now approach the two main questions of this
chapter, (i) How can immediate experience ever serve as
a criterion ? and (ii) How can immediate experience itself
become an object and a not-self, since ex hyp. it essentially
is no object ? The first of these questions, after what has
gone before, may be dealt with briefly. ,

(r} I am not discussing here the general problem of the
ultimate criterion. We may perhaps agree that the criterion
consists in that which satisfies our wants, and is to be found
where we have felt uneasiness and its positive opposite.
That in which I feel myself affirmed, and which contents
me, will be the general head under which falls reality,
together with truth, goodness, and beauty. But I cannot
enter further on this here, or inquire as to the special


vI IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE 179


characters of these diverse ‘satisfactions. What on the
other hand I wish here to emphasize is the point that I do
not take immediate experience as being in general the
criterion. I do not say that in agreement merely with the
content of this we are to find in all cases our answer to
the question of truth and reality. The inquiry as to why
an object contents or does not content me, how it satisfies
or does not satisfy a demand of my nature, cannot in all
cases be met by an appeal to the actual content of my
feeling. Hence the problem before us is limited to a special
issue. How, we must ask, in the cases where my immediate
experience does serve as a criterion of truth and fact, is it
able to perform such an office ?

We have already in the main anticipated the answer.
‘I can feel uneasiness, we found, both general and special
apart from any object or at least without regard to any
object in particular. Again I can have a sense of uneasiness
or its opposite in regard to a particular object before me.
I do not, so far, make an object of my uneasiness and hold
it before me in one with the object ; but so far, without
actually doing anything of this kind, I feel the jarring or
unison specially together and in one with the object. And
we have now to ask how this disagreement can become
a contradiction before me in the object, so that I am not
merely dissatisfied with that but can go on to reject it as
unreal.

What is required is that the object should itself become
qualified by the same content which was merely felt within
me. As soon as this qualification has appeared, I have
actually before me in the object that which previously was
felt within me to be harmonious or to jar in regard to the


1 I assume here that goodness is not to be used for the general term
which is equivalent to satisfaction in general. But whether goodness is to
be used in a wider or a narrower sense, is to myself a question merely of
nomenclature.


N2


180 ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF CHAP.


object. The feeling (to speak roughly) remains what it
was, but it no longer is merely grouped round and centred
in the object. The feeling itself is also before me in the
object-world, and the object now confronts me as being itself
satisfactory or discordant. My description, e. g., is seen to
come short, or to be otherwise conflicting, when compared
with the corrected idea of my actual emotion.

I will now notice briefly the various ways in which the
object can gain its fresh qualification. The object naturally
is unstable and in constant change. Apart from what we
may call external alteration, there are reactions from the
subject. Even where these are non-acquired, they often
tend to make the requisite change in the object. And then,
as we have seen before, there is redintegration from the object
both physical and psychical. This redintegration again is
all-pervasive, and holds good beyond the object-world and
within the region of mere feeling. Hence the object, having
been continuous with what is felt in me, both generally and
in special groups, becomes an ideal centre and bond. It has
a tendency both to restore and to qualify itself by associated
content whether foregone or present. And further, as soon
as this qualification from whatever cause has taken place,
the identity of the content before me and within me is felt.
Thus I am no longer merely satisfied or in unrest with regard
to the object, but the object contains for me and itself is
that which I feel must be accepted or rejected.

We are attempting here to deal briefly with a difficult
point which tends on all sides to lose itself in complications.
I am endeavouring, therefore, so far as I can, to narrow and
simplify the issue. We may feel satisfied or otherwise when
we have contents felt to be harmonious or jarring, and further
a perceived object may also in feeling be an element and
an important element in a special felt group. Then, when
the object (as may happen from various causes) itself acquires
the content which before in feeling gave satisfaction or


vI IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE > 181


unrest, I become aware of the perceived object as that which
in itself gives satisfaction or discord. And according to
the nature of the dissatisfaction and of that which is done
to remove it from the object, our general criterion acts in
various specific ways. But all that concerns us here is the
case where the particular content, which lies in my feeling,
is used in order to judge of an object before me.

We may recur to our former instance of an emotional
state. If I shrink from or am attracted by some person, and
do not know how this happens, I may endeavour accurately
to realize the detail of my feelings, and perhaps to discover
the real nature of the conduct which the object suggests.
We have here an object, perceived and thought of, and on
the other side we have dim uneasy feelings in myself which
are not objective and before me. Let, however, the object
from any cause—an instinctive action, a chance sensation
or an oscillation of emphasis—develop its content in a certain
direction, and the situation may at once be changed. That
which formerly was but felt in regard to the object has
become now, also and as well, a quality of the object. And
it may satisfy us because it is that qualification which answers
to what we felt and still feel. I know now what my feelings
actually were, and whether and how far they were that for
which I took them. And I understand now how the person
himself has perhaps a character which suggests this or that
behaviour towards him. In either case an object has been
judged of in accordance with and from the content of
immediate experience, and that experience has acted as
a criterion of the object.


(2) From this hurried treatment of a difficult problem I
pass on to deal at last directly with the special subject of
this chapter. We must ask how immediate experience is
able to know itself and to become for us an object. That
such knowledge exists in fact seems to me incontestable.


182 ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF CHAP.


Immediate experience certainly cannot make an object of
itself throughout and in all its individual detail. And such
a result not only fails in fact to be achieved but is impossible
essentially. We can, however, set our immediate experience
before us not only in partial detail but in its main general
character. We can know about it as a positive experience,
an awareness of many in one which yet is not relational;
and I must attempt to point out the steps by which such
a conclusion may be reached. But I am not here offering
any genetic account of the matter. That inquiry, however
important, may here fortunately be ignored. The idea of
immediate experience, once suggested, is, like other ideas,
verified by its working. And all that I am concerned with
here is to show that the origin of the suggestion is itself not
in principle inexplicable.

(i) We-can in the first place have before us as an object
the idea of a complete reality. Our actual object, as we saw,
is unstable, and its advance (so far as it advances) in a certain
main direction tends generally to remove uneasiness and to
bring satisfaction.1 Hence we can form (I need not ask how)
the idea of an object with all uneasiness removed entirely,
an object which utterly satisfies. But this means an object
with nothing that is really outside it in the form of an ‘ else-
where’ or a ‘ not-yet’. The ‘ elsewhere’ or the ‘ not-yet’
that falls really outside the object, precludes (this seems
obvious) entire satisfaction. We hence are led to think of an
object without any external ‘ elsewhere’ or ‘ not-yet’, an
object which in some sense contains within itself, and already
is qualified by, every real possibility. We form in other
words the idea of an all-inclusive Reality. And this idea,
being set before us, may so far satisfy us as true and real.
The Reality with anything outside of it will now not merely
be felt as defective, but will in addition be discrepant with


1 I am not saying that every satisfactory addition to the object is pre-
ceded by uneasiness and fulfils a felt need or want. That in my opinion
would be going at least beyond the facts. ;


VI IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE 183


its own idea. And anything now that is suggested or that
can be suggested, if it fails to be there 7” our actual object,
must be made somehow of the actual object, if at least that
object is to be complete.

(ii) I have thus the idea of an object which is complete
and all-inclusive, while on the other hand the object actually
before meisincomplete. But this perceived object is changed
and, let us here say, is changed by addition. And, with this,
the source of the added elements goes on to become for me
a problem. (a) These elements, I proceed to judge, come to
me in part from the unknown not-self. This is an inevitable
inference, the nature and validity of which it is perhaps not
necessary here to discuss. We have hence, in this unknown
province, a reality which has the form of an object not-self,
but which on the other side is not present actually before
me in perception. And this reality must be set down as
included within my complete object. (b) Again within that
object which I actually perceive there are contained (as we
saw) tracts more or less undistinguished internally. These
tracts are nebulae the contents of which have on the one hand
manifoldness, but on the other hand are more or less without
the relational form. They have within them adjectives
which sensuously inhere and cohere, though these adjectives
have not yet been ordered. But, as our knowledge increases,
these sensuous wholes go on more or less to be broken up and


} The reader will bear in mind that I am not asking here if the above
idea is true. That is a question which here may be ignored. There are
two points which I may notice in passing. (a) It may possibly be sug-
gested that, instead of taking everything as of the object, I may take it
as merely together with the object, and that this exception is fatal. But in
this case I reply that the ‘ together’ has now itself become the object—
an object in my judgement most unsatisfactory but still answering the
purpose of the text. (b) Again it may be said with regard to the ‘ not-
yet’ that, given a recurrence of a certain character, the ‘ not-yet’ may be
harmless. To this I answer that in such a case the ‘ not-yet’ qualifies
this character which recurs, and in some sense is included within this
character, and that taken as really external it still means incompleteness.
But, obviously, innumerable difficulties attaching to what is said in the
text may occur to the reader, and must here be passed by.


184 ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF CHAP.


discriminated.. And the object, which of course is continuous
throughout, appropriates the result of this process. . Hence
the object now possesses to some extent actually all its
contents in a discriminated form, and for the rest it can
assume (rightly or wrongly) that the same result, though not
actual, is possible. The object will now include for us both its
distinguished and undistinguished contents, the latter taken
as distinguished ideally though not in actual detail. How
far and in what precise sense it is proper to attribute reality
to these unmade distinctions, we are not concerned here to
inquire. It is enough for us that the idea of the complete
object now includes within itself an objective ‘ not-yet’
external to its actual detail, and again an objective ‘ not-yet ’
lying undistinguished within the fact which is given. And,
having concluded so much, the self so far is satisfied with the
idea before it, and it feels that this idea is somehow true.
and real.

Now in the above two cases (we must go on to observe)
there is a difference, a difference which is felt. When an
addition is made to our object from the outside we feel this
addition as new. I do not mean that in this respect it does
not matter how the alteration of the object is made, and that,
however the addition comes, we have precisely the same
feeling. I admit the diversity, but I must insist that, in
spite of this diversity, we have, when the object is added to
from outside itself, a specific feeling of newness, and that
this feeling differs from that which comes when the object
develops itself from within itself. In the latter case (the case
of what we called nebulae) the content was actually there
though it was not yet distinguished, and the content was
already felt as being there; while in the former case (the
case of addition from without) the content was not felt at
all. The added features in both cases are felt as new, but in
the one case these features arrive from a world which is
unfelt, while in the other case the features already were


VI IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE 185


somehow present in my actual awareness. And the difference
between the two arrivals shows itself in each case in a
different feeling. The reader who finds a difficulty here
should recall the results we have accepted as true.. In
the first place everything, the object included, is actually
felt, and, in the second place, a change in feeling itself also
is felt. All that we have added here is the conclusion, that
in the two cases distinguished above there is in each case
a specific felt difference.?

(c) But beyond these two cases we have also a third. An
addition may be made to our object, but neither from the
unknown not-self without it nor from the undistinguished
tracts within itself.s We saw that, when a felt emotion is
described, a man may feel that the description agrees or
does not agree with an actual fact of which he is aware. And
yet we found that this experienced fact, by which the
description is measured, has contents not objectively before
the man even in an undistinguished form. The object in its
wavering, and in its movement to complete -itself through
redintegration and otherwise, changes in directions which
cause on one side satisfaction and on the other side uneasi-
ness. And it is, largely or mainly, because these suggestions
are felt to be in unison or discord with something already
felt as present, that they are accepted or rejected. In some-
thing of the same way (we need not trouble ourselves here
with the difference) the beautiful reality may seem to give
you what you wanted, though what you wanted you did not
know, or may seem to say for you what you always meant
and could never express. This experience may doubtless
in part be illusory. The want in part may not actually
have been there before it was merged in satisfaction, and the
meaning may in part never have gone before its expression.
But upon the other side the experience certainly conveys


+I am of course not supposing that the consciousness which we are
considering, knows at the present stage about these feelings all that we
from the outside and at a later stage perceive.


186 ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF CHAP.


to us things that were not perceived but were actually felt
within us. Again earlier in this chapter we saw how in psycho-
logical introspection my self is put before me as an object,
an object to be completed ideally. And its content, we went
on to perceive, is filled up in part out of elements which I
merely feel, and which in no sense are before me in the shape
of an object. And we may once more remind ourselves in
general how the object is continuous in substance with the
content that merely is present in feeling, and hence tends
persistently to complete itself by that content.

But, the fact being as above, how is the self ever to become
aware of this fact or even to suspect its existence? How
is the merely felt to become in that character an object ? In
the main, I think, this question has by now been answered.
When my object is increased and the addition comes from
that which was and is felt, there is, in such a case, first, a
positive sense of expansion and of‘accord. And there is,
next, an absence of the feeling of complete otherness and
newness. We have not here quite the same experience as
when the object is increased from the undistinguished not-
self, but we have an experience more or less similar. This
felt absence of disturbance, and this positive sense of some-
thing the same although new, prevent my attributing the
change to that actual object-world which extends beyond
my object. Can I then take the change as arising from the
undistinguished tracts present within my actual object ?
Once more here, we find, the path is closed. For the feeling
here, though similar, is not the same as that of which in the
present case I am aware. Again, however much I develop
the object in idea, I seem always to be left with a sense of
defect. Further in some cases (through a persisting after-
perception or otherwise) I can reproduce the special object
as it was experienced before the addition. And here I find
that the new feature does not in fact fall even within the
undiscriminated parts of that object.


vI IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE 187


To repeat, my object, felt to be unsatisfactory, is changed
and now is qualified by an addition. This addition gives
a positive sense of agreement and unison. It is without the
sensation of disturbance, and it gives the feeling of identity
with what went before. On the other side this feeling differs
from that which I experience when the object is developed
from its own undistinguished tracts. And in recalling the
change of the object, where this is possible, there is, in pass-
ing between the earlier and the later object, a feeling of
difference. And this difference remains even when I attend
to those contents of the object which are not discriminated.
For the above reason I cannot set down the change as due
to the object even so far as that is undistinguished. __

Generally then my object is added to, and the new matter
cannot be taken as without a source. But in the first place
the matter is not felt as wholly new but as something
already there and mine. And, in the second place, what is
new cannot come from the object-world. It goes beyond my
actual object, and yet I cannot attribute it to the non-
perceived object-world, or again to any non-relational nebula
contained within my. object. The origin of my experience
therefore is non-objective and it is also non-relational ; but,
on the other side, positively, it comes to me as something
which already was present to me. The idea, therefore, is
suggested of an experience neither objective nor relational
but, in a word, immediate. And this idea, being suggested
(no matter how it is suggested), satisfies me so far, and is
accepted as true and real. The process outlined above may,
if you please, contain logical flaws. Whether that is or is
not the case, I am not concerned to discuss. And the true
history and the real genetic origin of the idea reached, you
may contend, has escaped me. That would be an objection
which once more I am not called on to answer. I claim to
have shown how the idea of immediate experience can be
brought before the mind, however otherwise normally it


188 ' ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF CHAP.


may be brought there. But the idea, once suggested, is
verified by its working, and its acceptance does not logically
depend upon the manner of its discovery.


The whole process which I have sketched may be briefly
resumed thus, Our actual object fails to satisfy us, and we
get the idea that it is incomplete and that a complete object
would satisfy. We attempt to complete our object by
relational addition from without and by relational distinction
from within. And the result in each case is failure and
a sense of defect. We feel that any result gained thus, no
matter how all-inclusive so far, would yet be less than what
we actually experience. Then we try the idea of a positive
non-distinguished non-relational whole, which contains more
than the object and in the end contains all that we experi-
ence. And that idea, as I have endeavoured in these pages
to show, seems to meet our demand. It is not free from
difficulty, but it appears to be the one ground on which
satisfaction is possible.

The reader who accepts such an account of volition as
I, for instance, have offered elsewhere,1 may perhaps find our
main result more evident when viewed from the practical
side. Will, according to such an account, is on one hand
the self-realization of an idea, but on the other hand it
cannot be resolved into any complex of elements existing
before the mind. We have in volition a positive experience,
which is more than any sensation or idea or any mere set
of sensations and ideas with their relations and movements.
If you take my state of mind before the volition, followed
by the actual satisfaction with its awareness of agency, and
if you attempt to confine all this within the limits of what
takes place before me in the objective field, the result is
failure. You perceive forthwith that in your analysis there
is something left out, and that this something is a content


1 Mind, NS., Nos. 44, 46, 49. Cf, Nos. 40, 41, 43.


VI IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE 189


which is experienced positively. The felt outgoing of myself
and from myself has in short been ignored. And hence
comes a consciousness of defect in the object as described,
and a desire for its completion. On the other side, since the
whole experience is integrally one, the objective side naturally
tends to complete itself ideally and to fill itself out from
what merely is felt. And the suggestion of a defect thus
remedied, when once it has been made, is found so far to
satisfy. But I would remind the reader that, neither here
nor in what precedes, am I offering a true genetic account of
the matter.

In some such manner it, however, seems possible to reach
the idea of immediate experience. That experience we have
seen is a positive non-relational non-objective whole of
feeling. Within my immediate experience falls everything
of which in any sense I am aware, so far at least as I am
aware of it. But on the other side it contains distinctions
which transcend its immediacy. This my world, of feeling
and felt in one, is not to be called ‘ subjective’, nor is it to
be identified with my self. That would be a mistake at once
fundamental and disastrous. Nor is immediate experience
to be taken as simply one with any ‘subliminal’ world or
any universe of the Unconscious. However continuous it
may be with a larger world, my immediate experience falls,
as such, strictly within the limits of my finite centre. But
again to conclude from this that what falls within these
limits is merely myself, would be an error entailing in the
end theoretical ruin. The above idea of immediate experi-
ence is not intelligible, I would add, in the sense of being
explicable; but it is necessary, I would insist, both for
psychology and for metaphysics.


The genesis of the idea, I should agree, in the main may be called
practical, I should presume it to arise when the self is identified with
the body, and when we become aware of something experienced within
the body which is not the body nor yet things within it or outside it.
To set down this experience as being further, like pleasure and pain,
non-relational, is of course a step taken only by a later reflection.


Igo ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF CHAP.


Its larger application would go far beyond the scope of
these pages. Nothing in the end is real but what is felt, and
for me nothing in the end is real but that which I feel. To
take reality as a relational scheme, no matter whether the
relations are ‘ external’ or ‘internal’, seems therefore im-
possible and perhaps even ridiculous. It would cease to be
so only if the immediacy of feeling could be shown to be
merely relational. On the other side relations in fact do
exist and immediacy in fact is transcended.1 And, just as
we cannot explain the possibility of finite centres of feeling,
so we cannot explain how this transcendence of feeling is
possible. But the fact remains that feeling, while it remains
as a constant basis, nevertheless contains a world which in
a sense goes beyond itself. And when we seek for a unity
which. holds together these two aspects of our world, we
seem to find given to us nothing but this unity of feeling
which itself is transcended. Hence, as I have urged else-
where, we are driven to postulate a higher form of unity,
a form which combines the two aspects neither of which can
be excluded. That such a form is given to us directly in
any experience? I have never pretended. On the other hand
against its possibility I have nowhere found a conclusive
objection, And because this satisfies our demands, and
because nothing but this satisfies them, I therefore conclude
that such an idea, so far as it goes, is final and absolute
truth. But, however that may be, I trust that the humbler


1 We never in one sense do, or can, go beyond immediate experience.
Apart from the immediacy of ‘ this ’ and ‘now’ we never have, or can have,
reality. The real, to be real, must be felt. This is one side of the matter.
But on the other side the felt content takes on a form which more and
more goes beyond the essential character of feeling, i.e. direct and non-
relational qualification. Distinction and separation into substantives and
adjectives, terms and relations, alienate the content of immediate experi-
ence from the form of immediacy which still on its side persists. In other
words the ideality, present from the first, is developed, and to follow this
ideality is our way to the true Reality which is there in feeling.

* Given, that is, adequately and as required. I am not forgetting the
claim of, e.g., our aesthetic experience. .


VI IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE IQr


contentions of this chapter may in their way be useful. I
have felt throughout that everything here which I have been
able to say, could and should have been somehow put more
simply. But if, while so far agreeing with me, the reader is
nevertheless led to reflect further on this difficult theme, my
main end will have been accomplished. The problem which
has occupied us, however sterile and baffling it may appear,


threatens, if left unresolved, to bring danger or even theo-
retical destruction.


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VI


CONSCIOUSNESS AND EXPERIENCE!


THE idea of writing a few remarks on this head was suggested
to me by Mr. Ward’s article on Modern Psychology. These
remarks are not intended as a contribution to the subject, and
certainly not as a hostile criticism. We must all feel grateful to
Mr. Ward for his interesting discussion, and for myself I feel
sympathy with its general drift. And, as Mr. Ward has not yet
worked out his positive view as to the Subject, it would be absurd
in me to offer to criticize that view beforehand. But what has
struck me is that in the discussion assumptions are used which,
if true, are very far from appearing self-evident. And, though in
his own mind doubtless Mr. Ward is prepared with a defence of
them, I do not find that he has done anything to prepare the
reader. Hence I thought it might be well to call attention to
some points which seem ignored, but which to my mind appear
to be fundamental.

The main assumption seems to be the identification of experi-
ence with consciousness. Now, if by consciousness we under-
stand the being of an object for a subject, this assumption, 1
should say, is at least disputable. To my mind consciousness is
not coextensive with experience. It is not original, nor at any
stage is it ever all-inclusive, and it is inconsistent with itself in
such a way as to point to something higher.

(x) On the inconsistency of consciousness I can partly refer to
Mr. Ward, but I must also state the case briefly in my own way.
We have an object, a something given, and it is given to the
subject. Is the subject given? No, for, if so, it would itself be
an object. We seem, then, to have one term and a relation
without a second term. But can there be a relation with one


1 These pages were first published in Mind for April 1893. It is with
some hesitation that I have resolved to reprint them, but it seemed to me
clear that, if republished, they should be left unaltered. Whether Prof.
Ward has anywhere, since the above date, discussed the points raised in
this paper, I regret to be unable to inform the reader. In his interesting
and valuable work The Realm of Ends, lately published, he appears to
myself still to ignore a view which, if it stands, tends to unsettle the
foundation of his main theories. For his article see Mind, N.S., No. 5.


CONSCIOUSNESS AND EXPERIENCE 193


term? No; this appears to be self-contradictory, and, if we
assert it, we must justify and defend our paradox. But, again,
can a term be known only as a term of a relation or relations,

‘ while it is not, in any aspect, known otherwise? No, once more ;
this is impossible, and in the end unmeaning. Terms are never
constituted entirely by a relation or relations. There is a quality
always which is more than the relation,.though it may not be
independent of it. We may, of course, for certain purposes
abstract and use working fictions, as we do, for instance, in the
case of atoms and ether. But, outside natural science, it is a
serious error to mistake these useful fictions for realities. And
anything like a point without a quality in the end seems to be
unreal, and ‘constitution by relations’ a misleading phrase.
But, once more, can we have a relation, one term of which is
contained in the experienced and the other not? No; for aterm,
which is not in some sense experienced, seems nothing at all.
If in itself it falls outside the experienced, then it appears to be
unmeaning, and it cannot therefore consistently be said to exist.
Or at least we must continue to hold this, until our difficulties
are met. And they are not met by the mere repetition of those
every-day distinctions which we have been forced to set down as
barely relative.

And now, leaving the terms, consider the relation. Is there,
in the end, such a thing as a relation which is merely between
terms? Or, on the other hand, does not a relation imply an
underlying unity and an inclusive whole ? And then, once again,
must not this whole be experienced or be nothing? Here are
points surely which at least require some discussion. But con-
sciousness must lead to self-consciousness, where possibly these
difficulties are lessened. If the object is given to me, then I also
must be given, and on reflection I so find myself. I find myself
given not in the abstract but as concrete experienced matter.
Both terms are now objects, expérienced with their relation, and-
the question is whether the difficulties are now less. We must
reply in the negative. The correlated terms are for a subject
which itself is not given. The correlation falls in the experience
of this new subject, which itself remains outside that object.
And of the relation to this new subject the old puzzles are true. _
This relation must have two terms, terms more than their relation ;
and the ‘more’ again must be experienced, or else be nothing.

1574 ; fe)


“194 APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VI


Any attempt to pass from within the experienced to that which
in itself is not experienced, seems quite suicidal. The distinction
between the experienced and experience seems in the end totally
inadmissible. And the infinite regress is but an actual unremoved
contradiction. It is itself an absolute irrational limit.

(2) The form of consciousness thus seems in hopeless contra-
diction with itself. But is it necessary to identify experience
and consciousness ? Here is a question which seems worth some
consideration. Now consciousness, to my mind, is not original.
What comes first in each of us is rather feeling, a state as yet
without either an object or subject. Feeling here naturally does
not mean mere pleasure and pain ; and indeed the idea that these
aspects are our fundamental substance has never seemed, to me
at least, worth discussing. I have ventured to consider it an

“absurd perversion of the older view. Feeling is immediate
experience without distinction or relation in itself. It is a unity,
complex but without relations. And there is here no difference
between the state and ifs content, since, in a word, the experi-
enced and the experience are one. And a distinction between
‘cognition and other aspects of our nature is not yet developed.

’ Feeling is not one differentiated aspect, but it holds all aspects in
one. And, though a view of this kind naturally calls for explana-
tion and is open to objection, I am forced to doubt the wisdom of
ignoring it wholly. For, if it is difficult, it seems hardly so diffi-
cult as to take, for instance, our inward Coenesthesia as through-
out our object. And a reference to Volkmann’s book would show
that it owns, more or less, the endorsement of well-known names.
But, if it is not false, then the identification of consciousness
and experience is a wrong assumption.

(3) But consciousness at all events, it may be urged, at a
certain stage exists. Doubtless, but feeling on this account does
not wholly cease to exist, and the experienced is therefore always
more than objects together with pain and pleasure. Everything
experienced is on one side felt, and the experienced is, also in part,
still no more than felt. I fully admit the need here for explana-
tion and defence,! but [ cannot admit that such a view deserves

1 One point to be noticed is that the products of relation and distinction
apparently come to be experienced without their process. In this way
relational complexes may be experienced immediately, and, in a secondary


sense, felt. Such felt masses can be attached to the object of conscious-
ness, but to a far larger extent they qualify the background [p. 177].


CONSCIOUSNESS AND EXPERIENCE 195


to be ignored. The real subject, we may say, is always felt. It
can never become wholly an object, and it never, at any time
and in any case, ceases also to be felt. And on this felt back-
ground depends the unity and continuity of our lives, lost hope-
lessly by Associationism, and lost no less hopelessly by the
identification of experience with consciousness. Our personal
sameness consists in the ideal identity and the continuity of the
experienced. Nothing more is wanted, and anything more, if it
were possible, would, at least so far as we are concerned, be
nothing. And the opposite of this, I venture again to urge,
should not be assumed as self-evident.

For, in dealing with the puzzles of consciousness and sale eons
sciousness, the difference brings important consequences. : Those’
puzzles consisted in the internal difficulties of the relation and
its terms, and then again in the fact of the relation itself. An
experienced relation seems to involve an experienced whole, but
this whole is at once supplied by feeling. For consciousness is
superinduced on, and is still supported by, feeling ; and feeling is
itself an experienced whole. And the difficulty of the relation
and its terms might from the same basis be dealt with, though -
. naturally I cannot attempt to work this out here. I will how-
ever try briefly to point out where the solution lies. There is a
doubt, first, whether consciousness must imply self-consciousness,
Can there, in other words, be an object, unless that object bears
the character of a not-myself? In this latter case the ‘ object’
itself will be but part of the whole object, for it will be given as
one term in relation with another given term. This question to
some slight extent, perhaps, is one of language, but for our
present purpose it may be left unanswered wholly. The solution
of the problem in any case remains the same. And that solution
lies in the fact that between the felt subject and the object there
is no relation at all. Whether the ‘object contains, or does not
contain, a self and not-self in connexion, on either view there is
still a real felt subject. And the object qualifies this subject, but
there is emphatically no experience of a relation between them.
And when by reflection a relation seems given, the experience has
been changed. That relation is now part of a new ‘ object’ ;
and with that new object we have 4 felt subject, with which it is
experienced, but to which it is not related.

The above statement, I am well aN ates calls for much

02


196 APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VI


explanation, but the only proper explanation would be a full treat-
ment of the matter. What an ‘ object’ is, and how it differs from
the rest of the experienced, how a content becomes an object,
and how the transition is made from feeling to consciousness—
these are problems which in a small space could not be dealt
with. But, assuming an object in the sense of a something for me,
I will say a few words on this preposition. The word ‘ for’
without. doubt asserts a relation, and in addition it asserts a
relation in space; and, if so, clearly in language I contradict
myself, when I deny that the object implies a spatial or any
relation. And, if all metaphors are to be pressed, then I, and
I think all of us, in the end must keep silence. But the question
surely is whether such a contradiction is more than formal. And
the question is whether on some matters, in order to speak ac-
curately, one has not to use metaphors which conflict with and
correct each other. Believing this to be the case I repeat that
the felt subject, in and for which the object exists, is not related
to it and yet is experienced with it.

The object in self-consciousness (for it is better to take that
stage at once) is two concrete terms in relation with each other.
The whole of it consists in content, in presented elements more
or less qualified and extended by thought. What the content
is on each side is not here my concern. My concern is to deny
that this: whole ‘ object’ is related to the subject, and yet to
assert that it is there for the subject and present in it and to it,
and that the subject itself is also experienced.

The object-content is no longer in unbroken unity with the
felt whole, but this breach itself is not, and cannot be, an object.
It can become an object for reflection ; but, in becoming one, it -
generates a new experience and a fresh felt subject. The subject
always is felt, and neither itself, nor its actual distinction from
the object, can be got out and placed before it as an object. And
there is no distinction here between the experience and what is expe-
rienced.! For the subject always is experienced because it is felt,

1 For the outside observer, I may be asked, is there no distinction of
this kind? Unquestionably there is, but what it is, is a matter for dis-
cussion. If the observer takes the experiencing subject to be more than
what is at one time experienced, taken together and in connexion with
its experienced past—he may possibly be right. But I must remind him
that, if he assumes this, he is not arguing against any one. He is merely


assuming without argument that he is unquestionably right and we are
certainly wrong. ‘


CONSCIOUSNESS AND EXPERIENCE 197


This view, briefly and, I must confess, obscurely indicated, -
does not of course remove all difficulties. But the difficulties it
leaves are, I believe, not more than difficult. The elements we
must deal with are at any rate contained in one world; while
to make a passage in any sense from one world to another will
remain, I venture to think, entirely impossible. And this view,
again, is surely not prima facie absurd. It is hard for one, who
like myself learnt and tried to teach it now many years ago, to
judge on this point, but I would appeal to the reader. Take
such an experience as ordinary desire. Beside pleasure and pain
we have in this state, I presume, a relation of something, that is,
to an idea in me. These terms we may certainly agree to call
objects, and, in some cases and in one sense, we may agree also
to say this of the relation between them. But, beside the above,
is there nothing experienced in desire? I should say, yes, the
whole experience is felt as one, and in that unity there is a
background which is not an object. Desire, for me, is a felt
whole containing terms and a relation, and pleasure and pain. —
But it contains beside an indefinite mass of the felt, to call which
an object strikes my mind as even ludicrous. And I would ask
the reader if this view is so irrational that it may safely be ignored,
and that the opposite of it may, without any discussion, be
assumed.

_ And my purpose in writing is not at present to explain and
justify this view, but to emphasize the fact that it exists. And
I would venture on a respectful remonstrance against approaching
these questions with undiscussed alternatives. I do not suggest
that Mr. Ward is not familiar with all that I have set down, or
that in his own mind he is not fully prepared to deal with and
dispose of it. But his readers, I think, are left without informa-
tion. And the consequences, if so, must be injurious to the
study of philosophy. When, for example, Mr. Ward assumes,
or appears to assume, of unity and continuity, that, because they
are not in separate presentations, they are in, or come from, a
subject outside the experienced—he can hardly realize the nature
of the shock he administers. For unity and continuity, many of
us have learnt, are always ideal. They consist wholly in content,
or else they are nothing. And they come from content, or else
they do not come at all. Andany assertion of the opposite, we
are ready to contend, is inconsistent with itself. We may be


198 APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VI


mistaken doubtless in all this, and Mr. Ward doubtless is prepared
to show us how our positive doctrine is wrong, and our negative
criticism mistaken. And when he produces, as I hope he soon
will produce, his doctrine about the Subject, and its true con-
nexion with the change and sequence of phenomena, I trust he
will take some account-of our errors. I do not know what his
doctrine will be, but it could hardly lose in clearness if it were
defined against such criticism as, I presume, Hegel would have
launched against it. And I do not say this for myself, who claim
no right to assistance, and whose mind is, I suppose, presumably
ossified. But with regard to the younger men, some of whom
are growing up more or less in the same general view, the case is
different. And they will hardly be helped by a tacit assumption
that their conclusions, positive and negative, are not worth
discussing.

As for the Associationist, if he is not confuted, he surely never
will be ; and I am sure that, however much confuted, he will
never be convinced. Our business is, I suppose, not to be troubled
about that, but to try to gain a positive result which on all sides
will bear criticism. . And is it not almost time to say, Let the dead
bury their dead? But, whether in metaphysics or in psycho-
logy, perhaps I hold the Associationist far cheaper, and differ
from him more radically than Mr. Ward would think justifiable.
For in principle Mr. Ward, I should say, has not broken with
Associationism. - The question of principle, to my mind, is about
the nature of the universal in being and knowledge. But with
that question Mr. Ward, as soon as he makes a serious attempt
to work out his view of the identical (?) subject, will have to deal.
Then I may find that these well-meant remarks have been super-
fluous, sitice any truth they may contain has been included and
provided for. I offer them, notwithstanding, in the meantime,
not as hostile criticism nor yet as positive doctrine. For I admit
that there are difficulties attaching to the problem, which I cannot
at present, to my mind, altogether remove. But I offer the
above as some considerations, which ought not, in any case
and by any view, to be quite ignored.


SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE TO CHAPTER VI


In republishing the two foregoing articles I would call atten-
tion to the metaphysical importance of their doctrine. Most
of us, no doubt, agree that in metaphysics we start, in some sense,
from what is given, and that hence the question as to what is
given at the start is fundamental and vital. And the divergence
of the answers, stated or implied, is a point which we are bound
to recognize and deal with. There is, for instance, a well-known
view that, whatever is given at first, it is not the One Reality ;
and that hence the One must be reached, if at all, by some super-
vening process. Our beginning, it is asserted, is with the mere
Many. Or we may hear that we have to start with the correla-
tion of subject and object, which correlation, we find later, we
cannot transcend.

Disagreeing otherwise, I would emphatically endorse this
last result. If what is given is a Many without a One, the One
is never attainable. And, if what we had at first were the mere
correlation of subject and object, then to rise beyond that
would be impossible. From such premisses there is in my
opinion.no road except to total scepticism. This is the ground,
inherited of course from others, on which I may say that I have
baséd myself always. If you take experience as above, then
all the main conclusions which I advocate are assuredly wrecked.
And nothing, I presume, is gained by simply urging against
myself and others a result on which we ourselves have consistently
stood:

But what is more important to discuss is, I should say, the
truth of the premisses. The doctrine that what is given at the
start is a mere Many or a mere correlation, is, we contend, a-fatal
error. This, we maintain, is no genuine fact, but is a funda-
mental perversion of the fact. And while we are ready to inquire
as to what would follow from any premisses alleged, we insist
that the truth of the premisses is first in question, and we submit


200 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE TO CHAPTER VI


that, after all, it is perhaps better to begin by asking as to the
nature of what is actually experienced.

Any one who has read the foregoing papers (not to speak of
what I have written elsewhere),! will, I think, see that for me
at no stage of mental development is the mere correlation of
subject and object actually given. Wherever this or any other
relation is experienced, what is experienced is more than the
mere relation. It involves a felt totality, and on this inclusive
‘ unity the relation depends. The subject, the object, and their
relation, are experienced as elements or aspects in a One which
is there from the first. And thus to seek to extrude the One from
what at first is experienced, is in every case to mistake for fact
what really is sheer abstraction.

, Everywhere, and not only here, a mere relation is in my
view an_abstraction, which never is given and could never be
real. The experienced fact is not the mere terms and the
relation. Over and above these it involves another aspect of
given totality, and without this aspect the experienced fact is
not given. And the same remark, of course, applies to the con-
tention that what is first given is a bare Many.

I regret to repeat here once more what I have urged through
so many years and so often. But, as long as what I hold to be
fundamental fact is so much ignored, I have no choice but from
time to time to repeat what to me seems indubitable.

As to what would follow if J am here in error, and if a mere
Many or a bare correlation were actually given, I will add a few
words. Relations (this, I presume, must follow) would be at
least as real as their terms and would have ultimate reality.
What, however, is to be said about the experienced ‘ together-
ness ’ of terms and relations, I do not know. Not only does the:
‘ together ’ seem to me, on this ground, to fall outside of know-
ledge and reality, but the whole fact of experience and know-
ledge has to my mind become non-existent and even impossible.
Whether, if we start from the above basis, any subject could ever
become aware of any other subject, I will not offer to discuss.
But that the God of Theism could have his place in such a world,
unless that world were radically changed, to myself seems
inconceivable. ;


1 I would refer the reader to an article in Mind, July 1887, as well as
to my published volumes.


CONSCIOUSNESS AND EXPERIENCE 201


But is it not better, I would ask once more, to begin by
a discussion as to what is actually given in experience ? Is it not
better to recognize that on this point there is no agreement, and
little more than a variety of conflicting opinions? The opinion
which I myself, with others, have adopted, may of course be
erroneous. But obviously I cannot desert it because certain


doctrines, on the rejection of which it long ago was based, are
assumed to be true.


CHAPTER VII


ON TRUTH AND COHERENCE?


THE welcome article by the Editor in Mind, No. 65, con-
tains, we shall all agree, much food for reflection. Profiting,
I hope, by all of it, there is nevertheless much from which
I am forced to dissent. And in what follows here I shall
try to deal with one point of disagreement. We can, I
trust, isolate this point, at least sufficiently for a separate
discussion. |

Prof. Stout denies, I understand, that coherence will work
as a test of truth in the case of facts due to sensible percep-
tion and memory. Mr. Russell again has taken the same
line in his interesting article on Truth in the Proceedings
of the Aristotehan Society for 1907. This is the issue to
which here I confine myself, neglecting the question as to
other truths whose warrant also is taken as immediate.
What I maintain is that in the case of facts of perception
and memory the test which we do apply, and which we
must apply, is that of system. I contend that this test
works satisfactorily, and that no other test will work. And
I argue in consequence that there are no judgements of sense
which are in principle infallible.

There is a misunderstanding against which the reader
must be warned most emphatically. The test which I ad-
vocate is the idea of a whole of knowledge as wide and
as consistent as may be. In speaking of system I mean
always the union of these two aspects, and this is the sense
and the only sense in which I am defending coherence. If.
we separate coherence from what Prof. Stout calls compre-


1 This chapter appeared first as an article in Mind for July 1909.


VII ON’ TRUTH AND COHERENCE 203.


hensiveness, then I agree that neither of these aspects of
system will work by itself. How they are connected, and-
whether in the end we have one principle or two, is of
course a difficult question. .I hope to return to this,! but it
is impossible for me to touch on it here. All that I can do
here is to point out that both of the above aspects are for
me inseparably included in the idea of system, and that
coherence apart from comprehensiveness is not for me the
test of truth or reality.

So much being premised, I will proceed not to argue in
detail against Prof. Stout and Mr. Russell, but to endeavour
to explain the real nature of that view which I advocate.”
For the sake of clearness let me begin by mentioning some
things in which I do not believe. I do not believe in any
knowledge which is independent of feeling and sensation.
On sensation and feeling I am sure that we depend for the
material of our knowledge. And as to the facts of percep-
tion, I am convinced that (to speak broadly) we cannot
anticipate them or ever become independent of that which
‘they give to us. And these facts of perception, I further
agree, are at least in part irrational, so far as in detail is
visible. I do not believe that we can make ourselves inde-
pendent of these non-rational data.

But, if I do not believe all this, does it follow that I have
to accept independent facts ? Does it follow that perception
and memory. give me truths which I must take up and keep
as they are given me, truths which in principle cannot be
erroneous ? This surely would be: to pass from one false
extreme to another. Our intelligence cannot construct the
world of perceptions and feelings, and it depends on what is
given—to so much I assent. But that there are given facts.
of perception which are independent and ultimate and above
~ 1 See Chap. VIII.

* In speaking of this common view as mine, I merely wish to indicate


to the reader that I have no right to commit others to every detail of
my case.


204 ON TRUTH AND COHERENCE “CHAP.


criticism, is not to my mind a true conclusion. On the
contrary, such facts to my mind are a vicious abstraction.
We have, I should say, the aspect of datum, and we have the
aspect of interpretation or construction, or what Prof. Stout
calls implication (p. 27). And why, I ask, for the intelligence
must there be datum without interpretation any more than
interpretation without datum? To me the opposite holds
good, and I therefore conclude that no given fact is sacro-
sanct. With every fact of perception or memory a modified
interpretation is in principle possible, and no such fact
therefore is given free from all possibility of error.
The reason for maintaining independent facts and infallible
' judgements, as I understand it, is twofold. (x) Such data, it
may be said, can be actually shown. And (2) in any case
they must exist, since without them the intelligence cannot
work. Prof. Stout is identified I think, only with the
second of these contentions.

(x) I doubt my ability to do justice to the position of the
man who claims to show ultimate given facts exempt from
all possible error. In the case of any datum of sensation
or feeling, to prove that we have this wholly unmodified by
what is called ‘ apperception ’ seems a hopeless undertaking.
And how far it is supposed that such a negative can be
proved I do not know. What, however, is meant must be
this, that we somehow and somewhere have verifiable facts
of perception and memory, and also judgements, free from
all chance of error.

I will begin here by recalling a truth familiar but often
forgotten, a truth of which Prof. Stout does not fail to

‘remind us. In your search for independent facts and for
infallible truths you may go so low that, when you have
descended beyond the level of error, you find yourself below —
the level of any fact or of any truth which you can use.?
What you seek is particular facts of perception or memory,


1 Mind, No. 65, p. 28. * Cf. Chap. V, p. 108.


vit ON TRUTH AND COHERENCE 205


' but what you get may be something not answering to that
character. I will go on to give instances of what I mean,
and I think that in every case we shall do well to ask this.
question, ‘ What on the strength of our ultimate fact are we
able to contradict ? ’

(a) If we take the instance of simple unrelated sensations
or feelings, a, b, c—supposing that there are such things—
what judgement would such a fact enable us to deny? We
could on the strength of this fact deny the denial that a, b
and c exist in any way, manner or sense. But surely this is.
not the kind of independent fact of which we are in search.

(0) From this let us pass to the case of a complex feeling
containing, at once and together, both a and 6. On the
ground of this we can deny the statement that a and b cannot
or do not ever anyhow co-exist in feeling. This is an ad-
vance, but it surely leaves us far short of our goal.

(c) What we want, I presume, is something that at once
is infallible and that also can be called a particular fact of
perception or memory. And we want, in the case of per-
ception, something that would be called a fact for observa- .
tion. We do not seem to reach this fact until we arrive
somewhere about the level of ‘I am here and now having a
sensation or complex of sensations of such or such a kind’.
The goal is reached; but at this point, unfortunately, the
judgement has become fallible, so far at least as it really
states particular truth.

(2) In such a judgement it is in the first place hard to say
what is meant by the ‘I’. If, however, we go beyond feel-
ing far enough to mean a self with such or such a real exis-
tence in time, then memory is involved, and the judgement
at once, I should urge; becomes fallible (cf. Mind, N.S.,
No. 30, p. 16, and No. 66, p. 156). Thus the statement
made in the judgement is liable to error, or else the state-
ment does not convey particular truth.


1 Chapters XII and XIII, pp. 371-2, 384, of the present volume.


206 ON TRUTH AND COHERENCE CHAP.


(8) And this fatal dilemma holds good when applied to
the ‘now’ and ‘here’. If these words mean a certain
special place in a certain special series or order, they are
liable to mistake. But, if they fall short of this meaning,
then they fail to state individual fact. My feeling is, I agree,
not subject to error in the proper sense of that term, but on
the other side my feeling does not of itself deliver truth.
And the process which gets from it a deliverance as to
individual fact is fallible. ;

Everywhere such fact depends on construction. ‘And we
have here to face not only. the possibility of what would
commonly be called mistaken interpretation. We have in
addition the chance of actual sense-hallucination. © And,
worse than this, we have the far-reaching influence of ab-
normal suggestion and morbid fixed idea. This influence
may stop short of hallucination, and yet may vitiate the
memory and the judgement to such an extent that there
remains no practical difference between idea and perceived
fact. And, in the face of these possibilities, it seems idle to
speak of perceptions and memories secure from all chance of
error. Or on the other side.banish the chance of error, and
with what are you left ? You then have something which
(as we have seen) goes no further than to warrant the asser-
tion that such and such elements can and do co-exist—some-
how and somewhere, or again that such or such a judgement
happens—without any regard to its truth and without any.
specification of its psychical context, And no one surely
will contend that with this we have particular fact.

The doctrine that perception gives us infallible truth rests
on a foundation which in part is sound and in part fatally
defective. That what is felt is felt, and cannot, so far as felt,.
be mistaken—so much as this must be-accepted. But the
view that, when I say ‘ this’, ‘now’, ‘here’, or ‘my’, what.
I feel, when so speaking, is carried over intact into my judge-.
ment, and that my judgement in consequence is exempt


vil ON TRUTH AND COHERENCE 207


from error, seems wholly indefensible. It survives, I venture
to think, only because it never has understood its complete
refutation.! That which I designate, is not and cannot be
carried over into my judgement. The judgement may in a
sense answer to that which I feel, but none the less it fails
to coritain and to convey my feeling. -And on the other hand,
so far as it succeeds in expressing my meaning, the judge-
ment does this in a way which makes it liable to error. Or,
to put it otherwise, the perceived truth, to be of any use,
must be particularized. So far as it is stated in a general
form, it contains not only that which you meant to say but
also, and just as much, the opposite of that which you
meant. And to contend for the infallibility of such a truth
seems futile. On the other side so far as your truth really
is individualized, so far as it is placed in a special construc-
tion and vitally related to its context, to the same extent the
element of interpretation or implication is added. And, with
this element, obviously comes the possibility of mistake.
And we have seen above that, viewed psychologically, parti-
cular judgements of perception immune from all chance of
error seem hardly tenable.


(2) I pass now to the second reason for accepting infallible
data of perception. Even if we cannot show these (it is
urged) we are bound to assume them. For in their absence
our knowledge has nothing on which to stand, and this want
of support results in total scepticism. .

It is possible of course here to embrace both premisses and —
conclusion, and to argue that scepticism is to be preferred
to an untrue assumption. And such a position I would press
on the notice of those who uphold infallible judgements of
sense and memory. But personally I am hardly concerned
in this issue, for I reject both the conclusion and the
. 1 Iam of course referring here to Hegel. This is a matter to which


I shall return (see Chapters VIII and IX). I am naturally not attempting
to deal here with the whole subject of Error (see Chap. IX).


“208 ON TRUTH AND COHERENCE CHAP.


premisses together. Such infallible and incorrigible judge-
ments are really not required for our-knowledge, and, since
they cannot be shown, we must not say that they exist:

In maintaining that all sense-judgements are liable to
error it would be better no doubt first to discuss the nature of
error. But, since this is impossible here, let me state how
much I take to be admitted or agreed on. I understand
it to be admitted that some judgements of perception are
fallible, and that the question is simply whether this descrip-
tion applies to all such judgements without exception. But,
if some at least of these judgements are to be called fallible,
what are we to understand by that word? We'each of us
have a world which we call our‘ real’ world in space and
time. This is an order, how made and based on what, it is
impossible here to inquire.1 But facts of sense are called
imaginary or erroneous, when in their offered character they
do not belong to this ‘real’ order in space or time. They
all belong to it of course as facts in some one’s mental
history, but otherwise they do not qualify the ‘ real’ order
as they claim to qualify it. We therefore relegate them to
the sphere of the erroneous or the imaginary, unless we are
able to modify and correct their claim so that it becomes
admissible. So much as this I must take here to be admitted
on both sides, though it is more than possible, I fear, that
I may have thus unknowingly perverted the issue. Still,
unless the question by some: means is cleared, I see no
way of proceeding. And the issue, as I understand it, will
now be as follows. Are there any judgements of perception
or themory, purporting to qualify the ‘real’ world, which
must necessarily qualify that world as they purport to
qualify it? Or on the other hand are all such ‘ facts’
capable in principle of being relegated to the world of error,
unless and until they are corrected ?

This I take to be the issue, but there is a distinction


» See Chapters III and XVI,


vit ON TRUTH AND COHERENCE 209


which, before proceeding, the reader must notice, the dis-
tinction between my experience and my world and the world
in general. It is one thing to say that there are truths
which in and for my personal experience are fundamental
and incorrigible, and it is another thing to assert that the
same truths are infallible absolutely. This distinction will
become clearer as we advance, for I will begin by confining
the question to my personal experience. Is there any truth
of perception which here is fundamental and infallible, and
incapable of being banished to the world of fancy ?

I agree that we depend vitally on the sense-world, that
our material comes from it, and that apart from it know-
ledge could not begin. To this world, I agree, we have for
. ever to return, not only to gain new matter but to confirm

and maintain the old. I agree that to impose order from
without on sheer disorder would be wholly impracticable,
and that, if my sense-world were disorderly beyond a certain
point, my intelligence would not exist. And further I agree
that we cannot suppose it possible that all the judgements
of perception and memory which for me come first, could in
fact for me be corrected. I cannot, that is, imagine the
‘world of my experience to be so modified that in the end
none of these accepted facts should be left standing. Bu®
so far, I hasten to add, we have not yet come to the real”
issue. There is still a chasm between such admissions and
the conclusion that there are judgements of sense which
possess truth absolute and infallible.

We meet here a false doctrine largely due to a misleading
metaphor. My known world is taken to be a construction
built upon such and such foundations. It is argued, there-
fore, to be in principle a superstructure which rests upon
these supports. You can go on adding to it no doubt, but
only so long as the supports remain; and, unless they re-
main,.the whole building comes down. But the doctrine, I
have to contend, is untenable, and the metaphor ruinously

1574 P


210 ON TRUTH AND COHERENCE CHAP,


inapplicable. The foundation in truth is provisional merely.
In order to begin my construction I take the foundation as
absolute—so much certainly is true. But that my construc-
tion continues to rest on the beginnings of my knowledge is
a conclusion which does not follow. It does not follow that,
if these are allowed to be fallible, the whole building col-
lapses. For it is in another sense that my world rests upon
the data of perception.

My experience is solid, not so far as it is a superstructure
but so far as in short it is a system.1 My object is to have
a world as comprehensive and coherent as possible, and, in
order to attain this object, I have not only to reflect but
perpetually to have recourse to the materials of sense. I
must go to this source both to verify the matter which is old
and also to increase it by what is new. And in this way I
must depend upon the judgements of perception. Now it is
agreed that, if I am to have an orderly world, I cannot
possibly accept all ‘facts’. Some of these must be rele-
gated, as they are, to the world of error, whether we succeed
or fail in modifying and correcting them. And the view
which I advocate takes them all as in principle fallible. On
the other hand, that view denies that there is any necessity
for absolute facts of sense. Facts for it are true, we may
say, just so far as they work, just so far as they contribute
to the order of experience. If by taking certain judgements
of perception as true, I can get more system into my world,
then these ‘ facts’ are so far true, and if by taking certain
‘facts’ as errors I can order my experience better, then
so far these ‘facts’ are errors. And there is no ‘fact’
which possesses an absolute right. Certainly there are

* I would venture here in passing to question in principle the truth of
a thesis advanced by Prof. Stout (pp. 34-5). Prof. Stout maintains that
a proposition may be guaranteed by other propositions, and yet itself
lend these no support. But if any proposition has a consequence which
is not discordant with what we already know, this consequence is surely,


so far as it goes, a support, however small, to the proposition from which it
follows. I however agree that the amount of such support may be trifling.


Vil ON TRUTH AND COHERENCE 21


truths with which I begin and which I personally never
have to discard, and which therefore remain in fact as
members of my known world. And of some of these cer-
tainly it may be said that without them I should not know
how to order my knowledge. But it is quite another thing
to maintain that every single one of these judgements is in
principle infallible. The absolute indispensable fact is in
my view the mere creature of false theory. Facts are valid
so far as, when taken otherwise than as ‘real’, they bring
disorder into my world. And there are to-day for me facts
such that, if I take them as mistakes, my known world is
damaged and, it is possible, ruined. But how does it follow
that I cannot to-morrow on the strength of new facts gain
a wider order in which these old facts can take a place as
errors? The supposition may be improbable, but what
you have got to show is that it is in principle impossible.1
A foundation used at the beginning does not in short mean
something fundamental at the end, and there is no single
‘fact ’ which in the end can be called fundamental absolutely.
It is all a question of relative contribution to my known
world-order.

‘Then no judgement of perception will be more than
probable?’ Certainly that is my contention. ‘ Facts’ are
justified because and as far as, while taking them as real,
I am better able to deal with the incoming new ‘ facts’ and
in general to make my world wider and more harmonious.
The higher and wider my structure, and the more that any
particular fact or set of facts is implied in that structure, the
more certain are the structure and the facts. And, if we
could reach an all-embracing ordered whole, then our cer-
tainty would be absolute. But, since we cannot do this, we
have to remain content with relative probability. Why is
this or that fact of observation taken as practically certain ?

* A possible attempt to do this will be discussed towards the close of


the chapter, p. 216.
P2


212 ON TRUTH AND COHERENCE CHAP,


It is so taken just so far as it is mot taken in its own right.
(i) Its validity is due to such and such a person perceiving
it under such and such conditions. This means that a cer-
tain intellectual order in the person is necessary as a basis,
and again that nothing in the way of sensible or mental
distortion intervenes between this order and what is given.
And (ii) the observed fact must agree with our world as
already arranged, or at least must not upset this. If the
fact is too much contrary to our arranged world we pro-
visionally reject it. We eventually accept the fact only
when after confirmation the hypothesis of its error becomes
still more ruinous. . We are forced then more or less to re-
arrange our world, and more or less perhaps to reject some
previous ‘facts ’.1 The question throughout is as to what
is better or worse for our order as a whole.

Why again to me is a remembered fact certain, supposing
that itisso? Assuredly not because it is infallibly delivered
by the faculty of Memory, but because I do not see how to
reconcile the fact of its error with my accepted world. Un-
less I go on the principle of trusting my memory, apart from
any special reason to the contrary, I cannot order my world
so well, if indeed I can order it at.all. The principle here
again is system (cf. Chapters XII and XIII).

The same account holds with regard to the facts of
history. For instance, the guillotining of Louis XVI is
practically certain, because, to take this as error, would
entail too much disturbance of my world. Error is possible
here of course. Fresh facts conceivably might come before
me such as would compel me to modify in part my know-
ledge as so far arranged. And in this modified arrangement
the execution of Louis would find its place as an error. But
the reason for such a modification would have to be con-
siderable, while, as things are, no reason exists. And take
again the case of an historical fact which is called more or


.


1 Ch. Appearance, P- 543, note.


Vil ON TRUTH AND COHERENCE © 213


less isolated. Mr. Russell} has instanced the honourable
death of a late prelate, and has urged (as I understand) that
on any view such as mine I have just as much reason
to believe that this prelate was hanged. The fact is sup-
posed to be isolated, and on mere internal evidence either
alternative is taken, I presume, as equally probable. Now,
of course I agree that we have innumerable cases where on;
mere internal evidence we are unable to distinguish between _
fact and fancy, but the difficulty that is supposed to arise
I am unable to see. For the criterion with me is not mere
absence, within the limits of this or that idea, of visible dis~
crepancy. The question with me everywhere is as to what is
the result to my real world. (Appearance, chap. xvi, and
p. 618.) Now, confining myself toacertain case, theacceptance
on the one side of the mere fancy or on the other side of the
attested fact may, so far as I see, be in itself the same thing
to my world. But imagine my world made on the principle
of in such a case accepting mere fancy as fact. Would such
a world be more comprehensive and coherent than the world
as now arranged? Would it be coherent at all? Mr.
Russell, I understand, answers in the affirmative (p. 33), but
it seems to me that he has misconceived the position. To
take memory as in general trustworthy, where I have no
special reason for doubt, and to take the testimony of those
persons, whom I suppose to view the world as I view it,
as being true, apart from special reason on the other side—
these are principles by which I construct my ordered world,
such as it is. And because by any other method the result
is worse, therefore for me these principles are true. On the
other hand to suppose that any ‘fact’ of perception or
memory is so certain that no possible experience could justify
me in taking it as error, seems to me injurious if not ruinous.
On such a principle my world of knowledge would be ordered
worse, if indeed it could be ordered at all. For to accept all


1 On the Nature of Truth, pp. 33, 35-


214 ON TRUTH AND COHERENCE CHAP.


the ‘ facts’, as they offer themselves, seems obviously im-
possible ; and, if it is we who have to decide as to which
facts are infallible, then I ask how we are to decide. The
ground of validity, I maintain, consists in successful con-
tribution. That is a principle of order, while any other
principle, so far as I see, leads to chaos.4

‘ But,’ it may still be objected, ‘my fancy is unlimited.
I can therefore invent an imaginary world even more orderly
than my known world. And further this fanciful arrangement
might possibly be made so wide that the world of perception
would become for me in comparison small and inconsider-
able. Hence, my perceived world, so far as not supporting
my fancied arrangement, might be included within it as
error. Such a consequence would or might lead to con-
fusion in theory and to disaster in practice. And yet the
result follows from your view inevitably, unless after all you
fall back upon the certainty of perception.’

To this possible objection, I should reply first, that it has
probably failed to understand rightly the criterion which I
defend. The aspect of comprehensiveness has not received
here its due emphasis. The idea of system demands the
inclusion of all possible material. Not only must you in-
clude everything to be gained from immediate experience
and perception, but you must also be ready to act on the
same principle with regard to fancy. But this means that
you cannot confine yourself within the limits of this or that
fancied world, as suits your pleasure or private convenience.
You are bound also, so far as is possible, to recognize and
to include the opposite fancy.

This consideration to my mind ruins the above hypothesis
on which the objection was based. The fancied arrange-


1 To the question if the above principle is merely ‘ practical’, I reply,
‘Certainly, if you take ‘‘ practice” so widely as to remove the distinction
between practice and theory.’ But, since such a widening of sense seems
to serve no useful purpose, I cannot regard that course as being itself
very ‘practical’, I answer therefore that the above principle is certainly
not merely practical. : :


VII ON TRUTH AND COHERENCE 215


ment not only has opposed to it the world of perception. It
also has against it any opposite arrangement and any con-
trary fact which I can fancy. And, so far as I can judge,
these contrary fancies will balance the first. Nothing, there-
fore, will be left to outweigh the world as perceived, and the
imaginary hypothesis will be condemned by our criterion.
And, with regard to the world as perceived, we must
remember that my power is very limited. I cannot add to
this world at discretion and at my pleasure create new and
opposite material. Hence, to speak broadly, the material
here is given and compulsory, and the production of what
is contrary is out of my power. After all due reservations
have been made, the contrast in this respect between the
worlds of ‘ fact ’ and of fancy will hold good. You cannot,
as with fancies, make facts one to balance another at your
pleasure. And (if we are to go still further) the riches of
imagination even as regards quantity are deceptive. What
we call our real world is so superior in wealth of detail that
to include it, as outweighed in quantity, within some arrange-
ment which we merely fancy, is to my mind not feasible.
The whole hypothesis which we have considered seems to
have been shown on more than one ground to be untenable.
But if 1 am asked, ‘ Were it otherwise, what becomes of
your criterion?’ though I think the question unfair, I will
answer it conditionally. In that supposed case I would
modify my criterion. I would say, ‘ The truth is that which
enables us to order most coherently and comprehensively
the data supplied by immediate experience and the intuitive
judgements of perception’. But this answer, I repeat, is
1 As I am not committed to this answer, I can hardly be called on to
explain it further. But I may remind the reader that immediate ex-
perience and perceptional judgement is not all of one kind. Aesthetic
perceptions, for instance, will not fall under the head of mere fancies.
_ Where the ‘fancy’ represents some human interest, it ceases, in propor-
tion to the importance of the interest, to be mere fancy or, properly,


fancy at all. Cf. Chap. XII, p. 365. .
Again, to pass from this to another point, I may be asked whether the


*


,*
316 ON TRUTH AND COHERENCE CHAP.


merely conditional, and I do not believe that the condition
holds good. For I believe that our criterion, applied with-
out modification, gives its proper place to mere fancy. And
in any case (need I add ?) it does not follow that particular
judgements of perception and memory, all or any of them,
are infallible.


But there is an objection which perhaps for some time has
been troubling the reader. ‘ After all’ (he may say) ‘my
experience has got tobe mine. If you went beyond a certain
point in modifying my known world, it might possibly be
a superior world but it would be no world for me. And
from this it follows that something, and something given,
is in my world fundamental, and that, while my world
remains mine, this something is indispensable and infallible.
And the fact, if it is fact, that I cannot produce this element
fails to show that it is not there.’ Now it is one thing,
I reply, to allow the existence of a fundamental element,
and it is another thing to admit this in the form of an
infallible judgement. I wish to emphasize this distinction
and to insist that, if there is to be an infallible judgement,
that judgement must be produced. On the other hand, I do
not seek to deny in every sense the fact of the fundamental
element. We are here in a region which so far is perhaps
little understood, but for our purpose fortunately the whole
question is irrelevant.

We must remind ourselves of the distinction which we
laid down above. Conceivably a judgement might be funda-
mental and infallible for me, in the sense that to modify it or
instance of a man in collision with a new environment to which he can-
not adapt himself presents no difficulty to our general criterion. In our
case none, I reply, since we hold all such knowledge for relative. A
difficulty arises only in the case of those who take judgements as absolute.
We must, however, remember that, in the above instance of collision
between inner and outer worlds, it would be wrong to assume that the


man who prefers his inner world goes always against the weight of his
immediate and intuitive experience.


VII ON TRUTH AND COHERENCE 217


doubt it would entail the loss of my personal identity, while
yet to another mind that modification or that doubt might
be possible and necessary. Of course I do not mean that
anything which is something for me, could by a wider ex-
perience be taken as something which in no sense exists. I
mean that the character in which it offers itself to me in
judgement might by a wider experience be seen to need
correction, and might, apart from that correction, be classed
as error. I am speaking here (the reader will remember)
about particular ‘facts’ of feeling, perception or memory.
And with regard to these I do not see the way by which
I am to pass from relative to absolute infallibility, and I do
not know how to argue here from an assumed necessary
implication in my personal existence to a necessity which
is more than relative. Am I to urge that a world in which
my personal identity has been ended or suspended has ceased
to be a world altogether? Apart from such an argument
(which I cannot use) I seem condemned to the result that
all sense-judgements are fallible.


The repugnance excited by this conclusion seems due to
several grounds. Our immediate experience is not fallible,
and this character (we have seen) is mistakenly transferred
to those judgements which claim to deliver that experience.
And further we had the false identification of knowledge
with a mechanical superstructure supported by an external
foundation. But behind this we have the demand for abso-
lute reality in the shape of self-existent facts and of indepen-
dent truths. Unless reality takes this form it seems to be
nowhere, and so we go on to postulate absolute knowledge
where no more than probability is attainable. Again, if the
conclusion and the principle advocated here are accepted,
the whole Universe seems too subject to the individual
knower. What is given counts for so little and the arrange-
ment counts for so much, while in fact the arranger, if we


218 ON TRUTH AND COHERENCE § caap. vit


are to have real knowledge, seems so dependent on the
world. But the individual who knows is here wrongly iso-
_ lated, and then, because of that, is confronted with a mere
alien Universe. And the individual, as so isolated, I agree,
could do nothing, for indeed he is nothing. My real per-
sonal self which orders my world is in truth inseparably one
with the Universe. Behind me the absolute reality works
through and in union with myself, and the world which
confronts me is at bottom one thing in substance and in
power with this reality. There 7s a world of appearance
and there 7s a sensuous curtain, and to seek to deny the
presence of this or to identify it with reality is mistaken.
But for the truth I come back always to that doctrine of
Hegel, that ‘ there is nothing behind the curtain other than
that which is in front of it’. For what is in front of it is
the Absolute that is at once one with the knower and behind
him.

The conclusion advocated in these pages is, however, but
limited. With regard to the two aspects of coherence and
comprehensiveness I have in these pages not asked if they
are connected in principle. I have merely urged’ that it is
necessary to use them in one, and that here and here alone
we have the criterion of perceived and remembered truth.
And I have argued that in principle any judgement of per-
ception or memory is liable to error, and I have urged that,
if this is not so, the right conclusion is to chaos. But to
some of the points here left unsettled I shall return.

1 I believe these to be Hegel’s words, but I cannot give any reference
for them. Almost the same words will, however, be found in Phdano-


menologie (second edition), p. 126. This is the last page of the division
marked A, ITT.


CHAPTER VIII


COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION 1


In the preceding chapter I pointed out how coherence and
comprehensiveness are the two aspects of system, and I
attempted to justify the claim of system as an arbiter of
‘fact. In the chapter which follows I am ‘to endeavour to
show how system stands to contradiction. The question is
difficult and could in any case here be dealt with but im-
perfectly, and the reader again must excuse me if I approach
it by a circuitous route. —

What in the end is the criterion ? The criterion of truth, '
I should say, as of everything else, is in the end the satis-
faction of a want of our nature. To get away from this test,
or to pass beyond it, in the end, I should say, is impossible.
But, if so (the suggestion is a natural one), why should we
not set forth, or try to set forth, the satisfaction of our nature
from all sides, and then accept and affirm this statement as
truth and reality ? That in practical life we should do this, at
least in some sense, I am fully agreed. But I cannot on the
other hand endorse generally such an answer in philosophy,


——


1 The present chapter appeared first in Mind for October 1909. I
would take this opportunity to say that, with regard to the principle of
non-contradiction as a test of truth, I agree in the main with what Prof.
Bosanquet has urged in his Individuality and Value, pp. 49 foll. and
265 foll. One contradicts oneself in principle in asserting that there is
no beauty or virtue, as much as in asserting that there is no truth. Cer-
tainly, as Prof. Bosanquet points out, if a man chooses to deny the fact
of beauty or virtue, you cannot, with that denial, formally convict him
out of his own mouth, as you can if he asserts that there is no truth.
And in this latter case there is a superiority in what may perhaps be
called theoretical elegance. Still in philosophy our real object is not the
dialectical confutation of an opponent. Our real object is the under-
standing of facts which cannot reasonably be denied.


220 COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION — cuap.


for I am unable to see how by such a plan we avoid theo-
retical shipwreck.

Truth to my mind is a satisfaction of a special kind, and,
again, it is a satisfaction which, at least at first sight, is
able to oppose itself to others. But, however that may be,
truth seems to differentiate itself clearly from other satis-
factions. And philosophy, I at least understand, has to meet
specially this special need and want of truth. To say that
philosophy’s mission is to find ideas which satisfy all sides
of my being, and that the truth of these ideas does not other-
wise matter, remains to my mind untenable. Ideas which
are inconsistent, chaotic and discordant must, I think, by
philosophy in the end be rejected as false. The doctrine
that there is no truth in the last resort but the general
working of ideas, whatever is otherwise the character of
these ideas, is, or may be, acceptable, I once more agree,
as a practical creed. But on the other side, with such a
doctrine, it seems to me, there is an end of philosophy
(cf. pp. 66, 132).

To philosophize at once with all sides of my nature is, if
you will, what I desire. But I at least do not perceive how
I am to go about to accomplish this feat. If you agree with
me that truth is special, then I am at a loss to see how to
aim at it, or to find it, or to verify its presence, by some
general movement of my being. _On the other hand, to
produce ideas at the dictation of all my particular wants is
a thing which certainly I understand. : But to maintain that,
whatever the intellect may say or feel about these ideas,
they are all none the less true, is to me ruinous theoretically,
It seems the sheer denial, ultimately, of intellectual satis-
faction and truth. There is to be, in other words, no more
philosophy except in the sense of a collection of useful ideas.
The value of such a collection I do not seek to disparage,
though the value disappears, I would insist, so far as the
collection is one-sided. Still, if philosophy has to end here,


VII COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION 221


there is, I would repeat, in the proper sense to be no more
philosophy.

» Hence I have to remain so far in my old position. If there
is to be philosophy its proper business is to satisfy the
intellect, and the other sides of our nature have, if se, no
right to speak directly. They must make their appeal not
‘only to, but also through, the intelligence. In life it is other-
wise, but there is a difference between philosophy and life.
And in philosophy my need for beauty and for practical
goodness may have a voice, but, for all that, they have not
a vote. They cannot address the intellect and insist, ‘ We
are not satisfied, and therefore you also shall not be satisfied.’
They must be content to ask and to repeat, ‘ Are you in
fact satisfied with yourself as long as we remain unsatisfied ?
It is for you to decide, and we can only suggest.” Hence,
I conclude, I can philosophize with my whole nature, but
I cannot do this directly. On one hand the appeal is to the
intellect, but on the other hand every aspect of my being
can and does express itself intellectually. And the question
is how far, in order to reach its special end which is truth, the
intelligence has to adopt as true the various suggestions
which are offered. How far, in order to satisfy itself, must
its ideas satisfy all our needs ? »

In the above I am of course not assuming that the intellect
is something apart, working by itself, and, so to speak, shut
up in aseparate room. On the contrary those who teach the
implication of all sides of our being with and in what we
call thought, deny no doctrine held by me. All that I main-
tain is that we have a specific function, as such verifiable in
fact; and claiming to possess special rights of its own. I
insist that, unless we take that claim seriously, speculation is
impossible. And,if any one differs from mehere, I would goon
to urge that he is in conflict with fact, and rests on inconsis-
tency. And the result, I think, is confusion or total obscurity.


* Appearance, chap. xiv.


222 COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION  cuap.


I retain therefore, on the whole (if I may repeat this), my
former position. All that I would modify is the importance,
perhaps one-sided, which was given to pain, and the em-
phasis on the special doubt which arose here from our
ignorance.1 I would not withdraw what I said as mistaken,
but I should certainly prefer now to state the case otherwise.
The better way, I think, is to point out that all sides of our
nature press for satisfaction, and, if left unsatisfied, will
‘manifest themselves so in idea. We cannot, I think,
reasonably suppose an aspect of our being left somewhere
outside and able to say nothing directly or indirectly. That
this is not possible we could hardly prove, but its probability
seems really trifling. Every element of my nature then will
find a voice. Every side of my being will represent itself as
satisfied in idea and in reality, if not in what we call fact.
And influenced, as we must be, by these claims within us
and before us, we undoubtedly in a sense philosophize with
the whole of our nature. But from this I still see no short
cut to the conclusion that any need of our nature satisfied in
idea is truth. The way of logical proof to my mind must on
the contrary be indirect. Suppose, that is, the intellect
completely satisfied and truth really attained, can you have
with this the idea or ideas of other needs unfulfilled ? These
ideas, if so, will be there, and they will not be true, but, at
least apparently in conflict with the truth. For to admit
them as necessary and as good, certainly does not in itself
seem to make them true. And the real issue is whether, if
left outside and not included in the truth, these ideas do not
make truth imperfect in itself. The intellect has to satisfy
its own requirements, and the question is whether, if the
above ideas are not included but somehow conflict, those
requirements are satisfied. And the further question is
whether the ideas can possibly be included without being
taken as true.


1 Appearance, chap. xix, and pp. 609-12.


VII COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION — 223


It is obviously ‘necessary therefore to inquire what does
or would satisfy the intellect. Such an inquiry I am not
undertaking in this chapter, but I may state the view which
has commended itself to my mind.1 Truth is an ideal
expression of the Universe, at once coherent and compre-
hensive. It must not conflict with itself, and there must be
no suggestion which fails to fall inside it. Perfect truth in
short must realize the idea of a systematic whole. And
such a whole, we saw (Chap. VII), possessed essentially the
two characters of coherence and comprehensiveness. I will
therefore, without pausing here to raise and discuss diffi-
culties, go on at once to ask as to the connexion between
these two characters. Have we in comprehensiveness and
coherence two irreducible principles, or have we two aspects
of one principle ?


If we can adopt a well-known view the answer is plain.
The whole reality is so immanent and so active in every
partial element, that you have only to make an object of
anything short of the whole, in order to see this object pass
beyond itself. The object visibly contradicts itself and goes
on to include its complementary opposite in a wider unity.
And this process repeats itself as long as and wherever the
whole fails to express itself entirely in the object. Hence
the two principles of coherence and comprehensiveness are
one. And not only are they one but they include also the
principle of non-contradiction. The order to express your-
self in such a way as to avoid visible contradiction, may be
said in the end to contain the whole criterion.

No one who has not seen this view at work, and seen it
applied to a wide area of fact, can realize its practical
efficiency. But, for myself, if this solution of our puzzle ever
satisfied me entirely, there came a time when it ceased to
satisfy. And when attempting to discuss first principles this


} Appearance. Cf. Chap. V and elsewhere.


224 COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION — €unap.


was not the answer which I offered.1 However immanent
in each element the whole is really, I cannot persuade
myself that everywhere in the above way :t is imma-
nent visibly. I cannot perceive that everywhere with each
partial object we can verify the internal contradiction, and
a passage made thus to a wider unity of complementary
opposites. And, this being so, the question as to aur two
principles of coherence and comprehensiveness requires, so
far as I am concerned, a modified answer.

To a large extent partial objects are seen (I at least .can-
not doubt this) to develop themselves beyond themselves in-
definitely by internal discrepancy. Everything, so far as it
is temporal or spatial, does, I should say, thus visibly tran-
scend itself, though, if there are many orders of time and
space, the same self-transcendence will not hold between
them. But I will not seek here to urge a principle as far as
it will go, when I admit that, so far as I can see, it will not
go to the end. The visible internal self-transcendence of
every object is a thing which, as I have said, I cannot
everywhere verify.

And the principle which in my book I used and stated was
the following. Everything which appears must be predicated
of Reality, but it must not be predicated in such a way as to
make Reality contradict itself? I adhere to this principle,
and I will go on briefly to justify it with special reference
to what we have called comprehensiveness and coherence.
There are two main questions, I think, to which answers
here are wanted. (1) If my object is really defective, and if
it cannot develop itself for me beyond itself by internal


1 Appearance, 1893. I have perhaps fallen in places into inconsistency,
but there was, I think, no doubt in my mind as to which of the two answers
was the right one. There is, however, a natural tendency to pass from
really to visibly, and this tendency may perhaps at times have asserted
itself unconsciously.

* This is of course not the same thing as taking up a suggestion (what-
ever it may be), and then, if you fail to see that it is visibly inconsistent,
forthwith calling it real (p. 213).


VIL . COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION — 225


contradiction, how otherwise can it do this? (2) How and
in what sense does an isolated object make Reality contra-
dict itself ?

(x) The object before me is not the whole of Reality, nor
is it the whole of what I experience. The Universe (I must
assume this here) is one with my mind, and not only is this
so, but the Universe is actually now experienced by me as
beyond the object. For, beside being an object, the world
is actually felt, not merely in its general character but more
or less also in special detail! Hence, as against this fuller
content present in feeling, the object before me can be ex-
perienced as defective. There is an unspecified sense of
something beyond, or there may even arise the suggestion in
idea of the special complement required. We may perhaps
hesitate to say that the defective object itself suggests its
own completion, and we may doubt whether the process
should be called Dialectic. But at any rate a process such
as the above seems to furnish the solution of our problem,
Exactly how that idea comes by which the partial object is
made good, is, on the view we have just sketched, a matter
of secondary moment. The important point is that with
the object there is present something already beyond it,
something that is capable both of demanding and of furnish-
ing ideal suggestions, and of accepting or rejecting the
suggestions made.”

On a view such as this the essential union of comprehen-
siveness with coherence seems once more tenable. We have
not only connexions in the object-world, temporal, spatial


1 The reader is referred here specially to Chap. VI.

2 See further Principles of Logic, pp. 381-2, as well as the chapter
just referred to. The reader should bear in mind that we may have (a)
a detail or (b) a general character which is wanting in the object and
which is actually felt by me. Beyond this there is the question whether
content, not actually now felt by me, can be suggested by a reaction of
the whole reality which is one with me. I am myself ready to accept
even this further possibility, but I would urge on the reader the impor-
tance here of maintaining in any case the above distinctions. Cf. Chapters
VI and XI.

1574 : Q


226 COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION _ cnap.


and other relations, which extend for us the content of a
partial object. We have also another world at least to some
extent actually experienced, a world the content of which is
continuous with our object. And, where an element present
in this world is wanting to our object, dissatisfaction may
arise with an unending incompleteness and an endless effort
at inclusion. The immanent Reality, both harmonious and
all-comprehending, demands the union of both its characters
in the object. The reader will notice that I assume here
(a) that everything qualifies the one Reality, (6) that, when
one element of the whole is made an object, this element
may be supplemented even apart from visible inconsistency,

and (c) that, to know Reality perfectly, you must know the
' whole of it, and that hence every partial object is imperfect.
To this last point I shall return, but will proceed first to deal
with the question asked as to Contradiction.


(2) For, the reader may object, ‘Suppose for the sake
of argument that I admit the above, I still do not see how
Contradiction comes in. Why am I to add with you that
the test of truth is its ability to qualify Reality without self-
contradiction?’ In replying to this I will first dispose of a
point which possibly is obvious. If, in speaking of Reality,
you say ‘Ris mere a’, and if then, while you say that, an-
other qualification, 6, appears and is accepted, you contradict
yourself plainly. To this your answer, I presume, will be,
‘Yes, but I was careful not to say ““mere a’’. I merely
said “‘a’’, and between these two assertions there is a vital
difference.’ The question as to this vital difference may
perhaps be called here the real issue. It is contended
against me that I may first say ‘ Ra’ and then later ‘ Rb’
and then later ‘ Re’ without any contradiction. For a, b
and c may be separate, or, if related, they may be conjoined
externally. Hence ‘a with b’ (it is urged) is quite con-
sistent with ‘a’


, since ‘a’ remains unaffected. It will


vit COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION 227


hence be absurd to argue that by merely saying ‘a’ the
presence of ‘ 6’ is denied.

My object here is to explain the sense of the doctrine
which I advocate far more than to make this doctrine good
against all possible competitors. And hence, if in what
follows I seem to the reader to be assuming all that has to
be proved, I must ask him to bear this warning in mind.
Certainly I must assume here that the view of judgement
which I hold is correct, and it is on this view that what
follows is really founded. I have at least seen no other view
of judgement which to myself seems tenable, but this isa
point on which I cannot attempt to enter here. I assume
then that in judgement ideas qualify Reality, and further
that in judgement we have passed beyond the stage of mere
perception or feeling. The form of qualification present in
these cannot, as such, be utilized in judgement. And the
question is whether in judgement we have any mode of
qualification which is in the end consistent and tenable.
I do not think that we have any.


_? What follows in the text may perhaps be summed up thus. In
feeling (with which we start) we have an immediate union of one and
many, where the whole immediately qualifies the parts, and the parts the
whole and one another. In judgement this immediate unity is broken up,
and there is a demand for qualification otherwise. This ‘ otherwise’
involves distinction and a relational plurality ; and that, because simple
qualification is now impossible, entails mediation and conditions. And,
because in judgement we cannot completely state the conditions, we are
forced into an indefinite process of bringing in new material and new ~
conditions. The end sought by judgement is a higher form of immediacy,
which end however cannot be reached within judgement.

It may perhaps assist the reader if I put the whole matter as follows.
Take any object, and you find that, as it is, that object does not satisfy
your mind. You cannot think it as real while you leave it just as it
comes. You are forced to go outside and beyond that first character,
and to ask, What, Why, and How. You must hence take your first object
as included with something else in.some wider reality. There is thus
a demand so fax, we may say, for comprehension.

On the other hand you want to know the object itself and mot some-
thing else. Therefore, while going beyond the object, you must not
leave it but must still follow it. If you merely conjoin it with something
outside that is different and not itself, this in principle is contradiction.


Q2


228 COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION — cuap.


In all predication I assume that the ultimate subject is
Reality, and that in saying ‘ Ra’ or ‘ Rb’ you qualify R by
aor. My contention is that, in saying ‘ Ra’, you qualify
R unconditionally by a, and that this amounts to saying
‘mere a’. For is there, I ask, any difference between R and
a? Let us suppose first that. there is no difference. If so,
by saying first Ra and then Rd you contradict yourself
flatly. For a and 6, I presume, really are different, and
hence, unless R is different from a and b, what you (how-
ever unwillingly) have done is to identify a and b simply.
But the simple identification of the diverse is precisely that
which one means by contradiction.1_ If on the other hand,
when I say Ra, I suppose a difference between R and a,
then once more I am threatened with contradiction, for I
seem now to have simply qualified R by a, the two being
diverse. The reader will recall that we are concerned here
with judgement and not with mere feeling or perception.
And the question to be answered is how in judgement we are
to qualify one thing by another thing, the two things being
different. '

A natural answer is to deny that the judgements, Ra and
Ré, are unconditional, That, it will be urged, was never
meant. But, if it is not meant, I ask, ought it to be said,
except of course for convenience and by a licence? Let it


Hence what you want is connexion and implication, where the object is
its own self as contributing to a reality beyond itself, That now is co-
herence and comprehensiveness in one.

Of course the critic who ignores what Prof. Bosanquet and myself have
urged as to the real meaning of contradiction, must-expect to miss the
sense of the doctrine which we advocate, each in his own way. Take a
diversity (here is the point), a diversity used simply to qualify the same
subject, and with that you have contradiction, and that is what contra-
diction means. The ‘And’ (see p. 231), if you take it simply as mere
‘And’, is itself contradiction. The reader should consult further the early
part of Chap. XI.

+ For a discussion of the nature of contradiction the reader is referred
to Mind, N.S., No. 20, reprinted (with omissions) in Appearance since 1897,
and may now be directed especially to Prof. Bosanquet’s Individuality
and Value, pp. 223 foll.


.


vilt COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION 229


then be understood that the above judgements hold good
because R is somehow different from a and from b, and that
the assertion is made under this condition, known or, I
suppose, here unknown. The assertion then will really be
“R(x)a’ and ‘ R(x)d’, the % being of course taken to qualify
R. But, if so, apparently ‘ Ra’ is true only because of :
something other than a which also is included in R. R is
a only because R is beyond a, and so on indefinitely. Merely
to say a is therefore, if our view of judgement is sound,
equivalent to denying the above and to saying mere a; and
that, since R is beyond mere a, seems inconsistent with
itself. Contradiction therefore so far has appeared as the
alternative to comprehensiveness, and the criterion so far
seems to rest on a single principle.

If, in other words, you admit that the assertion ‘ Ra’ is
not true unless made under a condition, you admit that no
knowledge in the form Ra can be perfect. Perfect know-|
ledge requires that the condition of the predicate be got
within the subject ; and, seeking to attain this end (which,
I assume, can never be completely realized), we are driven to
fill in conditions indefinitely. The attempt to deny this, so
far as we have seen, seems to force you to the conclusion
that a makes no difference to R and that b makes no differ-
ence to either. And, if so, upon our view of judgement you
have said nothing, or else have fallen into self-contradiction.?

' IT will remind the reader once more that the above argument assumes
that in judgement what is asserted is taken to qualify Reality, and that
there is no other way of asserting. To those who believe in another way
the above argument is not addressed. The same thing may again be put
thus, The assertion of any object a is Ra. Here, if R is not different
from a, you have really no assertion. But, if R is different, you either
deny this difference and so have a false assertion, or else you qualify R (that
is, a higher R) both by a and this difference. Hence you have now asserted
a manifold. But, as soon as you assert of R a manifold (however you have
got it), there arises at once a question as to the ‘how’. You cannot fall
back on mere sense, because in judgement you are already beyond that ;
and on the other hand again you cannot simply identify. Hence you have


to seek ideal conditions, and this search has to go on indefinitely. The
above statement of course does not claim to show how these special


230 COHERENCE: AND CONTRADICTION ~ cunap.


The general position here taken must, so far as I see,
be attacked either by falling back on designation or by the
acceptance of mere external relations. I will say something
more on these alternatives lower down, but will for the
present seek to explain further the view which I hold.
Judgement on that view is the qualification f one and the
same Reality by ideal content. And, if we keep to this, we
must go on to deny independent pieces of knowledge and
mere external relations. The whole question may, perhaps,
be said to turn upon the meaning and value of the word
‘and’. Upon the view which I advocate when you say ‘ R
is a, and R is 6, and R is c’, the ‘and’ qualifies: a higher
reality which includes Ra Rb Re together with ‘and’. It
is only within this higher unity that ‘ and’ holds good, and
the unity is more than mere ‘and’. In other words the
Universe is not a mere ‘ together ’ or ‘ and’, nor can ‘ and’
in the end be taken absolutely. Relatively—that is, for
limited purposes—we do and we must use mere ‘and’ and
mere external relations,1 but these ideas become untenable
when you make them absolute. And it would seem use-
less to reply that the ideas are ultimate. For the ideas,
I presume, have a meaning, and the question is as to what
becomes of that meaning when you try to make it more
than relative, and whether in the end an absolute ‘ and’ is
thinkable.

That on which my view rests is the immediate unity


conditions which you want are supplied. The process, that is, so far does
not point to the particular complement which is required. Again, the
reader must not understand me to suggest that, given a single feeling or
sensation, we could by any logical process pass beyond it. I am on the
contrary assuming that at the stage of judgement we are beyond any
single feeling or sensation, if ever we were confined toone. In the foregoing
the word ‘ logical’ has been used (perhaps improperly) in a narrow sense,
to mean simply a visible process of intrinsic implication. See above,
p. 227, note.

* How the ‘and’ is to stand to the external relations seems doubtful.
If ‘and’ itself is an external relation, then obviously, to unite it to its
terms, you seem to want a further ‘and’, and so on indefinitely.


vit COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION a3r


which comes in feeling,' and in a sense this unity is ultimate.
You have here a whole which at the same time is each and
all of its parts, and you have parts each of which makes a
difference to all the rest and to the whole. This unity is not
ultimate if that means that we are not forced to transcend
it. But it is ultimate in the sense that no relational think-
ing can reconstitute it, and again in the sense that in no
relational thinking can we ever get free from the use of it.
And an immediate unity of one and many at a higher remove
is the ultimate goal of our knowledge and of every endea-
vour. The aspects of coherence and comprehensiveness are
each a way in which this one principle appears and in which
we seek further to realize it. And the idea of a whole some-
thing of this kind underlies our entire doctrine of judgement,
You may seek, and I agree that it is natural to seek, for
another view as to judgement and truth. But, so far as
I see, that effort has resulted and will result in failure.
Judgement, on our view, transcends and must transcend
that immediate unity of feeling upon which it cannot cease
to depend. Judgement has to qualify the Real ideally.
And the word ‘idea’ means that the original unity has so
far been broken. This is the fundamental inconsistency of
judgement which remains to the end unremoved, and which
in principle vitiates more or less all ideas and truth. For
ideas cannot qualify reality as reality is qualified immediately
in feeling, and yet judgement seeks in vain to escape from
this foregone method. And thus, aiming to reconstitute
with its ideas the concrete whole of one and many, it fails,


1 Cf. Appearance, p. 569, and Chap. VI of this volume. In my view (I
am here of course in the main following Hegel) the ‘and’ is a developed
and yet degraded form of the immediate unity, and throughout implies
that. Make the contents of the felt totality both objective and relational,
and then abstract from any special character of the relations and any
special character of the totality—and you have gat what you mean by
‘and’. But the point to be emphasized here is that, if you abstract
altogether from the totality, you have destroyed your ‘and’. The ‘and’
depends essentially upon the felt totality, and of course cannot generate
its own foundation.


232 COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION _ cnap.


and it sinks through default into the abstract identity of
predicate with subject. But this is a result at which it did
not aim and which it cannot accept as true. Judgement in
the form ‘ Ra’ never meant that between R and a there is no
difference. What it meant was to predicate its idea of, and
to reconstitute with its idea, the old immediate reality. But
since that whole and its way of unity were not properly ideal,

and since now we are in the world of truth and ideas, the

judgement has failed to express itself. The reality as con-

ditioned in feeling has been in principle abandoned, while

other conditions have not been found ; and hence the judge-

ment has actually asserted unconditionally a of R and R of
a. And such an assertion, it perceives, is false. The way to
remedy its falsehood is to seek the conditions, the new ideal
conditions, under which ‘ Ra’ is true. To gain truth the’
condition of the predicate must be stated ideally and must be
included within the subject. This is the goal of ideal truth,
a goal at which truth never arrives completely ; and hence
every truth, so long as this end is not attained, remains more
or less untrue.

Every partial truth therefore is but partly true, and its
opposite also has truth. This of course does not mean that
any given truth is merely false, and, of course also, it does
not mean that the opposite of any given truth is more true
than itself. These are obvious, if natural, misunderstandings
of our view. But surely it should be clear that you can both
affirm and deny ‘ R(x)a’ so long as x remains unspecified.
And the truth on one of these two sides surely becomes
greater in comparison, according as on that side, whether of
affirmation or denial, you are able to make the conditions’
more complete. -But, as long as and so far as the conditions
remain incomplete, the truth is nowhere absolute. ‘It is
possible to produce sparks by striking flint’ is, I under-
stand, offered as an instance of unconditional truth! But


1 Prof. Stout in Mind, N.S., 65, Pp. 42.


VU COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION 233


the opposite of this truth surely is also true. The. thing
clearly, I should have said, is possible or not possible ac-
cording to the conditions, and the conditions are not suffi-
ciently expressed in the judgement. You have therefore so
far a truth which can at once be affirmed and denied, and
how such a truth can be absolute I fail to perceive. The
growth of knowledge consists (as we saw) in getting the
conditions of the predicate into the subject. The more
conditions you are able to include, the greater is the truth.
But so long as anything remains outside, the judgement is
imperfect and its opposite also is true. Certainly the truth
of the opposite becomes progressively less, and may even be
negligible, but on the other hand it never disappears into
sheer and utter’ falsehood.*


I cannot attempt to deal here with the alleged absolute
judgements to be found, for instance, in arithmetic,? but I
must touch on the claim of designation to offer logical
truth. I mean by designation the essential qualification of
our meaning by pointing, or by the equivalent use of such
terms as ‘ this’, ‘now’, ‘here’, or ‘my’. That in fact we


1 For a discussion of the nature of Error see Chap. IX.

* The question as to mathematical truth appears to be as follows:
(i) Are there really independent, self-consistent, self-contained principles
from which the conclusions are developed, and (ii) can these conclusions
be developed without inconsistency ? The second of these questions I
am through ignorance of the subject unable to discuss. With regard to
the first all I can do here is to remind the reader that there is an emphasis
on ‘self-contained’. Unless the whole process is completely intelligible
per se, it depends on an unknown condition (however apparently constant)
. in my mind or elsewhere. ‘ A is such that 6 is c’ may (we have seen) be
perfectly compatible with the statement that ‘ A is such that } is not c’.
The question is whether the ‘such’ is completely specified and got within
the judgement itself. :

3 What Prof. Stout calis ‘implicit cognition’ I take to fall under the
head of designation. Otherwise the instance which he gives (on p. 44)
is far from helping his case. For if the ‘I give you, &c.’ is true, surely it
_is obvious that ‘I do mot give you’ also is true, so far at least as our know-
ledge goes. I understand Prof. Stout really here to rely on the ‘ this’,
in other words on designation.


234 COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION _ cuap.


are forced to use designation and cannot in life possibly
get on without it, I suppose, is obvious. We may set this
much down, I presume, as universally accepted. And how
far in our knowledge, if at all, we are able to get free from it,
I do not propose here to discuss (see Chapters III and TX).
We have to deal here with designation merely in regard to
its ultimate logical value.

At the entrance of philosophy there appears to be a point
where the roads divide. By the one way you set out to seek
truth in ideas, to find such an ideal expression of reality as
satisfies in itself. And on this road you not only endeavour
to say what you mean, but you are once for all and for ever
condemned to mean what you say. Your judgements as to
reality are here no less or more than what you have expressed
in them, and no appeal to something else which you fail to
make explicit is allowed. When, for example, you say
‘this ’, the question is not as to what you are sure is your
meaning if only you could utter it. The question is as to
what you have got, or can get, in an ideal form into your
actual judgement. And, when you revolt against the con-
clusion that ‘ this ’ appears to be a mere unspecified univer-
sal, when you insist that you know very well what ‘ this’
meant, and protest that your object was something other
than such illogical trifling and child’s play—our answer is
obvious. What are you doing, we ask, with us here on this
road? You were told plainly that on this road what is
sought is ideas, and that nothing else here is current. You
were warned that, if you enter here, you are committed to

_this principle. If you did not understand, whose is the -
fault? And as to your protests and ‘ refutations’, they
may count elsewhere but they count for nothing with us.
If you cannot show that on our own principle our conclusion
is wrong, then for us you have said nothing. Our whole
way doubtless may be a delusion, but, if you choose to take
this way, your judgement means what ideally it contains ;


VIII COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION 235


and, contrariwise, what you have not explicitly expressed
and included in it is not reckoned. And, if so, no possible
appeal to designation in the end is permitted. ‘ This,’ ‘ my,’
‘now’ and the rest will mean once for all exactly what they
internally include and so express. Your meaning has always
on demand to be made explicit and stated intelligibly within
the judgement.

This I take to be the way of philosophy, of any philosophy
which seeks to be consistent. It is not the way of life or of
common knowledge, and to commit oneself to such a prin-
ciple may be said to depend upon choice. The way of life
starts from, and in the end it rests on, dependence upon feel-
ing, upon that which in the end cannot be stated intelligibly.
And the way of any understanding of the world short of
philosophy still rests on this basis. Such understanding
may despise feeling, and may claim to have risen into a
higher region, but in the end it will be inconsistent and be
found to stand on that which, taken as truth, does not
satisfy. Outside of philosophy there is no consistent course
but to accept the unintelligible, and to use in its service
whatever ideas seem, however inconsistently, to work best.
And against this position, while it is true to itself, I have
nothing to say ; though I regret that to be true to itself is
a thing so seldom within its power. For worse or for better
the man who stands on particular feeling must remain out-
side of philosophy. If you are willing to be inconsistent
(this is now an old story) you can never be refuted, and that
is why philosophy can be said to depend upon choice. On
the other hand the impulse to truth is strong, and the
abnegation often too difficult, and the reason for this
abnegation often, if not always, invisible without some
training in philosophy. And hence the way of life, and of
ordinary knowledge, obscurely conscious of its own impet-
fection, for ever seeks to complete itself by that which, if it
aimed to be consistent, would be philosophy.


236 COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION  cHap.


On the other side even within philosophy itself the counter
tendency is irrepressible. Even if you harden your heart to
accept the view that philosophy, as against life, is one-sided,
and has to remain mere understanding, yet, even with this,
you may revolt against the rule of mere ideas. If we have
certainty anywhere, this seems obvious, we have certainty in
feeling. Whatever else may be doubted, at least we know
what we feel. And that is why to some persons volition
appears specially to give indubitable fact, for volition ob-
viously is felt, And it seems monstrous, when we seek for
truth, to leave certainty behind. But what is often forgotten
here is that the certainty belongs to feeling only as that is
actually felt. To translate this certainty unmodified into
ideas seems impossible ; and how you are at once to trans-
pose it into another mode and still use it as a test, I have
failed to understand. And this is my position here against
the use of designation as logical truth. I appreciate the
certainty, the knowledge beyond all words and ideas, that
may belong to ‘mine’ and ‘this’. I recognize that in
life and in ordinary knowledge one can never wholly cease
to rest on this ground. But how to take over into ultimate
theory and to use there this certainty of feeling, while still
leaving that untransformed, 1 myself do not know. I admit
that philosophy, as I conceive it, is one-sided. I understand
the dislike of it and the despair of it while this its defect is
not remedied, But to remedy the defect by importing bodily
into philosophy the ‘ this’ and ‘ mine’, as they are felt, to
my mind brings destruction on the spot. To import them
half-translated and ambiguously hybrid may give immediate
relief but no less entails certain ruin. And my conclusion
therefore is that at all costs consistency is better. If philo- |
sophy remains one-sided that is perhaps after all a sign
that it is following its own business. And, until better
informed, that is all that .I wish to say with regard to
designation.


VIII COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION 237


Apart from designation what remains as an alternative to
the view which I advocate? The alternative, it seems to
me, is to maintain a plurality of self-contained pieces of ideal
knowledge. That course, even if we can regard the ultimate
reality as being somehow a kind of. passive but all-contain-
ing reservoir, leads in principle inevitably to Pluralism. And
Pluralism, to be consistent, must, I presume, accept the
reality of external relations. Relations external, not rela-
tively and merely in regard to this or that mode of union,
but external absolutely must be taken as real. To myself
such relations remain unthinkable, and it would be natural
for me to end this chapter by enlarging on that head. - But
my chief difficulty here is that, perhaps from defective know-
_ ledge, I am not acquainted with any sufficient attempt to
explain and justify the proposed alternative.t A scheme of
external relations in the first place is confronted by the
apparent fact of feeling with its immediate unity of a non-
relational manifold. To attempt to deny this fact, or again.
to leave it somewhere outside, seems ruinous; but how on:
the other hand it is to be included in the scheme I do not
know. And the external relations themselves, if they are


1 Such a work we may, I hope, expect from Mr. Russell. I do not
understand that at present he has offered any view which could fairly be
taken as an account of first principles. In such an account obviously it
would not be permissible to introduce ideas, ultimate or otherwise, with-
out in each case discussing whether the ideas are consistent with all the
rest which is accepted. In a subordinate subject one can of course start

. with a ‘ save as hereinafter provided ’, and in this way preclude objections
as to inconsistency. But in dealing with first principles such a course
is clearly inadmissible. I am not, however, proposing here to criticize
a doctrine which, I confess, I do not understand. And I trust I shall not
be taken as disparaging the remarkable contribution which Mr. Russell,
I am sure, has made to philosophy. The general tendency which he so
ably represents has long been as good as unadvocated among us, and
there has thus been, I agree, a very serious defect in the main body of
our speculation. Whatever the result, Mr. Russell’s inquiries should do
a service to philosophy which, I imagine, it would not be easy to over-
estimate. On the inconsistency of some of the ideas used by him I hope
to touch later in this volume (Chapters IX and X). For ‘ external
relations’ see the references in the Index. And cf. Prof. Bosanquet’s
Logic, vol. ii, chap. ix.


238 . COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION — cuap.


to be absolute, must, I suppose, be thinkable apart from any
terms. Such a position, to my mind impossible in principle,
seems, when you consider the variety and detail of the rela-
tions required, to be more than staggering. On the other
side, if the relations apart from terms are not thinkable,
‘obviously, I should have said, they have ceased therewith to
ibe external absolutely. Your ultimate has now become a
unity of terms and relations. And in any case, even if the
relations are really external, there is the problem as to how
somehow in fact we take them together with their terms.
Further there is the difficulty caused by the fact of know-
ledge. If the world, as a whole, has the above character
and also is so known, is the fact of our knowledge of the
world’s general character compatible with the fact of the
world’s being thus? Or, from the other side, if external
relations were absolute, could we get to know that they
were So except by a vicious argument ? These are perhaps
the main questions which press on any attempt to advocate
external relations, and I do not know where these questions
have been answered. External relations, if they are to be
absolute, J in short cannot understand except as the sup-
posed necessary alternative when internal relations are
denied. But the whole ‘ Either-or ’, between external and
internal relations, to mé seems unsound. -
Philosophy perhaps may be called an attempt, possibly in
the end an unsuccessful attempt, to escape from the fallacy
of false alternative. To assume, if external relations are
unthinkable, the possibility of a scheme of relations founded
on and based in their terms, or again to pass from the rejec-
tion of internal relations as illusory to the acceptance of sheer
externality, seem counterpart fallacies. The alternative in
each case, if it is to stand, must justify itself independently.
And in neither case to my mind is the justification likely to
succeed. To myself it seems that ultimate reality is supra-
relational. We find it first below relations, and again rela-


Vill COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION’ = 239


tions are necessary to its development, and yet the relations
cannot rightly be predicated of the original unity. They
remain in a sense contained in it, but none the less again
they transcend it. And the natural conclusion in my judge-
ment is to a higher unity which is supra-relational. In such
a unity the imperfect relational scheme and the imperfect
whole of feeling are both included and absorbed. And I
have advocated this conclusion, certainly not on the ground
that it seems to explain everything, but because it appears
to me to leave nothing really outside, while it loads us with
nothing in the end worse than the inexplicable. My object,
though I do not say that I never joined in aiming higher, is
to be left with something which is positive and all-compre-
hending and not in principle unthinkable.

Criticism therefore which assumes me committed to the
ultimate truth of internal relations, all or any of them, is
based on a mistake. I cannot accept, for instance, the rela-
tion of subject and predicate as an adequate expression of
reality. It evidently fails to carry over consistently into a
higher region the felt sensible unity of the one and many.
And there is no possible relational scheme which in my view
in the end will be truth. The apprehended fact of-terms in
relation cannot itself, I am sure, be reconstituted ideally.
In any mere relational synthesis there will be something left
out, or else imported surreptitiously from elsewhere, and
there will be ensuing inconsistencies which are rooted in and
‘which point to incompleteness. I had long ago made it
clear (so I thought) that for me no truth in the end was
quite true, and I had myself (as I fancied) pointed. out and.
dealt with the consequent dilemma. But it is in the nature
of things, I presume, that there should always be some critics
who know better.

The ideas which we are compelled to use are all in vary-
ing degrees imperfect, and certainly this is the case with
internal relations. They seek to hold on to the initial felt


240 COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION CHAP.


fact of identity in -difference, and they point to a higher
‘consummation beyond themselves and beyond all relations.
But, at least in the end, they cannot, I should say, be thought
_ consistently. On the other side external relations, except
relatively and within certain limits, cannot in my opinion
be accepted. They first of all seem to break wholly with
the sensible fact, with that felt union of the diverse with
which we begin, External relations not only dissolve its
immediate totality, but they appear to wish to leave its car-
cass lying, so to speak, somewhere unexplained outside of!
truth and reality. And, having destroyed the starting-place,
they further cut us off in principle (so far as I see) from any
advance to a higher unity. The totality they seem to offer
(though I hardly know what this is, or indeed whether or
how it is offered) does not satisfy our ultimate desire, and,
themselves unthinkable, the construction they build seems
joined by inconsistency. This, at least until better in-
formed, is what I am forced to think of external relations if
taken as absolute..

Amongst ideas which, though imperfect, must necessarily
be used, I may mention here the ideas of identity and differ-
ence. Identity must not on the one side be confused with
resemblance, nor again on the other side can it be taken as
abstract. There is, for instance, in the end no such positive
idea, at least to my mind, as mere numerical sameness or
diversity. On either of the above alternatives (I do not offer
to argue the point here) identity is destroyed. On the other
hand, when you take it otherwise as one aspect of the con-
crete union of sameness and difference, identity, when you
think it out, becomes inconsistent. It leads at either end to
an infinite process, and the same again is the case with
diversity. These ideas therefore cannot be ultimate, and
we naturally desire to get beyond them to something wholly
consistent. Yet, if we find we cannot do this, the ideas still
must be accepted. They will remain the best means we


vit COHERENCE.AND CONTRADICTION = 241


possess of approximating to the truth, or of removing .our-
sélves, if you prefer that, from the furthest extreme of error.
They are not ultimately true, but they are truer far than
what is offered in their stead.?
~‘ Coherence and comprehensiveness then we have found to
be each an integral aspect of system. In practice they may
-diverge, but.they remain united in principle. And system
is connected essentially with contradiction and its absence.
For what is inconsistent is so far unreal, and a diversity,
judged unconditionally to be real, we found was inconsistent,
and such internal discrepancy tends to involve an indefinite
passage beyond self. Further, apart from this, an object
which is short of the whole tends naturally, we may say,
to suggest its complement. And, since that suggested
complement is absent in fact, reality thus contradicts itself,
How the suggestion is made we have inquired. The object
itself may through its own internal content pass for us
visibly beyond its own limits, or, on the other hand, the
addition may come to us from that whole which we feel.


1 The above was written in June 1908, and since then Prof. James’s
Pluralistic Universe has appeared, containing some controversial refer-
ences on the subject of identity. I have, however, left the text as it
stood, and will merely add that I cannot accept Prof. James’s account of
the difference on this point between himself and me. My difficulty with
Prof. James has been that from time to time I am led to suppose that he
is advocating a view opposed radically to mine, and then later discover
that he holds the very view which I have defended against him. And
hence I am inclined to suspect that this may be the case elsewhere. Prof.
James asserts, for instance, ‘ external’ relations as absolute; but I am
forced to doubt whether he, any more than myself, believes in such things
except as relative (see above, p. 151). And, while professing Pluralism, to
myself Prof. James appears really to be a Monist, or, at most, a Dualist.
Again, if there is any difference between the ‘ pragmatic’ doctrine of free
will and that which I, for instance, have advocated since 1876, I cannot
find in what it consists. And other examples could be given. Hence,
things being thus between Prof. James and myself (though I admit that
this may arise from my own failure to understand), it seems to me that
explanation is wanted far more than controversy. Our differences may
perhaps on the whole be small when compared with the extent of our
agreement. But apart from further information it would be hardly in
my power to form an opinion on this point.

1574 R


242 COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION  cuap.


And this whole, as felt, may contain, we saw, actually a
special detail,.or again a general character which was want-
ing in the object ; or the whole may be present to us even
more vaguely as a something beyond, a something which is
not satisfied with what is before us. But when the sugges-
tion is made, however it is made, we have a fresh predicate
of Reality. Our object has thus become more comprehen-
sive, and we must endeavour now to include this fresh
predicate within it consistently.

With the various questions which arise there is obviously
here no space to deal. There is however one point on which
I will venture to add a few words. The reader naturally
may ask what on the whole the above conclusion is to mean.
Does it mean that I am forthwith to set down everything
that I want as real? The answer is, Not so, if by ‘ every-
thing ’ you understand ‘ all that you want and exactly as you
want it’. We have been compelled to conclude to the actual
satisfaction of all sides of our being, and hence doubtless
everything that we need must be included in reality. But;
this being agreed on, the question remains as to the sense
of such inclusion. Now to say that such or such a detail
cannot be left entirely outside is one thing, and it is another
thing to insist that, when included, this detail maintains
untransformed its special character. The burden of proof
in my opinion lies here with the assertor, and that burden is
likely too often to strain or to overpass his power.

It is after all an enormous assumption that what satisfies
us is real, and that the reality has got to satisfy us. It is
an assumption tolerable, I think, only when we hold that the
Universe is substantially one with each of us, and actually,
as a whole, feels and wills and knows itself within us. For
thus in our effort and our satisfaction it is the one Reality
which is asserting itself, is coming to its own rights and
pronouncing its own dissent or approval. And our confidence
rests on the hope and the faith, that except as an expression,


VU COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION - = 243


an actualization, of the one Real, our personality has not
counted, and has not gone here to distort and vitiate the
conclusion. Hence our confidence is but the other side of
our willingness, so far as is possible, to suppress irrelevancy
and to subordinate self-will. And, wherever this is felt,
there is little desire to insist that what we want must be real
exactly so as we want it. Whatever detail is necessary to
the Good we may assume must be included in reality, but
it may be included there in a way which is beyond our
knowledge and in a consummation too great for our under-
standing. On the other side, apart from the belief that the
ultimate and absolute Real is actually present and working
within us, what are we to think of the claim that reality is
in the end that which satisfies one or more of us? It seems
a lunatic dream from some cell the walls of which are like
a bubble against the inroad of fact. The ideas and wishes
of ‘ fellows such as I crawling between heaven and earth’,
how much do they count in the march or the drift of the
Universe ?

‘One or more of us men ’—between these two things, so
far as I see, there is little difference. We have heard, at least
in this connexion, surely too much about the social nature

. of mankind and about the accumulated funds of humanity.
Offered as an explanation of our confidence, wise or stupid,
as an account, that is, of how it comes to exist, these con-
siderations of course have their value. But offered as a.
justification, how can they be anything but worthless? We
know how joint action with its fellows, and even that re-
duplicated sense of self which comes from the perception of
its kind, gives assurance to the humblest. But we know
again how this assurance can prove to be illusory. The
gardener’s spade and the unheeding footstep have long ago
pointed the moral which at least to my mind has not some-
how grown obsolete. Its force to my mind is not lessened '

by that vapouring, new or old, about Humanity, which, if it
R2


244 COHERENCE AND CONTRADICTION cuap. vii


were not ambiguous, would be scarcely sane. We have here
to choose, I imagine, between two courses. We must either
hold to a view of the criterion which succeeds in separating
it from our demand for human satisfaction ; or, if we cannot
do this (as I cannot), we must once and for all abandon and
reject any special prerogative for human beings. Where
humanity stands in the scale of being we do not know, and
it seems presumptuous to fancy that we ever can learn. And
such knowledge for us, so far as we can see, would be useless.
But the meanest creature has its absolute right.


The spirit of the worm beneath the sod
In love and worship blends itself with God.


And not only in love and worship does such union hold, but
' in will also and in the knowledge and enjoyment of beauty
and truth. And, if we believe this, the result should be at
once both confidence and humility. Our truth, such as it is,
has its indispensable part in the one transcendent Experience,
and is so far secure. But that any particular truths of ours,
as we conceive them, should be unconditioned and absolute,
seems hardly probable.


CHAPTER IX


ON APPEARANCE, ERROR AND
CONTRADICTION ?


In the following pages I am to offer some remarks on the
subject’ of Appearance, Contradiction and Error. I have
probably nothing to say here which I have not said before,
and there is nothing, I imagine, in what I have said which
could be called original, I, however, offer these remarks
because they seem to me to be wanted,. because, that is, the
general view which I have adopted seems still partly mis-
understood. I am not seeking here to argue with any one
who wishes to criticize rather than to understand. I address
myself to those whose interest in these topics is impersonal,
to those who desire to make their own every way, however
imperfect, in which these matters are apprehended.

TI propose here first to say something as to the general
foundation on which I stand. I shall next deal briefly with
the relation of Error to Appearance. From this I shall go
on to discuss at length what may be called the relative and
absolute.views of Error. I shall then examine a difficulty
with regard to Contradiction, and shall finally remark on the
general reality of Appearance and Degree, The reader who
finds here too much repetition of what to him is familiar,
will, I hope, accept the explanation which has been offered
above.

The way of taking the world which I have found most

1 First published in Mind for April 1910, and, with the exception of
some small additions and of the Supplementary Notes, written rather


_more than a year previously. There are some further questions as to
the nature of Truth which will be dealt with in the chapter which follows.


246 ON APPEARANCE, ERROR CHAP.


tenable is to regard it as a single Experience, superior to
relations and containing in the fullest sense everything which
is. Whether there is any particular matter in this whole
which falls outside of any finite centre of feeling, I cannot
certainly decide ; but the contrary seems perhaps more prob-
able.t_ We have then the Absolute Reality appearing in and
to finite centres and uniting them in one experience. We
can, I think, understand more or less what, in order for this
to be done, such an experience must be. But to comprehend
it otherwise is beyond us and even beyond all intelligence.
The immanence of the Absolute in finite centres, and of
finite centres in the Absolute, I have always set down as
inexplicable. Those for whom philosophy has to explain
. everything need therefore not trouble themselves with my
views. Whether on the other hand the doctrine which I
hold is intelligible and thinkable, depends, I should say, on
the meaning which you like to give to these ambiguous
terms. To myself this doctrine appears at least to have
a positive sense and meaning which I am able clearly to
apprehend. And in the main I inherited this doctrine from
others, and find myself sharing it with others, to whom it
seemed and seems intelligible. But in what follows I of
course am speaking only for myself.
No one, I think, will understand such a view if he makes
a mistake as to the given fact from which in a sense it starts.
There are those for whom the outer world is one given fact,
and again the world of my self another fact ; and there are
- others for whom only one of these two facts is ultimate. It
is in philosophy a common doctrine that there is immediate
certainty only on the side of my self, a basis from which I
should have thought that Solipsism must demonstrably
follow. If you start from the absolute reality of your self,
you need not puzzle yourself as to how you are to leave this
ground and leap to a transcendent Reality. You may,


* But on this difficult point see Chap. XI, pp. 350-1.


Ix AND CONTRADICTION 247


I think, wait till you have shown how knowledge of anything
at all beyond the limits of your own self is more than an
illusion. But in truth neither the world nor the self is an
ultimately given fact. On the contrary each alike is a con-
struction and a more or less one-sided abstraction. There
is even experience in feeling where self and not-self are not
yet present and opposed; and again every state where
there is an experience of the relation of not-self to self, is
above that relation. It is a whole of feeling which contains
these elements, and this felt containing whole belongs to
neither by itself. ‘Subject and object’, you say perhaps,
‘ are correlated in experience’; and, I presume, you would
agree that we have here one experience which includes the
correlation. But are we to say that this experience itself
is a mere correlation? Such a doctrine to myself seems
untenable and it seems contrary to the given fact. The
given fact to me is a single whole of feeling, within which
the above distinction and division holds. This totality is
the property of neither side, but it contains and is superior
to each.’ And to emigrate somewhere beyond such a whole
as this seems clearly impossible. In short on our view we
may go on to say that the Absolute Reality is in a sense
the given fact, and that to leap to it from fact by tran-
scendence is unmeaning. Within the Absolute you transcend
the lower and partial forms in which it appears, in order to
reach those which are truer. But as for transcending the
Absolute to gain my finite centre, or my finite centre to gain
the Absolute—everything of such a kind to me is mere non-
sense. These ideas start by supposing that to be true which
we think most false, and by assuming that to be given which
for us is the one-sided product of a vicious abstraction.
From the first, if we are to speak of transcendence, my
finite centre is transcended. From the first and throughout
it is one thing directly with the all-embracing Universe, and


_ 1 See Chap, VI.


248 ' ON APPEARANCE, ERROR CHAP.


through the Universe it is indirectly one thing in varying
degrees with all other centres.1_ Nothing in the end therefore
is simply private; the most intimate feeling and the simplest
experience of a pleasure or pain is experienced by the whole
Universe. -The idea of some inner recess or sunken depth
from which the one Reality is or can be shut out, is the mere
creature of false theory. It is a perversion of the truth, an
important truth, that each centre has an experience which is
never directly one with that of other centres.

Certainly I speak of my finite centre, and with this an
emphasis may be laid on the ‘ my ’, and, with this, the road
that leads to Solipsism once more seems opened. But it is
forgotten here that my self, the self that I take as a thing
which endures in time and which I go on to oppose to the
world, is an ideal construction. It is a construction which is
made on and from the present feeling of a finite centre. The
work of construction is performed by that centre and by the
Universe in one, and the result depends for its origin and
existence wholly on this active unity. From the other side
we naturally speak of the feeling centre from which my self
is developed, and with which it remains throughout con-
tinuous, as ‘its’. And this expression is true so far as it
means that this centre is not directly one with others, and

‘ that the material and the agency out of and by which my self
is made, is to that extent private. But we turn our truth
into sheer error when we maintain that my self is an inde-
pendent substantive, to which the rest of the world belongs
somehow as an adjective, or to which other self-sufficient
Reals are externally related. Such a position, we have seen,
cannot be defended. That foundation and agency from and
by which my self is generated, and through which alone it
persists, is one thing with the whole Universe. My self may


1 I cannot accept the view that my self in relation with other selves is
a fact immediately given. For ne point and for what follows see further
in Chap. XIV.


AX . AND CONTRADICLTION . 249


rightly be ‘called a necessary and even an indispensable
element in the world. But its ultimate substantiality and
closed privacy seem to be no more than false inferences.

It would not, I think, be well for me to enlarge further on
points where I could do little but repeat what I have said
elsewhere. My object here is not so much to argue that the
above views are correct, as to urge that any criticism of such
views merely from the outside will touch no one who has
understood them. I fully agree that difficulties are left
which, if you like to say so, must be swallowed. The fact
of an all-embracing, supra-relational, absolute experience
you may call, if you please, ‘ unverifiable’. I do not know
what this word means, and, so long as its meaning is un-
known, I do not care to object to it.) But I hold to the
above fact because to me it is the necessary conclusion from
what is certainly given. And I hold to it because on this
ground it seems to me possible, far better than on other
grounds, to do justice to the various aspects of life. And
when I hear, for instance, that in the Absolute all personal
interests are destroyed, I think I understand on the con-
trary how this is the only way and the only power in and by
which such interests are really safe. For after all, whether
we wish it or not, we have got somehow to believe in some-
thing, and, at least in philosophy, I suppose we wish to
believe in something self-consistent. And when, rejecting
the Absolute, I consider the alternatives that are offered me,
my mind is affected as follows. I not only find these alter-
natives to be untenable and self-inconsistent, but I at least


4 I should myself suppose that no philosopher ever did hold a doctrine
which he did not take to be in some sense verifiable. And no one, I should
have thought, ever honestly advocated ideas, unless he thought that these
ideas served some purpose, and so were useful and worked, and naturally
possessed the character required for such working. I do not know why
certain critics, in order to grapple more effectively with the Absolute,
should apparently think it well to begin by divesting themselves of every-
thing like ordinary Common Sense. On the other hand I gratefully
welcome the existence of various criticisms, which, whether they seem to

« me to be justified or not, are at least thoughtful and sane,


250 ON APPEARANCE, ERROR CHAP.


cannot understand how any one, who realizes what in the
end they mean, can suppose them to be compatible with the
satisfaction of all our highest demands.! If to satisfy such
interests is ‘ to work’, then these alternatives to my mind
do not work. But I must end these introductory reflections,
such as they are, and approach the special subject of our
chapter.


I. In dealing with Error we are at once led to ask how
it stands to Appearance. Is all appearance to be called
error? I will venture here to repeat briefly what I have
stated elsewhere.2 The term ‘appearance’ has a twofold
meaning. If you take it as implying an object and the
appearance of something to some one, then all appearance
is at once both truth and error ; for appearance in this sense
involves a judgement however rudimentary. But the term
is used also in a much wider sense, and you have appearance
. wherever, and so far as, the content of anything falls outside
of its existence, its ‘ what’ goes beyond its ‘that’. You
have reality on the other hand so far as these two aspects
are inseparable, and where one may perhaps be said to
reconstitute the other. Now in every finite centre (on our
view) the Whole, immanent there, fails to be included in


1 One hears, for instance, that our spiritual interests require the abso-
lute reality of time ; and there seems often to be literally no idea that such
a doctrine is contrary to that which we most care for.


The Moving Finger writes; and, having writ,
Moves on: nor all thy Piety nor Wit

Shall lure it back to cancel half a Line,

Nor all thy Tears wash out a word of it.


Surely, as an ultimate truth, this is as abhorrent to our hearts as it should
be false in our philosophy. And, if on the other side you emphasize the
ultimate tryth of chance and change, and urge that lapse and instability
invade even the past, I do not see that you have gained anything. If
there is to be no supreme spiritual Power which is above chance and
change, our own spiritual interests surely are not safeguarded. But, with
any such Power, it seems to me nonsense to talk of the absolute reality
of time. :
® Appearance, pp. 163-6, 485-6, and Index.


1X AND CONTRADICTION 251


that centre. The content of the centre therefore is beyond
itself, and the thing therefore is appearance and is so far
what may be termed ‘ideal’. It has what later becomes
for us a meaning, a meaning which is used as an idea, as an
adjective which qualifies that which is other than its own
being. And thus by anticipation all appearance may be
called error, because, when you go on to think of it as being
true, you are led (at least on my view) to recognize that it is
false. So far indeed as you confine yourself to what is felt,.
you have no recognized contradiction (I shall return to this),
nor anything which for you appears, or can for you be either
true or false. For these qualities in the proper sense exist
only in judgement. Since however we can go on to judge
of everything, all appearance may thus be called already
true or false. And in the end for myself all appearance is at
once both truth and error.

To pass from this point, there is, I have contended, in all
truth the separation of idea and being, the loosening of that
which an idea itself is from that which it means and stands
for. And in my opinion this breach is at once essential and
fatal to truth. For truth is not perfect until this sundering
of aspects is somehow made good, until that which in fact is,
forms a consistent whole with that which it stands for and
means. In other words truth demands at once the essential
difference and identity of ideas and reality. It demands (we
may say) that the idea should in the end be reconstituted by
the subject of the judgement and should in no sense whatever .
fall outside. But the possibility of such an implication in-
volves, in my view, a passage beyond mere truth to actual
reality, a passage in which truth would have completed itself
beyond itself. Truth, in other words, content with nothing
short of reality, has, in order to remain truth, to come short
for ever of its own ideal and to remain imperfect.1_ But on ~


1 Thus when I think of the Absolute, in which all ideas are in the end
real, that truth and thought does not, in my judgement and for me, re-
constitute the psychical being of my idea. Everything, that is, implies


252 ON APPEARANCE, ERROR CHAP.


the other side there is no possible judgement the predicate
of which can fail somehow to qualify the Real ; and there is
hence no mere error.

There are, we may say, two main views of error, the ab-
solute and the relative. According to the former view there
are perfect truths, and on the other side there are sheer
errors. Degrees of truth and error may, on this view, in
a sense be admitted, but in the end you have ideas which
are quite right, and again other ideas which are quite wrong.
This absolute view I reject. I agree that in limited spheres
and for some working purposes its doctrine holds good, but
I find it untenable ultimately. Ultimately there are, I am
convinced, no absolute truths, and on the other side there
are no mere errors. Subject to a further explanation, all
truth and all error on my view may be called relative, and
the difference in the end between them is one of degree.
This doctrine at first sight may perhaps seem paradoxical,
but, when its real meaning is perceived, I think the paradox
disappears. And I will venture here to repeat and to
enlarge on that which I have advocated elsewhere.

If there is to be sheer truth, the condition of the assertion
must not fall outside the judgement. The judgement must
be thoroughly self-contained. If the predicate is true of the
subject only by virtue of something omitted and unknown,
such a truth is defective. The condition left out is an x
which may be filled in diversely. And, according to the way
in which the unspecified condition is actually filled in, either
the judgement or its denial is true. The judgement there-
fore, as it stands, is ambiguous, and it is at once true’ ane
false, since in a word it is conditional.

The more the conditions of your assertion are included in
your assertion, so much the truer and less erroneous does


everything else. But in a judgement you fail to include the condition on
which your idea is true of the Real. And you also fail to include the
condition on which your judgement, itself as a fact, exists. And these
two disabilities in the end are one, .


Ix AND CONTRADICTION 253


your judgement become. But can the conditions of the
judgement ever be made complete and comprised within the
judgement ? In my opinion this is impossible, And hence
with every truth there still remains some truth, however
little, in its opposite. In.other words, you never can pass
wholly beyond degree.

For (a) ‘the limited self-contained subject to which you'
seek to attach the predicate, is not in the end real as so
limited. And (0) further, even if it were so, there remains
a difficulty with regard to predication. The separation of
the predicate from the subject seems at once to be necessary
and yet indefensible. These obstacles in the way of periect
truth are on my view irremovable.

(a) All judgement (I have argued elsewhere) predicates its
idea of the ultimate Reality.1 Certainly I do not mean by


1 At the same time the very form of predication prevents any judgement
from being perfectly true (Appearance, p. 544). Subject to this condition
the above doctrine to my mind holds good. ‘There is an objection, raised
by Mr. Russell (Principles of Math., p. 450), that on this view you cannot
say that ‘Reality is real’ or that ‘Existence exists’. No truth (I have
just stated) can upon my view be perfectly true, but, apart from that,
I should find it easier to deal with this objection if I were told the sense
in which any one ever could want to say that Reality is real. To affirm
that Reality has the character of reality, I presume, is harmless, while
to suggest that Reality is a member of a class ‘real’, to my mind is
monstrous. And it would be of course wrong to call it ‘real’, in some
sense which would restrict it. With regard to ‘ Existence exists’, once
more, until I know exactly what that means, I can hardly reply. What
I can say is this, that to place ‘ Existence’ itself within the sphere of
existence would be clearly indefensible. There are, however, several
other objections raised by Mr. Russell (ibid., p. 448), which I think I
understand, and to which I will reply briefly. (i) It is (as we have seen)
true that predication is in the end self-contradictory. (ii) It is true that
relations (a) do, and (b) do not, presuppose their terms. Terms (a) must
be, and (b) cannot be, different through being related. And within any
related term there is a difference whith sets up an endless process, (iii)
It is true that to predicate of the Absolute involves contradiction, because
it involves an unjustified difference between subject and predicate. It
implies that the Absolute as subject.is not the Absolute but a distinction
made within it, and’ so on indefinitely. While admitting or rather urging
all this, I do not agree with Mr. Russell that I have failed to see and to
meet it.

There is an objection raised by Prof. Taylor, in the Proceedings of the


254. ON APPEARANCE, ERROR CHAP.


this to deny that there is a limited subject. On the con-
trary in all judgement the subject is in some sense limited.1
But, notwithstanding the presence of this narrowed subject,
I urge that the assertion is made of the Universe. For the
judgement affirms reality, and on my view to affirm reality
is to predicate of the one Real. This one Reality I take to
be a whole immanent in all finite subjects, immanent in such
a way that nothing finite can be real by itself. Thus, with
every finite subject, the content of that subject is and passes
beyond itself. Hence every assertion made of the subject
implies that which is not contained in it. The judgement in
other words is made under a condition which is not specified
and is not known. The judgement, as it stands, can there-
fore (as we saw) be both affirmed and denied. It remains
conditional and relative only. Our advance in knowledge


Aristotelian Society, vol. ix, p. 205, to which I have to make much the
same reply. Certainly I myself am not a class and cannot (to speak
strictly) be a predicate, but then again, to speak strictly, I cannot be a
subject either. Our relational logic (no matter of what kind) is in the
end not adequate to reality. It is adequate neither to my self nor the
Universe, nor on the other side to any given fact of sensuous perception
or of feeling. From this I do not see that any conclusion follows which
is contrary to that which I hold. For such a conclusion would (as I
understand) be required other premigses which I should reject.

I should be glad to carry out here a sort of promise, and to discuss the
arguments advanced by Prof. Dewey, in Mind, No. 63, but I do not find
that this is possible. Any objection resting on the antithesis of ‘ formal’
and ‘material’ I obviously cannot deal with, unless supplied by Prof.
Dewey with a clear statement as to the meaning to be given to these
ambiguous terms, And as the idea of truth’s plunging us into contra-
dictions is to Prof. Dewey obviously inconsistent with the idea of its also
pointing to an end above anid beyond them, and also realizing that end
progressively, though always imperfectly—and as on the other hand all
this to me is consistent, and was offered to and urged on the reader as
consistent and true—there is really nothing to be discussed by me, and
no more to be said but to leave the issue to the reader. But I am ready
to admit that, though I seldom read anything written by Prof. Dewey
without pleasure, when it comes to first principles I seldom succeed in
understanding him. On some of the points referred to in this foot-note
I shall once.more touch in the Supplementary Notes appended to this
chapter. And the reader must, on the whole subj ect, be requested to read
Prof. Bosanquet’s Logic (Ed. Il), vol. ii, chap. Vii.

‘2 See Chap. XI, pp. 331 foll.


IX AND CONTRADICTION 255


consists, we may say, in further specifying the conditions;
but, though in this way truth is increased, it at no point can
become absolute. This is the principle and the foundation
of the relative doctrine of error and truth.

Now you may object that in the judgement the coridition,
though it may not be stated, is understood. It is left out


(you may say) merely for the sake of convenience. But, if


so, the judgement, as it stands, is I presume admitted to be
imperfect. And when you urge that the conditions are
understood, I reply that, if so, they can be stated. But (1
will return to this) I maintain that you are really unable to
state the conditions. You cannot in the end specify them,
and you cannot show how far, being completely specified,
they would modify your subject and your judgement. The
conditions therefore, which you call ‘ understood ’, remain
in the most fatal sense unknown. And the only consistent
course which remains is to deny wholly that these conditions
exist. Reality consists of (we must not say im) an uncon-
ditioned plurality. Reality is not R but 7, 7,7. There are
thus a number of self-contained subjects, and it is of one of
these that you make your assertion, which is hence absolutely
true. How can it be conditional in a world where nothing
like a condition or an implication exists, or indeed could
have any meaning? This I take to be the real absoltite
view of truth, and I will return to it lower down.

(6) I will now go on to notice the difficulty which attaches,


not merely to the subject of a judgement, but to the predica- .


tion itself. If the predicate is different from the subject,
what is the sense and the justification of their unity ? And,
if the predicate is not different, is there any sense left at all ?
If we take the ‘ is ’ as mere identity, the assertion disappears.
It: once more vanishes if the ‘is’ is understood as mere
difference. And the question is whether we have any other
way of taking the ‘is’ which in the end satisfies us and is
tenable. We do not, in my opinion, possess any other way.


x


256 ON APPEARANCE, ERROR CHAP.


We start (if I may once more repeat this) from the
immediate union of oneand many, of sameness and differ-
ence, which we have given to us in feeling and in the in-
‘herence of qualities in a sensuous whole. This immedjate
union is of necessity dissolved in our judgement, and it
never in any judgement is completely made good. The
higher form of union, which satisfies at once our feeling,
sense, and intelligence, is not found, in my. opinion, within’
truth itself. It lies beyond and on the other side of judge-
ment and intelligence. It is a goal to which always we may
be said to draw nearer, but which never is reached wholly.
‘And the reason is that in sense and feeling the unity of
_|sameness and difference is mot unconditioned. It is con-

‘ditioned, but it is conditioned for us unintelligibly. The
‘how’ of the union remains unknown. But in intelligence,
and judgement the use of an unknown ‘how’ does not,
satisfy. An assertion made under an unknown condition,
we have seen, admits the assertion of the opposite. Hence
our aim is to replace the sensuous ‘ is’ by a full statement of
the conditions under which the predicate and subject are
connected. But, our statement remaining incomplete, the
connexion remains in part unintelligible. The ‘is’ of our
judgement against our will is left in part still untransformed.
But the consequence is that, since we can no longer use the
sensuous whole of feeling, and since certainly we do not
mean to affirm bare difference, all that we have left is mere
identity—which again certainly we do not mean. We wish
to discover how the subject and predicate are in one. The
object of intelligence is to find the complete conditions under
which the predicate is (we may say) equated to the subject.
And, as long as we stop short of these, our judgement may
perpetually advance in truth, but in the end any judgement
remains erroneous and untenable. This difficulty is not ~
removed by the acceptance of finite realities independent and
. self-contained. It isa difficulty inherent in predication itself.


1X AND CONTRADICTION "389


%
okt general, then (to pass from this point), every error upon
pur Yiew coritains some truth, since it has a content which
‘in some sense belongs to the Universe. And on the other
side all truths are in varying degrees erroneous. The fault,
of every judgement may be said to consist in the taking its
subject too narrowly or abstractly. The whole of the con-
ditions are not stated. And hence, according to the way in
«which you choose to fill in the conditions (and no special _
‘ way belongs to the judgement), the assertion and its opposite
are either of them true. Again, all judgements may be
condemned on the ground that they take the subject too
widely. The subject turns out to be the ultimate Reality,
at which the judgement did not aim specially, and so has
missed its genuine aim. The subject in other words is not
confined as we desired to confine it. But these two defects
obviously are in principle one. Their root is the indissoluble’
connexion of our limited subject with the ultimate Reality,
the discrepancy between these two subjects, and our in-i
ability to close this breach by ‘conditions’. Our judgement
makes its predicate real, but when it is asked how, being
real, its predicate differs from the Reality, it fails in the end
to answer intelligibly. The same fault again shows itself
when we consider the form of predication. That form in
principle transcends the immediate totality of sense and
feeling, and is therefore condemned to seek another way in
which sameness and difference are united. This way (we
have seen) consists in the discovery and statement of explicit
and complete conditions. And the search for these con-
ditions, driving (on our view) the judgement beyond any
finite subject, fails of perfect success. The full implications
of any judgement in the end fall beyond our understanding.
This discrepancy of the whole with the finite centre, a dis-
crepancy implicit only in feeling, becomes visible in the form
of judgement. The discrepancy is not removed within the'
‘region of truth proper, and that region is hence throughout _
1574 s


238 ON APPEARANCE, ERROR CHAP.


affected more or less by error. And the difference between
error and truth will in the end consist in degree.


In the above statement the words ‘in the end’ must be
emphasized. It is an old objection that, if you believe in an
Absolute, all distinctions are lost, and, since everything
comes to the same, nothing in particular is left. And I admit
that the relative view of error and truth may be held and
taught one-sidedly. But, rightly understood, it compre-
’ hends, and on a lower plane it justifies, the absolute view.
‘en the realm of the special sciences and of practical life, and

in short everywhere, unless we except philosophy, we are
compelled to take partial truths as being utterly true. We
cannot do this consistently, but we are forced to do this,
and our action within limits is justified. And thus on the
relative view there is after all no collision with what may be
called Common Sense, Before explaining this more fully
I will once more point out the real essence of that absolute
view which I reject.

Error, upon this view, will consist in the deviation of the -
idea, whether by excess or defect, from that reality at which
it aims. It is impossible for me here to be precise, and you
may understand reality as a fact or as a-mere type, or in
short however you think is best. The point is that by being
something else, whether by addition or substitution or de-
fault, or through all these in one,! the error is not the truth.
Degrees need not be denied, but all the same it is insisted
that we have here a matter of Yes or No. And what is here
assumed is that the reality, or the type, itself is self-con-
tained and fixed. This is an assumption made often by
that which would wrongly usurp the name of Common
Sense. But the ultimate root of this assumption is, as we
saw, a certain doctrine as to the final nature of reality.


1 Substitution in the end seems otiose, and addition and default seem
in the end to imply one the other. ;


1x AND CONTRADICTION ~ 239


Reality must be such as to comprise self-existent pieces of
fact and truth. The principle and the conclusion involved
here is of course Pluralism, which, if it aims to be consistent,
holds to relations which are barely external and tries to
take the Universe as a mere ‘And’! The point which
should be emphasized is that everything ordinarily covered
by the word ‘ implication ’ is here utterly denied. - Nothing
can make in the end any kind of difference to anything else,
for every kind of difference and relation is external and
unable to qualify that outside of which it falls. And the
whole as ‘ And ’, since it is to make no difference to anything,
seems in fact to be nothing; or else, if something, it will
itself require to be comprised in a fresh ‘ And’, and so on
indefinitely. This is the underlying principle which seems
involved in what we have called the absolute view of error.
I have stated this principle in my own way, a way which
I certainly attribute to no one else, and I do not propose
further to criticize it here.

Among various forms of reply I will notice an answer which
I have mentioned already. ‘The separate facts and truths’,
it may be said, ‘ need not really be separate. They are
however determined definitely, because fixed by a Universe
which is conditioned really throughout.’ Now, even if the
conditions of our finite truth are known and could be given,
surely apart from these conditions our truth is so far im-
perfect, and exists only by a kind of convenient sufferance.
But on the other hand suppose that the conditions are not
statable because they are not known ; in this case the whole
conclusion which I advocate appears to follow irremediably.
You may possibly reply that you do not, know the conditions
in detail, but, none the less on this account, you believe them
to exist, and you therefore are justified in taking the finite
fact and the finite truth as being real and perfect. To me,
however, this position appears to be untenable.


4 See Chap. VIII, pp. 230-1.
$2


260 ON APPEARANCE, ERROR CHAP.


There are conditions, known or unknown, from which a
finite fact or truth follows. Certainly I agree to this, and I
would even add that so much as this is obvious, since other-
wise the fact or truth would not be there for us to discuss.
But on theother hand I would urge that such a contention
here is irrelevant. If there are also other conditions from
which the opposite of the given truth follows, then the truth
is at once true and false, and, as it stands, clearly is defective.
And, in order to avoid this, and in order to show that your
fact or truth, as it is, can be justified, what is incumbent on
you is to exclude the possibility of these opposite conditions,
The question may be put thus: when aii the conditions are
considered, does your finite fact or finite truth still persist in
the character in which you take it? To reply in the affirma-
tive on the ground that there are at least some unknown
conditions from which the truth follows, seems hardly de-
fensible. For the position which you have to. maintain is
(as we have seen) not merely positive, but has a negative side-
also, And I do not understand how you are to base this
negation, and this exclusion of other conditions, upon simple
ignorance. What is wanted is a positive and an actual in-'
clusion within the judgement itself of all the conditions
required. And the question is whether and how such an
inclusion is possible.? ;

Passing on from this reply we may consider truth and
error under the heads (a) of abstract ideas and (6) of matters
of fact. The former head (a) I shall touch on but briefly.
The contention that an abstract truth is wholly and utterly
true, must mean, I take it, that this truth, as it stands, is
self-contained and self-subsistent. Either there are nowhere
any conditions or implications, and nothing anywhere makes
a difference to anything, or else in this truth you have within
itself any conditions that are required. The first of these


11 shall discuss lower down the attempt to gain this inclusion by
postulating uniqueness.


IX AND CONTRADICTION 261


alternatives involves a. view of things which to my mind is
in the last resort unintelligible. And the second alternative
again I am unable to accept. In no case, it seems to me,
is it possible to take any abstract truth as being real by
itself. Every such truth appears to me to be generated, and
to subsist, subject to implications and conditions not falling
within itself and in the end nowhere completely known.
And, if this is the case, the opposite of any abstract truth
can obviously never be utter and total error. But to justify
this contention in detail, and to attempt to show how the
abstraction made everywhere in the special sciences entails
inconsistency, is, I regret to add, even if space here per-
mitted it, beyond my power.

I will go on to deal at greater length (b) with ‘ matters of
fact ’. What is contended here is that a fact, in time or space
or in both, is, as it stands, real, and that hence such a fact
‘can serve as a test of absolute truth and sheer error. The
ground of this contention, at least in most cases, seems to
consist in an appeal to ‘ designation’, a subject on which
I have already remarked in the preceding chapter.1 The
“this ’, ‘now’, and ‘here’ of my feeling may, as they are
merely in my feeling, be said to be unique and self-contained.
And, though this statement requires some qualification, that
qualification may here be ignored. But it is a serious mis-
take, starting from this point, to go on to suppose that the
characters of my feeling are transferred unabridged to what
I call a truth about a particular fact in space and time.
The particular fact is to have a unique place within a single
unique order, and otherwise its nature becomes general and
ceases forthwith to be what we mean by particular. But
on the other hand our truth fails to reach beyond generality,
and hence the opposite of our truth becomes also tenable.
‘Caesar crossed the Rubicon,’ we say,~‘ or not’; but this
‘ either-or ’ is only true if you are confined to a single world

1 Chap. VIII, pp. 233-6.


262 ON APPEARANCE, ERROR CHAP.


of events. If there are various worlds, it may be also true
that Caesar never saw the Rubicon nor indeed existed at all.
And, with this, obviously our truth has ceased to be absolute.
Nor is it possible for us to remedy a disease which belongs
to the very essence of our procedure. You cannot at once
translate feeling into judgement and leave feeling untrans-
formed ; and what is lost in the translation is the positive

uniqueness which you demand. The ‘this’, as you use it,.
becomes general, and, though it does not become negative
wholly, it becomes essentially negative. You insist that

‘this ’ is not ‘ that’, though to each you give only a sense

which is general. But the ‘ this’ which you feel and which

you mean, does not trouble itself about a ‘ that ’, since it is

positively itself. And since your truth fails and must fail .
to contain this positive meaning, your truth is defective,

and is self-condemned.

The matters of fact in which we are to find absolute reality
and truth, must, in the first place, be self-consistent ; and i
they must, in the second place, go beyond a mere generality
in which both what we mean and its opposite hold good. .
But our matters of fact belong essentially to an order in
time, if not also in space. And with regard to the self-
containedness of any member in these orders there are well-
known difficulties. In the case of time these difficulties are
aggravated, and, far from being the technical puzzles of the
school, they are visible to all who reflect. Are past events,
we all ask, dead, and is the future really nothing, and, if so,
what is left, and what do we mean by the present ? And
again, if future and past are not wholly unreal, can we on
the other side say that they really exist ? And, if lapse and
change are not to be inherent in matters of fact, in what

3 I may perhaps mention that criticisms on Hegel, with regard to his
teaching as to the meaning of ‘ this’, usually show to my mind an entire
failure to perceive what he is driving at. But the reader must not take


the statement in the text, however much it owes to Hegel, as being an
exposition of his doctrine.


IX AND CONTRADICTION 263


other region shall we place them? But I propose to say
‘nothing here on difficulties which to my mind are fatal, and
which destroy the claim of matters of fact to possess in-
dependence and consistency. I will, passing from this, deal
briefly with the question of uniqueness.

If truth as to matter of fact falls short of uniqueness, that |
truth, we have seen, is defective. Without contradicting
yourself you can at once affirm and deny that Caesar crossed
the Rubicon. But such uniqueness (as we have already seen
in part) is unattainable by truth. For it is not sufficient to
give to your event an exclusive place in its series. The event)
still remains a mere generality, unless the series itself is:
unique. What you seek is something which is positively
itself, and not a sort of a heading which can be identified at
once with discrepant qualities. But no truth can reach the
unique order which is to be the condition of such an absolute
fact.

Uniqueness is a well-known topic, which might with profit
be discussed at very great length. I must confine myself
here to stating briefly what to myself appears to be the one
tenable conclusion. Wherever you have a different quality,
you have so far something unique, and this is the one root of
uniqueness. Uniqueness in a word means difference, and
difference in a word means a quality. For a distinction
without a difference, and again a difference without a diver-
sity in quality, are things which in the end to me are devoid
of meaning, I do not, I hope, ignore wholly the difficulties
which have led to the acceptance of such ideas, but, whatever
are the difficulties, these ideas I am unable to accept.
Briefly then every quality, so far as it is distinct from other
qualities, is unique. You cannot conceivably divide it and
make two specimens within it and of it, unless you in-
troduce further difference and go on to make so far new
quality. A quality which positively is itself, and therefore
and so far cannot be something else, this is in the end the


264 ON APPEARANCE, ERROR CHAP.


one foundation on which to my mind uniqueness is tenable.
Uniqueness has a negative aspect, but that negative aspect
must rest on a positive quality.

The ‘ this’ of feeling (I ignore here the difficulties which
arise) 1 everywhere, I agree, is positive and unique. But
when, passing beyond mere feeling, you have before you
what you call ‘ matter of fact ’ the case forthwith is altered.
The uniqueness has now to be made ‘ objective’. It has to.
be contained within the judgement and has to qualify the
content of your truth. The possibility of another fact in
another series must be excluded, so that in your fact and
truth (with all its imperfection) you have nevertheless no
general sort but a determinate thing. But, since you have
destroyed the positive quality of the felt, you have now no
means by which to reach your end. Where is the quality


1 Of these I will mention two. In the first place every different.‘ this’
will require a new quality. In the second place we have the problem of
the connexion of identity with difference, and of the ‘ infinite process’
which arises at either end. Chap. VIII, p. 240. Uniqueness is a subject
to which I desire to return.

I fully assent to the remarks on Individuality and Uniqueness made by
Prof. Bosanquet in his Logic (Ed. 11), vol. ii, pp. 260-1. I agree that the
further an individual is removed from designation, the more unique (the
less of a mere ‘ sort’) it becomes, though it never becomes unique utterly.
A thing, that is, has uniqueness through being above as weil as through
being below a kind or class. And the former of these senses is perhaps
the more important of the two. But I do not understand that this con-
sideration conflicts with the statement of the text.

I will add here that what Mr. Russell (On the relations of Universals
and Particulars, p. 24) calls ‘the self-evident fact that certain spatial
relations imply diversity of their terms, together with the self-evident
fact that it is logically possible for entities having such spatial relations
to be wholly indistinguishable as to predicates’ to me remains inad-
missible. On the contrary, that every place must differ from others in
quality, and again, that in spatial ‘ occupation’ there is not a mere rela-
tion, is to my mind clear fact. Occupation implies, I should say, a union
of qualities. Hence it is only in one respect, and by virtué of an abstrac-
tion from their difference, that two things in two different places are the
same. I fully admit that the above is in a sense unintelligible. But I
do not find that, like Mr. Russell’s view of ‘ occupation ’, it violates plain
fact; and, again, to me it is not in the same sense unthinkable. For mere
numerical diversity remains to me unthinkable, unless, while thinking it,
I allow differences in quality to introduce themselves surreptitiously.


Ix AND CONTRADICTION - 265


in your truth about your matter of fact which makes it
particular, which excludes other series and the possibility
that in another series the same thing happens differently ?
Show me this quality, or else confess that your truth is not
absolute, and that ‘ Caesar never crossed the Rubicon’ is
not utter error. You can of course assume that any order
of events is unique. You can of course credit it with an
unknown quality which makes it itself and which repels all
other series. And I need not ask here in what sense such
an assumption might be true. What I am urging is that
-even on such an assumption there is an unknown quality
which is not, and cannot be, contained within your judge-
ment. There is that which falls outside, and, falling outside,
makes the truth conditional. For that Caesar on a certain
unspecified assumption in fact crossed the Rubicon is surely
compatible with the assertion that the actual fact is also
otherwise. Your judgement is but conditional, because (if
I may repeat this once more) you have failed to get within
the judgement the condition of the judgement.! And the
accomplishment of this (if it were possible) would invelve
the essential transformation of your judgement.

The absolute view of perfect truth and of sheer error rests,
" we saw, on the idea that separate facts and truths are self-
contained and possess independent reality. And such an
idea (we have argued) must be rejected in the end ; but this


1 In order to include uniqueness within the judgement ‘ Caesar crossed
the Rubicon’ you would require (I should say) not less than two false
assumptions, and with anything less must fail. (i) You want (a) an
assumption that there is only one possible order in space and time—an as-
sumption which in my opinion is not true (Appearance, chap. xviii); or
(2), failing this, you must include a definition of the particular order
which you mean. (ii) Having got so far, (2) you must make a further
assumption that within your unique order there is no possible recurrence
of ‘ Caesar ’—and this assumption again to my mind is quite untenable.
Or you must (as you cannot) define the ‘this’ of that Caesar which you
mean. The reader will of course understand that the above unique order,
with its exclusion of possible recurrence of ‘ Caesar’, has got to be made
true unconditionally of the Universe.


266 ON APPEARANCE, ERROR CHAP.


does not mean that the absolute view is to be rejected alto-
gether. We are told (to repeat this) that to those who
accept a real Absolute, and with it a relative view of truth,
everything in particular becomes so much the same that the
distinctions which give value to life disappear. But such a
charge, I pointed out, is due mainly to misunderstanding.
Within limits and in their proper place our relative view in-
sists everywhere on the value and on the necessity of absolute
judgements, both as to right and wrong and as to error and
truth. Life in general and knowledge in particular rest on
distinction and on the division of separate regions. And,
though these divided regions are not independent and each
self-contained, yet within each to a very large extent you
must proceed as if this were so. If you ask me, for instance,
whether there is truth in the statement that 2 + 2= 5, I
answer that (though I am ignorant of mathematics) I believe
this to be sheer error. The world of mathematics, that is,
I understand to rest upon certain conditions, and under these
conditions there is within mathematics pure truth and utter
error. It is only when you pass (to speak in general) beyond
a special science, and it is only when you ask whether the
very conditions of that science are absolutely true and real,
that you are forced to reject this absolute view. The same
thing holds once more with regard to ‘ matters of fact’.
Obviously the construction in space and time which I call
‘my real world’ must be used; and obviously, within
limits, this construction must be taken as the only world
which exists.4 And, so far as we assume this, we of course


-1 Cf. Chapters III and XVI. Apart from a certain reservation as to
dreams and dreamlike states, this ‘real world’ is the world of practice.
The difference in practice, between my reaching here and now my end
and failing to reach it, may be said to be absolute. And this absolute
difference is thus fully preserved in our relative view. We must remember
here, on the other side, that the ends to be realized in my practice cannot
all be said to belong to my ‘real world’, and are certainly not all ‘ prac-
tical’. No doctrine of practice for the sake of practice will stand before
an inquiry into the meaning of ‘ practice’,


Ix - AND CONTRADICTION - 267


can have at once simple error and mere truth. Thus the
doctrine which I advocate contains and subordinates what
we have called the absolute view, and in short justifies it
relatively.

On the other side, even within the special sciences and
within the world of practical life, the absolute view of truth
has its limits. The ideas which we use within the special
sciences are hardly’self-consistent, and in our practical life
we experience the collision of discordant principles. And it
is now an old story that, even if the worlds of our diverse
interests were each at one with itself, at all events these
worlds can conflict with one another. Assuredly it is not
merely within philosophy that the absolute view of error and
truth is driven to suggest itself as false. But for philosophy,
as I at least understand it, the reason is plain, All ideas in
the end, if we except those of metaphysics, lack ultimate
truth. They may be called working conceptions, good and
true so far as they work. And, because they work, and
because nothing else could work so well, there is therefore
nothing better and nothing truer than such ideas, each in its
own proper place ; since nothing else could possibly be more
relative to our needs. But these ideas are not consistent
either with one another or even with themselves, and they
come short of that which we demand as truth. How far and
in what sense even within metaphysics that demand can be
satisfied, I have discussed elsewhere.


1 Appearance, pp. 544 foll. How far (we may ask here in passing) are
the ideas used by metaphysics to be called ‘ working conceptions’? (i)
In the first place these ideas are not merely ‘instrumental’, They are
not mere means to some end outside of, or other than, understanding.
And (ii) they are not means to, or elements in, the understanding merely
of one limited region. On the contrary, metaphysics aims at under-
standing the world in principle, in general and as one whole. The ideas
used for this purpose, since they work, may, if we please, be called working
conceptions, They are again all imperfect, and all differ in the degree
in which they approach and fall short of perfection. But the main point
is this, that, in order to work metaphysically, these ideas must themselves
have the character of the metaphysical end. They do not merely conduce


268 ON APPEARANCE, ERROR CHAP.


The doctrine that thereis no perfect truth or sheer error may
be said to conflict with Common Sense, if you understand
by that term the fixed prejudices of one-sided reflection.!
This is the Common Sense which we too often find with the
specialist and in the market-place. But if Common Sense is
taken more widely, the above conflict disappears. Is it after
all a paradox that our conceptions tend all more or less to be
one-sided, and that life as a whole is something higher and
something truer than those fragmentary ideas by which we
seek to express and formulate it? Is it after all the man
who is most consistent who on the whole attains to greatest
truth ? To most, if not to all of us, I should have thought
that there came moments when it seemed clear that the
Universe is too much everywhere for our understanding.
Any truth of ours, no matter what, fails to contain the
entirety of that which it tries to embrace, and hence is falsi-
fied by the reality. There is always another side, which we
may be right or may be wrong to ignore, but, we being
limited as we are, there must for us be of necessity another
side. And indeed the whole conclusion which I advocate
here on the ground of metaphysics, far from being para-
doxical, comes near, I should say, to platitude. If I were not
convinced of its truth on the ground of metaphysics, I should
still believe it upon instinct. And, though I am willing
to concede that my metaphysics may be wrong, there is,
I think, nothing which could persuade me that my instinct
is not right.


II. I will pass on from this to remark briefly on one of
the points which remain. Error, appearance and truth, we
have seen, do not in their proper sense belong to feeling.


to a foreign purpose, but are themselves the very existence in which their
end and principle is realized. The phrase ‘working conceptions’ tends,
I think, to suggest that this is otherwise, and hence it seems to me safer
not to apply it to the ideas of metaphysics, __

+ On Common Sense and Consistency cf. Chap. V, pp. 123-4, 132-3;
and, again, Chap. XV, p. 430.


IX AND CONTRADICTION 269


And again in their proper sense they on our view are tran-
scended in the Absolute. Taken as such and in their special
character they belong to what we may call the intellectual
middle-space, the world of reflection and of sundered ideas
and of explicit relations. But (and this is the point on which
I wish to insist) the middle-space is not detached and it does
not float. Not only do all ideas without exception qualify
the Real, but ideas everywhere are only so far as they are
felt. Ideas exist nowhere except so far as they belong
integrally to the world of some finite centre.

It may repay us to consider the matter further with
regard specially to Contradiction. The self-contradictory, I
suppose most of us would agree, is unreal. And yet, since
we discuss it, it is clear that the self-contradictory in some
sense exists. Whether this is a problem which presses more
on those who agree with me than on those who differ, I will
not here discuss. The problem was noticed by myself some
years ago (Mind, No. 20, p. 482), and I have returned to it
later (Mind, No. 43, p. 308, and No. 60, p. 455); 1 and I will
once more here offer the solution which seems satisfactory.

The reader will recall that on our view there is in feeling:
no contradiction as such. We feel uneasiness and change,
and we have in feeling. contents which do not agree? An
experience of this kind may be intense, but.it gives no.
awareness of contradiction, and that it should give this
seems impossible. For, however gredt our uneasiness, how-
ever discordant and unstable our condition, whatever comes
in feeling must come together and must come somehow in
one. So far as feeling goes, we may say that an unknown
condition of union is implied and is operative. And this
state of things is again present in those perceived contents


1 See Chap. III, p. 41, note, and Chap. X, p. 302.

2 Cf. Chap. VI, pp. 168 foll., 174. I may perhaps be permitted to
mention here, in passing, that I do not venture to derive change from
inconsistency. I think it better to take change as belonging to the incon-
sistent finite, but exactly how we do not know.


270 ON APPEARANCE, ERROR CHAP,


which no analysis breaks up, and in various forms it under-
lies the mere conjunctions of our confused thinking. Con-
tradiction in the proper sense is made only by reflection.!
It is when diversities are referred to and located in the same
point that they clash. When we analyse (and to think we
must analyse), the immediate bond of union, with its un-
known condition, is perforce more or less discarded. The
diversities can hence no longer come to us as somehow
conjoined. . And, attempting to connect them simply,
‘thought forces them into an open conflict, where our felt
uneasiness is developed before us into explicit contradic-
tion. Within was a felt conjunction which failed to satisfy
and caused disquiet and unrest. And it is the break-
ing up of this congeries, and it is the attempt to identify
differences apart from any condition of union, which
turns our inward unrest into the collision of a perceived
discrepancy.

But (and this is once more the point which we should
emphasize) there is no such thing as a mere contradiction,
just as there cannot be any such thing in the world as a bare
negation. Every negation (I have dealt with this elsewhere)
must have a positive ground. And every contradiction!
implies in some sense the actual conjunction of that which,
clashes. Within feeling, as we saw, and in many cases even
within sensuous perception, the discrepant elements were,
by virtue of an unknown condition, together in one whole.
And when these elements pass into judgement and are seen

1 See Appearance, Appendix, Note A. The reader will remember that
we have diversities which can sensuously be in one and ‘ coinhere’, and
other diversities where we find that this is not possible. An inconsistency
like change, for instance, can be felt and perceived (so far as appears)
immediately: and simply. An inconsistency, again, such as a round
square, cannot be perceived or felt apart from some further complication.
This distinction possesses on certain views, which I think erroneous,.a
fundamental importance. But a thing to me is not self-consistent or real -


because it is present in feeling or to perception. Beside the pages of
Appearance just referred to, the reader will and some further discussion


in Mind, No. 20, pp. 475-81.


IX AND CONTRADICTION 271


to collide, they nevertheless, in order to collide, must in some
way be perceived to coexist. ;

When I think of contraries I first take them as being
somehow separated and yet conjoined. The special nature
of this ‘ somehow ’, this known or unknown condition, will
vary in different cases, but it here is irrelevant.1_ Then in
thought I remove this imaginary condition of both apartness
and union, with the result that the diverse elements tend to
be forced together in one point. On this ensues a clash and
a divergence, with a recognized failure. And, generalizing
this experience, we now set down the elements as contraries.
We say that they are such as not to be predicable of one and
the same subject, the truth being that we have abstracted
from them and from the subject every condition of union.
But the above experience is possible only because the con-
trary elements are not simple contraries. In order to per-'
ceive them or to think of them, even as repellent, they must’
be still before us in a medium in which so far somehow they;
do not collide. And obviously they and our whole know-'
ledge of their collision must be felt. It must depend on
a positive and an immediate awareness within my finite
centre. ;

Contradiction in the: proper sense thus belongs to the
middle space of our reflective world, and it may be said to
inhabit that region, or rather part of that region, which lies
between feeling and perfect experience. But contradiction
is perceived nowhere except on the ground of a neutral con-
junction, present to sense or imagination, and it is possible


1 When I, for instance, think of a round square, I may for the moment
- drop out of view the special meaning of these words, and couple them as
if they were some other adjectives, like ‘cold’ and ‘ green’, which can
together qualify a perceived thing. Or, if I realize the meaning of ‘round’
and ‘square’, I may drop out of view the identity of the space which
these adjectives are to qualify. I take the round space and the square
space as being somehow diverse; or again I may deliberately represent
them as two surfaces, one lying over the other, and so compatible. The
moment, however, that I suppress the diversities and make these spaces
really one, a collision takes place and the round square is destroyed.


2720 ON APPEARANCE, ERROR CHAP.


only because in the end it rests and is based on felt positive
experience. And contradiction, we may add, is erroneous
only because it is deficient, because the condition on which
the contraries were conjoined is in part suppressed, and
because the condition of their higher unity has not been
supplied. We should, however, remind ourselves that this
problem, like other problems, is but soluble in part. The
immediate immanence of the one Reality in finite centres
has always to be presupposed ; and this fact, we have seen
from the first, remains inexplicable.


III. I will end by touching on a difficulty which was
noticed some years ago by Prof. Stout.1_ The Absolute must
really have appearances or it could not appear, and hence the
appearances (it is objected) cannot really be mere appear-
‘ance. Before discussing this, I would first mention that on
my view there is not and cannot be any such thing as a mere
appearance.” The reader next should recall the twofold -
meaning of the word ‘appearance’. That sense of the
term in which something appears to some one, we have
seen, is secondary. What is fundamental is (as we have
seen) the presence in everything finite of that which takes
it beyond itself.

Having removed from our minds. these possible miscon-
ceptions, we may address ourselves to the above dilemma.
Are we to maintain that the Absolute does really appear ?
If we answer No, then it seems to follow that nothing
appears. But if on the other hand we say Yes, then finite
centres seem at once to have become absolutely real. Our
true reply, as I understand the matter, is to say ‘ Yes, but
also and in the end No’. The Absolute really appears, but
the conditions of its appearance are not known.? Our


1 Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, ‘Mr. Bradley’s Theory of
Judgement,’ pp. 27-8. 2 Appearance, pp. 557-8.

* This again is in principle the answer to the objection urged by Prof.
Royce (The World and the Individual, Series i, pp. 550 foll.}. The ob-
jection, as I understand it, rests on the assumption that the transcendence


xX AND CONTRADICTION 273


former statement therefore is defective, and comes short of

truth in the highest sense of that word. It needs correction

somehow, but how to correct it we are unable to discover.

Nor can we even take our statement to be in the end cor-

rigible by any mere intelligence. Hence on the one side,

‘because nothing intelligible can be set against it, its truth
is ultimate and final; while on the other side that truth
remains defective and must in a sense be called untrue.
The real appearance of the Absolute in finite centres is a
thing which therefore in the above sense can rationally be
at once affirmed and denied. The same reply holds once
more with regard to the ultimate reality of degrees, There
is a point where the ‘how’ of things passes beyond the
nature of our vision, and where our knowledge, because
defective, is condemned in a sense to remain erroneous.

On the other hand, since there is nothing which can be
opposed to our main conclusion, that conclusion is certain,

and we may rest on it as finally true. All understanding
and truth, upon my view, to reach its end passes beyond
itself. It is perfect only when beyond itself in a fuller
reality. But short of such a completion, and while truth

remains mere truth, there are assertions which are so far

ultimate and utterly true. This general explanation of the

proposed difficulty was offered in my volume (Appearance,

PP. 544-5). Ishould hardly exaggerate if I added that the

view of truth and reality which, I think, solves the above

dilemma, is really the beginning and the end of that volume.

It is at any rate a conclusion offered as something which can

stand between us and a logical issue in theoretical scepticism.

It is a doctrine which to my mind is less one-sided than

others, and, so far as I can judge, the criticisms directed

against it have left it unshaken. This is, however, a point

on which the decision must rest with the reader.


of the relational form, which is experienced in the Absolute, must itself
be in the relational form, or else be nothing. But it is precisely the oppo-
site of any such alternative which, at least I have contended, is true.

1574 T


CHAPTER IX


SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE I


SINCE the publication of the foregoing paper there have
appeared (in the Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1910-11)
two essays dealing with the subject of Error. The first of these,
by Dr. Schiller, makes, so far as I see, no contribution to the
discussion of the subject, but the second, by Prof. Stout, has, as
was natural, a different character. Without any claim that he
some years back ‘inaugurated the modern theory of Error’!
(whatever that may be), Prof. Stout addresses himself directly
to deal with the well-known difficulties of the problem.

His essay, interesting as it is, I have found extremely hard
to understand. If Prof. Stout’s main doctrine is that Error
consists in treating what is only possible as if it were actual, his
main conclusion would seem to differ hardly, if at all, from that
which I have advocated. It would apparently be another way
of saying that Error takes the conditional as being categorical
and absolute. And, again, Prof. Stout’s solution of the question
as to how we can think of the contradictory, seems to me (perhaps
wrongly) to be the same in principle as that which I have offered
myself.2 But, apart from Prof. Stout’s criticism of myself, to
which I will return, there are other things which point to a diver-
gence of our views.

Prof. Stout’s account of error implies to my mind (perhaps
mistakenly) the metaphysical doctrine that all possibilities are,
as such, ultimately real. If this is his position, he seems to me
not to appreciate the difficulties by which it is beset. But, if
this is not his position, I have failed to understand how exactly
it differs here from my own. Certainly Prof. Stout’s apparent
acceptance of the doctrine * that the difference between an actual


i This claim (I do not suggest that Prof. Stout approves) is made on his
behalf by Dr. Schiller, p. 156.

? See Chap. III, p. 41, and Chap. JX, pp. 269-71.

* I have discussed this matter in Chap. III. The conclusion there
advocated hag (so far as I know not been met otherwise than by being
simply ignored.


Ix SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE I * 278


and possible object does not lie in the object’s content, tends to
make a chasm in principle between our ways of approaching the
matter. But until Prof. Stout deals with the whole subject of
Error and of Reality more fully, I can hardly hope myself to
estimate the amount and the nature of our disagreement.

How great, in one sense at least, that disagreement is, may be
seen from the criticism offered by Prof. Stout on myself. He
says, on p. 199, ‘ My position [is ?], that whatever is thought,
in so far as it is thought, is therefore real. His [Mr. Bradley’s]
position is, that whatever is thought, in so far as it is thought,
is therefore unreal.’ I should have said that no one, except
Prof. Bosanquet, has emphasized more strongly than myself the
impossibility of thinking anything which is unreal. And the
exact sense in which for instance the possible, as such, is: real
for Prof. Stout and is not real for me, is precisely the point which,
so’ far as I see, he does not explain. Again it is said that
according to me ‘ the whole development of thinking conscious-
ness resolves itself into an endeavour to reconstitute the unity

_ which it has destroyed’. But this, I have tried to point out, is
not my view. The unity at which thought aims lies beyond
that from which it starts. Otherwise the consequence would
follow that, the more you think, the more you remove yourself
from reality, nor could such a consequence well escape the
notice of any one who has learned from Hegel. In short, for
a satisfactory discussion between Prof. Stout and myself, each
of us should take account of the sense or senses in which the
other of us understands reality. And since I do not know of any
sufficient explanation as to the sense in which the possible
according to Prof. Stout is real, I cannot in the end judge as to
the meaning of his account of Error. It would be a satisfaction
to me to find that really in the main we are agreed. But in any
case I should hope to profit, if Prof. Stout would return to
a problem at once so interesting and so difficult.

Since writing the above I have read the remarks in Prof.
Bosanquet’s Logic (Ed. II), vol.i, pp. 383-4. I am glad to find
that he considers that Prof. Stout and himself come to much the
same conclusion, for certainly I accept the view of Error taken
by Prof. Bosanquet.

With regard to the latter’s two cases of error I shold under-
stand them as follows, :

T2


276 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE I CHAP.


(i) Wherever S—P is asserted, it is asserted as real, and therefore
as fully mediated. Hence, so far as the condition of the judge-
ment falls outside the judgement, we have error. We have that
which can be at pleasure affirmed or denied. And, even where
S-P is asserted of a sphere limited by designation, we still have
error in the above sense, since we fail to get into the judgement
the full conditions under which, in this sphere, S and P hold to-
gether. Error is so far, we may say, the assertion of the un-
mediated as mediated.

(ii) Where S—P is affirmed of a certain designated world, S-P
also may contain and depend on a condition x1, which condition
is incompatible with a condition x* taken to be present in the
designated world. S—P therefore is valid elsewhere but not in
this world. Whether the condition x? is viewed as positive or
as privative makes no difference. Error here consists in dis-
crepancy with something limited which is taken as absolutely
real. This, I understand, is the kind of error of which I have
spoken in Chap. IX, p. 266.

Error is always difference between an idea and reality. And
hence in the end all truth is in varying degrees error, and, on the
other side, no error is absolute. For every idea, to be an idea,
must be real. But, where the reality has been for any purpose
limited, and is viewed in this character as absolute—so far we
can have unconditional truth and utter error. This is the
doctrine which I understand to be advocated by Prof. Bosanquet
and myself. If I could think that Prof. Stout also had now
been led to a conclusion much the same, that result would be
welcome. In any case I am sure that the subject would gain
if he would discuss it further.


SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE II?


In this Supplementary Note I propose to deal briefly with
two subjects. (I.) I wish to examine the doctrine as to Number
advocated by Prof. Royce in The World and the Individual,
First Series. And (II.) I must attempt to show that some of
the main ideas on which Mr. Russell’s views seem to rest, are
inconsistent and ultimately untenable. It is with great reluctance

1 This Note is from the article in Mind for April 1910.


Ix SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE II 279


that I enter upon either undertaking. I am ignorant of mathe-
matics, not willingly but through radical incapacity ; and again
(it is perhaps the same defect) I cannot follow any train of
reasoning which is highly abstract. If under these circumstances
what I am about to write proves worthless, no apology, it is clear,
can help me. The reader in that case must*judge of me as seems
to him best.


I. I understand Prof. Royce to contend that number and
truths about number can be constructed a priori, and that
these truths are completely unconditional and self-consistent.
The origin in time of our perception of number and quantity
he, I understand, does not discuss, and we are concerned simply
with what may be called an act of logical creation. I will ask
first as to the nature of the process, and next as to the character
of the result.

The process of creation appears to consist in reflection, a
process more or less familiar to students of philosophy. We
are to think of some object (no matter what), and then we are
to think of our. thought of this object, and so on indefinitely.
In this way we gain (it is contended) an ordinal series where the
process contains no unknown condition, and where the result is -
consistent. Now I agree that in the above way we produce some-
how a series which is ordinal, in the sense that each fresh product
somehow contains and preserves what has gone before. I do
not mean that, after reflecting in such a manner for a certain
time, I know in fact where I am, and could say how many steps
are included in my present result. To gain that knowledge I
should say that a further operation.is required. Still I admit
(what is, I presume, the main point) that through the process of
reflection an ordinal series is somehow generated. What I have
to deny is first (a) that the generation consists in pure thought, and
next (5) I have to deny that the product is consistent with itself.

(a) You have an object (O):before your self (S). You then
go on to reflect that this is so; and in consequence you now
have a new object (S—O) before you. A further reflection of |


s
the same kind gives an object (S— i ), and thus you make an


ordinal series which has in principle no end. Now what is the


278 . SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE II CHAP.


nature of this process? Prof. Royce contends that all that you

«start with is not a one in many, nor even a mere many, but
simply an object. This is all that there is, and then’pure thought
(I understand) supervenes and produces the result. Here I join
issue. I can no more accept Prof. Royce’s doctrine than I can
accept what is often understood as the process of Hegel’s dialectic.
I do not believe in any operation which falls out of the blue upon
a mere object. On the contrary I maintain that with an object
you have, and you must have, a felt self. And I urge that this
felt self is a one in many and many in one, which for the intellect
remains incomprehensible, and which therefore for the intellect
depends on an unknown condition. Hence you really start
with a felt subject (S) which is complex, and which contains in
itself the object (O), which is both felt in it and opposed to it.
Whether we ever in fact have an O which is single, I need not
stop to discuss. In any case your experience at the start is
complex, and you have a demand on the part of this experience
to make the object adequate to the whole subject, and to carry
out the subject into the object. This is the basis and this is the
impulse which (I contend) sets up the process of reflection. And
the process cannot end, because to make O=S would destroy
in principle the whole éxperience. To come to an end the process
must simply cease, or else lapse back, or else be taken up into
something higher.

Thus the series of reflection is generated by and through the
unity of immediate experience. And this unity is a one in
many and a many in one which for thought is not intelligible or
unconditional. It is this totality which for ever demands an
expression which is unattainable within our relational experience,
or within any experience for which the object is against the
subject in some way which we are unable to understand. The
principle of the process therefore does not reside in pure thought,
but on the contrary must be said to imply a mere conjunction.
And any process other than the above to my mind is even impos-
sible. There is for me no such thing as a mere object or mere
objects, nor any process of reflection which falls down from
nowhere.

(0) Prof. Royce insists that both process and product are
self-consistent and free from all contradiction. If what I have
already urged is correct, no such claim can be admitted. -An


Ix SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE II - — 279


immediate totality, unless you allow and include an unknown
condition, cannot without inconsistency be formulated in»
thought. If the one is not one of the many, it seems to be
nothing, and if it 7s one of the many, there is no one left in which
the many can be. There is therefore either an unknown con-
dition or else a self-contradiction. So again with the whole and
its parts. So again with the class and its members, a matter to
which later in this Note Ishallreturn. We have a difference which
cannot be, and yet must be, and we have to choose between
a self-contradiction and the admission of an unintelligible con-
dition. So again with subject and object. These have got to
be different, or what are they ? On the other side the difference
of the object excludes perfect satisfaction. The end is not
reached except for a passing moment. The object therefore both
must remain, and yet cannot remain, over against the subject.
There is a ‘ beyond ’, to be for ever asserted and denied. The
formula is ‘ Realize the subject as object beyond any object ’, and
surely such a formula is not self-consistent. .For myself I urge
that there is here an unknown condition and that so the contra-
diction is avoided. But how Prof. Royce can avoid it I am
unable to say.

Hence the principle which generates the series carries within
itself a difference and a negation, which it at once asserts and
denies. To Prof. Royce, on the other hand, the principle is
wholly positive (p. 520) ; but how that can be I fail to perceive,
The illustration, again, advanced by Prof. Royce (pp. 503 foll.)
appears to myself to contain an obvious and glaring fallacy
(cf. Prof. Taylor’s Elements of Metaphysics, p.150). The idea of
a copy which has not an existence different from, and so far
negative of, its original, remains to me meaningless. If you
take away the idea of another existence, another and a different
medium and fact, you for my mind abolish the essential element
of copying and representation. And yet, according to Prof.
Royce, the coming into existence of the copy is not to alter the
fact. And, while I hesitate to attribute to Prof. Royce such an
open inconsistency, I have.been unable in any other way to inter-
pret his teaching. I must end therefore by submitting that
both principle and product are self-contradictory in essence.
And I have already urged that the process is not unconditional
and ‘ pure’.


-280 _ SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE II CHAP.


Finally there is a question on which I would invite the reader
to reflect’ The empirical origin of our sense of more and less,
of quantity and of number I am willing to treat here as being
irrelevant. But another question remains which can hardly
be dismissed, How far does our arithmetic depend upon spatial
schemata ?1 How far can we rid ourselves of the datum of space
as percéived, and how far is this datum ultimately consistent
and intelligible ? I raise no separate doubt as to time, since our
developed perception of time itself appears largely to be spatial.
How far, even to think of (I do ot say to experience) the relation
of object to subject, are we forced to make this a spatial relation
to something which certainly is not in space ? And the endless
process of reflection on reflection, how far without a spatial

‘scheme can any such process exist ? And what in the end holds
our ordinal series both apart and together? These questions
to my mind are very relevant, but I can do no more than suggest
them to the reader. Apart from any answer to them, I have -
however endeavoured to show that Prof. Royce’s generation of
number is, in the form in which he advocates it, not proof against
criticism. I cannot however end without thanking him for the
service which hé has done in calling attention to issues, the
importance of which, I am sure, he in no way exaggerates.


II. I have now to remark on some of the fundamental ideas
used by Mr. Russell, and must endeavour to show that these
ideas contain inconsistency. It is a task to which in one sense
I am quite unequal. I am incompetent utterly to sit in judge-
ment on Mr. Russell’s great work (Principles of Mathematics).
But, if the mathematical part is as good as the part which is
philosophical, I am sure that he has produced a book of singular
merit. To confine myself here to a one-sided criticism of ideas
which I can only partially comprehend, is ungrateful to me, and
I could not do it if I did not feel myself in a sense compelled to
_ say something.

I understand Mr. Russell to hold that mathematical truth is
true perfectly and in the end, since the principles as well as the
inferences are wholly valid. The fundamental ideas, I under-


1 I of course do not mean visual schemata. Obviously that could not be
true of every mind. But of how many minds it would be true is, again,
another question.


Ix SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE II © 281


stand, are throughout self-consistent. If there were an exception
the extent of its influence would raise a question at once of the
most formidable kind, and the main doctrine obviously would be
imperilled. But this is a point on which, through my own
incapacity, I have been unable to appreciate Mr, Russell’s
decision. I must therefore, passing this by, go on to inquire as
to the consistency of some leading ideas.

I encounter at the outset a great difficulty. Mr. Russell’s
main position has remained to myself incomprehensible. On
the one side I am led to think that he defends a strict pluralism,
for which nothing is admissible beyond simple terms and external
relations. On the other side Mr. Russell seems to assert empha-
tically, and to use throughout, ideas which such a pluralism
surely must repudiate. He throughout stands upon unities
which are complex and which cannot be analysed into terms and
relations. These two positions to my mind are irreconcilable,
since the second, as I understand it, contradicts the first flatly.
If there are such unities, and, still more, if such unities are funda-
mental, then pluralism surely is in principle abandoned as false.
Mr. Russell, I cannot doubt, is prepared here with an answer,
but I have been unable to discover in what this answer consists.
To urge that these unities are indefinable would to myself be
merely irrelevant. If they had no meaning they could serve no
purpose, and the question is with regard to their meaning. If
that is not consistent with itself or with Mr. Russell’s main doc-
trine, then that meaning is not admissible as true, unless it is
taken subject to an unknown condition. But, if so taken, that
meaning, I would urge, is not ultimate truth, For a certain
purpose, obviously, one can swallow whole what one is unable to _
analyse ; but I cannot see how, with this, we have rid ourselves
of the question as to ultimate truth. ;

On my own position here I need not dwell. For me immediate
experience gives us a unity and unities of one and many, which
unities are not completely analysable or intelligible, and which
unities are self-contradictory unless you take them as subject to
an unknown condition. Such a form of unity seems.to me to be
in principle the refutation of pluralism, and on the other side it
more or less vitiates the absolute claim of all truths (I cannot
stop here to make the required qualification) including those of
mathematics. Now what is Mr. Russell’s attitude towards


282 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE II CHAP.


a position of this kind ? On the one hand I understand him to
reject it most decidedly. On the other hand, wherever anything
like ‘implication’ or ‘ unity’ is involved (and how much have
we left where these are excluded ?), Mr. Russell seems to myself
to embrace a conclusion which in principle I find it hard to
distinguish from my own. And, it being clear to me that there
is something here which I have failed to comprehend, I must
leave this fundamental issue and go on to consider some difficulties
more in detail.

The notion of ‘ implication ’,1 I understand Mr. Russell to say,
is necessary for mathematics; and let us consider very briefly
what this notion involves. It seems to mean (if it means any-
thing) that something is both itself and more than itself. There
is a difference here which is both affirmed and denied; for of
course that anything should imply merely itself is meaningless.
But how can anything be at once itself and in any sense not-itself ?
Mr. Russell leaves us here, so far as I have seen, without any
assistance. But with this we are face to face with the familiar
problem of the one and many, the universal and particular. We
are driven back to the immediate experience where the whole is in
the parts and where, through the whole, the parts are in one
another. But such an immediate experience seems in the first
place (I would repeat) to contradict pluralism, and in the second
place it offers by itself no theoretical solution. The same
difficulty appears in “such that’. If this phrase does not mean
that a particular is also a universal, and with a certain conse-
quence, it surely has no meaning at all. But how to justify this
necessary inconsistency Mr. Russell does not tell us. Among
other fundamental troubles of the same kind I would mention
the ideas of ‘ occupation’ and of ‘magnitude of’. Certainly
Mr. Russell asserts here the existence of a relation, but this
assertion to my mind seems obviously opposed to fact, and once
more I find an unjustified recourse to the inconsistency of imme-
diate experience. ;

I will enter now on some instances of a somewhat different
kind, where however the difficulty remains at bottom the same.
I will not repeat what in a former chapter I have urged with regard

* In connexion with ‘implication’ the axioms given by Mr. Russell


(p. 16) demand the attention of logicians. But want of space makes it
impossible for me to offer here any criticism.


IX SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE II 283


to the word ‘ And’ (Chap. VIII, p. 231). Its relevancy and its
importance in this connexion however are obvious. But, leaving
this, I will touch briefly on the subject of relation and identity.
Mr. Russell, I. understand, defends ‘and builds on such an idea
as the relation of a term to itself. This idea to my mind is
unmeaning or else self-contradictory. To my mind a relation
must imply terms, and terms which are distinct and therefore
different from one another; and our only ground for thinking
otherwise in any case is our failure to apprehend the diversity
which has really been introduced. Mr. Russelt in particular
uses and justifies the abstract identity of a term with itself.
He does not, I think, say the same thing here with regard to
difference. But, if difference is a relation (and, if it is not a
relation, its nature seems puzzling), and, if again all relations
are external,—then the difference of a term from itself seems as
justifiable as its identity with itself. For, ex hyp., it is all one
to the term what its relations are. But, however that may be,
Mr. Russell defends identity between a term and itself. And
this idea surely contradicts itself, since (to repeat this) diversity
is required for relation, and Mr. Russell would not admit that
the idea can be at once the same with itself and different from
itself. He attempts to justify his doctrine here by producing
a number of examples (p. 96). But I can see no meaning in any
of these unless diversity is introduced, and I will lower down
say something more with regard to one instance.

I will proceed now to remark more in detail on thé incon-
sistency of such an idea as ‘class’. We have here no fresh
difficulty in principle, any more than if we examined, for example,
such a word as ‘instance’. It is still the old problem of the
universal, and of the one in the many, and the dilemmas which
everywhere arise change their particular shape but not their
radical essence. Mr. Russell however has attached great impor-
tance to the problem raised specially by the word ‘class’,
I regret that my incapacity for following abstract arguments has
prevented me in great part from understanding the position
which he has here taken up. But J will venture briefly to
exhibit some of the puzzles and inconsistencies from which
I cannot find that he delivers us.

I will first remark that no class can be related merely to itself.

‘We have seen above that everywhere relation without diversity


284 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE II CHAP.


is meaningless. In the next place no class can consist only of
one member. Such an idea is a fiction which contradicts itself.
It ceases to do this only when you introduce plurality in the
form of possible members. Where these are excluded, as in the
idea of the Universe, you can no longer speak of a class. The
Universe obviously is no class nor any member of a class of
Universes. And in any case, with the introduction of possibility
into the idea of class, difficulties would arise, which, as I under-
stand it, on Mr. Russell’s view would be fatal. The idea of
possibility, I may perhaps add, seems to call for an attention on
his part which it appears hardly to have received. The account on
page 476 seems scarcely adequate, and the idea, Isubmit, must be
dealt with in any satisfactory account of Continuity and Infinity.
After this necessary preface I will set out briefly the inherent
inconsistency of ‘class’. (a) The class is many. It is its
members. There is no entity external to and other than the
members. Theclassisacollection. And it is not a mere possible
collection, nor is it a collection of mere possibles. Either of these
alternatives would ruin the idea of class, as could be shown, if
required. The class is an actual collection of actuals. But it is
a collection which is not collected by itself (that idea would seem
meaningless), nor is it again collected by anything from the
outside—for, if so, it would have to contain this other agency.
It is a collection, since it is taken together ; but it is a collection
collected by nothing—an idea, which seems either senseless or
self-contradictory.
(0) The class is One, but the One is not something else outside

-the members. The members even seem to be members because
of what each is internally. And this apparent quality in each
cannot be a relation to something outside the class. The One
clearly is something within the members. If there are two
qualities they must be taken in one, or else we have forthwith
two classes. And (to return to the idea of a collection) two
collections, differing only as collections and not differing at all
in their contents, seem certainly not the idea which we seek in a
class. On the other hand a quality merely internal to each
member seems to leave the class without any unity at all. The
unity therefore, not being external, must be taken itself as a
member of the class. And, since this once more seems senseless,
the class appears to be dissolved.


IX SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE II 285


To save ourselves from ruin we may construct a new class
which is wider, and which includes within itself, as members,
both the members of the old class and their unity. But since
the principle of inconsistency is left, any such expedient is useless.
We are forced once more to dissolve our class and to seek refuge
in a still wider class. And, when we have reached our widest
class of ali, our bankruptcy is visibly exposed. We are then
compelled openly to make the class as one a single member of
itself as many. And with this we end in what is meaningless or
else plainly is in contradiction with itself.

The discussion of these inconsistencies (the reader is perhaps
aware) might be pursued almost ad libitum. Since the class
cannot fall outside the several members, each member by itself
will be the class, and will even be the whole class. And from
this will follow results which are obviously ruinous. For instance,
the member itself will become many, and will be internally
dissipated. But the reader, if so inclined, can develop these
consequences for himself, as well as the puzzles which arise in
connexion with the ideas of ‘ a collection ’ and of what is ‘ actual ’
and ‘ possible’. I have, I hope, said enough to show that the
idea of class is inconsistent ultimately, and that every region
where it is employed must be more or less infected with self-
contradiction.

How Mr. Russell would avoid this conclusion I regret to say
I have been unable to understand. He apparently defends the
idea of a class being a member of itseli—an idea which to myself
contains a glaring self-contradiction. And, as we have seen, he
advocates the doctrine that a term can be related to itself—
a view which for the same reason I am forced to reject. In every
instance adduced, such, for example, as ‘ Predicability is pre-
dicable ’, I find (I would repeat) a distinction and difference, or
else I find nothing. The reader will permit me perhaps to illus-
trate and explain this statement by the instance of ‘ being’.
I do not reject as meaningless such a judgement as ‘ being is’
or ‘isis’. TI only insist that, in order to have a meaning, I must
introduce distinction and diversity. I might, for instance, mean
by such an assertion that only or merely being is and that any-
thing else must be denied. I might wish to convey that after all,
or whatever else it is, being still is. I might in the end mean
that in ‘ being’ itself there is the distinction and diversity of


286 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE II CHAP,


‘what’ and ‘ that’, and might imply that either of these thus
‘is’, and yet that each of them is so different from‘ being’
that our assertion ‘is is’ may be significant. And then I might
go on to urge, of ‘ what’ and ‘that’, that each is included‘in-
the class of the other, and that each is a part of the other and
so perhaps even of itself. And in short I might develop all
those monstrous results which follow when an inconsistent idea
like ‘class’ is taken as true, not for a limited purpose, but
absolutely. : ;

I will end by some remarks on the subject of negation. ‘It
seems to me that negation is a topic which, on a general view like
Mr. Russell’s, causes difficulty, and calls for more notice than (so
far as I can find) it has received. Mr. Russell’s doctrine of zero
to.myself appears to be philosophically untenable ; and in various
other ideas negation is present in a way which seems to me to
require explanation. I will take the last point first in connexion
with such ideas as ‘a’ and ‘any’. (i) ‘A man’ appears to
‘assert one instance of man and to deny more than one man. (ii)
‘ Any man’ seems to affirm that there is a man, and to assert
also the existence of other men actual or possible.? It denies,
with regard to these others, any difference—in a certain respect.
‘Any’ therefore contains negation in its essence in the form
of ‘it does not matter who or what’. (iii) ‘Every man’ and
‘ all men ’ (I will not here discuss the difference between these)
contain the denial of ‘ man ’ outside of certain limits ; while (iv)
‘ some man Or men’ means a man or several men, together with
a negation as tomy further knowledge. It conveys that ‘ I know,
or need know, no more about it than that ’’. Now I do not suggest
that the negation in these terms is a matter with which Mr. Russell
is not perfectly familiar. I am urging merely that-I do not
understand the place which in his general system of ideas negation
is to occupy.

To come now to the account of zero, this idea, unless I have
failed to understand it, seems to contain an open self-contradic-
tion. ‘It would seem that “ no pleasure ” has the same relation
to pleasure as the various magnitudes of pleasure have, though it
has also, of course, the special relation of negation’ (p. 186). The


1 Cf. Chap. X, pp. 295 foll.


2 * Any’ tends to drift away from this assertion, but so tends’ to drift
away from itself, ;


, ix SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE I 287


s


-<alsog here to my mind involves a self-contradiction. To my
‘mind “no pleasure’ excludes pleasure, and by consequence the
‘required relation; and how this consequence is avoided by
Mr. Russell I have been unable to see. On the alleged positive:
relation I have already remarked, and the difficulties attaching
themselves to Mr. Russell’s idea of a kind of magnitude to myself
seem insuperable. Every magnitude has ‘a certain specific
relation to the something of which it is the magnitude. This
gelation is very peculiar, and appears to be incapable of further
definition’. I must repeat with regard to this relation that to
my mind it is a sheer fiction, as is also the relation alleged to
exist in ‘occupation’. The fact is a complex not consisting of
“ot reducible to terms in relation. But, however that may be,
the proposal to unite this relation by an ‘ also’ to the relation of
negation I can only understand as a demand to bring together
simply two elements which exclude each other. And with regard
to ‘ indefinable ’, what troubles me is not that I insist on defining
everything. What troubles me is that, if an indefinable is
‘meaningless, to me it is nothing, and that here the meaning which
I must give to zero (if I am not to leave it meaningless) seems
inconsistent with itself.
” It is intolerable to my mind to speak of ‘ no pleasure’ as being
a decreased lot of pleasure, or, when pleasure is once more
added, to speak of pleasure as being increased. On the other
hand, since to me there is no such thing as bare nothing, and
since all negation rests on a positive basis, you can rightly speak
of diminution when you descend from pleasure to no pleasure,
and, when you pass the other way, you can rightly speak of
increase. But what is this positive something which has here
become less or more, and has become less or more by pleasure ?
To call this something ‘ pleasure’, even where pleasure is speci-
fically excluded, surely involves self-contradiction. And the
same remark applies to any attempt to begin with less than
something, and to increase this until it becomes something, or
to descend by degrees of diminution from something to nothing.
If such ideas are useful, then of course they must be used, but
in the end they do not hold together. But I hasten to add that
I think it probable that on the subject of zero I have wholly
failed to. understand Mr. Russell.
These pages have been written, I would repeat, with great


288 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE II CHAP.


reluctance and with a sense of compulsion. I have felt myself

coming forward, or rather driven, to speak on matters where

on one side I am quite ignorant, and where this ignorance is

_ only too likely to have led me into fatal error. And I have
criticized a writer whose work as a whole I’gm unabke to appre-
ciate, and in connexion with whom I can say nothing on some ‘of
those merits which I am sure are very great, but which are really

- beyond me. And, even where mere metaphysics or mere logic is
concerned, I have had to confine myself here to dissent. I regret
this, for I do not think, amongst those present writers on philo-
sophy whom I know, there is any one who, as compared with
Mr. Russell, calls for more or even for as much attention.” For
any student of first principles that attention seems to me to be
not merely advisable but imperative. The problem of the
general nature of order and series has been too much neglected,
and yet surely it is a problem which seems infinitely promising.
Not only has this inquiry been brought to the front by Mr.
Russell, but he has,-at the lowest estimate, supplied matter for
its solution which no one can neglect. And to have done this by
itself, even if he had done nothing beyond, is to have helped our
philosophy in a way which, I hope and believe, will become more
and more manifest. :


SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE III?


,” THE explanations offered by Mr. Russell in the -July number of
Mind (1910) have been read, I am sure, with interest by many
readers. I unfortunately did not see the number at the proper
time, but still I hope it is not too late to ask Mr. Russell to explain
somewhat further; for in the main I am left still unable to under-
stand. If, however, Mr. Russell should feel that within con-
venient limits there is no more to be done, such a position, so
far as I am concerned, would call for no justification.

x. In the first place, my difficulty as to ‘ unities’ remains.?
Is there anything, I ask, in a unity beside its ‘ constituents’, i.e.


1 From Mind for January 1911.
* On this and some other points cf. Chap. X.


IX SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE III 289


the terms and the relation, and, if there is anything more, in what
does this ‘ more’ consist ? Mr. Russell tells us that we have not
got merely an enumeration or merely an aggregate. Even with
merely: so much I should still have to ask how even so much is.
‘possible,* But, since we seem to have something beyond either, —
the puzzle grows worse. If I remember right, Prof. Stout some
years ago stated the problem as attaching essentially to the fact:
of ‘relatedness’, What is the difference. between a relation
which relates in fact and one which does not so relate? And if
we accept a strict pluralism, where,I urge, have we any room for
this difference ?

2. In the next place, as to ‘ implication ’ my troubles continue,
Tf we have nothing but facts, I see no room for implication, and
if we have anything more or fess than facts, I cannot understand
what this is. . By all means banish possibility as real, but where
among facts does implication fall? Is a disjunction with its
‘Either-or’ an actual fact? Are ‘conditions’ facts? Is ‘de-
ducibility’ a fact >? With regard to facts I thought our attitude
was one of ‘It is’ or (perhaps also) ‘It is not’. I donot in the |
least understand the position of ‘ either-or’ or of ‘can be’ or
‘may be’,

3. I urged against the possibility of a term being related to
itself the fact that relation implies diversity, and I should like to
explain my reason for holding to this fact, Ido not proceed hére
by arguing downwards from some assumption or axiom.!_ I pro-
ceed on the contrary by way of actual experiment. With any
relation remove diversity (this is my experience), and the relation
is destroyed. You have (I find) no relation left unless you alsa
leave that diversity which you may have failed to notice, What
I of course am forced to assume here is that I have correctly
performed my experiment. If Mr. Russell on the other side says
that he can perceive a relation where there is absolutely no
diversity about the terms, I do not see pow we are to argue
about our difference.

4, With regard to diversity, externality a mere fact, the
assumptions (I do not call them such) which I make are as
follows. I assume first that, where I get the unmeaning or the
self-destructive, I have not got even the possible. And I assume
that what is is, in the sense that, so far as I have truth and


; 1 Cf. here Chap. XI, pp. 311 foll.
1574 U


290 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE III CHAP.


reality, I have not got something which is true and real merely
because of something else. This second assumption, if it is to
be called one, bears on the question of externality and mere fact
in a way which I will explain.

(a) But, first, with regard to diversity Mr. Russell maintains,
as I understand, that our only reason for denying the relation of
diversity between a term and its own self is that this relation is
not a fact. Whether Mr. Russell means more than that the
relation has not yet been found, I am unable to judge. To
myself on the other hand the above relation is not possible.
To myself it either is meaningless or self-destructive. In making
an ideal experiment I either have no diversity, or else the terms
are different ; and, when I suppress the difference, the relation
is destroyed. I therefore deny this possibility, and I go on further
to argue that any premisses from which such a possibility follows
are false.

(0) With regard to externality and mere fact I should first
explain that, in my opinion, these are things which are not and
which cannot be observed. To have bare A in bare external
relation to B is not possible in any observation or experiment.
The supposed fact is really an inference reached by vicious
abstraction. We saw above how ‘ unities ’ and ‘ implications’,
without which Mr. Russell apparently cannot move a step, involve
always a something more which on his view seems inexplicable.
And the same thing holds good with regard to any alleged
perception of mere conjunction.

To myself the mere fact in which something seems to qualify
A from the outside, is never really the whole fact. There is
always here a condition left outside of what you take as the fact.
Your statement is therefore true not of A itself but of A qualified
by x. And ‘hence the opposite of your statement is also true.
On the other hand to say something about A which in no sense
qualifies A, remains to my mind meaningless. In other words,
no ‘and’ which is purely external is thinkable. This is once
more the point to which Mr. Russell is invited to address himself.
The above is the ground of objection to externality and to mere
fact. You want, that is, to say something about something,
and not about something else, particularly when the something
else is unknown. The demand for ‘ intrinsic’ relations I take
to be an expression of this want, but I agree that here once more


1x SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE III 2gt


complete satisfaction is impossible. There is of course with me
no question of any ‘ axiom’. ,

Naturally I realize that in this way doubt may be thrown upon
every possible conclusion, however certainly it seems to follow
in ideal experiment. How are we anywhere to save ourselves
from doubt arising from the presence of the possibility of an
unknown condition ? Have we not with every result a counter-
possibility ? This question in its turn leads to the inquiry whether
the alleged counter-possibility is everywhere really possible.
But I must not here digress into a defence of what I have argued
elsewhere.

5. I have stated the main principle on which objection is taken
to absolute externality and bare conjunction. I would go on to
add that I am still in doubt as to the sense in which according
to Mr. Russell relations are external. The terms are to contribute
nothing, and so much I understand. But I still do not know
whether Mr. Russell takes the relations apart from any terms to
be thinkable. To be consistent he should, in my opinion, hold
this view, but I cannot say that he does so. If all that is meant
is that this or that term contributes no more than any other term,
clearly, from so much, absolute externality and pluralism do not
follow. On the other hand, a relation apart from terms is to me
unmeaning or self-destructive, and is an idea produced by an
indefensible abstraction (cf. pp. 295 foll.).

6. I will end by noticing briefly Mr. Russell’s contention that
on his view we are less in conflict with science and with common
sense. This is an argument which I am very far from under-
valuing. In fact the doctrine which I hold I hold largely because
it seems to me to remain, more than others, in harmony with life
as a whole. I am speaking of course only of views which aim at
theoretical consistency, and not of those where inconsistency and
self-contradiction are of minor importance. But I could not on
this ground compare the conclusions advocated by myself with
those taught by Mr. Russell, because on the most important point
T do not know what his conclusion is. To myself the things which
matter most in life are not to be resolved into terms with relations
between them. And I am ignorant as to what on this point
Mr. Russell may really hold. The question is in a word as to
experiences which, to a greater or less extent, are non-relational.
Obviously, when I do not know whether and how far Mr. Russell

UZ


292 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE III CHAP. IX


denies the existence of such facts, or in what sense he admits them,
it is not in my power to judge as to how far his views are in
harmony with science and common sense, if I use these terms,
that is, in anything like a wide meaning. This isa point on which
some explanation by Mr. Russell would be welcome, I am sure,
to others as well as to myself. We return here to the doubt as
to ‘ unity ’ with which we began. We have again on our hands
the whole question as to sensible fact and as to all that is covered
by the word ‘feeling’, I should perhaps add that, so far asI can
judge, Mr. Russell’s view as to the inviolability of ‘ facts’ would
make indefensible the constructions in and by which the entire
body of history and of natural science consists.


CHAPTER X


A DISCUSSION OF SOME PROBLEMS IN CONNEXION
WITH MR. RUSSELL’S DOCTRINE


Since, the preceding chapter appeared in Mind, Mr.
Russell has brought out several important articles in the
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society (1910-12), and,
beside his Essays, has published an interesting little volume
on the Problems of Philosophy. While grateful for all these
I do not find that my main difficulties have been removed.
And I cannot perhaps do better than touch and even
enlarge on certain points which seem vital.


I. The first of these will be Mr. Russell’s theory of judge-
ment and truth. I will not attempt to state this, since
I doubt my having succeeded in grasping it. But I cannot
accept the view that a unity can here, or anywhere, consist
in a multiple relation, and to this difference in principle
I will return lower down. And, even apart from this,
Mr. Russell’s doctrine to my mind has remained untenable,
and I have found my difficulties confirmed, it seems to me
convincingly, by Prof. Stout.1 The view that for me, as
I judge, there is no unity anywhere in what I take as true
‘except the unity made by my judgement, seems indefensible.
It involves apparently in principle the complete previous
dissolution for me of the whole content, followed by its
re-integration in detail by means of one new multiple rela-
tion. Only (so it seems) because of this supervening relation
is for me the horse before the cart, and everything through-


1 Inthe Aristotelian Proceedings for 1910-11. Prof. Stout, however, seems
willing, as I am not, to accept in principle the ‘ multiple relation ’.


294 SOME PROBLEMS IN CONNEXION _ cuap.


out not turned just the other way. I amreminded here of
the position taken by some over-zealous disciples of Kant,
where every particular relation found in the object appears
to have been thrown out by an impartial, not to say casual,
eruption from the synthetic Ego. But I can scarcely sup-
pose that such an interpretation of Mr. Russell’s view can be
really much more than a misapprehension.

Suppose that, as sometimes happens, a husband A is
jealous of a man C who does not exist in fact but is imaginary.
On the above doctrine this complex unity C would, appar-
ently, be made ad hoc by A’s present judgement. But C
has really been the result of a gradual morbid growth.
And, in order for the new unity of the judgement to super-
-vene, this result apparently must be ad hoc disintegrated.
Again, to pass from this, there is a difficulty, the importance
of which it would, I think, be hard to exaggerate. I under-
stand that the world made for me by a new multiple relation
may or may not answer to things as they are outside that
relation. But what I cannot understand is why one of
these two worlds should be more real than the other. Why
is not the content affirmed in my judgement in any case
absolutely real? Suppose that, more or less, it does not
correspond with some other arrangement, why and on what
principle do we set one arrangement above the other?
Why is a multiple relation, where a subject comes in, not
just as real as anything else? And can its detail be false,
just because that detail is different from something other
than itself? I have so far been unable on all these points
to understand Mr. Russell’s teaching. Are we, I repeat,
to call unreal anything which is what it is only in and
through relation to a subject, and, ifso, why? And, if we
are not to say that this is unreal, are we ever to call it false,
and if so, on what principle? And are we, I add, still to
use the word ‘ false ’ even where we have a whole psychical
state which does not so much as pretend to be true?


x WITH MR. RUSSELL’S DOCTRINE —_295


II. Leaving this point, where I cannot pretend to have
understood Mr. Russell, I will touch on another difficulty.
Is it possible to think of a relation as being real apart from
all terms? I now understand that Mr. Russell affirms
this possibility, and further adduces arguments in favour of
its existence in fact.2 Of course I agree that, since one
speaks of a relation without terms, in a sense one must
think of it, but for myself I am sure that I cannot think of
it as real,

Difference and identity, where nothing is the same or
different, after and before and the difference between after
and before, where nothing is before or after anything, right
and left and their difference, and greater and less on some
scale, where there are no terms and, perhaps, no different
places—all of this to my mind in the end is unmeaning.
When I remove the terms wholly, my idea is forthwith
destroyed, or, again, it becomes inconsistent with itself when
the removal is ambiguous. And there is no question here
of arguing downwards from some axiom which I assume.
I am appealing direct to an ideal experiment, and the result,
at least to my mind, is certain. Whether Mr. Russell goes
so far as to ask me to conceive of a series or scale where
there are absolutely no terms, where there is nothing at all
but bare relations, and perhaps in the end nothing but one
multiple relation—I am unable to say. But I cannot find
that any relation survives in my mind the total removal of
its terms. The terms may be to the last degree vague and
schematic, but, once attempt to abstract them, and you
find that they were there.

But relations without terms, Mr. Russell argues, must be
thinkable, and I go on to deal with what I understand to
be the reasons adduced. Where a relation is universal and
holds of ‘ anything ’, you could not take it so, Mr. Russell


1 Chap. VIII, p. 238, and IX, p. 291.
2 Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1910-11, pp. III, 112.


290 SOME PROBLEMS IN CONNEXION _ cuHap.


urges, unless you took it quite apart from everything. And,
again, since it is admitted that you can analyse a whole
into terms and relations, you could not do that unless the
relations were really separate. Whether Mr. Russell main-
tains that every possible distinction has separate reality,
I do not know. But that this is the conclusion which must
follow, appears to me to be obvious.

(2) I will consider first the argument with regard to
universals. Whether, given a bare universal, Mr. Russell
can supply a satisfactory account of its relation to ‘ any-
thing ’, I will not inquire. What I wish to show here is
that the facts can be dealt with quite otherwise. The
subject is a large one, and it raises psychological problems
on which I cannot touch, but I will endeavour to state
briefly the conclusion which to myself seems tenable. There
is no such thing as a bare universal, nor for my consciousness
of universality is such a thing wanted, nor could it serve.
In fact there is always an aspect of particularity, though
this aspect may of course be hard to observe, and though
the whole content may be highly schematic in character.
But, though in our perception of a universal the particu-
larity always is there, it is treated as more or less irrelevant.
We ignore it, or, while recognizing it, we exclude it from
our view entirely or partially. It is in a word negation
which is implied in our awareness of universals and which
makes that awareness possible. ‘ Representation ’ at least,
the reader perhaps may agree, without exclusion would be
a word deprived of its meaning.

When I have the universal idea, say, of a triangle, that
idea is an event in my mind, and it is particular in a certain
aspect. In what this aspect of particularity in various cases
consists, I do not propose here to discuss. But every
psychical event, I assume, has particular existence.2 Now


> Cf. pp. 286-7.
2 Cf. pp. 153 foll.,and Prof. Bosanquet’s Logic, vol. ii, chap. x.


x WITH MR. RUSSELL’S DOCTRINE 299


my awareness of a triangle as universal negates the above
aspect, and it does so by ignoring the aspect or by excluding
it asirrelevant. Whether tacitly or consciously, the thisness
is in various senses discarded. I can-use the ‘ instance’
while I ignore even the fact that it is an instance, or, while
recognizing that fact, I can treat it as irrelevant. I can
again be conscious that my instance is one among others,
while at the same time I take that diversity as immaterial
since it here makes no difference. Again I may recognize
that the many instances, actual or possible, form a class.
Their plurality is to me now the positive existence of the
universal, while at the same time I exclude their differences,
at least as mattering or counting. Thus, when I speak of
‘any case of a triangle’, I am aware, though perhaps
vaguely, that a number of cases actual or possible is there,
but, so far as these cases differ, I imply. (however incon-
sistently) that their difference can be ignored or excluded.?
I am speaking here throughout (the reader will remember)
of the abstract and not of the concrete universal. _ This
latter (we may here remind ourselves) is perhaps really,
though not avowedly, admitted by Mr. Russell under the
name of ‘ unity’.

‘But your account of the matter ’, the reader may urge,
“takes no heed of an obvious objection. According to you
I have not before me the bare universal idea, and yet what
I have to use, in the negation which you describe, is appar-
ently nothing else. How can negation help me to arrive at
that from which it proceeds, and which it presupposes as
already there?’ This objection, I reply, forgets that nega-
tion is of more than one kind. Denial always rests on a


1 It is important to keep in mind that we use universals from the very
beginning of our mental development. With regard to these we of course
do not know that they are universals, or are representative, or form a
class. Whether and in what sense there is negation here, is of course
a further question. The action from the very first of universals is a
matter discussed by me elsewhere. See my Principles of Logic,


298 SOME PROBLEMS IN-CONNEXION _ cuap.


basis, but that basis is not always, like that which it denies,
an object before the mind. When you exclude you exclude
on the strength of something positive, but this positive
something, which serves, may not be explicit. In the above
distinction is found, I think, the solution of our problem.
The universal idea cannot come before us as bare, but this
universal on the other hand is used as the positive ground
of a negation, and, as that, it can on reflection be affirmed.

Our idea of a triangle has, we saw, a particular side which
we ignore or take as irrelevant. Our attitude here is so far
negative, and, as negative, it involves a positive basis.
This basis is that central area in our triangle. which is
identified in feeling with a familiar name and with a use
beyond itself.1 The central area is by itself no object.
It is something in the object, not separated from the
object, which repels whatever else in the object interferes
with a certain reference elsewhere. It is the qualification
which, we feel, answers to a recognized employment and
name.. And later, though our meaning never becomes bare,
we can be aware of it in its proper character, and can go
on to relate it positively to that diversity which in a sense
it excludes. :

Suppose that on an object of a certain kind you are
accustomed to act, practically or theoretically, in a special
manner. So far you may know nothing about any universal,
though obviously there is here a universal, which you use,
or which uses you, in a certain fashion. Then let us suppose
that there comes a striking difference in the instance. Upon
this you hesitate perhaps, and then proceed to act in your
usual way. Still this noticed difference may have its effect,
and may lead to a consciousness of ‘ and yet ’ and of ‘ after
all’. You are now aware of a sameness, and, with it,
a difference which is there and does not count. But this


1 Even in the case of a sensation, such as our awareness of red, the
universal aspect depends, I should say, in the end on a certain use, but,
in some cases, on a mere theoretical use. . .


x WITH MR. RUSSELL’S DOCTRINE 299


sameness is a basis which, as such, is not before you. It is
felt, and felt as that which is in one with the habitual use.
which later is named. And, however much you reflect,
and, however clearly the identical and universal are expli-
cated, they can never become naked. Your awareness of
triangularity still must leave the particular standing as a
fact, while you disregard it, or while, recognizing it in various
senses, you deny its relevance. Your exclusion in the end
rests on that which by itself is not an object. Its positive
basis is an area of content emphasized in feeling, and identi-
fied later in feeling with a recognized function and name.
This emphasized nucleus, with its exclusion of any accom~
paniment which threatens to invade it, is the root of our
knowledge of the universal as object (cf. p. 309, note).

If this brief account is not mistaken, it would follow that
for our consciousness of a universal the idea of a class or
collection is not required. The diversity, ignored in use or
recognized as excluded, may (to repeat this) be the particular
nature of our idea as a mental fact. There is here no refer-
ence to other cases whether actual or possible. “When these
cases and their diversity are recognized, we are aware of an
‘instance’. And, when again further the other instances
are taken collectively, we have the idea of a class. But
knowledge of an instance or a class is not essential to our
use of a universal, nor, even when we have before us. an
abstract idea, need this aspect be present to our minds.
On the difficulties involved in the idea of a class I have
remarked already (pp. 283 foll.).


(6): I will pass from this to touch briefly on the nature of
analysis. Mr. Russell urges, as I understand, that the fact
of analysis proves the existence of bare relations. For, if
you were not acquainted with these relations by themselves,
the result of the analysis would to you be meaningless. The
principle here involved leads to results which, so far as I see,


300 SOME PROBLEMS IN CONNEXION _ cuap.


are wholly ruinous. It will follow that without any excep-
tion every distinction which I can make anywhere, exists
bare and real by itself. This plain consequence does not,
however, appear to be drawn and accepted by Mr. Russell.
And I therefore conclude that I have failed to apprehend
the argument which he seeks to found on the nature of
analysis.1

Without any further reference then to Mr. Russell I will
venture to add a word on this difficult problem. Analysis
and synthesis I take in the end to be two aspects of one
principle, just as are again (to give a general illustration)
rights and duties. Every analysis proceeds from and on
the basis of a unity. The ‘ And’, we have already seen, is
nothing but a form of oneness. Analysis and abstraction,
far from suppressing union and totality, are the substitution,
the superposition for a certain end and purpose, of another
kind of synthesis.* But on this general aspect of the pro-
blem I do not wish to remark here. The point before us is
the question as to how, without separation in existence, we
can discriminate ideally in analysis; and this question has,
I think, in principle been answered already. The individual
unity, as we saw, can be left standing in fact, while one of
its aspects is emphasized, and while from that basis other
aspects are negated. The result of the process is, in the,
present case, the ideal discrimination of one or more features
left none the less united. The moving principle is the
identification of some character of a complex whole with
that which goes beyond this whole and is incompatible with
its residual content. Hence you have incompatibility. in
idea, conjoined with coexistence in fact. If, for instance,
you take a confused plurality, a dc, and if you emphasize 4,
as used in a function 6-d, and then attend to what happens,
the result is as follows. You have the feature 8 given at


4 Loc. cit., p. 112.
* Principles of Logic, pp- 430-54. And, for the nature of ‘And’, see
above, p. 231, note. .


.X WITH MR. RUSSELL’S DOCTRINE 301


once in perceived unity with @ and c, and yet as passing
away from them and distinct from them, The function 6-d,
I need hardly add, may be at bottom theoretical or practical.?
In any case the felt oneness of b with a use excluding its
implicit unity with a and c, is that which brings out at once
the two sides involved in discrimination and analysis,

The whole of this question, both as to universals and as
to analysis, turns on the meaning given to ideality, for all
discrimination is ideal, Here the two paths diverge, If an
idea is something separate, there will be in the end no
difference between facts and ideas, and in the end, I should
say, you will be left without either.2. But on the other path
there is nowhere an absolute division in reality. Ideality is
the loosening of some feature of content from its own exist-
ence, a loosening which comes from the attachment also of
that feature to something beyond.? Ideality rests on the .
identity at once with a standing ‘ here’ and a transcendent
‘elsewhere’. And we have an idea where we attribute
some feature of given content to a reality which falls outside
of that content’s private existence. This existence, we have
seen, is in various senses negated, but, if it were removed,
the idea would be lost, Ideality, we may say, is what moves
the world, and it is the inseparable union at once positive
and negative of fact and transcendence. .

Leaving the subject of analysis I will notice a dilemma,


1 There is a further point of importance to be noticed here. After we
have learnt to discriminate, we have gained a new form of awareness of
many in one. And hence, when later we go about to discriminate, we
can make use of this form. We can apply it as an ideal schema to some
unanalysed complex, and then the features of this complex may become
distinct through fusion and identification with the differences in our
schema. This is of course one form of what is called ‘ apperception ’,
but it is obviously not so ultimate as the process explained in the text.
It should be clearly understood that in that process ‘fusion’ js not in-
volved, and that, to bring it in, would be in my opinion 4 serious error.

* So far as I can judge that is really the case with Mr. Russell. Unless,
that is, he is prepared to place ‘ unities’ first, and to subordinate to that
principle all the rest of his doctrine, I fail to see what place is left in his
world for either a fact or an idea, ' * Cf. Chap. III, pp. 28-9...


302 SOME PROBLEMS IN CONNEXION CHAP,


not, I believe, offered by Mr. Russell. It is admitted (this
may be urged) that one can think of bare triangularity, and
can think of a relation naked and devoid of all terms. But,
if these things were not real, how, it may be asked, could
they really be objects? This same argument, it will be
noticed, applies without exception to every idea, no matter
how self-contradictory ; and its consequence, if it held good,
would be theoretical ruin. With this dilemma I have dealt
already,! but it may be well perhaps once more here to
state its solution.

.Any idea, of course not meaningless, let it be ever so
monstrous, is thinkable, so long, that is, as you do not think
it out. For you may couple it with some tacit condition,
taken with which its elements are somehow kept apart and
so combined. In this manner you can hold it before you
as an object. But go on to realize your ‘ somehow ’ and to
make that explicit, and the object either becomes another,
or, by the withdrawal of the condition, is disintegrated.
Thus a relation without terms is a thinkable idea. ‘ Rela-
tion’ and ‘exclusion of terms’ and ‘coupling’ are all
thinkable, and their union without doubt is an object
somehow ; but then the question is how. The relation by
itself is thought of really perhaps as a relation taken with
other terms, and on the strength of these other terms, which
are ignored, I exclude the terms which are explicit. Or I
couple ‘ relation’ and ‘ absence of terms ’, because coupling
is intelligible, and it is easy to forget the special nature of
the coupled. Or (it is all the same thing) exclusion clearly’
is a relation, and there can be a relation, we know, between
a relation and its terms. But realize what you are doing,
cease to ignore and to forget, and once begin to make
explicit every ‘ somehow ’, and your relation without terms
is either transformed or goes to pieces before your eyes.


* Chap. Til, p. 41, note, and Chap. IX, pp. 269-72. Cf. Prof. Stout,”
Arist. Proc. for 1911-12, p. 194. ; Re


x WITH MR. RUSSELL’S DOCTRINE 303


Everywhere what may be called the individual is the real,
and yet the individual is in various ways never self-con-
tained. And in use we may disregard this or that residual
aspect of its content. We may emphasize and may attend
merely to the opposite of what we disregard. And we may
go on to set down what we thus transcend as excluded for
a purpose or even utterly. But this idea of exclusion, when
you make it.absolute, becomes self-discrepant and inco-
herent ; and the more you seek to grasp it, as it is, the more
certainly does it fly apartin yourhands. Thisis, however,
not so much a matter for argument and discussion as for
actual experiment.!


III. I will pass now to the subject of what Mr. Russell
calls ‘multiple relations’, If there were such things, I
cannot think that they would serve their alleged purpose,
and in. the second place I fail to see that such things exist’
at all.

(a) We are brought back once more here to the funda-
mental question of ‘unities’. Is there, in the end and
really, for Mr. Russell such a thing as a whole which is non- .
relational or again super-relational ? Unless we know the
answer to this question, the entire position seems doubtful
throughout. Now on the one hand Mr. Russell appears to
be fully committed to such unities, but,.if so, how this
doctrine stands to his other views, I am unable to conceive.
On the other hand, in his interesting little book on the
Problems of Philosophy, the idea seems to have disappeared.
There is even a tendency to imply that a complex unity
consists in a relation (p. 202). But this problem surely
(if in philosophy there are problems) is second to none in
importance.

Let us consider (it is one of Mr. Russell’s instances) the
case 3 jealousy. We have here an emotional state, and in


“4 Cf. p. 289, and Chap. XI, at the beginning.


304 SOME PROBLEMS IN CONNEXION — cuap.


this state let us agree that we have relations, and for the
sake of argument (if you will) one principal relation. And
on the other side let us agree that our state is a unity.
Now the question is whether this unity consists in a relation
or relations. Given the terms and the relations (whatever
these are), as terms and relations, and given nothing else,
have you got, or can you reconstitute, the emotional fact ?
The fact, I presume, is the jealousy that I feel. And is this
a relation, or is it, on the contrary, a unity of another sort ?
To myself, as I understand the question, the answer is
obvious. It seems to me monstrous to describe a felt whole
asarelation. A relation (to repeat this) is one thing, while
a relational whole is another thing. And, not only with an
emotion but everywhere, to myself the fact of a relational
complex is a unity which cannot possibly consist in a set of
relations or again in a relation. Nor could any ‘ multiple
relation’, if such existed, make the unity of a fact. But
how in the end Mr. Russell understands this matter, I am
quite unable to say.


I can imagine a view which I certainly do not attribute
to Mr. Russell, a view which for a moment (if the reader is
so inclined) it may be well to take seriously, Reality here,
or at least the main reality, will consist in relations, bare
relations without terms. And these relations are able to.
generate a kind of world. They are of many kinds, and
at least some of them are such as to have what Mr. Russell
calls ‘sense’, and to be capable thus of forming series,
unities which express and consist in one constitutive relation.
There are (to use another terminology) various functions of
analysis and synthesis in one. And these, being applied
one to the other and so dealing only with themselves, produce

thus an indefinite number of more complex wholes in endless
generation. Thus a spatial relation may seem to be single,
but a relation of time, applied to it, forms a principle of


x WITH MR. RUSSELL’S DOCTRINE 305


fission and a sphere of diversity in which the space-relation
becomes plural—and so reciprocally. And consider what
happens when on both of these a relation of degree becomes
active, and again itself by both is multiplied and pluralized.
Further, if these. functions have ‘sense’, each, even by
itself and acting on itself, can perhaps serve as its own
principle of endless fission and unbroken unity.1. And the
world, perhaps in the end, is one world through such a mere
bare self-dividing synthesis.

There remains, however, a doubt and a question as to the
terms. It is hazardous perhaps after all to generate terms
by one naked relation which turns another relation, or even
itself, into its object and the field of its own activity. On
the other hand, if we cannot venture as far as this, we at
least do not require a plurality of actual reals to serve as
‘matter’. Nor need we fall back on the. mythology of
a Chaos at once nothing and ready for everything. All that
we require in the end is one single term. And this one term,
together with our world of ideal. functions, will make the
concrete universe. For one and the same term can be
related to itself, and so becomes double and different. And
entering into the multiplicity of the various series, it becomes
through them an infinity of diverse matters. Its singleness
is thus sundered into endless plurality, and is at the same
time connected. in the end perhaps into one great world of
organic unity.

I need not, I presume, state once more that I do not for
one moment attribute anything like the above to Mr. Russell.


1 Take a relation, such as ‘up and down’, and to this, as a term, apply
the same relation. The result apparently would be ‘up and down’ in
another dimension. And this same procedure could be continued so as to
reach an indefinite number of dimensions, And, if you believe that the
self-same term can stand on both sides of a relation, I do not see how you
can object that this process of @ priort.constructtion is from the first ille-
gitimate. Then, not content with this result, repeat the same procedure
even where the first relation has no terms at all, The same result (it
seems to me) will still follow, if. once you can accept, as real or possible,
a relation without terms and yet not meaningless.

1874 ».4


” 306 SOME PROBLEMS IN CONNEXION  cuap.


And yet, when.I ask myself what in the above is on Mr.
Russell’s principles untenable, and exactly why, and how
far, it is so, I find myself at a loss. And the source of my
darkness is, I think, first the question as to the ‘terms’ of
relations, and secondly this vital problem as to the existence
and nature of ‘ unities’.


(0) Even if there were multiple relations, such relations
could not constitute unities, since no whole, however rela-
tional, is made by and consists in a relation. This is the
first point. And now further I wish to question the exist=
ence anywhere of a ‘multiple relation’. This, so far as
I can judge, is merely something which has to be postulated
because the theory requires it. And in this it seems to me
to be like, for instance, the relation alleged by Mr. Russell
to exist in ‘occupation’. Not only then does the multiple
relation in any case fail to be all that we want, but I pei
believe that it is even really there.

“Let us take Mr. Russell’s instance of ‘between’? ‘ Be-
tween’ requires a multiplicity of terms,* and ‘between’,
it is said, is a relation, and so much may seem obvious.
But, I reply, to my mind it is not true that ‘ between’ is
a relation, and the opposite of this I even venture to regard
as evident. ‘ Between’ is certainly a feature which appears
in a relational arrangement. But the arrangement is not
itself a relation, and still less could it be the relation of
‘between’. What is ‘ between’ is one piece of the related
whole, and it never could be that whole itself. So far as
the unity of the complex is relational, it is a relation between
relations and not between terms. And, secondly, the


1 See Chap. IX, pp. 264, 287.
2 Problems, p. 195. The meaning of ‘ between ’ is discussed elaborately
by Mr. Russell in his Principles of Mathematics, chap. xxv.
® If, however, a term could be related to itself, all that we should want
would be, I presuile, one term, and the eaunlaplcty would come from the
* multiple relation ’.


x. WITH MR. RUSSELL’S DOCTRINE —_—_307°


complex never consists in a relation, and it never so much
was implies a relation which is multiple.

Certainly in a series you can find between the terms 0 one
relation, one, that is to say, in character. So far as a series
is one series, its several connexions, I understand, must
have one character throughout, and one or more of its terms
must be between others. And, given this formula, I agree
that you can construct a series. But, even if the formula
were the series, which surely it is not, yet the formula itself
is not between, and what really is between is not the formula.

And, where I probably have not succeeded in under-
standing, it would hardly serve to elaborate further. I agree
of course that there is a looser usage of speech which may
be adduced in support of multiple relations. We can
doubtless speak, for instance, of jealousy as being a relation
between persons, but we do not here, I am convinced, mean
to assert a single relation which is multiple. _ We are saying
perhaps that jealousy is an arrangement involving such and
such relations. But more probably we mean that, where
persons are related in a certain manner, with that you have
jealousy. And so we go on, expressing ourselves carelessly,
to call this manner a relation. But, when we try to speak
accurately, our position, I think, is otherwise. The doctrine
that an emotion 7s a relation, we should reject, nor should
we agree that it even implies one relation of many terms.
We should be again perhaps quite as clear, if we were asked

, to take the instance of some product of fine art. And with
this, regretting once more my failure to comprehend, I am
forced to leave the subject of multiple relations.

1 On the other hand I am still unable to accept what has been called
the Law of Duality (Mind, O.S., No. 47, p. 382). In the apprehension,
say, of a hexagon or a triangle, I am compelled to follow no such principle.
I can have a relational arrangement, perceived as a unity, where there is
no such dual subordination of the relations involved. This is possible
because their unity is more than relational. Such, again, is the case,
I would add, with every possible spatial figure. No points and lines in
the end can make that whatitis. _

X2


308 SOME PROBLEMS IN CONNEXION  cuap.


- ]-will, however, end by laying stress on a point which
seems fundamental. Given a plurality of terms, and given
one relation of a certain sort, to be taken in as many instances
as you please—and IJ agree that with this you can make
a series. But I deny emphatically that the series is really
made out of nothing more: Obviously, if no further con-
dition is added, the result is not one series, and so far I
understand that Mr. Russell would agree.1 From the terms
and the relations,.as materials, the series cannot be made
anyhow, and the question as to the how to myself seems
vital. And, in order to make your series, what in my
opinion you really do, is to superimpose, openly or covertly,
upon the data a form of serial arrangement. The series in
short is presupposed and is implied in those conditions from,
which it is supposed to be made.

Hence, finally, we are led to ask as to what is involved in
that which Mr. Russell calls ‘ sense’, and which in English
is perhaps better. expressed as ‘direction’. Can any mere
relation by itself have a ‘sense’? Has a series, and have
the links of a series, if taken apart from a serial whole, any
meaning left ? Does not the ‘sense’ of each relation take
its very character from the serial whole,- and, viewed by
itself, is not a relation with ‘sense’ a vicious abstraction ?
I need not state how in my opinion such a question should
be answered. i,

I should thus agree that a series is in the end teleological,
but such a conclusion, we must remember, may help us but
little. Ifthe end or object is taken as outside the passage
and its steps, we are as far as ever from having reached the
essential nature of a series.. We do not have a series unless
the end is immanent.in the passage itself, and is reached not-
merely by that passage, but in it, at once gradually and as
a whole. . In a series there. must throughout be something
identical, of which each link gives you more, and apart from


Principles of Mathematics, chap. xxiv.


x WITH MR. RUSSELL’S DOCTRINE 309


which there is no meaning in sense or direction. But I fully
admit that we have here a difficult problem which calls for
investigation in detail.

Throughout the foregoing remarks I have doubtless failed
to comprehend, and I fear that I must have perverted Mr.
Russell’s doctrines. But I publish what I have written,
partly to express my own views, but mainly perhaps as
a help towards a better understanding: There is no living
writer, with whom I am acquainted, whose work in philo-
sophy seems to me more original and valuable than that of
Mr. Russell. It will, I hope, not be long before he is able on
some fundamental points to explain himself more fully.


Note to p. 299.—The reader will, I hope, not misunderstand
what I have written with regard to universals on p.299. The
universal, and even our awareness of it, come in my view
(p. 297, note) long before language is developed. As soon as
one has with anything the sense of sameness or familiarity,
with and over against the sense of difference or novelty, one is,
I should say, aware of a universal. On the other hand, I agree
that it is only through language that the universal becomes
known as such.


1 In connexion with the above would have to be discussed the question
as to whether, and how far; passage, and I mean by that in the end tem-
poral passage, is implied in a relation of any kind whatever. Obviously
at first sight from some relations anything like passage is excluded. But
still, if you remove passage wholly, the relation, as such, seems to dis-
appear, since in its essence it seems to be discursive. The solution lies,
I presume, in our taking the passage as at once implied and ignored,
since its direction in the supposed cases is immaterial. There are of
course those who with regard to spatial and other relations would dispute
this, but hardly, I think, rightly. And, if in the result the whole idea
of a relation becomes inconsistent, that is a conclusion which may perhaps
already have been forced upon our minds. Everywhere in the end a
relation appears as a necessary but a self-contradictory translation of
a non-relational or super-relational unity.


CHAPTER XI


ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH!


I must begin this chapter by once more asking for the
indulgence of the reader. Once again I am writing on
a theme where I doubt if I have anything really new to offer.
My excuse is that there are some questions on which, even
at the cost of repetition, I desire to be explicit. And these
questions are so difficult and so important, that the reader,
if led to dwell on them, may, I hope, be too much occupied
to ask for novelty. ‘ When I think truly, can I think that
which has never been so thought before?’ and ‘Can I in
any sense make truth ? ’—these were the two problems
which I wished specially to notice. And I have thought it
better to take these problems more or less in connexion with
some other inquiries,

In any discussion about truth I am met by what to myself
is a great difficulty. It is impossible, in my opinion, to deal
with truth apart from an examination of the nature of reality.

~Not merely has every one (though perhaps gnly at the back
of his mind) a view as to reality which is sure to affect his
result. The very questions as to truth with which a man
begins, involve in the end an answer to certain questions
about the nature of things. And to deal with these final
inquiries here is obviously not possible. Hence I am forced
‘to refer the reader to that which I have published elsewhere.
In what follows I am in the main confined to showing how
various problems are dealt with, supposing. that. you adopt
a certain view as to the Universe. If the reader insists on
1 This chapter appeared first in Mind, July rox.


x1 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 311


asking throughout for more, I can only reply that here I am
writing for others.

I will however begin by noticing some misunderstandings
as to the tmethod employed in ultimate inquiry by writers
like myself. There is an idea that we start, consciously or
unconsciously, with certain axioms, and from these reason
downwards. This idea to my mind is baseless. The method
actually followed may be called in the main the procedure
used by, Hegel, that of a direct ideal experiment made on
reality. What is assumed is that I have to satisfy my
theoretical want, or, in other words, that I resolve to think.
And it is assumed that, if my thought is satisfied with itself,
I have, with this, truth and reality. But as to what will
satisfy I have of course no knowledge in advance. My
object is to get before me what will content a certain felt
need, but the way and the means are to be discovered only by
trial and rejection. The method clearly is experimental. _

Speaking from this point forwards simply for myself, T
find an object which is plural. I do not of course mean that
it is only plural, but I mean that it has maniness. Now how
am I to take this object ideally so as to satisfy my mind ?
If I try to take the object as merely many, it is forthwith
dissipated and is lost. Therefore the object is not a mere
many. Let me now, starting from this result, try to take
the object as a mere conjunction of terms and external rela-

- tions. The aspect here, other than the mere many, will be
a bare ‘together’ or ‘and’. But I want to see what this
aspect is. I take it first as adding to the many-only another
one, a something more of them. And, as soon as I do this,
the object once more is dissipated, and the whole conjunction
disappears. Therefore the ‘together’ or ‘and’ does not
consist in terms and external relations. It is something
else.. It may perhaps be called a form of unity and totality.


2 On the nature of ‘and’ see Chap. VIII, p. 231, .and for ‘ external
relations’ cf, the Index. ‘


312 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH CHAP.


T take the plural object as many in one, and with that so far
I am satisfied. But on this naturally succeeds further in-
quiry and further trial, not going backwards but endeavour-
ing to advance and to specify the How. And where the
alleged downward deduction from axioms comes in here,
I am myself unable to discover.
As to what has been called the axiom of internal relations,
I can only repeat that ‘internal’ relations, theugh truer
by far than ‘ external’, are, in my opinion, not true in the
‘end. You have no alternatives here, by denying one of
which you can go on to assert the other; for truth in the
end is not merely relational. And the alleged axiom is
a comparative truth. which is not a premiss but a result.
The same remark applies to any ‘ axiom of ground’. Where
A is not real by itself but implies and. belongs to an ideal
whole, you want a reason for A, for you want to know the
How of this unity. Mediation is called for, and, if external
merely, is none. But the ‘axiom’, once more here, is a
result and not a premiss.
I will venture to enlarge on this second supposed axiom.
1s it true that everything must have a reason, a ‘ how’ and
a ‘why’? In the end this assertion is not true, we see at
once, of the Universe. The ‘axiom’ holds only so far as a
thing is not complete in itself, and is therefore, on our view,
ideally beyond itself. The demand for the making good of
such imperfection, not as real but as ideal, the completion of
the thing in idea so as to satisfy us theoretically, is what we
"mean by the search for-a ‘why’ and ‘how’. Wherever,
in other words, you have an ‘implication’, you want a
reason, because you ears to see the whole nature of your
implication.
Where you have a felt whole, as felt, or where you have
a non-relational unity, as in a work of art, there, so far, you
need not ask ‘why’. The -tendency of the content to pass
beyond the limits of the thing is not always forced on your.


XI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 313


notice. The case is different where, by analysis or otherwise,
the self-contained unity has been lost. Wherever the oneness
of ‘ what’ and ‘that’ has perished before us, or has been
destroyed by reflection and analysis, and wherever we seek
to reunite these aspects not really but ideally, we have
a demand for a ‘ reason’

Every felt whole changes in time, and the felt ‘ present
has narrdw limits. We are left, when we notice this, with
two things, a felt present and a recalled past ; and these two
things come to us somehow together. But are the two felt
or perceived as one in the sense that their contents are
throughout in immediate unity ? Clearly not so, and hence
the ‘ somehow ’, as it is, does not satisfy us. It is the name
of something which, for us, is not all there, and is not
actually contained in our fact. And we want the whole of
the ‘somehow’ actually and in detail. Such a complete
totality we cannot directly experience, so as to have once’
more something which is or seems to be self-sufficient. We
therefore attempt to supply this defect by ideas. We seek
to understand, to make good ideally our lost unity.

Passing by the question raised by space, let us go on also to
ignore change in time. Let us take some sensible whole, or
other non-relational unity ; let us suppose that this does not
change in time, and let us, for the sake of argument, assume
also that within this, as it comes to you, there is no tendency
of the content to pass beyond the limits of the thing. Here
so far, it-will be said, there is no ‘ why’ or ‘how’. I agree,
but I ask whether you intend to remain here. And that, as

"I observe, is precisely what you do mot intend to do. You
go on to think, you analyse, you introduce terms and re-
lations, whereas in your immediate whole there were no
relations or terms; or, at least and in any case, the whole
itself was non-relational. And, so far as you have terms
and relations, the unity is destroyed. It now, as the fact of
‘relatedness ’, falls outside of the relational scheme, and this


314 - | ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH _cuar.


fact you have not specified. The attempt to specify this
fact, to re-include it not really but ideally, and so to make
good the broken unity, is the demand and the search for
the ‘how’ and the ‘why’. We wish in other words to
perceive the full nature of the ‘and’ or the ‘ implication ’,
We desire in short to understand.

To-ask us here why we cannot remain content with ‘ the
brute fact’, seems even ridiculous. What is the brute fact ?
Is it the fact as merely felt? Is it an immediate unity
taken non-relationally and so not understood ? On the con-
trary your ‘ brute fact’ is that ideal scheme of terms and
relations which comes into being only through the destruc-
tion of the felt whole. Such a fact is not brute, but is ideal.
It is a thing which, as itself, is only for thought. And it
itself is not a fact. It has no unity except that which is
added from outside itself and is supplied irrationally from
elsewhere. Your ultimate brute fact is in brief your own
half-thought-out theory.

We have now seen the nature of the demand for a reason,
a ‘how’ anda ‘why’, We have here no axiom, standing on
which we proceed to argue downwards. So far as this truth is
true, it is a result and a character of our procedure itself.


Passing now from this misunderstanding about axioms,
I will venture (if the reader will pardon the repetition) to try
to throw some further light on the general method which
IT have used. In theorizing we put questions directly to
Reality. In other words we experiment ideally on the nature
of things. We find that, given a, we have 8, and that this is
how the world behaves! The objection that in this way we
learn nothing about Reality itself, is ill founded. It depends
on a false separation between Reality and ‘ourselves, and it
“may therefore be dismissed. Reality is such that ais}. All
our truths are true of Reality, but all are subject to a con-


1 Cf. Principles of Logic, p. 87.


XI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 315


dition. We can say indifferently ‘ a (x) b is real’, or ‘ Reality
is a(x) 6’. Such is the doctrine of judgement which I have
found to be the one doctrine which holds.

But obviously with an unknown condition we are but
partly satisfied. To pass from one term to another term, we
‘do not know how, is not enough. We have to seek know-
ledge where the mode of transition, the mediation itself, also
is known.’ And, even if we had various pieces of knowledge
which held good, each in itself, that would still fail to satisfy
us, as long as we remained in ignorance as to the connexion
of these pieces. For some connexion there is. If we had
no ‘and’ or ‘ together’, we should not even have pieces,
and ‘together’ or ‘and’, as we have seen, is an expression
of unity and totality. It asserts a whole, but it couples
this assertion with blank ignorance as to ‘how’. -And such
ignorance does not content us. We are led, therefore, to
search for the reason why we pass from one term to another
term. We seek in other words a mediated intelligible whole.
That whole, if we could reach it, would fulfil our theoretical
want. That would be true and real ; and reality and truth,
we have to assume, is that. But whether we can. say
‘ merely that ’, is of course a further question.

‘The reader may object that, even if the above, so far as it
goes, is admitted, if still is useless. It tells us nothing as to
the world, since all it tells us is formal. The word ‘ formal’
I put on one side as a probable source of misapprehension.
But I fully agree that all the knowledge we have reached so '
far about reality is too general and empty. To the question
‘What do I know?’ the above is an answer which by
itself does not satisfy. And not only do I hold this, but
I have urged also that by itself no, such knowledge could
even exist. For the whole of our knowledge may be said to
depend upon immediate experience. At bottom the Real is
what we feel, and there is no reality outside of feeling. Andin
the end the Reality (whatever else we say of it) is experience.


316 - -ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH CHAP.


Our fundamental fact is immediate experience or feeling.*
We have here a many in one where, so far, there is no dis-
tinction between truth and fact. And feeling again is mine,
though of course it is not merely my feeling. It is reality
and myself in unbroken unity. We in a sense transcend
this unity ; that is clear, for we could not otherwise speak of
it. But that we should ever in any way reach a reality out-
side of it, seems impossible. And if this is so, as I have con-
tended more fully elsewhere, then experience is reality. For
in attempting to deny this thesis, or to assert something
else, we find on experiment that we have asserted this thesis
or nothing.?

Tf then Reality is an intelligible whole and Reality also is
experience, can we assume that, above relations and inclusive
of them, there is an Experience which reasserts our original
unity ? If this is possible, our theoretical want would be
satisfied. Such a whole would be Reality, and nothing else
could in the end be called even possible. There is of course
no question here of explaining everything. Such an idea, at
least to my mind, is ridiculous, not to say insane. The real
question everywhere as to the inexplicable is whether it falls
within the general view, or whether, falling outside that, it
becomes a negative instance. In the latter case, and in
the latter case only, the general view is refuted. But into
the discussion of such alleged instances there i is no space to
enter here.®


* See sepesially, Chap. VI, and cf. the Index.

2 We have here.a matter for observation and experiment and not for
long trains of reasoning. In Mind, No. 75, p. 335, I notice, for instance,
that Prof. Perry, while uprooting Idealism, demolishes in passing myself.
He takes me to argue to a conclusion which I do not hold, from a basis
which I have rejected as an error, and then wonders at the unnameable
vice of the process. But, if Prof. Perry wishes to get an idea as to the ©
view which he is anxious to refute, why should he not suppose (for a
moment) that on my side there is no argument at all, and that on his side
* there is an inference by way of vicious abstraction ?

% Any critic who desires to be fair, should, I think, make up his mind
on these two questions: (4) Has or has not a philosophy got to explain


xI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 317


My object in the above has not been to indulge in idle
repetition, nor again to argue that the conclusions which
I hold are not refutable. What I have been aiming at is to
help the reader to understand how it is that such conclusions
as mine are reached; in what way, that is, and by what
method, starting from what is given, we arrive at our goal.
I wish finally to point to a merit possessed, I think, by no
view which is not akin to my own. In philosophy it is not
enough merely to state the connexion between truth and
reality. One is bound to show in addition how, this con-
nexion being so, we can know that it is so, how in.short our
knowledge is such that it can comprehend itself and reality.
I will not repeat here how, on the view which I hold, this
vital question is answered. What I wish to. urge is this,
that on no opposite view (so far as I see) can the question
be answered at all. The problem of the ultimate Criterion
must be faced, and on any other basis it cannot, I think, be
fairly encountered and solved. I. will now point out this
failure in the case of two widely held doctrines.


The theoretical criterion, for myself, is in theory supreme.
The truth for any man is that which at the time satisfies his
theoretical want, and ‘more or less true’ means more or
less of such satisfaction. The want is a special one. We
do not of course know beforehand what it is and what can
satisfy it. We only at first feel that there is something
special that we miss or gain, and we go on to discover the
nature of the want and its object by trial, failure and
success. .Let me now proceed to ask what will happen if
we take the Criterion to lie in satisfaction not specific but
general, The necessary result to my mind is failure and
bankruptcy.


everything ? (by) What is it (if anything) that a philosophy may leave
unexplained ? Without some consideration of these points I do not
myself see how rational discussion is possible.

* What follows may be taken as a CORUM on Appearance,


Pp- 373-4


318 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH CHAP.


We must not confuse the position in question with that
taken in ordinary Hedonism. The Hedonist, as such, has
no doctrine of his own about truth. The means to the
one Desirable are sought by the intellect, but, as to the
nature of the intellect and of truth and fact, almost-any
view can be joined with Hedonism. But in the position

to be now examined the ground is changed. Satisfaction
has itself become the criterion of truth. And this satis-
faction we are not to understand in any narrowed sense. It
is not to be merely hedonic, nor is it to be merely practical
as belonging to what we do, as against what we feel and
are. Satisfaction in general is to be our criterion of truth
and error.

There is a mental attitude from which the above must
again be distinguished. We may, despairing, for ourselves
or in general, of ultimate truth, or finding the quest of it too
costly, resolve to abandon it. The satisfaction of our human
interests, truth included, is our end; and we decide for
ourselves to limit truth to those ideas which subserve our
interests so far as they subserve them. Truths are to be
working ideas. And if we really understand our present
position (as we seldom do), any ideas, no matter how in-
consistent, are to be counted true, if and so far as they are
required in our spiritual interest. What we feel to be the
general health and harmony of our being is the end, and
truth is to be subject absolutely to dictation from that. But
within these limits we, like the common Hedonist, use the
everyday notion of truth, and confine it to the search for
that which, in the above sense, works. I myself have much
sympathy. with this attitude which of course, in theory, is
not mine.t But we must remember that such an attitude
is not a doctrine about truth and the criterion, and, if it
understands itself, makes no pretence to the name of philo-
sophy. And, keeping this in mind, we may pass onwards:


: Ct, feces v, Pp. 132-3.


XI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 319


The position which we.are to examine claims to be a
philosophy and to offer an account of truth which. is valid.
Its criterion, we have seen, is satisfaction not one-sided but
general. As to how on this view we are to know what is
one-sided or general, a doubt might be raised. But, leaving .
this, we are face to face with a serious difficulty. Is the
general satisfaction to be that of my own self or of others, or
again of both at once? And whoare others? Let us decide
to mean by others the present and future inhabitants of this
our planet, so far as they are known, and, if you please, let
us consider only those inhabitants which are human. But
in any case my satisfaction and that of others seem able to
collide. Are we to assume that really this is not SO, or are
we on the other hand to subordinate my satisfaction to that
of others, or that of others to my own? Whatever attitude
we adopt, our procedure seems irrational and arbitrary, and
we shall hardly save ourselves by trying to take all three
positions at once, or as each serves the turn. But our theory,
if so, has been shaken by the first simple question. __

It is better however to examine it. further. The general
satisfaction includes the future and is not merely present,
Let us call it satisfaction in the long run for myself or for
humanity. And ‘in the long run’ does not mean what
‘will be’ in an ordinary realistic sense. For that sense is
excluded by our doctrine of truth. What ‘ will be’ is that
which satisfies now as fending to satisfyin the long run.
‘Whatever idea of means to our end satisfies most now, is
the truth. a . .

And ‘ satisfies ’ does not point solely or specially to éheo-
retical satisfaction. That would be a return to the view of
truth which has been abandoned definitely. Then satisfies
(we must at once proceed to ask) whom and how? It cannot
be my future self, of humanity in the future, which has to be

‘satisfied, for these surely are inaccessible. The satisfaction
clearly must be present. And-the present satisfaction. of


320 ON SOME ASPECTS OF aca CHAP.


humanity once more cannot be reached. For this is known,
I presume, only by an inference, and an inference on our
present view of truth must rest on actual satisfaction. Thus
actual satisfaction in the end must be now and be mine.

Truth is the idea which satisfies me now. Then in what
way? Not theoretically, for to say that would be to relapse
into a discarded attitude. You may say, ‘It satisfies me
most now to adopt and act on a certain view as to the
probable future. This view rests on my present satis-
faction, and hence all is consistent.’ But no such defence
is really valid. For it is an obvious fact that (not to speak
- of other persons) to adopt and to act on other views some-
times satisfies me as much or more. If we admit this fact,
then all these opposite views will be equally true. And we
can only deny the fact by a collision with everything like
common experience and common sense. ‘To identify my:
satisfaction now with a certain view and a certain object
which I take as real, with an ideal construction capable of
appearance at. other moments and in other persons, would
be to make the. criterion. theoretical. And on our present
theory. there is no essential connexion between the satis-
faction and any special quality in the object. The idea
therefore, whatever it is, which satisfies me most now, is
true. The truth is whatever idea at this moment is felt
to’ satisfy me most, and, beside this, there is no other
truth.

Theoretical satisfaction may be rejected (and this is the
better course) as not existing or as subordinate. Or it may
be admitted as one element in. the satisfaction which is
general. This admission leads inevitably to a collision
between the truth which is theoretical and the truth which
is true. And there would be no principle on which to decide
between these conflicting claims. The only. criterion left in
any case is the feeling which at the moment prevails. Truth
is nothing but whatever idea I feel.at a given moment to


XI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 321
s


give most satisfaction. And.with this I submit that we
have ended in bankruptcy.


I will pass on now to say something on the doctrine called
Darwinism, so far as it bears on the question of the criterion.
We have here at first sight the antipodes of our former view.
That stood on satisfaction, while for Darwinism there is
nothing in the world like value or good or evil. Anything
implying evolution, in the ordinary sense of development
or progress, is wholly rejected. But the two views meet
positively so far as there is coincidence between that which
prevails and that which satisfies. And negatively they meet
in their exclusion from the criterion of anything like a special
quality, type or character, as essential to the object.1 What-
ever idea satisfies or prevails (no matter what else it is)
is true.

Darwinism often recommends itself because confused with
a doctrine of evolution which is different radically. Human
ity is taken in that doctrine as a real being, or even as the
one real being, and Humanity advances continuously. Its
history is development and progress to a goal, because the
type and character in which its reality consists is gradually. -
brought more and more into fact. That which is strongest
on the whole must therefore be good, and the ideas which
come to prevail must therefore betrue. This doctrine, which
possesses my sympathy, though I certainly cannot accept it,
has, I suppose, now for a century taken its place in the
thought of Europe. For good or for evil it more or less
dominates or sways our minds to an extent of which most
of us, perhaps, are dangerously unaware.

Any such view of course conflicts radically with Darwin-
ism, and let us now ask how the latter can deal with our
inquiry as to truth. The ideas (it may explain) by which
our world, and our human world, have got on so far, are


* Cf. Chap. IV, pp. 85, 103.
1574 Y


322 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH CHAP,


called true. There is some probability, though we cannot
estimate the balance, that by using the same ideas we shall
continue to get on in the same direction. Therefore (a) truth
is merely the ideas by which we get on, or (0) at any rate
these are the ideas to which we should confine our attention.

(a) The first conclusion is suicidal, since it contradicts its
basis.1 Its basis obviously is positive doctrine, right or wrong,
which assumes and rests on the validity of theoretical truth
in the sense which Darwinism denies. (b) The second con-
clusion, if, that is, it admits truth in the ordinary sense with.
regard to human history, is so far consistent. But, so far as
Darwinism has anything to say, this conclusion seems ar-
bitrary or worse. For the word ‘should’ falls outside of
Darwinism, just as to ‘ get on’ means nothing if it means
more than to ‘ go back’. And the historical assertion that
only ideas of ‘ getting on’ have so far worked, is clearly
untenable.

For Darwinism the true idea is the idea which prevails,
and we may perhaps identify satisfaction with inward
prevalence, Then the question which at once arises is,
‘ prevails where and when?’ As to the ‘how’ we need not
ask, because we know that ‘how’ means ‘ anyhow’. Ifthe
where and when are taken as in our world in general, then
(as we saw before) such knowledge on our part must rest on
the very theoretical truth which we deny. But, if the |
prevalence is in myself, and in myself here and now, then
any idea, no matter what, if it prevails, is true, and all such
ideas are true alike. There is no criterion, and from this
result we cannot escape by refinements. The argument that
Darwinism’s idea of prevalence prevails in me here and now,
and so proves itself by a circular reinforcement, will not
stand scrutiny. For all that we have here is the moment’s
coincidence, unessential and external, and any of the other
ideas which elsewhere or at another time prevail, are as


1 Cf. Appearance, p. 137.


XI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 323


unquestionably true. A contegtion like the above is good
only if the other, the incompatible, doctrine of development
is accepted. And it rests probably, wherever it is used, on.
some reminiscence or result of this other doctrine. The one
criterion for Darwinism is the abstract success or prevalence
of whatever happens to prevail, without any regard for its
character. And this-must surely leave us in the end with
no criterion at all.


« It may however repay us, before we go further, rapidly
to view this matter from the other side. To maintain that
Reality or Truth is what prevails, or is that which satisfies
us, is not wrong. And similarly it is not wrong to affirm
that Reality is ‘ this’,‘ now’ or‘ mine’. The mistake here,
so far as there is a mistake, lies in our simple identification
of both terms, and in our addition of the word ‘ only’.
Any positive attribution, in other words, to Reality must
be right, so long as it abstains from the denial, implicit or
explicit, of ‘something more’. To say ‘only’ is to lay
emphasis on the negative side of the positive identity.
‘Only ’ or ‘ merely ’ excludes any ‘ other ’, or again it may
warn us against making an abortive attempt to find an
‘other’ where any other is meaningless. Hence such an
assertion as that Reality is merely prevalence, is, on our
view, inconsistent with itself. Since an other than mere
prevalence has, on that view, a meaning, we have set up
within Reality the distinction of R (a) and R (8). -This
distinction however must imply a higher and more inclusive
R within which it falls, and the exclusive identification
asserted by our ‘ merely ’ is thus in contradiction with itself.

Even the judgements that Reality is one in many and is —
experience, would be untenable, if we meant by these judge-
ments to deny that Reality is in any sense more. But no
such denial should be the intention of our judgement,
What we really exclude here as senseless is the idea of any

Y2


"324 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH CHAP.


‘other ’ falling outside of our predicate, and able to be set
over against it in idea as being itself also an attribute of the
Real. And we deny no qualification of our predicate which,
remaining still under it, fills out its character merely from
the inside. But how a truth, claiming to reach reality,
should at once be absolute and yet for ever consciously in-
complete, I have elsewhere discussed.1


I will now proceed to deal with a number of special ques-
tions as to truth. Any knowledge which on my view can in
a proper sense be called truth, is the qualification of Reality
by ideal content. The Real must here have the form of an
object, and the idea must in some sense have an existence
other than that of the object. With these points I have
dealt fully elsewhere, and I propose to go on here to ask first
as to the meaning of qualification. That meaning is derived
from immediate experience and sensible perception. If you
take, for instance, an object such as an apple, this is qualified
by its adjectives. It is each and all of them, and yet it is
something more, though you are unable to say what. It is
different from its qualities, and it is also the same and one
with them. This is the idea of qualification which we apply
to judgement. It is an imperfect idea obviously, and it is
‘not ‘ thinkable ’ or ‘ intelligible ’ if that means that you can
analyse it without destruction into terms and relations. But
it has a positive sense which, however inconsistently, you
use. And, because this sense is not ‘ intelligible ’, there is a
constant tendency to deny or to destroy it. You may seek
for the essence of qualification in an arrangement of relations
and terms, or in a simple identity ; and in either case what
you will find is anatomized death or vacuity. Or again,
shrinking from these, you may still deny that anything other
than these is there.’ But the positive meaning exists, and,
with all its imperfection, it is applied in truth. On the


+ See Appearance, chap. xxvii.


XI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 325


nature and the result of this imperfection I have written
elsewhere.?


From this I go on to approach another question at once
important and full of difficulty. Does truth always refer to
something other than itself ? And, if this is always the case,
in what sense are we able to affirm it? As to what is the
obvious view, there is no doubt. Truth, to be true, must be
true of something, and this something itself is not truth.
This obvious view I endorse, but to ascertain its proper
meaning is not easy. And it commonly is misinterpreted so
as not to be tenable. I will begin the discussion by the
statement of what is called an antinomy.

(i) No judgement is self-contained. For (a) on my side
there is always something which does not qualify the object,
and which therefore falls outside. There is always my psy-
chical state of the moment, a context in which the assertion
happens and which it has to transcend. So far, for example,
as my judgement pleases and satisfies, that feeling, where we
are confined to truth, does not qualify the object. And,
again, I may be aware of an act which proceeds in and from
me with more or less of difficulty or ease, and either faster or
more slowly. But this difference is irrelevant to the judge-
ment. And (bd), on the side of the object, Reality is never
confined in and limited to my special object, but is always
also beyond it.?

(ii) No judgement is self-transcendent. For (a) it refers
to and qualifies something real. But how it could qualify
something which is not there for me and present, or how
this something could be present and yet not within the
judgement, seems not intelligible. Or rather we see that,
when we attempt such assertions, we have really implied
the opposite. And (6) that activity which seemed to lie

1 See A ppearance, Index, s.v. Truth, and, again, the Index to this volume.


2 Even where Reality or the Universe is the subject, this still will hold
good. See Chap. III, p. 4r.


326 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH CHAP.


merely in myself, is not external to the object. To take the
felt activity as falling wholly in or on something outside the
judgement, is not a tenable view. We cannot regard the act
as expended merely by myself on myself, nor does it move
or hang somewhere between myself and the object. And,
asking in general for the sense of this ‘ between ’, we find
that we have nothing beyond a self-inconsistent metaphor.
Judgement cannot consist in the external relation of two
independent things, nor is it the presence (one-sided or
otherwise) of one merely to the other. If you imagine two
foreign bodies, one impressing or soliciting the other, and
the second body attempting to grasp the first which has
impressed or excited it—you have passed away from an
actual judgement. For somehow undeniably there is an
awareness of that whole judgement as one, and we belie that
fact when we take its felt activity and its entire psychical
existence as falling somewhere apart from it. The act of
judgement itself must belong also to the object, and itself
make an element in the judgement.

A dilemma such as the above is insoluble so long as we
remain on the ground which supports it. The notion of
myself as a thing standing over against the world, exter-
nally related to it in knowledge, and dividing with it some-
how unintelligibly the joint situation or result, must once
for all be abandoned. This point of view rests on the ideal
construction which we call the soul or the mind, and it
assumes this construction to be an absolute fact. But, as
I have argued elsewhere,? such a position is untenable. To
take my self or soul as a separate thing, and to regard every-
thing that happens to it as its psychical states, is, in its own
place, proper and necessary. For certain purposes we are
right, and we are even compelled, to adopt such an attitude.
And not to realize this necessity is to fall into dangerous


1 What some one should explain is how the merely external relation of
two terms is able to be aware of itself.
2 Appearance, chap. xxiii; Mind, No. 33: Cf. Chap. XIV of this volume,


XI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 327


error. On the other side to rest in this position as ultimate,
is fatal. It is to turn a relative truth into ruinous falsehood.
And, if we are to understand knowledge and judgement, we
must discard the doctrine of a self wish by itself is or
could be real.#

Here, as everywhere, so far as I can ierean there is no
way except one which holds good in the end. We must
view the Reality in its unbroken connexion with finite cen-
tres. We must take it as, within and with these centres,
making itself an object to itself and carrying out them and
itself at once ideally and practically. The activity of the
process is throughout the undivided activity of the Reality
and of the centre in one. There is in the end no ‘ between’,
nor any external relation. The striving of one side or the
other merely for’ itself is impossible, and to seek to verify.
such a striving, for instance, in selfishness or its opposite, is
futile. And in knowledge the impression by the object, and
the will to experiment in fact with the object or to grasp it
ideally, all belongs to the single activity at once of myself


+ In his interesting book, Pragmatism and tts Critics (p. 31), which
I read while revising the above in 1911, Prof. Moore states that the
doctrine that the individual conscieusness is a function of the ‘com-
munity life’, has appeared only within our own generation. Such a
statement surprises me. Is Prof. Moore really prepared to deny that
the doctrine was taught by Hegel, and that I, for instance (if I may men-
tion myself), following Hegel, fought for it in 1876? What Prof. Moore,
I think, has failed to realize is the necessity for defining the ‘ community
life’, and for deciding whether this is merely social, and, if so, precisely
in what sense. We seem to have here once more the well-known old
ambiguity which obscures, and which assists, that which calls itself
Humanism. But is Prof. Moore ready to identify reality with the ‘ com-
munity life’, and, if so, in what sense of this term? The question left
unanswered surely threatens to destroy his doctrine as to the perception
of material objects. But I am glad to find that on the whole the differ-
ences between Prof. Moore and myself are small in comparison with the
amount of our agreement.

* The same thing of course holds with regard to passivity. My present
actual contents are, for instance, disturbed by the felt inroad of an un-
expected perception or of a sudden and surprising thought. And on the
other side the object is passive where in reflection I attack and analyse it.
But such passivity is on neither side the change made in a thing acted


328 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH CHAP,


and the whole Universe. For certain purposes (if I may
repeat this) the division of subject from object, and the
relation taken as existing between them, are ideas which
are requisite. But beyond these purposes such ideas are
fatally false. They are directly opposed to our immediate
consciousness of the whole relation in one,! and, if you start
from them as premisses, you are inevitably entangled in a
network of dilemmas.

You cannot however, it will be urged, deny that with
every judgement there goes an element which is only per-
sonal and merely ‘ subjective’. There is surely something,
when I judge, which you cannot take as belonging to the
object. Certainly to this I agree, and to myself it seems
even incontestable. But what, I ask, do we mean by the
‘subjective’? For myself it is merely the irrelevant. It
is that which does not count, it is that which falls outside of
the matter here in hand, and does not now serve our pur-
pose. Our purpose, when we seek truth, is the ideal quali-
fication of the object. In our search for goodness or for
beauty again we pursue in each case a different end, and the
subjective is whatever in each case is irrelevant to our end.
The irrelevant may be called the ‘ mere this ’, because it is
left behind in the general immediacy of the moment. And
it may be called the ‘ mere mine’, because my self is a con-
struction based upon the feeling of one finite centre. But
there is no mere ‘ this’ or ‘ mine’ which is such absolutely.
These things are everywhere illusions, unless we take them
as relative.?

The merely personal is the irrelevant ; but this brings t us
to a serious difficulty. How can anything in the end be
irrelevant ? If all in the end hangs together, then, whether
in the world inside us or outside, there seems no place for


on merely from without. Truth does not break into my premises like
a burglar, nor again like a corpse does it suffer my anatomy.

1 Cf. Chap. VI.

® See Appearance, chap. xix, and Chap. Y. p- 119, of this volume.


XI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 329


irrelevancy. Nothing can really be quite loose from any-
thing else in the Universe. On this conclusion I have to
insist, and I accept the consequence that all irrelevancy,
when you go further back, becomes a matter of degree. The
alleged bare conjunction of mere facts is itself a lower kind
of connectedness. It lies at the bottom of the scale of truth
and reality, but not somewhere outside it. And even degree
itself, I have to add, in the end is transcended. Our distinc-
tions all hold good, but not precisely in those forms which
for us are necessary.?

All judgement and truth depend on distinction, upon
abstraction and selection. That which falls outside a par-
ticular judgement is hence taken as not counting for the
purpose, and this not merely in degree but utterly. And,
if truth is to exist, such an attitude is necessary. You
cannot (to put the same thing otherwise) condition your
judgement from the outside. After it is made, you can of
course go on to reflect on it and to correct it, but for you,
while you make it, its truth must be absolute.? Apart from
a selection to which you commit yourself unreservedly and
unconditionally, no, truth is possible.

The selection is not arbitrary, for its object is truth. Our
goal is in the end to gain Reality in an ideal form, to possess
ourselves of a self-contained individual whole. The criterion
here, as everywhere, which we use is the Absolute. And the


1 Cf. here Chap. IX, p. 273.

* Cf. Chap. XIII. It is impossible in the end by any judgement to
qualify Reality as conditioned. R, taken with the condition, implies a
higher R within which it falls and of which it is asserted, This general
principle has of course many applications. Thus (as we have seen) you
may attempt to make the qualification of the object m a judgement
include also the personal satisfaction of the judger. But this inclusion
forthwith makes a new object, and so on indefinitely. Hence the satis-
faction of the judger, as and while he judges, is necessarily excluded from
the judgement. From the other side, the satisfaction, or the psychical
prevalence, which is asserted, cannot be the satisfaction or prevalence
belonging to the act of such assertion. It may or may not be consistent
with this, but to judge concerning such a point belongs.to and involves
a further reflection.


330 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH CHAP.


justification of our procedure is through its result. We seek,
that is, to include the conditions of the assertion within the
assertion itself. And those conditions which we take any-
where as falling outside of our assertion and as irrelevant,
are so actually for our purpose. They are disconnected from
that purpose to such a degree that we can treat them as
‘ matter of fact ’, which is only coincident and which there-
fore is negligible. And our object can be gained, so far as
we gain it, by no other method.?

Every judgement therefore transcends immediacy. It in-
volves a distinction and selection, and it may be said to pass
. beyond whatever for its purpose it leaves outside of its object.
- But the notion of a psychical subject, standing opposed to
the object and then transcended somehow in knowledge,
must be rejected as illusory. It holds good elsewhere, but
only so far as it is an idea which works usefully.

And even the account of truth which we have just given
cannot satisfy in the end. It implies that dualism which,
involved in truth’s essence, for ever stands between it and
its goal. Truth is not perfect so long as it fails anywhere
to include its reality, and its reality is not whole so long as.
any of its conditions are left out. Truth, compelled to
select, is therefore forced to remain for ever defective. Its
purpose, though realized increasingly, is not utterly fulfilled,
and to fulfil that purpose would be to pass beyond the
proper sphere and limits of truth. The problem cannot be
solved by any alleged creation, in and by one act, of truth
and reality in one. And it cannot be solved by that reunion
at a higher level of fact and idea, which we can produce
(I will not ask how far) in our intuitive knowledge or again
in aesthetic perception. For everywhere there is an object
which remains incomplete in itself, and which in any case


) Cf. Chap. IX, p. 266,
2 The same thing holds again of course mutatis mutandis in Ethics and
in Aesthetics, in short wherever you have an object.


XI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 331


could not be an object if nothing else remained outside.
Truth in short is about the real, while that which is only
‘about’ has stopped short of the truth. The complete
attainment of truth’s end is reached only in that Reality
which includes and transcends intelligence.

The question, how far a judgement refers to something
beyond itself, can now be answered as follows. If you take
a judgement as my psychical state, then certainly it refers to
that which is beyond itself. But to take a judgement thus
is to destroy its essence and to be lost in dilemmas. From
a better point of view our answer to the question is twofold.
(i) No judgement can refer to anything beyond itself, since
in every judgement the ultimate Reality is actually present.
In any judgement on the other hand this Reality is incom-
plete, and there will therefore be a difference between the
Reality present and the truth actually reached in the judge-
ment. But this difference remains within the object, and
for truth to pass or to refer beyond that is impossible.
(ii) In the second place every judgement is conjoined with
irrelevant existence and must transcend this. For a judge-
ment to exist, you must have that which, as you judge, you
do not in any sense include within the object. This attitude,
untenable in the end, is essential to truth. But if, going
further, you desire to know how in the end irrelevancy is
explained, the answer is that it cannot be explained. Irrele-
vancy belongs to the fact of finite centres and the process
in time, and this aspect of the Whole I at least have set
down as inexplicable.

I will dwell further on one of the points which has just
been noticed. Judgement refers always an ideal content. to
reality. Now in every judgement this reality is at once the
whole Universe and something less than the Universe. (a)
Although judgement is mine, and again involves a selection,


+ Those who have done me the honour to read my book will know this.
Other critics may be referred to the Index (in any edition of my work,
under the heading Inexplicable.


332 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH CHAP.


still what it qualifies is the one all-containing Reality, present
alike to you and to me and to every one else? Let us sup-
pose this to be otherwise, and knowledge is destroyed. For
knowledge apart from the real is nothing, and the real again,
on our view, is nothing if apart from the Universe. And we
may once more remind ourselves that to leave truth for
something outside which it does not include, is illusory and
senseless. On the other hand, suppose, for instance, that
the lapse of time were ultimately real in our experience, then
what on such a view would have become of our past? To
us it could be nothing, unless indeed we possessed a mira-
culous ‘ Faculty of Memory’. If there is not, present in
this passing ‘now’, a Reality which contains all ‘ nows’
future and past, the whole of our truth and knowledge
must be limited to the ‘now’ that we perceive. For to
reach a larger Universe by transcendence would really be
nonsense.
On the other side (6) what I have in judgement is not
the whole Universe at once. This seems obvious, and, for
example, it is clear that I must leave the present to gain, so
far as I am able to gain, the past and future. For I do not
possess these as present. JI have everywhere indeed present
-to me the whole Universe, but I have not all of its detail
or even its actual complete form. In knowledge what is felt
and perceived at any moment is but little, and what again
is true is but ideal. That which we call our real world, the
past and future of ourselves and of others, and the whole
body of things common to us—all this in the main is ideal
construction made by selection and synthesis. It is the
* Universe realizing itself as truth within finite centres. And
the immediate experience on which this common world, so
far indeed as it is common, is based, is at any time and
in any centre obviously incomplete. The entire undivided
Universe in short is everywhere present, but it is present as
appearance and but partially. And, though it again in and


XI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 333


for us transcends this partial character, it never does so
completely.

We have to guard ourselves here against a double mistake.
Truth, we have seen, qualifies the Reality by an ideal con-
tent. And we may be led to take on one side this ideal
content as detached wholly from the Real, to which then we
apply it. And the Reality on its side may perhaps be re-
garded as an undetermined object, such as mere Being or
again the Universe at large. But, in the first place, there.
is no such thing as an ideal content which absolutely fails to
qualify the Real. Except in a relative sense, there are no
ideas which float or are suspended, or are assumed or pre-
sumed or in any way entertained, except as adjectives of the
Real. This is a common mistake which leads everywhere
to dangerous confusion and error. And in the next place
the Reality (as we have seen), while it is the Universe, is
never the mere Universe. It is always also a selected reality.
The selection may be made only by a designation that does
not seek to specify, but the selection always is there. My
idea is not attached to a blank object, but is launched into
a context which more or less is distinguished and ordered.
And thus judgement in principle, we can say, involves
mediation and is in a sense inferential. It asserts some-
thing of and in a whole, and the place of this something in
the whole and the relation which it bears to other elements,
are problems implied in the assertion. ‘ Reality is such
that S is P,’ may be taken, we saw, as a formula which
expresses the nature of truth. S is P (to put it otherwise)
because Reality is such. The ‘ such’ is that order which we


1 The reader must not take me to have forgotten the worlds of art and
of social reality. Iam confining myself here to the problem of knowledge
and of truth in the narrower sense. ;

® See Chap. III. Into this error, with really no decent excuse, I fell
myself for a time (Principles of Logic, chap. i). The second mistake
I certainly never made, though I failed to be clear on the matter. But

‘see pp. 109, 438 (ibid.).


334 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH CHAP.


realize progressively in an ideal system. The ‘ because’
is the conditions more or less specified, the intermediaries
which ideally connect S and P.1 This mediation must
remain, while truth is truth, a work for ever unfinished, but
the search for its completion is implied in the very essence
of judgement,


I will pass on now to consider two questions which:the
reader perhaps may find more interesting. (a) Has every
truth which I think been thought before ? Did it, as truth,
always exist before? And, together with this, I will ask,
Can truth or knowledge alter reality? (6) Further again, in
what sense, if in any sense, can I be said to make truth ?

(a) Neither this problem nor any other problem can be
solved by bringing in the potential or virtual. This is a
device specially favoured by ‘ empiricists ’, and is perhaps
the screen that serves most to veil their bankruptcy. Prof.
James, we have seen (p. 147), can furnish us with a signal
illustration of this misuse. But I cannot pause here to dwell]
on a matter which I must venture to regard as settled, The
recourse to the potential is everywhere a worthless self-
deception, and, so far as I am aware, no serious attempt has

been made to justify it against criticism.

To pass from this point, there is a sense in which we may
maintain that every truth, however old, is new at any time
when it is affirmed. And, for myself, I agree that in this
sense no judgement ever is repeated. The occasions are
different and so are diverse, and, for myself, I am bound to
hold that the diversity of each appearance in some way in
the end qualifies the identical content, But this qualification,
we have seen, must here be disregarded as irrelevant.


1 To take the intermediaries as mere events in time is a ruinous error
(see pp. 146-7). ; ;

* Other terms of the same kind are ‘nascent’, or some word ending
in ‘ible’, or, possibly again, #ay.

* Cf. Prof. Bosanquet’s Logic, vol. ii, p. 310.


xI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 335


What then am I to answer to the inquiry whether a truth,
’ which I think, is possibly now thought for the first time?
To go beyond possibility seems to me here out of the ques-
tion. For the full extent of finite mind, and of the events
which happen there, is to me clearly unknown. To this
" you may reply that, for anything we can tell, the world of
finite minds, with the exception of a small province, is out
of temporal relation with ourselves, and that therefore any
general assertion of priority in time could have no meaning.
With this naturally I agree, but our doubt cannot in this
way be removed. Let us confine ourselves to those finite
minds among which our before and after hold good, and yet
. how much even of this region do we certainly know? Even.
here to assert positively that my truth has never been for
another mind before me, seems not in my power. On the
other hand the possibility of such a first appearance must in
many cases be admitted. The description of truth as that
which is essentially common to more minds than one must
(we may remark in passing) be rejected as false. Within
our series the individual conditions may, for anything we
know, neither be shared nor recur, and the truth may appear
never but to one person, and only once.

I shall be told perhaps that there is a higher Mind and
Intelligence by which all truths are thought. Even if we
admit this, there, however, remains, in connexion with this,
a question as to the validity of before and after. I will not,

. however, discuss that question, since I do not accept the
Intelligence referred to. I am not asking here how God
is to be conceived by the religious consciousness.1 For me
(readers of my book will know) the Absolute is not God, and
we here are dealing theoretically with first principles. Cer-
tainly I admit that the Absolute Experience may perhaps
contain some matter which is not included within the experi-
ence of finite minds. I incline to the opposite view, but I


1 See Chap. XV.


336 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH CHAP.


still think that the doubt must be admitted. Here, however,
the question is confined to judgement and truth, and I see
“no reason to suppose that, outside of some finite mind, truth
and judgement are possible. And hence on the main issue
without hesitation I can reply thus. “It is possible for:
a finite mind to have a truth which, as truth and judgement,
is for no other mind whatever, and has never in time existed
before.

But I must hasten to add that any such answer is one-
sided. It pays its regard solely to that which is but one
aspect of the whole matter. Wherever you have truth you
must have one or more seriés of appearances in time, of
events which occur one before or after another. On the
other hand, with no more than this, truth would have no
existence. Events happen because of that which is beyond
all happening and at once contains and subordinates its
temporal form. The Reality, above mere time and mere
relations, possesses now and always all truths, whether actual
or possible. And hence the whole view for which a truth
first was not and then is, must be set down as in the end
inadmissible and false. You may therefore insist that my
present truth was waiting there and has been found. Such
a statement once more must in the end be called untenable,
because it again is but partially true. But it is truer far
than the assertion that a truth can originate as this or that
person first conceives it.

Starting from such a basis we can now dispose rapidly of
a further question, Is it possible that any knowledge should
alter its object ? It is easy here to answer in the negative,
and even to insist that the opposite is really self-evident.
But the assertion, however self-evident, that reality or fact.
is not altered by knowledge, is still but a partial truth, which,
taken as more, becomes false. For if truth and knowledge,
when they come to exist, make no alteration in reality, to


1 Appearance, pp- 273-4, 527-8. And see pp. 350~1 of the present chapter.


xI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 337


what other region, we have to ask, does their appearance
belong? To deny that knowledge happens, or to assert that,
happening, it makes no difference to reality, seems a mon-
strous paradox. And you cannot dispose of such an objection
by insisting blindly on your opposite thesis. Both thesis and
antithesis are but aspects of a truth which at once overrules
and embraces them. The Reality was known always, and
now its knowledge occurs. My contribution leaves it unin-
creased, and yet is indispensably requisite. The fact of my
knowledge makes an evident change in reality, and yet the
idea that the Universe is changed by me must be rejected
as folly. We are moving here in a region of partial truths
broken away from that which includes all aspects in a higher
experience.

We cannot always be labouring to express at once the
complementary aspects of the whole. We are forced, to suit
our varying purpose, from time to time to make statements
which, as they are made, contradict one the other. Unless
the Reality itself enters into the process of events, unless it
itself is what it becomes there, unless it itself discovers itself
to itself and us, and takes on a change from that discovery—
the Reality remains outside of knowledge, and itself is un-
real. On the other hand if that which is discovered is not
found, if that which appears is not revealed, if in short the
thing, which we get to see, was really not there—then reality
and knowledge once more are illusory. But we are unable
to combine these partial truths so as to understand in detail
how both of them go to make the Universe.


1 The attempt to escape by urging that a difference is made but made
only to me, cannot succeed. The difficulties which arise here should be
well known, and can never, I think, be met. To fall back on an external
relation, which, though external, is lopsided and so makes a difference to
one term, seems even ridiculous. The conclusion which will follow really
is that neither knowledge, nor anything else, can make any difference to

+ anything, and that anything like alteration is an illusion which itself could
~pt exist.” ;

by, ae Z


338 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH CHAP.


(2) The position, just reached, anticipates our answer to the
question which follows. Prof. James and Prof. Dewey have
each advocated the view that truth is made. I cannot, how-
ever, find that either of them has made an attempt to consider
seriously the whole subject.1_ If I can make truth, I can
make also, I presume, error and falsehood, and goodness and
beauty, and whatever is opposite to these. Everything, in
brief, that is covered by the terms ‘value’ and ‘worth’, is in
the end merely made. It will repay us at some length to
examine this statement. The conclusion which I have to
advocate is briefly as follows. The doctrine that this or that
man, or set of men, can make truth, is in the end false and
even monstrous. From one point of view I can be truly said
to bring truth into being, either for. the first time or once
more. But there is no tenable point of view from which
I can be properly said to make truth.

Any such expression is condemned, we may notice first,
by the usage of language. I may make a true assertion or a
mistake, or again an experiment, but, unless I violate lan-
guage, I cannot make either a truth or anerror oralie.2, Now
Tam not suggesting that such usage is everywhere infallible,
but I am sure that it deserves everywhere our careful atten-
tion. And in this case it is based, I submit, upon a distinction
and a principle which is valid.

_-What is ‘to make’? It is to produce in time, and
usually also in space, a certain existence. What so exists
may, or may not, be what we call a thing which goes on to
endure for a period. Neither endurance, nor again the
character of being a thing, is here really essential. I can,
for instance, make a noise or an experiment. What is
essential here and essential absolutely is the aspect of event


1 Cf. Chap. V, p. 141. Prof. Dewey has republished the article there
noticed, but has not tried, I think, to go any further into the matter.
(The above was written before Prof. James’s lamented death.)

? I can make a lie only when the lie is regarded as a thing which exists,
and the phrase, even then, is clearly irregular.


XI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 339


and of temporal existence. It is this aspect of happening in
time on which the word ‘ make’ lays its stress. And hence
to make anything, so far as anything goes beyond existence
in time, is not possible. I can make a box but not the nature
of the materials, nor again the properties of the box itself
when -once made. -I can make, as we saw, a noise, but to
make an explosion begins at once to strain language. The
explosion refers to that which is beyond the mere course of
events. In this respect it is like an act, and-I cannot be said
to make anact. And on the same principle truth and error,
or beauty or goodness or badness, are none of them things
which are made. The life of none of them is confined
within that element to which making points, and to which
it gives emphasis. They appear in time certainly, and as
certainly they can be made to happen, but they cannot
be identified wholly, or even mainly,. with their aspect of
existence and fact.4 ~ >

Truth, beauty and goodness must appear as temporal
facts, but their essence does not consist in that appearance.
It transcends the lapse of time and the flux of change, and it
everywhere in this sense is eternal. Wherever you have an
object taken as good or beautiful or true, or as the opposite
of one of these,? you have at once something which reaches
and holds beyond time and event. And, if it were otherwise,
a truth, true at one moment, might at another moment have
become a falsehood ; and, if so, obviously the whole notion of

1 Illustrations, I know, are dangerous, but perhaps to some persons the
above may be clearer if I state it as follows. Suppose that there is a
necessary way of doing something, say of making a box, can you be said
to make this way? No, it may perhaps be answered, but all the same
I make the box, and, if so, why not truth? The reason why you cannot
may be put thus. The box can be regarded, and is regarded, as separable
from the way in which it has to be made. But, with truth, an abstraction
of this kind is not possible.. There is no truth left if you abstract from
the way in which truth is made, a way which itself is not made. What is
made is therefore something which, taken by itself, is not truth.


2 You can, we saw, ‘make a mistake,’ but this is because, and so far as,
you can regard a mistake merely as an event.


-22


340 ‘ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH cua.


truth is destroyed. ‘Oh no,’ I may perhaps hear, ‘a truth
at any moment may become false, and I can make it false
and can make something else true.” Such a reply to my
mind is based on sheer confusion and want of thought. We
can say of course first, ‘ Now it is light,’ and then, ‘ Now it
is dark,’ but obviously, with this, the first truth is not falsi-
fied. That truth was stated ambiguously and imperfectly,
and involved a condition not made explicit.4_ But assuredly,
so far as it was true, its truth-is eternal. And of course
again you can alter the fact. You can make it so that now
not the former truth but another truth holds good. You
have brought this other truth into existence, and you have
made it appear. But on this ground to assert that you have
made it, shows, to my mind, mere confusion.

And even if ‘ Humanity ’ is brought in, the same answer
applies. This seems to be obvious if by Humanity you mean
merely the set of beings on our planet. Or if, attempting to
profit by a wretched ambiguity long since exposed, you seek
tacitly to identify Humanity with all finite mind, or perhaps
the entire Universe, still your conclusion is false. Even from
such an extreme paradox it does not follow that truth can be
made. The issue still turns upon the way in which Human-
ity or the Universe is taken, and on the position given there
to the aspect of temporal event. But it is difficult to discuss
a doctrine which its supporters seem afraid even to try to
state clearly.”

~ | Every truth is eternal, even, for instance, such a truth as
‘I now have a toothache’. Truth qualifies that which is

~ “beyond mere succession, and it takes whatever it contains
beyond the flux of mere event. To be, it must appear there,
“but, to be truth, it must also transcend that appearance,
~ The, same thing holds again without exception of all beauty


i See Chap. IX, pp. 262 foll.
2 T have repeatedly called attention to what I must now regard as mere
bankruptcy veiled by ambiguity. See the Index, s.v. Humanity.


XI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 341


and goodness, and of everything in short, however mean,
which is apprehended as an object.1. You may be said to
make me happy, but to make it beautiful or right or good or
true that I am happy, violates both language and reason.
Such characters do not happen, and still less are they made.
In a sense you make them to be, but for any man to make
their being is inconceivable. Though revealed in time and
in our ‘ mortal world’, they are not subject to its chance
and change, and, though in this world, they remain some-
thing which never is of it.

The conclusion is suggested that, if that which calls itself

‘empiricism’ takes reality to have its life in the mortal
world of events, and holds time and change to be ultimately
real, no empiricism can give an account of truth or beauty,
or, generally, of goodness or worth. It will be compelled to
break openly with the plainest of facts, or to obscure its bank-
ruptcy in a mist of phrases such as ‘ potential’ and ‘ virtual’,

I will ask finally, at the cost of repetition, how far it can

be said that ‘ Truth does not depend on me’. There are
misunderstandings here against which it is vital to guard
our minds. Obviously, first, in the case where the truth is
about me, the assertion that it in no way depends on me is
false. On the other hand, if the ‘ me’ stands for that which
is irrelevant in and to the judgement, the above assertion (we
have seen) will hold. Its more probable meaning, however,
is that truth does not depend on my acé.* And here, as we
have argued, a distinction must be made. My act certainly
can be said to bring a truth into existence, but there is that
in the truth which essentially is beyond any act in time.
The truth can also (we have seen) be said to be prior to my
act and to be found.

1 Not only is all beauty an object, but it is even taken as that which is
self-existent. Cf. Appearance, chap. xxvi.

2 If the ‘my ’ is here taken in opposition to the object, and it is assumed


that my act is not also the act of the Reality, that would be of course
once more an error, which has been dealt with sufficiently (p. 327).


342 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH  cuar.


* My act never is creative. It presupposes always what we
have called the dualism between fact and idea, and to create
both at once is beyond us. And thus the truth about a fact
must be for ever beyond it. It would be otherwise if truth
were the immediate experience which to some extent my will
can produce. It would be otherwise, again, if the ultimate
teal union of both aspects could be brought into being by me.
But, since creation is impossible for my will, that must still
be limited to and by fact. Any act of mine is therefore com-
pelled to be one-sided. It brings into temporal existence
something which, except for its aspect of existence, cannot
be properly said to depend on the act.

’. You may reply that the whole thing is a matter of em-
phasis. You may object that in acting, and even in making;
if you insist. on emphasizing too strongly the aspect of mere

event, you.in the end would have no act, and nothing in the
end could be said even to be made. In the end both aspects
are inseparable. I do not seek to dispute this, for in what
has gone before I have been endeavouring throughout to urge
(if you ‘please) that falsehood lies in a one-sided, emphasis.
And to say that truth depends on me, and still more to assert
that it is made by my act, is therefore certainly false. For
by its emphasis on the aspect of event such an assertion
really means that in this aspect consists truth’s essence.
And it really denies that other aspect of eternity apart
from which truth has utterly perished. Whatever else you
can assert about truth, you must still be able to add that
it was, and is waiting there to be found, and that it is made
by no man? .

I will now proceed to touch in passing on two further

' Everything (to repeat this) in the end depends on everything else, and
connexion is:in the end- a matter of degree. It is our selective emphasis
for a certain purpose which makes the relative absolute. And the point
here is this, that, in asserting the dependence of truth on niy act, the


emphasis and the selection is not warranted by the degree of connexion.
® On the whole matter the reader is referred to Prof. Bosanquet’s Logic,


XI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH - 343


questions, (a) What is the relation between reality and
truth ? and (b) Does truth copy reality? I have dealt
already with these subjects,1 but, in view of persistent
misunderstanding, I will venture on a brief repetition.

(a) You cannot ask how in any proper sense truth is
related to the real. For such a relation to be possible, you
would require reality on one side and truth on the other.
And, since without truth reality would not be real, and truth
apart from reality would not be true, the question asked is
ridiculous. There cannot in the end be a relation between
two inseparable aspects of one whole. On the other hand
you can inquire as to how truth stands to reality, in this
sense that you can ask in what way truth is different from
and falls short of the Whole. What is it lacking to truth, on
the addition of which truth itself would be reality? This
is a question which to some extent can be discussed and
answered. ,

Reality for me (if I may be pardoned such repetition) is
one individual Experience, It is a higher unity above our
immediate experience, and above all ideality and relations.
It is above thought and will and aesthetic perception. But,
though transcending these modes of experience, it includes
them all fully. Such a whole is Reality, and, as against this
whole, truth is merely ideal. It is indeed never a mere idea,
for certainly there are no mere ideas. It is Reality appear-
ing and expressing itself in that one-sided way which we call
ideal. Hence truth is identical with Reality in the sense


vol. ii, chap. x. Practice, he points out (p. 321), finds as well as makes,
and knowledge alters as well as finds. The reader perhaps will recognize
that, if we have a complete whole completing itself in the temporal develop-
ment of finite selves, these apparent inconsistencies must be. The universe
in knowledge makes itself in and by me into something néarer to its
full actual nature. ‘The result therefore is found. Again in practice the
idea which I carry out into existence—so altering existence—was actually
there for me as an ideal, and I then find it in what I make to exist.

1 I may refer in particular to Chap. V. Cf. Prof. Bosanquet’s Logic,
chapters ix and x.


344 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH CHAP.


that, in order to perfect itself, it would have to become
Reality. On the other side truth, while it is truth, differs
from Reality, and, if it ceased to be different, would cease
to be true. But how in detail all this is possible, cannot be
understood.

Further, the ultimate Reality is not a development, and it
is absurd even to ask if it progresses. On the other hand
it essentially contains a process, or rather processes, in time.
And, looking at it from this partial aspect, we may say that
the Reality uses ideas in order to realize itself. Immediate
experience, itself showing ideality in lapse and change, in its
endeavour to complete itself develops truth. It produces
ideas progressively freed more and more from union with
particular objects of sense. It uses these ideas to procure
for itself a fuller experience, both practically and in higher
perceptions and in intuitive understandings and in apprehen-
sions of beauty. It is the nature of ideas, we may say, to
pass over into a completer whole which both subordinates
and includesthem. Even for us in our experience this end
partially is attained. And in the absolute Reality it is
reached entirely and throughout, though obviously for us
not visibly.

On the one side, therefore, our experience remains in part
merely ideal, and thus, within certain limits, an activity
which is but theoretical is called for and is justified. With
every side of our life all the other sides are inseparably im-
plied, but it is impossible that everywhere in detail these
other sides should be verifiable. So far as the detail goes,
we everywhere, and not merely in theory alone, may be said
to rest upon faith. But on the other hand the character
of the absolute Reality is everywhere manifest, and we can
possess no other possible criterion of truth?

(o) For a discussion of the question as to how far truth
is a copy of Reality, I must once more refer the reader to
Chap. V, but I will repeat briefly what seems called for


XI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 345


here. On any view like mine to speak of truth as in the
end copying Reality, would be senseless. To copy is to
reproduce in some other existence more or less of the char-
acter of an object which is before your mind. Now, apart
from knowledge and truth, there can be no original object
before you to copy. And hence to make truth consist in
copying is obviously absurd. This question I take to have
been settled, once and for all time, by the post-Kantian
criticism of the doctrine of the Thing-in-itself. That criti-
‘cism F take to have proved that, outside of truth itself, there
can’ be no criterion of truth.

The working to carry out a certain general character to
construct an ideal world according to a certain prescription,
would surely not be copying in detail. And, when the
general character and prescription is itself again not copied,
the idea of copying is nowhere applicable.

Copying, as an ultimate account of truth, is therefore out
of the question, and to ask what would be gained by it, if it
were possible, is an idle inquiry. I have spoken of course,
so far, of that copying which is absolute, that which has to
reproduce in truth an object which does not already itself
more or less consist in truth. On the other hand with copy-
ing in a relative sense we are all familiar, though the extent
even of this we are prone to exaggerate. Past and future
facts, for example, can scarcely be copied, unless we are
assisted by some miraculous ‘ Faculty’. We come nearest
to copying intellectually when we attempt to describe a per-
ceived fact. But, even here, the fact itself depends more or
less upon idealization, and the reproduction of it involves a
further process of the same kind. And, where this can per-
haps be doubted as to the fact itself, as, e.g.,in sensations of
pleasure and pain; the conclusion as to our truth about this
fact will still hold. Truth must select and abstract, and, if it
failed to do this, and if it repeated feeling, it would be itself
mere feeling and no longer truth. But I will not venture


346 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH CHAP.


here further’ to abuse the reader’s patience,! but will pass on
to-deal with another well-known topic.


What is the good of truth? To ask a question is here,
as everywhere, to imply an assertion. And the assertion in-
volved in the above inquiry is often as follows. The inquirer
may affirm (a) that truth itself is not good, and he may (d)
imply also that some other aspect of life, taken by itself, is
good. This is the position of the ordinary Hedonist, and
he at least knows, or may be supposed to know, what he
means. But it is the position of others also, who possibly
may know what they mean, but whose mental state, for any-
thing that appears, is certainly otherwise. Any one, however,
who in philosophy asks such a question as ‘ What is the
good of’,? is obviously bound, when challenged, to state his
answer to the inquiry, ‘ What is good’,

On any view such as mine no one aspect of life is good
ultimately by itself. To set up any one aspect of life as the
absolute Good or Evil, and to reduce the rest of life to mere
means, is a most serious error. Relatively of course with
every aspect of life this point of view is tenable. Morality
and religion can be regarded as means to worldly success or
' to bodily health. We can say the same thing of pleasure, or
again pleasure may be taken not as a means but as the end
which all else should subserve. The pursuit of beauty in art
may be spoken of as a more or less useful amusement, or as
a way perhaps of keeping out of vice. And truth again also
undeniably is useful, and is a means and instrument valued
for the sake of other purposes. All this is justifiable, but
justifiable only when we remember that it is but relative.
" 1 tt may of course be said that with truth we have the same idea in two
different contexts. We have it before us as an adjective of the real, and
at the same time it has its place in the series of psychical events. This,
I should agree, is indubitable, but, once more here, there is obviously
nothing like copying from an original.


* The same remark mutatis mutandis applies to the covert assertion
contained in such phrases as ‘ instrument’ and ‘use’ (pp. 134-3).


XI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 347


To turn any one aspect of life by itself into the end is false
ultimately. What is ultimately good is life itself or ee
ence as a whole.!

The question, What is the good of truth? can (as we nave
seen above) be asked properly, if it means, How does truth
stand to, and how does it conduce to experience or life as
a whole? And, except as so conducing, you can certainly
affirm that truth is not good, and that it possesses no value
whatever. I emphasize this assertion, and I once more re-
peat that truth’s natural destiny is to return once more into
unbroken union with Reality, and to restore at a higher level
that totality out of which it has.emerged. But that this
destiny is accomplished, verifiably and in detail, within and
throughout our experience seems demonstrably false. And
(as we have seen). within our experience truth remains and
must for ever remain relatively free.*

The attempt to deny or to condemn the relative freedom
of truth and of art, involves to my mind, in general, mere
prejudice and error. And it is difficult to argue where, as
opposed to you, you for the most part can perceive little else
but confusion. But it may perhaps tend:‘to make this whole
matter clearer, if we consider it from another side. Let us
take the instance of a high and heroical will for good at any
cost to oneself, an effort which, so far as we can see, has

1 It is possible to identify Reality with the Good, but I prefer not to do
this. It is unnecessary to enter on the question here. See pp. 89, 179.

2? While denying this freedom, Prof.. Moore, speaking for the ‘ prag-
matist’ (Pragmatism, p. 168), allows, as I understand, to thought a value
of its own, though not in ‘independence’. It is, I think, important to
have got, even as far as this. But what surely follows is that to speak of
thought, e.g., as instrumental, is not permissible. The rest of the whole
process is surely also instrumental, as thought is, and may itself, by the
same right, be taken as instrumental to thought. But Prof. Moore does
not say this, and once more as to the position of beauty, so far as I have
seen, he says nothing at all. But to deal with these matters is surely
imperative. However, between such a ‘pragmatist’ as Prof. Moore
and myself, the points of difference (as I said before), in comparison with


the amount of agreement, seem really small. And again with regard to
Prof. Dewey the same remark, I think, would hold good.


348 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH CHAP.


failed to carry itself out. This effort, for anything that we
can discover, has failed, even when you look at its indirect
result in human history, and it has failed even when you
regard merely the inner life of the man who has made it. It
may have left that life more frustrated and more discordant,
and in a sense really lower, than if the man had never risen
to the struggle. Now, is an effort of this kind to be set down
as sheer waste.and loss? I abstract here from any belief as
to a difference made to a state of existence after death. For
such a belief may be true or false, but to call it verifiable
seems nonsense, if we mean by that to imply that we can
find that and how it holds in every detail. Apart then from
any belief as to a future state, what are we to say of those
moral efforts which, with all their intensity, appear to have
failed? Are we to call them mere waste, or perhaps some-
thing even worse than waste? While on some other views
this seems inevitable, I can give an opposite reply. For me
the Absolute is there to see that nothing in the world is lost.
That effort which for our vision is wasted, passes over be-
yond our vision into reality and is crowned with success.
Of all the foolish criticisms (and they are many) which have
been directed against the Absolute, the most foolish of all
perhaps is that it is useless. And this does not mean that,,
whatever I do, it is all one to the Absolute. The Absolute
is there to secure that everywhere the highest counts most
and the lowest counts least. For it is at once the active
criterion and the supreme power.
Truth and beauty then on the one hand within limits are
free. On the other hand truth and beauty, all without
‘exception, conduce to a higher Reality. But in detail this
consummation must remain for us invisible. The idea, how-
ever, that any one truth is just as good as another is sense-
‘less. A truth is true so far as it works, in the first place
theoretically, and truths, so far as they are empty and are
idle, fail to work. They fail proportionately to make a


X1 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 349 |


contribution to the Absolute. But there are criticisms to
which I feel that it is useless to reply. It is not giventoany
man to argue against self-satisfied ignorance.!


In conclusion I will ask how far the view which I hold is
open to the charge of ‘subjectivism’ and ‘relativism ’.
What I mean by relativism here is the consequence that,
beyond this or that man or set of men, there is no truth or
reality. In neither of these senses (between which of course
there is in principle no difference) can my view be said to
end inrelativism. With regard to Solipsism there is, I think,
no occasion for me to notice any criticism which ignores or
is ignorant of what I have said on this subject.2_ And it is
equally obvious, I presume, that, for me, reality and truth
are not confined within the limits of any one set of finite
beings, such, for example, as the human race.

Certainly for me beyond and outside of all finite minds
there is no truth. From the doctrine which I inherited all
such transcendence has in principle been banished. And
certainly for that doctrine, once more, the desire and the
striving of finite minds is essential to Reality. The im-
manent will of the Universe, for knowledge and truth within
those minds, is impossible unless it is in one with their per-
sonalendeavour. If to hold this is to embrace subjectivism,


1 Cf. Chapters IV and V. ‘

2 Appearance, chap. xxi. It may be useful perhaps to recall that
Mr. E. D. Fawcett (Mind, No. 78, p. 200) understood me to start from a
‘provisional Solipsism’. Mr. Fawcett attended here, I think, merely to one
side of my view. On that view the whole Universe is directly aware of
itself in each finite centre, but'so as not there to be aware of the contents
of any other finite centre as they are experienced immediately by ttself within
that other centre. The highest all-embracing experience is never reached
in any finite mind. How this is possible, I repeat, is inexplicable. I fully
understand that the logical result of applying here an ‘ Either-or’, is
either a denial of any self or else an assertion of Solipsism, whichever of
these alternatives you please. But I do not see how it can be right to
suppose that I accept either of these alternatives. I may add that,
if I accepted either of them provisionally, I should have to accept it as
final. But whether there is any real disagreement here between Mr. Fawcett
and myself, I cannot say.


350 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH CHAP.


then assuredly to subjectivism I have always been wedded.
But, upon a view such. as mine, that which is ‘ objective’
can be distinguished from that which is merely personal,
and I have shown the principle upon which this vital
distinction is made. And any view, I would add, in
which such a distinction does not hold good, is ruined irre-
trievably.+


1 A point on which difficulty, I believe, has been felt, is the account to
be given of Nature and of its position in the Universe. Nature has seemed
on my view to possess no external reality. But this apparent failure is
mainly perhaps due to a defect in my exposition. I have emphasized
perhaps too one-sidedly our inability to arrive here at an ultimate explana-
tion. I never sought to deny that in our own wills we have the experience
of what we may call a power of real externalization. Certainly the idea
that any such externalization can break somehow quite out of the absolute
Experience, to my mind remains untenable. But to a conclusion which
stops short of that I am far from being in principle opposed.

I will venture, in republishing this footnote, to add some further re-
marks on the subject of Nature. The fact of finite centres, with change
in time and apparent externality, must remain, I would once more repeat,
in my view inexplicable. Certainly in volition we experience the carrying
out of what is ideal into the world over against us. And, though no
ultimate explanation can in my judgement be found in Will (cf. Chap. IV),
it may be well to consider the fact of Nature from this side.

The absolute Reality of course is will, since it includes will in something
higher. On their side the wills of finite centres, though real, are never
the mere wills of these several centres. Experienced volition is always °
the will of the Whole in one with my own. What therefore is carried out
into existence in and by my will is always more than any content which
merely is mine. The content carried out belongs also and, in one sense,
just as much to the Whole. And not only is this so, but some content
is realized in and by my will, though this content goes beyond that of
which in willing I was aware. To some extent this realization beyond
what I have consciously willed seems evident in fact, and how far it
conceivably might go, we seem unable to say. My will thus carries out
into existence, and into the external world, more than in one sense was
actually contained in my will.

It is thus important to ask about the source of such additional matter.
Is there any margin of content over and above that which is experienced
in all finite centres? The totality of experiences must (this is obvious)
have some content beyond that which falls in the experiences as several.
For otherwise the totality (this seems clear) would be nothing. But is
there (here is the point) in the absolute Experience any margin of content
beyond what falls in the finite centres as unified? In my book (Appear-
ance, pp. 273-4, and pp. 527-8) I raised a doubt on this point, a doubt
which later I have tended perhaps too much to ignore. The question is
difficult, and since we do not know how the finite centres are One, the


XI ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH 352


For me truth gives the absolute Reality, the whole Uni-
verse as in its general character it really is. It gives its
result imperfectly, as I have explained. But, so far as this
truth goes, it is impossible to think that for any other mind
it is otherwise. And, in attempting to entertain such an
idea, you succeed merely yourself in thinking inconsistently.
On the other hand, outside of this general character, in a
sense relativism holds good. That which in particular, for
one mind or one set of minds, is true or real or good, may
be the opposite for another individual or set of individuals.
And how far in detail this diversity may extend we have no
means of knowing. In such a sense our knowledge must
always be relative. But this detail remains subordinate to
our general principle. It is not mere ‘ matter’ conjoined
externally to an indifferent ‘form’. Any such indifference
(some critics tend to forget) is a positive doctrine which it is
incumbent on them to prove, and which for me is untenable.
The detail, upon our view, can vary only so far as the
general character is preserved. Herice our faith in the world,
in truth and in beauty and goodness, is unshaken by doubt.
And, if so, to hold that belief in an Absolute can make no
difference to any one or to anything, seems ridiculous, while


question possibly may be unmeaning. On the other hand I cannot maintain
that it is so, and hence I am forced to admit as possible this margin of
content not included in finite centres. Such a margin, if so, might go to
make up that sphere which appears to each of us as the world of external
existence. It would contribute to, or at least affect, that order of dis-
orderly perception in which other centres appear to mine: But, beyond
this, it would never enter into my consciousness or will. And, though
made one in the whole with all finite centres, it could never be properly
called the content of any.

I do not think that, in order to account for Nature, such a supposition
is necessary. But to my mind it is tenable, and any one, to whom it
seems to remove difficulty, is, I think, right if he adopts it. On the other
hand beyond this point I am unable to move. I could not admit that
any externality is more in the end than appearance. A real split or
sundering in the Universe I am forced to reject, and anything of the kind
leads, so far as I see, to difficulties far worse than those which it may
appear to banish or lessen. But this is a point on which naturally I am
willing to hear reason.


352 ON SOME ASPECTS OF TRUTH  cnHap. xi


to intimate that this is even my own opinion is worse than
ridiculous. The Absolute is that by which all reality, and
all truth and goodness and beauty, in their various degrees
are, and without which they are nothing. And, if there is
any one in whose eyes this makes no difference, I address
myself to others. .

The above are those aspects of truth on which I wished to
remark. ‘ I cannot hope that I have succeeded in not tasking
the patience of the reader. My remarks have at the best
been disjointed, and I have repeated (it is the vice of ad-
vancing years) what I have said, and have said perhaps too
often before. But I will end by insisting once more on that
with which I began. Except in connexion with a view or
views as to the nature of Reality, any controversy as to the
nature of knowledge and truth in the end is futile. Such a
discussion may be more or less instructive, and it may be
stimulating more or less, but it never can deal with the real
question at issue, or arrive at any final result whether
positive or negative.


CHAPTER XII -


SOME REMARKS ON MEMORY AND
INFERENCE 1 ,


My object in this paper is to discuss certain questions
about the nature of memory in connexion with inference on
one side and mere imagination on the other. I have been
led to write it partly from a desire to explain and justify the
position which I took elsewhere.2 But the reader need not
concern himself with the matter from this point of view,
and I shall endeavour to treat the subject independently.
On the other hand, even if I were able anywhere to deal
satisfactorily with all the problems involved, the present
limits are much too narrow. I can offer no more than a
discussion imperfect at the best, and in which the reader
must not expect to find anything really new.

We may notice first the well-known ambiguity of the word
‘memory’. I have used, and shall use, the term in what
seems its proper sense, the consciousness of past events as
having been in fact experienced in my past. But memory
is often employed otherwise. It may be taken to embrace
all recognition and sense of familiarity, to cover persisting
after-sensation and resurgent images, sporadic and undated.
It may be a general head which includes all retentiveness
and reproduction, and may be enlarged to cover every habit,
even where habit rightly or wrongly is applied to a case of |
mere physical mechanism. And hence nothing is easier
than to defend memory as basal, if not as quite ultimate,
and to refute the true view that it is a complex and late

1 This chapter appeared first in Mind for April 1899.


2 In my Principles of Logic.
1or4 Aa


354 SOME REMARKS ON CHAP.


phenomenon. If, however, we keep in mind its various
senses, less labour may be wasted.

Memory in its proper sense seems certainly complex, and
involves a high degree and development of thinking, and
memory for any sound psychology must be derivative and
secondary, We may find it for the moment more convenient
to postulate a faculty inexplicable and ultimate, by which I
know my past events isolated or even in their synthesis with
my present, an organ which gives us really the really exist-
ing past, or somehow immediately reports to us that which
perhaps really does not exist—an oracle, which, although
inexplicable or even perhaps because inexplicable, is to be
accounted veracious. But the path which seems easy may
be long in the end when it involves us in confusion, and a
miracle, however cheap, in the end is dear when it entails
the subversion of principle. And if against fact we are led
to postulate the veracity of memory, that postulate, as
I shall show, leads to ruinous scepticism.

Memory is an ideal.construction of the past by which the
present reality is qualified, or we know the past as an enlarge-
ment by ideal content of reality beyond the present. In
this respect memory does not differ, it will be urged at once,
from at least some inference and even from fancy. But,
without at present touching on these differences, it will be
better to ask in general how we are able at all to think of the
past. There is, of course, the further question as to what in
the end is the real nature of the past, but that question
does not in this chapter concern us. We are to ask about
the past simply so far as it is for us.

Now there are doctrines which I must take for granted
without explanation or discussion, and all that I can here do
is to try to state them so as to avoid unnecessary objections.
If the reader finds that he dissents, I would ask him to
consider this chapter as written for others. We must first
of all presuppose retentiveness and the growth of associa-


XI MEMORY AND INFERENCE | 355


tions, the formation in other words of special dispositions to
restore elements previously conjoined ; and it is better to
abstain here from the least attempt further to explain or
formulate these doctrines, since that would involve us in
controversy and in the discussion of some obstinate diffi-
culties. Here I would add merely that I have presupposed
nothing except that which I take to be present in principle
at the very lowest level of mind.

Now, So much being assumed, it is no great step to advance
from it to serial connexions. Wherever A tends.to call up B,
and B to bring in C, A being present will tend to produce the
series A-B-C. The means and the condition of this mediate
connexion is the identity of B. There is here a common
link which is one and the same, or which at least somehow
behaves as if it were so, and which also again on examination
seems so. Without.this identical link there is certainly no
series at all, but how far its identity must be perfect is a
further question to be considered later: And at that point
there will arise the difficult and most important problem
about the unity of the whole series, a problem at which
I shall be able to do no more than glance.

But when once we have such series joined by common.
links, it seems easy from this point to proceed to the future
and past and to transcend the present. For given the dis-
position to an ideal series such as c-d-e, and given on the
other side a present qualified as A(d-c), there is, through the
identity of c, a transition from A to e through b-c-d. And
with this transition memory, it might be said, is at once
explained. Now in principle I think memory is so explained,
and the explanation is correct, but it on the other hand is
insufficient, and takes no account of serious differences. For
in the first place memory has perforce to go backwards if it
is to reach the past, while our series, it seems, run all the
other way, and we can only think forwards. And. in the
second place memory is certainly not the mere extension of

Aaz


356 SOME REMARKS ON CHAP.


the present. It gives us rather something which is not the
present, something which is known as different and incom-
patible. I will proceed briefly to discuss these two diffi-
culties, beginning with the second.


To know the past or future as such is a hard and late
achievement of the mind, for it implies an enormous degrada-
tion of the present. We do not properly represent the past
or future until we have gained an order of things in which
the present has become but one thing among others. These
other things, not the present, are not presented, and, if by a
miracle they were so while the present itself still remained
untransformed, the result would be chaos. But past and
future do not and cannot exist for us until reality appears as
a series in which the present has sunk and has become but
one member among others. Such an order is an array into
the ranks of which the present is cashiered ; it is an order
which is ideal and yet real, which is often not practical
except remotely and indirectly, and which can conflict sharply
with our presented perception and our presented need. The
passage to this new world is the barrier, if there is one,
between the animal and the human mind.! The animal
mind (I am here compelled to be dogmatic) has neither past
nor future. It has no world but the reality felt present and
given, a present qualified ideally and qualified incompatibly
with itself, but never transcended and itself degraded to be
but another qualification. It has ideas assuredly and from
the first, and, if it had not ideas, it could most assuredly
have no conation or desire. But the ideas of the animal
mind are but adjectives of the given, ideas that enlarge the
given and may indefinitely distract it, but never can set them-
selves up beside it as other and equal realities. Hence the
animal could never say, Yesterday I was sad but I shall be
happy to-morrow. Its présent is clouded and is brightened.
by the movement of its ideas, but remains always its present ;


1 I do not mean to say that there is no snimat but man which ever. in
fact makes this transition.


XII" MEMORY AND INFERENCE 357


its revenges are never retribution for the past, and even its
plans, where it has plans, are no forecast of the future. It
-has, in brief, no world sundered from the world of its imme-
diate practical interest, and to take an immediate practical
interest in the past as past is surely not possible.

I regret to be unable to explain and defend this brief state-
ment. It may serve, perhaps, to point out the interval which
in my judgement separates memory from the lower level of
mind. How in detail that interval is filled up and crossed
I cannot here discuss. I agree that it is the use of language
for social needs which is the principal agent. It is in this
manner, I agree, that in fact we gain a world of ideas beyond,
and in part incompatible with, our personal world, an ideal
order which seems fixed and independent and which sub-
ordinates the present. On the other hand, I must demur to
the conclusion that without society no such ideal world is
in principle possible or could slowly be fixed by the mind.
But, however it may have arisen, it is this ideal order which
makes memory possible, and apart from this development to.
postulate memory is to invoke a senseless miracle,


I will pass next to the difficulty which arises from the ©
direction of our thoughts. The past lies behind us while, it
seems, we can only think forwards. Given the disposition
to an ideal series b-c-d, then, if X0 is presented, the identity
of b can develop X ideally as Xb-c-d. But if, on the other
hand, Xd is presented, how are we able to arrive at b-c?
Our sensations, we may say, come wave on wave out of the
future and disappear backwards into the past, while the
direction of our ideas is naturally opposite, and our asso-
ciated series, usually if not always, run from the present to
the future.1 We, to maintain our being, must face and must
meet with our ideas the incoming waves, and it is this
practical attitude against the course of mere events which
gives the direction to all our series. I do not, indeed, admit


1 Ch. Appearance, Pp. 214,


358 SOME REMARKS ON CHAP.


that all our associations are practical, and that is a question”
I pass by. But the rule that usually they are directed

forwards we must admit as true, whatever we may think as

to possible exceptions. The current of our lives and thoughts

in short runs opposite to the stream of mere event.

How then, given the disposition to an ideal series a-b-c-d-e,
and given our actual presence at d, can we arrive at the past?
The result is gained in this way. Our present has a char-
acter associated with a, the beginning of the series, and so, by
means of a, we identify ourselves with and pass through the
series a-b-c-d-e. But this so far is not enough. This series
so far, it will be rightly said, can at best give us.a future, and
it will not supply us with a past which lies behind us. Our
explanation, however, so far was incomplete, and our fuller
reply is as follows: (a) In order to perceive the past we
must not merely identify ourselves with the beginning of a
series, but that beginning must, also and as well, be incom-
' patible with our present. That beginning must, beside its
identity with our present state, have also a further character
which prevents identification. If our present is Xd, then,
since xis associated with a, we through x ideally reconsti-
tute Xa, but the two, Xd and Xa, are or may be incompatible.
(6) And secondly, starting from this incompatible beginning
Xa, the series leads up to our actual present Xd, and can be
prolonged into the future. And this in principle is the expla-
nation required for our recovery and perception of the past.

I will illustrate this first by a simple example which in
part is defective. I have seen a stone thrown and now
perceive it at my feet. It is the ideal identity of the stone
which reinstates its existence at the point of departure, an
existence incompatible with the present. And then that
incompatible sameness produces itself in series ideally till
it is one with the actual present perception. The illustra-
tion is, however, imperfect because it presupposes and makes
use of a fixed spatial order, and, whatever may be true of our


XIL . MEMORY AND INFERENCE 389


‘actual development, I cannot think that in principle such a
spatial series is involved. Let us then take another illustra-
tion. Let us suppose that in the same locality I am first wet
and cold and then dry and warm. Now my personal presence
in this place can by association restore in idea my wet and
cold presence in the same place, the two being both the same —
and yet also incompatible—and then an intermediate series,
say of lighting the fire, or of the sun’s coming out, may unite
by an ideal prolongation the first with the second. It is bya
leap through ideal identity that we make ourselves one with
what is incompatible with our present, and, this difference
being then connected by a series with our present, we have
our past, which is thus given both as sundered and as con-
nected. Such at least is the main principle involved, though
I cannot attempt to work it out in its complex detail, The
most instructive illustration is probably furnished by the
fact of double memory. That past from time to time is
remembered or forgotten which has or has not the special
quality which from time to time distinguishes the present.
In this way at least the facts can in principle be explained,
and in some cases the actual quality appears to have been
discovered.!

The above may be made clearer, perhaps, by a reply to a
possible objection. You cannot in every case, it may be said,
show that what we remember is thus reproduced from the
present, and memory therefore, it may be urged, is im-
mediate and inexplicable—except of course, like everything
else, by physiology. Now I should myself admit that the
reason why I remember this thing and not that often catnot
be found in my present psychical state. One might indeed


1 By Janet. See his Automatisme. The principle was long ago laid
down by Lotze, Med. Psych., 487, Mtk., i, 371. I would remark in this
connexion that any one who fails to see that the present character of
my feeling is a basis of reproduction, and who argues as if that basis
must either be something before the mind, or else not psychical at all,
does not in my opinion really understand the doctrine of Association,


360 SOME REMARKS ON CHAP.


urge that the reason is in all cases there and has been
simply overlooked, but I am not myself prepared to
endorse this contention. I would rather take no account
here of unconscious states of mind, and the contention

seems at least not. warranted by those facts which we are
‘ able actually to observe. Certainly to argue, ,on the other
hand, that dispositions work without any kind of support
from my present psychical state would be quite mistaken.
The support is there always, though not always, I admit,
the special support to this one disposition against any
other. And hence the special activity, I am quite ready
to add, is in some cases to be taken as initiated merely cere- _
brally. But then I object that simply so far and with no
more than this we have no memory at all. We have no
memory until that which is reproduced is ideally separated
from and is ideally connected with my present; and this
ideal separation and connexion is and must be performed
always in the way which I have described.1 In short,
memory as immediate is to my mind a sheer miracle, and
I cannot accept a miracle even where I am assured that it
is due merely to the brain.

The past, we have so far seen, is perceived by means of
serial association, and, before I proceed, it is necessary to
warn the reader here against a dangerous misconception,
We have in the series a-b-c the association of b with a and of
c with 6; but we have not merely these separate associa-


1 If we wish to avoid mistake here, we must beware of confusion. We
must distinguish the exciting cause of a reproduction from the ground of
a memory. The ground of a particular memory is that which places it
in connexion with a certain member of my past Series. But it may be
partially excited by that which cannot complete and so date it. A scent
may, for instance, remind me of a certain flower, which then by associa-
tion calls up its adjuncts involving a dated event in my life. The dating
associations here are not those which excite, and the latter may be very
frail and slight indeed. The reproduced when excited then dates itself
by association with what is constructed from my present. Hi on the
contrary I go backwards or forwards retracing my life, the exciting cause
of a memory and its ground may be the same. ,


x ’ MEMORY AND INFERENCE 36


tions, and, if we had no more than this, we should have no
series at all. For,every series which we know is known by
us as one, and, if it had no real unity, the appearance of its
oneness would be inexplicable. But this unity involves, so
far as I ean see, and consists in an ideal identity of character.
There is some one content that is present through and is de-.

- veloped by the series, and is qualified by, and itself essentially
qualifies, this series. But, if so, the members of the series
will be joined not merely by association with one another,
for each one must be associated also with one and the same
quality. There will hence in fact be no merely successive
association any more than there is any merely successive
perception. The division of association into that which is
simultaneous and that which. is merely successive is in
principle vicious, and any inquiry based on it is foredoomed
to failure. The succession should be represented not as Xa-b


xX ‘
but rather as _“\... And so we perceive how the whole
a—b


series may thus be thought of as one, and how the idea of
the whole is united with and so may reproduce any of the
members, singly or at irregular intervals, and again in either
direction. For beside the mere association of member with
member we have as its complement in every series the con-
nexion of each member with the idea of the whole? And.


1 Cf. Chap. X, pp. 307-9.

2 This consideration, I need hardly add, should never be lost sight of, as
at times it has been, in investigating the subject of ‘successive’, ‘ re-
gressive’, and again ‘ indirect’ association. Another aspect of the same
problem is the existence of general forms or schemata of series. It, seems
clear, from abstract considerations as well as from particular facts, that
these must exist and be used in the retaining of concrete series. Our
awareness. of gaps and our transition over them, and our power of repre-
senting series in an abbreviated form, point in this direction. But these
schemata, being themselves presumably psychical and associative, tend to
confirm the doctrine of our text. There are some results bearing on this
point in the investigations of Schémann and Miiller. The subject is both
very obscure and very difficult, and it deserves more attention than it
appears to have received, a remark which applies emphatically to the
perception of a series in general,


362 SOME REMARKS ON CHAP.


with this brief warning on a matter of the greatest impor-.
tance I must pass on to pursue further the subiect of this
chapter.


We are aware of and think of the past as past always by
an ideal construction from the present, and the immediate
presentation of the past as such would be a gratuitous
miracle. But the past comes to us not by memory alone
but also in mere fancy and again by pure inference, and it
is clear that we are here concerned with serious differences.
I may for-instance remember that yesterday I sent a letter
to the post; or I may-imagine how I might have done this,
though in fact I know that I did not; or again, while I
- cannot remember my act,,I can perhaps prove that it
happened. I will now briefly discuss the nature of these
differences, beginning with mere fancy in its contrast with
thought, and taking thought here in the sense of proof or
inference.

How does mere imagination differ from inference? The
question, difficult in itself, has been obscured by a funda-
mental error, a superstition about the abstract nature of
thought proper. Deferring the consideration of this, I will
state briefly the true ground of distinction. In inference
there is, or at least there is supposed to be, a continuous
necessity, and there is necessity because in a word there is
identity. The self-same subject develops itself ideally in
the process, and is qualified in the conclusion. And it
qualifies itself throughout by itself, without the intrusion at
any point of an extraneous.connexion. We say that 0 ts c
and ¢ is d and d is e, and each of these is not because of any-
thing outside, but simply. Hence Ab must be Ae because
in the end it'is so. And whatever difficulties may be raised
as to the possibility of using in our actual practice this type,
this type at least represents what we aim at and seek to find
in inference. It may help us to perceive this if we suppose


xi MEMORY ‘AND INFERENCE 363


. that the type is modified. Let us assume no longer that
& is c simply, but admit that 6 is ¢ only by the help of x,
The’ premis$ must now be written 6(x) is c, and the old

“cohélusion will not stand. We cannot any longer assert
that Ad must be Ae. It only may be so, and, so far as it
is so, it is so because of x. The Ad that is e is now not the
Ab with which we started. We can no longer assert that
the subject has been qualified throughout further without
becoming something else. The subject of the conclusion is
Ab together with a foreign condition x, and the conclusion
‘is therefore conditioned, and, if you assert it of mere Ab, it
is conditional or faulty.

It is a defect of this kind which vitiates the result of mere
imagination. That result, we should agree, has no necessity.
In my mind’s wandering the subject Ad may have actually
now become A-e, but we cannot add that the thing is so really
and of itself, for Ad, also and just as actually, may become
something incompatible and may appear as Aé-not-e. In
mere imagination, because the thing may be otherwise, it is
not really what it is. Necessity is not present, and necessity
is absent because there is a breach of identity. The subject
Ab becomes Ae, but you cannot add ‘ of itself’. Something
extraneous has at some point entered in and has vitiated the
process, and you have passed from 6 to ¢ not because b is ¢,
but only because the passage has happened. An element has
intervened not belonging directly to the pure essence of },
but attached to d merely as } is now present in psychical
fact ; and it is this unknown addition, this x, which by a
chance association has carried Ab to e. Such is the defect
in identity which distinguishes mere imagination from in-
ference,! and where this defect is remedied imagination
becomes at once the strictest thinking.

It may be instructive to notice here the superstition to
which I referred. The distinction of mere imagination from

- 1 Compare my Principles of Logic, p. 410.


364 SOME REMARKS ON CHAP.


thought consists in the absence or presence of logical control,
and that control lies, as we have seen, in the preservation of
idealidentity. But where this principle has not been grasped
most incredible doctrines have found favour. Thought is
abstract, we may be assured, while imagination is concrete.
Now I might ask if mere fancy may not be itself highly
abstract, but, passing this by, I will go on to a plainer
objection, To maintain all thought to be abstract is to
be brought into collision with evident facts. For the lower
animals surely can reason, while they hardly are able to
think abstractly, except in certain theories. And in our
own lives the field covered by what is called intuitive under-
standing is certainly not all abstract, or again on the other
side devoid of judgement and inference. An obvious in-
stance is the thinking and judging about spatial arrange-
ments in an individual case. And the writer who will assert
‘that such conclusions as He is the guilty man, or That is
the right way, are either all abstract or are else not acts
of thought, is to my mind past argument.? Inference of
course is always abstract if that means that it implies
1See for example Prof. Sully, Human Mind, i, p. 384. He finds
himself later in.conflict with fact, and admits (p. 395, note) that the de-
marcation is ‘ not to be taken absolutely’. But the real question surely
is whether the very principle of distinction is not false and contrary to fact,
and, if so, how we can be justified in using it. If Prof. Sully’s view is
that between thought and mere imagination there is in principle really
no difference at all, that the distinction drawn between them is merely an
affair of language and convenience, and depends, perhaps usually though
certainly not always, on degree of concreteness, that is a doctrine which,
however unsatisfactory, would be intelligible. But such a doctrine hardly
entitles any one who holds it to speak of these processes as if they really
“were two, to lay down a ground and principle of distinction, and to go on
to speak of ‘a connexion between the two’ (p. 381). Such a position
seems quite inconsistent and indefensible, though I fear it is not un-
common. :

2 T am tempted to say this again of any one who can maintain that
thought must depend upon language. There arises here, of course, the
further question, how far thinking which is not throughout dependent
on language, and which is in this sense intuitional, can be genuinely


abstract. This is an interesting and important question, but we are not
concerned with it here. ;


XII MEMORY. AND INFERENCE 365


analysis and selection, and involves always a principle of
necessity which can, or could conceivably, be abstracted.
But in any other sense judgement and inference need cer-
tainly not be abstract, but may be concrete to an indefinite
extent, In short, to set up imagination and thought as two
separate faculties, and to speak of one using the other or
again being applied to its service, is from first to last errone-
ous and indefensible. Imagination, if of a certain kind,
is not something employed by thought, but is itself thinking
proper. If, on the other hand, by mere imagination we
mean our mental flow so far as that is subjected to no control
whatever, and is so not ‘ used’ at all, this certainly is not
imagination in the higher sense of the word. Mere imagina-
tion, where regulated logically, itself is inference. And
again, so far as serving other ends and subjected to other
kinds of control, it becomes and itself is contrivance, fancy
and creation in various forms, intellectual, practical and
aesthetic. It is the special nature of the end and the special
nature of the control which makes the difference in principle,
and in the case of inference we have seen in what that
difference consists,}


From this our inquiry may return to the subject of
memory. The mere imagination of the past, we have seen,
is, like inference, an ideal construction from the present, and
yet it fails to be inference. Memory is also an ideal con-
struction from the present, and thus we are led to ask in
what way memory differs from inference and from fancy ;


1 T do not know whether Wundt (Grundsztige, ii, p. 490) really means
to say that all imagination involves a plan and an idea which it develops,
Such a statement seems to be in collision with the obvious fact of mental
wandering. The nature of the different kinds of control over mere wan-
dering is, so far as I see, the only ground from which this whole question
could be satisfactorily treated. I certainly could not myself attempt that
treatment, and I do not myself know where to send the reader for satis-
faction. Wundt’s exposition seems not only confused in detail but based
on no clear principle whatever. Such principles of division as ‘ passive’
and ‘active’ are, for instance, much worse than merely useless.


366 SOME REMARKS ON CHAP.


for that there is some difference seems plain. I may, to
repeat our instance, infer that on-last Monday I must have
posted a letter, or I may remember the fact, or again I may
merely imagine it, and these three attitudes are not the same.
Now, as against fancy, it is clear that memory has necessity.
It does not qualify its subject by a predicate the opposite of
which can also be remembered, and which for this reason
does not qualify the subject itself. Memory, in other words,
is a judgement and an ‘assertion about its subject. Hence
it is often again said to involve belief, a point which I shall
consider lower down.1 Thus memory, being a judgement,
is so far the same as inference, and we must go on to ask if
they are the same altogether.

If inference is understood in the sense in which we have
taken it above, inference and memory certainly differ. For
-in memory there is a sequence and a continuity which is
necessary, but on the other hand the necessity is not wholly
intrinsic, or, if wholly intrinsic, is not so visibly. We do not,
as in inference, go from Ab to Abc, because b is c. The
sequence in memory cannot beso stated. The premisses are
not Ab, bc, but must be written as Ab, Bc. Now certainly
b is contained in and is an element in B, but, with only so
much, the sequence fails to be logical. For you cannot logi-
- cally proceed from Ad, Be, to A-c, unless you assume that Be
is equivalent, say, to b-B-c, and not merely to b(x)-c.. The
essential question is as to how the difference, which turns
b into B and which so brings in c, is related to b ; whether, in
short, and how far this difference is really accidental. Let
us take once more the example which we used above. When
I remember that on Tuesday last I sent my letter, the send-
ing does not follow of itself from the mere idea of myself on
last Tuesday. Thus I cannot prove that I sent the letter,
and I can even imagine that in fact I did not send it. The
connexion, therefore, between the day and the act is not


* pp. 376-7-


XII MEMORY AND INFERENCE 367


visibly logical, and it may be urged further that the con-
nexion is not logical at atl. The predicate, it may be said,
does not in memory truly and really belong to the subject
of the process. The predicate, on the contrary, is added
brutally from without, and is attached by something quite
external; and in memory, therefore, as was the case With
mere chance imagination, ideal continuity is broken,

Now a breach of visible continuity I have agreed must be
admitted, and memory therefore will fall short of inference.
There is no proper inference where you predicate the con-
clusion of the subject because the subject is conditioned by
something not intrinsically developed from its own nature.
But in memory on the other hand the constraint is not
wholly external. For the necessity is taken to lie within
the content of the ideal process which develops the subject.
From the idea of myself on Tuesday I pass to the sending of
my letter because of something which belongs to the nature
of things which is taken as present at that date. The com-
pulsion in other words is assumed to come, not from mere
matter of fact, but from the special character of a certain
concrete fact.1 We wrote the premisses of inference as AQ,
bc, and of mere imagination as Ab, Bc, where B was equi-
valent to b(«), and where about the x we could say nothing
whatever. But in memory that addition to and condition
of 6, which constitutes B, is taken not to bea mere x. The
bond of union on the contrary is supposed to fall within the
area of a specified content. The result is therefore logical
so far and not merely psychical. It is logical so far as
the x has been partly determined, and so far as the condition
of the result has thus been brought within the process, and
no longer, as in mere imagination, falls outside in the un-
known. On the other hand, because the x cannot further


1 I shall add at the end of this chapter some further remarks on the
logical difference between memory and imagination, and on the ambiguity
of the term ‘ matter of fact’. Mere imagination gives ‘matter of fact’,
in ene sense, more than memory does.


368 SOME REMARKS ON CHAP.


«


be specified, the result, though taken as necessary, still
falls short of a logical conclusion. For the condition which
carries Ab to c may qualify Ad beyond its own nature, and
the conclusion therefore may not be true if you predicate
it of Ab. And so far as in the proper sense we remember,
this ignorance and this inability is still implied.1_ In memory
the predicate somehow belongs to the subject by the necessity
of the content. The necessity is therefore intrinsic so far,
since it falls within the process. On the other hand, because
it is not known to belong intrinsically to the subject itself,
we have no inference proper.

But though memory 7s not inference, in all memory an
inference is involved, To connect my letter with the idea
of last Tuesday I must first of all possess myself of that idea.
But this possession involves, as we saw, a process from the
present to something different, a process made through and
resting on a point of ideal identity ; and a passage of this
sort seems certainly to be an inference. From the present
Ac I go to the past C because of the c within C, and to go
otherwise is not possible. You may object that the initial
difference here between c and C is really external to c, just
as again the further connexions given by memory were
admitted not to be internal. This objection goes deep and
would raise questions which I cannot discuss in this chapter,
but for our present purpose it may be dismissed. It would,
if admitted, show that we have a defective inference here, as
perhaps almost everywhere,* and it would not show that we


1 Hence to draw an inference from a recollection as such is not possible,
For the mere recollection implies that we have not got the premiss which
we desire to employ. To draw an inference from one individual fact as
such to another fact is as impossible actually as it would be senseless in
principle. So far as you remember, we may say, so far you are debarred
from reasoning. But on this subject I am confident that better ideas
are beginning to prevail both in psychology and in logic.

2 In now republishing the above I would call the attention of the reader
to the fact that, in my Principles of Logic, pp. 518-9 (published 1883), it
is clearly stated that, even if the form of the inference is impeccable,
every inference is subjected to the risk of error on account of the doubt
as to the identity of the middle term. Cf. Chap. XIII, pp. 392 foll., 4o7.


XII MEMORY AND INFERENCE 369


use no inference at all. And the premiss which is and must
be employed is this connexion of c with its difference, not
taken as subject to the condition of an individual case but
as unconditioned and simple. The connexion is of course
not really simple in an absolute sense, but it is simple in the
sense of being taken as unconditioned by the present fact
as such. And if you do not use it so, you clearly cannot
transcend the present at all. In other words this con-
nexion is not itself an affair of memory or of ‘ matter of fact’,
since it underlies these as their condition. The connexion
is direct, and the process where it is used, even if it is used
unjustifiably, I must therefore call an inference.?

In the proper sense of inference then memory involves an
inference but itself really is not one,? If, however, the term


1 We see here that inference both logically and in time precedes memory.
I am convinced that, while in fact many or most of the lower animals
certainly reason, perhaps none of them is able to remember in the proper
sense of memory. ;

* The above and what follows may, I hope, justify the doctrine I have
stated elsewhere, that memory in its essence involves an inference and
so is inferential. I have never said or meant that memory consjsts in
mere inference, and that you could make the goodness of the inference a
test of memory. The question as to how memory, involving an inference,
differs from inference proper, was not discussed or raised by me at all.
The statement in my Principles of Logic, p. 75, as to the want of a point
of identity in mere imagination, is certainly, as it stands, obscure and
perhaps misleading. Whether my mind was clear when I wrote it I
cannot now tell, What I should have said is that wherever we take
ourselves merely to imagine, there not only is no intrinsical necessity
attaching the result to the starting-place, but we also recognize that the
identity of the subject is lost and that there is a breach in continuity.
In memory, on the other hand, though the result is not taken as the
necessary ideal development of the subject itself, yet we ignore the doubt
as to a solution of continuity. We connect. the end of the process with
and attribute it to the beginning, because the process cornes to us from
one end to the other without an apparent break or loss of the subject, and
without the suggestion of an alien intrusion, or again of a sufficient com-
peting alternative. In imagination the connexion between subject and
predicate is that of casual occupancy, but in memory we have possession
which to such an extent is de facto that the question of title is not raised,
or, if raised, is assumed to be somehow satisfactorily settled. With
regard to the distinction between inference and mere imagination, that
is given correctly in my Principles, p. 410.


1574 Bb ig


370 SOME REMARKS ON CHAP.


were used in a looser way, the answer might be different,
and the whole sequence might perhaps be called an inference.
It would be here as in a case which involves observation. I
may see a man and recognize him as a certain person by a
genuine inference, and I then may perceive him to act in
a certain manner. I may, on this, attribute the perceived
act to the inferred person, and this whole process might be
termed an inference. And in the same way memory also
might be called an inference, for the reason beside that it
does not involve perception. I do not think, however, that
we need here consider this looser use. Nor will I stop
here to discuss a possible attempt to confound inference
with memory on the ground that all inference in the end
is irrational habit. For the secondary distinction between
inference and memory proper would still remain, even if
both were in the end mere results of memory in the sense
of habit. I could not in this chapter attempt to deal with
such a fundamental question,! and must pass on to another
’ branch of our inquiry.


A memory, we have seen, is a state of mind which differs
from a mere imagination of the past, and in passing from
one to the other we are aware that we take a new attitude.
But how in the end can we tell that in memory our attitude
is justified, and that our remembrance really is any better
than mere fancy ? So far, indeed, as we can apply inference
and can rationally construct the past order, we seem to stand
on safe ground. But when we are left at last with an idea
of the past which shows no visible inconsistency, but about
which we are able to find no further evidence, what test can
we apply ? The answer must be that we do not possess any
valid criterion. There are marks which give us a certain


1 A sceptical objection of this kind, if based on a psychological ground,
seems (Appearance, p. 137) inconsistent with itself. The proper way-to
urge the objection is to compare the actual inferences which we must use
with that ideal of inference which alone we can take as satisfactory.


XI MEMORY AND INFERENCE 371


degree of probability, and there are characters which more
or less strongly impel us to take the idea as real, but there
is in the end no criterion which is not fallible. I will briefly
mention the characters which usually distinguish what we
call a memory from a mere imagination. The interest of the
subject is in the main confined to psychology ; we should find
some difficulties there into which I shall not enter, and the
order of my statement does not pretend to be systematic.
We may place first the characters of clearness and strength,
and in the next place fullness of detail, a detail which is not
visibly rational. Next may come the sense of familiarity;
and after that fixity of connexion ; and I will then go on to
add a few remarks. (i) I will not venture to ask here what
clearness and strength are to mean, but, whatever they mean,
a mere imagination may have as much of them as a memory
(or even more), and this seems even plain. (ii) The same
may be said with regard to mere fullness of detail, for a
simple imagination may be very full in comparison with
a memory. The character of the details is, however, a sign to
be noticed. If the particulars are many and yet appear as
an accidental conjunction, not depending upon any general
idea but seemingly irrelevant, that, so far as it goes, is
a mark of genuine memory. But this mark of irrational
detail is, however, no test. (iii) The sense of familiarity is
again deceptive. Its nature has been much discussed,* but
T think we may represent it as follows. There is in memory
an absence of strangeness. The detail comes without shock
to a mind which does not expect it and yet is already
adjusted to receive it. And this adjustment points to an
associative disposition set up by past experience, but it
points ambiguously. For your present accidental mood
may favour and support strongly some idea about the past,
and this idea may in consequence strike you as natural


1 The word ‘assimilation’ tends to introduce us here, in the pages of,
Wundt and others, into a world of what I will venture to call the merest
mythology.


Bb2


372 SOME REMARKS ON CHAP.


and true. And again a mere imagination, if you repeat it,
becomes in this way familifr, and itself thus creates the
inner association which théh offers itself as a witness to
independent fact. And there is, once more here, no sure way
of distinction between the false and the true. (iv) Fixity of
connexion is again not a trustworthy test. Where an idea
is connected with a certain date strongly and fixedly in such
a way that the opposite is maintained with difficulty, and
where in addition this. connexion is constantly recurrent, we
tend to take it as memory. And where, besides this, the
detail appears as a mere conjunction of coinciding particu-
lars, we feel ourselves confirmed. But mere imagination
is unfortunately well known to present all these features,
and it is jmpossible to find an infallible criterion or remedy.
There are certain characters which usually are the result of
that past fact to which the present idea refers. Foremost
among these is that fixity and necessity of non-rational but
integral detail which belongs to and points to an individual
experience ; and, when to this is added the sense of fami-
liarity, then memory seldom fails to appear and is commonly
justified. But the above characters can each, and all
together, be present in a false imagination.

The veracity of memory is not absolute, and memory itself
is subject to the control of a higher criterion. Our justifica-
tion for regarding memory as in general accurate is briefly
this, that by taking such a course we are best able to order
and harmonize our world. There is in the end no other
actual or possible criterion of fact and truth than this, and
the search for a final fact and for an absolute datum is
everywhere the pursuit of a mere ignis fatuus. “You may
look for it in outward perception, or you may seek it in
inward experience and intuition, but in each case you are
inisled by one and the same error in a different dress. This
is a subject too large to be dealt with here as a whole, but
I will notice before proceeding a recent instructive attempt
to prove that memory is not fallible,


XII MEMORY AND INFERENCE 373


The position taken by Prof. Ladd on this point seems far
from clear.1. I understand that for him it is a vital matter
to show that memory is at least in part infallible, but for
the rest his procedure seems obscure and even inconsistent
with itself. He admits the extreme fallibility of memory in
detail, but contends that at least it cannot be wrong in its
assertion of my past existence. But how far, and in what
sense, when bared of or transformed in detail, my past
existence remains mine, is a matter not discussed, nor,
apart from ‘this, is there any evidence produced for the
truth of the contention. If wherever else a witness can be
tested he is shown to be fallible, you can hardly assume
him to be infallible in or beyond a certain point, simply be-
cause in or beyond that point you have in fact always found
him to be right. And with regard to memory of my past
existence the case stands as follows. All the memories that
we can examine belong to minds which have had some
previous existence, and it is very probable that memory can
exist only as the result of some foregoing psychical develop-
ment, however'short. And, if this is so, then memory will
be for this extraneous reason, and will be so far, infallible.
It will be infallible, we may say, accidentally and in fact,
but not in principle. Its evidence will depend on and be
restricted to that which is otherwise known. And such an
infallibility is, I presume, for Prof. Ladd’s purpose useless.
And even so much as this can, perhaps, not be demonstrated.
For that memory should supervene suddenly at a certain
point of physiological development in such a way that its
report of a past psychical self would be wholly mistaken,
seems not clearly and in principle to be impossible. Ifso, even
the limited infallibility of memory seems not proved; but in
any case, even if proved, I have shown its dependent nature.?


1 Philosophy of Mind, pp. 133 foll. I have at present no acquaintance
with Prof. Ladd’s other works.

2 If a man mistakenly remembers events ten years before he was born,
is it satisfactory to add: here you see at once that his memory is really
infallible, for he had, as a fact, some actual past (as you saw) before he


374 SOME REMARKS ON CHAP.


From this obscure and unsafe position Prof. Ladd passes
to asecond, which, itself untenable; seems not even consistent
with the first. All reasoning, he argues, goes from premisses
to a conclusion, and our knowledge of the conclusion depends
upon our memory of the premisses. Hence, if that is fallible,
every possible act of reasoning is discredited. Far then from
being able to show that memory is fallible, we have even to
assume the opposite if we intend to have any conclusion
whatever. And with this we have a sure and certain remedy,
Prof. Ladd argues, against the disease of scepticism. But
the ground of the argument seems to me incorrect, and the
conclusion drawn quite mistaken. The argument should
prove, it seems to me, that memory is not fallible at all.
Hence, when a particular memory is shown by reasoning to
be false, we are left, it would appear, in hopeless confusion.
For we must either accept both contradictories at once, or,
if we select, we select on no principle, and surely this must
be admitted to amount to scepticism. What we are to do
when memory is thus divided against itself, and how mere
memory is to sit in judgement on itself, are matters not
explained. In short, that argument for the supremacy of
reason which holds good against scepticism, becomes, if you
transfer it to memory, wholly and entirely sceptical.1


made that mistake about ‘his past? And even this amount of de facto
infallibility rests on the assumption I have noticed in the text. It is
therefore so far precarious, as well as in any case derivative.

1 How is mere memory to be a ruler and judge of itself? I cannot see
how this is to be possible. If, on the other hand, memory is to subject
itself to the judgement of reason, I cannot see how anywhere it is to claim
independent authority, and to be treated as infallible or as more than
de facto not mistaken. These are points on which I seek enlightenment
so far in vain. If, for instance, it is urged that, in order to make the
world intelligible, I must postulate that memory is right, unless so far as
I have some special reason to think it anywhere wrong, I entirely agree.
Certainly, I reply, and without doubt, we must make this assumption.
But if, on this, I am told that, if so, we have an independent and ultimate
postulate, I am forced to demur. Most evidently not so, I answer, if the
assumption is made in order to make the world intelligible. If you leave
out that, then, I agree, the postulate becomes ultimate, but it becomes
at the same time arbitrary and, so far as I see, quite indefensible. If


XII MEMORY AND INFERENCE 375


Prof. Ladd’s conclusion then is really sceptical; but the
foundation of his argument, to return to that, consists in
a mistake. It is not the case that reasoning depends on
memory, and such an idea implies a wrong view about
inference. In the first place in inference there need be no
premisses drawn out and: put before the mind, and a very
large tract of our reasoning must in this sense be. called
intuitive. Prof, Ladd has seen this, but without more ado
he drives the evidence bodily out of court. Everything of
this kind is ‘a merely mechanical movement of the ideas ’,
a conclusion which I venture to regard as quite monstrous
and a sufficient disproof of its foundation. That foundation
is, however, in itself untenable. To assume that in an
inference, where I go from premisses to.a conclusion, I depend
upon memory, is to maintain that in inference I am neces-
sitated en route not to know what I am about, and arrived
at the end must have forgotten, and so be forced to remem-
ber, the starting-point and the way—and this surely is
erroneous. The normal type of inference is surely the
unbroken development of an identical subject,1 which does
not leave the mind by the way and which, therefore, can
hardly be remembered. This is the normal type, and I
will add that, so far as this fails to be present, the operation
is really not an inference. With this I must pass from the
subject of memory’s fallibility,


I will add some words on the question which has been
raised about Belief. Memory, we saw, takes its ideas of the


we are to think at all, we must postulate that reason is in principle in-
fallible, and is the ultimate judge of its own errors. But to postulate
that memory is in principle infallible seems to me to be, on the one hand,
wholly unnecessary and, for any legitimate purpose, quite useless; and, on
the other hand, it appears to me to be in the end almost devoid of meaning.

1 There are some further remarks on this head in the following chapter.

* Even in an indirect argument, where I divide A into Ab and Ac, and
then by disproving Ac prove Ab, I do not in the operation depend upon
memory. Certainly at the end of my disproof of Ac I may have forgotten
Ab, but I then return to the beginning with the knowledge that A is not
¢, and now with that in my mind reach the conclusion Ab from A. The
knowledge that A is not ¢ does not here depend on memory. It might


376 SOME REMARKS ON CHAP.


past as real, while in mere imagination there is no such
claim. It is the addition of belief, then, we hear it said,
which turns imagination into memory, and our main task
is to find in what this addition consists, or at least to set it
down as ‘ a final inexplicability ’. But the whole question
is in this way misunderstood and the issue radically per-
verted. To take for granted the existence of ‘ mere ideas ’ as
self-evident and as a matter of course, and to treat belief in
these as something supervening, or even adventitious, which
we have then got to explain, is fundamentally erroneous.
It is to make an assumption quite false in its principle and
in its consequences most misleading. The presence of and
the possibility of these ‘ mere ideas ’ is, on the contrary, the
very thing which calls most for explanation. No such ideas,
we may say with confidence, can possibly exist in an early
mind. To entertain an idea in which you do not believe,
a suspended idea held in separation from the presented
reality, is a late and, when we reflect, an enormous mental
achievement. It implies a disruption of that immediate
unity of theory and practice which is at first throughout
prevalent and is alsonecessary. At an early stage of mind,
every suggestion which does not conflict with the felt present
is appropriated by that present and is necessarily believed
in, so far as we are able as yet to speak of belief. The sug-
gestion, on the other hand, which is not believed in, cannot
possibly be retained theoretically, but, apart from appetite
or fear, is banished forthwith. It is not my business here
to attempt to show how mere ideas become possible, and


so depend if, e.g., I had merely found in my notes that I had one day
proved Ac to be false, and if I used that bare result. But so far that
result obviously does not pretend to be itself made in my inference at all.
And with direct reasoning it seems clear that, so far as the subject has
lapsed from the mind by the way, there is properly no inference. The
operation, to become an inference, must in some form be repeated without
that lapse. The retention of an identical content before the mind, and
the assumption that where I have seen no difference by the way there is
no difference, can neither of them be called memory except by an abuse
of language. The points raised by Prof. Ladd are certainly well worth
raising and discussing, but his treatment of them seems not satisfactory.


XI MEMORY AND INFERENCE 377°


again how far, and in what sense, the simple entertainment’
of them still involves judgement and their reference to a
modified Reality. - It is sufficient to have noticed in passing
a common mistake and to have pointed out its nature.
The main question, we may say, is not about the plus of
belief, but about the minus of mere thinking. The main
question in other words is, How is it possible not to believe ?
Then, when that point is clear, we may approach with con-
fidence a different and subsequent problem, What is the
difference between primitive belief and the belief or judge-
ment which comes after doubt, and which really does super-
vene upon our ‘mere ideas’? And when we have seen
that mere ideas consist in the disruption of a unity, we shall
not find it hard to perceive the nature of that which super-
venes. It is the restoration of those ideas to the unity from
which they were separated, and to which they are now once
more joinedina higher sense. Itisin this restoration that we
must seek and find the real nature of that addition which we
observe in belief. But the question of the separation is funda-
mental, and, if it is ignored, the whole inquiry is wrecked.


I should like to append to this chapter some remarks on a
point to which I have adverted (p. 367), the question, that
is, about what is to be called ‘ Matter of fact’. So largea


1 In this matter Prof. Bain’s doctrine of Primitive Credulity has been
of great service to psychology. I must, however, in passing remark that
I am forced largely to dissent from his view as to belief. I dissent further
from the mere identification of judgement with belief, but I cannot enter
here into the difference between them. I would further direct the reader’s
attention to the fact that I may disbelieve in that which I certainly
remember. The memory is here a judgement necessary in and on its own
ground, but that region has here been disconnected fromi the world which
I call my real world. This attitude is, of course, my common attitude
towards the ‘imaginary’. The judgement will be here a kind of condi-
tional judgement. The difference I have noted between either the theo-
retical or practical acceptance of an idea after it has been held as a mere
idea and its acceptance previously, has great importance. There is a re-
union of the element, which was held aloof, once more with the felt reality.
And it is this re-union which gives that feeling of ‘consent’ which has
been found so inexplicable. On the question of ‘mere ideas’ and.‘ the
imaginary ’ see Chap. III.


378 SOME REMARKS ON CHAP.


subject, it is obvious, cannot properly be discussed in passing,
and what follows, though not new, is offered mainly as an
invitation to further inquiry (see Index, s.v. Fact).

‘Matter of fact’ seems a highly ambiguous phrase, and
for our present purpose we may distinguish three different
senses, or three aspects of one sense. (1) The word may
stand for that which is merely felt or is simply experienced,
something which therefore excludes, so far, anything like
judgement, truth, or falsehood. In this meaning of the
word, imagination, memory and observation all alike are
above, or if you please are below, matter of fact; for their
connexions are all more or less analytic and abstract. (2) On
the other side, these connexions will be matter of fact in
varying degrees in proportion as they are external and
apparently devoid of any intrinsic reason. (3) And again,
they may be matter of fact as belonging to and as dependent
on a certain point in our ‘ real’ series. It is on these two
later shades of meaning that I am about to make some very
brief remarks.+

The ‘merely imaginary’ marks the furthest extreme of
matter of fact in the second of our meanings. It is not an
affair of mere sense, since it qualifies a subject by an ideal’
predicate ; but its bond of connexion, on the other side, is
bare matter of fact. This connexion or conjunction on the
one hand is actually there, but on the other hand it seems
entirely irrational, since there is no more reason for it than
for its diametrical opposite. The connexion therefore is, but —
it is true and real only by virtue of unknown conditions, and
therefore in an unknown form. You pass from subject to
predicate not on any ground which appears as intrinsic, not
because of anything which seems comprised in your content,

1 A man is, I presume, called for good or evil a ‘ matter of fact’ person,
according as he confines himself to the actual events of what we call ‘ our
real world’, in opposition either to the ‘imaginary’ or again to wide


general principles of truth and conduct. For the limited reality of ‘ our
real world’ the reader is referred to Chapters HII and XVI.


xu MEMORY AND INFERENCE 379


but on the strength of what falls outside. This unknown
bond is for you no more than the nature of the universe at
large, and you may call it matter of fact in general. In this
sense of matter of fact memory and observation possess less
of it than does mere imagination.

But if, we pass from the second to the third meaning of our
term, and understand matter of fact not as general but as
special and individual, the case is altered, and observation
and memory must now be admitted to stand above mere
imagination. For in them the predicate is not attached to
the subject by a merely unknown cause, but is taken as con-
nected with it by the nature of what appears at a certain
point-of our real series. Their truth therefore belongs to,
and is conditioned by, what is known at least in part. The
connexion on the one side remains outward and an unin- .
telligible conjunction, so far as its bond, though localized, is
not made explicit. The condition cannot be specified and so
brought within the subject, and the judgement to this extent
remains irrational and mere matter of fact. But on the
other side, so far as the connexion falls within, and is con-
ditioned by, a limited area of content, so far as it belongs, in
other words, to a special matter of fact, it has so far already
ceased to be a mere conjunction, and has become intrinsic
and rational.t

It is impossible within these limits to attempt to show how
the process once begun is carried further, The growth of
our knowledge consists, we may say, in the sustained
endeavour to get rid of mere matter of fact, to make the
bond of connexion explicit, and to bring the condition of
the predicate within the content of the subject. A genuine


» A mere imagination, if you take it.as an occurrence in my history,
belongs to matter of fact in the above sense of limited and individual
fact. But this is because you have taken it not logically but psycho-
logically. If you confine yourself to its logical aspect and consider it with
reference merely to what it asserts, it is of course so far not an event in
my life and a thing which can be observed. It so far zs not matter of fact,
but Possesses matter of fact in the sense of matter of fact in general.


380 ON MEMORY AND INFERENCE cuap. xu


and complete truth cannot be confined within one part of
our real series, but, to be complete and genuine, must,take
in the rest. And observation, if repeated, and in a higher
degree artificial experiment, transcend the individual case
and pass into general truth, truth not conditioned by the
fact of any date. But whether in the end, and, if so, how
far and in what sense, the externality of the predicate can
wholly disappear, is a question which here cannot be dis-
cussed (see Chapters VIII and Ix).


1 Jn this respect memory remains inferior. .To speak broadly and
apart from a certain qualification, we have in memory a mere result
which cannot be developed, and we cannot, as in contiinued and repeated
observation, inquire further into the conditions of the yesult. For in
memory (in the main) we are not in direct contact with, these special
conditions. .


- CHAPTER XIII


ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT


My object in this chapter is to throw light on the ultimate
value of memory as a test of truth.1 Memory, I shall con-
tend, must have a subordinate position and validity, and
otherwise we are reduced inevitably to total scepticism.
Philosophy, if it is to be more than an exercise more or less
desirable, must have an answer, I presume, to sceptical ob-
jections. On the other hand, I shall contend that there is no
answer which does not involve the denial of memory’s inde-
pendence. Philosophy cannot exist apart from absolute
sovereignty, and we have to choose between monarchy and
chaos. But this means that in the end we can recognize
nothing in the shape of a self-sufficient element or autono-
mous detail,

As soon as doubt is raised as to what we are finally justi-
fied in believing, that doubt, it is clear, drives us back on
reflection. And truth, if we go on to find it, will be a judge-
ment which, when we reflect, satisfies us. Now, as to the
nature of this special satisfaction there is of course much to
be discussed, and there are points on which here I am un-
able to enter.2. But what I have to insist on here is a point
which seems to be vital. Our last judgement, and that is our
present judgement, must be taken or rather must be treated
as infallible. This does not mean that a further reflection
may not cause us to reject it. It means that, until that


1 This chapter appeared first in Mind for April 1908. It was written
some four or five years before that time, and hence, for better or worse,
contains no reference to any controversy of later date.

2 Most of these are dealt with in other parts of the present volume,


382 ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT CHAP.


reflection comes, we must hold the judgement as true, and
that we cannot, while making a judgement, entertain the pos-
sibility of its error. Psychologically I should agree that there
are various intensities of belief, and that, when I judge, my
degree of confidence and my whole emotional tone may on
each occasion be different. But the actual presence of an
idea which is directly contrary to what I judge, would,
taken psychically, be an effective hindrance to the presence
of the judgement. It would prevent the making of the
judgement or would destroy it if made. And again, when
we view the matter logically, there seems left nd room for
doubt. As soon as a judgement is made you can of course
then proceed to reflect on it. In this way what was your
judgement can be turned into the object of a later thought.
And taken thus you can approve of it and find it true, or
you can reject it, in part or altogether, as a more or less
complete mistake. Or again, unable to decide, you may
regard it as doubtful. But in any case your reaffirmation,
denial or doubt, goes beyond and supersedes the original
judgement. They each add an element which in no case
leaves that judgement as it was, but everywhere destroys in
some sense its first character and force. As the object of
later reflection, this, that was my present judgement, has
been transformed, and now, whether it is doubted, denied
or reaffirmed, it has been made subordinate to a later
moment. It has been included and embraced in a new
logical present, and its life, so far as it now lives, must be
drawn from that inclusion. A mere past judgement, when
I reflect on it, loses at once by my reflection its own inde-
pendent value. I am logically beyond it, while I obviously
cannot go beyond my present judgement while that remains
present. My present judgement therefore, while it exists,
cannot possibly be doubted, and, however strange this may
sound, that judgement cannot be allowed or even suspected
to be fallible. —


XIU ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT 383


Such a doctrine tends naturally to be misunderstood, and
it suggests obvious objections, some of which I will proceed
to notice in passing. If every judgement can be superseded,
how, I shall be asked, can any judgement be final? But,
even if all past judgements hitherto had been corrected as
wrong, I do not see how you could doubt the judgement
which at present you make. For, even if you make your
judgement subject to a doubt, and if you so condition it, at
least this conditional judgement of yours is made uncon-
ditionally. And, further, the supersession of a judgement
need not mean its correction. If a judgement is reaffirmed,
it has been set on one side in its old character of ‘ this
judgement ’, but that which it affirmed has been made
dependent on my judgement which now is. The truth of
my judgement has therefore become independent of its past
assertion, but it certainly need not have been corrected or
vitally transformed. And it is not difficult again to reply
to a further objection. If every judgement is found, as
being something human, to have the character of fallibility,
how, we may be asked, can any judgement escape from this
sentence? But a judgement, I reply, may be fallible only
in its general character as being one judgement among others.
Hence if you take it differently, as it certainly is taken in
my actual present judgement, any such partial aspect may,
without misgiving, be set on one side. The probability of
error in other words was antecedent and abstract, and it
cannot be applied to this case as this case actually exists,
And if you insist that experience proves that every possible
judgement is fallible in essence, you have involved yourself
now in contradiction with yourself. For if this doctrine of
yours is not certain, the conclusion which you draw from it
vanishes, while, if it is certain, it for that very reason must
itself become doubtful.

The objections we have noticed, it is clear, possess no
force. We must continue so far to maintain that our last


384 ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT ss cuap.


judgement in reflection is supreme. And memory, if so,
cannot have independent worth, nor is it possible that my
judgement can in the end depend on memory. But, before
proceeding to defend and to explain this view, I will briefly
point out what follows if the opposite is maintained.

The independent value of memory is often asserted. It
suggests itself at times as an obvious fact, while at other
times it comes in to stop a hole in some theory, and it may
even be offered as a sure remedy for scepticism. But to me
it seems that no long consideration is required in order to
perceive that such a doctrine is ruinously sceptical. Memory
is used in a number of different senses.1_ It may stand for
my present judgement as to some past event of mine, or its
meaning may be stretched so as to include everything which
falls under retentiveness. So far therefore as in a judgement
we have a succession of perceptions or ideas, we must (it will
be said) postulate memory in some sense in order to prevent
a solution of continuity. For otherwise, with a broken
succession of different subjects, we infallibly must lose all
we gain by the way, and at the end of:the process can have
nothing to show. And again, since our present meaning
must depend on our past experience, we cannot now, it is
further urged, even begin to think at all, except so far as we
take our stand on the faculty of memory.”

Now no one can deny that in a sense we depend on past
experience, For, apart from any other consideration, it is
from past experience that in the main our minds are filled.
And generally to suppose that without the past we should
have an intelligible present seems obviously absurd. We
bring, to the present from the past, materials, furniture and
implements, and no one, so far as I am aware, could even

1 See p. 353.

2 See Dr. Venn, Empirical Logic, pp. 116-18. Dr. Venn appears to
accept here some traditional psychology which at best is doubtful. I do


not know how he would propose to meet the sceptical result from his view
of memory. This last remark applies again to other writers.


XIIi ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT 385


seek to deny this. But.this, on the other hand, is not really
the point which is at issue. The result of the past, I main-
tain, is to be used as material with regard to which the
decision of the present is supreme. This result has not got
to be accepted, as it comes, and in the form which it bears ;
and taken in its own character it has no ultimate and in-
dependent worth. To contend on the other hand for our
ultimate dependence on memory, is to claim in effect for
this mere result from the past a position and value which is
independent and absolute. “And, held in any form, such a
doctrine, I urge, must lead us to ruin,

In the first place it gains little if any support from Common
Sense. Common Sense goes no further than to take some
memory as practically certain, while it allows that memory
in general may be mistaken and is corrigible. But, on the
other hand, anything which stands independently seems not
capable of correction. If however, passing from Common
Sense, we consider the facts, we seem forced to admit that
memory is fallible to an indefinite extreme. If you add to
ordinary mistakes those cases of error which are called
pathological, and include in these the results of hypnotic
experiment, there seems no limit to the possibility of
memory’s failure.1_ And the position is no better where the
meaning of memory is improperly widened, and covers in
general our present use of past perception or judgement,
For past experience may be incorrectly retained or con-
nected wrongly with a present instance, and at what point
here a line can be drawn I am unable to perceive. In short
to hold that memory is not fallible seems to entail the denial

1 T have above, pp. 373-5, criticized Prof. Ladd’s position with regard
to this point, Philosophy of Mind, p. 133. To hold that memory cannot
be wrong as to the fact of my past existence is, even if tenable in the
abstract, quite futile, because it is tenable only in the abstract, If my
memory may be wrong so far as it says anything about my past exist-
ence--and this apparently Prof. Ladd does not deny—how much is left
for it to assert infallibly I hardly comprehend. But see the pages
referred to.

1574 cc


-


386 ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT CHAP.


of plain fact. But if on the other hand my present judge-
ment is to depend on something falling outside of itself,
then unless that something (whatever it is) can be taken as
infallible, my judgement must be taken as liable to error.
In other words, if memory is to have an independent stand-
ing and value, we are condemned, so far as I see, to unlimited
scepticism.

Still, it will be objected, if the alternative you offer is to
throw away all past results, your alternative itself in the end
is ruinous., But it is your mistake, I reply, which brings in
such a vicious alternative. To say that no past result has
independent and absolute value is not to deny that past
results are in another way indispensable. Past results are
in short to be used as material out of which my present
judgement has to make a construction; but there is no
standing conjunction in this material which is in principle
sacred.t Any past judgement is taken as fallible in prin-
ciple, and as capable of being overruled by a present judge-
ment which rearranges its material. On the other hand
there is no question as to the throwing away of all or of any
material. The question is. whether the material, when used
in my present judgement, has any connexions which, taken
as they stand, retain absolute validity, or whether on the
contrary the validity of all now depends on my present
judgement and is subject to that. I have shown that the
independent worth of past connexions means present ruin,
On the other side the superiority of present to past judge-

* I regret that I cannot, while correcting this paper for the press, remark
on the position lately taken by Mr. Russell and again by Prof. Stout.
But in passing I would emphasize the following point. Our object is to
make the widest and most harmonious construction. In order to carry
out this object we accept, and we must accept, remembered past facts.
But we accept them only provisionally, and subject in any particular case
to correction in the light of further knowledge. The reason why we do
not in the same way accept what is offered by mere fancy, is that on such
a principle of action we could not make the intellectual construction


which we seek. [This foot-note belongs to the year 1908, and I now refer
the reader to Chap. VII of this volume]


XIII ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT — 387


ment entails, apart from misunderstanding, no mischievous
consequence, It is compatible with the doctrine that any
judgement once made must stand until over-ridden, a
doctrine the truth of which will be discussed ower down.
The fact in short that all judgements are, as judgements,
corrigible, does not imply that every judgement is in fact
to be corrected. And again the general rule on which we
act with regard to memory, our presumption, that is, that
memory is correct except so far as we have a special reason
to doubt it, in no way conflicts with the superiority of
present judgement. It would conflict with this only if
our last judgement were to pronounce the above rule to be
invalid. And if it is urged that memory, though corrected,
is corrected only by further memory, such an objection, it
seems to me, can be easily disposed of. What it states is
not true except in part, and is not true in the end. For
memory at times seems to be corrected not by memory but
by inference. And, apart from this and in. general, I am
unable to understand how an infallible memory can possibly
correct itself. It is to me on the other hand intelligible that
diverse memories can and do radically conflict, and that such
a collision, if we have no higher criterion, leads inevitably
to scepticism. In fact and in truth memory, wherever
corrected, is corrected by a judgement. This judgement in
different cases may differ widely. It may make use of a
_ greater or less amount of materials, and it may or may not
be itself a memory-judgement. Certainly, where our last
judgement is a memory-judgement, it remains none the less
infallible, but this, it is plain, does not show memory fo be
infallible in general. We have a special memory-judgement
which we cannot doubt so long as it remains our last judge-
ment. This judgement, however, is infallible not because it
is memory but because it is our last judgement. Memory in
short becomes for you infallible only where you judge that
all memory is infallible. But such a judgement, we have
cce2


388 ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT CHAP.


seen, is dispelled by reflection, and must give way to another
which pronounces it false.


J have so far urged that a present judgement cannot be
treated as fallible, and that as against this nothing outside
can possess any force. And I have argued that to assign an
independent and ultimate value to memory leads necessarily
to scepticism. On the other hand the doctrine which I
advocate requires explanation, for it seems itself to invite
and to justify sceptical doubt. ‘If to rest on memory ’, it
will be objected, ‘ is to build upon sand, it is after all upon
sand that your doctrine is based. For you cannot deny
that your judgement requires time and is successive, and you
cannot deny that the result of past experience now qualifies
your judgement. Even if in some instance you contend that
this is not visibly the case, yet in no instance can you exclude
the doubt or even the presumption that really it is so. And
hence, if you will not invoke a “ faculty of Memory ”’, and if
you will not go on to assume that this “faculty” is infallible,
your own conclusion will in any case fall into ruin. For
your judgement in the end will stand on something external
and foreign, something the truth of which will remain at best
precarious. And your judgement itself, when arrived at its
end, will fail to connect its end with that beginning of itself
which now has perished. It is only through memory that
a judgement is one, and any judgement that is not one, is no
judgement at all.’ This objection seems serious, and we
must endeavour to meet it.

We are led at once to recall a principle, well known but
often neglected, the distinction between a judgement viewed
in its logical and, on the other side, in its psychical aspect.?

‘Every judgement on the one hand asserts an ideal content.
It asserts this of something which is other than that con-
tent and other than the judgement itself. Again, on the


1 I may remind the reader that I am not here replying to scepticism in
general, but only to one kind of sceptical objection.


XIII ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT 389


other hand, every judgement is a state of myself. Now a
state of myself has lapse and has duration indefinitely
divisible, and it is a product which results from external
conditions. But you cannot take these characters, which
belong to my state when I assert, and use them to qualify
that which I assert. On the contrary my assertion in this
latter sense must, except for certain purposes, be taken as
independent of my state as asserting. And for our present
purpose certainly we must so take it as independent. The
thing affirmed is different from what goes on in my mind as
I affirm it, and you cannot take the nature and the origin
of this last and apply them to qualify the matter which
I affirm. My judgement that ‘ ginger is hot in the mouth’
contains no reference to any origin in past instances of
ginger. And again this judgement does not involve an_
internal sequence and lapse, and warrant an ensuing doubt
as to the identity of ‘ ginger’ when ‘mouth’ is reached.
Everything of this kind is at once extraneous and so far
unknown. And when by reflection it is reached, you have
ipso facto left your original assertion and have passed on to
others. These other judgements, with regard to your state
when asserting, cannot except through a mistake be made.
to conflict with your original judgement. And they them-
selves, when made, are valid merely so far as they are
assertions. And in this character they themselves exclude
any reference to your psychical state as at present you
make them. ;

Every judgement may be taken to involve a psychical
lapse and succession, but this aspect of its existence falls
outside of the judgement as logical. If, for instance, the
judgement asserts a succession, this is not the succession.
which belongs to its existence as a psychical fact. And
again the judgement need not assert any succession at all.
In this case within the judgement there is no succession 3
and whether we begin (as we say) with the subject or begin


390 ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT CHAP.


with the predicate, and whether again the process endures
for the fraction of a second or for an hour or for a century—
this is all in itself indifferent to the content asserted. And
no lapse or change outside this content can affect the unity
of our judgement. Nothing in short can affect our judge-
ment except from the inside. And hence anything external,
whether it is psychical lapse or again the previous existence
or worth of some element in the judgement, must remain
irrelevant. If it is to enter the judgement it must put off
its external character. And thus within the judgement no
complexity of detail or structure prevents the judgement
being one, so long as no element is allowed to retain an
independent force. You may urge that my judgement
stands or falls with the truth of some element contained
within it, and you may insist that this truth comes from
nowhere but previous experience. But all this to my judge-
ment is either unknown and so nothing, or else, if known and
admitted, is the destruction of my judgement, as such.
These considerations, true or false, have in any case gone
beyond my present judgement, and they have taken me, if
anywhere, on toanew judgement. But this new judgement;
like the former one, itself guarantees its own contents, and
to me, while it lasts, cannot seem to be fallible.

Such a doctrine, I know, must appear to be ridiculous. It
is absurd, I shall be told, to suggest that there is no reason
for my judgement being true except the fact that it is there,
and it is perverse to recommend me to hold my judgement
standing in order to keep it infallible. But I have made,
I reply, no suggestion of this kind. I agree on the contrary
that it is our duty to ask and to reflect, and to supersede one
judgement by another. Thus‘ He is the person who did that
last week ’, may be superseded by ‘ The truth of that depends
merely on my recollection ’, and this by ‘ After all one must
trust one’s memory ’, and this again by ‘ In the present case
the main point is uncertain’. But it does not follow that


XIII ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT 391


before a judgement is superseded I am to take it as fallible.
And I agree once more that there is a reason why judgements
are true or else false. There is a character which, when I
reflect, leads me to prefer one judgement to another, and
leads me even to reject both of them if neither will satisfy,
But this character, I would.urge, is not external to my
judgements, and to make the truth of a judgement depend
on something which falls outside itself, must lead in the end,
if you follow it to the end, into scepticism or nonsense.
But at present I am not inquiring into the nature of this
character. The point on which I am insisting here is one-
sided, if you please, but none the less I must insist on it as
evident and necessary. . I cannot, while I make a judgement,
at the same time also doubt it. I cannot doubt or deny
a judgement without going beyond this judgement and
without making it a part in some wider ideal whole.1 And
at least I cannot deny it except by another judgement which
I cannot at once make and regard as fallible. And, while
I make a judgement, that which falls outside it is so far
nothing to me. The psychical existence with its lapse and
its duration is nothing. The priority or independence of
any portion of its content is nothing. These things cannot
be anything for our judgement till they are brought into
that judgement ; until, that is, one judgement is superseded
by another, itself now infallible. We may end with the
decision that there are conflicting ideas between which we
are unable to decide, or we may conclude that, in the end
and in its full exactitude, no conclusion is tenable. But
even here our decision and our conclusion, if we make it,


1 By doubt here I do not mean the mere psychical oscillation in which,
after failure or rejection, the judgement merely comes back again as it
was. I mean by doubt the state where the judgement is made an object,
and where another idea is held as opposed to it. Again in denial the
reader must remember that a judgement may be denied from a basis which
is not made explicit. The denial here merely takes the form of, This
judgement does not satisfy me. :


§ 392 ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT CHAP.


is indubitable, until at least it has been banished or super-
seded by something beyond itself. And, while I agree that
this contention may perhaps be called obvious and trivial,
I must insist that it is not on that account to be treated
as false.} ,


We have so far seen that my present judgement cannot be
taken as fallible, and further that in a sense it must be self-
contained. Whatever independent reason there may be for
or against its assertion, that reason, while independent, is
nothing to my judgement. And if it becomes something for
me, then forthwith I have gone beyond my original judge-
ment, which thus has ceased to exist. This conclusion, if
trivial, seems certain, but it leads at once to a further ques-
tien: What am I to mean by one judgement, and how am I
to know that one judgement is over and has been succeeded
by another? For, if on this point I remain in doubt, our
doctrine, however true, will remain inapplicable. When I
say to-day that ‘ Caesar is sick ’, and to-morrow that ‘ he is
well ’, we naturally should take this as a succession of judge-
ments. But if I tell you that ‘ he has crossed the street and
has now entered that shop ’, you probably take these succes-
sive events to be expressed in one judgement. Indeed
otherwise we should be led to doubt if in the end any judge-
ment is one. And hence it is necessary to seek a principle
by which to decide whether in any given case we have
several judgements or one judgement.

The singleness of a judgement lies in the identity of its
subject.2. Its unity in other words admits no solution of
logical continuity. The subject throughout must be one,
and it must remain one for me, and otherwise we have

1 In what sense a judgement is self-contained, and how we are able to
correct one judgement by another, are of course further questions. They
involve difficulties which are discussed elsewhere.


* On this whole matter the reader is referred to Prof. Bosanquet’s
logical works. ;


XIII ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT 393


either two judgement¢ or none. I take this answer to be
correct, but it needs further explanation, and I will begin by
excluding a view which for our present purpose is too wide.
The whole of experience, it can be said, forms a single con-
tinuous judgement, for, so far as it is intellectual, it is the
qualification of one real subject. And all our diversity be-
longs to and is predicated of this unbroken reality. Such a
doctrine states what I accept in principle as a fundamental
truth, but for our present purpose this truth is stated too
widely. The judgement we are seeking here is that judge-
ment which I myself make as one, and in which the unity
of the subject is unbroken for me. And, unless the whole of
experience is now the object of my reflection, the unity of the
subject must fall within narrower limits. There are past
judgements that have been made and that now are forgottep,
while there are others which, forgotten or not, have at some
time been overridden and corrected. And, since these
judgements clearly are not now present to my mind when
I judge, they cannot for my mind be included in my present
judgement. The one subject, though so determined, is not
determined so for me, and this last qualification seems here
to be essential.

What I mean by one judgement is an ideal determination
of reality in which for my mind the subject remains one and
unbroken. It is not enough that at the end I merely have
still the same subject, for I may have the same subject in
a succession of different judgements. A judgement is one
when its subject keeps hold throughout of the diversity, and
carries with it to the end everything which it has gained in
its process.1 The dropping on the road of that character
which has been taken up by the way is the fault which makes
a solution of logical continuity and draws a line across the
process. I have a single judgement where for me the one
subject qualifies itself continuously and qualifies itself


1 Everything, that is, which is essential. See below, pp- 396 foll.


304 ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT CHAP.


cumulatively. Our most natural expression here is in short
the much abused term ‘ development ’ or ‘ evolution ’.1

' Before illustrating the above by some ordinary examples,
I must first call attention to a point of importance. By the
subject of a judgement I do not mean the mere grammatical
subject, or that again which at first sight may seem to be
the real subject. The real subject is that, whatever it is,
which does in fact qualify itself continuously in the way
I have mentioned. In any given judgement to discover
what this individual subject is, you must inquire into the
‘meaning of the special judgement before you. And the
answer cannot be reached by the application of any general
rule.?

I will now give some instances of the principle which we
laid down above. If I first say that A has travelled from
Paris to London, and then later add that A has travelled
from London to Liverpool, we have probably two judge-
ments. If Isay on the contrary that, having travelled from
Paris to London, he thence went to Liverpool, there is pre-
sumably but one judgement. The first half of the journey
has in this latter case not dropped off from the subject, and
hence we have here no solution of continuity. To assert
‘ John is in London ’ and then ‘ William is in London’, may
or may not be one judgement, but ‘ John and William are
in London’ is certainly one assertion. For here, when we
arrive at William, we have not let fall John. The most


1 TI seem to observe now that scarcely any one who sets a value on
himself intellectually, ventures to use the former of these words when he
can bring in the latter. It is perhaps difficult for any of us wholly to
avoid cant.

2 The doctrine of ‘the universe of discourse’ (the phrase is far from
being elegant) has been useful, but it fails here to give us much help. It
rightly calls attention to the truth (the discussion of which will be found in
Chapters VIII and IX) that judgements are made subject to an unexpressed
qualification. Thus when we say that a chimaera does not or again does
exist, the term ‘ existence’ in each case has a different meaning. But if
we ask whether ‘ existence’ here is or is not the real subject of the judge-
ment, the doctrine of the ‘ universe of discourse’ seems to fail us.


XUI ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT 395


natural example is the seeking of means for an end; and let
us take the attempt to trace mentally a path up a cliff or
across a morass or torrent. We are forced perhaps to make
in idea a variety of partial passages before we find a way
which will lead from the beginning to the end. Now this
way, when we find it, is a continuous ideal sequence, and it
is assuredly one judgement. Its stages on the other hand,
while you trace them piecemeal, are many judgements in
succession, and so are the fragmentary mental passages
which have refused to come together. It is one judgement
where the subject, on arriving at the second step, takes that
step in the character of a subject which has been qualified
by the first step, a subject which carries the beginning and
every stage of its process continuously with it to the end.?
And we fail to have a single judgement so far as the subject,
when arrived at the end, has dropped by the way any part
of its career. But the whole mental collection once again
and in a different way may become one judgement. For I
may take it not now as a connected ideal means to my end,
but as one continuous sequence of psychical events and as
one passage in my history. In brief, though it is not true
that all judgements express succession, the example of a
series best illustrates the unity of judgement. Anything so
far as I take it as a series is assuredly one judgement, for, as
so taken, it consists in a single subject which develops itself
without break or loss.2, The nature of this subject, I should
agree, is not easy to fix, but without it I am forced to con-
clude that a series is unmeaning, If like a child or an idiot
I thoughtlessly repeat ab, ab, that obviously for myself is
no series at all. It is a series for me so far as I take the
sequence abab as one process. And I donot take it as one
process unless the second ad is qualified by the first, unless,
that is, the subject of the series carries the first ab with it to


1 This statement is once more made subject to explanation given below.
2 Cf, Chap. X, pp. 307-9.


396 ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT CHAP.


the second and so on continuously. Every process of
reasoning will on the same principle be contained in one
judgement, so long, that is, as the subject is unbrokenly
determined. Suppose, for instance, that I have proved that
there was no possible person, outside A and B, at a certain
place. If I then, without that result leaving my mind,
show that A was elsewhere, and that hence B was present,
this whole process, it seems to me, must be called one judge-
ment, And it will be one judgement again even if the first
result has left my mind, and if then, learning that A was
elsewhere, I resume this knowledge which has lapsed and so
draw the conclusion. But it will be only so far as resumed
that my first result enters into my final judgement. My
first result, if you take it apart from the further judgement
that A was elsewhere, is merely one judgement which then
is succeeded in time by another. And these two successive
pieces of knowledge, as separate, are simply two judgements.
But so far as one subject carries with it the whole content
unbroken from the beginning to the end, we have one process
of inference,and with this a single judgement. And it is
one inference and one judgement just because, and just so
far as, it does not admit the existence of anything discon-
nected and independent. It is one judgement, we may say,
so far as it excludes anything like memory.


I will pass now from the general question to consider some
special difficulties. Has the subject in a judgement, we may
be asked, really to carry on everything ?) Is not on the
contrary some acquired detail often dropped by ‘the way ?
Certainly I should agree that not every detail need be carried
on to the end. And I should agree that such a retention is
often both useless and impossible. If for example I judge
that a vehicle has passed from A to D, my final judgement
may or may not contain its passage through Band C. But


1 Cf. here Chap. XII, pp. 362 foll,


XII ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT 307


as to the observed incidents, however trifling, which have
qualified the whole movement, it is absurd to suppose that
their presence in the judgement is essential. These things
are not essential because they fall outside the judgement’s
purpose and interest, and because everything which is
external to this is irrelevant. I cannot ask here in what
the interest of a judgement consists, but every judgement,
I must insist, is made in some special interest. It is this
interest which defines and limits the amount of identity
required in the subject, and determines what details may be
called accidental. Such details may never have been taken
up by the subject, or again, if taken up, they need not be
carried on, or, even if carried on, they may at the end be
neglected. Such a process, it is clear, must imply some
abstraction, and therefore, we may add, must run the risk
to which in the end all judgement is liable. But certainly
the subject in a judgement need retain no qualification which
is not essential. And hence with every judgement, such as
‘ the carriage has passed from A to D’, we may have other
judgements as to the details which happened to the carriage
in its passage. And these judgements may be called accom-
paniments of the main judgement, and are not now contained
init. Nothing in short need be contained in the judgement
except what is relevant to its purpose. And our present
conclusion may be summed up thus, that we have one
judgement so far as one ideal content develops itself for me
continuously without loss from beginning to end. We may
go on from this point to consider a further difficulty.

The subject of the judgement, we have seen, must remain
continuously before my mind, but there is a question as to
the sense in which it has so to maintain itself. When I
trace a genealogy it is clear that I end with a judgement,
but as to the subject which maintains itself, and as to how
much that subject carries on, we are left after all in some
perplexity. And there are cases where our perplexity is


398 ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT CHAP.


heightened. If I have seen a man enter a certain house, and
if I watch to observe who comes out, certainly here once
again the result is a judgement. That same subject which
appeared at the beginning is further determined at the end
of the process. On the other hand we can hardly say that
everywhere this subject has, perhaps through somé hours,
been maintained before my mind.

The difficulty which we find in such cases is due, I think,
to several causes. (a) The subject in the first place, if present
throughout, may be present in more than one shape. The
subject may have a character which is more or less fully
individualized, or again it may be abbreviated and made
schematic to a greater or less degree. (0) In the second
place the real and the apparent subject may differ widely,
and the former may remain though the latter has lapsed.
(c) In the third place, though the subject and with it the
judgement has lapsed, yet the process at its end may result
in a judgement. And, since in this ensuing judgement the
original subject may once more appear, it may hence natur-
ally seem to have been present throughout.

(a) Every judgement, we may remind ourselves, is made
in a certain interest ; and hence, to discover the shape in
-which the subject is present, we should begin by asking
for the sense in which that subject is wanted. When, for
instance, I trace a pedigree from A to Z, I may for the
moment perhaps desire only to know that the connexion is
direct and unbroken. Thus I begin with A, and I end with
the judgement ‘ A is the direct ancestor of Z’. And A in
this case may throughout the process have remained before
my mind, and may never for one moment have lapsed by
the way. But how much has qualified A on its road, and
in what precise sense A at the end has been modified, is
a question which may admit of various answers. Where
the series is very short all its steps may possibly remain
before my mind, and each severally may in some shape


XIII ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT 399


appear in the final judgement. But such a complete reten-
tion is in most cases neither possible nor wanted. If what
I require is to join Z to A by a certain kind of connexion,
then the length of the line and its other characters may be
called immaterial, The genealogy with its several steps
may be’ present only in a form which is highly abbreviated
and schematic. And in fact all that in the end connects
A with Z may be the idea of progression through a series,
which in respect of its length and its constituent members is
left more or less general and undefined. But, so long as A
has maintained itself throughout in an unbroken progress,
there has been in any case a single judgement throughout.
For the several stages of A’s journey on its way to Z, if you
take them in their particular character, are here mere
external and irrelevant incidents.

(0) There is one judgement (we know) so long as one
subject develops itself continuously. But, even where the
subject may appear to have lapsed, this lapse, we must add,
need not affect the real subject of the judgement. For the
real subject (this distinction is of supreme importance) may
be different from that which at first sight offers itself to us
as such. When I trace a genealogy from A to Z, there may
come a point at which A is no longer before my mind, but
then on the other hand A may not have been the real subject
of the process. The actual object of my inquiry may be in
fact the whole series. Hence it is the whole series which
determines itself continuously before me, and is here the
genuine subject of my judgement. I may seek, for example,
to discover the length of this series, or again the presence
of some quality in its several members or in their modes of
sequence. And so far as, however vaguely and schematic-
ally, the series as a whole maintains itself before me and
develops itself ideally, the result so far is a single judgement.
It is accompanied probably by other judgements which
I make on the way. But these, so far as they are let fall


400 ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT CHAP.


and not carried on to the end, will fail to appear in my final
judgement. They will be mere incidents which once be-
longed to past stages of its course.

In the same way, when watching a house, I may perceive
the exit of A or of B, and may end with the judgement that it
was A or B who there entered and remained. A man known
to be inside may be no doubt here the genuine subject, and
throughout he may have been waiting before my mind to be
determined further. But on the other hand the subject
may have been not the man but the house, or again more
generally the whole scene or situation concerned. But so
long as while watching I have kept before me something,
however vague, to be determined further, and so long as my
judgement at the end does determine this subject, there has
been an unbroken judgement throughout. And through the
whole process of watching this final judgement, we must say,
has beet continuously in making.

(c) On the other hand the state of watching, if prolonged,
tends naturally to degenerate. There may be no constant
subject there which develops itself without lapse before my
mind, And in this case the process may result in a judge-
ment, but you cannot say that this judgement has been
present throughout. When I set myself to watch a house,
T may allow the subject more or less to lapse from my mind.
I place myself usually, as we say, so as to keep the door in
sight or so as perhaps to hear it if opened. I keep myself,
that is, so that any change of a certain kind at once attracts
my attention. But here my not forgetting, as we say, to be
attentive does not imply the continuous presence of an idea
before my mind. It does not in short mean that all the time
I am attending actually. The house may be associated
with the general scene and with my felt uneasiness, so that
its absence from my view tends to recall me with a kind of
shock. On the other hand the renewed sight of the house
renews my uneasiness, and any observed change in it along


XUI ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT 401


the line of my more special association at once arrests and
occupies me. Then comes a judgement, and this judgement
qualifies, we may agree, the original and the main object of
my watching. But since the subject has not developed
itself unbrokenly before me, there has not been here, I must
insist, a singlejudgement. Certainly I may have had before
me through all the time a more ultimate subject that has not
lapsed. Reality as the general scene in which I am included
has perhaps maintained itself as my object. And this
general object will from time to time have qualified itself
by a changing succession of miscellaneous judgements. But
on the other side these judgements have, at least for my
mind, not been the development of my subject. A judge-
ment has been made and then dropped, and has given way
to another judgement which in its turn has passed away.
And hence, when at the end my final judgement is reached,
these foregoing judgements have not led up to that result
and they are not contained in it. And I may even, let us
suppose, for a time have been asleep, and am roused, let us
say, by the unbarring of the door. The judgement, which
follows here, will qualify the subject which I have set my-
self to watch, but you could not add that this subject has
been continuously before me. The subject of my judgement
has been recalled at the end, and it is at the end that this
final judgement begins.

The matter is so important that I may be permitted
perhaps to repeat and to insist on these distinctions. A feeling
which is in my mind and qualifies my felt self is one thing,
and an object qualified ideally before my mind is another
thing. And what we call a condition of watchfulness or
of attention or of standing will, may amount to little or
no more than an emotional state.1 It need not involve
the development of a single ideal content throughout the

1 And it hardly, taken at some moments, need even amount actually to


that. Cf. Mind, N.S., No. 41, p. 26.
1574 pd


402 ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT  cuap.


process, and the process is therefore not one judgement or
volition. Even a melody, as I hear it, is not in itself a single
judgement or idea. Certainly it is a whole, and it may be
attended by and it may result in one or more judgements,
but in itself it is not the progressive qualification of a subject
which develops itself ideally before the mind.1 And again
we must hold fast the distinction between a judgement
passed at the end of a sequence, and a judgement which
throughout the sequence has made itself continuously.
When I observe A, which after an interval is to be followed
by B, A, as perceived, may produce in me a certain felt
state. Then, when B supervenes, its perception may cause
an alteration in that feeling, an alteration which I recognize
as having the familiar quality, say, of stronger or weaker.
And on this I judge that B is stronger or weaker than A.
But it does not follow that throughout the interval A has
remained before my mind. For, when B produces a felt
change with a recognized quality, the whole situation may
by association reproduce A, which has lapsed, and A, being
reproduced, is thus qualified by the judgement. Hence you
cannot infer in this case the continuous presence of A, and
you cannot on the other hand contend that A is absent from
the final judgement. For to judge about anything in its
absence seems really meaningless.?, And, on the other side,
the presence of A at the end is consistent with the fact that
it has lapsed on the way.


The unity of a judgement, we have now seen, lies in the
continuous development of one ideal content. This unity is


1 I cannot wholly follow Prof. Royce here; but a melody, perceived as
a continuous object, I agree, so far implies judgement.

* This, however, appears to be the conclusion which was adopted by Prof.
Schumann, Zettschrift fur Psych., Bd. xvii, an article noticed in Mind,
N.S., No. 33, by the Editor. To myself not only this conclusion but Prof.
Schumann’s general view of judgement, as there developed, is quite unin-
telligible. What precisely his observers took to be and not to be before
their minds, when after an interval they made their judgement, is a point
to which insufficient attention seems to have been directed. I would


XII ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT 403


logical, and to base the essence of it on a psychical state
seems at best superfluous. You may argue that it is one
judgement where we have a single act of attention, and this
answer at first sight may appear satisfactory. But when on
the other side we inquire as to the singleness of the act, we
must fall back, it seems to me, upon the oneness of the idea.!
Again the unity of a judgement can be sought in its interest,
and from this we may go on to argue that it consists in the
singleness of a purpose or conation. But if you ask where
the unity of this conation resides, then. once more I should
say we come back to an idea, and to that unbroken con-
tinuity which we have urged as essential. At all events an
inquiry into this logical essence is needed, and it cannot be
avoided by any reference, however correct, to any psychical
state?

Thus an answer to the question of the unity in a judge-
ment does not in principle call for an appeal to psychology.
On the other hand there are points where such an appeal,
although not necessary, seems desirable, and I refer specially
to the duration which we allow to a judgement. Certainly
the content of the judgement is one thing and its psychical
duration is another thing, and in principle we have seen that
the duration is irrelevant. On the other side every judge-
ment is a psychical event and has therefore duration.
Wholly to deny the existence of this aspect seems a funda-
mental error,? and even to ignore it in practice may lead to


venture to suggest that here (as too often happens), from want of theo-
retical inquiry beforehand, the experiments were largely based on a vicious
alternative.

1 Cf. Mind, N.S., No. 41.

2 T am not asking above how the unity of the idea is in fact maintained.
That is a further question which here I think it is not needful to discuss.
All that I am urging is this, that the unity of the ideal content is essential,
and that, unless you both recognize this unity and also treat it as a feature
belonging to or resulting from a certain psychological state, the appeal
to psychology has added nothing, And in any case the addition seems
here quite unnecessary.

* This fatally unsound position seems to me to be taken by Prof. Mtn-
sterberg in his Grundzige d. Psychologie.

pd2


404, ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT  cuap.


inconvenience. Thus to regard all experience, or even all
my experience, as one judgement may fairly, as we saw, be
called inconvenient. And wherever for me there is a break
in the progressive development of the subject, we agreed to
deny the unity of the judgement. Taking this as our
principle we may perhaps with advantage apply it still
further. Let us take an instance where the subject, say
a house to be watched, remains continuously before my
mind. Here I notice first that a person A has left the house,
and then after an interval I notice the exit of B, and I judge,
on this, that the house contained both A and B. Now if
for one moment of this process A has lapsed entirely from my
mind, we cannot say that one judgement has been present
throughout. But suppose that the subject, as qualified by
A, has maintained itself till B has been added, can we then
say that the development has been continuous throughout ?
Logically we can affirm this, but psychically the ideal move-
ment, while I waited for B, made no advance. And it is
better perhaps to allow that the process has not been
continuous, and to make the final judgement begin on the
perception of B. And even in tracing a genealogy, where
the ideal advance of the subject does not pause, but where
this unbroken process may last through a considerable time,
it is wiser, I think, in practice not to insist on so much
duration for the judgement. I should prefer to hold that
the subject is qualified through a succession of judgements,
and that the final judgement as to the whole applies this
result, but is not itself actually there till we come to the end.
But, if on this point the reader prefers to take a different:
view, I could not insist that he is in error.

- Logically the duration of a judgement, if viewed merely as
psychical, is irrelevant. But taken otherwise that duration


1 The qualification of the house by A is not present, we may presume,
actually on the exit of B, but is then recalled. The judgement ieretore
begins at this point.


XIII ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT 405


may give cause for misgiving. The longer a subject has
remained before my mind, the less chance, you may urge,
has that subject of preserving its identity.1 And this is
not because change, while only psychical, can qualify our
subject, but because we fear that some change may in fact
not have remained psychical merely, but on the contrary
may have been taken up into the subject’s content. And
again we may doubt whether a subject can really be war-
ranted to be the same, because I during its career have not
noticed a difference. But, so far as the purpose of this
chapter is concerned, we already have discussed the force of
these suspicions. As long as our judgement is present, then
to whatever length it has been extended, that judgement
for us is infallible. And we can apply the above objections
to our judgement only by subordinating it to a further
judgement which itself is infallible. Nor is it necessary,
I think, here to enlarge further on this head. We cannot
allow that in principle the duration of a judgement can be
an argument against its unity. On the other hand in
practice it is better to meet and, if we can, to obviate
objections. If at the end of a series my judgement extends
the real identity of the subject, so as logically to include the
whole series, and so that now throughout the whole series
we have one development of ideal content, that, I imagine,
is all which can be called essential. And so long as this is
effected, it does not matter how schematically it is done, or
at what point of the psychical process my judgement begins,
whether at the first stage, or in the middle, or at the close
of the process. Hence if to postulate an act of judgement
enduring beyond a certain duration is inconvenient, such
a postulate to me seems uncalled for and undesirable. The
duration of a judgement should therefore perhaps be re-
stricted to whatever can be fairly taken as one psychical


‘ ,


now ’,
1 Cf. here Chap. XII, p. 368.


406 ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT CHAP.


And for this restriction there is a ground which is deeper
than mere convenience. A judgement in the last resort
must in a sense depend on my feeling. It is true or false
in the end because it is felt to satisfy me in a certain manner,
or felt again in a certain way to be offensive.1_ This aspect
of the case has necessarily its psychical side. If in the end
my judgement is coincident with a certain feeling, the dura-
tion of that feeling cannot well be disregarded. And with
respect to this duration also it is better to avoid any strain
on the facts.. In any case we have seen that by extending
the actual duration of our judgement we should have gained
nothing worth fighting for.


T will pass from this to deal, rapidly and in conclusion, with
several questions. Every judgement, while I make it, must
be taken by me as infallible, but, when once it has been
made, the situation seems altered. A judgement, we say,
may be corrected by alater judgement. It may be subordi-
nated to this later judgement, and over-ridden by it in a way
which here I am unable to discuss. But can we say that
every judgement remains standing until in this way it has
been rectified explicitly ? Such an assertion would assume
that judgements once made remain always before me, and
maintain themselves in living connexion with every later
judgement. And this assumption would obviously be con-
trary to fact. In fact our past judgements may be wholly
forgotten, and, where not forgotten, they may often be said
to be unconsciously modified and altered, unknown to us,
in order to suit our alteréd present. Subject to this limita-
tion a judgement, once made, may perhaps be said to stand
till corrected. But on the other hand we can maintain this
only if we assume that a certain condition is satisfied.
A past judgement holds not because once it was made, nor


1 This is not the place to discuss this whole question, together with the
special nature of theoretical satisfaction (see the Index).


XIII ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT 407


merely because it is not in actual conflict with our present.
It holds because, and so far as, we assume identity between
our present and our past, and because, and so far as, our
past judgement was made from the basis and on the prin-
ciple which stands at present. An assumption of the same
kind, I may add, is all that justifies our belief in testimony,
and, so far as you cannot infer in the witness a mental state
essentially one with your own, his evidence for you has no
logical worth. Another aspect of the principle which we
have just been applying, is the doctrine that what has been
once true is true always. Differences of time and of place
do not count except so far as they themselves enter into
the truth; or, again, the truth in its essence is unchanged
however much places and times alter. This doctrine may
wear even a more formidable shape, for it may insist that,
whatever else in the world is or is not, any truth remains
true. We have here to face the conclusion that all truth
must be abstract, and to meet the doubt whether, if that is
so, any genuine truth is possible. But once more this is no
place for the discussion of such problems.*

We may finally deal with the postulate as to memory’s
general correctness. This remains standing and valid
although the infallibility of memory has been rejected as
illusory. We are accustomed in practice to assume that
memory is correct so far as we have no special reason for
doubting it. And this assumption is rational, but it is not
ultimate, Its warrant is that it enables us best to introduce
order into our world, and to make our experience as a whole
more concordant and inclusive. And, if so, our assumption’s
force is obviously derivative.2_ We may put this otherwise
by saying that our assumption as to memory’s general truth
is based solely on experience. This assumption again can
be confirmed from the psychical side. As far as we have


1 The reader is now referred fo Chap. IX.
* Cf. Chap. XII, p. 374.


408 ON MEMORY AND JUDGEMENT — cuap. xi


reason to believe that the psychological conditions of correct
memory were present, we have a reason for accepting its
evidence as true. And such a belief for the most part and
in general can be justified. But it is clear on all sides that
we are not in possession here of any ultimate postulate.


‘I may now briefly resume the main results of this chapter.
My present judgement must be taken by me as infallible, and
on the other hand memory cannot claim any independent
or ultimate force. Any such claim, we saw, led inevitably
to ruinous scepticism. The main difficulty: in the case, we
found, arises from a confusion between what I assert and
my state as asserting it. My psychical state may be com-
plex, and full of lapse and of dependency on something
foreign. But none of these characters can be transferred to
the judgement itself, and its independence and its unity
remain unaffected. This suggested the doubt as to what in
the end is the unity of a judgement, and we found an answer
in the continuous and progressive development of the subject
forme. Nothing can be dropped by the subject except what
falls outside of and is incidental to the judgement’s end.
And we then went on to ask for the sense in which the

-subject must throughout be present to my mind, and were

led here to offer some important distinctions. With regard
to the duration of a judgement we allowed in principle no
appeal to psychology, but we found it better for several
reasons to limit that duration. We finally touched on the
question how far a judgement once made remains standing,
and stated the rational ground for our assumption that
memory is in general correct.


CHAPTER XIV


WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR?


IT may throw some light on the general position defended
by myself, if I briefly state the answer which in my opinion
should be given to this question. I will begin by emphasiz-
ing what to myself is the main and vital issue. Mr. Russell
in a recent essay’ ventures on the following assertion:
‘Returning now to Julius Caesar, I assume that it will be
admitted that he himself is not a constituent of any judge-
ment which I can make.’ To my mind the opposite of this
admission appears to be evident. It seems to me certain,
if such an admission is right, that about Julius Caesar I can
have literally no knowledge at all, and that for me to
attempt to speak about him is senseless. If on the other
hand I am to know anything whatever about Caesar, then
the real Caesar. beyond doubt must himself enter into my
judgements and be a constituent of my knowledge. And
I do not understand how Mr. Russell can suppose that on
any view like mine a different answer should be given.

The problem of the ultimate reality of Julius Caesar is
obviously one which in a limited space cannot be thoroughly
discussed. I can here deal with it but partially, and only -
on the assumption that the general conclusion which I have :
advocated is sound. To me the Universe is one Reality
which appears in finite centres, and it hence is natural to
ask at once if Julius Caesar is to be identified with a finite
centre. The reply is obviously in the negative. A finite
centre is not a soul, or a self, or an individual person.


* Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, vol. xi, pp. 118~19.


410. WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR? cnap.


Hence in the following pages we have throughout to bear
these distinctions in mind. And these distinctions are so
important, and they seem to be so difficult to apprehend,
that I must begin by attempting, even at considerable length,
to make them clear to the reader.

There is, however, one point to which I must first call
attention. The Universe to me is one Experience which
appears in finite centres. I take this to be true, but on the
other hand it is not the whole truth. It is the truth to my
mind so far as truth is attainable by me, but it nevertheless
remains imperfect, and in the end it is not intelligible. Our
ultimate conceptions, that is, are necessary, and in a sense
they are really ultimate. But there are features in them
which without any satisfactory insight we have to accept,
since we are able to do no better. The complete experience
which would supplement our ideas and make them perfect,
is in detail beyond our understanding. And the reader,
throughout what follows, will, I hope, not ignore this
general warning.?

To proceed then, a finite centre, when we speak strictly,
. is not itself in time. It is an immediate experience of itself
and of the Universe in one. It comes to itself as all the
world and not as one world among others. And it has
properly no duration through which it lasts. It can contain
a lapse and a before and after, but these are subordinate.
They are partial aspects that fall within the whole, and that,
taken otherwise, do not qualify the whole itself. A finite
centre itself may indeed be called duration in the sense of
presence. But such a present is not any time which is
opposed to a past and future. It is temporal in the sense
of being itself the positive and concrete negation of time.”


1 See my Appearance (the last chapter) for a discussion of this matter.
2 I will allow myself to add two passages from an early work of my
own. ‘The present is the filling of that duration in which the reality
appears to me directly; and there can bé no part of the succession of
events so small or so great, that conceivably it might not appear as
present.’ . . . ‘ Presence is really the negation of time, and never can properly


xiv. WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR? = 411


The distinctions of a past and future beyond the present
time, and of one centre of experience as separate from
others, are essentially the products of ideal construction.?
And the same remark holds with regard to the duration in
time of any finite centre. Hence these ideas properly are
true only of the world of objects, and in the end a finite
centre (if we are to express ourselves strictly) is not an
object. It is a basis on and from which the world of objects
is made. We may speak, as I have spoken myself (4 ppear-
ancé, p. 529), of a-finite centre’s duration. But we can do
this only on sufferance, and so far as by reflection we have
transformed into an object the nature of that which lies
behind objects.

And thus in the end a finite centre has no identity with
any past or future of itself. It has, or it contains, a char-
acter, and on that character its past and future depend. And
the special quality which makes my self one self as against
others, remains (I will return to this point) in unbroken
unity with that character. But the identity of a centre or
a self with itself in time is essentially ideal. Its being
depends on construction and holds good only through a
breach in the immediate given unity of what and that.
And so, to speak strictly, there is in my life neither continu-
ance nor repetition of a finite centre. For a centre is
timeless, and for itself it is not even finite as being itself one
thing among others. To speak of its continuance and its
sameness is to apply to it expressions which we are forced


be given in the series. It is not the time that can ever be present, but
only the content.’ Principles of Logic (pub. 1883), pp. 52-3. The reader
will of course not understand me here to claim originality for a doctrine
which I inherited.

1 Cf, here Chap. XII.

2 From such a position as mine it is obvious that the question whether
change is in the end real, admits of but one answer. The Universe con-
tains change, but the Universe itself cannot change. I would gladly
deal here or elsewhere with any arguments in favour of an opposite con-
clusion. " But, to speak frankly, those arguments, so far as I know them,
have failed to understand the position which they seek to attack.


412 WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR? cuap.


to use, but which in the end and in their proper sense cannot
be justified.

The duration of a finite centre in time, and a plurality of
centres which do not share their immediate experiences as
immediate, are (I would repeat) necessary ideas. They are
conceptions without which we could not express ourselves,
and through which alone we can formulate that higher truth
which at once contains and transcends them. Such ideal
constructions, on the one hand, beyond question are real,
and their reality is affirmed both in thought and volition.
But they are neither immediately given nor in the end are
they wholly intelligible. They are special appearances the
full and ultimate reality of which cannot in detail be known.

It is interesting to inquire into the stages of that process
by which we enter into possession of our everyday world,
and it is important to trace in outline that development by
which we come to distinguish outward things from our
selves, and our own self from others. But in principle we
are concerned here not with the origin but with the nature
of our knowledge. We have seen that a finite centre, so
far as it exists as an object, so far as it endures in time,
and is one of a number, is made and subsists by ideal con-
struction. There really is within the Absolute a diversity -
of finite centres. There really is within finite centres a
world of objects. And the continuance and identity of
a finite centre, together with the separation of itself from
all others, can become an object to that centre. These
things are realities, and yet, because imperfect, they are
but appearances which differ in degree. That they are
supplemented and -without loss are all made good absolutely
in the Whole, we are led to conclude. But how in detail
this is accomplished, and exactly what the diversity of finite
centres means in the end, is beyond our knowledge.


To repeat myself thus may perhaps be useless, and is
certainly not pleasant to myself. And yet I will pause to


xiv. WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR? 413


dwell on a point which seems still to trouble some critics.
How I am to transcend my finite centre and to climb
the walls of my pit, is, they urge, inconceivable. But
that they themselves argue here from premisses which I
reject they seem not to realize. I will venture, therefore,
once more to set down what I ‘have perhaps already said
too often.

From the side of the Universe, so to express ourselves,
the one Reality is present in a plurality of finite centres,
but so that these do not directly share their experiences as
immediate. None the less the one Universe is there, and
it is real throughout, and it is also a higher experience in
which every unshared diversity is unified and harmonized.
How this ‘also’ is possible, and how there can. be such
a thing as appearance, we on the one hand do not under-
stand. But, on the other hand, that the thisness of each
finite centre must prevent the one Absolute from knowing
itself and from realizing itself in and through finite centres,
otherwise than in their several immediacies—of this again
I assuredly am ignorant. My critics may perceive and
may even comprehend this alleged incompatibility, but to
my mind the incompatibility does not exist. For rejecting
a higher experience, in which appearances are transformed,
I can find no reason, while on the contrary I have more than
sufficient reason to accept it.

Again, to view the same thing from the side of my finite
centre, all my experience and knowledge is that of the
Universe and this centre in one, and therefore clearly
without exception all my knowledge is ‘ transcendent ’.
The entirety of the object-world, the prolongation in time
of my finite centre, its conscious limitation as one among
others and as mine and not yours, the whole of this dis-
tinguished region comes from and lives through transcend-
ence. To ask as to the possibility of my passing beyond
my finite centre seems therefore senseless. My being is
there only because and in so far as my being is also and


414 WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR? cHap.


already beyond, and is one with the life of the all-pervading
Universe. You may insist that the felt immediacy on
which my self is based makes an impassable obstacle. It
is something (you are sure) connexion with which prevents
the Universe from knowing itself as possessed also of other
such connexions. But the whole of your contention rests
to my mind on misconception and prejudice, while its
assumption of knowledge as to what is possible seems to me
even ridiculous.

What I mean by truth and reality is that world which
satisfies the claim of the Universe present in and to what
I call my self. Here is the one criterion, and to me no
other criterion is possible. This satisfaction, I am sure,
implies that the Universe immanent in my self is present
also otherwise and elsewhere. The Reality therefore I take
to have this character, and, though I cannot understand
how it is so, I find no reason in my own want of compre-
hension. Thus by the radical incompatibility, of which
my critics speak, J am not moved. For they have them-
selves made their own difficulty, because they have begun
by falsifying the nature of things. It is they who have
dismembered the living whole, and have sunk it in the pits
which they have dug, and out of which they challenge it
to rise. But this illusory construction of their own is
possible only because in the end it is not true. Their
divided world is made thinkable only by that totality which
itself throughout upholds and is beyond it.


After this digression, which I hope the reader will excuse,
I will return to our main inquiry. I will proceed to ask as
to the meaning of a soul and again of a self. Neither of
these ideas must be confused with what we call a finite centre,
and with each there is a demand for careful distinction.

What is a soul? A soul is a finite centre viewed as an
object existing in time with a before and after of itself.


xiv. WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR? = 415


And further the soul is a thing distinct from the experiences
which it has, which experiences we take not as itself but
as its states. The finite centre was an experience which is
in one with its own reality. It comes to itself (we saw)
immediately as a content which is the Universe. And thus,
when by a construction you prolong the finite centre in
time, you have still not arrived at the idea of a soul. In
order to reach this, you must go on to distinguish the con-
tent as experienced from that which experiences the content.
The latter, you must say, has these experiences, and yet
has them not as other things but as states of itself. And
to whatever other reality these experiences may be due,
to whatever other world they may belong, and to whatever
things, other than the soul, they may stand in relation,
all this in one sense is indifferent. If you confine your
attention to the soul as a soul, then every possible experience
is no more than that which happens in and to this soul.
You have to do with psychical events which qualify the
soul, and in the end these events, so far as you are true to
your idea, are merely states of the soul. Such a conception
is for certain purposes legitimate and necessary, and to
condemn it, while used within proper limits, is to my mind
mistaken. But, outside these limits, what we call the soul
is, I agree, indefensible. It is vitiated by inconsistencies
and by hopeless contradictions into which there is here no
need to enter further.?

Whether the soul is essentially one among other souls need
not be discussed. I cannot myself see that an affirmative
answer is necessary, but the question here seems not
relevant. We may say the same of the doubt whether


1 See Appearance, and Mind, No. 33. The reader will bear in mind
that, though feeling is in itself not an object, on the other hand, when
you go on to view it as an event, you have so far made it objective. For
psychology everything psychical which happens is in one sense an object,
though most certainly not everything is an object for the individual soul
in question.


416 WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR? cuap.


without a body a soul is possible. And with regard to
a soul’s identity I will merely state that, so far as I see,
this point, if it is to be settled, must be settled more or less
arbitrarily. But such inquiries have little or no bearing
on our purpose. We are concerned here simply with the
distinction between a soul and a finite centre, and I will.
pass from this to consider a similar point with reference to
the ‘self’. How does a self stand towards a finite centre
and again towards a soul? We have to do here, I agree,
with an intricate and difficult problem. And I regret that
in what follows I can do no more than set down that result
which to myself seems tenable.


The self in the first place is not the same as the finite
centre. We may even have a finite centre without any self,
where that centre contains no opposition of self to not-self.
On the other hand we have a self wherever within a finite
centre there is an object. An object involves opposition,
theoretical and practical, and this opposition is to a self,
and it must so be felt. As to the duration of a self, that in
principle need be no more than momentary. If we keep
to ordinary usage a different reply would have perhaps to
be given, but the usage, so far as I can judge, does not rest
on any principle. And, again, for myself I cannot see that
to be a self implies what is called memory. Wherever you
take a finite centre as containing the opposition of not-
self to self, and as having, of course, some: duration through
which this opposition remains or recurs, you have reached
that which we term a self. _ It is usual, of course, for the
object to consist at least partly of other selves, but to my
mind this feature is certainly not essentials

We have, then, first (i) an immediate felt whole without
any self or object.2, Next (ii), where we find an object


1 On these matters see my Appearance.
2 On this and the following points cf. Chap. VI.


xiv. WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR? 417


against a self, this opposition is still a content within a
totality of feeling. And the relation (so to speak of it) is
not yet itself an object. There is not as yet in the proper
sense any relation, because the self, so far, itself is no
object. And, even when the correlation of self and not-self
thas been objectified, this complex object comes against
the self still in that way which (to be strict) is no relation.
The manner in which, in order to be an object, the object
is felt, must be expressed by a preposition. The preposition
implies the presence of two things before us. And thus,
if we are not to be silent, we have no choice but to use
a form of statement, while we deny an implication involved
in that form. Further (iii) the self, although not yet an object,
is experienced content, and it is itself a limited content and is
so felt. Any view for which the self is not thus experienced
as limited content, leaves us in my judgement without any
self that is experienced at, all. But from such a result it
would follow that the self must either remain completely
unknown, or at least must be known as something which
is no self. And again I do not understand how in any felt
whole there is to be an opposition, unless, as against the
object, the all-containing whole also itself becomes something
limited. While remaining, that is, still the unbroken whole,
it is felt also specially in one with a restricted content.
This limited self (I would once more add) may in self-
consciousness itself become, more or less, an object; but,
notwithstanding this, it always must continue to be felt,
and otherwise, as a self, it would bodily disappear. (iv) On
the nature of that limited content felt as self I can here
-say nothing in detail. Far from remaining always the
same, it varies greatly. There is much of it which from time
to time has come before us as objective, and on the other
hand there are elements which remain throughout in the
background. And all this will be true even of that central


group on which our personality seems to rest. But on these
1574 Ee :


418 WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR? cuap.


aspects of our problem I can here do no more than touch
in passing.! (v) I will go on to emphasize the point which
it is essential for us to keep in view. All that is experienced
comes, we saw, within a finite centre, and is contained
within that whole which is felt immediately. Now on the
one side the self must be less than this felt totality, but
on the other side the self must remain implicit in the un-
broken unity of feeling. The self (to repeat this) may become
an object, and yet the self still must also be felt immediately,
or it is nothing. As so felt it still belongs to that world
where content and being remain, at least formally, un-
separated. The self’s unity with that finite centre within
which and before which the whole Universe comes, remains
a unity which is implicit and non-relational. For, though
it may come before the background as an object, the self
(to repeat this) is a self only so far as it remains felt as in
one with that whole background. Iam fully aware that
this statement is in one sense not intelligible. On the other
hand to myself it serves to convey, if not to express, an
indubitable and fundamental fact, a basis without which
the world is ruined. And with this I must leave the
matter to the reader’s judgement.

(vi) The question why one finite centre, rather than any
other, should be mine, can now be readily answered. My
self, we have seen, depends on that which cannot become
merely an object, and hence it remains intimately one thing
with that finite centre within which my Universe appears.
Other selves on the contrary are for me ideal objects, the
being of which is made by opposition and construction.?


+ See Appearance, chap. ix.

* That any mind should have an immediate and direct experience of
another mind seems, to me at least, out of the question. So far as I know,
the only ground for such a doctrine is to be found in a false alternative.
There is an apparent failure to perceive the extent to which my knowledge
even of my own self is itself ideal and not immediate. My self and other
selves aré, each alike, constructions made in my experience. But my
self is connected there with the basis of feeling, as other selves, in my


xiv WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR? 419


They have, as such, no content which, except as within an
ideal construction, can be felt in immediate union with the
given foundation of my world. ,

It is true that other selves and God are far more than
mere ideal objects. On the contrary, the wills of others
can, as we say, be taken up into mine or mine resolved into
theirs. And, however we phrase it, this real unity of
emotion and action is most certain; and I know that God’s
will or that of others is carried out in my volition into actual
fact. Nay, in comparison with the reality of this higher
common will, anything that is merely my own can be
experienced as unreal and worthless. And yet, so far as
within my centre the overruling end is realized, the volition
is mine in a sense in which it belongs to no other being.
It realizes and it expresses that which is felt as itself in
unbroken unity with what is given, while it is only with
a different centre that another’s will can be felt as thus
intimately one. I can be aware of a common will which is
realized in and by myself. I can be sure that, present also
in another person, this same common will is also felt directly
as his own. But, though each of us knows certainly of the
other’s feeling, neither of us can experience it as it comes
in direct unity with immediate experience. .

It is only because it is an object that the other; for me,
is another at'all. Our joint experience, which I feel, I can
feel as yours only on the strength of an ideal construction,
which does not cease to be such because it is also a familiar
fact. Our common feeling may in you, as in me, be referred
ideally to both me and yourself. But that which in your
experience makes in the end your feeling to be yours is no
construction, while in my experience it depends on and
experience, most certainly are not connected. If, however, we are to
believe in memory in the sense of a direct knowledge of the past, and
are to believe, again, in a direct experience of others’ states, I do not see


why, in principle, we should not claim to experience Caesar, even to-day,
directly from the inside.


Ee2


420 WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR? cuap.


consists in nothing else. Here is the solution of the puzzle
well known to those who reflect on life, and who are driven
for ever alternately to affirm and to deny that thoughts
and emotions are shared.

It does not follow from the above that I myself am my
world, or that I possess any superior importance or reality.
As against the Universe, against the community or God,
I may find myself, as we saw, to be trifling and contemptible.
The nothingness of the self, in fear and in the condemnation
of the higher Will, is familiar to us all. I have indeed
a special and a singular reality possessed by naught else.
This reality of mine is even indispensable to the Universe.
But the same thing holds again of the meanest rudiment
of fact or least vestige of appearance. That which is in-
dispensable has its place; but what kind of place and what
amount of value belongs to it we have still to ask. The
World and God without myself are in the end inconceivable—
so much is certain. But this tells us nothing as to the degree
and as to the manner in which I serve to conduce to their
reality. In short I cannot suppose that those critics who
charge me with Solipsism can have much of an idea as to
the position in which stand. My self is not my finite centre,
and my finite centre is but one amongst many, and it is
not the Universe. It is the whole Universe entire and
undivided, but it is that Universe only so far as it appears
in one with a single centre. Feeling is the beginning, and
it is the source of all material, and it forms the enfolding
element and abiding ground of our world. But feeling is
not that world, and it is not the criterion of Reality. The
criterion for each of us is that system of developed content
which we call true and good and beautiful. But for further
explanation the reader must be referred to other chapters.

(vii) The intimate connexion of the finite centre and the
self leads us continually into error. We identify the two, and
then, failing perhaps to distinguish the finite centre from the


xiv. WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR? = gar


Universe, we are landed in Solipsism. Or in any case the
self, once confused with the prolonged finite centre, drifts
into the position of a soul. And, since everything experi-
enced within a soul must be taken as its adjective and state,
we fall at once into dilemmas from which no exit is possible.


The true relation of the self to the soul may be now
‘stated briefly. The soul is a self so far as within that soul
we have the felt opposition of not-self to self. Whether
within a soul there can at any time be more than one self,
is a question which here we need not answer. For myself any
decision on this point would have to remain more or less arbi-
trary. The same reply must be given if we are asked whether
personal identity and the identity of the soul are indistinguish-
able or at least must coincide. But it is not necessary for
us here to.embarrass ourselves with these problems.*
Passing them by, we may observe how a want of clearness"
as to the relative positions of soul and self leads us fatally
to confusion or ruin. On the one hand the self is a content
which falls within the soul, and must, F suppose, in a sense
be regarded as its ‘ state’. Hence, if we forget to distinguish
the self from thé finite centre, which finite centre, as pro-
longed, we have turned into the soul-thing, the result is
certain disaster. Every psychical content will belong to, and
will be an adjective of, the self, while again the self will be
an adjective and a state, in the end, of itself. On the other
hand, if the soul be taken as an aggregation or collective
unity, the self tends to become a mere ‘ ingredient ’ which
with others is found in this vessel. The self has here been
turned into a mere object and its essence has vanished. For
that essence, as we saw, lived in feeling and was inseparable
from-immediate experience as a whole.


The’ foregoing discussion has, I fear, been wearisome,


1 Cf. Appearance, chapters ix and x,


422 WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR? cuap.


though the importance and the difficulty of its subject is
obvious. I will now pass from it to deal with the question
of the individual’s reality. What is it that we are to call
the real Caesar ? Let us begin at once by asking as to the
limits of his being, and, again, let us start by assuming
the following conclusions. A soul exists, as such, only for
a certain period of some history, and the states of no soul
can be observed directly by others. These two theses, let
us add, will hold good of a self. What a man feels as himself
is not accessible directly to others, and any such feeling
is an event which falls within a single part of the time-
series. The reader who is unable to endorse these statements,
will perhaps, for the sake of argument, accept them provision-
ally. And is the real Caesar, let us now ask, confined within
the boundary of such a limited soul or self ?

(a) Even these limits, it may be argued, are already far
too wide. The real Caesar is the man who is actually
perceived, and, further, the man is not a body but is mental,
and-no one, we have agreed, but the man himself can perceive
his own mind. The reality of Caesar must be therefore
confined to his own self-knowledge. But-from the above
it follows that no one else, not even Caesar’s own mother,
ever knew the real Caesar, and that we ourselves now are
even more ignorant, if greater ignorance can exist. And yet,
‘ even with this, the being of Caesar has not been narrowed

to its strict reality. For how much of Caesar was ever given
even to himself in direct knowledge? That knowledge,
whenever actual, was certainly confined to one present time.
The past of Caesar and his future never came within his
own experience. It was the being of a fleeting moment of
‘ which alorie he was aware, and aware even of that, we may
add, but imperfectly ; and it is in this fragment or succession
of fragments that at last we have reached the actual hero.
In other words the real man has, if not essentially, at least
mainly become a thing unknowable even by himself. And,


xtv WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR? = 423


again, for us on our side, he has become simply nothing at
all, and what we are to mean when we speak of him I cannot
imagine. But this whole restriction of the individual’s
reality was founded on prejudice, and it leads inevitably,
as we have seen, to theoretical ruin.

(b) If, however, leaving this error, we go on to fix other
limits, and now confine the reality of Caesar within the
period of his own lifetime, is our position more secure ?
On the contrary we seem left at once without any principle
at all—unless the identification of Caesar with his perishing
body is perhaps to serve as a principle: And in short our
narrowing of his true being to the mere period in which he
lived, seems once more to rest on prejudice. Based on no
principle, it is in collision both with common sense and
consistent theory, and may be finally dismissed,

How far then, we ask, is the reality of the individual to
extend? It extends, I reply, in a word just so far as it
works. As far as any man has knowledge, so far, I insist,
the man himself really is there in what is known. And
it seems even obvious that his reality goes out as far as
what we call his’ influence extends. The real individual is
in short ‘that sphere which his activity doth fill’; The
question within what limits a man féels and is aware of
himself, does not, we saw, when it is answered, give you the
bounds of his reality. And, if it is objected that the limits:
have now become too indefinite to be fixed, I reply that
I both recognize and accept this consequence. It is a conse-
quence which conflicts, so far as I see, with nothing better
than prejudice.

Why. should I be forced to believe that the great minds
of the past, where they influence me, are unreal, and are
themselves simply dead? Surely I am right to ask here
for a reason, and for a reason that will bear scrutiny: ‘Then
you imagine also’, I perhaps may hear, ‘that a man’s will
really can survive his death.’ Long ago, I reply, I have


424 WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR?  cuap.


urged that this imagination is the fact and the literal truth.
A man’s will is there where that will is carried out into
existence. This of course does not imply that the man now
feels and is directly aware of his will. It really denies
that the man’s will is confined within the sphere of his
direct awareness. And, if this denial is not right, I am
still waiting to learn upon what ground it is wrong. For
I am acquainted with no ground which I at least could call
rational.

We must accept a like consequence with regard to dead
Caesar’s knowledge. A man actually must be there, wherever
his knowledge extends, even if that knowledge is of the
unseen present or of the past or future. So far as Caesar
in his own day foresaw ours, his proper reality was not
limited to his own world or time. He was and he is present
there, wherever anything that the Universe contains was
present to his mind. Caesar of course was not, and he is
not, in our own time as we ourselves now are there. The
distinction is obvious and to ignore it would be even absurd.
On the other hand this separation only holds within limits,
and it is perfectly compatible with the real presence of
Caesar in his known object. The further result that Caesar’s
knowledge will affect the being of, and will make a difference
to, his object, must again be affirmed. But as to the amount
of such a difference of course nothing is implied. Differences
may be there, and yet may fairly be called inappreciable.
For certain of our purposes, that is, they may be taken
as negligible?

It is then not evident, it is far from being evident, that
the real Caesar is unable to come within my knowledge.
He enters into my judgement on the contrary just as I, if
he had foreseen me, might: have been an actual constituent
of his known world. Such a view, I fully admit, brings with


* Mind, N.S., No. 44, p. 11. Cf. Mind, O.S., No. 49, p. 21, for the
question as to the object of desire. 3 Cf, Chap. XI, pp. 336-7.


xIvV. WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR? = 425


it its difficulties, but the denial of it, so far as I see, entails
absolute disaster. There surely can be no knowledge of
anything except what is real, nor about anything which
itself falls outside our knowledge.


We are here confronted by that error which consists
in the sundering of ideal from real experience. If we know
only by ideas, we never (it is an old argument) are able
to reach reality, that reality, at least, which we find in direct
awareness. But the whole division, when you take it thus
as absolute separation, is false. We never anywhere know
merely by ideas, and in the end a mere idea is but a ruinous
abstraction, just as, on the other hand, wherever we have
an object, our knowledge cannot fail to be ideal. That
ideal construction in which for us the entire past consists,
is based on and is inseparable from present feeling and
perception. If these do not support and do not enter into -
that extension of themselves which is the past, that past
has disappeared. You may insist that Caesar, at least as
he knew himself, falls outside of our construction, but even
this contention, understood as you understand it, is false.
My idea of Caesar is not in the full sense an immediate
experience of Caesar’s mind, and as to this thereis no question.
But I have none the less an idea of Caesar’s immediate
experience, and my idea is true, and, so far as it goes, it is
real, and actually, so far, it is Caesar’s own direct awareness
of himself. The difference here is not a wall which divides
and isolates two worlds. The immediate experience and the
idea of it, are, on the contrary, one in substance and in
reality. Why they should not be so, I fail to perceive, and
I am convinced, that if they are not so, our knowledge is
illusion. There is immediate experience assuredly which


1 When (to use the instance given by Mr. Russell in his essay referred
to already) we assert that Scott was the author of Waverley, what we
presuppose as true and real is the idea of a unique individual man at
such and such a determinate place in our unique ‘real’ order of space
and time. This idea, Mr. Russell contends, is not a constituent of any


426 WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR? cuap.


for itself is not an object, nor has any idea of its own being.
But in the Universe as a whole any such falling apart of its
complementary aspects is made good, And ex hyp. we
are concerned here with a case where the immediate ex-
perience of the individual is known even to others.

The past and future (once more to repeat this) are ideal
constructions which extend the given present. And our
present world itself is a construction based on feeling and
perception, ‘ construction ’ here meaning for us (the reader
will note) a living outgrowth of the continuous reality. The
past and future vary, and they have to vary, with the changes
of the present, and, to any man whose eyes are open, such
variation is no mere theory but is plain fact. But, though
ideal, the past and future are also real, and, if they were
otherwise, they could be nothing for judgement or knowledge.
They are actual, but they must remain incomplete essen-
tially. Caesar’s direct feeling and self-awareness are known
by us really. Our knowledge does not go far, but, so far
as it goes, our idea is the veritable reality. And, if it were
anything else, then once more surely we could have no idea
of Caesar. The immediate experience which Caesar had of
himself, if you take that, not in its general character, but
in its unbroken felt totality of particular detail, remains


judgement. It is on the contrary, he says, something indeterminate which
falls outside our proposition.

Any such doctrine to my mind is both false and utterly ruinous. I urge
that in connexion with present perception, and by an ideal extension
of that, we get the idea of a unique series and order, with a unique man
at a certain part of that series and order. Such an idea is incomplete,
but it is positive and determinate, and most assuredly it does enter into
our judgement, And, if this is not so, then what Mr. Russell has to show
is how our judgement can possibly be anything but senseless, and again
how in fact our judgement even is possible.

With regard to Mr. Russell’s contention that there are propositions
without any denotation (p. 122), I of course reject this. The sense in
which all propositions have denotation, and all are existential, has been
long ago discussed by me (I admit imperfectly) in my Principles of Logic.
Cf. Chap. IIT of this volume. The general view advocated by Prof.
Bosanquet and myself seems (I would venture to add) to be ignored by
Meinong and again by Mr. Russell.


xiv. WHAT IS THE REAL JULIUS CAESAR? 427


inaccessible. It is a feeling which comes within our know-
ledge, but which we do not ourselves actually feel. Caesar’s
experience however, as thus inaccessible, does not fall within
history. It is at once below, and (as some would add) above
the temporal order of events. Our knowledge of the past and
future is, in short, an actual and yet an imperfect knowledge
of reality. In this we have seen that it is like the knowledge
we possess of those persons who are nearest. And the same
conclusion holds even as to that which we can know of our
own selves. Any self-knowledge which contains a past or
future of our selves, is ideal. Any distinction of our own
self from that of others, and even any appearance of our
self as an object to our own selves, will bear the same
character. And, when you have narrowed your awareness
to that which both in substance and in form is direct, have
you anything left which you can fairly take as being by
itself the genuine knowledge of your own self? But into
the discussion of this last point I will forbear to enter here.*

The real individual then (we find) does not fall merely
within a moment, nor is he bounded by his birth and death,
nor is he in principle confined to any limited period. He lives
there wherever the past or future of our ‘real’ order is
present to his mind, and where in any other way whatever
he influences or acts on it. If you complain that these
limits are too indefinite, I will not ask you to reflect also
whether the individual’s reality does not pass even beyond
the temporal order. I will content myself here with urging
that at least any limit in time can in the end be seen to
be arbitrary. We must treat the individual as real so far
as anywhere for any purpose his being is appreciable. If
this is to be inconsistent, it is still perhaps our least incon-
sistent course, and it is our way, our only way, of satisfactory
knowledge.


1 Cf. Appearance, and Chap. VII, p. 205. The reader will, I hope,
bear in mind the difference between the felt basis on which the knowledge
of self depends, and, on the other side, that knowledge itself.


CHAPTER XV
ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE


THE following pages will contain little beyond that which
I have published already,! and I admit that on this subject
I never had much to say. But, in view of misconceptions,
Tam led to venture here even on mere repetition. And there
are points again where I desire to lay a different emphasis
upon some aspects of the question. But I cannot hope that
the positive result will seem satisfactory to most readers.

I have not, I know, to repeat to those who are acquainted
with my book that for me the Absolute is not God, God
for me has no meaning outside of 1 of the religious consciousness,
and that essentially is practical. The Absolute for me cannot
be God, because in the end the Absolute is related to nothing,
and there cannot be a practical relation between it and the
finite will. When you begin to worship the Absolute or
the Universe, and make it the object of religion, you in that
moment have transformed it.. It has become something
forthwith which is less than the Universe. This is at least
what I have advocated, and, if I have been misunderstood,
I cannot admit that the fault is wholly mine.

But from the above it follows that there is a fundamental
inconsistency in religion. For, in any but an imperfect
religion, G God must_be » perfect. God_must_b be_at once the
complete satisfaction of all finite aspiration, an d yet on the


other side must. stand in 1 relation. with my will. Religion
{at ‘least j in my view) is “practical, and on the other hand in
the highest religion its object is supreme goodness and power.


1 Appearance, chapters xxv and xxvi, —


XV ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE 429


We have a perfect real will, and we have my will, and the
practical relation of these wills is what we mean by religion.
And yet, if perfection is actually realized, what becomes o
my will which is over against the complete Good Will ?
7While, on the other hand, if there is no such Will, wha
becomes of God? The inconsistency seems irremovable an
at first sight may threaten us with ruin.

obvious method of escape is to reject the perfection
of God. God will still! remain good, “put in a limited sense.


in_him with] limited knowledge and power. Sufficiently
superior to ourselves to be worshipped, God will nevertheless
be imperfect, and, with this admitted imperfection, it will
be said, our religion is saved. For the practical opposition
-and struggle between our will and God’s, the hindrance or
furtherance (as the case may be) of either will by the other,
will be utterreality. It will be fact and truth not conditioned
by anything standing higher than, or going beyond, itself.
Now certainly on such terms religion still can persist,
for there is practical devotion to an object which is taken,
with ail its defects, to be at a level far above our own.
Such a religion even in one sense, with the lowering of the
Deity, may be said to have been heightened. To help
a God in ‘his struggle, more or less doubtful and blind,
with resisting Evil, is no inferior task. And if the issue
were taken as uncertain, or if even further the end were
known to be God’s indubitable defeat and our inevitable
disaster, our religion would have risen thereby and would
have attained to the extreme of heroism. But on the other
hand, if religion is considered as a whole and not simply
from one side, it is not true that with the lowering of God


religion tends to grow higher. A_principal part of religion °


is the assured satisfaction of our good will, the joy by and | peace
in_tl n_that_as “assurance, and the “added | strength which in the
majority of men 1 caii_come "perhaps from n no other s source.”


ei martes hee oe ere


7


430 ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE CHAP.


To sacrifice altogether or in part this aspect means on the
whole to set religion down to a lower level. And it is an
illusion to suppose that imperfection, once admitted iato
the Deity, can be stopped precisely at that convenient limit
which happens to suit our ideas. The assertor of an im-
perfect God is, whether he knows it or not, face to face with
a desperate task or a forlorn alternative. He must try to
show (how I cannot tell) that the entire rest of the Universe,
outside his limited God, is known to be still weaker and more
limited. Or he must appeal to us to follow our Leader ~
blindly and, for all we know, to a common and overwhelming
defeat. In either case the prospect offered entails, I should
say, to the religious mind an unquestionable loss to religion.

And yet it will be urged that we have ourselves agreed
that all other ways of escape are closed. For, if God is
perfect, we saw that_religion must contain inconsistency,
and it was Ss by seeking consistency “that we were driven to
alimited God. But our assumption here, I reply, is precisely
that which we should have questioned from the first. Is there
any need for our attempt to avoid self-contradiction ? Has
religion really got to be consistent theoretically ? Is ultimate
theoretical consistency a thing which is attainable anywhere ?
And, at all events, is it a thing attainable in life and in
practice ? This is the fundamental question upon which the
whole issue depends. And I need not pause here to ask
whether it is quite certain, that, when God is limited, the :
Universe becomes theoretically consistent ?

I have elsewhere discussed the question of theoretical
consistency.1 With a. certain exception (and how far this
is an exception I have explained) I have argued that_all
truth must be imperfect. Truth cannot in the end become
somitont and ultnotsts true, but, for all that, it is satis-
factory in varying degrees. Fhe idea that in the special
sciences, and again in practical life, we have absolute truths,


1 Chap. IX. See also the Index of this volusse.


XV ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE 431


must be rejected as illusory. We are everywhere dependent
on what may be called useful mythology, and nothing other
than these inconsistent ‘ideas could serve our various pur-
poses. These ideas are false in the sense that they are not
ultimately true. But they are true in the sense that all that
is lacking to them is a greater or less extent of completion,
which, the more true they are, would the less transform
their present character. And, in proportion as the need
to which they answer is wider and deeper, these ideas already
have attained actual truth.

Viewed thus the question as to what may be called religious
ideas is seriously changed. To insist on ultimate theoretical
consistency, which in no case can we reach, becomes once
for all ridiculous. The main question is as to the real nature
and end of religion, and as to the respective importance of
those aspects which belong to it. The ideas which best
express our highest religious needs and their satisfaction,
must certainly be true. Ultimate truth they do not possess,
and exactly what in the end it would take to make them
perfect we cannot know. But in this respect they are like

the whole body of special truths attainable by us, or indeed

by any other possible finite beings, whether in this life
and world or in arfy other. What we have to consider is
the relative importance of that, “purpose which the ideas
serve, and how well, viewed ffdm all sides, they aid and
express its satisfaction.

“If the If the object of religion is is to oalize st in the fullest sense
in my will the supremacy of "goodness, the then ‘the ideas and
the practices | s called for by this object are true and, right.
The test in every case is to ask whether our ideas and prac-
tices really answer to our need, while to judge them from the
outside by applying some other criterion is mistaken and
dangerous. This I take to be the principle, but I cannot
here discuss doubts as to the genuine essence of religion,
and still less can I offer to decide on those particular ideas


432 ON GOD AND.THE ABSOLUTE CHAP.


and practices which religion warrants or would forbid. How
far these issues can be settled otherwise than by practical
development I indeed do not know, and in any case I recog-
nize in myself no special competence to deal with them.
What I would emphasize is the principle which has been
laid down above. If religion is practical, then it is certain
that my will must count. On the other side, if goodness is
to be realized, except imperfectly, goodness must be master
of the world. The ideas that are to express this implicated
whole must be more or less inconsistent and, in a word,
mythological. But the demand for a theoretical consistency
which mutilates the substance of religion, starts from error
_in principle and leads in the result to practical discord or
sterility.


- I will touch briefly on two points which I have elsewhere
discussed, laying at that time perhaps an undue emphasis
on one aspect of the matter. I refer to the ‘ personality’
of God and the ‘immortality ’ of the soul. I shall assume
‘here, rightly or wrongly, that a personal God is 1 not the
ultimate, truth about. the Universe, _and in “that ultimate
truth would be included and superseded by something higher
than personality. A God that can say to himself ‘I’ as
against you and me, is not in my judgement defensible
as the ‘last and complete truth for metaphysics. But, that
being admitted, the question remains as to what God is
for religion. The religious consciousness must represent to]
itself the Good Will in its relation with mine. It must!
express both our difference and our unity. And must not,
it will be asked, that representation take the form of a
‘personal’ God? I answer that to insist here on ‘ must ’
to myself seems untenable,* but on the other hand I am fully
prepared ¢o accept ‘may’. But there is one condition on


1 The doctrine that there cannot be religion without a personal God is
to my mind certainly false.


XV ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE 433


which I have to lay’ stress. The real presence of God’s will
in mine, our actual and literal satisfaction in common, must
not in any case be denied or impaired. This is a religious
truth far more esstntial than God’s ‘ personality’, and
hence that personality must be formulated, no matter how
inconsistently, so as to agree with this truth and to support
it. But, apart from this*condition, how far and in what
sense we are justified in ascribing personality to God I have
no wish to discuss, Whatever ideas really are required in
practice by the highest religion are true. In my judgement
their truth is not contradicted by metaphysics, so long only —
as they will not offer themselves as satisfying our last
intellectual demands. And exactly how religious truths
are to be in the end supplemented and corrected, I would
repeat that, as I understand the matter, metaphysics
cannot say. Within the outline which it takes as real
there is room for all truth, and ali truth assuredly is com-
pleted. But the answer in concrete detail is beyond the
finite intellect, and is even beyond any mere under-
standing.

Before proceeding I may warn the reader against a dan-
gerous mistake. It may-be said that, if anywhere, we find
personality in religion. Personal striving and discord,
satisfaction and peace, are essential to that experience.
And hence, if there is a difficulty as to the personality of
God, why not avoid this by confining all that is personal ©
to the side of man? Why not insist, it will be urged, not
merely that God is self-conscious only in me, but also that
this self-consciousness in the end is merely mine? Any
such contention must however be rejected for a double
reason. Religion, in the first place, is throughout a two-
sided affair. Hence to place on one side (whichever that

" side is) the felt struggle and harmony, and the congciousness
of unity and discord, is to remove the essence of religion. |
How far we may go in representing mythologically each

1574 Ff


434 _ ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE CHAP.


self, man and God, as one over against the other, as I have
said, I do not discuss. That certain special feelings must
be located each in one side. only, seems obvious. But on
the other hand the religious consciousness is a whole which
includes and is superior to the opposition of its subordinate
elements. The terror of sin, for instance, and the wrath
.of God belong inseparably to one substantial unity, and
this unity further can be experienced, can be known and
felt in some measure as overriding each aspect. This self-
conscious totality can neither be divided, nor yet attributed
merely to one side or the other. Further, and in the second
place, to assume certainty and reality in the case at any
rate of my personality seems quite untenable. To identify
myself with my feeling centre would be, for example, to
fall into ruinous error. For within that centre is experi-
enced the real presence of the whole Universe, including
God and my self; and, further, that self is but a limited con-
struction, more or less ill-defined and precarious, built one-
sidedly out of materials which fall within my centre. This
is the conclusion at least for which I have contended else-
where, and which I have been forced to regard as certain.

We encounter here the main hindrance to the adoption
of a view of religion such as that which I have accepted.
On the assumption that individual men, yourself and my-
self, are real each in his own right, to speak of God _as
having. reality, in the religious consciousness, I agree, is
nonsense. God must be another independent individual,
and, if not that, is not real at all. On the other hand,
unless this whole assumption is rejected or ignored, the
essential content of the religious consciousness must, I sub-
mit, be lost or denied. And the independent reality of the
- individual, when we examine it, is in truth mere illusion.
Apart from the community what are separate men? It is
the common mind within him which gives reality to the


» Appearance, and cf. Chap. XIV of this volume.


hy ON GOD AND THE. ABSOLUTE 435


human being, and taken by himself; whatever else he is,
he is not human. When he opposes himself to the com-
munity it is still the whole which lives and moves in discord —
within him, for by himself he is an abstraction without life
or force. If this is true of the social consciousness in its
various forms, it is true certainly no less of that common
mind which is more than social. In art, in science and in
religion, the individual by himself remains still an abstrac-
tion. The finite minds that in and for religion form one
spiritual whole, have indeed in the end no visible em-
bodiment, and yet, except as members in an invisible
community, they are nothing real. For religion in short,
if the one indwelling Spirit is removed, there are nq
spirits left.

If you can deny social reality, if you can maintain, for
example, that the State is a mere aggregate or abstraction,
and can affirm that the human individual taken by himself
is still there and still human, then at least you are con-
sistent. And it is but a consequence when you refuse. also
to admit the reality of the one spirit which is present in
religion. But otherwise I fail to understand how your
difficulty is rational. For me, if the individual by himself
anywhere is a fact, the whole Universe is wrecked, while,
from the other side, if anywhere the community is real,
the reality of God in religion seems a matter of course.
The Supreme Will for good which is experienced within
finite minds is an obvious fact, and it is. the doubt as to
anything in the whole world being more actual than this,
which seems most to call for inquiry. If you turn this
indwelling will into a mere relation between yourself and
another individual, religion has perished and the world is so
far destroyed. The question which, so much being admitted,
you can go on to ask, is whether and in what sense the
reality of the immanent Will is also personal. ,

I have stated already that I cannot accept a personal

Fi2


436 . ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE CHAP.


God as an ultimate truth I cannot, for one thing, deny
the relation in religion between God and finite minds, and
how to make this relation external, or again to include it
in God’s personality, I do not know. ‘The highest Reality,
sovfar as I see, must be super-personal. At the same time
to‘fhany minds practical religion seems to call for the belief
in God as a separate individual. And, where truly that
belief is so required, I can accept it as justified and true,
but only if it is supplemented by other: beliefs which really
contradict it. And these other beliefs, I must add, are
more vital for religion. A God who has made this strange
and glorious Nature outside of which he remains, is an
idea at best one-sided. Confined to this idea we lose large
realms of what is beautiful and sublime, and even for
religion our conception of goodness suffers. Unless the
Maker and Sustainer becomes also the indwelling Lif Life and
Mind and the wspiring Love, how much of the Universe i is
impoverished! Arrd it is only by an illusion which is really
stupid that we can feel ourselves into, and feel ourselves
one with, that ‘which, if not lifeless, is at least external.
But how this necessary ‘ pantheism’ is to be made con-
sistent with an individual Creator I myself do not perceive.
The resulting tendency to seek a refuge in polytheism I of
course understand, but the belief that in this way we escape
inconsistency remains to myself unintelligible.

The so-called ‘ pantheism ’ which breathes through much


_ 3 I do not think that the facts of dual or multiple personality can help

us here, It is, I believe, found that the more inclusive of these per-
sonalities is, at least in general, the lower. And it is perhaps the case
that the opposite relation is excluded by a principle. Still I do not deny
the possibility of a higher inclusive will which can say ‘1’ to itself, whether,
for instance, in the case of the State or some other hifman community,
or again in the case, say, of some planet or even of the Universe. The
difficulty, however, remains that any such will must be finite, and that,
when you try to make it more, you pass at once into another form of
being and knowledge. God’s ways, in short, must be so different from
our ways that in the end, we may say, we find them cease even to be
God’s ways.


Xv ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE © 437


of our poetry and art is no less vitally implied in religious
practice. Banish_all that is meant by the indwelling
Spirit of God, in its harmony and discord with the finite
soul, and what death and desolation has taken the place of
living religion! But how this Spirit can be held consist-
ently with the external individual Person, is a problem
which has defied solution. To confine ourselves to the
latter is, in principle, to bring disaster on our religion, and
in practice tends to empty and to narrow it by an attempt
at consistent one-sidedness, Or, shrinking from that, we
have either to fall back on some irrational mythology, or
else, not troubling ourselves much about a creed, play fast
and loose, as suits the occasion, with our personal God,
For the reality of God means his own actual presence within
individual Souls, and, apart from this Presence, both he
and they ; are no i more t than abstractions, Hence in genuine
religion you have a a ‘ “ pantheism ’, which is not less there
because it expresses itself by what in fact is an inconsistent
polytheism. And you can break with this only by an
individualism which reduces God to one finite person among
others, a person whose influence remains utterly external.
If in short for religion you need a personal God, you must
accept also a creed which is not consistent. And, so far
as you refuse, the price you pay is injury or ruin to
religion.

The difficulties in the way of any view such as mine will
always be serious. It will recommend itself to few except
those who have realized that on any opposite view the
difficulties are worse. If you can accept individualism—
the’ doctrine that I and you, apart from any substantial
unity, are redf—then what I have to offer must be rejected.
But on the other side how much is implied in its rejection
I have tried to show. This may be called the first obstacle,
and a second obstacle lies in the demand everywhere for
strict theoretical consistency. No one is likely to content


438 ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE CHAP.


himself with the doctrine which I advocate, if he believes
that there is no truth except the truth which is self-consistent
and ultimate, and that this absolute truth is required for
religion. And the idea that Absolutism, as I understand
it, can fully warrant relative and inconsistent truths, will
to many seem even monstrous. This pursuit of consistency,
however, must lead to fatal one-sidedness. We may have an
over-emphasis on the universal aspect, and with this will
come the belittling of what is individual and personal ; or,
on the other hand, with a stress laid on the practical struggle,
we arrive at a dualism by which the Universe will be in
principle torn apart. But when a blind devotion to con-
sistency is seen to involve either in the end worse incon-
sistency, or else the mutilation of religion, there will be
perhaps more readiness to be content with that relative
truth which is based on Absolutism.


E will now pass on to say a few words about what is called
-‘immortality ’. I do not think that my individual exist-
ence, whether before my birth or after my death, could
possibly be disproved by metaphysics, and in favour of each
existence have been urged metaphysical arguments which
I do not discuss.1_ But on the other side any such existence,
so far as established by metaphysics, would, I should say,
be of a character which for religion is irrelevant and worth-
less.2, What is wanted for religion is not the mere con-
tinuance, in either direction beyond this life, of something
which in a sense may be called myself. The main demand.
of religion is for the assurance that the individual, as one
with the Good, has so far conquered death, and that what
we call this life with its before and after is not the main
reality. If and so far as it is necessary in the interest of


1 On this subject see Dr. McTaggart’s Studies in Hegelian Cosmology
and Some Dogmas of Religion. Compare also the following chapter of
this volume.

2 There are some further remarks in this chapter, Supplementary Note B.


XV ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE 439


religion to represent this fundamental truth in the form of
prolonged existence, I approve and I adhere to such a
doctrine. But for myself I feel the gravest doubt with
regard to such a necessity. .

I have no desire to discuss once again the arguments for
what is called immortality. From a religious point of view
their value, at least to my mind, seems limited.1 What
appeals to me, if I may be allowed to repeat it, is the demand
of personal affection, the wish that, where a few creatures
love one another, nothing whether before or after death
should be changed. But how can I insist that such a
demand (whatever one may dare to fondly hope or dream)
is endorsed by religion? And the rest of the arguments
leave me not merely unconvinced but cold. On the other .
side I readily admit a difference, and, if you please, a defect
in my temperament, and a difference also, and, if you like-
to say so, a weakness in my imaginative power. And
wherever after due consideration it is found by any man
or any set of men that religion calls for a genuine individual
personal existence after death, I am on the side of such
a doctrine. I think that the belief, so far, is right, and,
under this condition, may be called true. Exactly what
its truth comes to in the end however, I think that we
cannot know, and, so far as we are religious, I am sure
that we ought not much to care. And I must insist that
the above demand is to be made really in the interest of
religion, and not, as far more often happens, in the interest
really of something quite different.

We are encountered here once more by the unfortunate


1 The insatiable divine discontent within our finite personalities, accord-
ing to Prof. Royce (William James, pp. 296-7), calls for and implies
satisfaction-; and therefore we are to have ‘an opportunity for an endless
series of deeds’. As this, at least to some minds, appears to be the evident
condemnation of both God and themselves to the fate of Tantalus, and as
Prof. Royce can hardly be unaware of this result, I am once more led to
wonder whether on this question of personal immortality there is much
use in argument.


440 ' ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE CHAP,


ambiguity of religion. The fears of the old savage spirit-
world, with all its terror and all its cruelty, survive deep-
rooted in our nature, and by some persons still are taken as
religious. And with them remains the old savage demand
for feasting and drink, for hunting and fighting, and for
concubines and wives after death. In the sense, however,
which I would urge that religion really should bear, these
fears and desites are not in the very least religious. They
are on the contrary that which a true religion aims to
subjugate and control, as being in the main superstitions
contrary to our best human interests. Humanity has
progressed, so far as it has progressed, not by the ideas and
arts of the medicine man but by life and work in the day-
light. And to seek for truth and satisfaction elsewhere
I take to be the essence of superstition. It is imperative, |
I would once more urge, that, before we seek to deal with
questions such as these, we should endeavour to decide on
the sense in which religion is to be used."


+ The same remark is again applicable to any mere curiosity as to
‘spirits’, or as to our own condition after death. Such curiosity is not
in the proper sense religious at all. JI am of course not condemning any
kind of scientific inquiry, so far as it is scientific. And I fully recognize
that, for instance, in some present attempts to communicate with the
dead there is much which deserves sympathy. Though anything like
necromancy to myself is most distasteful, I cannot doubt the genuineness,
at least in part, of the motive which prompts these attempts. But there
is too much tendency, I think, to forget certain aspects of the matter.
And the first point is that mere personal survival and continuance has in
itself absolutely nothing to do with true religion. A man can be as
irreligious (for anything at least that I know) in a hundred lives as in one.
And the second point is this. If you are to treat the evidence scientifi-
cally, you must divest your mind of preconceived ideas. But, when
this is done, and when we are satisfied that we converse with beings
other than living men, the question as to what these beings are at once
becomes formidable. The old reply, still given, I believe, by orthodox
Catholicism, has at least to be considered. The inquiry which is opened
is in short not altogether a pleasant one, and the ordinary course, so far
as I know, is to avoid it blindly. What I myself wrote on this head
some time ago (Fortnightly Review, December 1885) is, I recognize, one-
sided and unsatisfactory ; but it contains, I think, doubts which are far
easier to ignore than to remove. For instance, to discuss the question


XV ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE 4AI


In conclusion I should like to touch briefly on the differ-
ence between morality and religion. From the point of
view of mere duty, and so far as merely that aspect is
concerned, I find no difference at all between religion and
morality. True religion, it is obvious, calls upon us to
be morally good, and on the other side to limit the sphere
of moral duty is impossible. But in morality, and still
more in religion, there is much beside and beyond this
aspect of mere duty, and hence between religion and
morality there is a real difference. The whole emotional
and perceptional side of each should certainly issue in
practice, and you may add that in each case the existence
of the entire experience is itself the object of a duty. But
the experience itself both in religion and morality, when
you take it as a whole with all its perceptional and emotional
elements, is a much larger thing than that special relation
which we call duty. I cannot here attempt to set. out
fully the contents in each case, and will merely point to
what seems to be the root of their difference. In morality
proper the moral ideal is, so far, not viewed as existing.
I do not mean that it cannot be embodied, or that in any °
case (Chap. III, pp. 31 foll.) it is really in every sense a mere
idea; but still this ideal must be taken as a mere idea so
far as concerns its practical relation to my world and to
me. The moral idea is a ‘ to be’ which is ‘ not yet’. But
in religion the ideal good must, be taken as real, though;
on the other side, as also in part not realized. Where for
us there is only an idea, I do not see how it is possible to
have religion. Morality, it is true, can make a religion of
morality. It can contemplate its ideal, whether as actually
embodied or as mere idea, and can entertain towards its
ideal those emotions which we call religious. But, so far


of the identification of a ‘ spirit’ without any regard to what is involved
logically in the identification of a man, seems to be still the common way,
and to myself it still seems to be ridiculous.


442 ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE CHAP.


as it does this, it necessarily regards its object as somehow
real. It has so far ceased to be mere morality and has
passed into an imperfect form of religion.?


I do not suppose that what I have said above with regard
to God and Immortality has given satisfaction. The reader


1 Some further remarks may perhaps be offered to the reader. If you
contemplate the realized good as a perceived, individual, self-existing
object, it is beautiful. To be so contemplated it must of course be loosened
from its context, be taken out of its space and time, and have thus become
eternal. And it is possible so to take an actual person or action. But
with beauty there is no essential relation of my will to the object.

It is otherwise with the object of religion. That, no matter how far
it stands above the world of events, is taken as the felt consummation of

‘my whole being, in which my self is at one with this utter reality. My
will is included in the object, and included not by way of relation, but in
felt intimate unity in which it is satisfied. But religion has also another
side, and here my will is related to the object as to a superior will, and
can even conflict with that object. This aspect of relation is essential to
religion. It depends on, and is subordinate to, the former aspect in
which the entire reality, including my satisfied will, is already there in
the object and is felt as mine and as absolute. But, though subordinate,
this feature of practical relation and of possible discord is necessary for
religion, and serves to distinguish if from that which is merely aesthetic.
The aesthetic object fails to comprehend and so to demand the whole of
my being.

The object in religion must be idealized so as to be taken out of time,
and on the other side it must be no mere idea but be real. And, in the
sense of utterly satisfactory, the object is absolute. But, so far as these
characters are preserved, the object can be finite. A man’s country,
the view of his native place or of his home, may, for example, be objects
for religion, if the man feels that ‘this reality is my consummation’.
The finite reality is taken thus out of time and, we may say, as absolute.
But there is here a contradiction in principle between the characters of
absoluteness and finitude. And, as religion develops, it is seen that the
true object of religion can in the end be nothing finite.

For morality, in the stricter sense, the object (in this unlike the re-
ligious object) is not real. Or, if and so far as the moral ideal is taken as
real, this ideal, if it is to remain moral, must not appear as the complete
réalized Good. ‘Wherever the morat ideal is viewed as existing, it may,
so far, become beautiful, and in any case it tends to pass into a form of
worshipped reality, where mere morality is transcended. Morality, in
the sense of duty, emphasizes that aspect of relation and process which
religion admits only as overridden by the aspect of realized Good. Thus
the moral failure to realize a duty: becomes in religion the falling away
from one’s essential being and reality. And everywhere religion must be
taken as the completion and fulfilment of what is moral. ,


XV ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE 443


too probably has condemned it as evasive and trifling, or
even perhaps as dishonest. But this is a sentence which
he would have to pass not only here but upon the entire
way in which, after and like others, I have found myself
compelled to regard the Universe. To us the Universe is
a living whole which, apart from violence and partial death,
refuses to divide itself into well-defined objects and clean-
cut distinctions. On the other hand these definite objects
and hard distinctions are demanded by that which counts
itself as sound sense and clear thinking. And the demand
is right, and its satisfaction is necessary and indispensable.
But unfortunately this necessary process and its indis-
pensable result must mutilate and distort the living whole.
And the consequence is that, as that unity is represented,
its divisions clash not only with one another but even
internally within themselves. And life as a whole is liveable -
because we select arbitrarily those ideas which seem best
to suit the occasion, while all the rest of our sound sense
and clear thinking is for the occasion ignored.. But, where
from any cause we cannot do this, we fall into collisions for
which we possess and can find no remedy. One man will
insist on a God palpable as is the friend whom he holds by
the hand, while another man upon the same principle
sweeps the heavens with his telescope and finds that God
exists nowhere. To one of us there is no religion unless
Jesus was preternaturally born of a virgin, rose with his
dead body from the grave and ascended with it to the sky.
While another man, finding that, except in vital relation
with the mental furniture of the early Christians, you have
no material by which to reconstitute the historical facts,
concludes forthwith that Christianity is no better than
humbug. But if such flagrant inconsistency or helpless
collision seems everywhere the necessary result of clear
thinking, that result cannot by every one be accepted as
final. ©n the other hand, when we attempt to return to


4A4 ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE CHAP.


experience and to do justice to life as a whole, and to follow
the life of that whole in its undivided movements, we are
driven everywhere to set down as relative those ideas which
once seemed absolute and independent. And, in our effort
to keep hold of all ideas of experience at once, we lose our
grasp of fixed points and our base on the solid ground.
Our dividing-lines and landmarks are obscured, and, instead
of reality, we seem to find nothing but that which for ever
shifts and evades us. And, if we claim to have passed
beyond the collisions of one-sided thinking into an intel-
lectual world which has come back nearer to fact and to
life, our claim will seem to be not so much ill-founded or
exaggerated as insane or dishonest. For myself I must
confess that { see no way, whether now or in the future, by
which the clear thinking which calls itself ‘Common Sense’
and is satisfied with itself, can ever be reconciled to meta-
physics. By metaphysics I do not mean the doctrine of
any one school, but I include under that term all speculation
which is at once resolved to keep its hold upon all sides of
fact, and upon the other hand to push, so far as it can,
every question to. the end. For ‘Common Sense’ it will
remain that the final result of reflection will seem not only
out of harmony with experience but in collision with sound
thought. And for ‘Common Sense’ also it will remain
that we shall be able to live only so far as, wherever we feel
it to be convenient, we can forget to think.

I cannot believe that a general remedy for our. disease is
to be found in the study of Metaphysics. My own experi-
ence, it is true, might tend to support that idea. Meta-
physical speculation has led me, if I may speak of myself,
neither to scepticism nor to pessimism. It has on the con-
trary, I hope, inspired me with a higher and a wider con-
fidence, and a better-grounded sympathy with all that is
best in life. Tt has in principle broken down the unnatural
barrier between beauty and truth, between poetry and fact.


xv ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE 445


But still even in metaphysics it is difficult to say how far
conclusions rest upon personal feeling. And for me to
assume that the majority of students will ever be able to
justify, each for himself, a result so affirmative, would not
be reasonable. On the contrary I am bound to suppose
that for many persons metaphysics would issue, I do not
say in conclusions abhorrent to our best instincts, but in
theoretical scepticism. By theoretical scepticism I certainly
do not understand a positive doctrine about our knowledge
and its necessary limits. That would -be a result to which
I must once again be allowed to apply the epithet of stupid.
I mean by scepticism the mere denial of any known satisfac-
tory doctrine, together with the personal despair of any future
attainment (cf. p. 118). And I must admit that with many
persons this may be -the intelligent outcome of a sincere
metaphysical endeavour.

Such a scepticism, I would add, if not the best issue, may
serve at least as a deliverance from spiritual oppression.
For it may free us on every side from the tyranny of intel-
lectual prejudices, and in our own living concerns from the
superstitious idolatry of abstract consistency.1 For such
a scepticism all our truths without exception are mere
working ideas. And this of course does not mean that all
truths are ‘ practical’. It means that our ideas are there
to serve our living interests, of whatever kind these may be,
whether practical or otherwise, and that our ideas are to be
subject to those interests which they serve. Hence any
claim on the part of these ideas to dictate to us on the
ground of consistency or of ‘ Common Sense’, may at once
be dismissed as ridiculous. And, with this, there comes in
principle an end to the worship of abstractions, abstractions
whether of the school or of the market-place. And there
comes the perception that prose and ‘ fact ’ may be fanciful
in a more extravagant and in a lower sense than poetry or


1 Ct. Pp. 123-4, 132-3.


446 ‘ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE CHAP.


art. Everything in short in life will be tried, and con-
demned or justified, solely on the ground of our highest
human interests.

Such a result, where there is nothing better, may be
welcome, and yet such a result is not in general enough.
For theoretical scepticism, if it is to have no bad side,
demands (we must not forget) some strength of character.
And, apart from this, there is a desire deep-seated in our
nature for what we call truth, and for the intelligent and
rational justification of our best instincts. We want and
we require in short some kind of working creed, and this
requirement is hardly met by any mere collection of working
ideas. And where there are no metaphysics, or where meta-
physics have led to no positive result, such a doctrine
apparently would have to rest on what we call religion,
individual or general.

There is, I should say, a need, and there is even a certain
demand, for a new religion. We want a creed to recognize
and justify in due proportion all human interests, and at
the same time to supply the intellect with that to which it
can hold with confidence. Whether we shall get this new
religion, and, if so, how, whether by modification of what
exists or in some other way, I am unable to surmise. But
it is not, so far as I see, in the power of philosophy to supply
this general demand. And I must doubt the possibility of
a religious doctrine able in the end to meet our metaphysical
requirement of ultimate consistency.. All that, in my
opinion, we can reasonably desire, is on one side a general
faith, and on the other side such a critical philosophy as
would be able in some sense to justify and to support this
faith. I think, that is (to use a word perhaps anticipated
by the reader), that any positive metaphysical doctrine
must remain ‘esoteric’, while a religion condemned to be
esoteric is but a refuge amid general destitution.. Therefore
a religious belief founded otherwise than on metaphysics,


XV ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE 447


and a metaphysics able in some sense to justify that creed,
seem to me what is required to fulfil our wishes. And,
though this fulfilment is a thing which I cannot myself
expect to see, and though the obstacles in its way are
certainly great, on the other hand I cannot regard it as
impossible.


CHAPTER XV


SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE A
ON THE REALITY AND PERSONALITY OF GOD


I am anxious on this subject to be frank with the reader,
and to answer plainly, so far as I can, or decline to answer,
his questions. But there is a difficulty here which the
reader may perhaps fail to apprehend. His questions, as
he asks them, may imply certain beliefs on his part which
I do not share. This is eminently the case with regard to
God’s reality. The reader perhaps may be sure that a
thing must be real or unreal, that, whatever things are real,
are real alike and equally, and that, in short, with regard
to reality it is always a case of Yes or No, and never of
more and less. Now, if I am forced to take reality as having
thus only one sense, I must reply that God is not real at all, —
any more than you and I are real. Nothing to me in this
sense is real except the Universe as a whole; for I cannot
take God as including, or as equivalent to, the entire
Universe. This answer is the result of forcing me to reply
to a question which I regard as erroneous. But, if on the
other hand I am allowed to hold to degrees in reality, the
conclusion at once is different. God to me is now so much
more real than you or myself that to compare God’s reality
with ours would be ridiculous. This conclusion to my
mind is the truth; but how can I give this reply, if
I am asked a question which really implies that my truth
is an error? Obviously, if we are to understand one
another here, the reader and myself must begin by coming
first to some agreement as to the meaning of reality.

When we pass from this source of ambiguity to inquire


XV ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE 449


as to the personality of God, our difficulties are not lessened.
‘And the idea that any and every question asked on this
point is a plain question admitting of a plain answer, seems
thoroughly untenable. Let me, however, begin by saying
that, if I exclude the evidence of the religious consciousness,
I, even then, do not deny the possibility or the existence
of one or more finite persons, such as to serve as the object
of religion, or at'least of some religion. (A person, I should
‘add, to me must be finite, or must cease to be personal.)
But the absence of such a denial, the reader will at once
see, amounts almost to nothing, and leaves us, SO | far,
without any actual object for religion. We have so far
excluded what, to me at least, is the only evidence which
counts. For the main interest and the genuine claim of the
religidus consciousness is, to my mind, the ground on which
everything here must be based. Whatever ideas are re-
quired to satisfy the above interest and claim, must, I think,
be true, true, that is, really though not absolutely. Hence
it is solely by an appeal to the religious consciousness that,.
in my judgement, the question as to God’s personality must
be answered.

If the reader can go with me thus far, he may further
agree that to define the exact nature of the true religious
interest becomes at once most important. Any unstated
difference of opinion here will probably lead to ambiguity
which obscures the issue and tends to vitiate the result,
And I may perhaps remind the reader that in my view the
essence of religion is practical.?

If now, passing onwards, I am asked if the personality
of God is required for religion, in the sense that without it
religion is ruined, I can answer at once No. Such a state-
ment would be to me not only false but absurd. One may,
however, maintain in another sense that the personality of
God is a necessary truth. If without that belief religion


: 1 Appearance, pPp- 439 foll.
1674 Gg


450 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE A CHAP.


remains imperfect, and if, on the other hand, religion’s
claim must be perfectly satisfied, it will follow that the
above belief is true, and in a sense is even necessary for
religion. The argument used here, I should agree, is, as an
argument, sound, but whether the conclusion is true or
false is a question of fact. The answer depends on the
interpretation of actual religious experience in the present,
in the past, and, I should be inclined to add, in the
future. And I do not myself propose here to offer any
answer. I prefer to leave this question to be discussed
by others.

There is, however, still an ambiguity to which I would
invite the reader’s attention. Suppose that we have
settled the definition of personality, and have further agreed
that God must be personal, there none the less may be
doubt as to a point. which seems important if not vital.
How much personality and of what kind are we to ascribe
to God? The personality, for instance, that is proved in
a philosophical treatise, may, so far as religion is concerned,
be no more than impersonal. And it is not simply the
reality perhaps of a special Providence, but the whole
matter of personal intercourse, love and friendship, which is
really here at stake. ‘It is not merely one of the doctrines
of religion, but -the central doctrine, the motive for all
religious exercises, that God cares for every one of us
individually, that he knows Jane Smith by name, and what
she is earning a week, and how much of it she devotes to
keeping her poor paralysed old mother.’} I propose to
leave the issue thus described to be dealt with by others,
but I would ask the reader to agree that it must be faced
in any satisfactory treatment of God’s personality.

Finally I must insist that we are dealing here, as every-
where, with that which in the end is beyond us. Any


4 Hamerton, Human Intercourse, p. 166. The whole context is well
worth_reading.


XV ON GOD AND THE ABSOLUTE 451


conclusion -to which we come has another side, which more
or less perforce we omit, and. every conclusion is defective
in a way the nature and extent of which we cannot exactly
specify. A doctrine such as the personality of God may
be true, as giving in an imperfect and incorrect manner
a most essential feature of reality which cannot as well be
given otherwise. And the doctrine may be necessary,
perhaps, as being for a certain vital purpose the best idea
that we can conceive, and the supreme belief on which we
have to act. But, however this may be, if we go further
and take personality as being the last word about the
Universe, we fall, in my opinion, into serious error.


SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE B


‘ON OUR FEAR OF DEATH AND DESIRE FOR
. IMMORTALITY


It may perhaps assist the reader if I add to this chapter
some further remarks on what is called the fear of death
and the desire for immortality. I do not doubt that there
is here some difference in our individual natures and senti-
ments, but the great divergence of opinion among us cannot,
it seems to me, be justified on this ground. It rests mainly
on what I am forced to ‘regard as confusion and mental
impotence. And it may be well for me perhaps to begin by
setting down my own feelings, so far as I know them.

Certainly in a sense I fear death and desire future life,
I shrink, perhaps more than I ought, from the pain of bodily
destruction, from the cruelty of severance, and the infinite
sadness of being torn from what one loves. “And, the older
I grow, the more I recoil from any forced venture in the
dark. But I recognize that religion, if it were effective in
me, would master these feelings. And in any case I know
nothing of what is called the horror of ceasing to be. Any

Gg2


452 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE B.—OUR FEAR cuiap.


fear of annihilation which may rise in my mind, seems in
me to come merely from a momentary lapse into thoughtless
confusion.

Again, as to personal survival, I should wish to survive if
my future life were to be desirable, and I on my side to
remain much what I am now. But, if my future life is to
be undesirable, I am of course averse from it. And, if I am
not to continue to be much what I am, the future life, being
the life of another man, does not personally concern me.

I have spoken already of the hope that after death we
might still, or once more, be young, and be with those with
whom we would be, the hope that decay and parting are
after ail hardly real. If this could be more than a hope,
then death, I suppose, would have lost its worst terror.
Apart from this, I should welcome of course the chartce to
undo some evil that I have done—if, that is, I did not fear
that perhaps I might go on to do more, and if the hope of
individual perfection appeared to me to be anything but
insane. If I believed that whatever I do now would make
all the difference to me hereafter, that of course might make
me more careful; though to be sanguine about a future
where all, no matter what, is retrievable, might possibly
produce a different effect. And the idea that by my
misdeeds I may be prolonging indefinitely an evil series of
lives, would conceivably trouble me more if I regarded life
as ah evil. Such are my own feelings, which I do not
suppose to be wholly typical, and, passing from these,
I will consider more in genera] what is called the personal
interest in immortality.

The question whether what I do and fail to do now, is to
make any difference, worth considering, to any one after my
death, must first be dismissed. An answer in the negative
(I fully assent to this) would be a very serious matter,
but we are not here concerned with it. I am assuming
here that we are agreed that death does not end all, but


xv OF DEATH AND DESIRE FOR IMMORTALITY 453


that on the other hand my actions have results beyond my
own life, results of which I am bound to take account.
But consequences to others than myself are not directly
here in question. What I am to consider here is my own
future, and I am about to ask, supposing that I have a
future after death, as to the nature of my present interest
in that. What kind of interest is it that I really take in
the idea of my future life? Far from being plain, this
question is extremely obscure. In asking it we usually
do not realize what we mean by our self. And in the second
place we fall constantly into sheer self-deception. We sup-
pose ourselves to imagine certain situations, when what we
really imagine is not these but something different.

That in which I take a personal, an individual, interest
is thé self which I actually feel, and feel as mine now. “So
far as I take this self to be in the past or future, and so far
as I feel myself now in that past or future self, it is to me
a matter of personal concern. Memory or anticipation (so
much seems clear) is not all that is wanted. To some of
my past which I remember, I remain indifferent, since it is
alienated too far from my present feeling. And again, if
I contemplate a future which is alienated in the same way,
that future fails to concern me personally. To be felt as
mine the past or future must be included within the self
which I feel now, or (it is the same thing) I must feel myself
individually into them. Memory and anticipation aré thus
by themselves insufficient, and yet on the other side memory
seems clearly wanted for personal interest.

You may be tempted to deny this. You may suppose,
for instance, the case of a letter written by me long ago and
now wholly forgotten. If I read this letter, I recognize
that there is in it something which is mine, and my interest
is individual though I do not remember. Yes, I reply, but
what I feel here as my own, is placed by me, however
indefinitely, in my past, and that depends upon memory.


454 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE B.—OUR FEAR cuap.


- Otherwise it is much as when I read.of another’s past, or
even of another’s present, which has features felt to be
akin to my own, or again when I meet some person in
- union with whom my felt personality expands. We have
personal interest here doubtless in a sense, but we have not
the individual concern felt in the prolongation of myself
into the past and future. :
. Suppose after my death a man to exist who is to be
Very like myself. Certainly I prefer to feel that I have now
perhaps helped such a man rather than another man less
like me. And suppose that I myself am to exist after
death and am to be altered considerably, the more I am
altered the less and less personal concern do I now feel,
until a point is reached where my interest really ceases to
be special. The only personal identity which seerfis to
count here is the degree and the amount of likeness in the
felt self. From the other side, though felt sameness in
character is wanted in order to have continuity recognized
between myself now and then, this by itself is not enough.
If I am to have an individual personal interest, I must
suppose also a memory in the ‘then’. I must imagine, for
instance, a man after my death reading what I myself
write now, and saying to himself, ‘ Yes, I wrote it.’ He
must not only feel it to be the expression of his self, but
he must make that self continuous in the past (even if there
are intervals) with my own. Here is the identity in which
I can now take interest as personal to me myself. In
whatever falls short of this I can feel a concern which,
though never individual, may be special, special until by
lessening degrees we arrive at that which is merely general.
It may help us if we consider the case of a man who, under
an anaesthetic, has endured an operation as to which his
memory is a blank. Let us suppose that a question is
raised now as to whether at the time pain was present or
absent. Would the man, if he is sure that he is in any case


xv OF DEATH AND DESIRE FOR IMMORTALITY 455


no worse now, take a personal concern in the inquiry?
And if the same question were raised as to a future opera-
tion, would the man, apart from fear that things might turn
out badly otherwise, concern himself any more?! And,
if not, why, if there is to be no memory, should he trouble
himself as to whether his future life is to be his or another
man’s? To answer that, if he is obtuse about one thing,
he need not be obtuse about another, does not help us: to
see where there really is obtuseness. And if you reply that
the man in fact assumes that his state, while anaesthetized,
is in any case so-alienated as not to be his, while with regard
to a future life that assumption is not made, I am not
shaken in my conclusion. Your alleged fact in the first
place seems at best very doubtful. And in any case this
supposed alienation and its opposite are connected in-
separably, I would urge, with the absence and presence of
memory. The man in the past or in the future who knows
nothing about mé, whatever else he is, after all will not be
myself. The interest that I feel in him may (to repeat this)
be more or less special, but it never can really be individual.
I can of course transcend my present felt state. I can
make an object of what goes beyond it and is even far
removed from my life. And with regard to such things
I can of course entertain a variety of feelings. In such
objects I can take an interest which is in varying degrees
special, and which again, from being impersonal, may alter
till it becomes in a sense personal. So far, I presume, we
are agreed. The question is whether my felt self can take
an interest in anything as being its own individual self,
unless it regards its present feeling as prolonged into that
object. And the further question is whether I can suppose
1 He would take a personal interest in his future self, as that is to be
while anaesthetized, if (a) that self is to feel and remember, or if (b) it is
to be included in the memory of a later self which remembers. I am of


course not assuming that the second alternative without the first is really
possible.


456 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE B—OUR FEAR cuap.


this felt identity to be there in the future, unless I assume
also that the future self is aware of the connexion between
itself and me, as I now am. These questions I have to
answer in the negative, and I am forced also to conclude
that, where they are answered otherwise, we have con-
fusion and a failure to be clear as to what really is before
the mind. Promise me, if I may repeat this, a future self
much the same as mine now, and promise me that my
present self shall hereafter be present in and present to that
future selfi—and I am here concerned individually. But,
with anything less than this, I find an identity which I
cannot regard as truly personal, though in a diversity of
ways and degrees I can take in it an interest which is special.


This conclusion is obscured by the weakness of, our
imagination, and by. this I mean our difficulty in realizing
what elements are and what are not actually present in
our object. There is a constant tendency to import into
the object feelings and ideas which are incompatible with
that object, and which may even have been formally
excluded from its being. And to this tendency we, many
of us, seem a helpless prey. Thus, to shrink from pain
and from partial annihilation is rational, while, if the
annihilation really is total, there is nothing either to shrink
or to shrink from. Our fear comes from imagining our-
selves present where we are explicitly set down as absent.
What we actually fear is the process where that which
clings to itself is rudely torn away and apart; while, on
the other hand, the pain of sheer negation is an incon-
sistent and illusory idea. At sunset where, sunk before
our eyes, :

- Le soleil s’est noyé dans son sang qui se fige,
we listen in our hearts to the complaining of


Un coeur tendre qui hait le néant vaste et noir,
Du passé lumineux recueille tout vestige.


xv OF DEATH AND DESIRE FOR IMMORTALITY 457


But, once the heart has ceased to beat, it is but folly to
dream that it feels. .And again to suppose that I seek
merely ‘to go on’ after death, while at the same time I
refuse to ‘ go on’ as another man, seems (to use plain words)
to be something like stupidity. For obviously I am here
desiring for myself a great deal more than merely to ‘ go on’.
Again there is no illusion when we are pained by the thought
of parting from what we hold dear. The struggle against
the destruction of.our being, while it lasts, is terrible, and
the prospect of those whom we love missing us and suffering
is cruel. And to sorrow for our loss of those who are dead
is at once rational and human, while to imagine them on
their side seeking to rejoin us in vain would -be torture.
But at once to suppose our dead to have ceased, and yet to
grieve not for ourselves but for them, comes from mental
confusion. Whether the dead now remember me or not may
concern me vitally, but whether, if they do not remember,
they are now themselves or some other self, can hardly make
a difference to me. What they now have become makes
of course a difference to the Universe. But how, if they
recall nothing, personal continuance, or its absence, should
be anything to me or them, I cannot imagine. Again, if we
meet hereafter, and if (as some think) we are drawn, without
memory, to one another once more, the question of our
individual identities (so far as I see) is not likely to concern
us. That what we have done in this life may cause our
future love might be true, and yet, if nothing is remembered,
individual continuance might to us then mean nothing.
Where love is the passion of which poets speak, the whole
inquiry might lack interest. Something has been revealed
which is beyond time and sports with the order of events.
There never was a before, and God has made the whole
world for this present. The sum of the matter is this,
that I understand gratitude towards a past, though I do
not remember it, if that past has brought-good, whatever


458 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE B.—OUR FEAR’ cnap.


it is, into my personal life. But mere individual survival,
as an incentive to present affection, is to myself not
intelligible.


Ah, Moon of my Delight who know’st no wane,
The Moon of Heaven is rising once again:
How oft hereafter rising shall she look
Through this same Garden after me—in vain!


The desolation that invades us, as we recall these lines, is
due not wholly to illusion. That what we have left should
search for us hereafter with grief and pain, distresses us in
prospect, and this is rational. But illusion begins if we
imagine ourselves at once as nothing, and at the same
moment as struggling helplessly in darkness towards light
and love. It may aid us perhaps in testing the real nature
of our sadness and our desire, if we go on to imagine
another man hereafter in the same garden, filled with the
same spirit and offering the same unaltered devotion, a
devotion recognized rapturously as the same without change
or loss. If, with that thought, we still suffer, our defect
is human. But, if we justify our pain, and if we insist
that we have something here really worth grieving for, then
either we do not understand, or we do not love. And,
though what I am about to say will perhaps with some
right be turned against myself, I must add that, if there
were more love, there would, at least on such points, be less
misunderstanding. The striving for personal and individual
existence and satisfaction is no doubt good in its own place,
but, whatever else it is, I cannot take it as essential to love
or religion.

The reader will understand that the scope of the above
remarks is limited. I have tried to point out the illusion
involved in some fears and in some hopes about the here-
after. But I have not attempted to argue that all such
fear is irrational. To die and go we know not where, to
survive as ourselves, and yet to become we know not what—


xv OF DEATH AND DESIRE FOR IMMORTALITY 459


such thoughts must always bring disquiet. If we are left
with that and with no more than that, we have obviously
some cause for apprehension, It is here that religion, if we
have a decent religion, should come to our aid. Any but
an inferior religion must on one hand condemn all self-
seeking after death. But on the other hand it will assure
us that all evil is really overcome, and that the victory (even
if we do not understand how) lies ‘with the Good.


CHAPTER XVI
ON MY REAL WORLD


THERE is an old familiar doubt as to dream and waking.
A man is led at times to ask whether his real life may not be
a dream and his dreams reality. With this doubt we all of
us perhaps are in some sense acquainted. There are moods
in which our daylight world seems to have lost actuality,
where the reflection and what it mirrors have equal force,
and we ourselves seem hardly more than one of the things
which we contemplate. And, apart from this, we are
tempted from time to time in an idle hour to question and
to wonder. Is there not another world within which I
might suddenly wake, and from which I should look back
upon this life as unreal? Such doubts and surmises, far
from being irrational, are in my opinion even justified.
And in any case to consider them may serve perhaps as
a way of approach to some ultimate problems of thought.

What is the world which I am accustomed to call ‘ my
real world’? It is (we must reply) the universe of those
things which are continuous in space with my body, and
in time with the states and the actions of that body. My
mental changes form no exception, for, if they are to take
their place in time as ‘ real’ events, they must, I think, be
dated in connexion with the history of my body. Now if
I make an ideal construction of this nature in space and
time, I can arrange (more or less) in one ordered scheme
both myself and other animates, together with the physical
world. This arrangement is practical since I can act on it,
and since I must act on it if I am to continue what I call my
‘real’ life. Again, this arrangement is true theoretically,


1 On this point cf. Chap. III, pp. 46 foll.


XVI ON MY REAL WORLD ar:


so far as it serves to bring facts before my mind harmoni- ~
ously and fully. And there are those who would even

seek to defend the belief that, beyond the above construc-

tion, there is nothing -else more vital and real. But any

such belief can be seen to be no more than a superstition,

and against this superstition the old doubt as to dream and

waking can be urged with what seems convincing force.

. My ‘real’ world depends, as we saw, on my body, but then
that leads to a further question, What is really my body?
If we insist on an answer we have to reply that my real
body means my waking body, and. that this means my
present body. It is simply the body which is for me here
and now as I am asking myself this question. The whole
centre and foundation of what I call my ‘ real’ scheme is
the Body which to me is mine at this here and this now,
Such a result may be unwelcome, but, however unwelcome,
it seems unavoidable. Why I should then assign to my

‘real’ scheme an exclusive or even a sepeneE reality, seems
far from evident.

For admittedly in dream, in mere imagination, and in
states of hypnotism or madness, I find myself with other
bodies. My body, as I dream, may often, I remember, seem
more or less helpless and ineffectual. But at other times
my dream-body does wonderful things to suit with a mar- -
vellous environment. As I am awake even now, I can
remember that this was so. And suppose that I could not
remember, would my failure be a sufficient ground for
denying both the fact and the possibility, and for insisting
on the unique claim of my waking body? Again, as I find
myself now awake, I can act only with my body which is
here present. With these other bodies, try as I may, I can
do nothing. They are to me here and now both useless
and foreign, and, in this sense, they are without doubt
unreal. But that this sense should be the only sense does
not rationally follow. And if J am to set up this one ‘ here *


462 ON MY REAL WORLD CHAP.


and ‘ now’ as superior to all the rest, I ought surely to find
some ground on which to justify my assumption.

My waking world, you may reply, dominates, and ought
to dominate, because as a system it is vastly more rational.
The order of things which I construct from the basis of my
waking body, is far more consistent and more comprehensive
than any other possible arrangement. In this order my
own past and future and the past and future of other selves,
together with our environment, can be displayed as a
harmonious scheme. If the scheme is not perfect, it is at
least incomparably better than any scheme set up from the
basis of any imaginary body. My real world in short, you
may urge, will contain rationally the other worlds, while
by none of them is it contained. And surely upon this
principle that world alone possesses a right to claim rée&lity.

The above argument is plausible but it is at the mercy of
a twofold objection. For in the first place (i) the facts,
even as known to us, will not warrant its conclusion. And
in the second place (ii) to argue from these facts to a region
beyond them would in any case be illogical.

(i) Even within our experience it is not always the fact
that our normal and waking state is wider and more com-
prehensive than other states. On the contrary, of certain
dreams, and of some hypnotic and other abnormal con-
ditions, the opposite assertion would hoid good. The
abnormal mind is often wider than the mind which we call
normal, and at times it may be said to include and compre-
hend the normal mind; and in certain cases this result,
however it is to be explained, appears even to be regular.
Again, to speak in general, it may be true that the controlling
system of ideas and principles is less orderly and wide in our
abnormal states ; but, if we go beyond the general, such
a statement becomes indefensible. If there is less tendency
in the normal waking mind to dissociation and to fixation
of the one-sided, we still have no right to exclude apparent
exceptions to this rule ; and again with regard to the normal


XVI ON MY REAL WORLD -. 463


mind we are bound to add ‘ what there is of it’. For our
' waking mind is narrowed, and it essentially is the result of
riarrqwing in a certain interest. Its memory is so limited
that, at least often, it recalls nothing of that abnormal state
which on the other hand may know and remember well
what is normal. Our waking mind is bounded and con-
tracted first for practical purposes, since it has to maintain
itself in being against a special environment. And on the
basis of this maintenance we have to limit ourselves farther.
There are positive human ends which go beyond the defeat
of that which threatens our mere continuance, and the one
way in which to realize this ideal order is through concen-
tration, through control and selection. ‘Hence, if J consider
not merely the life within my actual reach, but compare
genefally what I call ‘normal’ with ‘abnormal.’ states,
I cannot conclude that even within my knowledge the
former are always wider, or mantain that at least they are
always more orderly.
(ii) And if my conclusion were so far correct, to push it
' further would still be forbidden. I must not argue from
the facts as they come to me on a certain ground to the
denial of facts as they would appear from a different basis.
Such a denial, so far as I can discover, would rest on the
merest assumption. On the foundation of your waking
self you urge that a certain ideal arrangement is best. No.
one has questioned this or has proposed that your arrange-
ment should be dropped. From the same foundation you
find, again, that your actions can start and succeed. And
no one has suggested that your starting-place should be
abandoned by yourself. What we object to is your assump-
tion that no one anywhere can start from a different basis,
or at least that, if he does so, the result will turn out worse
theoretically and practically. Those abnormal states which
in relation to your environment seem to you to be inferior,
and to be inferior even when taken in and ‘by themselves,
may really be otherwise when viewed in relation to a differ-


464 . ON MY REAL WORLD CHAP.


ent environment, and within another mental context their
character may be transformed. What we call our real
environment may be indeed the merest fraction of the
universe, and, such as it is, it might, for anything we can
tell, be altered to-morrow. The contention that our waking
world is the one real order of things will not stand against
criticism. It is a conclusion which in short is based on
ignorance which chooses to take itself for knowledge.

Suppose that there are other minds which, in their waking
lives, start from a basis other than that of my waking self,
is it impossible that their worlds should be better and more
real than mine? And if you reply that the whole supposi-
tion is untenable, such an assertion, we have seen, has no
rational ground. Again (to leave other minds) suppose that
in hypnotism, madness or dream, my world becomes Wider
and more harmonious than the scheme which is set up
from my normal self—then does not, I ask, what I dream
become at once a world better and more real? And if you
know that this does not and cannot happen, then explain
how you know it. Or, again, quit the position of an on-
looker even on yourself, and imagine your own self in
dream, and that, while you dream, you can recall but little
of your waking state. But suppose also that, from what
you can recall, you judge that your waking state was more
distracted and more narrow, would you not be right if you
set down your waking state as less rational and real? And
if you went on further to embrace your dream as the sole
true reality, would you not, if reasoning badly, be reasoning
still on the principle so widely accepted ? And it is useless
to protest that the above supposition is absurd, if you are
able to assign no reason for your protest.

Once more, let us suppose that, as life goes on, your mind
becomes gradually alienated, that you are able still to
reflect and yet that things somehow come to you differently.
Your former interpretation and order of the world would,
if so, strain the given facts more and more, until a point


XVI ON MY REAL WORLD 465


was reached where you would have to choose between
another arrangement and chaos. And, deciding for another
“system built on a diverse foundation, why, in so deciding,
would a man not have chosen rightly and rationally? Can
a man (here is the main issue) do anything more rational
than to make the best order in his power out of the material
which is given him? -And does not the nature of this
material depend vitally on his present position? And has
he not to regard that position, whatever it may be, as being,
at least for this relative purpose, an ultimate fact? For
myself I see no way but one in which these questions can
be rightly answered.


In what sense, then (we may ask once more), and how far
are We justified when we regard such states as dream and
madness as irrational and take their deliverance as unreal ?
We believe in the first place their content to be more narrow
and less consistent ; and within our actual knowledge that
belief (we have seen) is, to speak in general, correct. Such
a conclusion on the other hand, even so far as it goes, we
must remember, is ex parte. It rests on the mere assumption
that our waking world has a sole or superior reality. Again
what we call ‘ abnormal’ states lead in general, we find, to
isolation and destruction. Between dream-bodies, for ex-
ample, we can discover no co-operation, and these bodies
seem in relation with no common environment. Now that,
to speak in general, they have no working connexion with
our environment must be admitted. On the other hand to
conclude that these bodies have no world of their own and
are everywhere isolated, each from all others, goes (we saw)
beyond our knowledge. Our judgement once more here
is simply ex parte. We are resting throughout on the
assumption that our ‘ real’ world of fact is the one reality.

Within limits, we must all agree, such an assumption is
necessary. If I am to live at all I must act, and, if I am


to act, it must be on the world which comes to me here and
174 “uh


466 ON MY REAL WORLD CHAP.


now as given. I cannot will myself away into another
sphere, even if there are other spheres better and more real.
If my life is to continue, and if I am to realize in it a rational
order and scheme of conduct and knowledge, there is but
one course possible. I must start from what I find, now
and here, in feeling and perception ; I must from this basis
construct what I call the real world of facts and events ;
and for most purposes I must accept at least this order as
real. There is a higher reality doubtless beyond all fact and
event, but it is within my own world that this higher world
must realize itself for me. And when reflection tells me
that, for all I know, the normal world of my experience is
but one world amongst others, what difference should that
make? The true Reality is not in any case a ‘ real’ world
or worlds of mere fact and event. And in any cave for
myself a ‘real’ world other than my own is useless. It
is on my world and on that alone that my ideal life
can be built.

It is well to remember that my life and world, as mere
existing facts, have no value; and the thought of other, of
even an indefinite number of other, unknown worlds and
lives may keep this truth before our minds. I will permit
myself, therefore, still to dwell for a while on this theme.
Other systems, as.real as my own or more real, seem beyond
doubt to be possible. Into one or more of these orders
from time to time I may enter in my dreams, and in one
of them, for anything that I can tell, I might awake to-
morrow. And in the words ‘from time to time’ and
‘to-morrow’ I am using the ideas, we must remind
ourselves, which take their meaning only from my ‘ real’
scheme of facts. Even my present being may be double.
At times in dream, or even perhaps always by night or day,
I may be leading a different life somewhere else. Romuald’s
twofold existence in Gautier’s exquisite tale of La Morie
amoureuse might conceivably be fact. We may have many
lives sundered wholly, or lives again which more or less


XVI ON MY REAL WORLD 467


may influence and even appear within one another, with
strange recognitions not due to mere fancy. And there may
be other spheres with other inhabitants beyond our counting,
between whom and us there may be gulfs bridged perhaps
at times and perhaps never. Our ‘real world’ is, we have
seen, a constraction indispensable but limited. As to what
other regions there are beyond it, we have literally no idea.
_But neither it nor any other finite scheme could anywhere
in its own right be truly real.

These considerations bear specially on the question as to
what we call Death. Our ‘ real’ bodies are seen to weaken
and to be corrupted; and, answering to the decay and
dissolution of these bodies, we partly experience, and in
part go on to infer further, a perishing and decease of

ourselves. Now, on the assumption that our real world is
the sole reality, such an inference, we must agree, has con-
siderable force, though obviously it falls very far short of
proof. On the other hand, if that assumption is untenable
and unsound, the strength of any argument drawn to the
destiny of my mind from the fate of my body is seriously
reduced. For how great a part of my mental life are we to
set down as connected or conjoined, solely or principally,
with the growth and changé of my ‘ real’ body ? We must
I think, admit that we are unable to answer this. inquiry.
And, when we leave the observed facts of organic growth
and retrogression in our ‘real’ world, facts which, I believe,
are far from being as yet understood, is there any valid
argument at all for senility and death? Everything finite
is, I agree, subject in principle to chance and change and to
dissolution of its self. But from this it does not follow that
finite beings are unable to endure, as themselves, for an
indefinite time. And in the end the argument that we are
finished when our bodies have decayed, seems to possess
but a small degree of logical evidence. Death may be an
overmastering impression, but it is certainly no necessary
truth, and the poet was perhaps not wrong when he called
Hh2


468 ON MY REAL WORLD CHAP


it ‘a mockery’! On the other side, to rush from this result
-to the affirmation of what we call personal immortality
would be hasty indeed.

’ Tam assuming here that we do not know how and why,
and in the end how far, we have a world of perception and
action common to ourselves and other finite heings. The
presence within us all of the same living Universe is obviously
by itself no explanation in detail, and for myself I ¢annot
think that any such explanation is possible. I must not,
however, here attempt to justify the general position which
I have defended elsewhere.? _


The main outcome of what has gone before may now be
stated briefly. Our real world of fact may, for anything
we know, be one of the least pieces of reality, and there‘may
be an indefinite number of other real worlds superior to our
own. On the other hand our world is the one place in
which we are able to live and work. And we can live there
in no way except by making our construction of facts in
space and time, and by treating this construction as the one
sphere in which our life is actual. Cultiver notre jardin is
the beginning, and it is in a sense the end, of wisdom. No
other place but here, no other time but now, no other world
but this world of our own, can be our concern.

Our world and every other possible world are from one
side worthless equally. As regions of mere fact and event,
the bringing into being and the maintenance of temporal
existence, they all alike have no value. It counts for
nothing where or when such existence is taken to have its
place. The differences of past and future, of dream and

1 The reference is to Shelley’s Sensitive Plant. I do not know whether -
this in my case is a mark of senility, but I find myself now taking more
and more as literal fact what I used in my youth to admire and love as
poetry.


> See my Appearance. This present essay may be taken as a com-
mentary on some of the doctrines advanced in that volume.


XVI ON MY REAL WORLD 469


_ waking, of ‘‘on earth’ or elsewhere, are one and all im-
material, Our life has value only because and so far as it
realizes in fact.that which transcends time and existence,
Goodness, beauty, and truth are all there is which in the
end is real. Their reality, appearing amid chance and
change, is beyond these and is eternal. But, in whatever
world they appear, that world so far is real. And yet these
eternal values owe their existence to finite wills, and it is
therefore only each in our own world that we can come to
‘possess them. We must till our garden awake and in no
dream to gain the fruits and flowers for which alone it is
worth while to live, and which, if anywhere there are better,
at least to us are everything. If this is not Heaven, it at
least comes nearer to the reality of the Blessed Vision than
doe any stupid Utopia or flaring New Jerusalem adored by
-the visionary. The fault of the visionary is his endeavour
to find, now or in the past or future, as an existing place
that Heaven which is no place, while he neglects those
finite conditions by which alone Goodness and Beauty can
in any place be realized.

‘ For love and beauty and delight ’, it is no matter where
they have shown themselves, ‘ there is no death nor change’ ;
and this conclusion is true. These things do not die, since the
Paradise in which they bloom is immortal. That Paradise
is no special region nor any given particular spot in time
and space. It is here, it is everywhere where any finite
being is lifted into that higher life which alone is waking
reality.


CONCLUDING REMARKS


I may be asked how the parts of this volume are con-
nected, and it will be well perhaps to add a few words in
answer to the question. The above chapters have a unity,
I should say, as being all illustrations of one main thesis.
They are applications of what I take to be the true view as
to ultimate Reality. And I seek throughout to show that
doctrines opposed to that view are based on one-sidedness
and on vicious abstraction. Everywhere on behalf of
the real Absolute I have been warning the reader against
that false absolutism which in philosophy is to me another
name for error. And it is an error which results in a two-
fold mistake. It takes some distinction within the whole
and asserts it as being real by itself and unconditionally ;
and then from this misconceived ground it goes on to deny
or to belittle other complementary aspects of the same
whole. But, as against such absolutism, the very soul of
the Absolute which I defend is its insistence and emphasis
on an all-pervasive relativism. Everything is justified as
being real in its own sphere and degree, but not so as to
‘entitle it to invade other spheres, and, whether positively
or negatively, to usurp other powers. The absolute right
owned by every side of life is, in other words, conditional
on its service, and on its acceptance of limited value and
reality. And it is the true Absolute alone that gives its
due to every interest just because it refuses to everything
more than its own due. Justice in the name of the Whole
to each aspect of the world according to its special place
and proper rank—Reality everywhere through self-restric-


CONCLUDING REMARKS 471


tion in claim and in denial—this may be said to be the
principle which unites these Essays. And this principle
throughout conflicts with what we have condemned as the
vice of abstractionism and absolutism.

My opponents for the most part, it seems to me, have
failed here to understand. Where the absolute reality of
some feature of the whole is rejected, they too often inter-
pret this as the denial that such a feature exists. And
how, for instance (they object) can an Absolute which
implies that there is no such thing as change, be better than
a vain idol? But to me, as to every one else, the world is
throughout full of change, and as to this, I suppose, there
is no question. The question is how change stands to that
which changes or shows change, and what, and how far
suberdinate, is the place and rank which belongs in the
Universe to this its aspect of change. You cannot get rid
of this question unless you will set up the abstraction of
change as real by itself, or as even perhaps the main or only
reality of things. On the other side, if you denounce the
Absolute for admitting change, in the vulgar sense, as
something more than an illusion, you have to show where
else than in the real Universe this mere illusion falls, and
how apart from such appearance your Real or Reals can be
more than an abstract ‘ preparation ’ from the living unity.

And so again it is with the becoming and the endless
incompletion of the world. To deny that this side of things
is fact would in my view be absurd. But on the other
hand to accept this side of things as real in itself and un-
conditionally, and to proclaim it as being in its own character
the last word about the Universe, to me seems no less
ridiculous. And as to my rejecting (to take another in-
stance) personality and will, surely nothing has been further
from my mind. Far from denying these facts I should even
be forward to urge their eminent reality, if only you would
not seek to deny or degrade what will not fairly fall under


C472 CONCLUDING REMARKS


them, if only you would cease to assume that there cannot
be anything’ more inclusive, more concrete and real. In
this volume I have urged that what matters and what is
ultimately good is the Whole, and that there is no aspect of
life which, abstracted and set utterly by itself, can retain
goodness. And on the other side I have insisted (if I may
repeat this) upon the absolute, the unassailable right of
every aspect of life to its own place, function and liberty.
Even the separation of play and earnest, I have pointed
out, has but relative worth. And the attempt to lower
science and art to the rank of mere instruments springs,
I urge, once more from this propensity to mistake some
. perverted distinction for a separate. Power, and to sentence
whatever is excluded from this to unreality or mere sub-
servience. Thé supposed gulf between sheer errors cand
utter truths is, again, created (I have urged) by the same
vice of abstractionism. A truth so true that it has no
other sidé, and an error so false that it contains no truth,
I have condemned as idols, They are to me no better than
the truths which are never at all born in time, or again the
truths whose life does not pass beyond that which is made
and unmade by chance and change. And, just as there is
no utter error, so again in the end there can be no mere
ideas. Every idea, no matter how imaginary, qualifies by
its content the Universe, and thus is real; and ideas float
never absolutely but always in relation to some limited
ground. But these many spheres, owned all by the Reality,
are one and all in the end abstractions, differing in con-
creteness and worth, but in no case self-existent. My
so-called ‘‘ real world’ of solid fact, like the airy realms of
dream and imagination, is but a single subordinate appear-
ance of the Universe. The independent standing, whether
of a physical Nature or of a past which pre-exists for history,
once again is not ultimate. These facts are ideal con-
structions most legitimate and necessary, and yet their


CONCLUDING REMARKS 473


separate life begins and ends with a selection. and sundering
made in the undivided Whole.

On the one side the creations of the intellect everywhere
arereal. The substantiated terms and relations, into ‘which
analysis breaks up the continuity of the given, are no mere
errors or simple instruments. They cannot fall somewhere
outside or fail positively to qualify the Universe. And the
idea that by discarding these figments of the understanding
we are to gain reality, is a mistake now long since refuted ;
for it is only through such distinction and dissection that
it is possible to reach knowledge progressively more living
and individual. On the other side these constructions,
however inclusive, are not independent truths. They are
real only so far as subordinate and as relative to individual
totality. And even in life it is only when I forget higher
experience that I can anywhere accept for all purposes as
final the partial and abstracted products whether of science
or of a presumptuous ‘ common sense ’.

On the one hand it is the entire Reality alone which
matters. On the other hand every single thing, so far as it -
matters, is so far real, real in its own place and degree, and
according as more or less it contains and carries out the
in-dwelling character of the concrete Whole. But there is
nothing anywhere in the world which, taken barely in its
own right and unconditionally, has importance and is real.
And one main work of philosophy is to show that, where
there is isolation and abstraction, there is everywhere, so
far as this abstraction forgets itself, unreality and error.


INDEX


A, An, 286.

Abnormal States, 46, 436 note,
462 foll. |

Absolute, The (ef. Criterion),
248, 246 foll., 250, 258, 272,
348 foll., 412, 413, 428.

—-+-and relative truths, 438,
470 foll.

’ Absolutism, 145, 152, 217, 342
note, 443~4, 470 foll.

Abstraction, 100, 110, 135 note,
I5I~2, 156, 200, 247, 290, 291,
308, 316 note; 397, 407, 435,
437, 470 foll.

Abstractionism,
foll.

Act, Action, 137, 138; 325-7,
341~2.

Activity :

— practical and non-practical,
101 foll., 137 foll. ; cf. Theory.

Actual, see Possible.

Auaiveis, 196 foll

Analysis, 176, 270, 296, 299 ,

And Veet, Relations), 157, 183
note, 200, 226, 228, 230-1, 259,
270, 283, 290.

. Animal mind, 356~7.

Any, 286. -

Anything, 296.

Appearance, Chap. IX, 250 foll.,
29243, 412-13.

Apperception, 3or.

Association, 357, 365.

Associationism, I95, 198.

Attention, 161 foll.

—— state of, 401.


143 note, 470


Beauty, 7-8, 88, 105, 333, 339,
341, 347 note, 46


Being (‘what’ and ‘that’), 285-6,

Beliet (cf. Faith), 80 note, 376-7,
: eS uae 306, 326-8.

Change, 150, 152, 250, 269 note,


337, 411, 471.. :
—-and knowledge, 336 foll,


Change, none to be assumed
without a reason, 163, 167.
Cf. Identity.

Class, 254 note, 283 foll., 297.

Coherence, see System.

Coinherence (cf. Feeling), 177,
183, 270, 324.

Collection, 284.

Common Sense, 258, 268, 443~4,


cov Rtion, Conditional, 227 foll.,
232, 252 foll., 259 foll., 265-6,
269-70, 272~3, 279, 281, 290,
329 foll., 363, 366-7, 378-80,
383.

Conjunction, see And.

Consciousness :

— and Experience, 150, 192-201.

— and relation, 196, 417-18.

— in narrow sense, 174.


—inconsistency of, 192 foll.,
195-6.

Consent, 377.

Consistency (cf. Coherence,


Truth), 123-4, 132-3, 268, 318,
430-2, 435-8, 445. ;

Construction (cf. Abstraction),
204, 206, 209, 292, 332, Chap,
XII, 386, 411-12, 418-19.

Continuity (cf. Inference, Judge-
ment, Identity), 197, 284.

Continuum, original, 151-2,156-7.

Contradiction and Contrary, 41,
Chap. VIII, 226-9, 269~72, 302.

Correlation, 199, 247.

Criterion, 66, 69, 89, 94, I14,
122, I29, 138-40, 157, 161,
171, 377-81, 190, 202 foll.,
222 foll., 225, 235-6, 242 foll.,
261, 278, 311, 316-17, 319-20,
321-3, 329, 344-5, 348, 372-5,
gor, 386, 406, 414, 420, 470
oll.


— feeling as, see Feeling.
— feeling not always the, 179,
420.


Darwinism, 321-2.


Data, merely given, 108-9,


INDEX


Chap. VI, 199-201, 204, 261-2,
290, 292, 314.

Death, 467. :

Degree, 258, 273, 329, 342, 431,
470 foll.

Description, 177.

Designation (cf. This), 207, 230,


233.

Development, 394.

Dialectic, 225.

Difference, see Identity, Rela-
tions.

~—— and Contradiction, 228.

— rests on quality, 263 foll.

Discourse, universe of, 394 note.

Discrimination, 184, 300-1.

Dispositions, 170, 355 foll.

Diversity, 283, 289-90. Cf.
Difference.

Doubt (cf. Faith, Scepticism),
17-8, 391.

Dream and reality, 30, 46-8,
461, foll.

Duality, Law of, 307.

Duration (see Time, Judgement),
410.


Emotional whole, 167, 197, 304.
Cf. Feeling, Immediate, eee
Empiricism, 135, 147, 149 foll.,


341.

End, see Good.

— chief, 86, 141.

Error, 112, 204, 208, 233,
Chap. IX and Note I, 342, 383,


470. a

— absolute and relative, 252
foll., 258-9, 276.

— and inference, 368, 405.

—and psychical duration, 405.

Every, 286.

Evolution, 394. Cf. Darwinism,
Progress, Series.

Existence, 338.

Experience:

—- and consciousness, 150, 1747-5,
192-201,

—-and reality, 149, 153. Cf.
Reality.

— immediate, see Immediate.

— personal, 209, 216-7.

— present, what, 150, 152. Cf,
Time.

Experiment, 289, 291, 295, 303,

. 311, 314, 316, 380.

Explanation, 177.


475


Fact, Facts.

— matter of, 261-2, 330, 378-80.
Cf. And, and Condition.

—- mere, see Data.

—- true s0 far as they work, 210.

Faith, 7, 8, Chap. II, 130, 344,
351, 440-7.

— how far practical, 21-4. Cf.
Practice. .

Feeling (cf. Immediate, Finite
Centre), 157, 174 foll., 194
foll., 227, 234 foll., 270, 292,
406, 417-20.

—and reality, see Reality.

—as criterion, Chap. VI, 179,
Chap. VIII, 225, 236.

— can be made an object, Chap.
VI, 166.

— diversity in, 174.

— how far infallible, 206. Cf.
Designation.

—how far transcended,


190, 231.

Finite Centre (cf. Feeling, Self,
Soul), 173, 189-90, 246-8,
272, 327, 349-51, Chap. XIV,
410-16, 418, 420-1.

Form and Matter, 315, 351.

Freedom, 131-2.


175-6,


Genetic View, 72-3.

God, 106, 133.

—and Absolute, Chap. XV.

— as finite, 82, 124.

—as perfect, 428 foll.

— as personal, 432 foll., 449 foll.

Good, Chap. I, 338, 472-3.

—as criterion (cf. Criterion),
Chap. I, 319-20.

—as Reality, 5, 64, 89, 170,
347-

— how far supreme (cf. Instru-
mentalism), Chap. I, 243,
472-3.

~—— meaning of, 2, 89, 94, 179.

— not. merely practical, 7, 84
foll., 105, 128, 14%, 319—20,
340. :

—not merely social, 9, 104.

—victorious in end, 432, 438,


459.
Ground, 312-4, 333-4. Cf. How.
Hedonism, 4-5, 318.


How (cf. Judgement), 227, 220,
256-7, 273» 312, 315, 333-4.


476


Humanity, Humanism, 64, 67-8,
73, 81, 98-9, 124-5, 129-30,
142-4, 243, 319, 321, 335-6,
340.


Ideal, Ideality, 28-9, 174, 190
note, 195, 197, 232, 251, 301,
312-14, 343-4, 411, 425.

Ideas, what, 28-9, 153, 231, 251,
298, 301, 343-4.

—and events. See Truth and
Time.

— all real, 269, 275-6.

— all used existentially, 42, 153,
425-6. Cf. Ideas, floating.

— floating or mere, Chap. III,
135, 333, 343, 375-7, 425.

— self-transcendent, 153-5.

Identity (cf. Inference, Judge-
ment, Truth, Series), 39, 232,
240-1, 264 note, 283, 295,

- 362-4, 366-9, 379, 411.

— Law of, 163 note, 407.
= aperzonel: 195, 217, 421, 453


Imaginary. Cf. Memory, Real.

—and play, see Play.

—- and real, how they differ, 42-9.

-~and real worlds, 46 foll.,
214-16, 461 foll.

—— what, 34, 46 foll., 362 foll.,


377.

Imagination (mere) ,214—5, 363-5,
367, 369, 371-2, 378-9.

Immediacy, higher, 227 note,
231, 256, 275.

Immediate:

-— Experience(cf. Feeling), 151-3,
156-7, Chap. Vi and Appendix,
I9Q9-201, 270-1, 324, 328, 410

foll., 417-8, 426.

—-— a3 non-relational, 176,

-———as stage of mind, 173-5,
194 foll.

— — idea of, 189.

— — of the mediated, 177.

—unity (cf. Unity), 227, 230,
256, 278, 313-5.

Immortality, 438 foll., 451 foll.,
467-8.

Imperative, 36.

Implication, 228 note, 254, 259,
282, 289, 314.

Impossible (how thinkable), 302.

Incompatible (see Contradiction),
-4T note.


INDEX


Individual, 303.

—and Universe, 121, 218, 243,
249, 327, 413-20.

— knowable, 422-5.

— limits of, 422 foll.

— not real as such, 218, 434-7.

Individualism, 84, 435 foll.

Individuality, 264 note.

Inexplicable, 114, 118, 177, 189-
90, 203, 209, 239, 246, 249,
272, 278, 316, 324, 331, 344,
350, 410, 412, 418, 433, 468.

Infallible, see Judgement.

Inference (cf. Judgement, Mem-
ory), 362 foll., 365-70.

identity in, 366-8, 379, 405.
Cf. Series, Judgement.

Infinity, 284.

Inherence (cf. Unity), 256, 264,
270, 324.

Instance, 283, 297-9.

Instrumentalism, 66, 68, 71-2,
99-100, 111, 127 foll., 131enote,
134-5, 267, 319-20, 346-8.

Intellectualism, 120, 135.

Intelligence, 221.

— and will, 97-8. Cf. Will, Truth.

Interrogative, 36.

Introspection, 166 foll.

Irrelevant(cf.Subjective),328-31,


341, 397 foll., 424.


Judgement (cf. Inference, Truth),
32, 293, 315, 325 foll., 329 foll.

—- abstraction in, 397.

—~and copying, 109.

—and its act (cf. Act), 325-6,


405.

—and mediation, 146, 154 foll.,
315, 333-

— duration of, 389, 403.

— explicit and implicit, 32-3.
—how far self-contained, 325
foll., 33x foll., Chap. XIII.

— hypothetical, 37-40. ;

— identity in (cf. aaa aya i
Inference), 389 foll., 396 foll,,
403, 405.

— infallible, 273, Chap. XIII.

— interest of, 397-8.

~——is conditional, 228 foll. Cf.
Conditional.

—its psychical aspect (cf. Truth),
388 foll., 403 foll.

— particular, not infallible, Chap. .
VI.


INDEX


udgement, present, 382.
china subject in (cf. Reality),
Chap. III, 41 note, 253 foll.,
329 note, 393-4, 399.
— selective, 32, 329 foll., 331-3.
— unity of, 390 foll., 403.


Knowledge (cf.
Truth, Reality) :

—alters its ohiack, 336 foll.,

. 424, ; ;

— and reality, 8, 13-14, 110 foll.,,
153 foll., 316, 424-5. _

—~ must know itself, 317.

— perfect, what, 229.

—- proper (opp. feeling), 19.

— truthand reality notseparable,
t10 foll., 148, :


Experience,


Life, 6 foll., 51, 63, 106, 235,


472.
Love, 10 note.
i)


‘Magnitude-of ’, 282, 287.
Many, the (cf. And, Pluralism),
given 311, not given 199-201,


315.
Mathematics, 233 note, 266, 277,
280 foll, ;
Matter and erm, 315, 351.
pple see Yow.
emory, 203, 212, 332, Chaps.
X11, XItP ; .
— abnormal, 463. Cf.
Abnormal,
— ambiguity of, 353, 360, 384.
—and imagination, 362 foll.,
369, 371-2, 378-9.
—and inference, 362 foll., 365,
372, 378-9, 388.
—-and observation, 380.
— and self, 416, 453 foll. ;
— fallible, Chaps: XII and XJII,
370 foll., 386-7, 407.
—not primary, 360, 372, 374,


359;


407-
Metaphysics, 267, 433, 444-7.
Monism, see Pluralism.
Morality, see Practice, Religion.
-— how far supreme, 11, 88,1234,


44t.


Nature, 350-1.

Necessity, 362-3, 366 foll., 379.

Negation (cf, Contradiction),
40-1, 279, 286-7, 296-8.


477


Negation, and privation, 36
note, 47, 258 note, 276.

Nothing, 41 note, 286-7.

Now and Here, see This.

Number, 277, 280.


Object, 416.

—and subject, see Immediate
Experience, Feeling, Subject.

— contradiction in, 224-6.

Observation, 205, 212,
380.

Occupation, 264, 282, 287, 306.

One and Many, 284. See Class,
Pluralism.


Only, 315, 323-4.


290,


Pain, 222,

Personal experience, see Experi-
ence, Subjective.

Personality, 433, 449. See God,
Identity, Truth.

— necessary, 119, 121, 471.

Philosophy, 9, 10, 106,
234 foll, 238.

—admits no data as absolute
(cf. Data), 372, 374 note,


391, 300.
—and doubt, 17-8. Cf. Doubt,
Scepticism.
—and faith, 8, 15, 26-7, 446-7.
—and religion, &c., 10 foll.,
13, 444 foll.
— limits of, 13.
— rests on an assumption, 15-16,
235.
— supreme in its own field, i0
foll.
Play, nature of, Chap. IIT.
—- and earnest, Chap. ITI.
—and make-believe, 57-63.
— control in, 51, 58-62.
Pleasure, 5.
— as criterion, 5.
—as the Good, 5.
Pluralism (cf. Many, And, Rela-
tions), 131, 151, 199-201, 237,
+241 note, 255, 259, 281, 289,
291, 315.
Possible, 274-5, 284, 289, 291.
— wrongly identified with actual,
23, 70-1, 137-8, 147, 150, 156,


220,


334:

Practical and non-practical ac-
tivity, 75-6, tot foll., 128 foll.,
136 foll.


478


Practice, 6~7, 21-3, 75-6, 8
foll., 99 foll., roz foll., rd
127 foll., 135 foll., 145, 214
note, 266 note, 445-6.

Practice, ambiguity of, 66, 69, 70,
72, 128 foll., 135 foll., 214 note.

—~ and belief, 21 foll., 70.

—~ and philosophy, to foll.

—and truth, see Pragmatism,
Truth.

— as end, 52, 85-6, 135 note.

—- inconsistent, 6-7, 124.

—- taken as = active, 22.

Pragmatism, 21, 66-74, 125, 127
foll., 145, 347.

-~ a wider, 66-7, 132-3, 445-6.

Privation, see Negation.

Progress, 125-6, 155, 321, 344,
439 note. §

Psychical Event, 140, 326. Cf.
Truth,

Psychology, 415.


Qualification, 324.
Question, see Interrogative.


Real, Reality. Cf. Absolute,
Experience, Ideal, Tryth.
~~and construction, see Con-
struction.
~~ and experience, 246-7, 316.
~~ and good, see Good.
— and idea, 251; see Idea.
—and imaginary, see Imagina-
tion, Imaginary.
—and knowledge, see Know-
ledge.
~~ and time, see Time.
— and truth, see Truth.
~— and ‘ what’ and ‘ that ’, 313.
. ag experience, 246, 316.
~— as stream of events, 153 foll.
~~ complete, idea of, 182 foll.
—~ degrees of, 448. Cf. Degree.
~— does not depend on something
else, 227 note, 289-90.
~- is super-relational, 190, 238-9.
~-may be for only one person,
48 note, 335.
— must be felt, 190, 315-16.
“~-not any single aspect, 97-8,


472. ;
—the one subject (cf. Judge«


ment), 32, 41 note, 153, 226,


253 foll., 333, 393-
— unity of all aspects, 75, 190.


INDEX


Real world, my, 30, 46 foll.,
48 note, 208, 216, 266, 356-7,
426 note, Chap. XVI.

Reflection, process of, 277-8.

Relational sphere, 156-7, 227,
269; 271.

Relations (cf. Unity, And):

— and time, 309 note.

—as the Universe, 304-5. '

— external (cf. And), 43~4, 151-2, |
230 foll., 237, 241, 259, 290-1,
312, 326-7, 337.

— imply diversity, 283, 285, 289.

— internal, 238-40, 290, 312.

— multiple, 293, 303 foll.

— never merely between, 193.

—not given as such, 151, 193
foll., 200, 417.

—rest on the non- or super-
relational, 176, 195 foll., 231
foll., 239, 304, 306, 313, 417.


— without terms, 238, 291,
295 foll., 304. ‘

Relativism, 142-4, 349 foll.,
470 foll.


Religion, 7, ro foll., 24, 54, 106,
Chap. XV, 438, 459.

— ambiguity of, 440.

——and morality, 441-2. .

— inconsistent, 4¥f-2. Cf. Con-
sistency. :

—is not one-sided, 433-4.

— is practical, 428, 431 foll., 440.

Revelation, 85, 105-6, 141, 337;
457, 469.


Satisfaction, as criterion, 318
foll. Cf. Criterion.

Scepticism, 17, 74, 118 note, 132,
374, 381, 384, 388, 391, 445.

Self, 416-21. ;

— a construction, 247 foll., 418-
IQ.

— and finite centre, 173, 189-90.
Cf. Finite Centre, Feeling.

—and selves, 31, 178, 421.

——cannot all at once become
object, 166, 195.

— divided, 173.

—— my real, 45.

— not given or ultimate, 246-7,
326. :

Self-consciousness, 175, 193 foll.,
417-18, 427. ,

Selves, other, how known, 248,
418-19. ;


INDEX


‘Sense’ of a relation, 304, 308.
_Sense-world, dependence on, 203,
209-10.
Series, 277 foll., 288, 295, 307-9,
355, 359, 361-3, 379, 394-6,


399.

Sign, symbol, 29 note.

Solipsism, 246 foll., 349, 420.

Some, 286. ;

Soul, 326, 415-16, 421.

Space, 280.

Spatial schemata, 280.

—- figure, 307.

Spiritualism, 440.

Subject (cf. Consciousness, Ex-

perience) :
—and object, related,
247, 279.
—and predicate, 239, 253 foll.
Ci, Judgement, Reality.

— is the Universe. Cf. Reality.

. Subjective, the, 119 note, 243,
328, 349 foll, Cf. Irrelevant.
Subliminal, 172.
Ede that’, 282.
upposition, 37-40,

a (cf. Criterion) :

—two aspects of, 114, Chaps.
*_, VII and VIII, 227 note, 241.


Terms (see Rolations) :
——~ not given as such, 151, 193 foll.
—not related to themselves,
285, 289, 305-6.
Testimony, 407.
Theory
—and practice, Chap. IV, 127
foll., 13% note, 134 foll., 140.
—~how far non-practical, toi
foll., 320, 344, 376.
‘— value of (cf. Instrumentalism),
92, 127 foll., 134.
This (Here, Now, and Mine, cf.
: pees 206, 261, 264,
* 328. ‘
Thisness, 297, 413-14.
Thought : :
~~ atidimagination. See Imagina-
tion.
— and reality, 275. See Idea,
' Reality.
—— not always abstract, 364.
Time:
—- and relations, 309. .
— and truth, 336, 340, 406-7.
’ Cf. Identity, Truth.


195-6,


”


|


479


Time, fixed order of, 356-8.

— past and future, 146-8, 150,
153, 332, 354, 360 foll., 4rr,
426. <4


| present, 150, 153, 303, 332,


356, 382, 386, 410, 416.
— reality of, 148, 150, 250.
Together, see And. :
Transcendence, 128, 130, 147-8,

153, 157, 160, 175-6, 189-90,
233, 2390, 246 foll., 316, 325,
330 foll., 339-41, 356, 368-9,
380, 382, 413.

— self-transcendence, uaiversal
(cf. Ideality), 223 foll.

Truth, 8, 12, 223, 231 foll., 234,
251 foll., 273, 324 foll., 329,
334, 343-4, 351, 407.

— abstract, 260, 407.

—-always incomplete, 114-16,
324, 330 foll., 430.

—and act, 341. Cf. Act.
—and alteration of existence,
83-5, tor foll, 119 note,
138-40, 336-7.

— and consistency, 67 note. Cf.
Consistency.

—and contradiction, 223 foll.
—and copying, Chap. V, 118
foll., 279, 344-6.

—and desire and will, 69, 92,
120, 242-3,

— and fact, 115, 119. Cf. Data.
—and feeling (cf. Feeling), 227,
231, .

— and goodness, #30. Seg Good.
— and practice, Chap. IV, 83-5,
go foll., tor foll., 123.
—and prevalence, 68, 99 note,
112, £40, 321-3. .

~— and psychical event, 140, 146,
153 foll., 336, 342, 346, 388 foll.,
403 foll,

~— and reality, relation between ?
117, 343. 2h

— and sequence in time, 146.
-~-and working idea, 69, 71, 93,
95, If10-I1, 122-3, 129 foll.,
137, 140, 145, 182, 188, 193,
210-11, 240, 267, 318, 431, 445.
— dualism of, 325, 330, 342. :
— eternal, 336, 340, 407. Cf.
Identity.

— ever new? 335 foll.

— for one mind, 48 note, 335.
— how far made, 141, 338 foll.


480


Truth, how far personal, 74, 119
note, 121. Cf. Irrelevant, Sub-
jective.

-— idle, 69, 348-9. See Truth and
- working idea.

— inconsistency of, 227, 251 foll.,
255, 430.

~~ independent, see Instrumental-
ism. ,

—— knowledge and reality insepar-
able, r1o foll., 130, 148, 331-2,
352, 425.

~— none absolute, 116, 228 foll.,
232, 273, 324, 430. :

— objective, 118-19. See Subjec-
tive.

— perfect, what, 252, 330, 380.

— unconditional, 329 foll.


Unconscious, 171 foll. .

Understanding, see Knowledge,
Truth.

Uniqueness, 45, 47-8, 261 foll.

Unity, 195, 197, 200, 227, 231,
247-9, 256, 270, 281, 289 foll.,
293, 300-1, 303-8, 511-16. .

—- of judgement, see Judgement.


INDEX


Universal:
— concrete, 297.
— consciousness of, 296 foll.


Validity, 109, 110, 470 foll.

Value, 49, 64, 143. See Good.

—how far made, 141, 338 foll.

Verification, 69-70, 109, 121,
123, 147, 182, 190, 219 foll.,
249, 344, 347-8.


Why, see Ground, How.


“Will:
‘| —-and emotional expression, So.


—and truth, see Truth.

— consciousness of, 159 ,188.

—mine and higher, 419-20,
429 foll.

— nature and limits of, 79 foll.,
96-8, 350-1.

— not creative, 342.

— primacy of, 69, 96 foll., 471.


‘| World:


— my real, see Real.

— one common, 465, 468.
Worlds, my various, 31-<.
Worth, see Good.


Oxford: Horace Hart M.A. Printer to the University


Digitized with financial assistance from


Mrs.Padma Barve
on 13 March, 2020
