Ethical Studies (F. H. Bradley, 1876)
==========================================================
The great idealist ethics: self-realization against hedonism and Kantian formalism. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (ethicalstudies00bradgoog).

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



ETHICAL STUDIES 



ETHICAL STUDIES 



ETHICAL STUDIES 



HV 

F. H. BRADLEY 

FELLOW OF MERTON COLLEGE, OXFORD 



* \* - - ^ 



-• J J .J 

» ■* 



^ -' , V J -^ J 

3 u 



Die Philosophic m>U nicht erst die substamtielle Wahrheir geben, tiocl^^&it d'tk" * ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 
Menschhelt erst atif die Philosophic /u warlen gchabt. urn das Bewudjtseyn d«7" „. ' :^ j; 
Wahrheit zu empfangcn.— Hegel. -._'^ '^*^ jo--^ 






^ b J » • 



J t -f 






« t* ^ 



* ^ * 






ANASTATIC REPRINT 1904. ..- : ,.;, 



Q.E. STECHERT & CO. NEW YORK. ' 



-i # J » 1 



HENRY S. KING & CO., LONDON 

1876 





;;;V 








• • • • 




• • 


• 




• • • 


••••* 




«• • 


• • • • • 
.V.v. 


• 
• 


• • • 

• •• 




• 




• •••• 


:;;;: 


> 


• • 






• • •• 


Y::/. 


• 4 • 

• • 


< 






• • 
• 


\}y. 




•••• 


• • • 


% m 


• • 


• • • 


• •• 


•••• 


• • • 


• . 






•» 


• •. 




• ••• 


•• •• 


• 


• • 








• • 


• 




•* • 


••. 




•• 


..••• 




• 






• c • • 






• • •• 






• 






••«.* 






• • • • • 

..'•V. 





/7^ 

: 092 ^ 



• •' 




V'S^^ 



;» 






PRE F A C E 



nPHE object of this volume is not the construction. of a 
system of Moral Philosophy. It is very far from 
attempting either an exhaustive or a systematic treatmeilt 
of- ethical questions. Nor is the Author so much as pre- 
pared to define the sphere of Moral Philosophy, to say 
what does fall within it and what does not. 

The writer's object in this work has been mainly critical. 
He sees that ethical theories rest in the end on pre- 
conceptions metaphysical and psychological. He believes 
that many of the fundamental ideas now current, especially 
in England, are confused or even false; and he has en- 
deavoured, by the correction of some of these, at least to 
remove what seem obstacles to the apprehension of moral 
facts. These Essays are a critical discussion of some lead- 
ing questions in Ethics, and are so far connected that, for 
the most part, they must be read in the order in which 
they stand. 

The writer knows how much is demanded by his task. 
It demands an acquaintance with the facts of the world 
which he does not possess ; and it demands that clearness 
of view on the main conceptions which govern our thoughts, 
which comes, if at all, to the finished student of metaphysic. 
The reader must not expect this either. 

These Essays may be dogmatic and one-sided. They 



ETHICAL STUDIES 



viii Contents. 



ESSA V IK 

PAGE 

DUTY FOR duty's SAKL, . . . . .128 

The end is the Good Will {tzZ-rag). This is the universal form (130-131). What * ought ' 
means (x3i-x3aX Principle of non-contradiction (133)1 This contradicts itself (134-136). 
Duty and duties (X37-X38). Psychological objection (138-X39X Practical uselessness of 
non-contradiction (X39-X4X). Collision of duties unavoidable (X4X-X43). 



ESSA V V. 



MY STATION AND ITS DUTIES, . . . • HS 

Present result (X45-X46). Advance to a higher point of view (146-148). Individualism criti- 
cized (X48-X56). The end is realization as member of a community (157). The moral 
ox:gamsm seems to be the solution of ethical problems (X58-X06). Satisfactoriness of this 
view (x66-x7x). Relative and absolute morality (T71-X74). Intuitive character of moral 
judgments (X74-X80). Morality not a mere private matter (180-X83). Criticism of the 
above view (183-X86). 

Note. Rights and Duties (X87X 



ESSAY VL 

IDEAL MORALITY, . .193 

No limit to the moral sphere (x93-x97)> Content of the ideal self (198-903). Collisions of 
moral elements (903-306). Morality not simply equal to self-realization (a»6X What it is 
(906-3x3)1 Difficulties as to its nature (3x2-230). In what sense is it approximative? 

(S90-93SX 



ESSA V VIL 

SELFISHNESS AND SELF-SACRIFICE, . * . 226 

Statement and refutation of the argument for general selfishness, which is founded on the 
confusion as to ' motive ' (337-335X What is the idea of a pleasure ? (236). Psychological 
genesis of the voluptuary (337- 345). What selfishness {5(345-347^. (General problem of 
the good and bad self (347-348X Hereditary theory insufficient (249). Content of 
good and bad selves (350). Genesi« of the good self (251-261). Genesis of the bad 
self (36X-965X Origin of morality proper (365-37 x). Nature of the morally good and bad 
selves (97x-a75]t What self-sacrifice is (376). 



CONCLUDING REMARKS, . . . . 279 



ETHICAL STUDIES. 



ESS A Y I. 

The Vulgar Notion of Responsibility in connection with 
THE Theories of Free-Will and Necessity, 

Tl rHAT is ncf the scope of this essay? We must begin with 
^ ^ that, for round the phrases which appear in our title there 
exist * perverse associations/ which may lead our readers to 
expect, some this, and others that And, because we think that 
some of these expectations will be disappointed, we will start 
with saying what it is tliat we do not propose to treat of. 

The scope of this essay miglit have been the solution of one, 
or both, of two difficult problems. We might have asked what 
responsibility at bottom is ; whetlier it implies necessity or free- 
dom, and what these mean ; and then we should have come to 
questions of abstract metaphysic. Or again, our task might have 
been the limitation of our accountability with reference to legal 
imputation, and here we should have had a juridical enquiry. But 
our object is not the solution of either one or the other of these 
questions. 

What then is the end which we do set before us? It is a three 
fold undertaking: to ascertain first, if possible, what it is that, 
moughly and in general, the vulgar mean when they talk of being 
responsible ; to ask, in the second place, whether either of the 
doctrines of Freedom and Necessity (as current among our- 
selves) agree with their notions ; and, in case they do not agree, 

n 



ETHICAL STUDIES 



Ethical Studies^ 



substance ; he can not put them onone side, and himself on the 
other, and say, * It is not mine ; I never did it.' What he ever at 
any time has done, that he i> now ; and, when his name is called, 
nothing, which has ever been his, can be absent from that which 
answers to the name. In this (real or supposed) juridical sphere the 
familiar saying of Agathon, 

ayevf^ra frottTy d<t<r' av ^ ^i'jrpayfi'sva 

is as iiiexorabty true, as it is false when we pass into a higher 
region, where imputation of guilt is as meaningless, as even the 
Westminster Review would have it be. 

And he must account for all. But to give an account to a 
tribunal means to have one's reckoning settled. It implies that, 
when the tribunal has done with us, we do not remain, if we were so 
before, either debtors or creditors. We pay what we owe ; or we 
have that paid to us which is our due, which is owed to us (what 
we deserve). Further, because the court is no dvil court between 
man and man, that which is owed to us is what lae pay (alas 
for the figments of the unenlightened mind). In short, there is 
but one way to settle accounts; and that way is punishment, which 
is due to us, and therefore is assigned to us. 

Hence, when the late Mr. Mill said, * Responsibility means 
punishment,' what he. had in his mind was the vulgar notion, 
thpugh he exf)ressed it incorrectly, unless on the supposition that 
all nmst necjessarily transgress. What is really true for the ordin- 
zx^ ccMOsciousness ; what it clings to, and will not let go; what 
mariui unmistakeably, by its absence, a philosophical ' or a * de- 
b^tuched ' morality, is the necessary connection between responsi- 
bility 2ind liability to punishment, between punishment and desert, 
or the -finding of guiltiness before the law of the moral tribunal. 
For practical purposes we need nuike no distinction between re- 
sponsibility, or accountability, and liability to punishment. Where 
you have the one, t^i^re (in the mind of the vulgar) you have the 
other ; and where you have not the one, tliere you can not have 
the other. And, we may add, the tlieory which will explain the 
one, in its ordinary sense, will also explain the other ; and the 
theory which fails in the one, fails also in the other; and the 



Ethical Studies. 



/ 

/ 



I am not an agent at all, or in any way responsible. Where com- 
pulsion exists, there my will, and with it accountability, does not 
exist So far fhe ordinary consciousness is clear, and on this 
point we must not press it further. To fix the limits of compul- 
sion ; to say where force ends, and where will begins ; to find the 
conditions, under which we may say, * There was no possibility 
of volition, and there could have been none ' — * is no easy 
matter, and fortunately one which does not copcem us. [See 
more. Note A.] 

Not only must the deed be an act, and come from the man 
without compulsion, but, in th6 second place, the doer must be 
-—supposed intelligent; he must know the particular circumsitances 
of the case. (T^ %%iMcm hb\,uiy olv elvai <Z n ^^%4 i*' auroS s/d^r/ rd 
xaf txaifra tv oJg n ^ga^^ii), U the man is ignorant, and if it 
was not his duty to know (for, supposing that to be, his duty, 
the act, done in ignorance, is imputed to the will through the 
ignorance itself, which is criminally imputable), then the deed is 
not his act A certain amount of intelligence, or * sense/ is thus 
a condition of responsibility. No one who does not possess a 
certain minimum of general intelligence can be considered a 
responsible being; and under this head come imbecile persons, 
and, to a certain extent,, young children. Further, the person 
whose intellect is eclipsed for a time — such eclipse being not 
attributable to himself — can not be made accountable for any 
thing. He can say, and say truly, *I was not myself;' foit he 
means by his self an intelligent will 

-^ Thirdly, responsibility implies a mora/* agent No one is 
accountable, who is not capable of knowing (not, who does not 

I 

* If. through my bad habits, it is my fault, that what presumably would* not 
have been compnlsion amomited to it in my case, then I "am responsible for 
what I do under such compulaon. The d^[ree is of course another matter. 

' Jf there are in fact any adult sane persons, of whom it can be said that 
(capacity or no capacity) they not only are without any notions of good and 
bad, but have nev^ had any the smallest chance of having them, and so are 
incapable ; and whose fault it therefore in no sense is that they are what they 
are, fktn such persons must be considered as out of the moral sphere, and there* 
fore, in the court of conscience, irresponsible and lunatic (whatever they have 
to be in law). But what standard a man is to be morally judged by, Is quUc 
another question, which we do not discuss. 



8 Ethical Studies. 



accountable. But the vulgar could not tell us beforehand the 
amount of sense which is required, and, even in particular cases, 
would often be found to disagree amongst themselves. If we 
asked again about the relation of act to intent, we should find little 
more than confusion. What consequences are, and what are not, 
contained in die act itself? and how far are they contained? 
What, in such cases, is the degree of moral responsibility? Does a 
criminal state (e,g.y drunkenness) make a man accountable for 
what he does in that state ? and, if so, to what degree ? How far, 
again, does a wrong act, done for an object innocent in itself, 
make the doer responsible for consequences issuing contrary to 
his intention? With regiird to such points we should find a 
' sterner and a softer view. One section would emphasiie the 
i act, and the other the (actual or possible) intention. The one 
sees crime committed, and is prone to neglect the mind of the 
doer; while the other is always ready to narrow tlie field of 
criminality, to see incapacity rather than guilt, and to make 
absence of crime in the intent carry its quality into the act 

To resume then ; According to vulgar notions, a man must act 
himself, be now the same man who acted, liave been himself at 
the time of the act, have had sense enough to know what he was 
doing, and to know good from bad. In addition, where ignorance 
is wrong, not to have known does not remove accountability, 
though the degree of it may be doubtful. And everything said 
of commission applies equally well to omi&sion or negligence. 

We have found roughly what the ordinary man means by 
responsibility , and this was the first task we undertook. W^e pass 
to the second, to see whether, and how far, the current theories of 
Freedom and Necessit)' (better, Indetcrminism and Determinism) 
are consistent with his beliefs. 

Let us first take the theory which goes by the name of the Free- 
will doctrine, and which exists apparently for the purpose of 
saving moral accountability. We have to ask, Is it compatible 
with the ordinary notions on the subject ? 

This doctrine, we are told, is the only one which asserts Free- 
dom, and without liberty responsibility can not exist. And this 
sounds well : if we are not free to do as we will, theo (on this point 
the plain man is dear) we can not be responsible. * We must have 



lo Ethical Studies. 



* Making is not the word, and very much more is implied than the 
latter. You are the uncaused cause of your particular volitions.' 
But does not what I am come from my disposition, my education, 

Imy habits ? * In this case certainly not The ego in volition is 
not a result, and is not an effect, but a cause simply; and of this 
fact we have a certain and intuitive knowledge.* Or, if we express 
the ajiswer in a different metaphysical language, it amounts to this: 
f * The 1 is an universal, which has the power to abstract from all its 
j particulars, and to suspend itself over them, before in choice it takes 
I any one of them into itself, so as to realize that one, and itself 
1 thereby. This I, in the act of " I will,'* is the self, as pure I, which 
is superior to all its contents, desires, &c., and descends into 
them only by its own libertas arbitriV 

We have stated the doctrine in its clearest form, without 
troubling ourselves to keep too closely to our English expositor. 
That to a large extent it rightly expresses indubitable facts, the 
thoughtful reader will perceive. But we are not to ask, Is it true, 
and if so, how far true ? but to find, if we can, how far it agrees 
with responsibility as commonly accepted. And so, reflecting on 
the theory, we see that, in the main, it is only the denial of the 
opposite theory. It is positive, so far as it asserts the self to be 
more than a collection of particulars, desires, &c, and to be 
necessarily concerned in the actions which are imputed to it 
And so far the doctrine agrees well enough with common ideas. 
But the chief bearing of its conclusion is merely negative \ and 
here, as we shall see, it comes into sharp collision with vulgar 
notions of responsibility. 

In this bearing, Free-will means Non-determinism. The will is 
not determined to act by anything else; and, further, it is not 
determined to act by anything at all. Self-determination means 
that the self, the universal, may realize itself by and in this, that, 
and the other particular; but it also implies that there is no 
reason why it should identify itself with this one, rather than with 
that one ; there is no rational connection between the two sides ; 
there is nothing in the self which brings this, and not that, act out 
of it Turn it as we wiQ, the libertas arbitrii is no more at last 
^than cofitingentia arbitrii. Freedom TXienxi'& chance ; you are free, 
because there is no reason lAich will account for" your particular 



12 Ethical Studies. 



Freedom would assure him of his responsibility, and our plain 
man would welcome and emphasize the statement. Our apostle 
would inform him, that the secret of man's accountability was in 
his possession. He woijld be received with attention, though 
perhaps not belief He might go on to say that a nmn was 
responsible, because he always had liberty of choice ; and so far 
he might be followed. But, when he advanced, and began to explain 
that such freedom of choice must mean, that, before a man acted, 
it was never certain how he would act, then, I think, he might 
get for an answer, ' that depends on what sort of man he is.' Per- 
haps at this point he might appeal to his hearer's conscious- 
ness, and put it to him, whether be was not aware that, on 
opportunities rising for the foulest crimes, he could not only do 
these acts if he would, but also that it was quite possible, in every 
case, that he should do them. Such a question, if asked, would be 
answered, I doubt not, by an indignant negative ; and should a 
similar suggestion be made with respect to a friend or relation, the 
reply might not confine itself to words. What sayings in life are 
more common than, * You might have known me better. I never 
could have done such a thing.' * It was impossible for me to act so, 
and you ought to have known that nothing could have made me*? 

We have seen that responsibility (on the usual understanding of 
it) can only exist in a moral agent. And, if it be true of any man, 
that his actions are matters of chance, and his will in a state of 
equilibrium disturbed by contingency, then I think that the ques- 
tion, whether such a being is a moral agent, is a question answered^ 
as soon as raised. And, if this is so, then, with the best (^inten- 
tions, (such good intentions are the ruin of thinking) the saviours 
of accountability have failed to save it They may have held their 
own against the enemy, and borne in triumph their ark from 
the contest. But what is brought out of the battle is a very 
different thing from that which went in, or, perhaps, which never 
was there at all. 

Having first seen what responsibility was for the vulgar mind, 
we have now also seen what it is (or ought to be) for the one of 
* our two great schools ' ; and wc have seen that the creed of the 
philosophical, so far, seems seriously different from that which the 
people hold by. In saying thus much we feel ourselves safe ; but 



Ethical Studies. 



\aE 



for acting rationally; and further, that this means to act with some 
regularity, to act so that your actions can be counted on, and, if 
counted on, then with more or less certainty predicted. 

Nothing is clearer than that the plain man does not consider 
himself any less responsible, because it can be foretold of him 
that, in a given position, he is sure to do this, and will cer- 
tainly not do that; that he will not insult helplessness, but 
respect it ; not rob his employer, but protect his interests ; and, if 
this be admitted, as I think it must be, then it will follow that it 
can not be all his actions, to the prediction of whidi he entertains 
an objection. 

So much being settled, we must ask. Is there no prediction then 

which he does find objectionable ? I think there is. I believe 

that if, at forty, our supposed plain man could be shown the calcular 

tion, made by another before his birth, of every event in his life, 

rationally deduced from the elements of his being, from his original 

natural endowment, and the complication of circumstances which 

in any way bore on him, — if such a thing were possible in fact, as 

it is conceivable in certain systems, then, I will not go so far as to 

say that our man would begin to doubt his responsibility ; I do not 

say his notions of right and wrong would be unsettled (on this 

head I give no opinion) ; but I believe that he would be most 

seriously perplexed, and in a manner outraged 

j Let us take these two points for granted then, that some pre- 

\ diction is not objectionable, while some, on the other hand, is ; 

1 and let us now proceed, if we can, to distinguish the cases, and 

find, in the first place, what is not, and, in the second, what is 

objected to. 

( Subject to the correction of the reader, I say that, when we 

; confine ourselves to mere prediction (as we must, because the 

attendant circumstances may always annoy), die man of healthy mind 

has no objection to the prediction oiany actions, which he looks on 

as issuing from his character.^ A formed man, if healthy, feels 



* We can not use» as an instance, the prediction of bad actions, i, e, such 
actions as the man himself considers bad. This is painHd, not because it is a 
prediction, biU because here the man is forced to see that he is bad, that 
another knows it for certain, and also has said it 



1 6 Ethical Studies. 



the ludicrous, so much the better. Suppose that on several 
occasions our man finds that another has said beforehand what 
fruit he would choose frotici a large variety, and on no two occasions 
the same. He would be much surprised ^ but if told by tJie other, 
* I knew you would do it, because I have noticed you, and you 
always have done it,' I believe he would be satisfied at once. 
But failing this, and failing a conclusion to his choice from any of 
his habits or ways, I think he would be most uncomfortable. 
His feeling would be, that the other man knew something he had 
no right, and which was not his, to know. And we might see • the 
same thing in a number of instances, as the reader will find by 
considering the matter. 

At present we have only to discover the facts, and no doubt so 
far they appear irrational; but the next illustration will, J hope, 
begin to enlighten us. As we have already remarked, the ordinary 
man would probably be little short of horrified to find that the whole 
of his history, everything which has gone to settle his character, 
every element in the evolution which has made him what he is, 
had been foretold in detail before his birth. If I am rights be 
would be inclined to say, * The growth of my character has been 
predicted when I was not; and how then can I have had anything 
to do with it ? ' 

We are certain, unless we are careful, to miss the important 
point here. It is noi the mere fact of his present character being 
beforehand an object of knowledge, which troubles him so much. 
For his notions are not clear, as they well may not be. He is bis 
self, and his self is his chaiacter ; and he being bom, his character, 
when he so considers it, is likewise bom. And thus^ snnking the 
fi^ct of the process of his developement, he is what he is; he is such, 
and may be known as such, and the sooper or later are unimport- 
ant considerations, which may be dropped out of sight. And hence 
the prediction is the prediction of his cliaracter with its actions^ 
which in no way troubles him. But what he was horrified 
atjw^.-to find |he qualities of his being, deduced from that which 
. ' is^bt himself. He can not bear to see the genesis of himself, or 
■^his self in becoming. And so, if 1 see the facts rightly, when we 
put out of view the results of his character, it is not the irratiomt 



1 8 Ethical Studies. 



What rieally does lie and does work in his mind, would appear 
to be this. He is sure that he exists. A man, as we know, 
may doubt of many things, of anything else; but he never can 
doubt of his own being. And he is sure that he is nothing but 
himselfl His notions on the matter are entirely hazy. It would 
be idle and absurd to ask him questions; but he can not think of 
himself and not-himself, and bring the t^'O ideas together. He 
can think (and it is a delusion to say he can not think) of the world, 
apart from and without himself. The stage is there, and he can 
come on or go off. He can appear or not appear^ be or not he ; 
can come in and go out, like a candle, which must be alight or not 
alight — ^a fire, which must be * in ' or * out ; * but by no possibility 
can he conceive of himself as in becoming. How can he (there 
' ^\ already) become himself? and how can he (there still) be ceasing to 
be himself? It Is impossible that this should come before his 
mind. 

What he means by his self, we have already remarked, he knows 
not ; and indeed his views are much confused ; for at times, as we 
said, he identifies his character with his self (anything but his 
character would not be his self), and carries it back to the begin- 
ning of his life ; and, at times again, he will tell you that without 
his bringing-up and education, and without his own resolution and 
self-denial, he never would have been the sort of man he is now ; 
and here the self, which is there fi-om the first, is not the character. 
You may tell him his character was bom with him, that is one of 
his views; or you may tell him it has been developed, that is 
another ; but then you must add (fairly to represent him) that he 
has developed it. 

Suppose that all this is lying in his mind, and one sees directly 
the ground of our man's dislike for rational prediction ; for such 
prediction is, in a word, the construction of himself out of w hat is 
not himself; and that, as we saw, he can not understan3^~ If, fi-om 
given data and firom universal rules, another man can work out 
the generation of him like a sum in arithmetic, where is his 
self gone to ? It is invaded by another, broken up into selfless 
elements, put together again, mastered and handled, just as a poor 
dead thing is mastered by man. And this being so, our man feels 
dimly that, if another can thus unmake and remake him, he himself 



20 JEfhical Studies, 



It is common to find some such belief as this. Either thf 
human world is subject to law, or it is not; and if it is subjectt 
then there is no reason in the nature of things, why you shouid 
not so understand the characters of men and the {urinciples of 
historical developement, as to be able to say beforehand, what 
a man or a stage in history is to be. As a matter of fact, 
you can not go beyond * tendencies ; ' but that is only because 
you never have a sufficiency of particular data; and, given these; ^ 
it would be possible rationally to foresee the future man or 
stage in history Such a notion, I think, is altogether enoneous ; 
and, if we ask what the proposal comes to in plain language, it is 
this, — it priori to construe an individual man or state of society 
Out of its elements, such individual being unknown, and not yet 
in existence. \jt\ us see what there is to be said against that. 

I am far from suggesting that the human world is not 

* under law;' partly, because I am not sure that I know what 

that means. And, though I consider the phi*ase * result ' inaccurate 

and here misleadmg, 1 do not deny that the character of a man 

does follow, as a result, from his natural endowment together with 

his environment If his self is the negajion of all its particulars, 

that does not mean that it is not determined by them. But I do 

say that, given the knowledge of a man's innate disposition, and 

given the knowledge of his outward world (in the fullest pQssible 

sense), yet you can not, from these data, deduce his character. 1 

do say that, given historical materials, and given any knowledge of 

laws which you please, it does not follonr that you can construe 

■from them a future state of society; and, d society is organic 

{ (and a better theory tells us it is vwre than Ofiganic), und' 

I if history is progressive, then you may guess and foresee many 

i thmgs by a practical insight ; but, give you what knowledge of 

inlaws' and what particular existing data you please, you can not 

^calculate the future. You can predict the resuU, only so far as your 

experience goes, i,e, so far as you know the result; and as long a^ 

history does not repeat itself, and while no two men are ever born 

the same, so long will the individual result you want be lacking 

to you. 

Even if we suppose, what is very hard to suppose, that the 
character is inborn ; yet even then it is knowable only so far as 



22 Ethical Studies, 



matter, you can do it here, gives you no right to say that, in respect 
of another subject-matter, you can do it there. And as to * science 
of tendencies,' what has science to do with such loose phrases ? 
If ' tendencies ' mean abstractions, there is no objection to that in 
itself. The question to be answered is, *Are the abstractions 
possible?'; and w^ have answered that in tiie negative, so far 
as the science of character is concerned. Its ' laws ' are * empty 
opinions;'* there is not one sphere in which they hold good. 
If they are not, they ought to be false outside the character, because 
they profess to be specially laws of the character ; and inside the 
character they are false, because they abstract from the character ; 
and where they happen to be right, it is only because they happen 
not to be wrong. And what applies to the individual man, applies 
mutatis mutandis to a stage in historical progress. 

If the above be in any way correct, then the rational prediction 
of human character is a sheer impossibility ; and to maintain it to 
be possible, may not be to jar with the plain man's feelings and 
beliefs, but it is to collide with his notion of accountability; 
because, as we saw, that notion contains the idea of an individual 
self, and because, unless that idea be not real, rational prediction 
is out of the question. So much for rational prediction : but how 
far, and whether, irrational prediction strikes at the root of 
individuality, is a question we can not enter into here. 

At the cost of a somewhat len^hy digression, we are now, I 
hope, in a better position to ask how far responsibility, as it exists 
for the vulgar, agrees with the teaching of the expounders of 
Necessity. We saw that the plain man did not think himself 
accountable, for the reason that he never could be counted on ; and if 
Necessity meant no more than the regularity of his volitions, the 
possibility of telling, from his character, his action in a given posi- 
tion, then, I believe, no objection would be made to it But we 
saw as well that, if necessity means the theoretical developement 
of the characterized self, then i^ecessity collides with popular 
morality. 

But this last point need not at present engage us ; let us confine 

»WP— I — ■ — — ■—■■■■■' a^— I ■ w ii- III,. ■ ■ , ■ . »»■ . ■■■■■■^irf^ ■■ ■■— ■■ ■■!! i^ W i«»ii» ■■»■ I ■-..11^ 

* The reader will be enlightened here by Hegel, Werke, ii. 218-24, hut Hegel 
must not be considered responsible for ev^Tthing X say. 



24 Eihicat Studies. 



And this, no doubt, is what lies at the bottom of the objection 
entertained against ordinary determinism. n[*he vulgar are con- 
vinced that ^ gulf dividi^s them from the material world ; they 
believjp their being to lie beyond the sphere of mere physical laws ; 
their duiracter, or their will, is to them their thinking and rational 
self; and they feel quite sure that it is not a thing in space, to be 
pushed here and there by other things outside of \t And so, when 
you treat their will as a something physical, and interpret its 
action by riechanical metaphors, they believe that you do not 
treat it or interpret it at all, but rather something quite other than 
it It is not that you say about it what you should not say, but 
that you never say anything about it at all ; that you ignore the 
centre of their moral being, that which for them means freedom, 
and is freedom ; and thi$^ is what is signified, when it is said of deter- 
I triinism, that ^ it holds by a will which wills nothing \ just as we saw 
I that indeterminism did indeed hold by a will, but *a will that 
Ljrillod nothing,^ 

But we must not allow our client, or ourselves, too great a liberty 
in what may be considered the assertion oi a theory ; for we have 
not to assert, but to understand and criticize. We must see for 
ourseh'es, in what the consistent determinist can not endorse the 
plain man*s notion of moral accountability 

We saw above that responsibility and liability lo punishment 
might be taken as convertible, and that, hence, tlie theory, which 
would justify punishment, would account for tesponsibility ; and 
that, whei^ the former (in its ordinary sense) was meaningless, 
there the latter must also be wanting. 

Let us see, then, what punishment means first for the vulgar, 
and, next, for the believer in Necessity. Let us see for ourselves,' 
if the two idea^ are compatible; and then enquire wherein they 
are incompatible^ in case U)ey are so. 

If there is any opinion to whicli the man of uncultivated morals is 
attached, it is the belief in the necessary connection of punishment 
and guilt Punishment is punishment, only wiiere it is deserved. 



^ The reader must not consider me anxious to prove against a theory -91 hat it 
is ready to admit ; but if we do not see the fiicts for ourselves, we&hail not find 
the reasons. 



26 Ethical Studies. 



Yes, in despite of sophistry, and in the face of sentimentalism, 
with well-nigh the whole body of our self-styled enlightenment 
against them, our people believe to this day that punishment is 
inflicted for the sake of punishment; though they know no more than 
our philosophers themselves do, that there stand on the side of 
the unthinking people the two best known names of modem 
philosophy.* 

But, even were we able, it is not our task here to expound to the 
reader, what this, or again what the other metaphysician under- 
stands by punishment. The above is no more than the theoretical 
expression of the popular view, viz. that punishment is justice; 
that justice implies the giving what is due ; that suppression of its 
existence, in one form or other, is due to guilt, and so to the 
guilty person ; and that, against his will, to give or take from a 
man what is not due, is, on the other hand, injustice. We have 
now to see what punishment is for the believer in Necessity. 

And here the Necessitarian does not leave us in doubt. For 
him, it is true, ' responsibility ' may * mean punishment,' or rather 
the liability thereto ; and perhaps he would not mind saying that 
guilt deserves punishment. But when we ask him, what is to be 
understood by the term * desert,' then we are answered at once, 
that its meaning is. something quite other than the 'horrid 
figment ' which we believe in ; or, lost in phrases, we perceive thus 



* The foUowing passages from Kant wiU perhaps surprise those persons 
among lis, who think nothing V philosophical ' but immoral Humanitarianism, 
Kant's Werke, ix. 180, 183 : — 

^Judicial punishment {poena forensis) is not the same as natural {poena 
naturalis). By means of this latter, guilt brings a penalty on itself ; but the 
legislator has not to consider it in any way. Judicial punishment can never be 
inflicted simply and solely as a means to forward a good, other than itself 
whether that good be the benefit of the criminal, or of civil society ; but it must 
at aU times be inflicted on him, for no other reason than because he has acted 
crifftinalfy, A man can never be treated simply as a means for realizing the 
views of another man, and so confused with the objects of the law of Property, 
Against that his inborn personality defends him ; although he can be quite 
properly condemned to forfeit his civil personality. He must first of all be 
found to be punishable^ before there is even a thought of deriving from the 
punishment any advantage for himself or his iellow-citizens. The penal law is 
a categorical imperative ; and woe to that man, who crawls through the serpen* 
tine turnings of the happiness-doctrine, to And out some consideration, which, by 



2$ Ethical Studies. 



theory, are sufficient to justify punishment • the benefit of the 
I offender himself, and the protection of others.*' 

And (p. 59.7), * If indeed punishment is inflicted for any other 
reason than in order to operate on the will; if its -purpose be other 
than that of improving the culprit himself, or securing the just 
rights of others against unjust violation ['justice,' th6 reader must 
remember, may be for him, and Mr M iU. two different things], then, 
I admit, the case is totally altered • If any one thinks that there 
is justice in the infiiction of purposeless suffering ; that there is a 
natural affinity between the two ideas of guih and punishment, which 
makes it intrinsically fitting that wherever there has been guilt, 
pain should be inflicted by way of retribution [the reader will not 
forget that for him, beside that of justice, there may also be 
other spheres, and possibly higher ; what is merely just need not be 
intrinsically fitting] ; I acknowledge that T can find no argument to 
justify punishment inflicted on tliis principle. As a legitimate 
satisfaction to feelings of indignation and resentment which are 
on the whole salutary and worthy of cultivation [the figments are 
not * horrid' to Mr Mill; he seems willing even to encourage 
them], I can in certain cases admit it; but here it is still a means 
-—to an end. The merely retributive [* merely ' is misleading] view 
of punishment derives no justification from the doctrine I support' 

Eunishment to Mr Mill is 'medidne'; and, turn himself aside 
^,.4ts he might from the issue (p. 593-4), he could not avoid the con- 
clusion forced on him by the * Inquirer,' that if rewards carried 
with them the benefits of punishment, then I should deserve 
rewards, when, and because, I am wicked. 

Now against this theory of punishment I have no^i|ig here 
to say. The great and ancient names, which in punishment saw 
nothing but a means to the good of the State or the individaal| 
demand that we treat that view with respect ; and hence I will not 



* Although it is not connected with the subject, I must continue the quotation 
as a specimen of our English philosophising. 'The first justifies it^ because to 
bene6t a person caimot be to do him an injury.' If ' injury ' is the opposite of 
' benefit,' the ' because' disappears ; if of ' justice,' we have the unproved assertian 
of a controverted proposition ; one which I, for instance, consider not merely 
false, but monstrous. The proviso of * a proper title ' in the following sentence 
makes matters no better. 



30 Ethical Studies. 



* figment;* and that his moral world is, in everything but names and 
phrases, not the moral world of the vulgar? Ifi to repeat, on the 
theory of Necessity I am not punishable in the ordinary sense, 
then (for we saw that the two went together) I am not responsible 
either. 

Our result so far then is this : we have seen what punishment for 
the vulgar and for the Determinist respectively are ; and to see 
that is to see that they are altogether incompatible ; and so in like 
manner the responsibilities, which correspond to them, are not tihie 
same. . And our conclusion must be, that neither the one nor the 
other of our 'two great philosophical modes of thought,' however 
excellent they may (or may not) be as philosophies, each by itself 
and the one against the other, does in any way theoretically express 
the moral notions of the vulgar mind, or fail in some points to 
contradict them utterly. 

But to perceive the fact is not enough for us. It has not been 
a discovery, but has been admitted and professed by teachers of 
Determinism. Our interest is mainly to see wherein it is that 
Necessitarianism fails to interpret the popular belief. It fails in 
this, that it altogether ignores the rational self in the form of will ; 
it ignores it in the act of volition, and it ignores it in the abiding 
personality, which is the same throughout all its acts, and by whiA 
alone imputation gets a meaning. 

A man, to express what the people believe, is only responsible 
for what (mediately or immediately) '•^ues from the act of volition; 



deserves it, but only to make him better ; and though practice is bad on l3ok 
head, yet I think most persons would say that a man, who habitually punished 
a dog for a fkult, in respect of which he was tXtf ^y/«rc#, was not fit to keep a 
dog at all ; but the t^Mi HifUrM among men, the hardened habituals, aie the 
men whom we consider most punishable. On the other hand, though the bctft 
can not be punished,' yet he can be corrected as often as is convenient and to ai^ 
extent. I was once told of a west-country sportsman who, on starting for the 
field before the day's work was begun, used regularly to tie up his dogs to % 
gate and thrash them, and at intervals during the da/s sport repeat the M»#{r«#iv* 
Whether it was wise to correct for no fault is a question for the dog-breaker ; 
but surely no man in his senses would call it pimishment And yet it was good 
utilitarian punishment. And that is what is meant, when it is said that svck 
punishment is the treating a man like a dog. 



32 Ethical Studies. 



what confidence we had altogether vanishes. And proceeding 
to inquire into the determination of the will by ' motives,' w« 
find every terjn and phrase has a meaning not until we import 
into the consideration of ourselves the coarsest and crassest 
mechanical metaphors of pulls and pushes^ drawings and thrust- 
ings, which we believed to exist not anywhere except in the lowest 
PpSenomena of the natural world. Just as in reading Locke and 
' so many of the friends of Lodce, we have nothing before our 
understanding, until, as it were, we call up before our, eyes soUd 
things in space, denting, and punching, and printing another thing 
called a mind, and this other thing in like manner (how, heaven 
knows) making marks and prints on ttsdfvUi&o — so, in reading our 
deteiminists, the one chance of their terms bringing anything at all 
before the intellect, is for us to keep in sight a thing called a will, 
pushed and pulled by things called motives ; or else certain ^ forces ' 
called motives, acting within a given space called self, and, by their 
* composition,' resulting in no movement at all or a movement 
called * will ; ' uncertain whether such movement is a movement of 
/the whole ^collection' in the space called self, or a movement only 
(i^Lpart of that collection. 

If now we can bring these objects before our minds, and know 
that the will is a thing ' in a bag ' called self, and is moved by other 
things out of or in the bag ; or (more refinedly) that slates of mind, 
called motives, stand to the mind, of which they are the states, as 
forces stand to the space they meet in, — then Determinism is intelli- 
gible enough, and considered as an intellectual amusement is 
perhaps a pleasing theory. But when such a theory is brought 
into relation with the actions of ourselves, then, speaking not 
merely for ourselves alone, we can say little more than that we 
really can see no connection between the thepry and the facts we 
know. The phrases of one sphere lose all their meaning vihen 
applied to the other sphere. That die self in desire should have 
gone beyond itself, and yet not be beside itself; that the many 
desires should all be the desires of the self; that the self should be 
divided against itself in desire ; that the self should from all its 
desires distinguish itself; that it should confront them, and taking 
some one of them into itself, should free itself so from all other 
attractions, and spend its whole being in that one direction ; that 



34 Etiiical Studies. 



''\ of all physical enquiry, to view through the glass of a n accurate^ 
* introspection this nebula of the ordmary vision, ti)l it breaks into 
^poiintei whichlaws, not their own, move hither and thither in the 
limited space which once seemed to be fulness. I do not assert 
that the selif is not * resolvable ' into coexistence and sequence <rf 
states of die mind. I am far from denying that the I or the self 
is no nK^re &an ' collective,' than a collection of sensations, and 
ideas, and emotions, and volitions swept together with one another 
and after one another by * the laws of association ' ; though I con- 
fess that to a mind, which is but little ' inductive,' and which can 
not view l^e world wholly h posteriori, these things are Yeiy 
difficult even to picture, and altogether impossible in any iwiy to 
Understand We can bring before the mind certain atoms in 
space ; we can call them feelings, or ideas, or what we will ; and we 
can say that we mean by the mind a given collection of these 
pictured atoms ; and so far we do well enough. But then conies 
our first trouble. We have imaged to ourselves a collection of 
points in space, and that means we see the collection itself^ las 
covering a given aiea, with other spaces and collections outside of 
it Are we to say that the mind is in space ? * Gh, no ! * we shall, 
be toldi ^![ for that.ia.taialK^^^"* things in tEeinselve s: our know- 
ledge is relative, which means that we must confine ourselves to 
our given coUecdon ;The queslion is unanswerdilei^BeGause imin- 
teHigible.' And so, by talking ourselves about * things in them- 
selves ', we dumge, so to speak, a subject of conversation which 
was beginning to be slightly improper, and continue, as before, to 
picture the mind as a collection in space of material points ; or H 
time be spoken of, we have but, as it were, to give a turn to our 
kaleidoscope. And so far still we are doing pretty well. 

But still we must not be tootx)nfident We forgot for the moment 
that tiie units of the collection are^ each one separately, a state of 
the collection (they are * states of mind,' and the mind is ' collec- 
tive'), and we can see well enough tliut in a bag of marbles or a 
bunch of grapes the state of the marbles affects the stat^ of the bag, 
and the state of ^die grapes is the state of the bunch ; but it is very 
hard, to see why each niarble is to be called a state of the bag oS 
marbles, and each grape a state of the bunch of grapes, unless wt 
suppose an 'entity' inside the bag inesplvable into marblesi, or an 



36 Ethical Studies. 



about ' self/ we (/. e, the onions) fall into the belief that there is 
something there under the onions and the rope, and on looking 
we see there is nothing of the kind. But on looking we see even 
more than this ; for the rope of tiie onions is a rope of straw, and 

• that is, being interpreted, no rope at all, but the fiction of a rope 
The onions keep together because of the laws of association of 
<mions ; and because of these laws it is, that the mutual juxtaposir 
tion of the onions engenders in them the belief in a rope, and the 

\ consequent foolish ideas of a self, which we see in all their foolish- 
ness, when we perceive, first, that there is nothing but a rope, and 

' then that the rope is nothing at all. The only thing which after 

; all is hard to see is this, that we ourselves, who apprehend the 
illusion, are ourselves the illusion which is apprehended by us ;* 
and perhaps, on the theory of * relativity,' in order to know a fiction 
you yourself must be the fiction you know ; but it all is hard to 
understand, especially to a mind which is little ' analytical ' and, 
I begin to fear, not at all ' inductive.* 

We can see that a stream is a flux^ and that the wisp which 
plays on it has really no more of permanence than the stream ; 
but how that wisp is ever to think about these things, and to 
delii^e itself into the belief, and to publish the theory, that it can 
ijp^t help thinking of itself as one being, and that yet after all it 

^is nothing but a wisp ; to see how this is seems really impossible. 
The only way to represent it is to picture a delusion, which is 

. nothing but a delusion, and which, after belief that it is fwt a 
delusion, has at length found out that really it is a delusion. And 
since this, to the non philosophical mind, appears meaningless 
nonsense; and since this. is the conclusion to which ^inductive' 
psychology, if we carry it out, seems necessarily to lead,* I do not 
see much reason to think that the premises of that psychology 

» 

* Mr. Bain collects that the mind is a collection. Has he ever thought 
who collects Mr. Bain ? 

■ I am perfectly aware that it is possible to inherit both premises and con- 
clusions, and then, while holding to the premises, to ignore or refuse to accept 
the conclusions, so far as they are found to be inconvenient. When a fact 
stopped the way of Hume's conclusions, he banished it as a fiction. The late 
Mr. Mill's was a mind of a different order. Starting from premises the same, 
with the same fact before him, which gave the lie to his whole psychological 



38 Ethical Studies* 



-^ — . I . I I , I I.I , I 



the ^cts of Oin* unenlightend beliefs and our vulgar moralities ; 
a^ since these moralities are what we most care about, that 
,. 'therefore we also should leave these philosophers to themsdves, 
nor concern ourselves at all with their lofty proceedings. This 
moral I think, on the whole, to be the best ; though in oiur days 
perhaps it also is the haidest for all of us to practise^ And the 
moral which comes next is, of course, the philosophical one, that, 
seeing the vulgar are after all the vulgar, we should not be at 
pains to agree with their superstitions ; but since philosophy is the 
opposite of no philosophy, we rather should esteem ourselves, 
according as our creed is different from, and hence is higher than 
theirs. And this moral, as for some persons it is the only one 
possible, so also I recommend it them as their certain toad to an 
Imnixed happiness. But there remains still left a Xh\x6, moral, 
which, as I am informed, has been drawn by others ; that if we are 
not able to rest with the vulgar, nor to shout in tlie batde of our 
two great schools, it might then be perhaps worth our while to 
remember that we live in an island, and that our national mind, if 
We do not enlarge it, may also grow insular ; that not fax from us 
there lies (they say so) a world of thought, which, with all its 
variety, is neither one nor the other of our two philosophies, but 
whose battle is the battle of philosophy itself against two undying 
and opposite one-sidednesses ; a philosophy which thinks what the 
vulgar Mievt; a philosophy, lastly, which we all have refuted, and^ 
having so cleared our consciences, which some of us at least 
might take steps to understand. 



\ 



40 Ethical Studies. 



This we may call absolute compulsion ; and ordinary examples 
are any forcible action on my body, direct or by creation ot 
physical circumstances; and, again, the production of any 
psychical state not under the control of my wilL 

Here there is little difficulty, since, properly speaking, I neither 
do nor abstain. The only thing which in any degree can make 
me accountable here, is that it is my fault that I was able to be 
compelled. Then all is, to some extent, the issue of my action or 
omission ; in either case, of my will. 

The real problem is what follows. When I have to say any- 
where, ^ I did it ^ can I then escape imputation by pleading com- 
pulsion ? Can my wiU be forced ? 

This has been denied. It has been said that compulsion of the 
will is hypothetical and 'relative' only, not r.bsc^ute; that all it 
means is, if I will to have or be without this or that, t?un some- 
thing else must follow, as a consequence which I can not escape. 
Choose to defy consequences on one side, and to renounce 
th^n on the other, and there can be no compulsion. * No one 
can be compelled to anything, unless he wills to let himself be 
compelled.' (See Hegel, xviii. 35; viii. 128.) 

I do not think this will hold. We see at once that, in a given 
case, there may be only one or two courses for me (my not-acting 
is a course of action) ; and all of these I may dislUce and dis- 
approve. But one course I must accept In short, I maybe 
compelled to an alternative; and here whether what I do is 
morally imputable, depends on whether it is my fault that I am in 
the position I am in. 

But let us pass by this, since the far more serious question 
awaits us, ' Apart from alternatives^ can I not be made to do this 
or that ? Can not the will be forced to this or that result ? ' 

It all depends on the way in which we use 'will.' If by * will* 
we mean 'dioice,' 'volition,' the conscious realizing of myself in 
the Qbject of one desire (in the widest sense), which has be^ 
separated from and put before the mind, as a possibility not yet 
real — ^then die will can not be forced. For, supposing you could 
produce a state of inind, which certainly would issue in such and 
such a volition, yet the result, when produced, comes 'from the 
self. There is no sayipg, ' I did not will it ;' or, ' If I could have 
willed, I would have willed otherwise.' » 



* Hence what issues from volition caii not issue from compulsion. But the 
question arises, 'Can a volition be compelled into existence)' This we must 
answer in the negative. Force and compulsion are terms not here applicable. 
For directly to produce a volition in another is absolutely impossible ; and 



4^ Ethical Studies. 



But virhen I know what I am doing, and also know Uie quality 
of it, know the relation in which it stands to the rest of my life, 
and know that it is wrong, can I then be forced to do it ?. It ia 
with some diihdence that I express an opinion, but I think we 
must say, yes. 

Whenever I can not collect myself, so as by conscious votition 
to decide one way or the other, there (provided that it is not my 
fault that I am unable), it seems to me, we must say I am not 
accountable, I did not do the act ; there was force put upon rae ; 
whether proceeding simply from an uncontrollable element of my 
nature, or, in addition, from a will outside me, makes no difference. 
Where volition is a psychical impossibility, and where it is not my 
fault that it is so impossible, there I am not responsible. 

Do such cases exist in fact? I believe tliey do. There seems 
no doubt that insanity supplies them ; and apart from that, and 
with regard only to sane persons, such cases are possible. Violent 
physical pain, with great weakness, may destroy the conditions of 
volition, by destroying energ)'^ \ or, further, violent emotion may 
make it impossible for the person to keep two courses before 
him and decide — impossible to separate himself from the strain put 
on hijm, so as either to resist it or to identify himself with it. In 
such cases the agents can not collect themselves so as to will, an4 
though with knowledge, )'et with pain and feeling of guiltiness, as 
in a dream, they perform some act which is abhorrent to them, 
and which they impute to themselves as guilt, but which {provided 
always their fault has not led to it) the sober onlooker may be 
unable to impute to them, in their character of a moial agent 1 can 
not doubt, for instance, that in some cases a woman is seduced really 
against her will ; and though morally accountable for what has pr^- 
ceded, is not so for anything else. With the practical bearing of 
this we are not concerned ; but I must be allowed to remark that- 
there are dangers beside those of nioral laxity. There is a false 
seif-condemnation> which takes on the will more than belongs to 
it, and hopelessness and self-desertion, which lets itself become 
really what it is not yet, because it thinks it is so alreadyi In 
morality the past is real because it is present in the will ; and con* 
versely, what is not present in the will is only past. 

Where the act was only voluntary, where there was no conscious 
volition, and where volition was psychically impossible, there wc 
are responsible only so far as we ourselves have made the impossi- 
bility. If this fs not so, we can plead cx)mpulsion. 

But we foresee the objection that will at once be made. * This 
doctrine,' it will be said, ' excuses well-nigh everything. For when 
we gp wrong, we do not always say, '* I will^ " and so act. We 



44 Ethical Studies. 



The doctrine that our will can be forced to voluntajy acts 
should not, I think, alarm or distress u& It seems to me by no 
means an immoral doctrine; and that charge holds good £ur 
more against the teaching that there is alwa3rs a possibility of 
resistance to evil and performance of good at any moment, and 
under any previous and present conditions. Possibility of com^ 
pulsion should make us see more clearly the need of so strengthen- 
ing our will for good, as to make that compulsion impossible for 
us, except in theory. It should also make us afraid of circum- 
stances, of which most people seem to me not enough afraid, 
being encouraged in some cases by the doctrine of libertas arbitriu 
£ut what we, who reject that doctrine, should encourage our* 
selves with, is the clear fact that again and again, and by the weak^ 
what we should have said beforehand it was impossible to resist 
has been resisted, and simply because they had made their will 
one with the good. 

This is all we have to say on compulsion in relation to responr 
sibility, and we know we have not done justice to it The 
compulsion which makes irresponsible is absolute compulsion.^ 
Relative compulsion, no one would say, relieves us from respon- 
sibility ; for this means not an unconditional ' must,' bjat a ' must,' 
only in case I make up my mind to have this, or decide that I 
can not face that. Here we can collect ourselves to take which 
course we choose. 

And at this point we should stop ; but I should like to wasider 
beyond the subject so far as to call atlentioil to a matter <m which 
there seems to be a great want of light Everybody sees that 
any and every sort of influence does not amount to compuhoon ; 
but if I may judge from Mr. Stephen's interesting book on 
Liberty, &c., and the few reviews of it which I saWj there is a 
general inability to draw the line between them. This is some- 
what surprising, and as, from wrong views on this point, wrong 



* The above doctrine, I think, will cover all maniacal phenomena. In con* 
nection with these let me remark against Dr. Maudsley that not all meta^ 
physicians have denied, or ignored, insane irresistible impulses, coexisting with 
knowledge of the moral quality of the act See, for instance,. Hegd, viL (2)9 
222. Dr. Maudsley's book on ' Responsibili^ in mental disease,* which I read 
witl^ much interest and I hope some profit, seems to me to proceed in a 
somewhat unscientific fashion. How in the world is it possible to say what 
relieves a madman of responsibility, until you know what makes a sane n^ii 
responsible ? But that Dr. M. does not tell us. And until we know whethier 
a writer is one with us in our main beliefs as to a sane man*s responsibility, how 
can we (unless we are most foolish) receive his evidence as to any one's non- 
responsibility, when, so ^ as we can see, on his showing no one (sane or mad) 
Would be what we call responsible ? 



46 EthUdl Studies. 



joke ]ying in the incongruity of such things with persuasion. In 
persuasion consequences to come from the persuader may be the 
fact we are to be persuaded of; but all that that means is that 
persuasion may be used in threat Mere persuasion is the 
mere bringing home the fact as a fact^ and in abstraction from 
'Ufhat the fact is, and from the relation of it to the will of the pai^ 
persuading and the party persuaded Further, in persuasion there 
must be reflection and reasoning of some kind. Jacob (tid not 
ptrsuade Esau with the mess of pottage ; he might have done so 
if he had argued the point. I should be glad, did space permit me, 
to develope this against possible objections ; but as it is, I must 
ask the reader to pardon the digression, on the ground that want of' 
clearness here must mean want of clearness m some of the firat 
principles of politics. 

Note B.— CharacteJi, how far Fixed, 

Thoroughly to imderstand what . character means is to know 
what individuality in general means, and in what sense a man's 
self is individual. And to understand this (need we say it?) is to 
be clear on some of the most difficult questions. This we do not 
for a moment pretend to be ; and all that we are going to sajr 
must be looked on as more or less superficial remark. 

' Given such a character and. such a stimulus, such an act mimt 
fpllow.' This is the view which certainly is making its way. To 
prove it by particular experiences is from the very nature of the 
case impossible ; nevertheless, when we understand it so — * Sup- 
posing you have the self-same character and the self-same stimulus, 
and nothing else, must not what follows be ^so the same ? '--^it 
seems quite, impossible to refuse our assent to it, or possible only 
if we are prepared to question the truth of any and every general 
proposition. But before we assent, we should see that the state- 
ment is not true except in the abstract It is true only (fyou have- 
nothing but the same character and stimulus. 

This suggests the inquiry, (s the abstraction any more than 
idle ? The whole statement stands and falls with the ^ given J No 
doubt, hypothetical conclusions from a fiction may be useful, but 
it is not well to forget the fictitious character of the starting point 
So we must ask, Do we ever have such a supposed ^ given'? 
{x} Is there such a thing as a character which remains the same? 
and (2) In all action are wa not forced to recognize somed)ing 
beside character and stimulus? 

There is a view which supposes character to be inborn and 
unailterable. Here we may «>ay that what solicits the character to 



48 Ethical Studies. 



and stimulus ? If so, if the act issues from an3rthing beside the 
character, then it is downright false to say, ' Same character, same 
act ; ' unless all you mean is, ' Supposing that to take place which 
perhaps does not ever take place, supposing that you never had 
anything but character, then you would have the same act' 

Thus, really to appreciate the truth of ' same character, same 
act,' we have to keep in view, (i) That characters are alterable; 
(2) That acts do, or may, proceed from something beside the 
character. And these two qualifications, which are closely con- 
nected, we must try to understand more fully. 

Character is fixed, but only relatively fixed. When we see how 
the first comes about, we see that the latter is true. The material 
of the character is disposition in relation to circumstances. The 
character is what I have made myself into from these elements, and 
the reason it remains fixed is that the conditions have so to speak 
been used up and realized into the individuality. What I 
am I have made myself, out of, in relation to, and against my 
raw material with its external conditions. The external con- 
ditions are more or less permanent, and the raw material is more 
or less systematized. Hence well-nigh everything is now 
subsumed under, and takes its quality from my character. The 
self is more and more determined and realized, and so excludes 
possibilities, fixes and closes itself; in short, gets hardened. 

Hence, knowing a man to be a certain system (conscious or 
unconscious), we can tell how things wiD present themselves to 
him, and how he will manifest himself against particular stimuli. 
And we say the man is settled and made, and we know what he 
is and have a practical certainty that he win always keep so, 
because we are sure that nothing will happen to him which he 
has not had before in some form, and which has not some 
principle in his character under which it will be brought. This 
is what we mean by the character being fixed. 

But the fixedness is not more than relative. There is always a 
theoretical possibility of change, and sometimes a good deal more 
than this. The reason is twofold, (i) We can not exhaust all 
possible external conditions; (2) We can never systematize the 
whole self. 

(i) You never can say, a man has withstood all sorts of tempta- 
tions and all combinations of them ; and thus there remains the 
theoretical possibility of some unknown and fatal kind. And (2) 
the man's self and his chaiacter never quite coincide. The 
diaracter is always the narrower; and moreover, its materials 
shift, or may shift This must be, because a man's body 
changes through change of climate, disease, or af e, and so too 



50 Ethical Studie^^ 



chaotic, it must be variable and subject to mere accident ; nor, 
.^ven a fresh combinaition of the elements, so far as I can se«, is 
It possible theoretically to deduce the result The result is not 
a mere * resultant' 

It has been remarked that before the time comes it is not 
possible to have an absolutely certain knowledge, how we shall 
act The reason partly, no doubt, is that particular knowledge 
of details is wanting to us; but this is not ail the reason. The 
act does not answer to the mere theoretical application of a 
principle. The desire in the presence of the object can not be 
excluded from the calculation, nor can that desire always be fore- 
realized by the presentation of the object before the understanding 
and imagination. In tSie act the wiU is the reaction of the wh(^ 
self against the presented object, and we can know how that will 
be determined^ only so far as the self, which we have not halHtu- 
ated and do not know, can be excluded. 

Thus the self we have habituated ourselves into, is the only self to 
be counted on, and so none of us are quite safe. Many of us show 
selves to ourselves and the world, which are not the realization of 
another element which we take about with us, and which quietly, 
or it may be longingly, remains below the * floor of consciousness,' 
perhaps never to appear, perhaps to burst out in we know not 
what, in light and love, or in • dkt and fire.' But this should be a 
mere theoretical possibility ; and if it really comes about, yet the 
self that we know should be strong enough to make the best of it 

This consideration (though in most cases there is little need for 
it) will help to explain mysterious conversions and changes; but 
we must bring this npte to an end. 

Our result is that we may have practical certainty that a man 
will not change ; and hence, knowing his ways, we may be pretty 
sure what he will do. But since the conditions he will meet with 
can not be theoretically exhausted, and his habituated self does not 
cover his whole nature, therefore theoretical possibility of fresh act 
and change of character remains ; ' and this is important ; for we 
see, on the whole, that it is only a part of the facts which is covered 
by ' same character and stimulus, same act' 



• This !>ears on a practical difficulty. Olten we feel tolerably sure ^at this 
or that old reprobate is hopelessly hardened^ but we can not sav there is n» 
chance of his tuminfr agaiia. Hence the theoretical justification o/fhe practical 
religious maxiai not to give up auy man as lo^t. 



52 Ethical Studies. 



even define them theoretically; and keep them distinct ? Is the 
opposite of a false view always true? Is it not much rather 
often (and always in some spheres) just as false?'; and to both, 
'So long as you refuse to read raetaphysicy so long will meta- 
physical abstractions prey upon ^ 

Or to put the same thing in a ghtly different way. "^^e all 
wani- freedom. Well then, what is freedom? * It means not 
being made to do or be anything. " Free " means " free frotn*^ * 
And are we to be quite free ? * Yes, if freedom is good, we can not 
have too much of it* Then, if * free '=r 'free yn^w,' to be quite 
free is to be free from everything— -free from other men, free 
from law, from morality, from thought, from sense, from — Is there 
anything we are not to be free from ? To be free from everything 
is to be — nothing. Only nothing is quite free, and freedom is 
abstract nothingness. If in death we cease to be anything, then 
there first we are free, because there first we are — not. 

Every one sees this is not the freedom we want * " Free " is 
" free from," but then / am to be free. It is absuid to think that 
I am to be free from myself. I am to be free to exist and to 
assert mysel£' Well and good; but this is not what we began 
with. Freedom now means the self-assertion which is nothing ^/ 
self-assertion. It is not merely negative — it is also positive, and 
negative only so far as, and because, it is positive. 

* I am to assert myself and nothing else, and this is freedom.' So 
far as this goes we quite agree ; but it tells us scarcely anything. 
I am to assert myself, but then what action doa assert myself; or 
rather, what action does nvf assert myself? And if I am to assert 
nothing ^t myself,vWhat can I do, so as to do this and nothing but 
this ? What, in snort, ts this self, the assertion of which is freedom ? 

* Mv self,' we shall hear, * is what is mine; and mine is what is 
not yours, or what does not belong to any one else. I am free 
when I assert my private will, the will peculiar to me.' Can this 
hold? Apart from any other objection, is it freedom? Suppose 
I am a glutton and a drimkard ; in these vices I assert my private 
will ; im 1 then free so far as a glutton and drunkard, oi am I a 
slave — the slave of my appetites ? The answer must be, * The 
slave of his lusts is, so far, not a free man. The man is free who 
realizes his true self.' Then the whole question is, What is this 
true self, and c-an it be found apart from something like law ? Is 
there any * perfect freedom' which does not mean * service ' ? 

Reflection shows us that what we call freedom is both positive 
and negative. There are then two questions — What am 1 to be 
free to assert? What am 1 to be free from? And these are 
answered by the answer to one question^ — What is my true self? 



54 Ethical Studies. 



we believe is false. Bath virtue and the asking Why? seem 
rational, and yet incompatible one with the other ; and the 
better course will be, not forthwith to reject virtue in (avour of 
the question, but rather to inquire concerning the nature of 
the Why ? 

Why should I be virtuous ? Why should 1 ? Could anything 
be more modest ? Could an5rthing be less assuming? It is not 
a dogma; it is only a question. And yet a question may contain 
(perhaps must contain) an assumption more or less hidden ; or, in 
other words, a dogma. Let us see what is assumed in the asking 
of our question. 

In * Why should I be moral ? * the ' Why should I ? ' was another 
way of saying. What good is virtue ? or rather. For what is it good ? 
and we saw that in asking, Is viitue good as a means, and how so ? 
we do assume that virtue is not good, except as a means. The 
dogma at the root of the question is hence clearly either (i) the 
general statement that only means are good ; or (2) the particular 
assertion of this in the case of virtue. 

To explain; the question For what? V^hereto? is either uni- 
versally applicable, or not so. It holds everjrwhere, or we mean it 
to hold only here. Let us suppose, in the first place, that it is 
meant to hold everywhere. 

Then (i) we are taking for granted that nothing is good in 
itself; that only the means to something else are good ; that 
* good/ in a word, = ' good for,' and good for something else. Such 
is the general canon by which virtue would have to be measured. 

No one perhaps would explicitly put forward such a canon, and 
yet it may not be waste of time to examine it 

The good is a means : a means is a means to .something else, 
and this is an end. Is the end good ? No ; \^ we hold to our 
general canon, it is not good as an end : the good was alwuys good 
fc^ something else, and was a means. To be good, the end raus( 
be a means, and so on for ever in a process which has no limit. 
If we ask now What is good ? we must answer, There is nothing 
which is not good, for there is nothing which ms^y not be regarded 
as conducing to something outside itself Everything is relative 
to something else. And the essence of the good is to exist by 
virtue of something else and something else for ever. Everything 



56 Ethical Studies. 



we have, I hope, made it clear that the question Why should I be 

moral? rests on the assertion of an end in itself, which is not 

morality ; ^ and a point of this importance must not be taken for 
granted. 

It is quite true that to ask Why should I be moral? is ipsofacU 

to take one view of mprality, is to assume that virtue is a means 

to something not itself. 3ut it is a mistake to suppose that the 

general, asking of Why? affords any presumption in &vour of^ or 

against, ajiy one theory. If any theory could stand upon the What 

for ? as a rational formula, which must always hold good and be 

satisfied ; then, to that extent, no doubt it would have an advan- 

l tage. But we have seen that all doctrines alike must reject the 

I What for ? and agree in this rejection, if they agree in nothing 

^ else ; since, they all must have an end which is not a mere means. 

And if so, is it not foolish to suppose that its giving a reason 

for virtue is ^ny argument in favour of Hedonism, when for its 

own eiid it can give no reason at all ? Is it not clear that, if yoii 

have any Ethics, you must have an end which is above the Why? 

in the sense of What for ? ; and that, if this is so, the question 

is now, as it was two thousand years ago, .Granted that there is 

an ^viA^ what is this end? And the asking that question, as 

reason and history both tell us, is not in itself the presupposing of 

a Hedonistic answer, or any other answer. 

The claim of pleasure to be the end, we are to discuss in 

.another paper. But what is clear at first sight is, that jto tak e 

virtue^a&.a mere. means to an ulterior end is in dir e ct antagoni sm 

to the voice of the moral consciousness. 

That consciousness, when unwarped by selfishness and not 

blinded by sophistry, is convinced that to ask for the Why ? is 

simple immorality ; to do good for its own sake is virtue, to do it 

for some ulterior end or object, not itself good, is never virtue ; 

and never to act but for the sake of an end, other than doing well 

and right, is the mark of vice. And the theory which sees in 

* *The question itself [Why should I do right?] can not be put, except in 
a form which assumes that the Utilitarian answer is the only one which can 
possibly be given. . . . The words "Why should I" mean "What ^aU f 
get by," *• What motive have 1 for " this or that course of conduct ? * — Stephfn, 
Liberty t Ac, p. 361, ed. ii. 



58 Ethical Studv^. 



satisfied, and so far as you are satisfied, do see whether It is not 
because^ and so far as, you are false to your theory; so far as yoa 
are living not directly with a view to the pleasant, but with a 
view to something else, or with no view at all, but, as you would 
call it, without any * reason.' We believe that, in your heart, your 
end is what ours is, but that about this end you not only are sorely 
mistaken, but in your heart you feel and know it; or at least would 
do so, if you would only reflect. And more than this I think we 
ought not to say. 

What more are we to say? If a man asserts total scepticism, 
y^yk-tssi not argue with him. You can show that he omtradicts 
•himself; but if he says, * I do not care' — there is an end of it So, 
too, if a man sayjs, ' I shall do what I like, because I happen to 
like it ; and as for ends, I recognize none' — ^you may indeed show 
him that his conduct is \n fact otherwise ; and if he will assert 
anything as an end, if he will but say, *I have no end but myself/ 
then you may argue with him, and try to prove that he is making 
a mistake as to the nature of the end he alleges. But if he says, 
^ I care not whether I am nioral or rational, nor how much 1 con- 
tradict myself,' then argument ceases. We, who have the power, 
believe that what is rational (if it is not yet) ait lea^t is to be real, 

moral philosophy, unless that has to do with the means whereby we are simply 
to get pleasure or avoid pain. The theory not only confuses morality and 
religion, but reduces them both to deliberate selfishness. Fear of criminal 
proceedings in the other world does not tell us what is morally sight in this 
world. It merely gives a selfish motive for obedience to those who believe^ 
and leaves those who do not believe, in all cases with less motive, in some 
cases with none^ I can. not forbear remarking that, so far as jbj experience 
goes, where future .punishments are firmly believed in, the fear of tliem 
has, in most cases, but little influence, on the- mind. And the: facts do 
not allow us to consider the fear of punishment in this world as the 
main motive to morality. In most cases there is,, properly speaking, «v 
ulterior motive. A man is moral because he likes being moral ; and he likes it^ 
partly because he has been brought up to tlie habit of liking it, and partly 
because he finds it gives him what he wants, while its opposite docs not do so. 
He is not as a rule kept 'straight * by the contemplation of evils to be inflicted 
on him from the outside ; and the shame he feels at the bad opinion of otheis 
is hot a mere external evil, and is not feared simply as such. In short, a man 
is a human being, something larger than the abstraction of an actual or possible 
criminaL 



6o Ethical Studies. 



will be said, • which are not myself, which fall outside my activity, 
and which, nevertheless, I do realize, and think I ought to realize.' 
We must try to show that the objection rests upon a misunder- 
standing; and, as a statement of fact, brings with it insuperable 
difficulties. 

Let us first go to the moral consciousness, and see what that 
tells us about its end. 

Morality implies an end in itself: we take that for granted. 

Something is to be done, a good is to be realized. But that 

result is, by itself, not morality : morality differs from art, in that it 

can not make the act a mere means to the result Yet there is a 

means. There is not only something to be done, but something 

to be done by me — / must do the act, must realize the end. 

Morality implies both the something to be done, and the doin^ of 

it by me; and if you consider them as end and means, you can not 

separate the end aiid the means. If you chose to change the 

position of end and means, and say my doing is the end, and the 

* to be done ' is the means, you would not violate the moral con- 

// sciousness; for the truth is that means and end are not applicatie 

' here. The act for me means my act, and there is no end beyond 

the act. This we see in the belief that failure may be equivalent 

, morally to success — in the saying, that there is nothing good except 

/a good will In short, for morality the end implies the act, 

and the act implies self-realization. This, if it were doubtful, 

j would be shown (we may remark in passing) by the feeling of 

\ pleasure which attends the putting forth of the act For if 

I pleasure be the feeling of self, and accompany the act, this 

1 indicates that the putting forth of the act is also the putting 

j forth of the seli^ 

But we must not lay too much stress on the moral conscious- 
ness, for we shall be reminded, perhaps, that not only can it be, 
but, like the miser's consciousness, it frequently has been ex- 
plained ; and that both states of mind are illusions generated on 
one and the same principle. 

I^et us then dismiss the moral consciousness, and not trouble 
ourselves about what we think we ought to do ; let us try to show 
that what we do do, is, perfectly or imperfectly, to realize ourselves, 
and that we can not possibly do anything else ; that all we can 



6t2 Ethical Studies. 



practically when I see that the engine is going to run off the line, 
and it lioes so. 

A desired object (as desired) is a thought, and my thought; but 
it is something moi^, and that something more is, in short, that it 
is desired by me. And we ought by tight, before we go furthei, 
to exhibit a theory of desire ; but, if we could do ^at, we could 

/ not stop to do it However, we say with confidence that, in desiie, 

. ^ what is desired must in all cases be self. 

If we could accept the theory that the end or motive is always 
the idea of a pleasure (or pain) of our own, which is associated 
with the object presented, and which is thai in the object which 
moves us, and the only thing which does move us, then from such 
a view itr would follow at once that all we can aim at is a state of 
ourselves. 

We can not, however, accept the theory, since we believe it both 
to ignore and to be contrary to facts (see Essay VIl.) ; but, though 
we do not admit that the motive is always, or in most cases, the 
idea of a state of our feeling self, yet we think it is d^r that 
V nothing moves unless it be desired, and that what is desired is. 
ourself. For all objects or ends have been associated with oqir 
satisfaction, or (more correctly) have been felt in and as our- 
selves, or we have felt ourselves therein ; and the only reason why 
they move us now is that, when they are presented to our mindg 
as motives, we do now feel ourselves asserted or affirmed m them. 
The essence of desire for an object Would thus be the feeling of 
our affirmation in the idea of something not ourself, felt against the 
feeling of ourself as, without the object, void and negated ; and it is 
the tension of this relation which produces motion. If so, thai 
nothing is desired except tha,t which is iden tified with oursel v^ 
sund we can aim at nothing, except so far as we aim ^aLOUiEsdxeSL 
in it 

But passing \sy the above, which we can not here expound and 
which we lay no stress on, we think that the reader will probably 
go with us so far as this, that in desire what we want, so far as we 
want it, is ourselves in some form, or is some state of ourselves ; 
and that our wanting anything else would be psychologically 
inexplicable. 

Let us take this for granted then ; but is this what we mean by 



64 Ethical Studies, 



in the body of acts which carry it out. We need not stop here, 
because the existence of larger ends, which embrace smaller ends, 
can not be doubted ; and so far we may say that the self we 

\' realize is identified with, wholes, or that the ideas of the states 
of self we realize are associated with ideas that stand for wholes. 

But is it also true that these larger wholes are included in one 
whole ? I think that it is. I am not forgetting that we act, as a 
rule, r\o\, from principle or with the principle before us, and I wish 
the reader not to forget that the principle may be there and may 
• be our basis or our goal, without our knowing anything about it 
And here, of course, I am not saydng that it has occurred to eveiy 
one to ask himself whether he aims at a whole, and what that is; 
because considerable reflection is required for this, and the 
amount need not have been reached. Nor again am I saying that 
every man's actions are consistent, that he does not wander 
from his end, and that he has not particular ends which will not 
come under his main end. Nor further do I assert that the life of 
every man does form a whole ; that in some men there are not 
C9-ordinated ends, which are incompatible and incapable of sub- 
ordination into a system.* What I -am saying is, that if the life 
of the normal man be inspected, and the ends he has in view (as 
exhibited in his acts) be considered, they will, roughly speaking, 
be embraced in one main end or whole of ends. It has been said 
that ' every man has a different notion of happiness,' but this is 
scarcely correct, unless mere detail be referred to. Certainly, 
however, every man has a notion of happiness, and /its notion, 
though he may not quite know what it is. Most men have a life 
which they live, and with which they are tolerably satisfied, and 
that life, when examined, is seen to be fairly systematic ; it is seen 

^.to be a sphere including spheres, the lower spheres subordinating 
to themselves and qualifying particular actions, and themselves 
subordinated to and qualified by the whole. And most men 
have more or less of an ideal of life — a notion of perfect happi- 
ness, which is never quite attained in real life ; and if you take 



v 



* The unhappiness of such lives in genera], however, points to the fact that 
the real end is a whole. Dissatisfaction rises from the Vnowing or feeling thai 
ihe self is not realized; and not realized, because not realized as a system. 



66 Ethical Studies. 



direction, have closed with A or B, For we are aware besides of 
ourselves^ no( simply as something theoretically above A. and B, 
but as something also practically above them, as a CQncentration 
which is not one or the other, but which is the i)ossibility of either, 
which is the inner side indifferently of an act which should realize 
A, or one which should realize B ; and hence, whi<^ is neither, 
and yet is superior to both. In short, we do not simply feel our- 
selves in A and B, but have distingubhed ourselves from both, 9& 
what is above both. This is one &ctor in volition, and it is hard 
to find any name better for it than that of the universal factor, or 
side, or moment^ We need say much less about the second foe- 
tor. In order to will, we must will something ; die universal side 
by itself is not will at all. To will we must identify ourselves widi 
this, that, or the other ; and here we have the particular side, and 
the second factor in volition. Thirdly, the volition as a whole 
(and first, as a whole, is ii volition) is tlie identity of both these 
factors, and the projection or carrying of it out into external 
existence; the realization both of the particular side, Uie this 
or that to be dene, and the realization of the inner side of 
self in the domg of it, with a realization of self in both, as 
is proclaimed Dy the feeling of pleasure. This unity of the two 
factors we may caU the individual w^ole, or again the concrete 
universal ; and, although we are seldom conscious of the distinct 
factois, yet every act of will will be seen, when analysed, to be a 



* As we saw in our last Essay, there are two dangers to avoid here, in the 
shape of two one-sided views, Scy}la aod Gharybdis. The 6rst is the ignoring 
of the universal side altogether, even as an element ; the second is the 
assertion of it as ^ more than an element, as by itself will. Against this 
second it. is necessary to insist that the will is what it wiUs, that to will you 
must will something, and that you can not will the mere form of the will? 
further, that the mere foimal freedom of choice not only, if it were real, would 
not be true freedom, but that, in addition* it is a metaphysical fiction \ that the 
uaiversal is real only as one side of ^he whole, and takes its character firom 
the whole ; &nd that, in the most deliberate and would-be formal volition, the 
self that is abstracted and stands above the particulars, is the abstraction 
not only from the particular desire or desires before the miud» but also from 
the whole self, the self which embodies all past acts, and that the abstractum is 
ittermined by that from whuh U is abstracted, no less than itself is a moment in 
the determination of the concrete act 



68 Ethical Studies. 



do not possess it until I find my will in k; and I do i\x^pt find 
that, until what I have is a hannony or a whole in system. 

Both in theory and practice my end is to realize myse* 
whole. But is this all ? Is a consistent view all that we 
theory? Is a harmonious life all that we want in pr^ 
Certainly not A doctrine must not only bold together, 
must hold the facts together as welL We can not rest in it 
because it does not contradict itsel£ The theory must take lis the 
facts, and an ultimate theory must take in all the Bu:ts. Sol again 
in practice. It is no human ideal lo lead ' the life of an of 
•""^^ We have no rigbt first to find out just what we happen to bfe^^^ 
to have, and then to contract our wants to that limit WeCcfin aot 
do it if we would, and morality calls to us that, if we try to do jit^ we 
are false to ourselves. Against the sensuous facts around u^ and 
^j^ within us, we must for ever attempt to widen our empire ; we ^must 

I at least try to go forward, or we shall certainly be driven backv_ 
/ / 1 So self-re^ization means more than the mere assertion of the 
I self as a whole.' And here we may refer to two principles, which 
Kant put forward imder tlie names of ' Homogeneity ' and ' Speci- 
fication.' Not troubling ourselves with our relation to Kant, we 
may say that the ideal is neither to be perfectly homogeneous^ nor 
simply to be specified to the last degree, but rather to combine 
botli these elements. Our true being is not the extreme of unity^ 
nor of diversity, but the perfect identity of both. And ^Realize 
<>^^ ^ yourself* does not mean merely * Be a whole,' but * Be an infinite 
/ whole.' 

At this word, I am afraid, the reader who has not yet despaired 
of us will come to a stop^ and refuse to enter into the region of 
nonsense. But why should it be nonsense ? When the poet and 
the preacher tell us the mind is infinite, most of us feel that it is 
so ; and has our science really come to this, that the beliefs which 
answer to our highest feelings must be theoretical absurdities? 
Should not the philosophy, which tells us such a thing, be very 



* I leave out of sight the important question whether any partial whole can 
be self-consistent If (which seems the better view) this can not be, we 
shaU not need to say 'Systematise and widen,' bat the second will be 
implied in the first 



70 Ethical Studies. 



justice. However that be, T know of no answer to it ; and until 
we find one, we must say that it is not true that the mind is finite. 

If I am to realize mjrself, it must be as infinite ; and now the 
question is, What does infinite mean ? and it will be better to say 
first what it does not mean. There are two wrong views on the 
subject, which we will take one at a time. 

(i.) Infinite is not-finite, and that means ^eud-less.' What 
does endless mean ? Not the mere negation of end, because a 
mere negation is nothing at all, and infinite would thus = O. The 
endless is something positive , it means a positive quantity which 
has no end. Any given number of units is finite ; but a series of 
units, v/hich is produced indefinitely, is infinite. This is the sense 
\ of infinite which is in most common use, and which, we shall see, 
is what Hedonism believes in. It is however clear that this 
infinite is a perpetual self-contradiction, andy-^so far as it is real, is 
only finitie. i^ny real quantity has ends, beyond which it does not 
go. * Increase the quantity ' merely says ' Put the end further 
off;' but in saying that, it does say ' Put the end.' 'Increase 
the quantity for ever* means, * Have for ever a finite quantity, and 
/or ever say that it is not finite.' In other words, * Remove the 
end * does imply, by that. very removal and the production of tlie 
series, the making of a fresh end; so that we still have a finite 
quantity. Here, so far as tlie infinite exists, it is finite: 
it is told to exist,'!! is told a^ain to be ngthiog ^t Jlp]^ 

(2.) Or, secondly, the infinite is m?/ the finite, no longer in the 
sense of being moie in quantity, but in the sense of being some- 
thing else^ which is different in quality. The infinite is not in the 
world of limited things; it exists in a sphere of its own. The 
mind {e. g.) is something ^^i^/ii^ the aggregate of its states. God is 
something beside the things of this worid. This is the infinite 
believed in by abstract Duty. But here once more, against its 
will, infinite comes to mean merely finite. The i nfinite is a some- 
thing over against, beside, and outside "the finite; and hence 
is itself also finite, because limited by something else. 
\ In neither of these two senses is the mind infinite. What then 
is the true sense of infinite ? As before, it is the negation of the 
finite ; it is not-finite. But, unlike both the false infinites, it does 
not leave the finite as it is. It neither, with (i), says 'the finite is 



72 Ethical Studies. 



tells us we are not concluded in ourselves not perfect, but that 
there exists a not-ourself, which never does wholly become oursel£ 
And, apart from morality, it is obvious that I and you, this man 
and the other man, are finite beings. We are not one another ; 
more or less we must limit each other's sphere ; I am what I am 
more or less by external relations, and I do not fall wholly within 
myself. Thus I am to be infinite, to have no limit from tl^ie out- 
side j and yet I am one among others, and therefore am finite 
It is all very well to tell me that in me there is infinity, the 
perfect identity of subject and object : that I may be willing 
perhaps to believe, but none the less I am finite,' 

We admit the full force of the objection. I am finite ; I am 
both infinite and finite, and that is why my moral life is a perpetual 
progress. I must progress, because I have an other which is to be, 
and yet never quite is, myself; and so, as I am, am in a state of 
contradiction. 

It is not that I wish to incrtiase the mere quantity of my true 
self It is that I wish to be nothing but my true self, to be rid of 
all external relations, to bring them all within me, and so to fall 
wholly within myself. 

I am to be perfectly homogeneous ; but that I can not be unless 
fully specified, and the question is. How can I be extended so 
as to take in my external relations ? Goethe ^ has said, ' Be a whole 
or\ovcL a whole,* but to that we must answer, * You can not be a 
whole, unless you join a whole.' 

The difficulty is ; being limited and so not a whole, how extend 
myself so as to be a whole ? The answer is, be a member in a whole. 
Here your private self, your finitude, ceases as such to exist; k 
becomes the function of an organism. You must be; not a mere 
piece of, but a member in a whole ; and as this must know and 
will yourself. 

The whole, to which you belong, specifies itself in the detail of 
its functions, and yet remains homogeneous. It lives not many 
lives but one life, and yet can not live except in its many members* 



^ ' Immer strebe zum Ganzeu, und kannst du !»elbei kein Ganzes 
Werden, als dienepdes Glied schliess' an ein Ganzes dich an.' 



74 Ethical Studies. 



when your personal will is wholly made one with it, then you also 
have reached the extreme of hcmiogeneity and specification ia 
one, aiid have attained a perfect self-realization. 

Hie foregoing will, we hope, become clear to the teader of this 
volume. He must consider what has been said so far as the text, 
which the sequel is to illustrate and work out in detail Mean- 
while^ our aim has been to put forward the formula of self-realiza- 
tion, and in some measure to explain it The following Essa>$ 
will furnish, we hope, something like a commenta^ and justifica- 
tion. We shall see that the self to be realized is not the self as ^ 
collection of particulars, is not the universal as all the states of a 

v^> certain feeling; and that it is not again an abstract universal, as 
the form of duty ; that neither are in' hatmony with life, with the 
moral consciousness, or with themselves ; that when the self is 
identified with^ and wills, and realizes a concrete universal, \ 
real totality, then first does it find itself, is satisfied, self-determinedt 
and free, * the free wiU that wills itself as the free will* "* 

Let us resume, then, the results of the present Essay. We have 
attempted to show (i) That the formula of 'what for?' must be 
rejected by every ethical doctrine as not universally valid; and 
that hence no one theory can gain the smallest advantage (except 
over the foolish) by putting it forward. That now for us (as it was 
for Hellas) the main question is, There being some end, what is 

1 , 'that end? And (2), with which second part, if it fall, the first 
need not fall, we have* endeavoiured briefly to point out that the 
final end, with which morality is identified, or under which it is 
included, can be expressed not otherwise than by self-realization* 



76 Ethical Studies. 



under a difTerence, to be the same. It does suppose that 
what was in the mind is carried out ; and, unless you Ibf nk that 
something can be in the self and carried out by the self, without 
being of Uie nature of the self ^and you would find the duficuUies 
of such a view insuperable), then you must say that vcdition is 
self-realization 

But doubtless there are many persons who, not isuskig meti* 
physical or psychological questions, but standing merely on £M:ts, 
would say, ' Theory apart, surely when I act I do realize moie than 
myself I quite see that I may not do so ; but when I devote 
myself to a cause, and at my own e}q[>ense help to cany it out, 
how then am 1 realizing only myself?' 

The difficulty no doubt is very serious, and we can not pretend 
here to go to the bottom of it. But we may point out that, it 
arises from a preconception as to the self (i. e, the identilicatioo of 
it with the particular self), which can not be defended. It is dear 
that, on the one side, selves do exclude one another. I am not 
you, you are not he ; and, resting on this notion of exclusiveneai^ 
we go on to look at the self as a repellent point, or, as we call k, 
a mere individual. Biit, apart from metaphysics, facts soon com- 
pel us to see that this is not a reality, but an abstraction of our 
minds. For, \sHithout troubling ourselves about the relation of one 
person to others, as soon as we imagine this mere 'individual' 
acting, we see he must bring forth something, and, todotha^ must 
have something in him, must have a content ; and, if so, is not znj 
longer a bare point, which we now perceive to be a mere form. 
Hence we now try to give him a content which falls wholly within 
himself, and is not common to him with others, and, finding it im- 
possible to account for facts on tiiis supposition j suddenly we turn 
round and fiy to the other extreme, and now siqqx>se him to 
realize the sheer suppression of himself; not seeinjg that now we 
have abjured our premises without having refuted them, and ait 
face to face with the psychological difficidty of how a man is to 
bring out of himself what was not in himseUf and part of himsd^ 
and with the facts which testify that action without interest is a 
fiction. 

But if firom a better metaphysic, or attention to facts, we are 
willing to give up those metaphysical preconceptions we took for 
fact, and now see to be futile, then we may also see that, 
tfiough certainly one person can not be 'like Cerberus, three 
gentlemen at once,' yet that, beside being thus exclusive, none the 
less in respect of their content (and that makes them what they 
are) persons are not thus exclusive; that I am what I will and 
will what I am, that the content qualifies me, and that there iskio 



E S SA Y III. 

Pleasure for PleasiTre's Sake. 

IT is an old story, a theme too worn for the turning of sentences, 
and yet too living a moral not to find every day a new 
point and te break a fresh heart, tliat our lives are wasted in the 
pursuit of the impalpable, the search for the impossible and the 
unmeaning. Neithex tonday noi yesterdayi but throughout the 
whole life of the race, the complaint has gone forth that all is 
vanity ; that the ends for which we live and we die are * mere 
ideas,' illusions begotten on the bcain by the wish of the heart — 
poor phrases that stir the blood, until experience or reflection for 
a little, and death for all time, bring *with it disenchantment and 
quiet Duty for duty's sake, life for an end beyond sense, honour, 
and beauty, and love for the invisible — all these are first felt, and 
then seen to be dream and shadow and unreal vision. And our 
cry and our desire is for something that will satisfy us, something 
that we know and do not only think, something that is real and 
solid, that we can lay hold of and be sure of, and that will not 
change in our hands. We have said good-bye to our tianscendent 
longings, we have bidden a sad but an eternal farewell to the 
hopes of our own and of the world's too credulous youth; we have 
parted for ever from our early loves, fi-om our fancies and asjpira- 
tions beyond the human. We seek for tlie tangible, and we find 
it in this world ; for the knowledge which can never deceive, and 
that is the certainty of our own well-being; we seek for the 
palpable, and we feel it ; for the end which will satisfy us as men, 
and we find it, in a word, m happiness. 

Happiness ! Is that clinmx, or bathos, or cruel irony? Hap- 
piness is the end ? Yes, happiness is the end which indeed we 
all reach after ; for what more can we wish than that all should be 
well with us — ^thai our wants should be filled, and the desire of 



8o Ethical Studies. 



school alone, but round us in life, we see that to identify in the 
beginning pleasure and happiness, leads in the end to the confes- 
sion that there ' is nothing in it,- Mat/ioviav oXug &6\i¥aro¥ %fytu. 
The ' pursuit of pleasure ' is a phrase which calls for a smile or a 
sigh, since the world h^s learnt that, if pleasure is the end, it is ao 
end which must not be made one, and is found there most where 
it is not sought If to find pleasure is the end, and science is . 
the means, then indeed we must say 

Die hohe Kraft 

Der Wissenschafty 

Der ganzen Wdt verborgen I 

Und wer nicht denkt, 

Dem wird sie geschenkt, 

£r hat sie ohhe Sorgen.* 

Common opinion repeats its old song, that the search for plea- 
sure is the coarsest form of vulgar delusion, that if you want to be 
happy in the sense of pleased, you must not think of pleasure, 
but, taking up some accredited form of living, must make that 
your end, and in that case, with moderately good fortune, you will 
be happy; if you are not, then it must be your own fault ; but that, 
if you go further, you are like to fare worse. You had better n^ 
try elsewhere, or, at least, not for pleasure elsewhere. 

So far the weight of popular experience bears heavily against the 
practicability of Hedonism. But Hedonism, we shall be told, 
does not of necessity mean the search by the individual for the 
pleasure of the individual. It is to such selfish pleasure-seeking 
alone that the proverbial condemnation of Hedom'sm applies. 
The end for modem Utilitarianism is not the pleasure of one^ but 
the pleasure of all, the maximum of pleasurable, and minimum of 
painful, feeling in all sentient organisms, and not in my sentient 



^ Thus rendered in Mr. C Kegan Paul's version of Faust. 

The highest might » 
Of science quite 

Is from the world concealed I 
But whosoe'er 
Expends no care. 

To him it is revealed 



84 Ethical Studies. 



X 



certainly include the feeling of pleasure ; but if the alliemative is 
presented to us of lower functions with less pains and greater 
pleasures, or higher functions widi greater pains and less pleasures, 
then we must choose the latter. 

And the alternative is conceivable. If it is impossible in fact 
that a stage of progress could come, where by advancing further 
in the direction of what seems to it highest, humanity would 
decrease its surplus of pleasure (and I do not see how it is to be 
proved impossible),' — ^yet, at all events, the alternative can be 
brought directly before the mind. Advance in this direction (the 
higher) at the cost of pleasure, on the whole, after the pleasure of 
advance is counted in; advance in that direction (the lower), 
with the gain of pleasure, on the whole, even after the r^rets of 
the non-advance have been subtracted. The necessity for choice 
can be imagined ; and there is no doubt, on the one side, what the 
choice of the moral man would be ; there is no doubt, on the other 
side, what, if pleasure were the end, it ought to be. In such a case, 
what we think the most moral man and people would be therefore 
the most certain to act immorally, if Hedonism is morality. 

But these consequences, it will be urged, do not apply to 
modem Utilitarianism. That creed, we shall be told, whether for 

' Mr. MilPs scssertion that * most of the great positive evils of the world «re 
In themselves removable' {UtUitarianisMj p. 21), calls for no remark ; but the 
reader may perhaps think that Mr. Spencer^s doctrine of the Evanescence of 
Evil {Social Statics, p. 73, foL) should be noticed. His proof seems (so fieir as 
I understand it) to rest on the following assumptions : — 

(i) The natural environment of mankind is stationary. Can this be proved? 

(2) The spiritual environment of mankind is stationary. Not only can. this 
not be proved, but the opposite is, or ought to be, supposed by the doctrine of 
evolutioiL Progress must alter the environment 

(3) Apparently children are to be bom in harmony with their surroondings^ 
and remain so till death. 

(4) Moral evil, in the sense of moral badness, is to disappear. It will be 
impossible to oppose one's private good to the general good, an4 act according 
to the former. Self-will will- cease, and with it the pain it brings. 

All these assumptions, I think, are wanted. Nos. 3 and 4 represent absolute 
impossibilities, so far as I understand the matter. Na 2 is impossible on the 
supposition of continual progress. No other siq)positi(m can be proved to be 
true ; and No. i can not, I believe, be proved. How for Mr. Spencer's own 
teaching contradicts these assumptioiis is <^ no importance here. 



86 Ethical Studies. 






pleastire'; and whether that pleasure is to be got iii morality, or 
merely by morality, yet tlie getting of the pleasure is the ultimate 

/ aim. Pleasure for pleasure's sake is the end, and nothing else is 

I an end in any sense, except so far as it is,a means to pleasure. 

\ This, we repeat once more, is absolute^ irreconcileable with 
ordinary moral beliefis. And not only is Hedonism repudiated by 
those beliefs as immoral ; but as we saw, so far as the popular mind 

I has pronouncedupon it^ it is also declared to be mapi agticable. 

( These two points we wished to make clear, and with this resul^ we 

i^have finished the first or introductory part of our undertaking. 
It remains to ask in the second p}ace, Why \a it that pleasure^ 
seeking, as the search for my pleasure, is declared vain, and 
pleasure itself impalpable and misleading, a something which gives 
us no standard to work by, and xio end to aim at, no system to 
realize in our lives ? We must look for an answer to the nature 
of pleasure. 

Pleasure and pain are feelings, and they are nothing but fedr 
ings. It would perhaps be right to call them the two simple 
modes of x^^feeling ; but we are not here concerned with psych(>> 
logical accuracy. The point which we wish to emphasize, and 

. which we think is not doubtful, is that, considered psychically, 
they are nothing whatever but states of the feeling sel£ Tlds 
means that they exist in me only as long as I feel them, and only 
as I feel them, that beyond this they have no reference to any- 
thing else, no validity and no meaning whatever. They are 
Subjective' because they neither have, nor pretend to, reality 
beyond this or that subject They are as they are felt to be, but 
they tell us nothing. In one word, th^ have no content : they are 
as states of us, but they have nothing for us. 

I do not think it is necessary to dwell on this matter. Let us 
proceed to the application. The practical end, if it is to be a 
practical goal and standard, must present itself to us as some 
4 definite unity, some concrete whole that we can realize in our acts, 
and carry out in our life. And pleasure (as pain) we find to be 
nothing but a name which stands for a series of this, that, and 
the other feelings, which are; not except in the moment or 
moments that they are felt, which have as a series neither limitar 
tion of number, beginning nor end, nor in themselves any refer- 



88 Ethical Studies. 




Hedonism, or of the seeking happiness in pleasure. Happiness, 
for the ordinary man, neither means a pleasure nor a number of 
l^asures. It means in general the finding of himself or the 
satisfaction of himself as a whole, and in particular it means the 
realization of his concrete ideal of life. ' This is happiness, ' he s«ys^ 
not identifying happiness with one pleasure or a number of them, 
but understanding by it, ' in this is become fact ^at I hav^ at 
heart But the Hedonist has said, Happiness is pleasure, and 
the Hedonist knows that happiness i$ a whole. ^ How, then, if 
pleasures make no system, if they are a number of perishing 
particulars, can the whole that is sought be found in them ? It is 
< the old question, how find the universal in mere particulars? 
And the answer is the old answer, In their sum. The self is te 
be found, haj^iness is to be realized, in the sum of the moments 
of the feeling self. The practical direction is, get all jdeasures 
and you will have got happiness; and we saw above ite wdt 
known practical issue in weariness and dissatis^ction. 

The theoretical reason is simple. The sum, or the All of 
pleasures is a self-contradiction, and therefore the search for it 
is futile. A series which has no beginning, or, if a beginning, yet 
no end, can not be summed ; there is no All, and yet the All is 
postulated,, and the series is to be summed. But it can not be 
summed tiM we are dead, and then, if we have realized it, we, I 
suppose, do not know it, and we are not happy ; and before deadi 
we can not have realized it, because there is always more to come^ 
the series is always incomplete. 'What is the sum of pleasure^ 

* I am quite aware that with some Hedonistic writers ' happii^ess ' is nft 
distixiguished from ' pleasure. ' They are said to be simply the same. This is 
an outrage on language, whidi avenges itself in the confusion described below, 
foot-note, p. 109. But the aigument of the text is not affected bj it. If happinea 
3= pleasure, then ' get hapjHness '= * get pleasoie. ' What is pleasure ? It is a 
general name, and * get happiness ' will mean ' get a general name. ' But a 
general name is not a reality, and can not be got. The reality is the particular. 
' Get happiness ' will mean then, 'get some one pleasure.' Is that it ? No^ 
we are to get all the happiness we can. And so, after all our quibbling, ^ get 
happiness ' does mean ' get the largest possible sum or collection of pleasures.' 
Mr Green, in his Introduction to Hume's Treatise (IL 7), has made this so deai^ 
that one might have hoped it could not have been misunderstood. On (he 
whole subject of this Essay let me recommend the student to consult hinu 



90 Ethical Studies. 



unsatisfied and hands empty, driven on and beyond for ever in 
pursuit of a delusion, through a weary round which never advances. 
There remains, then, to Hedonism either the assertion that happi- 
ness is completed in one intense moment, or the confession that 
happiness is impossible, or the attempt to place it elsewhere than 
in the siim of pleasures. 

The first is the ' mdlo vivere comilto^ It is the giving up of 
any practical goal or any rule of life, and we are not called upon 
to consider it further. The second is inevitable, if happiness is 
equal to the sum, or the greatest possible amount, of pleasures; for 
one and the other are the same unreal fiction. The end, in this 
I sense, exists only in the head of the Hedonistic moral man. His 
morality is the striving to realize an idea, which can never be 
realized, and which, if realized, would be ipso facto annihilated 
He would feel it no objection to his theory, nor any comfort in his 
sorrow, if we said to him that, if happiness could be, then the 
tale would be made up, the end would be reached, the search 
would be over, and with it all morality ; for his morality is nothing 
to him as an end, but only as a means ; and the bitterness of his 
lot is filled up by the thought, that the means he does not care for 
are. always with him, and the end he lusts after away from him. 

■ I II I Ml II M ■— — ^1 ■ Mil ■■■» ■■ IPW ■ !■ — I ■ I ■ — ^— ^1— ^— — 1^— i^— ^MMW— ^—i ^MWi— ^— — ^— ^M^M^^^I^M^^— ^a^— i^— *^— ^^^^ 

if you please, The end is an illusion, and the effort worthless in itself, bat this 
particular effort gives a specific pleasure, which is the end. Bat if you do this, 
then you either (a) sink considerations of quantity, and the greatest happiness 
principle is givc^' up ; or (b) the same problem as above breaks oat with 
respect to the sum of specific pleasure^ 

If you admit that to get the 'greatest sum in life is unmeaning, then arises 
the question, Can you approximate, and make approximation the end ? I will 
not raise the question, Can you approximate to a confessed fiction? and to 
avoid that, let us say, The end is for me, at any given moment of life, to be 
having then the greatest possible number of units of pleasure. Here we fall 
into the dilemma given in the text. Either happiness is never reached, or 
there is no one who does not reach the most perfect happiness imaginable. 

(i) If happiness means the greatest possible number of units, then I never 
reach it Whatever I have is finite, and beyond every finite sum another unit 
is conceivable. 

(ii) i^ happiness means having all I can get, no matter how much or how little, 
then, given the truth of the common Hedonistic psychology, every man at every 
moment has absolute happiness. This is very obvious. ' Why so ?' comes the 
objection ; * if Mr A. had done otherwise, he would have had more pleasure.' 



()2 Ethical Studies. 



t 

1: 



1 

/ 



to our minds, and not a mere means. In short, we have got 
interests, and these are objects of desire not thought of as means 
to pleasure. We have adopted happiness in the vulgar sense, and 
really have given up Hedonism, as the consistent hunt after pleasure 
for pleasure's sake. Yet pleasure is still nominally the end, and 
hence the above view of life lies open to the following objections :— 

' You tell me that pleasure is my end ; and yet you tell me not 
to make it my end, but to make some accredited type of life my end, 
and take the pleasure as it comes from that I am to make getting 
pleasure my aim, though only by the way and at odd times. And 
in this manner you assure me that, in the long run, I shall secure 
the greatest amoimt of pleasurable feeling. It seems strange to 
have a mark one mu^t not look at, but I should not care for that if 
I were sure to hit Yet this is what I can not tell if I shaH da 
t see men die, having reaped for themselves a harvest of painfiil 
self-denial ; and the pleasure they made by it was but gleanings ftr 
others, when they were in the grave. Did they attain their end? 
- And I, since our life at any moment may cheat us, shall I put off 
a present certainty for the sake of a doubtful future ? ' 

The answer must be. That is true enough ; there is no certainty 
in life ; but still it is more reasonable to act on probabilities. Yon 
may die, but the chances are you will live. You had better sup- 
pose that it will be so, and, taking the rules for living, the monl 
' Nautical Almanack,* * direct your course by them ; for, if yoa live 
as l<»ig as most men, you will certainly in this way get the Qost 
pleasure. 

And perhaps this answer may satisfy. But a new and serious 
difficulty arises. It being admitted that life b to be r^^ulated on 
proixibilities, the question then occurs. Who is to judge of the pso- 
babilities ? The mond end is for me to get the most pleasure I 
can ; the m<Hal n^e is, ^ Act on the probability of your livings and 
therefore live for life as a whole ;' but this moral rule telh me 
nothing about the moral Almanack. Why is that to be to me a 
law? Wliat does it rest upon? What others have done and 
^und? Will others be resp<»isible for me, then? Am I to act 
upon my own qpinion, or am I to follow the Almanack even 

« Mill's Util^ p. 3& 



94 Ethical Studies. 



L 



good, or tfaej may not hold good ; I may keep them, or break 
them, whichever I tUnk most likely to issue in pleasure in my 
particular case. And it is not in earnest with its end. To aim at 
pleasure is not to get it, and yet the getting of it is a m<»ral dxAy. 
We must aim at it then by the way, without caring or trying too 
much to get it We are not to think about the rules, exc^t as 
servants which may be useful or worthless; and about the end 
perhaps the less we think the better. We are to please ourselves 
about the rules ; we are to please ourselves about the end ; for 
end and rules are neither end nor rules. Our positive aim in life 
is given up ; we may content ourselves, as a substitute, with the 
resolve to live our life as we find it, to sink useless theories, and 
follow the bent of our practical kanings; or, saddened at our 
disenchantment, may embrace the conclusion that, if pleasure can 
not be found, yet pain at least can be avoided. Not only in the 
school, but in life around us, does the positive b^;inning conduct 
to the negative result, to the making a goal of an absence, to die 
placing the end in a mere negation. 

j We have shown, in the fi^t place, the collision between pq[>ular 
lopinion and Hedonism as the search for pleasure; we huifi 
jshown, in the second place, the reason why the seeking of iv^ 
/pleasure gives no practicable end in Ufe. On boUi points we have 
dwelt, perhaps^ at unnecessary length ; but we have not yet done 
justice to the doctrine which makes virtue a means, not to my 
pleasiure, but to the pleasure of the ' whole sentient creaticm ' — ^to 
modem Utilitarianism, which may be called, I suppose, our most 
£Eishionable moral philosophy. This we must now notice, but 
only so far as our subject compels us. A more detailed examina- 
tion is not called for here, and, as we think, would not repay us 
anywhere. 

The end, as before, is the greatest amount of pleasurable feeling, 
yet not now in me, but in the sentient world as a whole. The 
first thing to observe is that (as we noticed above), if happiness 
means this, happiness is unrealizable — it can by no possibility 
be reached. If the greatest happiness, in the sense of the 
maximum of pleasure, was, as applied to the individual, a mere 
* idea,' or rather a self-contradictory attempt at an idea, which we 
saw by its very nature could not exist as a fact ; then a fortiori^ I 



96 Ethical Studies. 

directly opposed to popular morality. If, by being changed into 
pigSy we secured an absolute certainty of a greater amount of 
pleasure with a less amount of pain, we (I speak for the ordinary 
person) should decline the change, either for ourselves or the race, 
and should diink it our duty to do so. But, if we believe that the 
greatest amount of pleasure is ' the end, it would be our duty 
to strive after, and accept such a change. And some sudi choice 
is not a mere theoretical possibility. Unless Fourier be much 
belied, his scheme of 'phalansteries' was a practical proposal to 
seek for pleasure as the ^id, and all else as means. The ordinary 
moral man refuses to discuss such a proposal He repudiates the 
end, and the means with it. But the ' greatest amount of pleasure' 
doctrine must accept the end, and calmly discuss the means ; and 
this is not tiie moral point of view. It is surely imaginable (I do 
not say it is likely), that we might have to say to a large and im-^ 
moral majority, ' If I wanted to make you happy, which I do not, 
I should do so by pampering your vices, which I will not' 
(Stephen, Uberty^ p. 287.) 

So much for the morality of the theory. Let us now consider 
its practicability and consistency. The end, as the pleasure of all, 
is, like my pleasure, not something which I can apprehend and 
carry out in my life. It is not a system, not a concrete whole. 
There are no means included in it : there are none which, in them- 
selves, belong to the end. Wanting to know what I am to do, 
* Increase the pleasure of all ' gives me, by itself, no answer. * But 
there is no need that it should,' will be the reply. The experience 
of mankind has discovered the means which tend to inorease plea- 
sure; these are laid down in the moral Almanack (Mill, p. 36), 
and they may fairly be considered as included in the end 

Here I think that Hedonism does not see a most serious 
difficulty. It is the old question, What is the nature of the 
authority of the Almanack, and are its rules laws ? If they are 
Jaws, on what do they rest ? If they are not, are there any other 
moral laws ; and without laws can you have morality ? Let me 
explain the objection. You can not, I object to the Hedonist, 
make these laws part of the end, and identify them therewith \ 
for the end was clearly laid down as pleasurable feeling, and 
there is no essential coimection between that end and the laws 



98 Ethical Studies. 



in the teeth of my own judgment? I may be perfectly 
aware that acting on rules is, speaking generally, the way to 
reach the end I may even admit that the departure from rules 
in most cases has produced, and must produce, an effect detri- 
mental to the end. I might, if I pleased, for argument's sake 
admit (though it would be contrary to fact, and no one could 
ask for such an admission) that every previous departure from 
rules has been a failure, and has decreased the surplus. But 
now the matter stands thus : I have taken all pains to form 
an opinion, and I am quite certain that my case is an exception. 
I have no doubt whatever that in this instance the breaking of 
a rule will increase the surplus. To say that I am a fool 
does not touch the question ; to say that I must be mistaken 
does not touch the question ; to say that I ought not to tibink 
as I do, or ought not to act accordingly, begs the question. The 
moral end is clear ; I, after having thought over all considerations 
up to my lights, am clear as to the means. What right have 
you, what right has the world to tell me to hold my hand, 
to make your uncertain opinion the standard rather than the 
certain end ? How shall I answer for it to my own conscience * 
if I do ? What is this rule that is to come between me and my 
moral duty? Let us repeat our illustration. The rule says, 
Do not commit adultery. I wish to commit adultery. I am 
sure I do not want to please myself at all ; in fact rather the 
contrary. I am as positive as I can be of anything, that the case 
is either not contemplated by the rule, or, if it is, that the rule 
is wrong, that the proposed act must diminish the sum of 
the pain, and must increase the sum of the pleasure of the 
sentient world as a whole, and this too after all consequences 
thai ' I can reckon (and I can reckon no more) have been 
counted in. Is it immoral then to break the rule ; or rather 
is it not immoral to keep it, to sacrifice a real good to a mere 
idea? My conscience is clear; and my dreams will not be 
broken by * the groans of an abstraction.' (Mill, Dissert,, i. 21.) 

Now, if it be answered here that, on any theory of morals, 
' ■■ ■ I ■■ ■ — • — • — - — 1 — - — -' ■ 

' * And to my God/ I might add, against those who drag the Deity into the 
question. 



lOO Ethical Studies. 



\ to make possible, to justify, and even to encourage, an incessant 
1 practical casuistry ; and that, it need scarcely be added, is the 
I death of morality. Before I proceed, however, let me entreat the 
reader to remember that the question, Are Utilitarians immoral ? 
is one question, and the question. Is their theory immoral ? 
altogether another, and the only one which we are concerned with. 
And (2), if it were true that no other moral theory was in a 
happier plight, what are we to say but *so much the worse for all 
moral theories,' and not *so much the better for Hedonism.' 
Thpjnoral consciousness is the touchstone of moral theories, and 
^ ^vj2V^/^^^« moral consciousness, I appeal to it in every man, hsus laws 
^ -^hich are a great deal more than niles. To that consciousness 

* Do not commit adultery ' is a law to be obeyed ; it is not the 
prescription of a more or less questionable policy. It is not a 
means, which in the opinion of A, B, and C will or may conduce 
to an end other than itself, and in the opinion of D may or will 
not do so. Let the Hedonist refute thrice or four times over, 
if he pleases, his rival theories j but he does not thereby establish 
. his own, and is no nearer doing so than before. 
I I To proceed — the conclusion we have reached is that, supposing 
<f it to be certain that the end is the maximum surplus of pleasure in 
i the sentient world, that end gives no standard for morality, llie 
end 18 in itself most abstract and impalpable. The means are 
external and in themselves immaterial to the end ; and the fixing 
the reflation of means to end must always be matter of opinion ; 
in the last resort it is, and (what is most important) it ou^t to be, 
matter of my private opinion. As it turned out before, so here 
also the rules are not laws ; I can please. myself about them : and 
a standard which is no standard, a law which is no law, but which 
I may break or keep, which is at the mercy of changing judgment 
and fleeting opinion, is no practical basis for me to regulate my 
life by.» 

* To bring the matter home to the reader, T will prodtice'an example or two 
of cases where Hedonism gives no guidance. If in certain South Sea Islands 
the people have; not what we call * morality," but are very happy, is, it moral 01 
immoral to attempt to turn them from their ways ? If by an immoral act, 
which probably will not be discovered, I can defeat a stroke of pernicioas 
policy on a laxge scale, what am I to do ? Is prostitutian a good or a bad 



I02 Ethical S Indies, 



The Hedonist in his distress may turn himself in various 
directions. 

(i) He may say, * The end is not provable because too good to 

■ be provable. It is self-evident, and nothing else is more certain.' 

; But having noticed already that the moral consciousness repu- 

I diates the claim of his end to be the chief good, and it being clear 

that selfishness often in its practice, and sometimes in its theory, 

rejects its claim to be anything more than a means, I think we need 

not trouble ourselves with its pretence to self-evidence ; more 

especially as, according to the psychology of the ordinary Hedonist, 

to desire the end as such is a psychological impossibility. 

(2) The next resource is the Deus ex machina. Not only on a 
certain stage, but also with certain theorists the maxim seems to 
hold good, * When in trouble bring in the Deity.' God, we shall be 
told, wills the greatest amount of pleasure of the whole sentient 
creation, and therefore we ought to do so likewise. Now, even if I 
were capable of it, I am not disposed to enter into the speculative 
theology of our * inductive ' moralists ; I will say to them merely, 

Lasst unsem liengott aus dein Spass, 

and go on. 

(3) But now I have to meet no less an antagonist than Mr. 
Mill himself; and he has proved that the Utilitarian end is 
desirable. Let us hear him ; 

* No reason can be given why the general happiness is desirable^ 
except that each person^ so far as he believes it to be attainable, 

ground can he say I may not ? on what ground can he refuse to discuss the 
case ? On what ground can he blame me, if I take and act on a view which 
is other than his view ? 

' The beliefs which have thus come down are the rules of morality for the 
multitude, and for the philosopher until he has succeeded in finding better. 

That philosophers might easily do this, even now, on many subjects 

I admit, or rather earnestly maintain' (Mill, Util., p. 34). l^rom the 
author of the Essay on Liberty this should mean a good deal. If the philoso- 
pher may make new rules, I suppose he may modify old ones. And who is 
' the philosopher ' ? Are we (as proposed for the franchise) to have an exami- 
nation, passing in which shall entitle a man to try ' experiments in living * ? 
Or shall we leave it to private judgment ? ^Then I should like to know in these 
days of ' advanced thinking * who would not be a * philosopher,' and how 
many would be left in the 'multitude.' 



I04 Ethical Studies. 



sense. Ought is the feeling of obh'gation, and ' when the feeling 
ceases the obligation ceases.' The Utilitarian believes on psycho- 
logical grounds that pleasure is the sole desirable : he believes on 
the strength of his natural and moral instincts that he must live 
for others: he puts the two together, and concludes that the 
pleasure of others is what he has lo live for. This is not a good 
theoretical deduction,' but it is the generation of the Utilitarian 
monster, and of that we must say that its heart is in the right 
place, but the brain is wanting. 

Its heart, its ' natural sentiment,' does tell it. that its substance 
is one with the substance of its fellows; that in itself and by 
itself it is not itself at all, and has no validity except as a victent 
and futile attempt at abstraction. And yet if we deny thaJt an 
universal can be more than ' an idea/ If we are sure tliat the merely 
individual and the real are one and the same, and in particular that 
the self is exclusive of other selves, and is in this sense a mere 
individual ; and if further, for morality at all events, we can not 
do without something that is universal, something which is wider 
and stronger than this or that self—then here, as in all otiher 



' It is monstrous to argue thus : — * Because (f ) on psychological grounds it 
is c<;rtain that we can desire nothing but our own private pleasure ; because 

(2) on some other grounds something eUe (whatever it may be), sorocthii^ 
not my feeling of pleasure, something other than my private sdf, is desired 
and desirable ; therefore (3) this something eke which is desired and desir- 
able is the pleasure of others, since, by (i), only pleasure can be defied.* 
If we argue in this way, we may as well go a little further to—-' (4) and 
therefore we can and do desire something not our own private pleasure^ and 
therefore (i) is false, and therefore the whole argument disappears, since it 
is upoi> (i) that the whole rests.' 

1 am ashamed to have to examine such reascnmg, but it is necessary to do 
so, sinct it is common enough. Is it not palpable at 6rst sight, th«t(i) and 

(3) are X bsolutely incompatible, that each contradicts the other flatly ? You 
must choi»se between them, and, whichever you c)ioose, the proof of Utilitarian 
ism goes, l>ecause that springs from the unnatural conjunction of both. 

The only escape that I can see is to say in (2) that something is desirable 
though npt desired, and write 'not desired but deshable' for 'desired and 
desirable.* But not only is this perhaps altogether unmeaning, hut alto the 
conclusion now disappears ; yoti can get nothing from the premises. Because 
A is desired tmd B is desirable, it does not follow, I suppose, that a hash of 
A and B is desired and desirable. 



io6 Ethical Studies, 



higher and lower. The former are superior, the latter are inferior; 
and hence, in preferring the higher pleasures, we are true to 
Hedonism, and yet are at one with the moral consciousness. We 
must briefly examine this doctrine. 

It has two forms. One of these takes quality simply as quality ; 
the other takes quality in relation to quantity, and looks on it as 
the index or result of quantity. The latter, we shall find, keeps 
true to the principle of the greatest surplus of pleasure, but it 
says nothing new. The former leaves the principle imawares, and 
moves unknowingly to other ground, but can get no standing- 
place for morality. Let us first discuss the latter; but, before we 
begin, we must call attention to the phrases ' higher ' and * lower** 

Higher and lower (forgive me, dear reader) are 'relative': they 
are comparatives, and they hence mean more or less of something. 
Higher means nearer some top, or it means nothing. Lower 
means nearer some bottom, or it means nothing. This being 
established, when we talk of 'higher' and Mower' pleasure, we 
ought to know what our top and our bottom are, or else we risk 
talking nonsense. 

Next let me observe (and forgive me, if you can, reader) that 
top and bottom, as a rule, are ' relative * and depend on the way in 
which you look at the matter. If the top is the ' end,* you may put 
the end anywhere: benevolence is (morally) higher than selfish- 



feeling, not the whole of what is felt. Then we have to ask, Does this 'what 
is felt/ which qualifie. the pleasure^ and malces it of one sort and not of 
another, make part of the mere pleasure itself, as pleasure? Or have 
we to say, Pleasure is itself always one and the same, and differs only in 
degree ; sorts of pleasures are degrees of the same pleasure in reference to 
sorts of other feelings^ which, as such, are not pleasures as such? Or more 
briefly. Has pleasure any content in itself? If not, then il has no qualitative dis- 
tinctness in itself, but only by its reference to that which it goes with. Is not 
pleasure, as such, the abstraction of one element of a whole psychical state from 
that state ; and when so abstracted, are there differences oikind in it, or only of 
degree? Not wishing to give a positive opinion on this point, I have not 
introduced it into the text as affecting the argument. ' But the thoughtful 
reader will at once perceive its bearing. Hedonism, when if ceases to aim at 
pleasure as such and nothing but pleasure, is false to its principle and becomes 
incoherent But if pleasure, as such, is not qualitatively distinguishable, then 
ve must have regard to nothing but quantity. 



io8 Ethual Studies. 



\ 



tributes on the whole to the existence of a larger number of 
degrees of pleasure liere the principle of the greatest amount 
of pleasure is adhered to ; that is the top, and what approaches to 
it or contributes to it is nearer the top. But since the moral 
* higher' is here, as we see, the more pleasurable or the means 
to the more pleasurable, we come in tlie end to the amount, 
the quantity of pleasure without distinction of kind or quality, 
and having already seeu that such an end is not a moral end, 
we get nothing from the phrases * higher' and Mower' unless 
it be confusion. 

(2) The second view is that which distinguishes pleasures by 

their w^rif quality. The * higher' pleasure here is not the more 

V intense pleasure; it is not the pleasure connected with the 

maximum of pleasure on the whole without distinction of kind. 

It is the preferable kind of pleasure (Mill, 6?//., p. 12). 

The first point to be noticed is that our theory gives up and 
abandons the greatest amount of pleasine principle. If you are 
to piefer a higher pleasure to a lower without reference to quantity 
— then there is an end altogether of the principle which puts the 
measure in the surplus of pleasure to the whole sentient creation. 
fit is no use saying all pleasures are ends, only some are more 
{^ends. It is no use talking of ^estimation' and ^coropanson' 
(Mill, pp. 12, 17), You have no standard to estimate by, no 
measure to make comparisons with. Given a certain small 
{ quantity of higher pleasure in collision with a certain large 
quantity of lower, how can you decide between them ? To work ■ 
the sum you must reduce the data to the same denomination. 
You must go to quantity or nothing; you decline to go to 
quantity, and hence you can not get any result But if you 
refuse to work the sum, you abandon the greatest amount of 
pleasure principle. 

There is no harm in doing that : but what else have we to go 
to? The higher pleasures? And what are the higher pleasures? 
Wo find higher pleasure means nothing but the pleasure which 
those who have experienced both it and others do as a fact choose 
in preference. Higher then, as we saw above, has no meaning at 
all, unless we go to something otUside pleasure, for we may not go 
to quantity of pleasure. But, if we go outside pleasure, not only 



no Ethical Studies. 



we then I think are in good company, but in no better case. For 
an opponent will hold to the fact that he does knowingly prefer 
what is called bad to good, and will hence, by our argument, con- 
elude first that bad is really good, and next that nothing can be 
'^ either good or bad, since bad to one man is good to another. 
And if we, on the other hand, persist that the fact is impossible 
(I do not know how we are to prove it so), and that no one ever did 
or could choose what we call bad, when he had in his mind what 
we call good, then we identify immorality with ignorance, and 
moral obligation disappears. For every man not only does, but 
must do, the best on every occasion, so far as he knows it ; his 
knowledge is an accident which has nothing^ to do with his will ; 
he must act up to the ought, so far as he has an ought, and he can 
not do what he thinks is wrong. 

To proceed — the basis of our moral theory is now. There is a 
scale of pleasures ; some persons know all, and others only some ; 
but you necessarily choose the pleasures you know according to 
the scale. I e, g. know the alphabet of pleasures, always or some- 
times, up to M. ' Immoral man to choose M, when you should 
have chosen P or R or even X.' But I do not know what they 
are. * And therefore you are immoral, for I and a good many 
other people do.* But let us drop the matter here; on such 
a theory, the reader will assent, moral obligation is unmeaning. > 

^ At the risk of hypercriticism I will make one or two further remarks on 
Mill's view. According to it, pleasures must stand in a kind of order of 
merit, represented, let us say, by the letters of the alphabet All pleasures, 
because pleasures, are good in themselves. A pleasure is immoral only when 
taken where a higher was possible, now or as a consequence. Then eveiy 
pleasure is moral, because it has a supposable pleasure below it ; every 
pleasure is immoral, because there is always a supposable pleasure above it No 
man is moral, because his knowledge is limited, and he therefore can not 
always take the highest conceivable pleasure ; but if so, then all men are 
equally moral, for they all take the highest pleasure they know. Or, passing 
by this, let us suppose the pleasures- divided into two classes, higher and 
lower. If the lower are to be cpnsidered at all, then, as we have said, in the 
event of a collision the problem is insoluble, because what is not of the same 
denomination can not be compared. Let us suppose then that the lower are 
not to be considered, and we are left with the higher. Here the same pro- 
blem breaks out. For these pleasures are no system ; if you make the idea 
of a system your end, and regulate the pleasures by that, you have deserted 



112 Eihual Studies. 



may not, by means of these influences, be made to act on the 
human mind with ail the authority of conscience ' (p. 44). The 
feeling of obligation then, we see, does not refer itself essentially 
to anything in particular. And further,^ this sanction has no 
binding efficacy on those who do not possess the feelings it appeals 
to ' (p. 42). *• The sanction, so far as it is disinterested, is always 
in the mind itself, and ttie notion, therefore, of the transcendental 
moralists must be that this sanction will not exist in the mind, 
unless it is believed to have its root out of the mind, and that, if a 
person is able to say to himself, This which is restraining me and 
which is called my conscience, is only a feeling in my own mind, 
he may possibly draw the conclusion that when the feeling ceases 
the obligation ceases, and that, if he find the feeling inconvenient, 
he may disregard it and endeavour to get rid of it * (pp. 42, 43). 
This is a serious matter; and I should say that any theory which 
maintains that a man may get rid 'of his sense of moral obligation 
if he can, and that, if he does so, the moral obligation is gone, is as 
grossly immoral a theory as ever was published. Does Mr. Mill 
repudiate the doctrine? Not at all; he evidently accepts it, 
though he prefers not to say so. The passage goes on : * But is 
this danger confined to the Utilitarian morality ? ' etc. Now I am 
ashamed of repeating it so often, but J must entreat th€ reader not 
to have dust thrown in his eyes in tins way, and not to be dis- 
tracted by * transcendental moralists ' or any other bugbears. The 
question is, Is theory A true, or are we obliged to say that either 
theory A is false or the facts are a lie? The question is not, Have 
theories B arid C the same fault as A? When we have done with 
A, we will then, if we choose, go to B and C j and if they turn 
out all false, that does not prove one true/ These pleader's 
devices are in place in a law-court, but philosophy does not recog* 
nizethem. 

If then all that the moral 'ought' means is tliat I happen 
to have a feeling which I need not have, and that this feeling 
attaches itself now to one set of pleasiu'es and now to another set 
according to accident or my liking, would it not be better alto- 
gether to have done with the word, and, as some have done, 
openly to reject it and give it up, since already we have given up 
all that it stands for ? But if we give up the word, then we have 



114 Ethical Studies. 



We agree that happiness is the end; and therefor^ we say 
pleasure is not the end. 

We agree that pleasure is a good ; we say it is not the good. 
We agree (strange fellowship !) with the author of the Essay an 
Liberty in affirming the 8 flrao'/ ^x«? toW that <p<Kfiiv ; and therefore 
we dissent from a theory which give? the lie to the moral conscious- 
nesSy and whose psychological basis destrc^ and makes unmeaning 
fthe maxim. 

We agree to make the self-evolution of ourselves and of humanity 

; the end. We refuse to place progress in the greater or less amount 

iof 'grateful feeling.' We repeat the good old doctrine that the 

test of higher and lower can not lie in a feeling which accompanies 

the exercise of every function, but is to be found in the quality of 

the function itself. To measiure that, we are to go to our idea of 

man, and to his place in creation and his evolution in history. 

! In one single word, the end and the standard is self-realization, 

■and is not the feeling of self-realizedness. 

May we suggest, in conclusion, that of all our Utilitarians there 
is perhaps not one who has not still a great deal to learn from 
Aristotle's Ethics ? ' 



' Since the above was written Mr. Sidgwick's book has appeared. I am far 
from wishing to deny to it a certain value, but on the subject of Hedonism I 
can not honestly say more than that he seems to me to have left the question 
exactly where he found it As other people, however, seem to think other- 
wise, I am forced to de6ne my position against him. But I labour here under 
two difficulties, — the first, want of space ; the second, my inability to make 
sure of Mr. Sidgwick*s meaning. 

The latter arises in great measure from the character of the work. Ostensibly 
critical, it goes throughout upon preconceptions, which not only are not dis- 
cussed, but which often are not even made expUcit. With some of these we 
mu$t begm. 

(i.) It is. tacitly assumed that the incividual and the universal are two 
independent things (p. 473). Hence the tner^ individual is not (as with us) an 
abstraction in our heads, but a real existence. 

(2. ) The practical result of this dogmatic preconception is seen on p. 374. 
To find a man's ultimate end we are to suppose ' only a single sentient coiisdous 
being in the universe.' This supposition /r^supposes either that the .universe 
is real out of relation to all consciousness, or is real in relation to one finite 
consciousness. An author no doubt )ias a right to maintain these or any other 



}i6 Ethical Studies. 



pleA^ttfe. This means that he perceiyes two things, (i) that he desires his 
private pleasure ; (2) that he desires the reasonable. Put them tc^ther, and 
you get the argument ; (a) The reasonable is not my private pleasure. 
<b) Other people's pleasure is not my private pleasure. There/ore (c) other 
people's pleasure is reasonable. Or, if this is not meant, perhaps the assertion 
is that the isolated man sees two things t(^ther, both that his pleasure is the 
jreasonable end, and that not his pleasure, but pleasun* as such, is so. In that 
case would it not be better to say at once, ' I intuitively f^erceive that the 
Utilitarian conclusion is right ' ? for then the reply, ' But 1 do not,' would end 
the argument 

However Mr. Sidgwick may get to his conclusion, he has to make it good 
against two parties — (i) those who assert the r^ht and reasonable, but deny 
that it is pleasure ; (2) those who deny the right and reasonable, but assert 
pleasure as my private pleasure, (i) The first party (so far as I can represent 
them) have spoken already. We deny the intuition, and the reasoniJ^r we 
have sufficiently refuted by stating it ; and if we wished to do more, we should 
do well to press for some further account of the phrases ' objectively desirable,' 
' real end of reason,' &c If my pleasure is my sole end, if the objective is 
(also) my end, then I should say there is a hopeless contradiction in whidi 
we stick. (2) But Mr. Sidgwick's attitude towards Egoism is more instructive. 
Having first (after Butler) rightly denied the basis of Hedonism, viz. the 
assertion that I desire nothing but pleasiure, he throws himself repentant into 
the arms of the true faith, and sa3rs, ' Though as a fact other things are or 
seem to be desired, yet nothing but my pleasure is desirable,^ *My pleasure 
is the end.' Here we have Egoism. 'But,' says Mr. Sidgwick, 'the right 
and reasonable is objectively desirable.' 'Not so,' replies the Egoi&t. 'The 
objectively desirable is a fiction. The distinction of desire/ and.desiro^^ is 
wholly fallacious, unless "desirable" is a clumsy name for the means to 
what I desire. The end is tirhat I do desire, and that is just what I 
happen to like ; " reasonable " is what I correctly conclude is a means tp 
that; and as for "right" and "ought," if they are not a misleading 
way of saying this over again, they are as nonsensical as ^objective 
end of reason."' And against this Mr. Sidgwick, having left the only 
true line, has nothing to say, but that he hopes the Egoist will be good 
enough to admit that something is objectively desirable as an end. If the 
Egoist does so, he is ' suppressed ' certainly, and deserves to be. But will he 
do so ? I recommend the reader to peruse Stimer's book, Der Einsige und 
sein Eigenthum, 

Mr. Sidgwick asserts that only my pleasure is desirable, and that I desire 
this as objectively desirable. But (i) ^I desire my pleasure as mine in par- 
ticular, is it not a flat contradiction to say I desire it as not mine in particular? 
and (2) can I desire my pleasure as pleasure in general ? Is not that a pure 
fiction invented to support a weak compromise, — a fiction which neither of the 
parties opposed would, if they understood their position, attend to for a 
moment? Is my feeling pleased anything but my feeling pleased? Can 



Pleasure for Pleasure's Sake. 117 



you put the 'feding pleased' on the one side, and the 'my' on the other? 
I know but one theoiy on which this is possible, and that Is the view which, 
while it rqg^aids the distinctions of 'me' and 'ydu' as mere illusion or 
' Maja,' nevertheless maintains that the pleasure and pain are not mere illusion. 
Against this view I am not called on to aigue, and Mr. Sidgwick i3» I 
imagine, no more a friend to it than I am. 

I have criticized Mr. Sidgwick sharply, not from want of respect, bat because 
I must be brief and fear to be obscure. Whether I understand him or not, I do 
pot know; and with respect to what Mr. Bain has said on the same subject 
this again is my case. As to what he means' by ' disinterested action ' I have 
not the least idea. He speaks of * entering into the feelings of another being,' 
whidi, on his view, is. to me much as if he said, ' One bag of marbles enters 
into the marbles of another bag;', and again (Emotions, etc., ed. iii. p. 267), 
heftalks of ' pleasures whose nature is to take in other sentient beings,' which» 
again, is as if he said, ' Th«re are some marbles ^diose nature it is to take in 
other bags oi marbles.' Either these things are illusions or not If they 
are not, it seems to me they revolutionize the whole of Mr. Bain's 
pegrchology. If they are, I want to know whether and why we are to rest 
our Ethics upon them. What seems dear to me is this — Pleasure is the 
one end, or it is not* If it is not, then Hedonism goes. If it is, then 
my pleasure is my end. The pleasure of others is neither a feeling in 
me^ nor an idea of a feeling in me. If it seems to be so, this is a mere 
illusion. If what is not my feeling or its idea is my end, then the root 
of Hedonism is torn up. If so, the argument from the individual to the race 
disappears, because pleasure is tn>t the sole end of the individuaL 

In this plight, notliing is left to Hedonism but an appeal to the facts of 
sodety. If these show that th ogress so far involves increase of pleasure (and 
here, on the question of fact. Hedonism has to meet Pessimism), that does not 
prove it will be aiwajrs so ; still less does it prove that the idea of increase of 
pleasure is the moving cause of progress, and even less that it oughi to be. 



NOTE TO ESSAY III. 

There are two questions suggested by the above — (i) Is pleasure 
good, and if so, in what sense is it goo^? (2) Is pain evil, and in 
what way is it evil ? Let us take the latter first 

Considered psychically pain is an evil, because it is the feeling 
of the negation of the self or life. The good is the affirmation of 
the self, and hence pain is counter to the good. If we are asked 
to suppose a pain which is a feeling of negation, but not a felt 
negation, /. e, which is not really in any way the negation of func- 
tion or the cause of such negation, .and are then asked. Is such 
hypothetical pain an evil ? we can not say it would he, because we 
can say nothing about it at all. It seems to us to be an unreal 
abstraction. Real pain is the feeling of the negatedness of the 
self, and therefore, as such, it is bad. It is bad also, because it 
further acts in the direction of the general lowering of life. Both 
as felt diminution of the good, and as the cause of further 
diminution, it is an evil. 

If, where pain comes from negated function, but the function 
is supposed to be indifferent, we are asked. Is then the pain bad ? 
we reply that it is so, because the whole self is negated; /feel 
pain, and am therein lowered directly or indirectly. 

In passing we may ask. Is then pain on the whole an evil ? We 
can not say that. We know that pain often is a good ; and we 
should have a right to say of any pain that it was an absolute evil, 
only if we knew that it was pain per se, ue. mere negation. Bui 
that is what we can not know. Speaking generally, you can noi 
have mere pain, the negative without the positive; painlessness 
means death ; pain appears to involve reaction; and again, wherever 
there is an active conscious self, it seems there must be pain. To 
say that pain is an absolute evil, we should have to answer in the 
affinnative the question. Can you have the positive without the 
negative, or the negative in this form? And I do not see 
how we can give this answer. We know that pain is often 
a stimulus; without some pain little is produced — ^perhaps 
nothing. We know that the pain of the part is often the 
good of the whole ; that that good demands sometimes 
even the destruction of the part The life of the whole is the 



ISO Ethical Studies. 



apart from some present function or activity pleasure could exist 
The questions to be answered would be, how &r in what seem 
the most, or mere, ^passive pleasures' of sense function is con- 
cerned ; how £u: in contemplative pleasures activity of contempla- 
tion comes in ; how far, lastly, the very feeling of self, which is 
pleasure, in being felt implies an activity. To a tired man, for 
instance, the pleasure of lying down in bed is great; he wants no 
more ; it is complete affirmation of his will, perfect ^tisfiednes& 
But as he grows more and more sleepy, does his pleasure increase? 
When he is asleep does he feel pleasure? On die other hand, is 
he less satisfied? and if so, in what- sense? If his pleasure has 
been diminished or has ceased, is not that because the reaction, 
the function of the feeling centre lias ceased or been diminished; 
and is not that reaction what is felt idien pleasure is felt ? 

Let us, however, pass by this question, as without answering it 
decidedly we hope to show how far pleasure is good. Roughly 
speaking, we can distinguish pleasures of activity and passivity ; 
pleasure which comes with our doing something, and pleasure 
which we do nothii^ to get' Let us ask with each class when 
pleasure is good, and when it is bad, if it is bad We will first 
take pleasures of activity. 

{i) {a) When are they good? When the activity is good the 
pleasure is good, because the. two are a psychical whole. You 
cannot have the function without the pleasure: tlie absence of 
the pleasure would weaken and perhaps destroy the function, and 
also generally lower the self to tike detriment of other functions ; 
whereas presence of pleasure tends to the heightening of functions 
in general, beside its own function. — ^Then what activities are 
good? Detail is impossible; but, generally, those which directly 
realize the good will in a living man, or which indirectly Increase 
life and so the possibility of a higher realization of the good in a 
living man or men. Or rather the two can not be divided, life 
is a whole ; and life is not only the condition of the good, but may 
be taken as another name for it 'The end of life is life,' and 
(speaking generally) what heightens life heightens the good 
Pleasure then is not a means to the good, but is included in it 
and belongs to it. 

{b) What pleasures of activity are bad then? for admittedly 
there are such. The pleasure is bad when the activity is bad ; and 
the activity is bad when, in its immediate or ulterior results, it lowers 



' We need not distinguish further the pleasure of havii^ something done to 
n!«. It will, I think, be covered by oui answer, and il is a somewhat com- 
plicated state of mind. 



T22 Ethical Studies. 



that too much is bad. But between enough and too much^ as in 
the pleasures of eating and drinking, there comes a neutral 
territory. It is probably good for you to have say not less than 
two glasses of wine after dinner. Six on ordinary occasions is per- 
haps too many ; but, as to three or four, they are neither one way 
nor the other. If asked, is the pleasure of these intermediates bad ? 
we say No. If asked, is it good ? I do not think we can say Yes. 
If asked, is it not a positive addition to the surplus of pleasure ? I do 
not think we can say No. We should put the whole question aside 
as idle. We should say the pleasure is neither good nor bad, or at 
least we do not know that it is. So far the ordinary man. 

Now whether this margin is scientifically defensible, whether 
there must not be a point say of number of drops or fractions of 
drops, which is good, and beyond which acme you fall at once 
into badness, we shall not discuss. It is not an easy question ; 
and fortunately the answer matters nothing to our argument. But 
for the ordinary man clearly some pleasures are neither good nor 
bad, and this because (for him) they do neither harm nor good. 

(2) To come now to the question. Is any pleasure a gQod per 
sef we are in a position, I think, to answer it in the negative. 
Ordinarily it does sound absurd to say mere pleasure is not an 
end, since at fir^ sight it seems desirable. The foregoing, how- 
ever, should have removed this difficulty. We have seen that the 
pleasures pronounced desirable are so because they are inseparable 
from and heighten life ; and hence these pleasures are not pleasures 
p^r se. And further, if the doctrine of the indifferent margin were 
indefensible (we believe that it is not so), then no pleasure could be 
a pleasure /^r 5^, and our present question would disappear. 

But supposing that there exist pleasures which are only pleasur* 
able and, so to speak, end in themselves, then these may certainly 
be desired, but i think they are not considered desirable or good. 
And, if that is so, then, in denying that pleasure in itself is good, 
we are not in collision with the ordinary consciousness. To illus- 
trate. Having had three glasses of wine, I may say I think so much 
was desirable. I certainly may have another if I like, and I suppose 
it will give me a certain amount of pleasure and no pain, or lessen- 
ing of pleasure, now or afterwards. Is the surplus good ? Is it 
desirable? Clearly, though a pleasure, and though not bad, 
it may not be good; and such is the case, I think, with all 
innocent pleasures, as e. g. those of physical exercise, sports and 
games, sight-seeing, &c If this be so, however, then common con-, 
sciousness does not hold pleasure per se to be desirable or good. 
And as for philosophical arguments, what and where are they ? 

We have now seen that pleasure is good so far as inseparable 



124 Ethical Studies. 



Thirdly (c) if you maintain more pleasure and higher function 
to be on the whole inseparable, you may at once be challenged as 
to the truth of that assertion ; and if you are not allowed to 
assume it, you can not assume that miore plesusure is ah end. 

But allowing you for the present to assume that higher function 
and more pleasure go together, so that to have one is to have the 
other, why (I would ask), if these two are one whol^ will yoo 
persist in isolating one side of that whole ; since surely it is tho 
less knowable side ? The coincidence of the two is an extremely 
general truth; it need not be true for this man or generation; and, 
if so, how is it possible to aim at progress except b^ aiming at 
function ? The function must (on the whole affid in the end) 
cany the pleasure with it, and it is surely a more definite mark- 
Is it not preposterous to think of aiming at more pleasure, in 
the end and on the whole (not in any future that we can see), 
in order, by making this the end, to get along with it some 
higher function which we know nothing about ? Is it not U, g,) 
hopelessly vague, if we want to find out what the divine will is, 
to attempt to define it by some idea of pleasure in the end and 
on the whole, and not to ourselves or any one else in any time 
that we can see ? Is it not less vague to study that will by con- 
sidering the previous evolution of it, and to accept what seems a 
higher step in that evolution, as an end in itself? Must we not 
say that this going together of function and pleasure is a mere 
general faith, which we can not verify by experience in every 
case, and so can not use to determine our particular course ? 

Of course one sees quite clearly that, generally speaking, it is a 
good thing to aim at the increasing of pleasure and diminisJiing of 
pain ; but it is a good thing because it increases the actuality and 
possibility of life. To make function the end justifies and 
demands the increase of pleasure and gives you all you can fairly 
ask in that way. But to say more pleasure is all the end, and Mq 
a mere accompaniment to that, is another matter. 

And again, when we are doubtful what is higher in progress, 
it may be a safe course to increase pleasure and diminish pain, 
because that heightens the good function we have. But to look 
on the increase of pleasure as the mark to aim at always and simply, 
when we aim at progress, is again a very different course. 

But, leaving this subject, we must observe that we have 
no right to assume that higher function and more pleasure 
do on the whole go together. We have bitter proof that in 
particular cases and stages of progress this is not the case, and 
so are forced to separate the two in our minds. We can 
imagine fimction widiout pleasure, since we have eaq)erienced 



126 Ethical Studies. 



pleasure. But I do not think that the Utilitarian wishes to teach 
that doctrine ; and whatever he wants to teach he can teach with- 
out making pleasure the end. To repeat it once more, if self- 
realization is the end, then pleasure is a relative end and good, 
because a condition without which good is impossible ; and hence 
to increase pleasure is good, though we need not add * for pleasure's 
sake/ And unhappiness is evil, if it is a psychical state which 
tends to exclude the good, and may be treated as an evil, which it 
is our bounden duty to fight against, without our being forced to 
say * it is the evil itself, and there is no evil beyond it' 

If again it is objected that the end is vague and has no con- 
tent, the following Essays will to a certain extent, I hope, remove 
the objection. Here we may reply that to take human progress 
as the end, and lo keep our eye on past progress, is not an usele^ 
prescription ; and if any one wants a moral philosophy to tell him 
what in particular he is to do, he will find that there neither is nor 
can be such a thing, and at all events will not find it in Hedonism. 
One word on the unconscious or latent Hedonism of society in 
its progress. That is no argument for making pleasure the end, 
as the reader who has followed me so far will, I trust, at once see. 
Taking for granted the asserted fact, that society tends to identify 
what brings pleasure with what is good, we altogether deny the 
Hedonistic inference. If society tends to realize life more highly 
and perfectly, it is obvious that it must also realize the conditions 
of such life. The fact that life can not exist without pleasure does 
not prove pleasure to be the end of life, unless we are prepared to 
say (the illustration is not a good one) that because as a man rises 
in society he wears better clothes, therefore to be dressed like a 
gentleman was the conscious or unconscious end of his advance- 
ment. Of course it might have been, but do we say tihat it was? 
Or, again, a mother may have desired her daughter's health not 
for her healtli's sake, but for the sake of her looks ; but would it 
not be an unfounded inference to conclude that it must have been 
so ? The argument we have noticed holds against asceticism, but 
we must entreat the reader to bear in mind that the opposite of a 
false view may be every whit as false ; and that you could argue 
from the denial of asceticism to the assertion of Hedonism only if 
you had previously made good your alternative, your * either-^r * 
of the two. 

Finally (as we have already gone beyond all bounds), let us 
make a remark on the phrase ^ Utilitarianism.' It is a thoroughly 
bad name, and misleads a great many persons. It does indeed 
express the fact that, for Hedonism^, virtue and action are not the 
end, but are useful as mere means to something outside them. 




£SSA V IV. 

Duty for Duty's Sake. 

IN our answer to die question, Why should I be monil ? we 
found that, explicitly or by implication, all Ethics pre- 
supposed something which is the good, and that this good (what- 
ever else may be its nature) has always the character of an en^ 
The moral good is an end in itself, is to be pursued for its 

^^'own sake. It must not be made a means to something not 
itself. We have now seen further that pleasure is not the 
good, is not the end; that, in pursumg pleasure as such, we 
do not pursue the good. Hedonism we have disirissed, and 
may banish it, if we please, from our sight, while we turn to 
develope a new view of the good, another answer to the question, 
What is the end ? In Hedonism we have criticiied a onesided 
view; we shall have to do here with an opposite extremity of on©- 

^ sidedness. The self to l>e realized before was the self or selves as 
'a maximum quantity or number of particular feelings: in the 
theory which awaits us the self to be realized has a defect which 
is diametrically opposed to the first, and yet is the same defect 
Its fault is the opposite, since for mere particular it substitutes 
mere universal ; we have not to do with feelings, as this and that, 
but with a form which is thought of as not this or thatr Jfe fault 
is the same fault, the failing to see things as a whole, and the 
fixing as rea l one eleme nt which ye t is xmreal when apart fipom the 
jtHerT" Xn'a word, we nnd mbotli a onesided view, ana their 

' common vice may be called abstractness. So much by way of 
anticipation, and now we must betake ourselves to our task. 
' What is the moral end ? We know already in part what it is 

* What follows, the reader must be warned, is very far from being meant to 
be a statement of Kant's main ethical view; as such it would be neithei 



130 Ethical Studies. 



is the end. It does- not say what will is the end ; and we want to 
know what the good will is. 

What is the good will ? We may call it indifferently the Free 
will, or the Universal will, or the Autonomous will, or finally the 
Formal will. 

(i) It is the universal will. The very notion of the moral end 
is that it should be an end absolutely, not conditionally. It is not 
an end for me without being one also for you, or for you and me 
and not for a third person ; but it is, without limitation to any this 
or that, an 'end for us all. And so the will, as end, is not the par- 
ticular will of particular men, existing as this, that, and the other 
: series of states of mind. It is the same for you and me, and, in 
the character of our common standard and aim, it is above you 
; and me. It is thus objective and universal. 

(2) It is the free will. It is not conditioned by, it does not owe 
its existence and attributes to, it is not made what it is by, and 
hence it can not (properly speaking) be called forth by, anything 
which is not itself. It exists because of itself and for the sake of 
itself. It has no end or aim beyond itself; is not constituted or 
determined by anything else. 

Hence we see it is not determined by anything in particular. 
For, as we saw it, was universal ; and universal means not par- 
ticular; and so no more than a verbal conclusion is wanted to 
show that, if determined by something particular, it would be 
determined by something not itself. And this we l*ave already 
taken to be false. 

(3) It is autonomous. For it is universal and an end to itself 
The good will is the will which wills the universal as itself and 

; itself as the imiversal, and hence may be said to be a law to itself 

I and to will its own law. And, because it is universal, hence in 

willing what is valid for itself it wills what is valid for alL It 

legislates universally in legislating for itself, since it would not 

legislate for itself did it not legislate universally. 

(4) And lastly, it is formal. For, in willing itself, it wills the 
universal, and that is not - particular. Any possible object of 
desire, any wished-for event, any end in the shape of a reisult to 
be attained in the particular existence of myself or another, all are 
this or that something: they have a content, they are * material.' 



132 Ethical Studies. 



self forcing the sensuous self, and here first can we attach a 
meaning to the words ' ought * and * duty .' ' 

If our self were nothing beyond the series of its states, if it were 
nothing above and beyond these coexistent and successive pheno- 
mena, then the word ^ ought ' could have no meaning. And again, 
if our self were a pure, unalloyed will, realizing itself apart from 
a sensuous element^ the word ^ oi^ht ' would still be meaningless. 
lit is the iantagonism of the two elements in one subject which is 
ithe essence of the ought. The ought is a command; it expresses 
something which neither simply is or is not, but which both is and 
is not ; something, in short, which is to be. Further, when ad- 
dressed to myself, it puts before me something which is to be done, 
and which I am to do. A command is the doing of something by 
me, which doing is willed by a will, not me, and presented as such 
by that will to me.' In the ought the self is commamled, and 
that self is the sensuous self in me, which is ordered, and which, 
if I obey, is forced by the non-sensuous formal will which stands 
above the empirical element, and, equally with that, is myself. 
The ought is the command of the formal will, and duty is the 
obedience, or, more properly, the compulsion of the lower self by 
thai will, or the realization of the form in and against the recal- 
citrant matter of the desires. 
^ Duty must be for duty's sake, or it is not duty. It is not enough 
that my acts should realize and embody the universal form, and so 
far be conformable thereco. It is not enough that the act com- 
manded be done by me. The end, as. we have seen, is not a 
result beyond and outside the activity. It is not the realizedness 



' In a lower sense we can use, and do use, ' oo^t ' outside the moral woild. 
Wherever 'law' has a meaning, 'oi^ht' has also a meaning. Where the par- 
ticular phenomenon does not answer to its conception, we say ' ought. ^ ^A 
man (e*g^ "ought '* to have two eyes.' ' Ice of that thickness " ought" to h{iTe 
borne.' Somethii^ has interfered in the\:ase, so that the fact is nor an exhibi* 
tion of the law. But the moral ' ought ' means much more than this. There 
the particular fact or phehMmenon is this or that willy which, moreover, is or 
can be aware ofUsposUum as snch in relation to the law or general conception. 
This makes an enormous difference. 

*A command may contain a promise or threat It i^ not of its essence that 
it should do so. 



134 Ethical Sttidies. 



/ever act embodies a self-contradiction is immoral. Whatever act 
/is self-consistent is legal. Whatever act is self-consistent, and is 
/done for the sake of realizing self-consistency, and for the sake of 

/ nothing else, is moral. This is simple, this is practical ; and there 
surely is cause for thankfulness in the arrangement of things which 
has placed the standard and test of all that is most important, of 
everything which really is important, in a form wbich even the 
unlettered can understand, and a child can apply. 

' Stated as we have stated it above, the theory of duty for duty's 
sake carries with it little or no plausibility. Criticism of it may 
appear to the reader., to be superfluous, but nevertheless it will 
repay us to see briefly sec forth the inner contradictions in which 
it loses itself, and which destroy its claim to practical value. 

The theory contradicts itself; and, reduced to a simple form, 
the contradiction is as follows : — Self-realization is the end, and 
the self to be realized is the negative of reality ; we are to realize, 
and must produce nothing real. Let us explain. The good is 
the will. The will is the carrying of the inner mind out into the 
world of fact ; it is the identity of thought and existence, the 
process in which the ideal passes over into reality, and where the 
content on both sides is the same, subject always to the diversity 
of the t\vo different elements. Mere thought is not will — that is 
the inner side only. Mere existence in time and space, or time, 
is not will — that is the outside only. For will we want both sides, 
and both sides in one. And from the above we see at once 
that, if the two sides are to correspond, there must be some cor- 
respondence in the nature of what they contain ; and, starting here 
from the side of existence, we may say, you can realize nothing, 
unless that which you are to realize have in it already the char- 

I acter which distinguishes reality. 

j I To realize means to translate an ideal content into existence, 



' As I said before, this is not a statement of the Kantian view ; that view is 
far wider, and at the same time more confused. As a system it has been 
annihilated by Hegel's criticism (i. 335, foil. ; and ii. 437, foil.), to which*^! 
owe most of the following. Compare also Schopenhauer, iv. Grundproblemc, 
p. 117-178. But the reader must bear in mind that only I am responsible for 
what I say. 



136 Etkkal Studies^ 



opposite of particular. * Realize the particular ' means, fealize the 
opposite of the universal ; and so, if you particularize the universal, 
you hav6 not realized //, L e. not the universal you had to realize; or, 
in other words, if you materialize the form, it is no longer formal 
On the other hand, * realize* means materialize, it means partic ularize. 
'Realize' asserts the concrete identity of matter and form whitlT" 
* formal will* denies; and we are left with the hopeless con* 
tradiction of an order, which tells us in one breath that only the 
formal (/. e, the «^/-real) will is good, and that for the sake df the 
good we are to realize {i.e. unformalize) the formal will 

Or less abstractly — ^we have two elements in one subject, the 
sensuous nature and the pure wilL The pure will is to be kept 
pure; it is for its sake that we act, and action consists in the 
forcing of the sensuous nature. Th e ord er is he re , * Real ize 
the pure will in the se nsuous natur^ ^* ^nd the contradiction is ^ 
above. 'I'he pure will means the non-sensuous will, and * realize 
ll'^lrheans, translate it into an element which destroys its essence. 
The formal will, when realized, is no longer formal, is material- 
ized, is sensusdized, is no longer pure. If you do not want 
to sensualize the will, why do you say make it real ? What is 
the use and meaning of realizing ? Or if you say the will is and 
means realization, then do you not see that the will means the 
identity of the pure and sensuous nature, that it implies the two 
sides, and that 'formal will' says, 'have both sides, but be sure 
you have only one ; ' or, more briefly, that pure or formal will is 
nonsense? 

In its simplest form the contradiction is this. * Realize non- 
contradiction ' is the order. But * non-contradiction' = bate 
form : ' realize ' =. give ccmtent to : content contradicts form 
withoiit content, and so 'realize non-cbntradiction' means 'realize 
a contradiction'.' 

(2) In our remarks on the self-contradiction of the principle. 



' The hopeless inconsistencies of the dualistic moral theory, the standing 
contradictions of its moral theology and practical postulates generally, arc 
beyond our subject . The whole point of view has been criticized in the 
second of the passages from Hegel referred to above. 

We may remark in passing a contradiction involved in the doctrine of the 



138 Ethical Studies. 



your duties ; that general doing good may mean doing no good 
in particular, and so none at all, but rather perhaps the contrary 

I of good. Everybody knows that the setting out, whether in 
religion, morals, or politics, with the intent to realize an abstrac- 
tion, is a futile endeavour ; and that what it comes to is that either 

k you do nothing at all, or that the particular content which is 

) necessary for action is added to the ab3traction by the chance of 
circumstances or caprice. Everybody suspects, if they do not feel 
sure, that the acting consciously on and from abstract principles 
means self-deceit or hypocrisy or both. 

(3) A more psychological consiaeration leads us still to the 
futility of duty for duty^s sake. A will which does not act is no 
will, and every act is a particular event : an act is this or that act, 
and an act in general is nonsense. But how can a formal act 
be this or that act? Even where the abstraction has been 
specialized into definite * material ' ends and aims to be accom- 
plished, yet even there for the particular volition the special 
circumstances of time, place, &c. are wanted. They may not be 
essential to the act ; they may make no practical difference to the 
content If I have resolved to kill a man in a certain way, the 
place, time, &c. are psychically necessary for the particular 
act of killing, but they may not enter into the essence of the act 
(So it is with one's ordinary duties.) The more specialized and 
materialized the previous intent, the less is added to it by the 
particular circumstances; and the less specialized the contenr, 
the more is added. If I run out into the street to kill a man, 

; chance » decides who it is I kill. So with duty. If I intend to 
do duty generally, chance decides what duty I do ; for what falls 
outside the preconceived intent is chance, and here everything 

i falls outside saving. the bare form. 

To act you must will something, and something definite. To 
will in general is impossible, and to will in particular is never to 
will nothing but a form. It must at best be to will a chance case 
of the form, and then (speaking psychologically) what moves is 
chance (desire). The bare form can not move. Will, when one 

^ Chance, that is to say, relatively to my intent ; because my intent does 
not essentially involve the particular person killecL 



X40 Ethical Studies. 



^ 



^ 



priation a negation, an exclusion. In this sense not only is the 
definite content in contradiction with die form, but it also in 
itself involves contradiction. 

This, however, is not the meaning of the rule of non-contradic- 
tion. The meaning of that is diat you must not posit a deterxni- 
nation and with it its own negation. You must not have an act 
which embodies the rule to negate anything^ for that is a self- 
contradiction. A rule * negate A ' contradicts itself, for if A is 
negated you can not negate it * Steal property ' is a contradic- 
ti on, for it des troys property, and with it possibility of theft. 

We have no need here to push further a metaphysical argument 
against this view, for it supplies us at once with a crushing instance 
against itself. The essence of morality was a similar contradic- 
tion.* * Negat e the s ensuous self' But if the sensuous self U 
negated, possibility of morality disappears. . Morality is thus 
as inconsistent as theft 'Succour the poor' both negates and 
presupposes (hence posits) poverty : as Blake comiodly says, 

Pity would be no more, 

If we did not make somebody poor. 

If you are to love your enemies, you must never be without them ; 
and yet you try to get rid of them. Is that consistent ? In short, 
every duty which presupposes something to be negated is no 
duty ; it is an immoral rule, because self-contradictory. 

No rule must be stated negatively then, but all positively; and 
then comes the very serious question, whether there is any rule 
vrhich can not be stated positively. The canon is an empty form, 
* Let A be A' It is a tautology ; and it requires no great skill to 
put anything and everylhing into the form of a tautology, and so 
to moralize it ' Let property be,' * let no -property be ; ' Met law 
be,' *let no-law be;' *let love be,' Met hate be;' *be brave/ 
*be cowardly;' 'be kind,' 'be cruel,' *be indifferent;' Met 
succour be,' * let no-succour be ; ' or riches, or poverty, or pleasure, 
or pain. Wheie is the canon? It is nowhere. Poverty is 
poverty, and is an affirmative tautology. Hate is hate, as much as 

' Hegel {loc, cit,) poshes this ruthlessly even against the postulate of immor^ 
tality. In what immediately follows we are drawing from him very largely. 



142 Ethical Studies. 



tions that, in many cases, you might as well have left it alone 
altogether. We certainly have laws, but we may not be able to 
follow them all at once ; and to know which we are to follow is 
a matter of good sense which can not be decided any other way. 
One should give to the poor — in what cases and how much? 
Should sacrifice oneself — in what way and within what limits ? 
Should not indulge one's appetites — except when it is right 
Should not idle away one's time — except when one takes one's 
pleasure. Nor neglect one's work — but for some good reason. 
All these points we admit are in one way matter of law ; but if. 
you think to decide in particular cases by applying some " cate- 
gorical imperative," you must be a pedant, if not a fool.' 

Ordinary morality does not hold to each of its laws as inviolable, 
each as an absolute end in itself. It is not even aware of a colli- 
sion in most cases where duties clash ; and, where it perceives it, 
and is confronted with collisions of moral laws, each of which 
it has been accustomed to look on as an absolute monarch, 
so to speak, or a commander-in-chief, rather than as a possible 
subordinate officer, there it does subordinate one to the other, and 
feels uneasiness only in proportion to the rarity of the necessity, 
and the consequent jar to the feelings. There are few laws a 
breach of which (in obedience to a higher law) morality does not 
allow, and I believe there are none which are not to be broken in 
conceivable (imaginable) circumstances, though the necessity of 
deciding the question does not practically occur. According to 
ordinary morality (the fact is too palpable to be gainsaid), it is quite 
right to speak falsely with intent to deceive under certain circum- 
stances, though ordinary morality might add, * I don't call that a 
lie.' It is a lie; and when Kant and others maintained that it must 
always be wrong to lie, they forgot the rather important fact that 
in some cases to abstain from acting is acting, is wilful neglect of 
a duty, and that there are duties above truth-speaking, and many 
offences against morality which are worse, though they may be less 
painful, than a lie. So to kill oneself, in a manner which must be 
called suicide, may not only be right but heroic ; ' homicide may 



' The story of the imprisoned Italian who, knowing that he was being 
drugged to disorder his intellect and cause him to betray his comrades, opened 



144 



Ethical Studies. 



overruled, and that its form and its absolute imperative are imprac- 
ticable. What after all remains is the acting for the sa]:e of a 
good will, to realize oneself by realizing the will which is above 
us and higher than oiurs ; and the assurance that diis, and not the 
self to be pleased, is the end for which we have to live. But as 
to that which the good will is, it tells us nothing, and leaves us 
[with an idle abstraction. 



146 Ethical Studies. 



because real in no particular content, or always and everj'where 
realized, because equally reconcileable with any content And so, 
33 before with happiness, we perceived that morality could have no 
existence, if it meant anything more than the continual assevera- 
\ tion of an empty formula. And, if we had chosen, we might 
have gone on to exhibit the falsity of asceticism, to see that the 
} self can noj J^ig jrealized as its own mere negation, since moraliT 
jir^iactice, is will to do somemiffgj iir^df-ainrmation : an3 that a 
wnrfo deny one s will is not self-realization, but rather is, stnctly 
speaking, a psychical impossibility, a self-contradictory illusion. 
And the possibility, again, of taking as the self to be realized the 
self which I happen to have, my natural being, and of making 
life the end of life in the sense that each should live his life as he 
happens to find it in his own nature, has been precluded before- 
hand by the result derived from the consideration of the moral 
consciousness, viz. that morality implies a superior, a higher sel^ 
dr at all events an universal something which is above this or that 
self, and *o above mine. And, to complete the account of our 
negations, we saw further, with respect to duty for duty's sake, that 
even were it possible ^as it is not) to create a content from the 
formula, and to elaborate in his manner a system of duties, yet 
even then the practice required by the theory would be impossible, 
anr? so too morality, since in practice particular duties must collide ; 
and the collision o^ duties, if we hold to duty for duty's sake,, is the 
destruction of all duty, save the unrealized form of duty in general. 
But let us view this result, which seems so unsatisfactory, from 
the positive side; let us see after all with what we are left We have 
V / self-realization left as the end, the self so far being defined as neither 
a collection of particular feelings nor an abstract universal The 
self is to be- realized as something not simply one or the other ; 
it is to be realized further as will, will not being merely the natu ral 
will, or the will'as it'Eapperi? to'exTsf and' findsltself he re or ther e, 
but the will as the ~^bd? wiir,~/. /. the "will tftat realizes an end 
which is above this or that man, sUpenor to mem, and capable of 
confronting them in the shape' of' a law or an ought This 
superior something further, which is a possible law or oug^t to the 
individual man, does not depend for its existence on his choice or 
opinion. Either there is no morality, so says the moral conscious- 



\ 



148 Ethical Studies. 



living soul that penetrates and stands fast in the detail of actual 
existence. It is real, and real for me. It is in its affirmation that 
I affirm myself, for I am but as a ' heart-beat in its system.' And 
I am real in it; for, when I give myself to it, it gives me the 
fruition of my own personal activity, the accomplished ideal of 
my life which is happiness. In the reahzed idea which, superior 
to me, and yet here and now in and by me, affirms itself in a 
,i " continuous process, we have found the end, we have found self- 

(realization, duty, and happiness in one ; — yes, we have found 
ourselves, when we have found pur station and its duties, oar 
Function as an organ in the social organism. 

S-. 

' Mere rhetoric,' we shall be told, ' a bad metaphysical dream, 
a stale old story once more warmed up, which can not hold its 
own against the logic of facts. That the state was prior to the 
individual, that the whole was sometimes more than the sum of 
(he parts, was an illusion which preyed on the thinkers of Greece. 
But that illusion has been traced to its source and disp^ed, ojid 
is in plain words exploded. The family, society, the state, and 
generally every commimity of men, consists of individuals, and 
there is nothing in them real except the individuals. Individuals 
have made them, and make them, by placing themselves and by 
standing in certain relations. The individuals are real by them- 
selves, and it is because of them that the relations are real. They 
make them, they are real in them, not because of them, and they 
would be just as real out of them. The whole is the mere sum of 
the parts, and the parts are as real away from the whole as they 
are within the whole. Do you really suppose that the individual 
would perish if every form of community were destroyed? Do 
you think that anything real answers to the phrases of universal 
and organism? Everything is in the organism what it is out, and 
the universal is a name, the existing fact answering to which is 
particular persons in such and such relations. To put the matter 
shortly, the community is the sum of its parts, is made by the 
addition of parts ; and the parts are as real before the addition as 
after ; the relations they stand in do not make them what they are, 
but are accidental not essential to their being; and, as to the 
whole, if it is not a name foi the individuals that compose it, is 



1 50 Ethical Studies. 



their organic structure and the assertion of the whole body as of 
paramount importance in comparison with any of the members, then 
they must fall back on their metaphysic. And the point we wish 
here to emphasize is this, that their metaphysic is mere dogmatism. 
It is assumed, not proved. It hi^s a right to no refutation, for 
assertion can demand no more than counter-assertion ; and what 
is affirmed on the one side, we on the ether side can simply deny, 
and we intend to do so here. 

A discussion that would go to the bottom of the question, What 
is an individual ? is certainly wanted. It would certainly be de- 
sirable, showing first what an individual is, to show then that 
' individualism ' has not apprehended that, but taken an abstraction 
for reality. But, if I could do that (which I could not do), this 
would not be the place ; nor peiiiaps should I have to say very 
much that has not been said before, and has been not attended to. 

But we are not going to enter on a metaphysical question to 
which we are not equal ; we meet the metaphysical assertion of 
the * individualist ' with a mere denial ; and, turning to facts, we 
will try to show that they lead us in another direction. To the 
assertion, then, that selves are ' individual ' in the sense of exclu- 
sive of other selves, we oppose the (equally justified) assertion, 
that this is a mare fancy. We say that, out of *^heory, no such 
individual men exist ; and we will try to show from fact that, in 
fact, what we call an individual man is what he is because of and 
by virtue of community, and that communities are thus not mere 
names but something real, and can be regarded (if we mean to 
keep to facts) only as the one in the many. 

And to confine the subject, and to keep to what is familiar, we 
will not call to our aid the life of animals, nor early societies, nor 
the course of history, but we will take men as they are now ; we 
will take ourselves, and endeavour to keep wholly to the teaching 
of experience. 

Let us take a man, an Englishman as he is now, and try to 
point out that, apart from what he has in common with others, 
apart from his sameness with others, he is not an Englishman — 
nor a man at all ; that if you take him as something by himself, he 
is not what he is. Of course we do not mean to say that he can 
not go out of England without disappearing, nor, even if all the 



I $2 Ethical Studies. 



while we yet maintain the previous dogma, 'resemblance' is 
brought in, — 2l conception which (I suppose I need not add) is 
not analyzed or properly defined, and so does all the better. 
Against these assertions I shall put some others, viz. that identity 
and diversity, sameness aiid difference, imply one another, and 
depend for their meaning on one another ; that mere diversity is 
nonsense, just as mere identity is also nonsense ; that resemblance 
or likeness, strictly speaking, falls not in the objects, but in the per- 
son contemplating (likening, ver-gleichend) ; that * is A. really like 
B ? ' does not mean • does it seem like ? ' It may mean * would it 
seem like to everybody ? ' but it generally means * is there an 
" objective identity " ? Is there a point or points the same in both, 
whether any one sees it or not ? * We do not talk of cases of 
'mistaken likeness;' we do not hang one man because he is 
* exactly like ' another, or at least we do not wish to do so. We are 
the same as we were, not merely more or less like. We have the 
same faith, hope, and purpose, and the same feelings as another 
man has now, as ourselves had at another time, — not understand- 
ing thereby the numerical indistinguishedness of partioriar states 
and moments, but calling the feelings one and the same feeling, 
because what is felt is the same, and not merely like. In short, 
so far is it from being true that ' sameness ' is really * likeness,' 
that it is utterly false that two things are really and objectively 
'like,' unless that means 'more or less the same.' So much by 
way of counter-assertion ; and now let us turn to our facts. 

The * individual ' man, the man into whose essence his com- 
munity with others does not enter, who does not indude relation 
to others in his very being, is, we say, a fiction, and in the light of 
facts we have to examine him. Let us take him in the shape of 
an English child as soon as he is bom ^ . for I suppose we ought 
not to go further bacL Let us take him as soon as he is sepa- 
rated from his mother, and occupies a space clear and exclusive 
of all other human beings. At this time, education and custom 
will, I imagine, be allowed to have not as yet operated on him or 
lessened his ' individuality.' But is he now a meie * individual,' in 
the sense of not implying in his being identity with others ? We 
can not say that, if we hold to the teaching of modem physiology. 
Physiology would tell us, in one language or another, that even 



;i54 Ethical Studies. 



that aptitudes are developed, and are latent in the child at birth ; 
and that it is a very different thing, even apart from education, to 
be born of civilized and of uncivilized ancestors. These * civilized 
tendencies,' li we may use the phrase, are part of the essence of 
the child : he would only partly (if at all) be himself without them ; 
he owes them to his ancestors, and his ancestors owe them to 
society. The ancestors were made what they were by the society 
they lived in. If in answer it be replied, * Yes, but individual 
ancestors were prior to their society,' then that, to say the least of 
it, is a hazardous and unproved assertion, since man, so far as 
history caui trace him back, is social ; and if Mr. Darwin's con- 
jecture a6 to the developement of man from a social animal be 
received, we must say that man has never been anything but 
social, and society never was made by individual men. Not, if 
the (baseless) assertion of the priority of individual men were 
allowed, would that destroy our case ; for certainly our more 
immediate ancestors were social ; and, whether society was manu* 
factured previously by individuals or not, yet in their case it 
certainly was not so. They at all events have been so qualified 
by the common possessions of social mankind that, as members 
in the organism, they have become relative to the whole. If 
we suppose then that the results of the social life of the race 
are present in a latent and potential form in the child, can we 
deny that they are common property ? Can we assert that they 
are not an element of sameness in all ? Can we say that the 
individual is this individual, because he is exclusive, when, if we 
deduct from him what he includes, he loses characteristics which. 
make him himself, and when again he does include what the 
others include, and therefore does (how can we escape the con- 
sequence?) include in some sense the others also, just as they 
include him ? By himself, then, what are we to call him ? I 
confess I do not know, unless we name him a theoretical attempt 
to isolate what can not be isolated ; and that, I suppose, has out 
of our heads no existence. But what he is really, and not in mere 
theory, can be described only as the specification or particular- 
ization of that which is common, which is the same amid diversity, 
and without which the ' individual ' would be so other than he is 
that we could not call him the same. 



156 Ethical Studies. 



them in indelibly He grows up in an atmosphere of example and 
general custom, his life \iidens out from one little world to 
other and higher worlds, and he apprehends through successive 
> stations the whole in which he lives, and in which he has b'ved 
i Is he now to try and develope his * individuality,' his self which 
lis not the same as other selves? Where is it? What is it? 
'Where can he find it? The soul within him is. saturated, is 
filled, is qualified by, it has assimilated, has got its substance, 
has built itself up from, it is one and the same life with the 
C\ universal life, and if he turns against this he turns against himself; 
I if he thrusts it from him, he tears his own vitals ; if he attacks it, 
1 he sets his weapon against his own heart He has found his life 
in the life of the whole, he lives that in himself, ' he is a pulse- 
beat of the whole system, and himself the whole system/ 

* The child, in his character of the form of the possibility of a 
moral individual, is something subjective or negative ; his growing 
to manhood is the ceasing to be of this form^ and his education 
is the discipline or the compulsion thereof. The positive side 
^ and the essence is that he is suckled at the breast of the universal 
Ethos, lives in its absolute intuition, as in that of a foreign being 
first, then comprehends it more and more, and so passes over into 
the universal mind.* The writer proceeds to draw the weighty 
conclusion that virtue ' is not a tronbling oneself about a peculiar 
and isolated morality of one's own, that the striving for a positive 
morality of one's own is fiitile, and \r\. its very nature impossible 
of attainment ; that in respect of morality the saying of the wisest 
men of antiquity is the only one which is true, that to be moral is 
to live in accordance with the moral tradition of oneVcountiy ; 
and in respect of education, the one true answer is that which a 
Pythagorean gave to him who asked what was the best education 
for his son, If you make him the citizen of a people with good 
institutions.' ' 

But this is to anticipate. — So far, I think, without aid from meta- 
physics, we have seen that the 'individual' apart ftxjm the 
community is an abstraction. It is not anything real, and hence 
not anything that we can realize, however much we may wish to 

» Hegel, L 389. 



V- 



158 Ethical Sttidies. 

! makes it In short, man is a social being ; he is real only because 
he is social, and can realize himself only because it is as social that 
he realizes himself. The mere individual is a delusion of theory ; 
and the attempt to realize it in practice is the starvation and 
mutilation of human nature, with total sterility or the production 
of monstrosities. 

Let us now in detail compare the advants^s of our present 
view with the defects of * duty for duty^s sake.' The objections we 
found fatal to that view may be stated as follows : — (i) The uni- 
versal was abstract. There was no content which belonged to it 
and was one with it ; and the consequence was, that either nothing 
could be willed, or what was willed was willed not because of the 
universal, but capriciously. (2) The universal was ' subjective.' It 
certainly gave itself out as ' objective,' in the sense of being inde- 
pendent of this or that person, but still it was not real in the v/orld 
It did not come to us as what wasy it came as what (merely) was 
to be, an inner notion in moral persons, which had not power 
to c^rry itself out and transform the world. And self-realization, 
if it- means will, does mean that we put ourselves forth and see 
ourseJves actual in outer existence. Hence, by identifying our- 
selves with that which has not this existence, which is not master 
of the outer world, we can not secure our self-realization ; since, 
when we have identified ourselves with the end, the end may still 
remain a mere inner end which does not accomplish itself, and so 
does not satisfy us. (3) Thie universal left a part of ourselves out- 
{ side it. However much we tried to be good, however determined 
I we were to make our will one with the good will, yet. we never 
succeeded. There was always something left in us which was in 
j contradiction with the good. And this we saw was even necessary, 
because morality meant and implied this contradiction, unless we 
accepted that form of conscientiousness which consists in the 
simple identification of one's conscience with one's own self 
(unless, /. ^., the consciousness of the relation of my private self to 
myself as the good self be degraded into my self-consciousness of 
my mere private self as the good self); and this can not be, if we 
are in earnest with morality. There thus remains a perpetual con- 
tradiction in myself, no less than in the world, between the * is to 



i6o Ethical Studies. 



itself the particulars of all lives, and here and now in my life has 
this and that function in this and that case, in exercising which 
through my will it realizes itself as a whole, and me .in it 

(2) It is 'objective;' and this means that it does not stand 
over against the outer world as mere * subject * confronted by mere 
* object' In that sense of the words it is neither merely * objec- 
tive ' nor merely * subjective ; ' but it is that real identity of subject 
and obiectwhich, as we have seen, is the only thing that satisfies 
our desires, ... The inner side does exist, but it is no more than 
the inside ; it is one factor in the whole, and must not be separ- 
ated from the other factor ; and the mistake which is made by the 
(morality which confines itself to the individual man, is just this 
attempt at the separation of what can not be sepattited. The 
inner side certainly is a fact, and it can be distinguished from the 
rest of the whole ; but it really is one element of the whole, depends 
on the whole for its being, and can not be divided from it Let 
^ ^us explain. The moral world, as we said, is a whole, and has two 
\ sides. There is an outer side, systems and institutions, from the 
family to the nation ; this we may call the body of the moral 
world. And there must also be a soul, or else the body goes to 
pieces; every one knows that institutions without the spirit of 
them are dead. In the moral organism this spirit is in the will of 
the organs, as the will of the whole which, in and by the organs^ 
carries out the organism and makes it alive, and which also (and 
this is the point to which attention is requested) is and must be 
\felt or known in each organ as his own inward and personal will. 
It is quite clear that a nation is not strong without public spirit, 
and is not publicnspirited unless the members of it are public- 
spirited, /. e, feel the good of the public as a personal matter, or 
have it at their hearts. The point here is that you can not have 
the moral world unless it is willed ; that to be willed it must be 
willed by persons ; and that these persons not only have the moral 
world as the content of their wills, but also must in some way be 
aware of themselves as willing this content This beingin wardl] 
aware of ones elf as willin g the go od will falirin"tIie"S5i 3eQi 
moral whole : we may call it the soul : and it is the sphere of per* 
IS&nai molality," or morality i n the narrower s ense of the consaous- 
ness of the relation of my private self "to the inwaSly presented 



1 62 Ethical Studies. 



\ 



ourselves (or into itself). The outer universal which I have been 

taught to will as my will, and which I have grown to find myself 

in, is now presented by me inwardly to myself as the universal 

which is my true being, and which by my will I must realize, if 

\ lieed be, against my will as this or that man. So this inner un'- 

^ Wersal has the same content as the outer universal, for it is the 

\ Jouter universal in another sphere; it is the inside of the outside. 

\ There was the whole system as an objective will, including my 

station, and realizing itself here and now in my function. Here is 

the same S)rstem presented as a will in me, standing above my will, 

which wills a certain ai.t to be done by me as a will which is one with 

the universal will. This universal will is not a blank, but it is filled 

by the consideration of my station in the whole with reference to 

habitual and special acts. The ideal self appealed to by the moral 

man is an ideally presented will, in his position and circumstances, 

which rightly particularizes the general laws which answer to the 

general functions and system of spheres of the moral organism. 

That is the content, and therefore, as we saw, it is concrete and 

filled. And therefore also (which js equally important) it is not 

X^merely * subjective.* 

If, on the inner side of the moral whole, the universal factor 
were (as in would-be morality it is) filled with a content which is 
not the detail of the objective will particularizing itself in such and 
such functions, then there would be no true identity of subject 
and object, no need why that which is moral should be that which 
is real, and we should never escape from a practical postulaU, 
which, as we saw, is a practical standing contradiction. But if, as 
we have seen, the universal on the inside is the universal on the 
outside reflected in us, or (since we can not separate it and our- 
selves) into itself in us ; if the objective will of the moral organism 
IS real only in the will pf its organs, and if, in willing morally, we 
will ourselves as that will, and that will wills itself in us, — ^then we 
must hold that this universal on the inner side is the will of the 
whole, which is self-conscious in us, and wills itself in us against 
the actual or possible opposition of the false private self. This 
being so, when we will morally, the will of the objective world wills 
itself in us, and carries both us and itself out into the world of 
the moral will, which is its own realm. We see thus that, when 



164 Ethical Studies. 



infinite process, an unending * not-yet ' ; a continual ' not ' with an 
everlasting * to be/ or an abiding * to be ' with a ceaseless * not' 

From this last peevish enemy we are again delivered by ' my 
station and its duties/ There I realize myself morally, so that 
not only what ought to be iii the world is, but I am what I ought 
to be, and find so my contentment and satisfaction. If this were 
not the case, when we consider that the ordinary moral man is 
self-contented and happy, we shouJd be forced to accuse him of 
immorality, and we do not do this ; we say he most likely might 
be better, but we do not say that he is bad, or need consider him- 
self so. Why is this ? It is because ' my station and its duties ' 
teaches us to identify others and ourselves with the station we 
fill ; to consider that as good, and by virtue of that to consider 
others and ourselves good too. It teaches us that a man who 
does his work in the world is good, notwithstanding his faults, if 
his faults do not prevent him from fulfilling his station. It tells 
us that the heart is an idle abstraction^ we are not to think of it, 
nor must we look at our insides, but at our work and our life, and 
say to ourselves. Am I fulfilling ray appointed function or not ? 
V Fulfil it we can, if we will : what we have to do is not so much 
better than the worTa that we can not do it ; the world is there 
waiting for it ; myduties are my jj^ts.. On the one hand, I am 
not likely to be much better than the world asks me to be, on the 
other hand, if I can take my place in the world I ought not to be 
discontented. Here we must not be misunderstood ; we do not 
say that the false self, the habits and desires opposed to the good 
will, are extinguished. Though negated, they never are all of them 
entirely suppressed, and can not be. Hence we must not say that 
any man really does fill his station to the- full height of his 
capacity; nor must we say of any man that he can not perform 
his function better than he does, for we all can do so, and should 
try to do so. We do not wish to deny what are plain moral facts, 
nor in any way to slur them over. 

How then does the contradiction disappear? It disappears 
by my identifying myself with the good will that I realize in the 
world, by my refusing to identify myself with the bad will of my 
private self. So far as I am one with the good will, living as a 
member in the moral organism, I am to consider myself real, and 



i66 Ethical Studies. 



now is not distinct from his ' artificial self.' He is related to the 

i living moral system not as to a foreign body ; his relation to it is 
* too inward even for faith/ since faith implies a certain separation. 
It is no other-world that he can not see but must trust to : he feels 
himself in it, and it in him ; in a word, the self-consciousness of 
himself is the self-consciousness of the whole in him, and his will 
is the wi)^ which sees in him its accomplishment by him ; it is 
the free will which knows itself as the free will, and as this beholds 
its realization and is more than content 

The non-theoretical person, if he be not immoral, is at peace 
with reality; and the man who in any degree has made this point 
of view his own, becomes more and more reconciled to the world 
and to life, and the theories of * advanced thinkers ' come to him 
more and more as the thinnest and most miserable abstractions. 
He sees evils which can not discourage him, since they point to 
the strength of the life which can endure such parasites and 
flourish in spite of them. Li the popularizing of superficial views 
inclines him to bitterness, he comforts himself when he sees that 
they live in the head, and but little, if at all, in the heart and life ; 
that still at the push the doctrinaire and the quacksalver go to the 
wall, and that even that too is as it ought to be. He sees the true 
account of the state (which holds it to be neither mere force nor 
convention, but the moral organism, the real identity of might and 
right) unknown or * refuted,' laughed at and despised, but he sees 
the state every day in its practice refute every other doctrine, and 
do with the moral approval of all what the explicit theory of 
^ scarcely one will morally justify. He sees instincts are better and 
' stronger than so-called 'principles.' He sees in the hour of need 
what are called * rights ' laughed at, * freedom,' the liberty to do 
what one pleases, trampled on, the claims of the individual trodden 
under foot, and theories burst like cobwebs. And he sees, as of 
old, the heart of a nation rise high and beat in the breast of each 
one of her citizens, till her safety and her honour are dearer to 
each than life, till to those who live her shame and sorrow, if such 
is allotted, outweigh their loss, and death seems a little thing to 
those who go for her to their common and nameless grave. And 
he knows that what is stronger than death is hate or love, hate 



1 68 Ethical Studies. 



I ( 



viduaJizes itself, is in its reality interlaced with the action of all 

The work of the individual for his needs is a satisfaction of the 

("Jl needs of others as much as of his own ; and he attains the satis- 

) faction of his own only through the work of the others. The 
individual in his individual work thus accomplishes an universal 
work — he does so here unconsciously ; but he also further accom- 
plishes it as his conscious object : the whole as the whole is his 
work for which he sacrifices himself, and from which by that very 
sacrifice he gets again his self restored. — Here there is nothing taken 
which is not given, nothing wherein the independent individual, 
by and in the resolution of his atomic existence, by and in the 
negation of his self, fails to give himself the positive significance 
of a being which exists by and for itsel£ This unity — on the one 
side of the being for another, or the making oneself into an 
outward thing, and on the other side of the being for oneself-^this 
universal substance speaks its universal language in the usages and 
laws of his people : and yet this imchaiiiging essence is itself 
nought else than the expression of the single individuality, which 
seems at first sight its mere opposite ; the laws pronounce nothing 
but what every one is and does. The individual recognizes the 
substance not only as his universal outward existence, but he 
recognizes also himself in it, particularized in his own individuality 

, and in that of each of his fellow-citizens. And so in the universal 

(mind each one has nothing but self-certainty, the assurance of 
finding in existing reality nothing but himsetf. — In all I contem- 
plate independent beings, that are such, and are for themselves, 
only in the very same way that I am for myself ; in them I see 
existing free unity of self with others, and existing by virtue of 
me and by virtue of the others alike. Them as myself, myself 
as them.' 



' Let me ilhistrate from our great poet : — 

So they loved, as love in twain 
Had the essence but in one ; 
Two distincts, division none : 
Number there in love was slain. 

Hearts remote yet not asunder ; 
Distance, and no space was seen- 



170 Ethical Studies. 



I The truth of individualism is saved, because, unless we have 
intense life and self-consciousness in the members of the state, the 
whole state is ossified. The truth of despotism is saved, because, 
unless the member realizes the whole by and in himself, he fails 
to reach his own individuality. Considered in the main, the best 
communities are those which have the best men for their members, 
and the best men are the members of the best communities. 
Circle as this is, it is not a vicious circle. The two prdi^ms of 
the best man and best stat e are two sides, two dist inguishabl e 
aspects of the one problem, how TolgaitZe "in human nature the 
perfect unity of hbinogenei^anE^pec^ when we see 

that each of these without the other is unreal, then we see that 
(speaking in general) the welfare of the state and the welfare of 
its individuals are questions which it is mistaken and ruinous to 
separate. Personal morality and political and social institutions can 
not exist apart, and (in general) the better the one^he better the 
other. The community is moral, because it realizes personal 
f^morahty; personal morality is moral, because and in so far as it 
realizes the moral whole. 

It is here we find an answer to the complaint of our day .on 
the dwindling of human nature. The higher the organism (wc 
are told), the more are its functions specified, and hence narrowed. 
The man becomes a machine, or the piece of a machine ; and, 
though the world grows, * the individual withers.* On this we 
may first remark that, if what is meant is that, the more centralized 
the system, the more narrow and monotonous is the life of the 
member, that is a very questionable assertion. If it be meant 
that the individual's life can be narrowed to * file-packing,' or the 
like, without detriment to the intensity of the life of the whole, 
that is even more questionable. If again it be meant that in 
many cases we have a one-sided specification, which, despite the 
immediate stimulus of particular function, implies ultimate loss of 
life to the body, that, I think, probably is so, but it is doubtful if 
we are compelled to think it always must be so. But the root 
of the whole complaint is a false view of things, which we have 
briefly noticed above (p. 73). The moral organism is not a mere 
anin:ial organism. In the latter (it is no novel remark) the mem- 
ber 18 not aware of itself as such, while in the former it knows 



172 Ethical Studies. 



4 ■ 
■ » 
1-. 



the true idea of man; in other words, by realizing man as an 
infinite whole (p. 68). This realization is possible only by the 
individual's living as jnember in a higher life, and this higher life 
is slowly developed in a series of stages. Starting from and on 
the basis of animal nature, humanity has worked itself out by 
gradual advances of specification and systematization ; and any 
other progress would, in the world we know, have been impossible. 
The notion that full-fiedged moral ideas fell down from heaven is 
contrary to all the facts with which we are acquainted. If they 
had done so, it would have been for their own sake ; for by us they 
certainly could not have been perceived, much less applied. At 
any given period to know more than he did, man must have been 
more than he was ; for a human being is nothing if h« is not the 
son of his time ; and he must realize himself as that, or he will not 
i do it at all. 

Morality is * relative,' but is none the less real. At every stage 
there is the solid fact of a world so far moralized. There is an 
objective morality in the accomplished will of the past and present, 
t a higher self worked out by the infinite pain, the sweat and blood 
f of generations, and now given to me by free grace and in love and 
'; faith as a sacred trust It comes to me as the truth of my own 
i nature, and the power and the law, which is stronger and higher 
; than any caprice or opinion of my own. 

' Evolution,' in this sense of the word, gives us over neither to 
chance nor alien necessity, for it is that self-realization which is 
the progressive conquest of both. But, on another understanding 
of the term, we can not help asking. Is this still the case, and is 
* my station ' a tenable point of view? 

Wholly tenable, in the form in which we have stated it, it is 
not. For if, in saying Morahty has developed, all we mean is that 
something has happened different from earlier events, that human 
society has changed, and that the alterations, so far as we know 
them, are more or less of a certain sort ; if * progress ' signifies 
that an advance has been set going and is kept up by chance in 
an unknown direction ; that the higher is, in short, what is and 
what before was not, and that what will be, of whatever sort it is, 
will still be a st^p in progress; if, in short, the movement of 
history towards a goal is mere illusion, and the stages of that 



174 Ethical Studies, 



of realization is evolution through stages, and hence existence in 
some one stage which is not final ; here, on the other hand, all 
morality is * absolute/ because in every stage the essence of man 
is realized, however imperfectly ; and yet again the distinction of 
right in itself against relative morality is not banished, because, 
from the point of view of a higher stage, we can see that lower 
stages failed to realize the truth completely enough, and also, 
mixed and one with their realization, did present features contrary 
to the true nature of man as we now see it Yet herein the 
morality of every stage is justified for that stage ; and the demand 
for a code of right in itself, apart from any stage, is seen to be the 
asking for an impossibility. 

The next point we come to is the question. How do I get to 
know in particular what is right and wrong ? and here again we 
fmd a strangely erroneous preconception. It is thought that 
moral philosophy has to accomplish this task for us ; and the con- 
clusion lies near at hand, that any system which will not do this 
is worthless. Well, we first remark, and with some confidence, 
that there can not be a moral philosophy which will tell us what 
in particular we are to do, and also that it is not the business of 
philosophy to do so. All philosophy has to do is * to understand 

A«. what is,' and moral philosophy has to understand morals which 
exist, not to make them or give directions for making theixL Such 

. a notion is simply ludicrous. Philosophy in general has not to 



bring out nothing but what was in, and bring it out, not from external com- 
pulsion, but because it is in. 

And further, unless what is at the end is different from that which was at 
the beginning, there is no evolution. That which developes, or evolves itself, 
both is and is not It is^ or it could not be U which developes, and which at 
the end has developed. It is not, or else it could not become. It becomes 
what it is ; and, if this is nonsense, then evolution is nonsense. 

Evolution is a contradiction ; and, when the contradiction ceases, the evolu- 
tion ceases. The process is a contradiction, and only because it is a contradic- 
tion can it be a process. So long as progress lasts, contradiction lasts ; so long 
as anything becomes, it is not. To be realized is to cease to progress. To be 
at the end (in one sense) is to lose the end (in another), and that because (in 
both senses) all then comes to the end. For the process is a contradiction, 
ind the solution of the contradiction is in every sense the end of the procesc 



176 Ethical Studies. 



the point that I do wish to establish here is, I think, not at all 
obscure. The reader has first to recognize that moral judgments 
are not discursive ; next, that nevertheless they do start from and 
rest on a certain basis ; and then if he puts the two together, he 
will see that they involve what he may call the * intuitive imder- 
standing,' or any other name, so long as he keeps in sight the two 
elements and holds them together. 

On the head that moral judgments are not discursive, no one, I 
think, will wish me to stay long. If the reader attends to the 
facts he will not want anything else ; and if he does not, I confess 
I can not prove my point. In practical momlity no doubt we may 
reflect on our principles^ but I think it is not too much to say that 
we never do so, except where we have come upon a difficulty of 
particular application- If any one thinks that a man's ordinary 
judgment, ' this is right or wrong,' comes from the having a rule 
before the mind and bringing the particular case under it, he may 
be right \ and I can not try to show that he is vrong. I can only 
leave it to the reader to judge for himself. We say we ' see ' and 
we * feel ' in these cases, not we * conclude.' We prize the advice 
of persons who can give us no reasons for what they say. There 
is a general belief that the having a reason for all your actions is 
pedantic and absurd. There is a general belief that to try to 
have reasons for all that you do is sometimes very dangerous. 
Not only the woman but the man who deliberates may be lost 
First thoughts are often the best>' and if once you b^in to argue 
with the devil you are in a perilous state. And I think I may 
add (though I do it in fear) that women are remarkable for the 
fineness of their moral perceptions * and the quickness of their 
judgments, and yet are or (let me save myself by saying) * may 
be ' not remarkable for corresponding discursive ability. 

Taking for granted then that our ordinary way of judging in 
morals is not by reflection and explicit reasoning, we have now 

' It is right to remark that second thoughts are often the ofTspring of wrong 
desire, but not always so. They may arise from collisions, and in these cases 
we see how little is to be done by theoretical deduction. 

* Not, periiaps, on a// matters. Nor, again, will it do to say that everywhert 
women are pre-eminently intuitive, and men discursive. But in prttctiaU 
matters there seems not much doubt that it is so. 



178 Ethical Studies. 



If a man is to know what is right, he should have imbibed b^y 
precept, and still more by example, the spirit of his community, 
its general and special beliefs as to right and wrong, and, with 
this whole embodied in his mind, should particularize it in any 
new case, not by a reflective deduction, but by an intuitive sub- 
sumption, which does not know that it is a subsumption ; ' by a 
carrying out of the self into a new case, wherein what is before 
tlie mind is the case and not the self to be carried out, and where 
it is indeed the whole that feels and sees, but all that is seen is 
seen in the form of this case, this point, this instance. Precept 
is good, but example is better; for by a series of particulars 
(as such forgotten) we get the general spirit, we identify ourselves 

* Every act has, of course, many sides, many relations, many ' points of view 
from which it may be regarded,' and so many qualities. There are always 
seveial principles under which you can bnng it, and hence there is not the 
smallest diflficulty iu exhibiting it as the realization of either right or wrong. No 
act in the world is without scme€vdA capable of bein^ subsumed under a good rule ; 
e, g. theft is economy, care for one's relations, protest against bad institutions, 
really doing oneself but justice, &c. ; and, ii all else fails, it probably saves us 
from something worse, and therefore is good. Cowardice is prudence and a 
duty, courage rashness and a vice, and so on. The casuist must have little 
ingenuity, if tliere is anything he fails to justify or condemn according to his 
order. And the vice of casuistry is that, attempting to decide the particulars 
of morality by the deductions of the reflective understanding, it at once degene- 
rates into finding a good reason for what you mean to do. You have principles 
of all sorts, and the case has all sorts of sides ; which side is the essential 
side, and which principle is the principle here^ rests in the end on your mere 
private choice ; and that is determined by heaven knows what No reasoning 
will tell you which the moral point of view here is. Hence the necessary 
immorality and the ruinous effects of practical casuistry. (Casuistry used not 
as a guide to conduct, but as a means lo the theoretical investigation of moral 
principles, the casuistry used to discover the principle y^^^xn the fact, and not to 
deduce the fact from the principle — is, of course, quite another thing. ) Our 
moralists do not like casuistry ; but if the current notion that moral philosophy 
has to tell you what to do is well founded, then casuistiy, so far as I can see, 
at once follows, or should follow. * 

But the ordinary moral judgment is not discursive. It does not look to the 
right and left, and, considering the case from all its sides, consciously subsume 
under one principle. When the case is presented,, it fixes on one quality in the 
act, referring that unconsciously to one principle, in which it feels the whole of 
itself, and sees that whole in a single side of the act. So far as right and 
wrong are concerned, it can perceive nothing but this quality of this cas^ and 



t^ 



t • 



1 80 Ethical Studies. 

This intuition must not be confounded with what is sometimes 
mis-called 'conscience.' It is not mere individual opinion or 
caprice. It presupposes the morality of the community as its 
basis, and is subject to the approval tiiereof. Here, if anywhere, 
the idea of universal and impersonal inorality is realized. For the 
final arbiters are the q>p6vifj,ot^ persons with a will to do right, and 
not full of reflections and theories. If they fail you, you must 
judge for yourself, but practically they seldom do fail you. Their 
private peculiarities neutralize each other, and the result is an 
intuition which does not belong merely to this or that num or 
collection of men. * Conscience ' is the antipodes of this, li 
wants you to have no law but yourself, and to be better than the 
^ world. But this tells you that, if you could be as* good as youi 
' world, you would be better than most likely you are, and that to 
wish to be better than the world is to be already on the threshold 
of immorality. 

This perhaps * is a hard saying,' but it is least hard to those who 
know life best ; it is intolerable to those mainly who, from inex- 
perience or preconceived theories, can not see the world as it is. 
Explained it may be by sa3dng that enthusiasm for good dies 
away — the ideal fades — 

Dem Herrlichsten, was auch der Geist empfangen, 
Dr&ngt immer fremd und fremder Stoif sich an ; 

but better perhaps if we say that those who have seen most of the 
world (not one side of it) — old people of no one-sided profession 
nor of immoral life — know most also how much good there is ia it 
They are tolerant of new theories and youthful opinions that 
everything would be better upside down, because they know that 
this also is as it should be, and that the world gets good even 
from these. They are intolerant only of those who are old 
enough, and should be wise enough, to know better than that they 
know better than the world ; for in such people they can not help 
seeing the self-conceit which is pardonable only in youtli. 

Let us be clear. What is that wish to be better, and to make 
the world better, which is on the threshold of immorality ? What 
is the 'world' in this sense? It is the morality already existing 



i82 Ethical Studies. 



We have thus seen the community to be the real moral idea, to 
be stronger than the theories and the practice of its members 
against it, and to give us self-realization. And this is indeed 
limitation; it bids us say farewell to visions of superhuman 
morality, to ideal societies, and to practical * ideals ' generally. 
/| But perhaps the unlimited is not the perfect, nor the true ideal 
l\ And, leaving * ideals ' out of sight, it is quite clear that if any- 
I \ body wants to realize himself as a perfect man without trying to 
/ / be a perfect member of his country and all his smaller com- 
/ munities, he makes what all sane persons would admit to be 
i a great mistake. There is no more fatal enemy than theories 
which are not also facts; and when people inveigh against 
the vulgar antithesis of the two, they themselves should accept 
their own doctrine, and give up the harbouring of theories Of 
what should be and is not Until they do that, the vulgar 
are in the right ; for a theory of that which (only) is to be, 
is a theory of that which in fact is not, and that I suppose is 
only a theory. 

There is nothing better than my station and its duties, nor any- 
thing higher or more truly beautiful. It holds and will hold' its 
own against the worship of the ' individual,' whatever form that 
may take. It is strong against frantic theories and vehement 
passions, and in the end it triumphs over the fact and can smile 
at the literature, even of sentimentalism, however fulsome in its 
impulsive setting out, cm: sour in its disappointed end. It laughs 
at its frenzied apotheosis of the yet unsatisfied passion it calls love ; 
and at that embitterment too which has lost its illusions, and yet 
can not let them go — ^with its kindness for the genius too clever 
in general to do an}^hing in particular, and its adoration of star- 
gazing virgins with souls above their spheres, whose wish to be 
something in the world takes the form of wanting to do something 
with it, and who in the end do badly what they might have done 
in the beginning well ; and, worse than all, its cynical contempt 
for what deserves only pity, sacrifice of a life for work to the best 
of one*s lights, a sacrifice despised not simply because it has 
iJEuled, but because it is stupid, and uninteresting, and altogether 
unsentimental 

And all these books (ah ! how many) it puts into the one scale, 



1 86 Ethical Studies. 



better does not always directly involve relation to others. The 
production of truth and beauty (together with what is called 
* culture ') may be recognized as a duty ; and it will be very hard 
to reduce it in all cases to a duty of any station that I can see. 
If we like to say that these duties to myself are duties to humanity, 
that perhaps is truej but we must remember that humanity is not 
a visible community. If you mean by it only past, present, and 
future human beings, then you can not show that in all cases my 
culture is of use (directly or indirectly) to any one but mysel£ 
Unless you are prepared to restrict science and fine art to what is 
useful, /. e, to common arts and * accomplishments,' you can not 
hope to * verify ' such an assertion. You are in the region of belief, 
not knowledge ; and this equally whether your belief is true or 
false. We must say then that, in aiming at truth and beauty, we 
are trying to realize ourself not as a member of any visible 
community. 

And, finally, against this ideal self the particular person remains 
and must remain imperfect. The ideal self is not fully realized in 
us, m any way that we can see. We are aware of a ceaseless pro- 
cess, it is well if we can add progress, in which the false private 
self is constantly subdued but never disappears. And it never can 
disappear: we are never realized. The contradiction remains; 
and not to feel it demands something lower or something higher 
than a moral point of view. 

Starting from these objections, our next Essay must try to make 
more clear what is involved in them, and to raise in a sharper form 
the difficulties as to the nature of morality. And our Conclu4- 
ing Remarks will again take up the same thread, after we have in 
some measure investigated in Essay VII. the difficult problems of 
the bad self and selfishness. 



1 88 Ethical Studies. 



such. * This answers the question, Has a beast rights ? He is the 
object of duties, not the subject of rights. Right is the universal 
in its relation to a will capable of recognizing it as such, whether 
it remain mere command or is also carried out in act 

Wherever in the moral world you have law you have also right 
and rights. These may be real or ideal The first are the will of 
the state or society, the second the will of the ideal-social or non- 
social ideal. ( Vide Essay VI.) 

It is in order to secure the existence- of right in the acts of par- 
ticular wills that compulsion is used. But compulsion is not 
necessary to the general and abstract definition of right, and it can 
not be immediately deduced from it. 

What is duty? It is simply the other side of right It is the 
same relation, viewed from the othei pole or mom<snt It is the 
relation of the particular to the universal, with the emphasis on 
the particular. It is my will in its affirmative relation to the 
objective will. Right is the universal, existing for thought alone 
or also carried out. Duty is my will, either merely thought of as 
realizing this universal, or actually also doing so. * This is my 
duty ' means ' in this I identify, or am thought of as identifying, 
myself with right.' 

Duty, like right, implies possible discordance of particular and 
universal. Like right, too, it implies more than this. It implies 
the consciousness (or presumed capacity for consciousness) of the 
relation of my will to the universal as the right Hence a beast 
has no duties in the proper sense. If he has, then he has also 
rights. 

Right is the universal will implying particular will It is the 
objective side implying a subjective side, /. e, duty. Duty is the 
particular will implying an universal will. It is the subjective side 
implying an objective side, /. e, right But the two sides are 
inseparable. No right without duty ; no duty without right and 
rights. (To this we shall return.) 

Right and duty are sides of a single whole. This whole is the 
good. Rights and duties imply the identity, and non-identity, of 

• * I have rights against others,' or * I have a right to this oi that from others,' 
means, (i) it io right, it is the expression of the universal, that they should do 
this or that in reference to me : I am the object of their duty. But this by 
itself does not give me ^ rights.' To ' have a right ' to anything from another, 
I must (2) be a subject which knows the universal as such, both (a) in its 
imniediaU relation to my will, in its expression through my ^cts ; and (b) also 
here in its expression through the acts of others, which acts may concern me. 
When my will as the imiversal, and the universal as my will, calls for these acts^ 
then I * have a right ' to them iu the proper sense ; but not otherwise. 



1 90 Ethical Studies. 



and here I affirm nothing but myself. In either case there is no 
duty and no morahty. 

* But rights and duties/ we shall be told, * collide.' They collide 
only as rights do with rights or duties with duties. Rights and 
duties of one sphere collide with those of another sphere, and 
again within each sphere they collide in different persons, and 
again in one and the same person. But that right as such can 
collide with duty as such is impossible. There is no right which 
is not a duty, no duty which is not a right. In either case right 
would cease to be right, and duty duty. 

This will be denied. It will be said, (i) There are duties 
without rights; (2) rights without duties. As to the first (i) we 
say, If we have not a right to do anything, it is not right for us. If 
it is not right for us, then it is not our duty. It is quite true that 
moral duty may not be legal right, nor legal duty moral right, but 
this is not to the point. 

As to the second (2), it seems harder to see that where I have 
no duties I have no rights. In the spheres of the state, of society, 
of ideal morality, I have a right to do this and not that, that and 
not the other. But can it be said that all these things that I have 
a right to do, are my duties ? Is not that nonsense ? 

No doubt there is much truth in this. It is almost as bad to 
have nothing but duties as it is to have no duties at all. For free 
individual self-developcment we must have both elements. AVhere 
the universal is all there is ossification ; where the particular is all 
there is dissolution ; in neither case life. 

Is it true then that there are rights where there are no duties ? 
No. In a sense, rights are wider than duties : but what does this 
mean ? Does it mean there are rights outside the moral sphere ? 
Certainly not. We shall see (Essay VI.) that there is no limit to 
the moral sphere ; and if there were a limit, then outside that 
rights would cease to be rights. * jMore rights than duties ' then 
must be true, if at ail, within the moral sphere. Does it hold 
there that there are more rights than duties ? It is not a very 
hard puzzle. To make it easier let us double it, and say * there 
are more duties than rights/ A man, for instance, has a certain 
indivisible sum to spend in charity. He has a duty to A, B, and 
C, but not a right to more than one, because it is wrong if he gives 
more than his indivisible limited sum. Hence there are more 
duties than rights. All that it comes to is that, when you look on 
duties as possible, they are wider than what, when actually done, 
is right and actual duty. Just so possible rights are wider than 
what is actually duty and actually right 

The reason why this is noticed on the side of rights, and not 



192 Ethical Studies. 



of the moral whole. It is, for the sake of the developement of the 
whole, created and kept up in the whole, but merely at the 
pleasure of the whole. Just so in morals there is a sphere of 
private liking, the sphere of indiffer6nts, but this exists only because 
It ought to exist, only because duty is realized in its existence, 
though not by its particulars as particulars, /. e, as this one 
against that one. The sphere of private right has rights only so 
long as it is right and is duty. . It exists merely on sufferance ; 
and the moment the right of the whole demands its suppression 
it has no rights. Public right everywhere overrides it in practice, 
if not in theory. This is the justification of such things as forcible 
expropriation, conscription, &c. The only proper way of regarding 
them is to say. In developing my property, &c., as this or that 
man, I am doing my duty to the state, for the state lives in its 
individuals : and I do my duty again in another way by giving up 
to the use of the state my property and person, for the individual 
lives in the state. What other view will justify the fiwrts of 
political life ? 

To repeat then : Right is the assertion of the universal will in 
relation to the particular will. Duty is the assertion of the 
particular will in the afiirmation of the universal Good is the 
identity, not the mere relation, of both. Right may be real, may 
actually exist ; or be only ideal, merely thought of. So may duty. 
Rights and duties are elements in the good; they must go 
together. The universal can not be affirmed except in the 
particular, the particular only affirms itself in the universal ; but 
they should be suppressed in the good as anything more than 
elements, which reciprocally supplement each other, and should 
be regarded as two sides to one whole. It is not mwal to stand 
on one's rights with the right ; 1. e, right should not be mere 
right: nor moral to make a duty of all one's duties ; /. e, duty should 
not be mere duty. 

We maintain the following theses, (i) It is false that you can 
have rights without duties. (2) It is fidse that you can have 
duties without rights. (3) It is false that right is merely negative.' 
(4) It is false that duty depends on possible compulsion, and a 
mere mistake that command alv/ays implies a threat ; and (5) It 
is absolutely false that rights or duties can exist outside the moral 
world. 



' Schopenhauer has developed this view with great clearness. He goes so 
fai- as to make wroi^ the orighial positive ccmception, right the mere Ji^gation 
of it 



£SSA y VL 

Ideal Morality. 

T N our criticism of the view developed in Essay V. we saw that, 

however true the main doctrine of that Essay may be, it is 

no sufficient answer to the question, What is morality ? and, 

guided by its partial failure, we must try to find a less one-sided 

solution. 

We saw (in Essay 11.) that the end was the realizing of the self; 
and the problem which in passing suggested itself was, Are 
morality and self-realization the same thing, or, if not altogether 
the same, in what respect are they different ? 

That in some way they do differ is clear from the popular views 
on the subject Everj' one would agree that by his artistic or 
sdentific production, an artist or a man of science does realize 
himself, but no one, not blinded by a theory, would say that he 
was moml just so far as, and because, what he produced was good 
of its sort and desirable in itself. A man may be good at this or 
that thing, and may have done good work in the world ; and yet 
when asked, ' But was he a good man ? ' we may find ourselves, 
although we wish to say Yes, unable to do more than hi*sitat«. A 
man need not be a good man just so far as he is a good 
artist; and the doctrine which unreservedJy identifies moral 
goodness with any desirable realization of the self can not be 
maintained^ 

Can we then accept the other view, which, as it were, separates 
molality into a sphere of its own; which calJs a man moral accord- 
ing as he abstains from direct, breaches of social rules, and im- 
moral if he commits them ; while it forgets tliat the one man may 
be lazy, selfish, and without a wish to improve himself, while the 
other, with all his faults, at least loves what is beautiful and good, 
and has striven towards it ? We can not do tliat unless, while we 

o 



194 Ethical Sttulies. 



recognize the truth of the doctrine, we shut our eyes to its accom- 
panying falsity. 

And, finding in neither the expression of our moral conscious- 
ness, we thankfully accept the conrection which sees in * conduct ' 
nine tenths of life, though we can not expect the main question to 
be answered by a coarse and popular method, which divides into 
parts instead of distinguishing aspects ; and though, in the saving 
one tenth and the sweeping nine tenths alike, we can see little 
more than the faltering assertion of one mistake, or the confident 
aggravation of another. 

A man's life, we take it, can not thus be cut in pieces, Vou 
can not say, ' In this part the man is a moral being, and in that 
part he is not' We have not yet found that fraction of his exist- 
ence in which the moral goodness of the good man is no more 
realized, and where ' the lusts of the flesh ' cease to wage their 
warfare. We have heard in the sphere of religion, ' Do all to the 
glory of God,' and here too we recognize no smaller claim. To 
be a good man in all things and everywhere, to try to do always 
the best, and to do one's best in it, whether in lonely work or in 
social relaxation to suppress the worse self and realize the good 
self, this and nothing short of this is the dictate of morality. 
This, it seems to us, is a deliverance of the moral consciousness 
too clear for misunderstanding, were it not for two fixed habits of 
thought. One of these lies in the confiixing of a man's morality to 
the sphere of his social relations; the other is the notion that 
morality is a life harassed and persecuted everywhere by ' impera- 
tives ' and disagreeable duties, and that without these you liave 
not got morality. We have seen, and have yet to see, that the 
first has grasped only part of the truth ; and on the second it is 
sufficient to remark that it stands and falls with the identification 
of morality with unwilling obedience to law, and that, according 
to the common view, a man does not cease to be good so far as 
goodness becomes natiu'al and pleasant to him. 

But we shall be met at this point with an absurdity supposed to 
follow. Work of any sort, it will be said, is, we grant you, a field 
for morality, and so is most of life in relation to others ; but there 
must be a sphere where morality ceases, or else it will follow that 
a man is moral in all the trifling details of his own life which 



X96 Ethical Studies. 



The reader will feel that, to a certain extent, the regulation of the 
times and fields of amusements, &:a, and, to a still larger extent, 
the choice of trifling details therein, involves no reflection, no 
deliberate choice, is not made a matter of conscience, is in a 
word done naturally ; and he may find a difficulty in seeing how, 
if this is so, it can be said to fall within the moral sphere. 
Morality, he may feel, does tell me it is good to amuse myself 
and more decidedly that I may not amuse myself beyond certain 
limits ; but within those limits it leaves me to my natural self. 
In this, it seems to us, there is a twofold misapprehension, a 
mistake as to the limits, and a mistake as to the character of the 
moralized self It is, first, an error to suppose that in what is 
called human life there remains any region which has not been 
moralized. Whatever hai been brought under the ccmtrol of the 
will, it is not too much to say, has been brought into the si^bere 
of morality ; in oui eating, our drinking, our sleeping, we from 
childhood have not been left to ourselves ; and the habits, formed 
in us by the morality outside of us, now hold of the moral will 
which in a manner has been their issue. And so in om lightest 
moments the element of control and regulation is not wanting ; 
it is part of the business of education to see that it is there, and its 
absence, wherever it is seen to' be absent, pains us. The chan^tei 
shows itself in every trifling detail of life ^ we can not go in to 
amuse ourselves while we leave it outside the door with oui dog ; 
it is ourself, and our moral fitXf^ being not mere temper or 
inborn disposition, but the outcome of a series of acts of will 
Natural it is indeed well to be ; but that is because by this time 
morality should be our nature, and good behaviour its unreflecting 
issue ; and to be natural in any sense which excludes moral 
habituation is never, so far as I know the world, thought desir- 
able. In a good and amiable nun the good and amiable self is 
present throughout, and that self is for us a moral self This 
brings us to the second mistake, which also rests on the same 
misap[>rehension of the cardinal truth that what is natural can not 
be moral, nor what is moral natural. 'What is natural does not 
reflect, and without reflection there is no morality. Hence, where 
we aie natural because we do not reflect, there we can not be 
moral.' So runs the perversiorL But here it is forgotten that we 



198 Ethical Studies. 



thus we are led to tlie enquiry, what is the content of this ideal 
self.' 

From our criticism on the foregoing Essay we can at once 
gather that the good self is the self which realizes (i) a social, (2) 
a non-social ideal ; the self, first, which does, and, second, which 
does not directly and immediately involve relation to others. Or 
from another point of view, what is aimed at is the realization in 
me (i) of the ideal which is realized in society, of my station and 
its duties, or (2) of the ideal which is not there fully realized ; 
and this is (a) the perfection of a social and (b) of a non-social 
self. Or again (it is all the same thing) we may divide into (i) 
duties to oneself which are not regarded as social duties, (2) 
duties to oneself which are so regarded, these latter being (a) the 
duties of my station which I happen to be in, (b) duties beyond 
that station. Let us further explain. 

The content of the good self^ we see, has a threefold origin ; 
and (i) the first and most important contribution comes from 
what we have called my station and its duties, and of this we have 
spoken already at some length. We saw that the notion of an 
individual man existing in his own right independent of society 
was an idle fancy, that a human being is human because he has 
drawn his being from human society, because he is the individual 
embodiment of a larger life ; and we saw that this larger life, 
of the family, society, or the nation, was a moral will, an universal 
the realization of which in his personal will made a man's 
morality. We have nothing to add here except in passing to call 
attention to what we lately advanced, viz. that the good man is 
good throughout all his life and not merely in parts ; and further 
to request the reader to turn to himself and ask himself in what 

* On the genesis of the ideal self and of the good self, or the self whose will 
is identified with its ideal, we shall say what seems necessary in other 
connections. 

* I may remark that a duty which is not a duty to myself can not possibly 
he a moral duty. When we hear of self-regarding duties we should ask what 
is meant. A * j«^-regarding duty ' in one sense of the word says no more 
than * a duty * ; in another sense it says * a duty which is the direct opposite of 
what a duty is,* f . e* a selfish duty : or again, it means a non-social duty. Con- 
fusion on this head leads to serious mistakes. 



200 Ethical Studies. 



questions, What was the historical genesis of the ideal ; by what 
steps did it come into the world ? And again, What is its genesis 
in us? And these can scarcely be separated fipm one another, or 
from the further enquiry. What is its content ? 

The historical genesis we shall not enter on; and as to the 
genesis in the individual, we will merely remark that we seem first to 
see in some person or persons the type of what is excellent ; then 
by the teaching, tradition, and imagination of our own and other 
countries and times, we receive a content which we find existing 
realized in present or past individuals, and finally detach from all 
as that which is realized wholly in none, but is an ideal type of 
human perfection. At this point we encounter a question of fact, 
namely, how far the ideal which serves as a guide to conduct is 
presented in an individual form. No doubt two extremes exist A 
large number of men have, I think, no moral ideal beyond the station 
they live in, and of these some are even satisfied with the presen- 
tation of this or that known person as a type ; while again in the 
highest form of morality the ideal is not figured in the shape of an 
individual.* But between the extremes must be endless gradations. 

We have previously said something as to the way in which the 
ideal is made use of in moral judgments, and what remains is to 
call attention to the content of this social ideal. It is obvious at 
once that it is a will which practises no other kind of virtues than 
those which we find in the world ; and we can see no reason for 
supposing this presented ideaj self to be anything beyond the 
idealization of what exists in human natiure, the material idealized 
being more or less cosmopolitan, and the abstraction employed 
being more or lesjj one-sided. 

And with these cursory and insufficient remarks we must dis- 
miss the ideal of a perfect social being. 

But (3) there remains in the good self a further region we have 
not yet entered on ; an ideal^ the realization of which is recognized 
as a moral duty, but which yet in its essence does not involve 



* The difficulty ererywhere is, Is the embodiment used to fire the imagina- 
tion, while the type is not that of this or that individual ; or is it otherwise ? 
'The solution is to be found in the answer to the question, Is the impersonation 
modified ; and if modified, how, and by what, and to suit what is it modified ? 



202 Ethical Studies. 



» 



be carried on, is also true ; but neither truth goes to show that 
society is the ultimate end, unless by an argument which takes 
the basis of a result as its final cause, and which would prove the 
physical and physiological conditions of society to be the end for 
which it existed. Man is not man at all unless social, but man 
is not much above the beasts unless more than social. 

If it be said that, morally considered, the realization of the 
social self is an end, and that of the non-social nothing but an 
outward means, and that hence science and art are not to be pursued 
independently, no doubt it would be possible to meet such an 
assertion by argument from and upon its own ground. We might 
urge that science is most useful, when treated as more than 
useful. But we decline by doing this to degrade and obscure the 
question. We repeat that the assertion is both unproven and false, 
and the decision is left to the moral consciousness of the reader. 

And if again it be said that the social self is the one end, but 
yet none the less science and art are ends in themselves, and to 
be pursued independently ; they are included in the social self, 
and therefore, as elements in the end, are themselves ends and 
not mere means — then, in answer, I will not reply that this is false 
(for indeed I hope it may be true), but only that it is utterly 
unproven. It is on the assertor that the burden of proof must lie. 
To us it seems plain that the content of the theoretical self does 
not in its essence involve relation to others : nothing is easier 
than to suppose a life of art or speculation which, as far as we can 
see, though true to itself, has, so far as others are concerned, been 
sheer waste or even loss, and which knew that it was so. This is 
a fairly suppo^able case, and no one I think can refuse to enter 
on it. Was the life immoral? I say, No, it was not therefore 
immoral, but may have been therefore moral past ordinary moral- 
ity. And if I am told Yes, it was moral, but it was social : it did 
in its essence involve relation to others, because there is a necessary 
connection (nothing short of this proves the conclusion) between 
theoretic realization in this and that man, and the realization of 
him therein and thereby in relation to others, and perhaps also of 
society as a whole — then I answer, You are asserting in the teeth 
of appearances ; you must prove this necessary connection, and, I 
think I may add, you can not do it. What you say may be true, 



204 Ethical Studies. 



from the complexity of individual cases, and this can be dealt 
with solely by practical insight, not by abstract conceptions and 
discursive reasoning. It is no use knowing that one class of 
duties is in the abstract higher than another r moral practice is 
not in abstradOy and the highest moral duty for W is my duty; my 
duty being the one which lies next me, and perhaps not the one 
which would be the highest, supposing it were mine. The man 
who can give moral advice is the man of experience, who, from his 
own knowledge and by sympathy, can transport himself into 
another's case ; who knows the heart and sees through moral 
illusion ; and the man of mere theory is in the practical sphere an 
useless and dangerous pedant. 

And now in particular the relation of the two ideal spheres to 
the real sphere is precisely what subsists inside the real sphere 
between its own elements We saw (p. 141) that, as in no one 
action can all duties be fulfilled, in every action some duties must 
be neglected. The question is what duty is to be done and left 
undone here ; and so in the world of my station neglect of duties 
is allowed. And, apart from the difficulty (often the impossibility) 
of distinguishing omission and commission from a moral point of 
view, we saw [ibid!) that positive breaches of moral law were 
occasionally moral. And hence if an artist or man of science 
considers himself called upon, by his duty to art or science, to 
neglect, or to commit a breach of ordinary morality, we must say 
that, in the abstract and by itself, that is not to be condemned. 
It is a case of colliding duties, such as happens every day in 
other fields, and its character is not different because extra- 
ordinary. 

And further, if a claim be set up, on the ground of devotion to 
no common end, to be judged in one's life by no common stand- 
ard, we must admit that already within the sphere of my station 
that claim is usually allowed. We excuse in a soldier or sailor 
what we do not excuse in others, from whom the same duties are 
not expected. The morality of the pushing man of business, and 
still more of the lawyer and the diplomatist in the exercise of their 
calling, is not measured by the standard of common life ; and so, 
when the sennice of the ideal is appealed to in justification of 
neglect and breaches of law, we say that the claim is valid in 



2o6 Ethical Studies. 



The highest type we can imagine is the man who, on the basis 
of everyday morality, aims at the ideal perfection of it, and on 
this double basis strives to realize a non-social ideal But where 
collisions arise, there, we must repeat, it is impossible for mere 
theory to offer a solution, not only because the perception which 
decides is not a mere intellectual perception, but because no 
general solution of individual difficulties is possible. 

To return to our main discussion — the field of morality we find 
is the whole field of life ; its claini is as wide as self-realization, 
and the question raised before (p. 59) now presents itself. Are 
morality and self-realization the same and not different? This 
appears at first sight to be the case. The moral end is to realize the 
self, and all forms of the realizing of the self are seen to fall within 
the sphere of morality; and so it seems natural to say that 
Y^ morality is the process of self-realization, and the most moral 
man is the man who most fully and energetically realizes human 
nature. Virtue is excellence, and the most excellent is the most 
virtuous. 

If we say this, however, we come into direct collision with the 
' moral consciousness, which clearly distinguishes moral from other 
excellence, and asserts that the latter is not in itself moral at all ; 
and, referring back (p. 129), we find the deliverance of that con- 
sciousness in the emphatic maxim that nothing is morally good 
save a good will. This maxim we shall forthwith take to be 
jjtrue, and so proceed. 

1 Morality then will be the realization of the self as the good 
^ ^\ will. It is not self-realization from all points of view, though all 
I self-realization can be looked at from this one point of view ; for 
all of it involves will, and, so far as the will is good, so far is the 
realization moral. Strictly speaking and in the proper sense, 
morality is self-realization within the sphere of the personal will 
We see this plainly in art and science, for there we have moral 

be committed. The first is a matter of fact it would not profit us to discuss in 
connection with the abstract question ; and the second in our opinion can not 
be theoretically determined. Which duty or duties weigh heaviest in this or 
that case is an aflfair for perception, not reasoning. We may remark, however, 
that the doctrine of tlie text will not be found to err on the side of laxity. 



2o8 Ethical Studies 



good will A will which obeys no law is not moral, a law which 
is not willed is nothing for morality. Acts, so £ar as they spring 
from the good will, are good, and a temper and habits and charac- 
ter are good so far as they are a present good will, result from it 
and embody it ; and what issues from a good character must thus 
likewise be morally good. 

That the good will for morality is my will is obvious enough, 
and it is no less plain (pp. 130, 147) that it is presented as universal 
That does not mean that everybody does or has to do wliat I do, 
but it means that, if they were I, they must do as I have to do, or 
else be immoral j it means that my moral will is not the mere 
will of myself as this or that man, but something above it and 
beyond it And further, again, the good will is presented as one 
will; in collisions, going to our moral consciousness, we are 
told that, if we knew it, there is a right, that the collision is for us, 
and is not for the good will We can not bring before us two 
diverse good wills, or one good will at cross purposes and not iu 
harmony with itself; and we feel sure that, if our will were but one 
with the universal, then we too should be one with ourselves, with 
no conflict of desires, but a harmony and system. 

Such is the will presented to itself by the moral consciousness, 
but for the moral consciousness that is ideal and not real Within 
the sphere of morality the universal remains but partially realized : 
it is something that for ever wants to be, and yet is not 

We saw that the will of the social organism might be called an 
universal will, and a will which was visibly real, as well as ideal ; 
but we saw too tliat the sphere of my station and its duties did 
not cover the whole good self ; and further, even within that 
sphere, and apart from difficulties of progress, for morality in 
the strict sense ideal and real remain apart The bad self Is not 
extinguished, and in myself I see an element of will wherein the 
imiversal is unrealized, and against which it therefore remains (so 
fJEu- as my morality is concerned) a mere idea, for, even if we 
assume that society gets no hurt, yet I do not come up to my 
special type. 

For morals then the imiversal is not realized within my station, 
and furthermore the moral consciousness does not say tliat it is 
realized anywhere at all The claim of the ideal is to cover the 



2IO Ethical Studies. 



Thus morality, because its end is not completely realized, is 
after all ideal ; and what we have next to see is that it is not 
simply positive; it is also negative. The self^ which, as the good 
will, is identified with our type, has to work against the crude 
material of the mitiual wants, affections, and impulses, which, 
though not evil in themselves, stand in the way of good, and 
must be disciplined, repressed, and encouraged. It is negative 
again of what is positively evil, the false self, the desires and 
habits which embody a will directly contrary to the good 
will And further it belongs to its essence that it should be 
so negative of both, because a being not limited, and limited 
by evil in himself, is not what we call moraL (Cf. p. 131.) A 
moral will must be finite, and hence have a natural basis ; and 
it must to a certain extent (how &r is another matter) be evil, 
because a being which does not know good and evil is not moral, 
and because (as we shall see more fully hereafter) the specific 
characters of good and evil can be known only one against the 
other, and furthermore can not be apprehended by the mere in- 
tellect, but only by inner experience. Morality, in short, implies 
a knowledge of what the ' ought ' means, and the ' ought ' implies 
contradiction and moral contradiction. 

So we see morality is negative ; the non-moral and the immoral 
must exist as a condition of it, since the moral is what it is only in 
asserting itself against its opposite. But morality is not merely 
negative ; it is a great mistake to suppose that the immoral is there 
already,^ and that morality consists simply in making it not to be.- 
The good will is not that which merely destroys the natural or the 
immoral ; it does indeed destroy them as such, but this by itself 
is not morality. It is when it destroys them by its own assertion, 
and destroys them by transmuting the energy contained in them, 
that the will is moral 

The good self is not real as the mere abolition of reality. On 
its affirmative side (and it is moral only when it is affirmative) it is 



' By its very essence immoFality can not exist except as against morality : 
a purely immoral being is a downright impossibility. The man who has be- 
come entirely mimoral has ceased to know good and evil, has ceased to belong 
to the moral sphere, is morally speaking dead. 



Ideal Morality. 2 1 1 



the position of the universal will, as the true infinite, in the per- 
sonal will of this or that man ; and here it has reality, not complete, 
not adequate, but still certain. You can not separate negation 
and affirmation without destroying the moral world. The abstract 
non-existence of the non-moral is nothing : and the existence of 
nothing (if that were possible) is not a moral end. The a.sser- 
tion of the moral, the positive realization of the good will to 
the negation of the natural and bad will, is morality, and 
no one element of this whole is so; for in the destruction 
of the bad it is only the affirmation of the good which is 
desirable (cf. p. 25). 

The realization of the good in personal morality is the habituated 
will, the moral character of individuals. It is actual in the virtues 
uf the heart, and those virtues are the habits which, embodying 
good acts of will, have become part of the man's self, and which 
answer to the various sides of his station, or more generally to his 
various* relations to the ideal. 

Morahty then is a process of realization, and it has two sides or 
elements which can not be separated; (i) the position of an ideal 
self, and the making of that actual in the will; (2) the negation, / 
which is inherent in this, the making unreal (not by annihilation | 
but transformation) of the forever unsystematized natuiai material, i 
and the bad self. And this account removes many of the diffi- 
culties we encountered in Essay IV. 

It docs not remove them all. Morality does involve a contra- 
diction ; it does tell you to realize that which never can be reahzed, 
and which, if realized, does efface itself as such. No one ever 
was or could be perfectly moral ; and, if he were, he would be 
moral no longer. Where there is no imperfection tliere is no 
ought, where there is no ought there is no morality, where there is 
no self-contradiction there is no ought The ought is a self-con- 
tradiction. Are we to say then that that disposes of it ? Surely 
not, unless it also disposes of ourselves ; and thai can not be. At 
least from this point of view, we are a self-contradiction : we never 
are what we feel we really are ; we really are what we know we are 
not ; and if we became what we are, we should scarcely be our- 
selves. Morality aims at the cessation of that which makes it 
possible.; it is the effort after non-morality, and it presses forward 



2 12 Ethical Studies. 



beyond itself to a super-moral sphere where it ceases as such to 
exist." 

It is at this point we find problems too great for us, and, if we 
follow any further, it will be only in our Concluding Remarks, and 
merely with a view to clear up what has gone before. But at our 
present point of view we must remain, till we have answered some 
objections and attempted to remove some difficulties. The rest 
of this Essay will have to do with a'xopiai which arise in respect of 
morality, and the next one will try to make more clear what we 
mean by the bad self which opposes the good. 

The first one-sided view of morality which must engage us may 
be put as follows : * Morality is not the realization of a content, 
but the identification of the will with the universal. The moral 
end is consequently the production of a system, a harmony in the 
desires, the heart and will ; and therefore we may and must sup- 
press aspiration in order to get moral harmony.' We answer — It 
is true morality is not the mere realization of a content, since in 
itself that content is not, strictly speaking, moral. The perform- 
ance is not moral apart from the will. That is one side. But on 
the other side the will which is not the will to perform is not 
moral at all. To try to be good not in science, art, or any other 
ideal pursuit, nor to be good socially, but to be virtuous simply in 
oneself, or to realize the good will with no content to it, is not to 
be moral in any way. A mere formal harmony is not a moral 
end : the end is not system, but the systematic realization of the 
self whose will is in harmony with the ideal. For example, if the 
question arises, Am I to advance as a good man or a good artist ? 
morality says, * Of course as a good man ;' but then the whole 
matter turns on this, What line of action, the doing of what, does 
make me the best man ? In collision of morality with morality it 
does not hold that the higher the morality the more harmonious 



* It does not concern me to go out of my way to say more on endless mord 
progress. I have already (p. 140) referred to Hegel's annihilating criticism. 
Progress to an end which is completeness and the end of progress and morality, 
is one thing. Endless progress is progress without an end, is endless incom- 
pleteness, endless immorality, and is quite another thing. 



214 Ethical Studies. 



For the moral consciousness tells us that a man is not good 
morally according as he stands in the scale of human progress ; 
that a man's morality may in one sense be higher than another 
man's, yet he himseJf may be, strictly speaking, morally lower. 
It tells us thar, if we judge by a purely moral standard, the low 
savage may be, not a higher, but a better man than the civilized 
European ; and, we see, (i) the most moral man is the man who 
tries most to act up to what his light tells him is best But in 
that v.e must lemember is included the getting the. best light 
which, ui> to his light, he can. 

(2) Suppose now that the lights of two men are equal, can we 
then look to the greater or lesser realization of their ideal, and 
judge them accordingly ? Morality says. No. It says the formal 
energy in all men is not the same ; and, unless selves are equal to 
start with, they can not be morally compared simply with an eye 
to their respective realization. 

(3) And again men vary, not only in light and in fonnal energ}', 
but also in disposition. Disposition no doubt is not moral 
character ; that does not begin until a man is self-conscious, and 
by volition the good and bad selves get their specific character one 
against the other ; ^ but none the less is natural disposition the 
material from which the moral self is built up. And dispositions 
or natures vary indefinitely: some are more harmonious than 
others, and some again are more chaotic and lead inevitably to 
jars and painful contradictions. The material of some men offers 
more resistance to the systematizing good will, and gives more 
openings for the increase and strengthening of the bad self, than 
does that of others. And, unless in this too individuals are equal, 
you can not simply compare them by the result. 

(4) And further we have to consider external circumstances in 
relation to disposition, as bearing on the facility of appropriating 
the good, and again on the difficulty of controlling the bad self; 
and our conclusion at present is this. Men equal in light, formal 
energy, natural disposition, and circumstances, and equal also in 
present extent and intent of their good and bad selves, are morally 
equal. 

*■ See more in following Essay. 



2i6 Ethical Studies. 



(i) In 'in itself indifferent ' the in itself \% the important point 
So far as the bad self thwarts the good by direct opposition, no 
one would call it indifferent And then, beside its open hostility, 
it creates consequences which thwart the good, and in addition 
appropriates to itself a share of the gencxal energy, which should 
have gone to the good, and so weakens it And all this no one 
would call indifferent 

But * in itself indifferent ' does not mean this.' It means, the 
bad self matters so far as it lessens the good, but by itself it is 
only a negation; and, after you have allowed for its negative 
properties, you need not consider it at all. The more or less of 
position of the good self in relation to light, energy, disposition, and 
circumstances, constitutes the more or less of morality. The bad 
self only takes from that position ; so that you need only find out 
what position after all you have, and then there is no occasion to 
consider the bad self. If in two men with equal light, energy, &c., 
the good selves are equal, it does not matter whether one has 
more bad self than the other, and we can strike tliat out of the 
account This is the first proposal. Is it satisfactory ? 

I think we must say it is not. Practically it might never 
mislead us, because the consequences of tlie affirmation of the 
bad self in immoral acts result in a weakening of the good will 
far more extensive than might seem at first sight The doctrine 
might not take us wrong, but we are asking. Is it theoretically 
accurate as an exposition of the moral consciousness ? and this 
we must deny, since for that consciousness the bad self is not in 
itself indifferent. 

(2) Considered otherwise, and not in relation to morality, the 
bad self may be only the negative condition of the affirmation of 
the good ; the presence of which is necessary for morality, but of 
which anything more than the mere presence is the decrease 
of the affirmation. It may be something to work against, a 



' The reader no doubt is aware that there is a view which reduces the 
distinction of good and bad to a mere quantitative difference ; virtue and vice 
differ only in being a little more or a little less of the same thing. This view 
makes great play with its * all is relative,* * it all depends on which way you 
look at it,' and the rest of the phrases behind which shallowness tries to look 
like wisdom. But we shall not stop to discuss it 



2iS Ethical Studies. 



a third has never been fdx either one way or the other ; how do 
we judge these morally ? Is it fair not to count the past ? 

The answer is that a man's morality, on the one hand, is 
not the summing up of a past result ; and we can consider only 
the present state, can look only at the will as it is now. This is 
one side. But on the other hand the will is what it has done ; 
and the present is thus also the past. Evil deeds must survive in 
a present evil will which is a positive evil, just as good deeds are not 
lost, but live in a present good will. No one gets bad or good all 
at once, however much they may sometimes seem to do so. And 
we believe that at the last the existing positive bad and positive 
good available energy of will (after making all the proper qualifi- 
cations and allowances, which include, of course, bodily changes) 
is the true representative of the good and evil the man has done. 
If in the sphere of morality we are to measure men's lives morally 
as wholes, this perhaps is how we are to do it, if we do it at all ; 
though from another point of \dew, and not by us, it may perhaps 
be done differently. 

In conclusion, we must warn the reader against supposing that 
morality is to be estimated by the intensity of the moral conscious- 
ness. It is true that a man who has never known himself to be 
good or bad is as yet not strictly either, is not yet within the moral 
sphere. Knowledge of good and evil is necessary for morality, 
and that (see Essay VII.) depends on a self-conscious volition 
with which responsibility begins, and after which we are answer- 
able for acts of will not self-conscious, because now we know their 
character, and ought to have them under our control Self-con- 
sciousness is necessary for a moral being, but it is a dangerous mis- 
take to think that all morality must therefore be self-conscious. To 
be moral, a man need not know that he is acting rightly ; still less 
need he know that he is acting righdy for the sake of morality, 
and for no other sake. It does not follow, because self-conscious- 
ness is the condition of imputation, that therefore everything which 
is imputed must be done with self-consciousness. The will both 
for good and evil need not be deliberate volition, still less the 
deliberate volition of the good simply because it is good, or the 
evil because it is eviL To will the evil because it is evil is, we 
think, impossible ; to will the moral because it is moral, and for 



Ideal Morality. 219 



the sake of morality, demands a certain pitch of culture, and then 
is not common. To will the right as the right, though not for the 
sake of rightness, is common enough ; but, in most of our moral 
actions, we do not do so much as this, because we act from habit 
and without reflection. Habits are all-important, and habits need 
not be self-conscious : and yet habits are imputable, because what 
makes the habit is within the region of conscious volition, and can 
not be disowned by it. The habits we encourage or sufler, we are 
aware of or might be aware of; we know their moral quality, and 
hence are responsible for them. Our character formed by habit 
is the present state of our will, and, though we may not be fully* 
aware of its nature, yet morally it makes us what we are.* Our 
will is not this, that, or the other conscious volition, nor does it 
exist just so far as we reflect upon it. It is a formed habit of 
willing, such a potential will as, apart from counteracting causes, 
and given the external conditions which we have a right to expect, 
must issue in acts of a certain sort. It is such a will as this which 
makes a man moral, and it need not everywhere and in all its acts 
be aware of what it is doing. 

To sum up, in estimating morality you take the amount of the\ 
present extent and intent (conscious or unconscious) of the will 
for good, less the present extent and intent of will (conscious or 
unconscious) for bad, and all in relation to what maybe called , 
chance, /. e, the amount of obtainable light, formal energy, natural \ 
disposition, and external circumstances of every kind, under which 
head must come that increase or decrease of general energy for 
which we are not accountable. Morality, in the sense of personal ) f *- 
morality, may either be self-con'^^cious or not so. It wills the end 
explicitly and directly as a meal end, as one not outside the heart 
and inner will, and so far it is self-conscious. Or again, it wills the 
end for its own sake, simply and direcdy, and not as an end 
within the heart and will ; and further, it need not always even 
be aware that it is acting rightly: in these cases it is not self- 

^ We have consciously^ and with knowledge of their moral character, coni> 
mitted ourselves to volitions with which our habits are essentially connected, 
or have failed to do so when we might have done so \ and hence those habits 
are ours, and constitute our standing wilL 



220 Ethical Studies. 



I conscious. But morally considered one morality is not higher 
than the other. 

Personal morality, then, is the process of the assertion of the 
ideal self, considered not directly as the position of its content 
but with respect to the intensity of the process as will. And W 
must be taken in relation to natural energy, disposition, and all 
circumstances; and again with respect to the intensity of the 
negation of the false self, since this negation is an inseparable 
element. It further includes the willing of psychical changes in 
the self, in the way of systematization, since these are means to 
the assertion of the ideal, and the negation of the bad self And 
the ground and result of morality is habit or state, which answers 
to process as its psychical embodiment and basis, and which, as 
standing will in a man for good, is virtue, just as the habitual will 
for bad is vice. 

Or otherwise, morality is the systematization of the self by the 
realization therein of the ideal self as will ; such ideal taking its 
content from (i) the objective realized will, (2) the not yet real- 
ized objective will, (3) an ideal, the content of which can not 
(without going beyond morality) be realized as objective will. 

' It is the process of self-realization from one point of view, 1. e. 
as the negation of the will which has a content other than the true 
content of the self, and the affirmation of the will whose content 
is that ideal in which alone the self can look for true realization. 

And being a process, involving a contradiction as the sim qua 
non of its existence, it tries to realize the for ever unreal, and it 
does desire its own extinction, as mere morality, in desiring the 
suppression of its finitude. 



Morality is approximative; and, before we proceed, we must 
learn more accurately how this is to be understood. The reader, 
recalling our criticism of the Hedonistic chief good (p. 89), may 
now object that the contradiction we discovered there is inherent 
in all morality : that in all we aim at a mark we do not hit, and 
endeavour to get nearer to an impossibility. We must try to clear 
up this matter. 

(i) That in morality we fail altogether to realize the end is not 



222 Ethical Studies. 



though the good will can legitimately be considered from one 
point of view as a number of units of a certain sort of energy, yet 
mere size is not the essence of the matter, and to say that moral 
perfection must rise and fall with the addition or subtraction of 
such units would be absolutely false. 

These questions at every point have done their best to draw us 
beyond our depth into the abstract metaphysic which in the end 
they turn upon. And now we come to one which threatens to 
involve us more deeply, and our answer to which must remain 
superficial. What sense have the words ^ higher 'and * lower ' 
when applied to morality ? 

(i) Tn the strict meaning of * moral ' we have discussed this 
/I above (p. 214). Strictly speaking, a higher stage in historical 
progress is not more moral than a lower stage. For in personal 
morality we consider not the relative completeness of the ideal 
aimed at, but the more or less identification of a given sum of 
energy with the particular ideal. And on this head we have 
dwelt as long as seemed necessary. 

(2) But in the \\nder sense of * moral ' there is a question which 
we have not properly discussed. If human history is an evolution 
(p. 171 foil.), how is one stage of it morally higher than another? 
For in one sense the European certainly is morally a higher being 
than the savage. He is higher, because the life he has inherited 
and more or less realized is nearer the truth of human nature. 
It combines greater specification with more complete homogeneity. 
And he is higher morally^ not only because the good will is better 
\ according as the type it aims at is truer, but also because that 
stage of the progressive realization of human nature from which 
the European gets his being is the historical product of a will 
w^hich in the main was for good, and now at any rate is the 
present living embodiment of the good will. Thus if we hold 
tnat in evolution one stage is higher than another, we can say also 
that one stage is more moral than another. But (as before) in 
the strict sense general hunfkn progress is not moral, because it 
abstracts from the collision of good and bad in the personal self. 

And here we might perhaps stop, did not a fresh question 
irresistibly intrude. Is there such a thing as progress ? Does 
not progress mean the perpetual * more,' the would-be approxima- 



224 Ethical Studies. 



I know of no answer but this, that the perfect is that in which 
we can rest without contradiction, that the lower is such because 
it contradicts itself, and so is forced to advance beyond itself 
to another stage, which is the solution of the contradiction that 
existed in the lower, and so a relative perfection. If there is a 
whole which is not finite, and if this whole exists in the finite, 
the reader will see at once that the finite must be discrepant, 
not only with what is outside itself, but also with itself. The 
movement towards the solution of this contradiction consists 
in the extension of the lower so as to take in and resolve its con- 
flicting elements in a higher unity. And this is the reason why 
the advance consists in greater specification and more intense 
homogeneity, and therefore, to a certain extent, can be measured 
by quantity. On this view the higher is above the lower, not 
because it contains a larger number of units, but because it is the 
harmony of those elements which in the lower were a standing 
contradiction. And this conclusion I will ask the reader to take, 
not as positive doctrine, but as matter for his reflection. 

But if any one says he must go further, and objects, * Well, but 
in every stage the whole is realized, and in no stage is it realized 
free from all contradiction. It is actual and complete in the one 
as in the other, — 

As full, as perfect, in a hair as heart, 
As full, as perfect, iu vile man that mourns, 
As the rapt seraph that adores and bums ; 
To him no high, no low, no great, no small ; 
He fills, he bounds, connects, and equals all,' 

here I confess I can not follow, nor, if I could, would my theme 
allow of it. For the moral point of view holds good only within 
the process of evolution. 

^ The question. Is evolution or progress the truth from the 
/ highest point of view ? raises problems which nothing but a system 
^ of metaphysic can solve. We are forced to believe in the many, 
we can not help believing in the one \ and^ whether we desire it or 
not, these thoughts come together in our minds, and we say, The 
process of change is the truth. Is then process, still more is 
evolution, what we can think without contradicting ourselves? 



Ideal Morality. 225 



To whom in England can we go for an answer ? And yet one 
might have thought that a part of the energy now spent in preaching 
the creed of evolution would well have been spent on the enquiry, 
What in the end is process in general, and, in particular, what is 
evolution ? Is it, or is it not, a self-contradiction ? And, if it is, 
what conclusions follow? But dogma is more pleasant than 
criticism, and as yet we have no English philosophy whose basis 
is not dogmatic 

But, whatever evolution may be. Ethics is confined within it 
To ask what it is is to rise above it, and to pass beyond the world 
of mere morality. 



£SSAV VII. 

Selfishness and Self-sacrifice. 

npO say that selfishness and self-sacrifice are equally selfish does 
-^ seem to the unthinking person a mere foolish remark ; 
which, if suspected to be true, would fill him with astonishment 
and horror. But the view of such emotions should the rather 
tend to recommend the doctrine to the thinker. For wonder, as 
he knows, is the beginning of philosophy : and a shudder comes 
over the not yet initiated, when the deeper mysteries are unveiled. 

But seriously, is it not strange that men can believe in a world 
of universal self-seeking, and men whose theories (the phrase is not 
mine) have not come from * raking into that filthiest of all jakes, 
a bad mind/ but whose lives in many cases were self-denying, and 
who were better and wiser than ourselves ? This on one side is a 
fact, just as, on the other side, the common belief in self-sacrifice 
is a fact; and such facts as these should engage our attention. 
For what we most want, more especially those of us who talk 
most about facts, is to stand by «// the facts. It is our duty to take 
them without picking and choosing them to suit .our views, to 
^plain them, if we can, but not to explain them away ; and to 
reason on them, and find the reason of them, but never to think 
ourselves rational when, by the shortest cut to reason, we have 
reasoned ourselves out of them. 

But our present undertaking has narrow limits^ We intend, so 
far as possible without reference to others, to ask, and in our o\vti 
way to develope, the question, VVhat is selfishness, and what self- 
sacrifice? and to include: in that the enquiry. What ground is 
there for the denial of unselfishness ? And with this last let us 
begin, not with reference to particular theories, but striving to 
Si'itisfy ourselves. 

If selfishness is self-seeking, and if to seek self is never to act 



228 Ethical Studies. 



Without want no action : want, is my want : I do what I want ; 
and therefore, whatever my outward act may be, my motive and 
my heart is seliish ; and for morals the act is qualified by the 
heart and motive. 

Such is the groimd we may assign for the theory of selfishnes^ 
and we shall see that, in a certain sense, that ground is firm. 
iVhat would be the answer of the practical man ? 

The practical man, I suppose, would say something of this sort • 
' True it is that a man does what he has a mind to, or, if you will, 
what he wants to do ; but I call a man selfish or not according to 
what it is that he wants and likes. Some men care to do the 
right, others to do only what they want, to please no one but 
themselves ; and the moral character of each depends on the 
nature of what pleases him.' If we pressed him further and said, 
* Yes, but the difference is superficial ; what pleases a man is 
what he desires, and hence in all cases alike he must do what he 
Hkes, and because he likes it : why he does it is the point, and 
the * why* is his perso..:' aesire or aversion; hence he is always 
at bottom selfish,' — ^then I thmk our supposed practical man would 
imagine you wished to impose upon him. These questions about 
the * why ' he would take to be misleading nonsense. He accepts 
it as a fact that some men want good and others mere pleasure, 
and he feels sure that for that fact there is no further reason, in 
the sense we have suggested. He believes that we are tr3dng to 
persuade him that he and others seek the good and avoid the 
bad, in all cases, with an ulterior object, — as a means, that is 
to say, to something else which is the end : and this idea he 
indignantly repudiates. He considers our question of the motive 
either an idle triviality, because asking what everybody knows ; or 
an attempt to mislead, because presupposing what is palpably 
false. 

And he is right That I do what I want to do, is an idle 
proposition. That it should lead to a new result would be strange, 
unless truth were to be found in the barest tautologies. Like the 
doctrine of the ' relativity of knowledge,' what significance it has, 
it has only as the nega.tive of unmeaning fictions, and, as a positive 
result, it has no significance at all. ' I know what I know,' ' I 
experience what I experience,' * I want what I want,' indeed * here 



2^o Ethical Studies. 



that it is either senseless or false. If 'because I want' means 
that it is want or desire which moves me to act, then it is sense- 
less; because, while professing to tell us something, it merely 
repeats ' I do what I want' But if * because I want ' means that 
I do everything as a means to an end, which I represent to 
m)rself as the feeling of my private satisfaction, then it is false, 
and it is grossly ^se. 

Let us dwell on this point, for to do so will repay us. (i) 
Everybody knows that there are actions which we say We do with- 
out a motive ; there are acts, in the first place, not preceded even 
by the (conscious) idea of the act to be done; and in the second 
place (and these latter are more important), there are acts which 
are done thinkingly and on purpose, and which yet are done 
without any ulterior intent beyond the act itself. In* both of 
these cases we have no motive before our minds, no thought 
of any end to be reached, out of and beyond the act itself; and 
here for our minds there is no * because ' — ^we do what we want, 
and it is simply a mistake to suppose that in and for our minds 
there is another or further end represented, which suggests the act, 
or to which the act is a means. (2) And where we act, as we say, 
with a motive, where we have in our minds a reason, an aim, an 
object beyond the act, which the act subserves, there these 
motives, these thoughts of ends or objects to be realized, are of 
very different kinds. The motive to the act may be the thought 
of another particular act, or of the whole of a complex scheme ; 
it may be the idea of an end which my action is to bring about, 
the pleasmre or tlie happiness, the pain or the ruin of another ; in 
a word, the idea of any event the thought of whose realization by 
certain means excites desire or want, and so is a motive. In none 
of all these is the thought of my future feeling of satisfaction what I 
have before me : but this again may be my motive, and sometimes 
is. The pleasant feeling which is to result from an act may be pre- 
sented in imagination, and thought of as the end to be reached ; 
or the thought of myself to be pleased as much 'as possible 
generally, and here by such means and in such a way, may be the 
end which I take as the principle and motive of my actionu 

Let us illustrate the above : I may eat because I am hungry, 
instinctively and unconsciously, or simply purposing to eat this or 



/ 



232 Ethical Studies. 

you willy seems) pleasant, and only what is pleasant is desired^ 
It is the pleasure which moves, and pleasure is my pleasure, and 
therefore it must follow that in this sense my pleasure is ray 
motive, and hence that I always am selfish.' Let us examine this. 

' All that is desired is (or seems) pleasant : ' this is questionable, 
as we have seen, if extended to instinctive appetites. We may 
ask, for instance, is it pleasure which first sets the child sucking? 
' — but this by the way. When the assertion is limited to the 
desire, where objects are before the consciousness, then we think it 
is always true that in desire the desired is pleasant, and nothing 
but the pleasant can be desired. 

* It is the pleasure that moves : ' then, understanding by this 
that what immediately determines the will is a feeling of pleasure, 
let us for argument's sake admit it to be true.* * And pleasure is 
my pleasure : ' yes, undoubtedly — I feel what I feel, and nothing 
but what I feel ; but such a formal assertion, as we saw, tells us 
nothing about the self which feels ; it tells us that the mere fee^ 
ing self is there, it does not tell us that any other self is not there. 

' And hence my pleasure is my motive \ for it is my pleasure 
(or, if you will, my pain) which moves me to act ; and therefore 
I am selfish.' Or, putting it separately, * My pleasure or pain 
moves me ; ' to this we say Yes. * And my pleasure is my motive ; ' 
to this we say No, non sequitur. 

The reasoning we have develc^ed rests, in a word, on the con- 
fusion between a pleasant thought and the thought of a pleasure ; 
between an idea of an objective act or event, contemplation of 
which is pleasant, and of which I desire the realization, and the 
idea of myself as the subject of a feeling of satisfaction which is 
to be. Both ideas move us ; both we desire to realize : but the 
ideas are radically different. One, we repeat, is the mental re- 
presentation of an act of will or thought, or an outward event, the 

' To save space I have omitted all consideration of aversion from pain. But 
o avoid pain is> in respect of selfishness, admittedly the same as to seek 
pleasure ; so we need not treat it separately. 

* I believe, on the other hand, that, when put in this way, it is false. What 
directly moves is a felt contradiction, and this is not pleasant, though it implies 
an element of pleasure, and though the whole state may be pleasant (cf. p. 63, 
and below, p. 259). This, however, does not matter hece. 



t 



234 Ethical Studies.^ 



stimulus to action. What moves to action, whether that action be 
merely voluntary or also volitional, whether it does or does not 
involve a formal act of choice or resolve, is, in all and every case, 
the desire or the desires ; and the real stimulus in desire, tlie 
direct and actual mover (whether it be pleasant or painful), is and 
must be always felt, and can never be thought* It is impossible 
to bring it before the mind in such a way as to make it our object, 
without, as a consequence, destroying its very nature:* the 
thinking it makes a motive of it, which how, as au idea, is not a 
desire, but is the object of a new desire. 

If it were necessary that the psychical antecedent which 
directly produces the act should be a motive;, then no instinc- 
tive act would be possible. And in this respect what holds 
good of one act holds good of all; the stimulus is a feeling. 
My pleasure (if it be pleasure), which moves me to act, is, 
because it moves, therefore not my motive ; and my motive, 
because it is my motive, therefore can not be the pleasure which 
moves. Admit that of several desires the strongest prevails, 
admit that of alternative pleasant objects we must choose the most 
pleasant, yet this is not to admit that we choose between the ideas 
of pleasures ; it is not to admit that, if my choice is determined, I 
therefore choose that which immediately determines it Out 
of the present ideas of pleasures, as such, to be had, to choose 
always what seems to be the greatest is selfish, but to choose 
what pleases me most is not selfish nor unselfish. It merely means 
that I choose, and says nothing whatever about what I choose. 

Let us close this discussion. — Pleasure is the feeling of self- 
realizedness ; it is affirmative self-feeling, or the feeling in the 



^ Of course, while being pleased by the contemplation of an object, jrou can 
transfer the pleasure, in idea, to that object, so that they form an int^;ral whole. 
But then a new feeling must be excited by that whole in order to move you. 

* I do not mean that it can not be theoretically apprehended, and so trans- 
formed by the observing intellect, while at the same time and none the less 
as feeling it moves us practically. What I mean is that, so far as transformed, 
it is destroyed. The ideal representation of the feeling, so long as only 
theoretical, may coexist side by side with the practical feeling ; but that 
representation as practical, tL ^. as an idea which generates new practical 
feeling, is ipso facto the destruction of the old feeling as such. 



236 Ethical Studies. 



occurs to us to identify the two, and say selfishness is this pursuit 
Can we do this ? Or shall we find that, though the pursuit cer- 
tainly is selfishness, yet selfishness is more than it, is a wider term 
than mere pleasure-seeking ? That we shall see better, when we 
know more accurately what pleasure-seeking is, a question which 
as yet we have not asked. 

Confusion here is inevitable unless we are cautious. We talk of 
pleasure and pleasures as if they were something by themselves, 
and apart from the pleasant ; as if a pleasant activity were simply 
a pleasure, and as if a pleasant feeling had no other content than its 
pleasantness. This is clearly unjustifiable. Pleasure we have called 
the feeiing of self-assertion, but we must remember that there is no 
such thing as the mere abstract assertion of the self. The self is 
affirmed in this or that, and the this or that of the particular 
affirmation must be felt : the self-feeling is not one thing by itself^ 
which is divisible from what is felt in the self: the feeling, and 
the feeling myself affirmed or denied, are not parts but elements 
or aspects of one whole, to be distinguished and not divided. 
It may indeed possibly be maintained that the general feeling of 
pleasure, which goes with the pleasant^ can be distinguished in 
such a way as to be brought before the imagination by itself, and 
apart from this or that particular pleasant feeling, and it does not 
concern us here to contest such a proposition ; but what is quite 
clear, and what we insist upon, is that the representation of this feel- 
ing of pleasure as such would not be what is ordinarily called the idea 
of a pleasure. If the abstraction can be nuide and brought before 
the mind, yet people do not commonly do this. A pleasure for 
them means something pleasant : in a pleasant feeling they do not 
separate the pleasure from what in particular is felt ; they follow 
jj3«a and not n^ovr^. This or that pleasant is not aimed at simply 
as a pleasure ; and the pursuit of pleasure in general for pleasure's 
sake would mean the abstraction from the pleasant of its pleasant- 
ness, and the setting that as an object before the mind. Such an 
end, the notion of the self simply to be pleased, is an intellectual 
abstraction, and the consistent pursuit of it exists only in theory. 
The ideal voluptuary desires only pleasure, and the pleasant merely 
as a means thereto ; but this ideal is not to be found, and his 
supposed consistent hunt is a practical impossibility. 



238 Ethical Studies. 



the water; before I did not. What makes the difference? Can 
we say, * Yes, now I drink because the perceived water suggests 
ideas of pleasure, and the ideas suggest (directly or through their 
feelings) the activities with which their archetypes were connected' ; 
or otherwise, * The pain of thirst suggests through the water the 
relief from pain, which is the idea of a pleasure, and that suggests 
the action, and so I drink ' ? All this again (apart from other 
objections^) would be an inaccurate description of the facts. 

It is not true as a matter of fact that in the second case, where 
I drink, the water has ideas associated with if which it had not 
associated with it in the first case, where I did not drink. And 
the whole phraseology is both clumsy and misleading. In more 
ordinary language this is what really happens. Water has a certain 
meaning to me ; and, when I see water and recognize it, I can have 
before my mind either all its meaning or only a part One part 
of that meaning is that water quenches thirst ; 1. e. it contains the 
ideas of certain activities, results, and feelings. These ideas, in 
the first case, we purposely called up ; they were there, and yet 
that did not move us to drink. In the second case we are moved 
to drink, but the question is, when we want the water, have we 
any more ideas than when we did not ? * Yes,' we shall be told, 
' you have now the idea of pleasure to be had by drinking, and 
therefore you drink : that is the new idea, and before you did not 
drink because you did not have it, or did not have it strong 
enough,' Taking the last part first, if it were true that we had 
the idea of future pleasure, then weak and now strong, and it was 



* We are not here concerned with the lowest stages of the will, but we may 
remark that the 'association' theory is not only helpless before the fact that 
yneasiness and pain are stimuli to action, and is driven by it to open inconsist- 
encies or palpable fictions (let the reader peruse Bain, EmoHons, £d. iL pp. 
.312-13 ; Ed. iii. pp. 316-18) ; but that also the real thesis with which it stands 
and falls, viz. the general priority of activity to all feeling, it fails even to 
recognize as the vital question, and obscures it by showing, what is nothing to 
the point, the priority of general activity to the special sensations of the 
senses {Emotions, 303). But if the dischai^e of energy from the -physical 
centre (lower or higher) be preceded by any specific feeling, and accompanied 
by any specific feeling, then, {/ this is so^ surely here is the place to look for 
the psychical genesis of the will, and not in the unverified postulate of a 
discharge, not felt in its origin or itself, and yet followed by pleasure. 



fi40 Ethical Studies. 



before the mind ; that is the object of desire, and it would be the 
motive, if it were the indirect object : for motive means an ulterior 
end. The felt stimulus of pleasure in the idea against pain 
in the reality is what moves, /. e, is the imniediate psychical 
prius of the putting forth of energy : and this, as we have seen, 
can never be the motive or the object, because a feeling which is 
an object is so far not a feeling. 

Or take the instance of a lump of sugar. That means to me 
mainly, or here at least, the sweet-tasting thing ; and I do aot 
want it In comes a child ; to him it means also, as it did to me, 
the sweet-tasting thing, but he cries for it. * Yes,' we shall be 
told, * in one case there is the idea of a pleasure, in the other not' 
Supposing we have in the child simple appetite, I deny the state- 
ment In both cases there is the idea of a sweet taste, and, if 
that idea is felt to be pleasant, it moves because it creates want, 
/. e. a state of contradiction, where the absence of sweet taste 
becomes uneasiness or pain ; such a state as I can produce in 
myself perhaps by eating something' sour. But it is a mistalce to 
say that I want the sweet thing because, so to speak, I discount for 
myself the promised pleasure to be got from eating it Whether 
the pleasure create the uneasiness, or the uneasiness suggest the 
pleasure, in any case the essence of desire is feeling. The child 
does not cry for the sugar on Tuesday, because he remembers 
he had a pleasure on Monday, and thinks he should like another 
to-day ; but because the feeling of sweet taste, now transfeixed as 
an idea to the sugar and made objective in it, is recalled in idea 
by its perception, and, being recalled, excites a feeling which, 
against the felt absence of sweet taste, is felt as want, and accord- 
ingly moves. 

An object of simple appetite (using appetite as desire for recog- 
nized objects, not as a name for the lowest form of want) is this or 
that thing or process, with the perception or image of which are con- 
nected (directly or through the idea of activities) certain feelings, 
which, against the feeling of privation, are pleasant Whether in 
any case now want precedes the pleasure or the pleasure excites 
the want, makes no difference. Whether the original satisfaction 
first came unneeded, or was preceded by and followed on the 
feeling of privation^ at the present stage again makes no difference. 



242 Ethical Studies. 



pass into what may be called, for convenience sake, lust. Here it 
is no longer the ideal satisfaction of appetite, felt as pleasant in 
this or that objective thing or process, which excites desire. The 
object does not remain sensuous ; but by its relation to the per- 
manent self it has been made into an idea, which itself, as against 
this or that moment of sense, is relatively permanent, and in the 
absence of perception can yet come before the mind. Hence, by 
the return of the feeling of satisfaction or the feeling of want, or 
in other ways, it is suggested to the mind when nothing is before 
the eyes.* But this is not all. Not only is the idea of the object 
a thought now independent of sense, but the pleasant feeling of 
satisfaction is reflected on and, as pleasant, is transferred to the 
object. The feeling of self-affirmation in the possession of the 
object has now, itself as an idea, become part of the idea of the 
object j and so not only is the object thought of when absent, but 
it is thought of as what is wanted, and what pleases when possessed 
With the ideal possession of the object is integrated the ideal 
pleasant satisfaction ; it is not the mere idea of the activities and 
feelings which give satisfaction, but the idea of these as pleasant, 
which is part of the content of the object. I think of the object 
habitually as that which gives pleasure when possessed, and hence, 
from time to time, when I do not possess it, the idea of the 
pleasarit feeling as pleasant excites the feeling of assertion, and 
this, against the present absence of real assertion, tends to awaken 
the feeling of privation, and hence desire.* The content of the 
I I ' ■ 'I I . » 

^ We may notice in illustration that what is never absent, what I can always 
have, seldom becomes an object of lust 

* Lust ihust be based on appetite natural or artificial. The reason furthei 
why th^ water, when by reflection it was thought of as pleasant, did not awake 
desire was that, though ideas of pleasant feeling were in one way ' associated ' 
with it, yet they did not make part of its meaning ; they were not inseparable 
from it. Desire for water always remains simple appetite, partly because we can 
get it when we want it, partly because the ordinary pleasure of drinking is not very 
gseat Hence by reflection and abstraction we may bring the pleasure of 
drmklng before the mind, yet, because the feelings of the process excited by 
th^jdea are not pleasant, as against our present state of satisfaction, appetite. 
IS not awakened. The idea of pleasure excited feeling of pleasure, but, because 
that did not' iteake us feel our present state as privation, therefore it did not 
move. 



244 Ethical Studies. 



again but tlie old delusion, for our ideal has no reality., and h can 
have none. The r&ality it calls for is its own, and it cails for it in 
that which is alien to its nature. It is permanent, and moments of 
sense are fleeting ; it is objective, and they are not ; it stays with 
us, and they must go. We have tried to find ourselves as this or 
that, and we are not this or that, and soon discover that not one 
nor any number of transitory sensations is our realization. We 
have made an end of the satisfaction of an appetite ; the satis- 
faction of an appetite does not last, but an end does last, because 
in it we have set ourselves before ourselves to be realized; and if 
an end is to satisfy us, it must be a permanent objective something, 
which when possessed we still have, and find ourselves really there. 

We need not repeat how the idea of the act which, as an ideal 
satisfaction, remains present and survives the particular act, goes 
on to institute a process with no end (p. 87) We may notice 
how the thought of an end makes possible the artificial creation 
of appetite as a means to sensuous satisfaction, and further that 
here again is the origin of loathing. The perpetual unsatisfied 
want and disappointment, with their pain, are themselves trans- 
ferred to and objectified in the idea of that which is lusted after, 
and now is both longed for and hated. 

So far we have seen the nature of lust as compared with 
appetite ; but the ideal voluptuary is not merely the man who lusts 
and is not satisfied. He reaches a level which, intellectually con- 
sidered, is still higher. The failure of the objects of lust to give 
satisfaction, and the disappointment which ensues, provoke 
reflection which may take this turn. * My ends are objects irt 
which I am to find pleasure, but I do not find it; and so there 
must be something wrong somewhere. I have made a mistake 
as to the end ; the deceit was "an illusion of close association"; 
I wanted pleasure in the ends, and so I thought I wanted 
the ends ; and the ends have fooled me. The attempt to 
realize the objective ends as ends in themselves was a delusion ; 
I have proved by experience that none of these objects is the 
end I really want I want them all, and yet I want none for 
itself; and that shows there is something in all which I want 
What is this? It is my pleasure. The idea of my pleasure, 
apart from any particular sort of pleasant feeling, and apart from 



246 Ethical Studies. 



yet all are hot called selfish. I^astly, it is not a general name for the 
bad self, because all sorts of wrong-doing are not indiscriminately 
called scjlfish. Weak yielding, self-conceit, pride, revenge and 
other vices are not so called. It would be absurd, for instance, 
to say * Jw^ selfish ! ' when we hear of a murder ; and we see at 
once that, thoiigh selfishness belongs to the bad self, it is not 
co-extensive with it If we ask what selfishness is, the readiest 
answer will be perhaps * thinking only of yourself;' and this 
appears to be right, though it needs explanation. Thinking only 
of oneself implies first that we think, that we are self-conscious 
reflecting beings ; and hence it seems a misnomer to call a beast 
or a young child selfish. Secondly, we think of nothing but ou^ 
selves ; and this means that the ends we set before us have not an 
objective content which is desired for itself, and without regard to 
its relation to our private selves. The selfish man, so far as he is 
selfish, hasT objects of desire which are not subordinated to any 
principle higher than his private satisfaction. If you ask what is 
the general end which includes his ends, you can point to none ; 
but you find that he tj;eats all objects as means, that he cares for 
none in itself, but will sacrifijce any with readiness ; and when you 
enquire what is common to them all, you find that they minister 
to his personal comfort ; this comfort being a certain quantum of 
the pleasant and of absence of pain^ which satisfies him, and 
which he either consciously aims at or unconsciously uses as a 
measure of all objects of desire. The ideal voluptuary consciously 
piursues pleasure in abstraction ; the real voluptuary consciously 
pursues the pleasant feelings which come from the satisfying of 
certain desires ; the selfish man pursues the generally pleasant, 
and avoids the painful in general, neither separating the feeling of 
pleasure as an explicit end, nor troubling himself with hunting for 
the pleasant for the sake of the pleasant, but making objects his 
end, either consciously or unconsciously, only so long as they are 
pleasant. If he separated pleasure from the pleasant and hunted 
for the maximum of that, he would be the ideal voluptuary : if he 
hunted for a certain sort of pleasant feeling as such, he w^ould be 
the real voluptuary. He is neither; he is characterized not so 
much by his end as his absence of end, by his readiness to use 
anything as a mere means^ to be let go when it ceases to serve the 



248 Ethical Studies. 



\ 



to the other. Nor is it only at different times that I feel so 
different, but also at one and the same time \ I feel in myself 
impulses to good in collision with impulses to bad, and I feel 
myself in each of them ; and, whichever way I go, I satisfy myself 
and yet fail to do so. If I yield to the bad self, the good self is 
dissatisfied ; and if I yield to the good self, the bad self is dis- 
contented; and I am driven to believe that two souls, two 
opposing principles, are at war in me, and make me at war with 
myself; each of which loves what the other hates, and hates what 
the other loves. In this strife I know that tlie good is the true 
self, it is certainly more myself than the other ; and yet I can not 
say that the other is not myself, and when I enter the lists against 
it, it is at my own breast that I lay my lance in rest 

No doubt this account, as a description of every one, would be 
much overcharged There are persons, no doubt, who know the 
bad self, not as an active enemy of the good, but merely as an 
opposing dr^. It is, however, better to see the whole extent of 
the facts we have to explain. 

The two selves do not present themselves as a mere collection of 
desires and habits, some of which we call good and some bad. 
We are not only conscious of ourself in them, but in each we are 
conscious of self in a certain character, as good against bad, bad 
against good. We are conscious of ourselves as willing them each 
in that specific character, and we recognize and refer our desires 
and acts, not to what seem to be certain headings, but rather each to 
an apparent active centre, embodied in our will, which has asserted 
itself and does assert itself in us, and in which we have assert.ed 
and do assert ourselves, not as a collection or series, but as a real 
being, as what we call our good and bad self 

A being which is not self-conscious, and morally self-conscious, 
can not know a division in himself of good and bad will ; and 
this by itself is a fatal objection against the theory which explains 
the two selves as hereditary groups of habits, 'egoistic' and 
'altruistic,' which oppose each other. I am far from denying 
that this view has a considerable value and sheds light on the 
subject, but, as a sufficient explai.ation of the collision in the self, 
it fails in two ways. In the first place, as we have just seen, the 
theory fails because the fact to be explained is a double self, and 



250 Ethical Studies. 



What, then, is the origin of the two selves ? And how are they 
developed from the crude material of the natural disposition ? 
This is the question we have to answer ; but let us first be sure 
we know what their content is. 

> / The good self is the self which is identified with, and takes 
■ pleasure in, the morally good ; which is interested in and bound 

; up with pursuits, activities, in a word, with ends that realize 
the good will. The good will is the will to realize the ideal 
self; and the ideal self we saw had a three-fold content, the 
social reality, the social ideal, and the non-social ideal We 

i need say no more, then, but that the good self is the self whose 

= end and pleasure is the realization of the ideal self. 

What is the content of the bad self ? Here we find no general 
head, no objective unity, to which, as an end, its content is subor- 
dinated. All we can say is that the content of the bad self in a 
man is the habits and pursuits which are antagonistic to the good ; 
the bad will is the will which is identified with the bad, and the 
bad is whatever is willed against the good. Its content is not mere 
pleasure-seeking as such, for that implies abnormal reflection and 
abstraction : nor, again, is it selfishness, because many bad deeds 
are done without conscious or unconscious regard to personal 
comfort. The content of the bad self has no principle, and iotms 
no system, and is relative to no end. Pride, hate, revenge, 
passionateness, sulkiness, malice, meanness, cowardice, and reck- 
lessness have no one thing common to the content of all : I 
please myself and my worse self in all ; and, if you abstract what 
is common, you must say, since the worse self as such can not be 
an end, that hence the end, under which all are subsumed, is 
private pleasure j but all that is true in that assertion is that there 
is no other end. The bad self has indeed, as we have seen and 
hatve yet to see, some sort of unity, because we are self-conscious 
in it ; but that unity does net lie in its content ; the content can 
be generally described only by reference to the good self, as what 
contradicts and opposes it, and can not be defined except against it 

in a man, you will not necessarily find all that he has icheritedy which was 
good in his parents, on the good side ; and all of the bad in them^ which he 
has inherited, on his bad side. A man's character is not the grouping of two 
descended heaps. 



252 Ethical Studies. 



his pleasant or painful activities and feelings the content of things. 
There are other objects round him, which please him apart from 
appetite, and of these not a few are permanent ; they are continually 
with him, and do not disappear when enjoyed. On the contrary, 
they remain when possessed ; and, so long as the child has them, 
he does not want them or desire them, but feels affirmed and 
satisfied in them. The feelings they excite, which are pleasant, are 
transferred to them as ideas, and are made part of their content, so 
that their mere presence gives pleasure ; the will is asserted ia 
them, and their perceived ideas by habituation enter into the 
content of the child's standing self-feeling (not as yet self-con- 
scious), so that, in their absence, he is uneasy, he feels himself as 
something which is not fully there; or without them (in the 
homely phrase) he does not ' feel his self* at alL 

Now, here we have not mere appetite, or tension between an 
actual empty and ideal full self, such as is felt in the presence of 
this or that sensuous object. The satisfaction is not preceded by 
a feeling of contradiction, and it is permanent. And further, we 
have no selfishness, because we have no reflection and abstrac- 
tion ; the presence of the environing pleasant objects excites the 
general habitual pleasant self-feeling. It is most incorrect and 
misleading to talk of ideas of pleasure being * associated ' with 
them. The fact is that the idea of the object (imagined or per- 
ceived) gives a feeling of pleasure ; and it does so, because for the 
child its very meaning is objectified pleasant actions and feelings. 
And the point is that for the child it is a permanent pleasant; it is not 
a permanent cause of pleasure. It is not a means to an end out- 
side itself. Whether its content is felt to be pleasant, or in addition 
is known to be so, in neither case is the pleasantness separated in 
idea from the objective content, and it can not be made an end 
apart from that. The child likes it for itself, and he will not give 
it up for another means to the same end, because he has not 
thought of an end apart from the things he likes.* 



* At this point for clearness' sake it may be well to put certain results 
together. And, passing over the stage of mere want or felt need, not referred 
to an object, we have 

(i) Simple Appetite. Here a sensuous image is presented, with which are 



254 Ethical Studies. 



other feelings, in the relation of the dog, or at least most dogs, to 
the master; and here again the rule is that the dog a man has 
brought up is most attached to him. Even later in life, with 
regard to some people, we feel something of the same sort, 
though here again the feeling is probably mixed. We like to be 
with them, their presence is pleasant. And in all these cases the 
ideas of pleasure and their external connection are fictitious, and 
the 'illusion of close association' is only there for the deluded 
theorist 

Nor is It merely in the absence or presence of what is dear 
that the child feels its will negated or affirmed ; it does so, too, in 
the negation or affirmation of the object Natural sympathy (into 
the ultimate nature of which we do not enter) no doubt plays a 
great part here; but, apart from sympathy, there are obvious 
reasons why the manifested well-being and pleasure, or again the 
discomf<Mt, of the mother or nurse should be identified by the child 
with what is enjoyable or painful to itself ; and further again, apart 
both from sympathy and this comparatively 'artificial' connec- 
tion, it must happen that the perceived affirmation or negation 
of any part of the endeared environment is felt as the assertion 
or suppression of the self. When we are pained by the loss or spoil- 
ing of parts of places where we have been happy, this, I think, 
does not rest on sympathy ; and when some childish possession is 
destroyed or damaged, and then replaced or repaired, sympathy 
no doubt may come in, bu. the diminution or increase of that 
which is perceived (of course, unreflectingly) as the area of self- 
assertion, or (if we like the phrase) as * the objectification of the 
will,' is essentially and immediately connected with our own dis- 
comfort or pleasure. The self lives in its contents, rises and falls 
with its world; things and other persons enter into those con- 
tents, and no great advance in perception is needed to know, for 
instance, that a mother or nurse is pleased or annoyed. 

At this point we have reached the stage where moral education 
begins ; not that the child will be a moral being as yet, but it is 
here we can see the unconscious beginnings Qf a better and a 
worse self. 

So far the child has felt pleasure or pain in the existence and 
well-being, oi the absence and hurt of what is not self; he has not 



256 Ethical Studies. 



own sakes, ^hile, by a counter process, what is disobedient and 
bad becomes undesirable, and is thought of as such. For this 
cause alone the good would please ; but, in addition, the nature 
of what the child is taught to think good is, in the main, what is 
on the whole pleasant, while indulgence in the bad brings on the 
whole contradiction and pain. The good accords with itself, the 
bad does not, and the child soon finds this out Other furthering 
incentives we need not consider ; the fact remains, that the child 
finds pleasure in the approval of the superior and in that which 
the superior approves of, and pain in the contrary ; and further, 
that he does so directly and unreflectingly. To will what the 
superior wills is an end in itself. 

In all this what is there selnsh ? Of course, if the child were 
habitually to say to itself, ' Will doing this be a means to my 
pleasure or pain ? ' and were to act accordingly, that question 
might be awkward. And I do not say that children, more especi- 
ally when they get older, never do argue in this way ; nor can I 
deny that I have heard ^morality' being taught them so, — a 
lesson, it seems to me, which, if not perilous, can fail to be so 
only because understood in a sense other than its simple meaning. 
But, roughly speaking, the process of learning to be good is as 
I have described it, and such calculating reflections are abnormal, 
and in infancy impossible ; and the developement being in the 
main what has been sketched above, I repeat the question^ Is there 
anything selfish ? 

* Oh yes/ we shall hear, * what moves is the idea of pleasure' — 
but of that fiction I think we must really have had enough. A 
child, when it tries to please its mother, is as imselfish as the 
hen who faces death for her chickens, as unselfish as the dog 
who gives his life for his master. The point is once more, what 
is before the mind in the act? Are there any ideas of my 
pleasure, as my pleasure, there or not ? If any one maintains 
that my dog follows me about, and frets when I leave him, because 
of ideas of his own private pleasure as such which are ' associated ' 
with me, I can not argue with such a man: we split upon a 
question of fact, and have no coipmon ground. If any one tells 
me (and I have heard people say it) that a dog loves his master 
for what he has got from him or expects to get from him, I say 



258 Ethical Studies. 



We saw above that when the satis&ction of appetite was 
reflected on, when the self was identified with the pleasant negaticm 
of particular sensuous objects, and that as an idea was made an 
end, then we had lust, with its infinite process and general 
unsatisfiedness. We have now to see how different it all is, when 
the self is made one with ideas of a different sort 

The child, as we saw, finds pleasure in accordance with the 
superior, in the piursuits which are approved of by him ; and the 
thought of these activities, which are called good,^ is pleasant 
and ideally affirms his will They are ends in themselves ; thejr 
are not reached by the excitement of appetite towards this or that 
perishing thing of sense ; they are not merely something to be 
enjoyed, they are something to be done. They have a content 
other than the feeling of the subject, an objective content ; and 
that objective content is by act carried out into the external world 
It can be seen and possessed there ; or, if invisible, yet exists for 
thought in its results, or at least in the recognition of othen. 
The child has done something ; and what he has done he still m 
some shape or other has, if it be only in credit \ he possesses an 
objective issue of his will, and in that not only did realize himself, 
but does perpetually have himself realized. The self, felt per- 
manent and identical within him, finds its counterpart in the 
world which is not merely itself ; it has a permanent and identical 
expression, and, if it think of itself, it has something to think o( 
a solid existing and real content, not the mere memory of the 
perished and unreal. Hence there is perpetual satisfaction, not 
because desire ceases, but because here desire is pleasant both in 
itself and its results. It is necessary, of course, that the yet to be 
done, the something more or the something new, should be 
presented as ideal assertion against relative non-assertion. But, in 
the first place, the privation is merely relative ; the desire is not, 
as in lust, the contradiction between fulness and absolute empti- 
ness (in lust we say, ' if I do not get this now, what matters all 
that I have got before? for now it is nothing') — ^but we start 
from the habitual complacency in our known realization, and, if 

* We shall come upon what may be called bad interests lateir on. la ear acoomit 
of t^ bad sell 



26o Ethical Studies. 



perishing moment of sense ; in interest the content is reah'zed^ 
because the moment of sense is not desired as such, but is used as 
the means and material for the objective result, which, as a resuJ^ 
does not depend on it ; the perished past was the condition of 
translation of the ideal into reality, and a reality which is present 
The one object struggles to life, but dies as fast as it is bom, and 
for ever remains a conscious and reluctant death ; the other is 
perpetually bom anew, and is for ever the same life, wHch 
lemains and keeps its past and its present 

And we must notice too, what further on will engage us, that 
the good which the child thus lives itself into and lives in, is in 
the main in harmony with itself. And hence the self, which feds 
itself to be one and a whole, feels in the good the answering 
harmony of its own true nature, and divines that what realizes it 
as a system realizes itself, and that the jarring and discrepant is 
£sdse and untrue. 

So far we have seen that the self is identified with pursuits and 
activities as eads to be gained by it, but further it is interested in 
persons and causes whidi stand in no direct relation to its personal 
activity. Apart from anything which it does or has to do, it feels 
its will affirmed or denied in the success or failure of that which 



cruellest want is where^ against the idea of the satisfaction, the reality of the 
privation is forced on us. The keenest pleasure is where, against the surviving 
pain of want, the satisfaction is felt or forefelt as actual. It is because the pain 
so soon disappears, that the pleasure of sensuous satisfaction fades so fast It 
is not indeed true that the moment the pleasure touches our lips, the pain is 
gone wholly, but it has even then begun to go, and with it the extreme of 
pleasure. That is why so often ' the dream is better than the drink.' It must 
be so where the negation of the sensuous object is the end, i, ^. where it is not 
the permanent assertion of ourselves in a permanent object which is aimed at 
Only in the latter case do we keep and have ourselves in what we have. When 
we do this the pain of want is outweighed. It was partly his failure to con* 
sider this, partly his mistake as to the negative character of pleasure (£ & his 
seeing in it only the n^;ation of a positive, viz. pain), which was the fonndatioo 
of Schopenhauer^s pessimism. For him life is an oscillation between the 
pains of want and ennuL Want of permanence again in the realization is the 
reason why aversion, so often liked, encouraged, and on the whole pleasant, 
mostly cheats jitself in the end. When our enemies are destroyed, we have 
destroyed our pleasure. The whole subject of aversion is difficult and 
interesting. 



262 Ethical Studies. 



difticulties, of which he who is ready with some crude solution 
knows but little, though no less perhaps than he (and there are 
many such) who commits himself offhand to the insolubility of a 
problem, about the true nature of which he knows as good as 
nothing. Those ultimate difficulties we intend to pass by. We 
have nothing to do with what is called natural evil, nothing to do 
with spiritual evil in its relation to the divine ; the false self as 
sin does not fall within moral pnilosophy. We have to do with 
evil solely in the form of the moral bad self, and must attempt in 
outline to show how it arises, first unconsciously, and then in its 
specific character ; and finally to say something ^n its nature as 
against the good.' We shall not attempt to mention, much less 
to criticize, every antagonistic view. 

The self, to begin with, is bom, morally speaking, neither bad 
nor good. No doubt it may not be what it should be ; it should 
for instance be a moral being, but I suppose that does not make 
it one already in any proper sense of the word ; and, not being a 
moral being, it can not be bad. We are far from denying a certain 
truth to other views on this point, but, as expressions of the 
whole, they are one-sided and false. The hereditary theory, in 
particular, we saw ubove failed wholly as an account of the good 
and bad self. We deny that good and evil come to us by nature, 
but we readily admit that certain qualities are transmitted which 
are the real possibilities of particular forms of both. We allow 
again the distinction between the purely natural and the potentially 
moral, and by no means assert that a new-bom child is a beast; 
but we must insist that the child is actually natural^ and that the 
natural is neither immoral or moral. The child is bom with a 
basis of physical and mental tendencies, more readily developed 
in some directions, good and bad, than in others, but stiU at 
present not developed, and moreover not to be developed by their 
own necessity. This common ground and material of good and 
e\dl we may call natural capacity ; and, while by no means passing 



^ My knowledge of the literature of the subject is so exoeedingly slight that 
I feel some diffidence in mentioning any work ; but I think the reader will 
find that Vatke's book {Die Mmschliche Freiheit; Berlin, 1S4X), if not satis£iictor>', 
9X all events goes deep into the whole subject 



264 Ethical Studies. 






!, 



propensities, which, as they are and exist, can not be systematized 
They must be made into a system by repression here and en- 
couragement there ; and even then, with all the conditions at the 
best, some element of the material is sure to give trouble. The 
will can be made one with the good by nothing but a process oi 
habituation, and this takes time. All the while the child is Uving 
from moment to moment what must, under any conditions, be 
the chance life of a finite being. It is simply impossible that this 
or that bad satisfaction should not take place ; impossible that 
desire for what is bad should not be awakened, and equally 
impossible that such temptation should not be yielded to. And 
here we have the inevitable affirmation of the self in what is bad; 
and this is also permanent 
y It is permanent because, in one word, the self is permanent, 
because the self is not a perishing flux or collection. Bad satis- 
factions are not gone when the moment is by, but in their results 
they remain in us. Apart fi*om reflection, indulgence strengthens 

I propensity, and, if repeated, forms habit ; ^ and, given the pre- 
sence of positive conditions, and absence of checks, habit wiH 
pass into the class of act which produced it It is a state of the 
standing will And reflection makes an idea^ independent of this 
or that sensuous thing, which remains ready to rise before us, 
and so provokes temptation, and reacts upon habit to the further 
intensification of both. The self is made one with the bad by 
abiding habit and lasting idea, and thus gets a content, not 
past but present, which is discrepant with the content of the 
good will 

-I And here we must remark that this content has no unity in 
itself; it is not subordinated to a single controlling principle. 
It is a chance collection, united partly by interlacing of habits, 



' It is surprising that a writer of talent could allow himself twice to publish 
the exquisitely silly remark, 'Failure is to form habits.' The saying is sense- 
less in relation to fact ; for every (xie knows that we can not choose between 
habits and no habits, but at most between good and bad habits. In connection 
with the remaining views of the writer it is, if possible, still more senseless ; for 
habit with him is a word that can mean notiiing ; and, to be consistent, he 
must say, 'It matters not. what habits you think yoxi have; for they are a 
delusion, and so are you.' 



Selfishness and Self-sacrifice. 265 

partly by relative subordination to this or that bad end ; but its 
various habits and ends are self-contradictoiy, €, g, lust and lazi- 
ness, pride and greediness, hatred and cowardice. There is no 
one end, and there is no identity, no bond of unity at all, except 
the affirmative self feeling which, under differences, is the same 
tiiroughout The bad is contrary to itself, as well as to the good, 
imd, for these two reasons, is already painful, and, apart from this 
or that external check, fails to satisfy. 

But at this stage in what sense is it contrary to the good ? Is 
the bad known as bad against the good, and in that character 
willed? Not so, for the moral self-consciousness is not yet 
awakened. The bad is not brought under the general head of 
bad against good. Bad actions are attempted or willed, and, 
when willed, are found in collision with good ; there is a sense 
of jarring and contradiction, accompanied at most by a perception 
of incompatibility, and followed by pain and dissatisfaction. The 
good and bad selves do not confront each other as unities : so far 
as they come explicitly before the mind (especially the bad self), 
they are only collections. Bad acts are known, as this or that, to 
be against the will of the superior, but they are not yet done as 
contrary. Through correction the act may have painful associa- 
tions, but may be done in despite of these, yet still not consciously 
against the general good will. As yet the child does not have 
before it the will of the superior, together with this or that desire, 
recognized as against the will of the superior, and deliberately 
realize itself in the known contrary. Hence there is no common \ 
predicate for evil things ; they are sought because desired as this » 
or that ; and the discrepancy with the good is at most felt And 
further, we must remember that in the begiiming all, and after- 
wards many, bad actions are done quite innocently^ and without 
the smallest feeling that they are out of harmony with anything 
else. 

So far we have seen the growth of the good and bad wills in 
what we may call their unconscious and non-moral stage ; we have \ 
now to pass into the moral sphere. But let us first see clearly what 
that implies. Three elements are involved in it, knowledge of *- 
good, knowledge of bad, and self-conscious volitioiL You can 

/ J 



266 Ethical Studies. 



not have the first without the second, nor the second without Hsxt 
first, nor either without the third. Evil implies knowledge o{ 
good, else it can not be known as opposite to good , and, where 
it is not known, there is no morality proper : and the same with 
good. If a subject does not know what evil is, the words moral 
goodness are devoid of meaning to it You can not define moral 
goodness without bringing in evil : if you leave that out, you have 
a natural or a superhuman subject ; in either case morality as such 
goes, because the * ought' means nothing.* And the next point, 
on which we must insist, is that to know moral good and evil 
without willing them is simply impossible. These ideas are not 
ideas of anything external, nor of anything that can by any process 
of analogy be gathered from the external : their originals are in 
the subject, and, if he does not know them there first, he will 
nevei know them at ail. Knowledge of morality is knowledge of 
specific forms of the will, and, just as will can be known only 
because we know our will, so these forms of will demand personal 
and immediate knowiedge. Hatred of evil means feeling of evil, 
and you can not be brought to feel what is not inside you, or has 
nothing analogous witihin you. Moral perception must rest on 
moral e^erience. 

And, lastly, for morality is required self-conscious volition. It 
ill not do for the subject merely to be identified with good on the 
one side, bad on the other, to perceive their incompatibility and 
feel their discrepancy. He can not know them, imless he knofw? 
them against each other ; and for that he must have them both 
before him at once. He must have before his mind himself 
as desiring two things in oi^osition to eiach odier at cme 
moment, each being seen to belong to a certain class ; he stands 
above them, and in his conscious identification of his whole self 
in act with one or the other arises the knowledge of himself, as 
asserting himself as the good or bad will. This is the condition 



m 






* The question of the exact extent to which evil xnust^^o in order to awake 
conscience has of course (though here again evil takes the form of sin) a coo« 
siderahle interest for theology, but it does not concern us here. It is discussed 
by Vatke, pp. 275-6b 



268 Ethical Studies. 



realizations the self knows it is bad. It knows itself in them as 
self, because, in volition, it now asserts itself consciously ; having 
willed them, it is aware that they are its will : and it knows itself 
in them as bad self, because, in the doing of them, the self was 
asserted in that very character. The particular evil act is done as 
an instance and case of evil ; the general is realized as such in 
the particulars ; and, when the particulars are reflected on, they 
possess within themselves, as their identity, the self-conscious 
assertion of the self, as the will which is bad and which knows 
itself bad. This or that evil action or desire is now referred to 
the general badness ; the general badness is carried out in this or 
that bad act ; and, answering to the thought unity, there exists a 
common specific feeling, which binds all together; so that one 
evil self is felt in all, and all are felt as one self, which opposes the 
good, and which acquires its fixity by habit and l^ the conscious- 
ness which reacts on habit 
y The unity of the bad self is opposition to the one good self, and 
it has no other unity. But the good is one, not merely against 
the bad, but also in itself. We saw that in the good will there 
was subordination and system ; and all that is wanted for its self- 
conscious unity is that, by volition, the self should be asserted in 
it as one will against particular evil desires, which are recognized 
in their general character of opposition to it Good acts are now 
done as good, and realize a principle which in them is aware of 
itself. The unity of self-consciousness is bestowed on the good 
will ; but the point to keep in sight is this, that it was one before. 
The good self is now morally good ; and there is no need for us 
to trace its upward developement It knows itself at first as the 
will which, against the temptation of the bad, wills in its acts, and 
wills its acts as, the will of a superior outside itself, whether that 
be a person or tribe. The higher will is here felt, but not yet 
known, to be the will of the obeying self; and the process of 
developement, whether in morals or religion, has for its result 
the end where this higher will is known as the true will of the 
self, where law ceases to be external and becomes autonomy, and 
where goodness, or the identity of the particular will with the 
universal, is only another name for conscious self-realization. 
Why in the good self we realize ourselves, and in the bad self 



^^o Eikic4d Studies. 

TtaSlie die clui ig es is scazcdf possible. And here, wbere a fdt 
discrqxmcj giadnaBy siiaipeiis itsdf into a perceived contxadic- 
tioa, we can redace die gcncial coarse, but can not recover die 
detailed ezpexienccs, eadi one of niikh told, and added to the 
whole. 

From die first the incompatibility of pleasare in the good and 
in die bad must be in some waj fidt ; and as the two sides by 
habit harden themsdves and grow moie connected, this feeling 
must become more definite: There mnst come more or less of a 
perception of the good as a whole, a more or less dear ins^t 
that this or that bad act was incompatible, and the disapproval 
of the superior mnst to a certain extent be reflected on as 
attaching to a class of actSw There are dawnings of the moxal 
consdoiiaiess which never torn to day, and acts not quite moral, 
while hardly non-moral ; but aU that we can accomplish is to see 
clearly that the two sides are not perceived as such until perceived 
in their specific character, one against the other ; and that morality 
proper does not begin until, being so apprehended, they are 
consciously made the piindples of the particular acts. 

Growth up to the appearance of the specific moral consdous- 
ness is thus not strictly moral, and up to this time, I think, we 
are not accountable But, after this time, we must be considered 
so, although moral growth is still to some extent unconscious. To 
take the last first, it is quite certain that the awakening of the con- 
sdence does not mean its sudden application to the whole of life. 
It is only by slow degrees that our acts take spontaneously the 
colour of good and bad, and the process, owing to new material 
and fresh combinations of the old, remains incomplete to the end 
of our days. For all that, we are responsible ; and if theory must 
fix some point at which imputation begins, it can not be elsewhere 
than here. From this time we are a will which knows itself as 
good and bad, and knows that the good has exdusive daim. We 
have with full consciousness identified ourselves with good and 
evil ; and from that twofold identification of the will, which begins 
a new life, and is no transitory accident but a standing sdf, we 
are bound to condude that our particular acts now proceed. The 
burden of proving the contrary lies in all cases upon ourselves ; and, 
to escape imputation of evil or good, we must show, by establish- 



2/2 Ethical Studies. 



nature of the case, they must be perpetuall)'^ ia the way of one 
another. Thus the bad is no unity, no system, no concrete 
universal. And, secondly, being thus what it is, when formally 
willed it is contrary to the self that wills it That self both is, and 
feels and knows itself to be one, a permanent universal, and a 
whole ; and in the assertion of itself in the bad it puts itself into 
what does not answer to its nature, and in that objectification 
must feel that, though the self is gone out, yet the self is not 
there. 
\^ For what in the end is this bad self? It is nothing but a col* 
lective self formally asserted as an unity. We have come at last, 
really and in fact, to the collection which is affirmed as not a col- 
lection ; but this, we must never forget, is possible only because it 
belongs to that which is more than a collection. The actual 
unity of the bad self is a group of centres of bad habits and 
desires, in which the self-conscious self has affirmed itself, and in 
which the self feels itself in a sp>ecific manner against the good. 
But the one self is affirmed there formally and not really ; evil deeds 
are acts of the whole self, but if you ask, * where then in ihem is 
the whole self realized ? ' you can find it nowhere ; and the specific 
feeling of being bad, which is common to all the evil, attaches to 
it by virtue of its opposition to the one good, not in virtue of any 
one common quality that it has in itself A specific feeling of con- 
trariness to the good, this or that more or less solid group of 
associated bad habits, the fonnal and unreal assertion of the whole 
self therein, and the reflection on all evil, as what by its general 
opposition to the good is known as one, this is all the unity of the 
bad self. It is an universal in the sense of a collection of ali, not 
in the sense of being a whole and an organic system. It is a 
group of bad tendencies, adhering by the association of habit into 
relative centres, with nothing common to all save the specific 
feeling of opposition to the same unity, and by formal self-con* 
sciousness and reflection made for our apprehension into a 
whole, while in reality nothing but a heap of particulars. 

The bad self can not as such be self-conscious ; if it were so, 
it would realize the ideal of a self-conscious collection. It is 
the whole self which therein is aware of itself as what it is not, as 
a collection ; and hence the contradiction, hence tlie indignant 




274 Ethical Studies. 

ance is this, that a being which desires evil, not as this, that, and 
the other evil, but as mere negation of good, is not a being which 
knows what good is. We have seen that, unless the will is 
identified with good, good can not be known. If good is not 
willed, it is not known, and therefore can not as such be hated : 
and if good is not willed, evil is not known as eviL In short, with 
the total absence of will for good goes the absence of knowledge 
both of that and of evil, and, with that, desire for evil as such. 
The simplest way to put it is to say that to hate good is to hate 
oneself, and no one can altogether hate himself. 
To hate good is to hate oneself, because our being is affirmative 
through; indeed, we are position and affirmation itself^ and 
ood is the one and only true form of positive realization. I do 
' iiot mean that in this and that evil we do not affirm ourselves 
positively, but I say that we do not do so truly. We know our- 
selves to be one and a whole, and we know that we have not tnily 
and really produced and got ourselves in any mere this or that as 
such, or in anything but that which reflects and realizes our 
nature, as a being which can not believe that its reality is of the 



the positive desire for self-assertion and nothing but self-assertion. And this 
positive desire can be directed against the good only jfifr acadens. The 
abstract negation of the good we can not really aim at ; but, having this or that 
desire, we negate what opposes it, because and so far as it oppoees it, in' order 
to assert ourselves positively. To hate one's life is possible only sohras one 
abstracts from it ; and here it is self-affirmation, however abstract^ which is our 
positive end. 

There is only one class of facts where evil seems done for its own sake, 
I. f, to n^ate the good ; and in these we find a psydiolc^cal illusion. 
The illusion is that the good is a foreign will, which represses us from the 
outside. Breaches of discipline seem done for their own salce; but they really 
ax>e done not because evil, but because the self asserts itself in them against 
what it mistakes for another finite will. Removal of discipline soon destroys 
the zest of illicit pleasure ; then the subject finds out it does not care for the 
evil as such, a knowledge bought dear. If the subject goes on to say^ 'I wish 
I could think it wrong, because, since I ceased to do so, the pleasure has gone,* 
we have the nearest approach to mxoXmeim, But this rests on the illusion as 
to a foreign wilL Other phenomena of the sort can. be reduced to the head of 
the wish 'to spite oneself/ a curious state of mind which involves the takmg 
of oneself, in this or that character or quality, to be a self foreign and external 
to one's present self. 



2y6 Ethical Studies. 



all identification of the will with the ideal, demands the suppres- 
sion .of the self in some form ; and so, though self-realization, it 
yet at the same time is self-sacrifice. Can we say, then, that 
self-sacrifice consists in following the higher and crushing the 
lower, and that, conversely, all such action is self-sacrifice ? 

No, the latter would be false ; for it is not what in the ordinary 
sense self-sacrifice means. In morality, as a rule, what you give 
is returned to you with interest ; and the bestowal of the self on 
the good is rewarded by the general heightening of individual 
life. If happiness is the realization of one's ideal in one's own 
existence, the attaining one's end as a whole in the private self 
and by and for the private self, then, so far as men can be happy, 
in the main it is true that virtue is happiness ; and virtue does not 
necessarily imply self-sacrifice. 

Self sacrifice is more than this. It implies the identification of 
the will with an object, which entails in the effort to realize it 
the probable or certain negation of our priyate existence. And 
by private existence (other phrases, if this be objected to, will 
serve) I mean the existence which is ours, J do not say apart 
from but, distinct from others, what is centred in us as this or that 
person. The extensive and intensive affirmation of our will, as 
this 'I' or that *You,' whether in bodily well-being, psychical 
harmony, influence on others, or appropriation of physical or 
spiritual good things, — ^all these assert our particular personal 
existence, and all that opposes the actuality or possibility of these 
lowers it. Self-sacrifice is knowingly to give up this existence 
to that which is higher. In it we bestow our will on what, 
we believe, either will or may lessen the extensive and intensive 
assertion of our private self. It is not giving up our will, for 
that is mere nonsense ; nor our will as this or that man, that also 
is nonsense : if any one likes so to look at it, it is something less, 
but it is also and therefore a great deal more. It is the will of us, 
as this or that, to realize an object which means the lessening or 
total suppression of us as this or that. It is the good, self ; it is 
the identification of our will with the ideal ; it is self-realization, 
and as such has a pleasure of its own ; it does assert the private 
will, but it asserts il to its own negation ; and the content of the 
self it rea]izes, it does not get for itself and have as a personal 



Selfishness and Self'SOLcrifice. 277 

— ' ^ ■ ■ II . 

good of its own, but by sight or faith beholds its accomplishment, 
if at all, outside of and beyond its individual existence. 

Answers to two more questions, and then we have done. 
The first is, Can there be self-sacrifice for the bad; for the bad, 
that is, when known as bad ? It is perhaps a matter for doubt, 
but we incline to the negative view. We have seen that the bad 
is not desired in its quality of bad for the sake of that quality ; but 
the difficulty which remains is that, for the sake of something 
known to be bad, persons do seem to give up their existence, while 
aware that they will or may do so. A closer consideration may, 
however, dispose of these cases. They may be divided into two 
classes, passionate and deliberate. In the former an element of 
self-sacrifice is wanting, /. e, the having the consequences in view. 
Fierce hate and hot lust for a mortal pleasure lead men to death ; 
as the poet says, 

Our natures do pursue. 
Like rats that ravin down their proper bane, 
A thirsty evil ; and when we drink we die. 

But the point here is this, Is the end only before the mind, with 
blindness to the possible result ; or is that result considered ? If 
it is not considered, there is no self-sacrifice proper. The second 
class is the deliberate pursuit of bad objects, with a readiness to 
consider and face all consequences, even one's own death ; sacrifice 
of oneself, in short, for a bad cause. Here the important point is 
this, Is .the cause really known as bad : or is the conscience con- 
fused, so as to take ba<J for good, or at least to see good in the bad 
besides its badness ? And on our answer to that question will 
depend our finding. Self-sacrifice is admitted, but the doubt is, 
was it not after all for the sake of what seemed good ? And, imless 
we remove that doubt, we can not maintain the possibility of 
self-sacrifice for evil. 

The last enquiry is whether all self-sacrific^ must be religious; 
and here we are decided in the negative. It might be urged that 
the will to suppress the temporal self implies a will made one with 
what is above all finite things, a >vill identified with a non-temporal 
will ; and that here (whether it call itself so or not) we have 
religion. But this, I think, will not hold. Of . course, if self- 



I 



278 Ethical Sttulies. 

sacrifice for the bad be admitted, we can not see in that the 
assertion of the divine will And further, if the question be 
narrowed to self-sacrifice for good, still we must say that it need 
involve nothing properly to be called religion. The cause, with 
which the will is identified to the negation of the temporal self, 
need not therefwe be apprehended as non-temporal, or that 
which is above the finite ; but only as a finite realization, which 
is above and superior to this or that finite. And thus, too, my 
will may be identified with some bad interest, which, though 
finite, is sl^i superior to my finite existence. The doubt which 
remains is whether, in cases where the personal existence is felt 
as utterly worthless in comparison of the good to be attained, the 
good is not so qualified by the comparison that we have passed 
into the religious consciousness, or at least into that which springs 
from and depends on it. Here, however, on the other side we 
must take account of the • abstract self-consciousness,' which 
stakes its existence on a trifle, not because it cares for this or 
that content, but because, in its abstract assertion, it cares for 
no particular content as such, not even that of its own finite 
existence. But this, as well as the consideration of the former 
difficulty, besides others no doubt which we have omitted or failed 
to throw light on, we will leave tp the reader (if such there be) 
who, in spite of its treatment by the writer,, remains yet unwearied 
by the subject 



28o Ethical Shulies, 



tempted to say something more ; however fragmentary, however 
much in the form of an appendix.' 
Y- f- Reflection on morality leads us beyond it. It leads us, in 
short, to see the necessity of a religious point of view. It cer- 
tainly does not tell us that morality comes first in the world 
and then religion : idiat it tells us is that morality is imperfect, 
and imperfect in such a way as implies a higher, which is religioa 

Morality issues in religion : and at this word * religion ' the 
ordinary reader is upon us with cries and questions, and with all 
the problems of the day — God, and personal God, immortality' of 
the soul, the conflict of revelatiQn and science, and who knows 
what beside ? He must not expect any answer to these questions 
here : we are writing a mere appendix ; and in that our object is 
to shew that religion, as a matter of fact, does give us what 
morality does not give ; and our method is simply, so far as our 
purpose requires, to point to the facts of the religious conscious- 
ness, without drawing conclusions to the right .or left, without 
trying to go much below the surface, or doing anything beyond 
what is wanted in this connection with morality. 

We purpose to say nothing about the ultimate truth of religion : 
nothing again about its origin in the world, or in the individual 
We are to take the religious consciousness as an existing feet, 
and to take it as we find it now in the modern Christian mind, 
whether that mind recognizes it or whether it does not And 
lastly, space compels us to do no more than dogmatically asseit 
what seems to us to be true in respect of it 

Tliat there is some connection between true religion and morality 
€very one we need consider sees. A man who is ' religious ' and 
does not act morally, is an impostor, or his religion is a fabe- one. 
This does not hold good elsewhere. A philosopher may be a 
good philosopher, and yet, taking him as a whole, may be immoral ; 
and the same thing is true of an artist, or even of a theologian. 
They may all be good, and yet not good men ; but no one who 
knew what true religion was would call a man, who on the whole 
was immoral, a religious man. For religion is not the mere 

* Throughout the sequel I have to acknowledge my indebtedness to Vatke's 
book, DU Menschliche Freikeit : 1^41. 



Concluding Remarks. 2.81 



knowing or contemplating of any object, however high. It is not 
mere philosophy nor art^.because it is not mere seeing, no mere 
theoretic activity, considered as such or merely from its theoretical 
side. The religious consciousness tells us that a man is not 
religious, or more religious, because the matter of his theoretic 
activity is religious ; just as the moral consciousness told us that 
a man was not moral, or more moral, simply because he was a moral 
philosopher. Religion is essentially a doing, and a doing which 
is moral. It implies a realizing, and a realizing of the good self. 

Are we to say then that morality is religion ? Most certainly 
not In morality the ideal is not : it for ever remains a * to be.' 
The reality in us or the world is partial and inadequate ; and no 
one could say that it answers to the ideal, that, morally con- 
sidered, both we and the world are all we ought to be, and ought 
to be just what we are. We have at furthest the belief in an ideal 
which in its pure completeness is never real ; which, as an ideal, 
is a mere * should be.' And the question is, Will that do for 
religion ? No knower ^of religion, who was not led away by a 
theory, would answer Yes. Nor does it help us to say that 
religion is ' morality touched by emotion ; ' for loose phrases of 
this sort may suggest to the reader what he knows already with- 
out their help, but, properly speaking, they say nothing. All 
morality is, in one sense or another, * touched by emotion.' Most 
emotions, high or low, can go with and * touch' morality; and 
the moment we leave our phrase-making, and begin to reflect, we 
see all that is meant is that morality * touched ' by religious emotion 
is religious ; and so, as answer to the question What is religion ? 
all that we have said is, * It is religion when with morality you have 
— religion.' I do not think we learn a very great deal from this.* 

■ !■■*■■ I ' ■ i < M ■ I I I I I 

• 

' Compare (Mill, Dissertations, i. 70-1) the definition of poetry as 'Bum's 
thoughts tinged by his feelings ;* where the whole matter again is, 7vhat feelings ? 
Anything in the way of shallow reflection on the psychological form, anything 
rather than the effort to grasp the content All that Mill saw wanting in this 
'definition' was that it missed *the poet's utter unconsciousness of a listener.' 
However, to make sure of hitting the mark, he, so to speak, set it down as hit 
beforehand, and in his own * definition ' of poetry introduced * the poet's mind.' 
This is much as if we were to say, * Religion is the sort of thing you hare in a 
religious man.* 



282 Ethical Studies. 



Religion is more than morality. In the religious consciousness 
we find the belief, however vague and indistinct, in an object, a 
not-myself ; an object, further, which is real. An ideal which is 
not real, which is only in our heads, can not be the object of 
religion : and in particular the ideal self, as the * is to be ' which 
is real only so f^r as we put it forth by our wills, and which, as an 
ideal, we can not put forth, is not a real object, and so not the 
object for religion. Hence, because it is unreal, the ideal of 
personal morality is not enough for religion. And we have seen 
before tliat the ideal is not realized in the objective world of the 
state ; so that, apart from other objections, here again we can not 
find the religious object. For the religious consciousness that 
object is real ; and it is not to be found in the mere moral sf^ere. 

But here once more ' culture ' has come to our aid, and has 
shown us how here, as everywhere, the study of polite literaturei 
which makes for meekness, makes needless also all further educa«> 
tion ; and we felt already as if the clouds that metaphysic had 
wrapped about the matter were dissolving Jn the light of a fresh 
and sweet intelligence. And, as we turned towards the dawn, we 
sighed over poor Hegel, who had read neither Goethe nor Homer, 
nor the Old and New Testaments, nor any of the literature which 
has gone to form ' culture,' but, knowing no facts, and reading no 
books, nor ever asking himself * such a tyro's question as what 
being really was,' ' sat spinning out of his head those foolish logo- 
machies, which impose on no person of refinement 

Well, culture has told us what God was for the Jews ; and we 
learn that ' I am that I am ' means much the same as ^ I olow 
and grow, that I do,' or ' I shall breathe, that I shall ; ' and this^ 
if surprising, was at all events definite, not to say tangible. How* 
ever to those of us who do not think that Christianity is called 
upon to wrap itself any longer in * Hebrew old clothes,' all this is 
entirely a matter for the historian. But when ' cultui^ ' went on 
to tell us what God is for science, we heard words we did not 
understand about * streams,' and * tendencies,' and * the Eternal : * 
and, had it been any one else that we were reading, we should 
have said that, in some literary excursion, they had picked up a 



* Cu7tt, KevieiVf xxiv. 988. 



284 Ethical Studies. 



object of the religious consciousness. The reality, which answers 
to the phrases of culture, is> we suppose, the real existence of the 
phrases as such in books or in our heads ; or again a number of 
events in time, past, present and future (/. e, conjunctions of 
virtue and happiness). We have an abstract term to stand for the 
abstraction of this or that quality ; or again we have a series or 
collection of particular occurrences. When the literary varnish is 
removed, is there anything more ?' But the object of the religious 
consciousness must be a great deal more. It must be what is real, 
not only in the heads of this person or set of persons, nor again 
as this or that finite something or set of somethings . It is in short 
very different from either those thin abstractions or coarse 'verifi- 
able * facts, between which and over which there is for our ' culture' 
no higher third sphere, save that of the literary groping which is 
helpless as soon as it ceases to be blind. 

But let us turn from this trifling, on which we are sorry to have 
been forced to say even one word ; let us go back to the religious 
consciousness. 

Religion, we have seen, must have an object ; and that object 
is neither an abstract idea in the head, nor one particular thing or 
quality, nor any collection of such things or qualities, nor any 
phrase which stands for one of them or a collection of them. In 
short it is nothing finite. It can not be a thing or person in the 
world ; it can not exist in the world, as a part of it, or as this or 
that course 6f events in time ; it can not be the * All,' the sura of 
things or persons, — since, if one is not divine, no putting of ones 
together will beget divinity. All this it is not Its positive 
character is that it is real; and further, on examining what we 



* * Is there a God ? * asks the reader. * Oh yes,' replies Mr. Arnold, * and I 
can verify him in experience. ' * And what is he then ? ' cries the reader. * Be 
virtuous, and as a rule you will be happy,' is the answer. * Well, and God ? * 
•That is God ;* says Mr. Arnold, 'There is no deception, and what more do 
you want ? * I suppose we do want a good deal more. Most of us, certainly 
the public which Mr. Arnold addresses, want something they can worship ; 
and they will not find that in an h3rpostasized copy-book heading, which is 
not much more adorable than * Honesty is the best policy,' or * Handsome is 
that handsome does,' or various other edifying maxims, which have not yet 
come to an apotheosis. 



Concluding Remarks, 285 

find in the religious consciousness,* we discover that it is the ideal 
self considered as realized and real. The ideal self, which in 
morality is to be, is here the real ideal which truly is. 

For morals the ideal self was an *■ ought,' an * is to be ' that is 
not ; the object of religion is that same ideal self, but here it no 
longer only ought to be, but also is. This is the nature of the 
religious object, though the manner of apprehending it may differ 
widely, may be anything from the vaguest instinct to the most 
thoughtful reflection. 

With religion we may here compare science and art The 
artist and poet, however obscurely, do feel and believe that beauty, 
where it is not seen, yet somehow and somewhere is and is real ; 
though not as a mere idea in people's heads, nor yet as anything 
fn the visible world. And science, however dimly, starts from 
and rests upon the preconception that, even agaii?ist appearances, 
reason not only ought to be, but really is. 

Is then religion a mere mode of theoretic creation and con- 
templation, like art and science ? Is it a lower form or stage of 
philosophy, or another sort of art, or some kind of compound 
mixture ? It is none of these, and between it and them there is a 
vital difference. 

In the very essence of the religipjft^ consciousness we find the 
relation of our will to the real ideal self We find ourselves, as 
this or that will, against the object as the real ideal will, which 
is not ourselves, and which stands to us in such a way that, 
though real, it is to be realized, because it is all and the whole 
reality^ 

A statement, no doubt, which may stagger us ; but the statement, 
we maintain, of a simple fact of the religious consciousness. If 
any one likes to call it a delusion, that makes no difference; 
unless, as some people seem to think, you can get rid of facts by 
applying phrases to them. And, however surprising the fact may 
be to the reader, it certainly ought not to be new to him. 

We find the same difficulty, that the real is to be realized, both 
in art and science. The self dimly feels, or fore-feels, itself as full 



* The reader must carefully distinguish what is for (or before) the religious 
consciousness, and what is only in it, Bzidfor us as we investigate iL 



286 Ethical Studies. 



of truth and beauty, ai\d unconsciously sets that fulness before it 
as an object, a not-itself which is against itself as this or that man. 
And so the self goes on to realize what it obscurely foreknows as 
real ; it realizes it, although, and because, it is aware of it as real. 
And in this, so for, art, philosophy, and religion are the same. 

But, as we saw, they are also different €n art and science the 
will of the man who realizes is not of the essence. The essence 
of the matter is that a certain result should be produced, that, 
of the unseen object w^hich is divined to be real, a part at least 
should become visible, that in short, however it comes about, 
some element of the real should be seen to be realized. Here the 
end is the sight of the object, as such, and the will which procure* 
that sight is not taken into account No doubt it would be a 
great mistake to forget that art suid science involve will, and the 
will of particular persons, and that it is this will which realizes the 
object ; and that hence, since the object of science and art is at 
least partly identical with the object of religion, both science and 
art may so far be said to imply religion, since they imply the 
relation of the particular will to the Teal ideal For suppose that 
the human-divine life is one process, and suppose again that art 
and science and religion are distinguishable elements or aspects 
of this one whole process. Then, if this is so, neither art nor 
science nor religion can exist as a thixig by itself, and the two 
former will necessarily imply the latter. . But on the other hand, 
though we may not divide, yet we have to distinguish ; and when 
by an abstraction we consider one side, e. g, the side of science or 
that of art, by itself, and take them as mere theoretic activities, 
then we must say that in this character neither of them is religion ; 
and they are not religion because the will of this or that man, 
over against the real ideal as will, is not an element in the 
scientific or artistic process as such. The real ideal of science 
and art is not will, and the relation of my will to it falls outside 
them ; arid we must say, and we think that the reader will agree, 
that, so soon as the philosopher or artist is conscious of his will 
in relation to the real ideal, as a will which has demands on him, 
he ceases to be a mere philosopher or artist as such (which after 
all no human being is), and becomes also religious or ineligious. 

To proceed, we find in the religious consciousness the ideal 



288 Ethical Studies. 



can not stay to develope this doctrine, and must content ourselves 
with pointing out that the opposite is Utterly incomprehensible. 
The two poles are what they are, because they are against each 
other in consciousness. In them the self feels itself divided 
against itself ; and, unless they both fall within one subject, how 
is this possible ? We have not the felt struggle of ourself against 
a perceived or thought external object ; we have the felt struggle 
in us of two wills, with both of which we feel ourselves identified 
And this relation of the divine and human will in one subject is 
a psychological impossibility, unless they are the wills of one 
subject. Remove that condition, and the phenomena in their 
specific character instantly disappear. You can not understand 
the recognition of and desire for the divine will ; nor the con- 
sciousness of sin and rebellion, with the need for grace on the 
one hand and its supply on the other ; you turn every fact of 
religion into immeaning nonsense, and you pluck up by the root 
and utterly destroy all possibility of the Atonement, when you 
deny that the religious consciousness implies that God and man 
are identical in a subject.' 



' On this whole matter, and not specially with reference to religion, it is 
worth while to consider the position of our philosophy. People find a subject 
and object correlated in consciousness ; and, having got liiis in the mind, they 
at once proje<;t it outside the mind, and talk as if two independent realities 
knocked themselves together, and so produced the unity that apprehends 
them ; while, all the time, to go out of that unity is for us literally to go out of 
our minds. And when the moiistrous nature of theii position dawns on some 
few, and they begin to see that without some higher unity this • correlation' is 
pure nonsense, then answering to that felt need, they invent a third reality, 
whidh is neither subject nor object but ihe ' Unknowable* or the Thing-in-itscif 
(there is no difference). JBut here^ since the two correlates are still left to- 
gether with, and yet are not, the Unknowable, the question arises, How does 
this latter stand to them? and the result is that the Unknowable becomes the 
subject of predicates (see Mr. Spencer's First Principles), and it becomes 
impossible for any one who cares for consistency to go on calling it the 
Unknowable. So it is necessary to go a step farther, and, giving up our third, 
which is not the correlates, to recognize an Identity of subject and object, still 
however persisting in the statement that this identity is not mind. But here 
again, as with the Unknowable, and as before with the two correlated realities, 
it is forgotten that, when mind is made only a part of the whole, there is a 
question which must be answered ; ' If so, how can the whole be known, and 



Covxluding Remarks. 289 

For it "is the atonement, the reconciliation (call it what you 
please, and bring it before your mind in the way most easy to 
you), to which we must come^ if we mean to follow the facts of the 
religious consciousness. Here, as everywhere, the felt con- 
tradiction implies, and is only possible through, an unity above 
the discord : take that away, and the discord goes. The antithesis 
of the sinful and divine will is implicitly their union \ and that 
union, in the subject, requires only to be made explicit, for the 
subject, by thought and will. 

But for the subject it is not yet explicit; and it is only we who 
reflect upon the religious consciousness, that see the matter thus. 
That consciousness as such has not the insight that the divine 
will is the will of its own true and inmost self : I may know that, 
as a fact, in God there is the unity of the two natures ; but for 
me God is (here at least) only not my self; the divine is an object 
between which and me there is a chasm ; my inner self may 
desire it, but can only desire it as aa other and a beyond. True 



for the mind ? If about any matter we know nothing whatever, can we say 
anything about it ? Can we even say that it is ? And, if it is not in conscious- 
ness, how can we know ii ? And if it is in and for the mind, how can it be a 
u'hole which is not mind, and in which the mind is only a part or element ? If 
the Ultimate unity were not self or mind, we could not know that it was not 
mind : that would mean going out of our minds. And, conversely, if we 
know it, it can not be not mind. AU in short we can know (the psychological 
form is another question) is the self and elements in the self. To know a not- 
self is to transcend and leave one's mind. If we know the whole, it can only 
be because the whole knows itself in us, because the whole is self or mind, 
which is and knoMrs, knows and is, the identity and correlation of subject and 
object*. 

There is nothing in the above which has not been before the world for 
years, and it is time that it should be admitted or refuted. I think it wiU not 
be much longer disregarded. Much against its will English thought has been 
forced from the correlation as far as the identity ; and, if it means to hold to 
the doctrine of ' relativity of knowledge,' it must go on to mind or self in some 
sense of the word, as this identity of inner and outer. Perhaps not that ; but 
if not that, then I think we must begin on a fresh basis, or else give up the 
attempt to have any theory of first principles. But if we do (as perhaps we 
may do) the latter, then let me conclude this note by observing that amongst 
the other doctrines which must go is the doctrine of Kelativity. 

U 



290 Ethical Studies. 



that the object is already the identity of God and num, but man 
does not include me : that object is not in me, it is only for me; 
it remains an object, and I remain outside. And for the religious 
consciousness the problem is, How can I be reconciled with this 
will which is not mine ? 

And the answer is that in the object the reconciliation of the 
divine and human is real ; the principle is there already ; and in 
its reality, the reality of the reconciliation of the human as such, 
is ideally contained my reconciliation. Yes, mine is there if only 
I can take hold of it, if only I can make it my own ; but how 
with the sin that adheres to me can this ever be? How can the 
human-divine ideal ever be my will ? 

The answer is, Your will it never can be as the will of your 
private self, so that your private self should become wholly good. 
To that self you must die, and by faith be made one with the ideal. 
You must resolve to give up your will, as the mere will of this or 
that roan, and you must put your whole self, your entire will, into 
the will of the divine. That must be yoiur one self, as it is your 
true self; tiiat you must hold to both with thought and will, and 
all other you mus»t renounce ; you must both refuse to recognize 
it as yours, and practtcaUy with your whole self deny it You 
must believe that you too really are one ivith the divine, and must 
act as if you believed it. In short, you must be justified not by 
/ ^ works but solely by faith. This doctrine, which Protestantism, to 
its eternal glory, has made its own and sealed with its blood, is 
the very centre of Christianity; and, where you have not this 
in one form or another, there Christianity is nothing but a 
name. 

In mere morality this faith is impossible. There you have not 
a real unity of the divine and human, with which to identify your- 
self; and there again the self, which is outside the ideal, is not 
known as unreal, and can not be, since the ideal is not all 
reality. 

But what is faith? It is perhaps not an easy question to 
answer, but in some sort it must be answered ; and to neglect it 
as worthless, or stand aloof from it as a mystery, are both wrong 
positions. It is easy to say what faith is not It is not mere 
belief, the simple holding for true or fact ; it is no mere theoretic 



292 EthiceU Studies. 



such and such a kind of knowledge. Faith is incompatible with 
common immediate sensuous knowing, or with a higher knowledge 
of the same simple direct nature : and, because our knowledge of 
the highest is, in religion, not thus immediate, therefore we are 
said to have only faith ; and fiaiith is, by a confusion, supposed 
to exclude, not one kind of certainty, but all kinds. Whence the 
above mistake, which, however, has a truth in it 

Why is it then that faith is incompatible with sensuous know- 
ledge ? It is because, in religious language, faith is a rise beyond 
' this world,' and a rise in which I stay here. What does this 
mean ? Does it mean that the object must not be a part of th« 
visible world ? It means this, and more ; &ith implies the rise in 
thought, but not that only ; it implies also the rise of the will to 
the object, which is not seen but thought And this presupposes 
the practical separation for me of myself and the object In the 
mere theoretic rise I do not think of myself, but only of the 
object: in faith I must also have myself before me; I must 
perceive the chasm between myself, as this or that unreal part of 
the unreal finite world, and at the same time must perceive the ideal- 
real object, which is all reality, and my true reality. And it is 
this presupposed consciousness of absolute separation (which, m 
terms of space or time, we express by ' this world ' and the ^ other 
world ') which is necessary for faith, and which survives therein as 
fi suppressed element Hence, where this is not, faith can not be. 

Faith then is the recognition of my true self in the religious 
object, and the identification of myself with that both by judg- 
ment and will ; the determination to negate the self opposed to the 
object by making the whole self one with what it really is. It is, 
in a word, of the heart ^ It is the belief that only the ideal is 

' 'True faith is no mere thought nor admission of the truth of a history.' 
' The true Christian is not the man who knows histoiy. ' ' Christianity should 
know that faith is not merely a history or a science. To have faith is nought 
else than for a man to make his will one with God's, and take up God's word 
and might in his wiU^ so that these twain, God's will and man's will, torn to 
one being and substance. Thereupon in the man Christ, in his passion, his 
dying, his death, and upxising, m ^£a own humanity, is reckoned for righteous- 
ness, so that the man becomes Christ, that is after the spiritual man. . . « . 
He who teaches and wills otherwise is yet in the whoredom of Babylon.' — 
J. 69HME. 



Con clmding Remarks. 293 



real, and the win to realize therefore nothing but the idead, the 
theoretical and practical ass eition that only as ideal is the self real 

Justification by £uth means that, having thus id^itified myself 
with the object, Ifed myself i ithatidenti5catkxito be already one 
with it, and to enj<^ the bliss of being, all ^Jadiood overcome, what 
I truly am. By my daim to be one with the ideal, which com- 
prehends me too, and by assertion of the non-reality of all that is 
opposed to it, the evil in die woiM and the evil incarnate in me 
through past bad acts, all this &2ls into the unreal : I being one 
with the ideal, this is not mine, and so imputation of offences 
goes with the change of sel^ and a{^es not now to my true 
self, but to the unreal, which I npudiate and hand over to 
destruction.* 

In one way ^th is of course only ideal, for the bad self does 
not cease. Yet rdigion is here very different £rom morality. 
Recalling to the reader what we said as to the meaning of 
'evolution' or 'progress' (p. 173), we say here that morality is an 
evolution or progress. The end, which is involved in these, is 
becoming realized in the evolution or progress, and therefore is 
not yet real \ and so in morality' we have the end presented as 
what claims to be real, together with the process of its realization, 
and that means its non-reality. Here we are not what we are, 
and must welcome a progress ; though that means a contradiction, 
which again we know we are not But for religious faith the end 
of the evolution is presented as that which, despite the fact of the 
evolution, is already evolved ; or rather which stands above the 
element of event, contradiction, and finitude. Despite what 
seems, we feel that we are more than a progress or evolution, 
in fact not that at all, but now fully real : and this full realit>' of 
ourselves we present to ourselves as an object, and by recognizing, 
both by judgment and will, in that object our real sel^ we 
sjiAticipate, or rather rise above the sphere of, progress. Ourselves 



* Hear again the vehement expression of mysticism. * WTien reason tells 
thee, ' Thou art ontside God,' then answer thou, ' No, I am in God, i ara. m 
heaven, in it, hi him, and for eternity wiif never leave him. The devil may 
keep my sins, and the world my tiesh ; I li^e in God's will, his life shall be my 
life, his will my will; I will be dead in my reason that he may live ia me, und 
ft& my deeds shall be his deeds.' 



} > 



294 Ethical Studies. 



being one with that object, we say we are a whole, and harmonious 
now. So far as we are not so, we are mere appearance ; and by the 
standing will to negate that seeming self, we are one with the true 
and real self. For this point of view and in this ^sphere (not out- 
side it) imputation ceases, though the bad self is still a fact; and 
in this sense faith remains only ideal 

But that it is in any other sense merely ideal, is a vulgar and 
gross error, which, so far as it rests on St Paul, rests on an entire 
misunderstanding of him. In faith we do not rise by the intdlact 
to an idea, and leave our will somewhere else behind us. Where 
there is no will to realize the object, there is no faith ; and where 
there are no works, there is no will. If works cease, will has 
ceased ; if will has ceased, faith has ceased. Faith is not the 
desperate leap of a moment; in true religion there is no one 
washing which makes clean. In Pauline language, that ' I have 
died,' have in idea and by will anticipated the end, proves itself 
a reality only by the fact that ' I die daily,' do perpetually in 
my particular acts will the realization of the end which is anti- 
cipated. Nor does faith mean simply works ; it means the works 
^ faith; it means that the ideal, however incompletely, is realized. 
But, on the other hand, because the ideal is not realized com- 
pletely and truly as the ideal, therefore I am not justified by the 
works, which issue from faith, as works ; since they remain im- 
perfect I am justified solely and entirely by the ideal identifica- 
tion ; the existence of which in me is on the other hand indicated 
and guaranteed by works, and in its very essence implies them. 

What we have now to do is to ask, What is the object with 
which the self is made one by faith ? For our answer to this 
question we must go to the facts of the Christian consciouuiess. 
But the reader must remember that we shall touch these facts 
solely so far as is necessary to bring out the connection between 
religion and morality. We are to keep to a minimum, and the 
reader must not conclude that we repudiate whatever we say 
nothing about 

The object, which by faith the self appropriates, is in Christianity 
nothing alien from and outside the world, not an abstract divine 
which excludes the human; but it is the inseparable unity of 



296 Ethical Sttidies. 



and what there was in a manner visible is here invisible ; (2) the 
relation of the particular subject to the whole was there immediate 
unity by unreflecting habituation and direct perception ; here it 
involves the thought which rises above the given, and the con- 
sciousness of a presupposed and suppressed estrangement 

Here, as in the world of my station, we have the objective side, 
the many affirmations of the one will, the one body, the real 
ideal humanity^ which in all its members is the same, although in 
every one it is different ; and which is completely realized not in 
any one this or that, nor in any mere * collective unity * of such 
particulars, but only in the whole as a whole. And we have the 
subjective personal side, where the one will of the whole is, 
in its unity with the conscious members, self-conscious, and 
wills itself as the personal identity of the universal and j^articular 
will* 

Such is the object, the fore-realized divine ideal ; and by faith 
the particular man has to make that his, to identify himself 
therewith, behold and feel himself therew^ith identified, and in his 
own self-consciousness have the witness of it. And this, as we 
explained, is done by the dying to the private self as such, by the 
bestowal of it on the object, and by the living in the self which is 
one with the divine ideal that is felt and known as the only real 
self, and now too as my self To our previous remarks on this 



' By faith, and so far as faith holds, the ideal as the self, and the self as ^e 
ideal, is all that is real ; and so, on the external side of my works, I r^ard 
myself as, with othei-s, the member or function of the divine whole. What 
falls outside, however much a fact, is still unreal. Again, on the in.side, 
tlirough faith I, as the mere this me, no longer am ; but only I as the self< 
conscious personal will of the divine, the spirit of the whole, which, as that 
spirit, knows itself in me. On both sides, though the form is not swallowed 
up nor lost, yet the mere particular content of the self has for faith disappeared. 

But there is a difference on the two sides, which was also there in ' My 
Station,' but the losing sight of which was there not likely to lead to con- 
fusion ; while here a confusion on this head may happen, and is a serious 
matter. 1 o explain — on the inside the particular self knows and feels itself 
now immediately one wiih the universal, which is the will of all selves ; but 
on the outside, its realization in works, it is only one member of the whole, 
one function or set of functions which is not, and which fails outside of, other 
sides or sets of fuuclioxis. So long as it remains on the inside, the self is not 



298 Ethical Studies. 



is, and what we are to do is done. Wliether it is thought of as 
what is done now, or what will be done hereafter, makes in this 
respect no practical difference. They are different ways of look- 
ing at ^ke same thing ; and, whether present or future, the reality 
is equally certain. The importance for practice of this religious 
point of view is that what is to be done is approached, not with 
the knowledge of a doubtful success, but with the fore-felt cer- 
tainty of already accomplished victory. 

Morality, the process of realization, thus survives within religion. 
It is only as mere morality that it vanishes; as an element it 
remains and is stimulated. Not only is strength increased by 
assurance of success, but in addition the importance of success 
is magnified. The individual life for religion is one with the 
divine ; it possesses infinite worth, a value no terms can express. 
And tlie bad gains a corresponding intensity of badness. It is 
infinitely evil, so that, for the religious consciousness, difierent 
amounts of badness are not measurable. All men are equally, 
because utterly, sinful. But this extreme of evil is therefore the 
more easy to subdue. It is not a reality against a mere ideal, but 
a mere fact which is contrary to the whole reality, an unutterable 
contradiction. Other incentives to good also come in. For the 
religious consciousness evil is an offence against what we love, and 
what loves us, not against something not real, which no one can 
well love. This makes evil worse, and more painful, and increases 
accordingly the power of good. All external control disappears, 
and in its place is gratitude to that which has conquered, confi- 
dence in it, and inability to be false to it* 

It is the same objective will, which in * My Station ' we see 
accomplished, in ideal morality know should be accomplished, 
and in religion by faith believe accomplished, which reflects itself 
into itself on the subjective side ; and thence reasserts itself 
explicitly as the real identity of the human and divine will And 



' We had this, too, in * My Station and its Duties.' Let me remark that, if 
humanity is a collection, active gratitude to it is impossible, without the most 
childish self-delusion. Unless there is^a real identity in men, the * Inasmuch 
as ye did it to the least of th^e * tecomes an absurdity. And I have never 
heard of anyone who, owing a debt to one man, thought he could pay it by 
giving to another man who was like the first, no matter how like. 



300 Ethical Studies. 



Instead of trying to give direct answers, the best way to clear 
the matter will be to begin with the extreme of a one-sided view : 
and, first, there is an opinion which may be said simply to identify 
religion mth orthodoxy, with the holding for true what is true. No 
doubt right doctrine is a very important matter, but does that 
make it religion ? Put it to the religious consciousness, and the 
answer is. No. It is the belief * with the heart ' that is wanted ; 
and where that is not, religion is not. Else even the very devils 
would be religious ; for they, as we are told, go further even than 
is required of them, and add to orthodoxy the fear of God. 

So, in morality, a man must know what is right ; but no one is 
moral simply because he has that knowledge. In both cases you 
can not do, without knowing what you are to do ; but mere know- 
ing, ai)art from doing, is neither religion nor morality. 

The next modification of this one-sided opinion is the view, 
which is all too popular, and says, * No doubt it is true that to 
know is not enough ; action ought to follow ; but, for all that, it is 
religion when I say my prayers, or meditate, or go to church, and 
that whether it goes any further, and whether anything comes of 
it, or not' 

By denying such a doctrine we ought not to give offence to 
Christians. Whether we shall give offence or not is another matter. 
We are sorry if it is so ; but nevertheless we deny the assertion, 
and we think that on our side we have the religious consciousness * 
and the New Testament. There we do not have the love of God 
and man put side by side, as things which exist or can exist apart, 
but, where the latter fails, there fails also the former, and with it, 
I suppose, religion. There we are told that * pure religion ' means 
duty to the afflicted, and the * world,' by which we are not to be 
spotted, is hardly all spheres outside our devotions, not every 
region where the authority of the clergyman ceases. 

We maintain that neither church-going, meditation, nor prayer, 
except so far as it reacts on practice and subserves that, is religious 
at all. Esthetic or speculative contemplation it may be ; it may 
be a production of the feeling which results from the satisfied 
religious v/ill ; but religious it is not, except so far as it means will 



I I am happy to say lh*it * reiigieux ' has no English equivalent. 



302 Ethical Studies. 



opinions, or in orthodoxy. But as we have seen, the presence of 
the religious object for the theoretical consciousmess, in any fonn, 
is not religion. 

(2) The second mistake is more common. In morality what 
we know we feel or see; and can not doubt There is nothing 
to believe against appearances. We have a daim and the con- 
sciousness that this is satisfied or unsatisfied, but nothing beyond 
oiurselves to hold for true ; except so far as ia the social object it 
is before our eyes. But in rehgion, despite of appearances, we 
have to believe that something is real. We must have an inward 
assurance that the reality is above the facts ; and we must carry that 
out against facts in which we can not see the inward reality, and 
seem to see what is contrary diereto. It is by faith in our recon- 
cilement with the invisible one reality that we are justified. 

That inward assurance, the self-consciousness that we are one 
with the divine, and one with others because one with the divine, 
natiurally does not exist wi'^hout expressing itself. And moreover 
it is right that it should express itself; because that exf^ession 
reacts most powerfully upon the self-consciousness, to intensify it, 
and so strengthen the conviction and will in which faith consists. 
It is right that the certainty of identity with the divine, and with 
others in the divine, should be brought home by the foretasted 
pleasure of unalloyed union ; and that in short is the rationale of 
the cultus. The cultus is a means to the strengthening of faith, 
and is an end in itself by subserving that end. As anything more 
and beyond it is not an end ; it may be harmless, and again it may 
be the destruction of true religion. 

And the religious community entails signs of communion ; and 
these, as the cultus generally, entail ministers; and it is generally 
found more convenient to have certain persons set apart, just as 
again the state generally finds it convenient to support and 
regulate one or more religious communities.' These ministers, 

^ Religious communities may be called ' churches ; ' but churches in this sense 
must not be confounded with the Church proper. That is the whole body of 
Christ, and whether it is limited cm- not depends on the answer to the question 
whether the spirit of Christ is limited ; whether it is visible or not, is answered 
with that answer ; as also the questions whether it can be divided, re-united, 
and so forth. A true view of the Church is of the last importance. From 



304 Ethical Studies. 



excess of them, against which we have to protest. Whatever is 
the expression of the religious spirit, which carries itself out in the 
world, is religious and good, unless it goes to excess : and the 
excess is measured by the failure to strengthen or the weakening of 
the will. Just so any institution, observance, or discipline (it 
matters not what) which strengthens the religious will, is good, 
provided it does so strengthen it as a whole, and is not in other 
ways contrary to religion and morality. The same holds good in 
the moral sphere ; there we may have ascetic exercises which 
strengthen the will, and are therefore, and so far as they do that, 
good ; but not good, or even bad, when they go beyond. But as 
to what in detail is legitimate or not, all this is matter of particular 
fact, with which we have nothing to do. 

To repeat, public and private exercises are religious and good 
as the simple voice of, or as means to the strengthening of, the 
religious will. That will consists in the faith that overcomes the 
world, by turning it into the Christian world which for faith it is. 
The inner sphere of religion, which brings home to itself its 
assurance and its bliss, is only the inner sphere, and by itself is 
not religion. By itself it is not even the fnner, for it is so only 
when it is the inner of the outer ; and that outer, where faith fails, 
is not, and with it goes the inner as such. A sensuous or semi- 
sensuous gloating over the pleasures of the anticipated result is, 
in morals as in religion, when considered in reference to the will, 
a mere debauchery.. Here as there it is the Hedonism which 
kills practice; and considered as tf •«/»/«, it belongs to art or 
science, not religion at all. Furthermore sensitiveness or intensity 
of the religious consciousness is no more rehgion than that of the 
moral consciousness is morality ; nor again is a right perception in 
these matters any more than a right perception. It is religion only 
when the divine will, of which for faith the world is the realization, 
reflects itself in us ; and, with the personal energy of our ownVand 
its Self-consciousness, cairies out both its and our will into the world, 
which is its own and ours, and gives us, in the feeling which 
results from function, that inner assurance of identity which pre 
cedes and accompanies the action of our wDl. And thus for 
religion and morality the content of the will is the same, though 
the knowledge and the spirit are widely different 



Conchiding Remarks. 305 

If this is so, then our Essays have, in a way too imperfect, yet 
brought us to the end, where morality is removed and survives in 
its fulfilment. In our journey we have not seen much, and much 
that we have seen was perhaps little worth the effort, or might 
have been had without it Be that as it may, the hunt after 
pleasure in any shape has proved itselt a delusion, and the form 
of duty a snare^ and the finite realization of * my station ' was truth 
indeed, and a happiness that called to us to stay, but was too 
narrow to satisfy wholly the spirit*s hunger ; and ideal morality 
brought the sickening sense of inevitable failure. Here where we 
are landed at last, the process is at an end, though the best activity 
here first begins. Here our morality is consummated in oneness 
with God, and everywhere we find that * imniortal Love,* which 
builds itself for ever on contradiction, but in which the contradic- 
tion is eternally resolved. 

Hie nullus labor est, ruborque nuUus ; 
Hoc juvit, juvat, et diu juvabit ; 
Hoc non deficit, incipitque semper. 



Note, — While these last sheets were going through the press- Mr. Harrison's 
article {Cont. Rev.y May 1876) appeared, and touches so nearly on much that 
I have said, that it seems advisable to make some remarks upon it, taking it 
as it stands, and without any reference to Comte's own views^ with which I am 
not acquainted. 

What I have to remark first is, that with the leading idea of Mr. Harrison's 
creed, a man may be familiar, and substantially, perhaps, in agreement, without 
having come into contact, direct or indirect, with Positivism. Whoever may 
claim to have originated it, it was distinctly set forth forty years ago by Strauss, 
m intimate connection with the speculative metaphysic of the first quarter o{ 
the century. (See an interesting article in the same number of the C, R,) It 
took its place in German literature as a metaphysical interpretation of the 
central doctrine of Christianity. 

Mr. Harrison appears to believe that in his case the element of metaphysic 
at least is absent. And here, I think, he makes a great mistake. For what is 
implied in his credo? He seems to hold that humanity is the evolution of an 
organic whole, while at the same time he asserts that it is 'a collective unity,' 
and that its evolution is *a collective evolution.* Here we are at once in the 

X 



3o6 Ethical Studies, 



midst of metaphysJc ; and, so far as I understand the matter, of bad meta- 
physic To me the evolution of a collection m^ans the evolutions of the 
units of that collection, and it means no more. To Mr. Harrison it seems to 
mean a great deal more. He seems to believe that in his collection there is a 
real identity, which under changes of component parts is permanent and the 
same; an identity, further, not of mere material particles or of force in general, 
but a human identity. If this is his belief, what is the basis of it ? What is 
the ground for his assertion that in past, present (and future ?) human beings 
there is a real self«>sameness ? I find no hint of any ground in the article ; and 
while no one, who knows what metaphysic is, can doubt that in the above 
assertion we have metaphysic, it is hard to stifle the doubt whether we have 
not also mere dogmatic metaphysic. 

But I may be doing the writer a wrong. Perhaps he does not affirm that, 
under differences, humanity is one and the same real being. Perhaps all that 
he means is that the summed particular effects of past and present human lives 
are existing in, and can be recognized by, the individual, f f so, then, unless 
we aie once more to have a metaphysical doctrine of the identity of cause and 
effect, this commonplace mechanical vieinr is but a small foundation for Mr. 
Harrison's superstructure. 

Collective humanity is at any rate organic ; and that seems to be the reason 
for the somewhat strange denial of a 'collective force* to the universe as a 
whole (p. 874). In his definition of an organism the writer seems to me to 
introduce the ideas of identity and teleology (877). If so, we have once more 
metaphysical doctrine. If not so, then (vid. Essay V. p. 173) the evolution of 
humanity is a phrase which has no meaning. In the one case what becomes 
of the writer's position against the metaphysicians? In the other, what 
becomes of his religion and his rhetoric ? 

But, passing by this, what reason is put forward for the belief that humanity 
is an organism ? Mr. Harrison starts from the social organism — a conception, 
by the way, not wholly unknown to the metaphysic of the beginning of this 
century. Let that be as it may, how are we to go from the organism of the 
state to the organism of humanity ? Admit the metaphysical assertion, that 
civilization is ' the activity of a being just as real us you or I, and far more 
permanent' (879) — but does history, after all, verify the belief that all or most 
of the perished millions who have covered this globe have entered into the 
main stream of civilization ? Does observation of facts no^ show that all or 
most of the dwellers on this globe are organically connected ? To show mere 
reciprocal influence is not enough ; for that holds good also of mere physical 
phenomena. Will observation warrant more than the hope that some day, we 
know not when, humanity may beconu an organic whole (cf. Trendelenburg, 
Naiurrechtj 610)? 

After all this, it may be idle to say anything about religion ; but I must 
point out that, even if himianity be more than the name of an imaginary collec- 
tion, even if it really is a self-same being which evolves itself amid change of 
particles, and in which we are members— even then it can not be the object of 



Note, 307 



modem religion. Our minds and hearts are not bounded to one among the 
phenomena of this one among the bodies in the universe ; and to attempt to set 
this finite phenomenon before us as an object of worship is an attempt to turn 
the history of religion backwards, and to close on us once more those Jewish 
fetters which Christian civilization, after so many efforts, has burst through. If 
humanity is adorable, it is so only because it is not merely the last product of 
terrestrial developement, but because the idea of the identity of God and man is 
the absolute truth, because (inrte rational mind (wherever it exist) is not merely 
such, but, in another sense than physical or animal nature, is the self-realization 
of tlte Spirit in which all moves and lives, and so is: an organic whole in that 
unity. Such a thesis I do not affirm, and to the enormous difhculties which 
beset it I am not blind. A scicntitic basis can be given to it, if at all, by a 
critical metaphysic, whose problems begin where Mr. Harrison's end, and which 
asks where he dogmatizes. But whether such a science is possible or impos- 
sible, after all a great religion is still a great religion ; nor is it easy to believe 
that it will not be so, when another of the sects which have lived and live in its 
life has gone the way it seems likely to go. 



THE END. 



edinouruh: i'kinteo by colston and son. 



