ON THE GORILLA TRAIL
By Mary Hastings Bradley — New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1922
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text reproduces the 1922 first edition as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier ongorillatrail00bradgoog). The 1922 publication is in the public domain. The work is complete.

========================================================================

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 



> 



ON THE 
GORILLA TRAIL 



By MARY HASTINGS BRADLEY 

Nmtli 

THE INKOCENT ADVENTITRESS 

THE FORTIETH DOOR 

THE WINE OP ASTONISHMENT 

THE PALACE OF DARKENED 

WINDOWS 
THE SPLENDID CHANCE 
THE FAVOR OP KINGS 



D. APFLETON AND COMPANY 
New York Londc 




Xhb Bio 0"»"' * or lt»»i«i—i 



ON THE 
GORILLA TRAIL 

:' '- MARY (HASTINGS BRADLEY 




D. APPLETON AND COMPANY 

NEW YORK : : LONDON : : MCMXXU 



CONTENTS 



L Off to Africa 1 

II. The West Coabt T»ip 11 

m. The Toueist Trail ,25 

IV. In the Bxloiam Cohoo 88 

V. On Safari 67 

VL The SintuiT or Africa 71 

Vn. The Goeula Trail 98 

VUL The Big Gorilla of Eari8IHBi .... 110 

IX. A GoKiLU. Bans 119 

X. The PTQHiEa Come to Camf 186 

XI. A NiOHT IN A Crater 148 

XII. The Threk-Stonb Kitchen 167 

XJU. The Lion That Came TO Life 168 

XIV. Lion Hdntino at Nioht 186 

XV. Elephants anb Bdffai.o 199 

XVL Santa in the Jungle 212 

XVIL Across Uganda 220 

XVin. The Tomb of Einq Muteba 288 

XIX. GooD-BT TO Africa 247 

XX. LUTS AMD EaSIFMBNT} £tC. ...... 267 



4202M 



ILLUSTRATIONS 

The Big Gorilla of EariaimH .... FrontUpiecg 

The KeitUworth Cattle at Madeira 12 

Freetown, Sierra Leone 13 

General Smuts 18 

Victoria Falls — Main Falls from Rock, beyond Ltvings- 

tone Island 84 

Mrs. Bradley at Victoria Falls, The Devil's Cataract . 84 
Where Do We Go from Here? Alice Hastii^ Bradley 

on the Congo 85 

Steamer on the Laalaba River 80 

Borassus Palms on the Lualaba River 44 

Congo Bdles Traveling 44 

Crocodile with Arm and Leg of Native He Had Jnst Eaten 4S 
Gavial, Asiatic Species of Crocodile, Caught in Lualaba 

River 4fi 

Giant Palm on Tanganyika AO 

Native Boat on Lake Tanganyika 61 

The Tree at Ujiji beneath which Stanley met Livingstone 51 

Native Market, Usumbura, Lake Tanganyika ... 64 

Native Barmaids at Usumbura 64 

Porters on the March 55 

Alice on Safari 66 

Personal Attendants on the March — Camera, Gun and 

Wheel 60 

Alice and Mablanga 60 

Alice and Her Tent 61 

Porters Waiting Rations 61 

Rest House and Chiefs House in the Rusisi Mountains . 68 

Martha Miller and Her Elephant 68 

vll 



ILLUSTRATIONS 

Wife of Erstwhae Cannibal Chief, Kabala .... 69 

AChief oftheWarnDdi,Lake.TRiigiuiyi^ .... 69 

Watuasi Fanuly Bringing Milk and Butter .... 90 
WatuBsi Girls Making Butter by Shaking Cream in a 

Giourd 90 

While Father*B Misrion at Nytinde 91 

Cathedral in Erection at Nyunde 91 

White Sistera at Nyunde 94 

Ht. Chaninagongo 04 

Native Fishing in Eivn 9S 

Flow of liava across Lake Stu 96 

The Woman with a Hoe 100 

Oar Postman 100 

The White Fathers at Lolenga Mission 101 

Lolenga Valley. Mission White Fathers .... 101 

Oar Objective—the Gorilla Trian^e ...... 112 

Gorilla Camp on Mt. Mikeno 113 

Where Gorillas Live — the Fairy Forests of Karisimbi 118 

The Big Gorilla of Karisimbi Shot by Herbert E. Bradley 113 

Mr. Akeley Working on Gorilla Skins 120 

Guides Removing Flesh from Gorilla Skeletons . 120 

Gorilla Skeletons— and Others 121 

Gorilla Camp — Skeletons and Skins Drying — ^Little 

Clarence Hanging in Tent 121 

In the Gorilla Forests of Mt. Mikeno 124 

Gorilla Bed and Trail 124 

Gorilla Bed Overhung by Ferns 12S 

Jast before Meeting GoriUas — Mrs. Bradley and Porters 12S 

The Peak of Mt. Mikeno, 14,600 Feet 180 

Porters* Huts at the Gorilla Camp 130 

A Glade in the Bamboos 181 

Native Cattle in the Foothills of Mikeno 181 

Batwa Chief and Wife ......... 140 

Dance of the Batwa 140 

Crossing the Lava Plains 141 

A Ni^t on the Sammit 141 



ILLUSTRATIONS 

Lava in Emption in Nyamlagira's Crater .... 104 
The Fire Pot of Njamlagirfr— Taken at Night by Its 

Own Li|^t IM 

Sonny Jim 16S 

Our Bicycle Boys 16S 

Leo and the Union Soit 166 

The Three-Stone Kitchen and Its Aids 166 

The Rnchuni River 167 

idled by Lion—GraTe of Mr. Foster 167 

Mrs. Bradley and the Lion That Did Not Stay Dead . 182 

The "Dead" Lion That Roared as His Picture Was Taken 182 

Topi Staked Out for Lion Bait 183 

Natives on the Ruindi Plains 183 

One Night's Kill— Mr. Bradley with Two Lions Shot by 

Him 196 

Miss Miller and Her Lion 196 

Natives Making Fire with Fire Sticks 197 

Ready for the March 197 

The Acacia la Faotastieally Flat Topped .... 222 
Baying Bark Cloth beneath the Euphorbia or Candelabra 

Tree 223 

The Golden Crested Kaviroodo Crane 228 

Family Scene at Lake Bunyoni 223 

Waiting for Canoes on Lake Banyoni 226 

Native Dugouts on Bunyoni 226 

The Tomb of King Mutesa, in Uganda 227 

The End of Safari 227 

Ripon Falls— the Birth of the Nile 250 

Alice at a Ceremonial Dance of the Kikuyus 250 

Natives Sawing in Nairobi ., 251 

A Rickshaw at Mombasa 251 

Giant Baobab Tree at Mombasa 254 

Good-by to Africa 254 

The Big GoiilU of Earisimbi 265 



ON THE 
GORILLA TRAIL 

CHAPTER I 

off to afeica 

An Expedition fob Gtorillaa Which Incluses a 

Fite-Yeae-Ouj Explobeb 

Oux objective was a tiny triangle in the heart of 
Africa. It was bounded by three volcanic mountains 
and was a high plateau of bamboo forest, eternally 
cold, eternally clouded, eternally rainy. 

It was there that Mr. Akeley was going to find 
gorillas for a group for the American Museum of 
Natural History of New York, and we were going with 
Mr. Akeley because we wanted to see Africa, as well 
as gorillas, and the way to this triangle was through 
one of the loveliest and least known parts of the conti- 
nent, tlie Eastern Congo. No Americans had yet been 
in the country to whidi we were going. 

I had always wanted to see Africa. I suppose I first 
thought about it when, like all Sunday-sdiool children, 
I shouted. 

Where Atrit?8 tann; foantaini 
Roll down thnr golden aand, 

and wondered if the life of a missionary did not have 
its thrilling compensations in its intimacies with croco 
diles and cannibals. 

Fliotogniplu eopTTidktcd b; Carl E. Akttej And Muf HMtingi Brftdl^f. 
1 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

I know that Africa first touched my imsginatioD 
when my great-grandfather read aloud to me his favorite 
book, Stanley's In Darkest Africa. 1 received then a 
vivid intimation of Africa's mysterious spell, stirring 
pictures of a vast continent peopled with savages, of 
feverish jungles and mighty rivers, of treacherous 
beauty and swift death, of a primitive barbarian that 
had been going on from the beginning of time, un- 
changed and unchanging, living its own life through 
the centuries, unknown and untouched by trade or 
civilization. 

I made up my young mind then that I would go and 
see Africa and that resolution was kept ahve by our 
family friendship with Mr. Carl E. Akeley, then with 
the Field Museum of Chicago. Mr. Akeley had already 
made one expedition to Africa and later he and Mrs. 
Akeley went on two expeditions, and from that time we 
saw Africa through the Akeleys' eyes. 

The Dark Continent was transformed. It was Africa 
the Beautiful, a land of wonder and delight, of wide 
plains and mighty forests and glacier-peaked moun- 
tains, a world of tropic splendors roamed by primitive 
peoples and magnificent beasts. It was Mr. Akeley*fl 
enthusiasm which inspired Colonel Roosevelt to make 
his African trip, recorded tn African Game Trails, and 
that same year Mr. John McCutcheon of the Chicago 
Tribtme was with the Akeleys on a hunting trip in 
British East, where he wrote In Africa. 

I used to stand before the Fighting Bulls in the Field 
Museum, a pair of elephants shot by Mr. and Mrs. 
Akeley, a group which is a record of his sculptural 
2 



OFF TO AFRICA 

methods of mounting, and wonder if I should ever he 
able to see an elephant on its native heath — and then 
live to remember it. So, with all this interest in the sub- 
ject, my husband and I were delighted that the gorilla 
expedition came at a time when we could arrange to go. 

The delight was not imanimous. In general our 
announcement was received by our friends with a flat- 
tering gloom, with what might be called the bedside 
manner to those resolved upon an untimely end. The 
less solemn and concerned were frankly facetious. 

Why do it this way, they wanted to know. Why not 
the lake or chloroform or something usual and imme- 
diate instead of taking the trouble to go to Africa and 
give ourselves to a lion for lunch? Also, demanded the 
merry ones, if anything did happen, were we planning 
to ship the consumer back to the Zoo so they could place 
memorial wreaths about its neck? 

They called attention to Mr. McCutcheon's picture 
of the jolly little cemetery back of Nairobi with "Killed 
by Lion" on every cross, and quoted "The bulge was 
Algy," with persistent humor. Especially they pointed 
out that the gorilla was not noted for hospitality and 
presented us with various accounts in which we inva- 
riably came upon some such heartening paragraph as, 
"The poor brave fellow who had gone off alone was lying 
on the ground in a pool of his own blood, his entrails 
torn out, his gun beside him, bitten in two by the 
gorilla's teeth." 

I admit there was room for both bimior and disnay. 

Between the lion's chances for hmch and ours for a rug 

the odda were sportingly even. As to the gorilla, the 

8 



JfS THE GORILLA TRAIL 

I- «cr« •mx cfKourag^Dg, describing the grown 
» « iiMM -tt ferocity, attacking on sight with a 
f* VMHen oin withstand; but the records of the 
«tf« 4x=renKly scarce. 

j[ h.> learn how little has been discovered 
; since Du Chaillu wrote his blood- 
p^ *NMn^ of his adventures in the West Coast 
4». * ^3M9^ A few recent pamphlets, a few isolated 
^ ^»^ -Mtt^nse the world's authentic information. 
, -^^ ^ AT ^<({Ua in a museum mounted by a man who 
^^ 4 «tU ^xrilla. Skins have been bought from 
.. «MK svtt^'Uvs and stuffed according to the best 

tftft,>(ttwttkm. Ahnost nothing of the animal's 

rr^ .* ^'«^*ttie« has been discovered. As far as 

^^j^^ ^^ viyt. w»tj' four true gorillas ever reached 

- n,ft,v Jitatr* aliw. three short-lived youngsters 

;« s^^^Vi., tN( fatuous Jolm Daniels, who did not 

^^ ,i4*fc.\v ttK' s«fiv»r«lion from the English w(Hnan 

^t. VVi^y (mkIih* intention of bringing back a gorilla 

^vtJKHM^ fw wane moments he dallied with the 

^ J ^ ^ ^ li^^ »n «tf\uuinl breath, seeing myself walk- 

^ .'" *v- Asw *t*^ ***** wailing infant — but he wished to 

\ *V AtMUWl *" »«»•.'*» «s possible, to bring back the 

s .»i «•* * )iV^Hl^^ (o in«ke anatomical and scientific 

*^ L v>i ovv'^v i«w^ »"^*' 'f '* *"* possible, a photo- 

^''^'^^^^^^ »v\N»»\l' *i«cth»»K tl>«t ^^^ never before been 

^* U »*< tf\*ttV «l\Hpp"l with his own invention, 

,*^*^y^^,Y^ MoU^«» rictiirr Ciunera, to try to realize 

^iv*^"*!*^ >*v. AkcWy Iwlicved that the rumors of 



OFF TO AFRICA 

the animars unreasonliig ferocity were exaggerated. 
He believed that the male of the species was maligned 
and that unless he was attacked or his family threatened 
his intentions were honorable and unobtrusive, and that 
he was a hannless and interesting old gentleman who 
ou^t to be taken off the game lists. 

And Mr. Akeley proposed to find out. He proposed, 
after he had secured his museum group, to g^ve the 
gorilla every social opportunity to meet him halfway. 

My husband and I were unbiased. We were neither 
for nor agunst the gorilla. He might be as peaceful 
as unexploded dynamite. The reputation of the species 
might be due entirely to the irascibility of minority hot- 
heads. We were not going to take any position before- 
hand, but let the gorilla show himself in his true colors. 
Privately I believed that my best position later would be 
behind something substantiaL 

I was sustained by that word Viory which I found in 
every account of the gorilla. Wary and elusive were 
his invariably given characteristics. Now I rather liked 
that in him. He could be as elusive as Peter Pan. I 
had no intention of frustrating any social barriers he 
wished erected. My New England blood could be as 
proudly reserved as his. He could rely upon me not 
to make undue advances. 

I was going into his country. I was trying to pene- 
trate his domain and spy upon affairs that were un- 
doubtedly his own concern, but I was not going to thrust 
myself and what might be an uncongenial New World 
personality upon his attention. And while I had no 
intention of killing a gorilla I had no intention, either, 
5 



OFF TO AFRICA 

ndoofl benefit to her. We decided it only after 
JMlhidy of every book of travel and unending con- 
|l^ with every one we knew who liad been to 
I^Jlien we made up our minds to go ahead and 
ipy mnnent with thorough care but not to invite 
ipuicm. So our party, headed by the most experi- 
OF African travelers, included the youngest of 

I the decision was made, the matter of outfit 

rn us. Tents, camp equipment, and "chop" 
food were ordered I^ Mr. Akeley from London 
p be ready for shipment when we arrived; the 
rcvneras — motion picture, plate and filni — and 
nipping apparatus were all collected here by 
|ieky» and the guns were arranged for here. My 

II and I each bad rebuilt Springfield rifies. 80-30^ 3 « '^i 
pd and soft nose ammunition, and in addition my s ^ ' '" ' 
Ift had the gun with which Mr. McCutcheon had 

b elephant, a .475 Je£Fery. 
Igdng by catalogue is an enticing joy, but after 
1^ daoK we were left to struggle with the thou- 
|)d one details of personal things for the long ■ 
pgc as well as for the interior. My lists ranged 
j^fanailed shoes and fiannel shirts and khaki 
ps to white crepe and lace evening gowns. Only 
■n who has tried to estimate the hairpins she will 
br months in the wilds, and how many pairs of 
igs and how many boxes of colored crayons a 
tittle girl will use, can feel for my state of mind I 
outfitted in Chicago during a spell of July 
tr that made us wonder weakly why on earth we 
*7 



ON THE vX)RILLA TRAIL 

^w* TTTn^T ^' jt:*" 1^7 "•iirer ibe equator anyway; we 
rstsr-i. '"-^ ■'-'= -1-^1^ • i-*^:5tiace of friends, compli- 
i^-i T-iiiit ' r i'L'i ire rijgage room and stateroom 
—r:n Ttf :«'■ ■':i :Mf i::;r-panic lest the gold slippers 
-^ - -::t Ku: i-'^ :-r::-j trousers appear in the state- 
-Kd — *" '=**^*' 'irv^i'-I* that savored almost of the 
.r^^^j^ ii!ii i:-"''e'- "i-* Mck* upon home and family and 
-^'-:> iiiS ":^ '!i-.-. "i-r rcrils of cirilization. 

l . < •«.: :"t :■• :>■:" B.:'::j for Liverpool on July 30, 
.^- "it-s'ii^ >i- A'xi".!)- s:;.i the three Bradleys the 
^,- ^udt-i >1>* >[Artha Aieley MiUer," Mr. 
, . ^ . , ^^-;sr' iv: >[:>> PrisciUa HaU of Chicago 
t* "jj. ■. \ A. »-■•.■ > >:xv:sl jiuardian. Mr. and Sirs. 
,.-. '^fc.^^ • '"' ^-^*' ^'■'rk accompanied us as 

, .^^ , ..r^t-r .j: »*^^^<«: restful calm and six meals 

-.-■x\' .> '■•'" ■■^'^" •"*''^* ^''^ hectic days in Lon- 

. - '. .i.%r V":;x.cs. These included helmets 

v*> ■•' ■-^' *""* ■''"^' .Taeger blankets and 

^^ .;. c\- *vU mountain nights, and 

^ ^ ,.j:!^i' wf.tr. and air-tight cases for 

' "^ :..•■■ vl-i'.'U- "uxlii'ine kit: and our rooms 

~^ *■ ; > .-.•".vtor's paradise. 

, ^ •'^ '.^i; «:i'' « i^^" presented by a 
- .■v> .•!^!%\*'- i*voivt\l with hilarity and 
'*^ ^^: « ;;« iwi-ri-tit gratefulness — a little 

■ :\- vtisiiircil from the London of 

\.; >six- ««■<*'' •"'*' ^'^O* poignant re- 

" \ Ns- i\iu'(nph in Wliitdiall to the 

--.i iV »i»'»^'' ''^ *'*'^ Unknown War* 



OFF TO AFRICA 

rior in Westminster Abbey. The service was just over 
the morning I went to the Abbey, and the dim aisles 
were filled with a throng that made its slow and quiet 
way up to the high paling about the grave. Within the 
palings I saw a stone slab covered with wreaths and 
little nosegays. Later there would be a permanent slab 
of Belgian marble and a dedication in brass lettering, 
but now in the dark stone was the simple inscription: 

AN UNKNOWN BRITISH SOLDIER, KILLED IN WAR, 
FIGHTING FOR COUNTRY AND FOR KING 

Greater love hath no man than this. 

The wreaths of all nations were there, with imposing 
names, but the most touching things were those little 
nosegays of violets and pansies, tied sometimes with a 
string. As I stood there I saw a little bunch of field 
flowers put through the palings from the pressing crowd 
and I looked down to see a young girl with country 
cheeks and eyes as blue as the cornflowers she had 
brought. She was crying. 

"It might be her brother, you know," said the Eng- 
lishman beside me. 

It was clear from the wet eyes of most of the women 
and the faces of the men that they were at the grave 
of son or f atiier, brother or husband. The world moves 
quickly and all too easily forgets, but these were the 
people who would never forget, and this was their 
Flace of Pilgrimage. 





ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

records were not encouraging, describing the grown 
male as a demon of ferocity, attacking on sight with a 
fury few hunters can withstand; but the records of the 
gorilla were extremely scarce. 

It is surprising to leam how little has been discovered 
about the animal since Du Cbaillu wrote his blood- 
curdling accounts of his adventures in the West Coast 
jungles in 1848. A few recent pamphlets, a few isolated 
instances, comprise the world's authentic information. 
There is no gorilla in a museum mounted by a man who 
ever saw a wild gorilla. Skins have been bought tram 
hunters and collectors and stuffed according to the best 
available information. Almost nothing of the animal's 
habits or capacities has been discovered. As far as 
we could find out, only four true gorillas ever reached 
tJie United States alive, three short-lived youngsters 
and, in 1920, the famous John Daniels, who did not 
long survive the separation from the English woman 
who had brought him up. 

Mr. Akeley had no intention of bringing back a gorilla 
alive — although for some moments he dallied with the 
idea and I held an agonized breath, seeing myself walk- 
ing the floor with the wailing infant — but he wished to 
study the animal as much as possible, to bring back the 
material for a group, to make anatomical and scientific 
records of every kind, and, if it were possible, a photo- 
graphic record, something that had never before been 
done. He was going equipped with his own invention, 
the Akeley Motion Picture Camera, to try to realize 
that dream. 

Personally Mr. Akeley believed that the rumors of 
4 



OFF TO AFRICA 

the animal's unreasoning ferocity were exaggerated. 
He believed that the male of the species was maligned 
and that unless he was attacked or his family threatened 
his intentions were honorable and unobtrusive) and that 
he was a harmless and interesting old gentleman who 
ought to be taken off the game lists. 

And Mr. Akeley proposed to find out. He proposed, 
after he had secured his museum group, to give the 
gorilla every social opportunity to meet him halfway. 

My husband and I were unbiased. We were neither 
for nor against the gorilla. He might be as peaceful 
as unexploded dynamite. The reputation of the species 
might be due entirely to the irascibility of minority hot- 
beads. We were not going to take any position before- 
hand, but let the gorilla show himself in his true colors. 
Privately I believed that my best position later would be 
behind something substantial. 

I was sustained by that word veary which I found in 
every account of the gorilla. Wary and elusive were 
his invariably given characteristics. Now I rather liked 
that in him. He could be as elusive as Peter Pan. I 
had no intention of frustrating any social barriers he 
wished erected. My New England blood could be as 
proudly reserved as his. He could rely upon me not 
to make undue advances. 

I was going into his country. I was trying to pene- 
trate his domain and spy upon affairs that were un- 
doubtedly his own concern, but I was not going to thrust 
myself and what might be an uncongenial New World 
personality upon his attention. And while I had no 
intention of killing a gorilla I had no intention, either, 
S 



OFF TO AFRICA 

y tremendous benefit to her. We decided it only after 
[■teful study of every book of travel and unending eon- 
initation with every one we knew who had been tb 
Lfrica; then we made up our minds to go ahead and 
■beet every moment with thorough care but not to invite 
^prehension. So our party, headed by the most experi- 
Bced of African travelers, included the youngest of 
e^lorers. 
I Once the decision was made, the matter of outfit 
^ was upon us. Tents, camp equipment, and "chop" 
boxes of food were ordered by Mr. Akeley from London 
firms to be ready for shipment when we arrived; the 
various cameras — motion picture, plate and fihn — and 
ibe developing apparatus were all collected here by 
Hr. Akeley, and the guns were arranged for here. My 
husband and I each had rebuilt Springfield rifles, 30-30,_- 3tt 
with hard and soft nose ammunition, and in addition my %'i -"i 
husband had the gun with which Mr. McCutcheon had 
slain his elephant, a .475 JefiFery. 

Ordering by catalogue is an enticing joy, but after 
that was done we were left to struggle with the thou- 
sand and one details of personal ^ngs for the long ■ 
sea voyage as well as for the interior. My lists ranged 
frood hobnailed shoes and flannel shirts and khaki 
knickers to white crepe and lace evening gowns. Only 
A w<Hnan who has tried to estimate the hairpins she will 
need for months in the wilds, and how many pairs of 
stockings and how many boxes of colored crayons a 
lively little girl will use, can feel for my state of mindl 
We outfitted in Chicago during a spell of July 
weather that made us wonder weakly why on earth we 
*7 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

triirc trying to get any nearer the equator anyway; we 
(iiMikrf). with the valiant assistance of friends, compli- 
(>hIhI trunks for hold and baggage room and stateroom 

with the inevitable after-panic lest the gold slippen 
frfi In ttir hold and hunting trousers appear in the state- 
tiniiitl we bade farewells that savored almost of tiw 
ftNirnn) and turned our backs upon home and family and 
ttifiutn and the familiar perils of civilization. 

Wi' N(-t nail upon the Baltic for Liverpool on July 80, 
iU'it. Besides Mr. Akeley and the three Bradleys the 
(rHrty Included Miss Martha Akeley Miller, Mr. 
Aki-tc-y's secretary, and Miss FrisciUa Hall of Chicago 
(villi wuN to be Alice's special guardian. Mr. and Mrs. 
fipnniird ]}aldwin of New York accompanied us as 
far no London. 

Wf had a crossing whose restful calm and six meals 
ft (Iwy fortified us for the next few hectic days in Lon- 
don, pursuing Last Things. These included helmets 
Hiid N|)lne pads for the sim, and Jaeger blankets and 
liNivy pnjanias for the cold mountain nights, and 
nioD(|nili) )iiH)tx for camp wear, and air-tight cases for 
piM-khiff, iind a formidable medicine kit; and our rooms 
III tlin lioli-I looked a collector's paradise. 

'I'hi' Very I^ast Thing was a can presented by a 
HiohhIiM'iiI l<'iiglish officer, received with hilarity and 
IiiIki' iirkriowli'dgcd with reverent gratefulness — a little 
iiiin itf inNiTlicide. 

Lorulnn M'l'nit'd little changed from the London of 

Imfnin wrir cliiyH, but there were two very poignant re- 

minitrri) of \\w war — the Cenotaph in Whitdiall to the 

Uhii-louN Ufud, and the grave of the Unknown Wir- 

8 



OFF TO AFRICA 

rioT in Westminst^ Abbey. The service was just over 
the morning I went to the Abbey, and the dim aislea 
were filled with a throng that made ita slow and quiet 
way up to the high paling about the grave. Within the 
palings I saw a stone slab covered with wreaths and 
little nosegays. Later there would be a permanent slab 
of Belgian marble and a dedication in brass lettering, 
but now in the dark stone was the simple inscription: 

AN UNKNOWN BRITISH SOLDIER, KILLED IN WAR, 
FIGHTING FOR COUNTRY AND FOR KING 

Greater love hath no man than this. 

The wreaths of all nations were there, with imposing 
names, but the most touching things were those little 
Dos^fays of violets and pansies, tied sometimes with a 
string. As I stood there I saw a little bunch of field 
flowers put through the palings from the pressing crowd 
and I looked down to see a young girl with country 
dieeks and eyes as blue as the cornflowers she had 
brou^t. She was crying. 

"It might be her brother, you know," said the Eng- 
lishman beside me. 

It was clear from the wet eyes of most of the women 
and the faces of the men that they were at the grave 
of son or father, brother or husband. The world moves 
quickly and all too easily forgets, but these were the 
people who would never forget, and this was their 
Place of Filgriniage. 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

records were not encouraging, describing the grown 
male as a demon of ferocity, attacking on sight with a 
fury few hunters can withstand; but the records of the 
gorilla were extremely scarce. 

It is surprising to leam how little has been discovered 
about the animal since Du Chaillu wrote his blood- 
curdling accounts of his adventures in the West Coast 
jungles in 18*8. A few recent pamphlets, a few isolated 
instances, comprise the world's authentic information. 
There is no goiilla in a museum mounted by a man who 
ever saw a wild gorilla. Skins have been bought from 
hunters and collectors and stuffed according to the best 
available information. Almost nothing of the animal's 
habits or capacities has been discovered. As far as 
we could find out, only four true gorillas ever reached 
the United States alive, three short-lived youngsters 
and, in 1920, the famous John Daniels, who did not 
long survive the separation from the English woman 
who bad brou^t faim up. 

Mr. Akeley had no intention of bringing back a gorilla 
alive — although for some moments he dalhed with the 
idea and I held an agonized breath, seeing myself walk- 
ing the floor with the wailing infant — but he wished to 
study the animal as much as possible, to bring back the 
material for a group, to make anatomical and scientific 
records of every kind, and, if it were possible, a photo- 
graphic record, something that had never before been 
done. He was going equipped with his own invention, 
the Akeley Motion Picture Camera, to try to realize 
that dream. 

Personally Mr. Akeley believed that the rumors of 
4 



OFF TO AFRICA 

the animal's unreasoning ferocity were exaggerated. 
He believed that the male of the species was maligned 
and that tmless he was attacked or his family threatened 
his intentions were honorable and unobtrusiTe, and that 
he was a harmless and interesting old gentleman who 
ou^t to be taken off the game lists. 

And Mr. Akeley proposed to find out. He proposed, 
after he had secured his museum group, to give the 
gorilla every social opportunity to meet him halfway. 

My husband and I were unbiased. We were neither 
for nor against the gorilla. He might be as peaceful 
as unexploded dynamite. The reputation of the species 
might be due entirely to the irascibility of minority hot- 
heads. We were not going to take any position before- 
hand, but let the gorilla show himself in his true colors. 
Privately I beheved that my best position later would be 
behind something substantial. 

I was sustained by that word iDory which I found in 
every account of the gorUla. Wary and elusive were 
his invariably given characteristics. Now I rather Uked 
that in him. He could be as elusive as Peter Pan. I 
had no intention of frustrating any social barriers he 
wished erected. My New England blood could be as 
proudly reserved as his. He could rely upon me not 
to make undue advances. 

I was going into his country. I was trying to pene- 
trate his domain and spy upon affairs that were un- 
doubtedly his own concern, but I was not going to thrust 
myself and what might be an uncongenial New World 
personahty upon his attention. And while I had no 
intention of killing a gorilla I had no intention, either, 
5 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

of strolling through his impenetrable bamboos without s 
gun. There was always the possibility that one might 
be dealing with the leader of the minority hot-heads I 

But the fact that we were going to gorilla land wai 
no serious cause for concern. The difficulties of dis> 
covering gorilla were so great that we might feel our- 
selves fortunate if we got a glimpse of them at all. The 
real concern was in the fact that we were going to 
Africa, as a friend expressed it, with a gun in one hand 
and a baby in the other. 

Mr. Bradley and I were taking our five-year-oM 
dau^ter Alice with us. But it wasn't as mad as it 
sounded. Mr. Akeley's experience would not burdm 
the expedition with a child imless it were both safe and 
feasible. We were going into a healthy region, up f mn 
the Cape through the Belgian Congo to Lake Eivu. 
along the mountainous backbone of Africa, where, 
although almost under the equator, the altitude would 
insure cool nights and pleasant days. 

Alice was an outdoor child who loved the open, and 
the experience would be an unforgettable part of her 
life. Our camp would be comfortable and well pro- 
tected, and her chief danger would be the equatorial sun 
against which a helmet and unceasing vigilance could 
guard her. Eternal vigilance is the price of existence 
at home even, where motors menace every ciu-b and 
crossing, and where she could never for an instant be 
safely left alone upon the streets. 

It seemed to us that the same imceasing care which 
tried to guard Alice in Chicago could keep her safe in 
Africa and that the change and outdoor life would be 



OFF TO AFRICA 

a tremendous benefit to her. We decided it only after 
careful study of every book of travel and unending con- 
sultation with every one we knew ^o had been to 
Africa; then we nuule up our minds to go ahead and 
meet every mranent with thorough care but not to invite 
apprehension. So our party, headed by the most experi- 
enced of African travelers, included the youngest of 
explorers. 

Once the decision was made, the matter of outfit 
was upon us. Tents, camp equipment, and "chop" 
boxes of food were ordered by Mr. Akeley from London 
firms to be ready for shipment when we arrived; the 
various cameras — motion picture, plate and film — and 
the developing apparatus were all collected here by 
Mr. Akeley, and the guns were arranged for here. My 
husband and I each had rebuilt Springfield rifles, 80-30 t_- 31 
with hard and soft nose ammunition, and in addition my "iO •' 
husband had the gun with which Mr. McCutcheon had 
slain his elephant, a .475 Jefifery. 

Ordering by catalogue is an enticing joy, but after 
that was done we were left to struggle with the thou- 
sand and one details of personal tilings for the long • 
sea voyage as well as for the interior. My lists ranged 
from hobnailed shoes and fiannel shirts and khaki 
knickers to white crepe and lace evening gowns. Only 
a woman who has tried to estimate the hairpins she will 
need for months in the wilds, and how many pairs of 
stockings and how many boxes of colored crayons a 
lively little girl will use, can feel for my state of mindl 

We outfitted in Chicago during a spell of July 
weather that made us wonder weakly why on eartii we 

47 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

were trying to get any nearer the equator anyway; we 
packed, with the valiant assistance of friends, compli- 
cated trunks for hold and baggage room and stateroom 
—with the inevitable after-panic lest the gold slippers 
be in the hold and hunting trousers appear in the state- 
room I — we bade farewells that savored almost of the 
eternal and turned our backs upon home and family and 
friends and the familiar perils of civilization. 

We set sail upon the Baltic for Liverpool on July 30» 
1921. Besides Mr. Akeley and the three Bradleys the 
party included Miss Martha Akeley Miller, Mr. 
Akeley's secretary, and Miss Priscilla Hall of Chicago 
who was to be Alice's special guardian. Mr. and Mrs. 
Leonard Baldwin of New York accompanied us as 
far as London. 

We had a crossing whose restful calm and six meals 
a day fortified us for the next few hectic days in Lon- 
don, pursuing Last Things. These included helmets 
and spine pads for the sun, and Jaeger blankets and 
heavy pajamas for the cold mountain nights, and 
mosquito boots for camp wear, and air-tight cases for 
packing, and a formidable medicine kit; and otu* rooms 
at the hotel looked a collector's paradise. 

The Very Last Thing was a can presented by a 
thoughtful English officer, received with hilarity and 
later acknowledged with reverent gratefulness — ^a little 
can of insecticide. 

London seemed little changed from the London of 
before war days, but there were two very poignant re- 
minders of the war — the Cenotaph in Whitehall to the 
Crlorious Dead, and the grave of the Unknown War- 



OFF TO AFRICA 

rior in Westminster Abbey. The service was just over 
the morning I went to the Abbey, and the dim aisles 
were filkd with a throng that made its slow and quiet 
way up to the hi^ paling about the grave. Within the 
palings I saw a stone slab covered with wreaths and 
little nosegays. Later there would be a permanent slab 
of Belgian marble and a dedication in brass lettering, 
but now in the dark stone was the simple inscription: 

AN UNKNOWN BRITISH SOLDIER, KILLED IN WAR, 
FIGHTING FOR COUNTRY AND FOR KING 

Greater love hath no man than this. 

The wreaths of all nations were there, with imposing 
names, hut the most touching things were those little 
nosegays of violets and pansies, tied sometimes with a 
string. As I stood there I saw a little bunch of field 
flowers put throu^ the palings from the pressing crowd 
and I looked down to see a young girl with country 
cheeks and eyes as blue as the cornflowers she had 
brought. She was crying. 

"It might be her brother, you know," said the Eng- 
lishman beside me. 

It was clear from the wet eyes of most of the women 
and the faces of the men that they were at the grave 
of son or father, brother or husband. The world moves 
quickly and all too easily forgets, but these were the 
people who would never forget, and this was their 
Place of Pilgrimage. 

9 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

For Alice, London consisted of hansom cabs and Hi 
Zoo. Her ambition to ride up beside a cabby, beiiin 
a real horse, was gratified by the discovery of an oM 
fashioned four-wheeler at Charing Cross and Alice W8 
lifted up to ride in triumph through the interestin, 
streets. All the motors in the world were nothing t 
her beside the delight of that. She and the cabby, a 
old-fashioned as his vehicle, agreed perfectly. 

" 'Orses be the thing." said he. "Gentlefolk shoul 
'old by them." He had a very poor opinion of mi 
chinery indeed. "It's the undoing of the 'uman race, 
he told us. 

At the Zoo she rode a donkey, a camel, an elephan 
and a llama in preparation for strange African momit 



CHAPTER II 

THE WEST COAST TEIP 

SiEBSA Leone and the Buknino Saxon; an 
Imfkession of Genebal Shuts 

The West Coast of Africa has an ominous ring. It 
savors of jungles and fever and hot stagnant harbors 
to which the sickly caravans wind down. . . . Grold 
Coast and Ivory Coast. . . . 

Probably no one knew less about the West Coast 
boats than I did, and when we found that the West 
Coast passage was the only one we could reserve in 
advance from New York I made inquiries that later 
filled me with amusement. Assured that the trip was 
comfortable and not at all fatal we took heart and 
passage. 

We sailed from Southampton on the KenUworth 
Castle, Friday, August 12, and our first discovery 
was that we were not the only family in the world risk- 
ing its young upon the West Coast. The decks were 
full of children and almost all, we learned, had been 
bom in Africa or had gone out at a tender age and 
were now returning from leave at Home. 

It looked as if all the African cradles had not been 

robbed by lions or emptied by fever. It also looked — 

and proved— extremely social for young Alice. If not 

the only child, she was the only little American, and 

11 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

as such received a special mothering from Ruth Smith* 
a sweet little South African ^I. 

The KenUworth Castle proved a most comfortable 
boat, the only ominous sign being the information that 
electric fans could be rented from the Barber Shop. 
But we never needed them. We had a delightful trip, 
a succession of lovely Junelike days, never too warm 
even when crossing the equator. 

We went direct to Capetown, a seventeen-day trip, 
with one official stop at Madeira the fifth day out. Four 
days at sea is enough to make land an event We an- 
chored before dawn and came early on deck — a deck 
we found festooned with embroideries and invested with 
swarthy venders — to look across blue waves to Madeira, 
a picturesque mountain island, smothered in green, 
with here and there a gleam of cream brick villas and 
red roofs. We went ashore in small boats and up 
steep stone steps to the quay. 

Our destination was a hotel halfway up the moun- 
tain and we had a choice of vehicles — the native sledge, 
drawn by oxen or donkeys over the tightly packed little 
stones with which the narrow streets are paved, or a 
motor car. 

Hunger prevailed over picturesqueness, and we mo- 
tored through the tiny town with a blaring horn scat- 
tering beggars and luvhins, and climbed the steep 
mountain to Reid's Palace Hotel where we break- 
fasted over a paradise of a garden, with shining views 
of sea and sky. The breakfast itself deserves honorable 
mention and was our introduction to the delicious 
passion fruit — a fruit the size of a lemon with a hard 
12 




TBI KsVILWOBTH CaITU at **.n»T»^ 




Freetown', SnmBA Leoxe 




Gememal Shdm 



THE WEST COAST TRIP 

rind and a soft, rosy-purple interior, and it was served 
on old mahogany that made one begin to compute 
freight rates. 

After a walk throng one of the loveliest gardens 
imaginable — ^palms and tropic bloom and high walls 
dn'pping with flowering climbers and everywhere an 
outlook over the blue bay far below — ^we went down 
into the little tourist-trap of a town and compromised 
upon embroidered handkerchiefs, mindful of African 
luggage problems ahead. 

It was that same day that the Committee on Sports 
met. Now that might not seem a momentous thing to 
record — until you knew that committee. Inspired by 
one dynamic spirit it arranged field sports, cricket 
matches, bridge drives, chess games, and tournaments of 
tennis, shuffleboard, deck quoits and bucket quoits, 
ladies' singles and doubles, gentlemen's singles and 
doubles, and mixed doubles. So well did it do its work 
that no one ever sat in peace thereafter, with a weak 
inclination towards a book or a pipe, without being 
reminded that he must now play off his tennis with 
Major Miller or that Captain Viney was ready for the 
finals in deck quoits. 

The day after Madeira we crossed the Tropic of 
Cancer and wore hats on the upper, unroofed deck, and 
people began to talk about the sun and I began to 
wonder how Alice would ever remember in Africa about 
a helmet on her curly head. 

I heard the encouraging little anecdote about the 

friend of Mr. Powell's who had taken off his helmet to 

wave a friend good-by and was dead in two hotu-s in 

18 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

consequence, and other anecdotes of even swifter dis- 
aster, and I fortified myself with the idea of hiring a 
lynx-eyed native whose sole duty would be to stalk 
after Alice and prevent catastrophe. 

Wireless brought us the news that the Saxoa, which 
had left Southampton the week before us, was on fire 
and putting back on her course. We were to meet her 
at Sierra Leone and take off as many passengers as 
possible. So we saw more of the West Coast than the 
palm-fringed strip of Cape Verde which we passed 
early on the nineteenth, for on the twentieth we steamed 
past a flat coast line, straight on, apparently into a 
mountain, then round a green promontory into a lovely 
bay, Freetown harbor, where the Sawon lay at anchor, 
smoke still pouring from her blackened portholes. 

Freetown was on the mountain side, the barracks 
on the top. Most of the population of Freetown 
seemed to be in canoes or square-rigged sailboats 
streaming out to us with limes and breadfruit and 
baskets. 

It was sweet to see how high sympathy ran for the 
unhappy Saxonites. We offered to double, to treble, 
in our staterooms that they might be accommodated, 
and we heard with scorn the stories which trickled from 
the purser's quizzically cynical lips of those who, single 
in staterooms, had approached him with tales of coughs 
or snores which would make life impossible for any 
roommate — although, of course, personally, each one 
would have been only too glad, etc., etc. . . . 

But that night, looking sympathetically off towards 

the SaiEon't lights, against the dark shadows of Free- 

14 



THE WEST COAST TRIP 

town, and listening to the endless creak of the cranes 
swinging the luggage aboard, we discovered that into 
the nxnns which we ourselves were trebling up to vacate, 
only two Saxonites were being put. 

It is sad to record how human nature changed. Why 
were not tiie Saixonites three in a room? Was it, per- 
diance, because th^ were the daughters of a general? 
The spirit which had laid the Magna Charta before 
King John approached the purser with this injustice, 
which he acknowledged with the swiftness of one quick- 
ened with experience, and altered his arithmetic. 

But as a matter of record by doubling and trebling 
we took on almost all first-class passengers and we 
never heard the slightest murmuring against any pos- 
sible compression, and, as it proved, we were infinitely 
indebted to the Sawon'a disaster, for the passengers we 
gained from her added greatly to the interest and 
pleasure of ^e trip. 

They were a distinguished line as they came on 
board next morning — Sir Arthur Lawley, former gov- 
ernor of the Transvaal, with Lady Lawley and ^eir 
dau^ter; Sir Lionel Phillips of South African Gold 
King fame; the Due d'Orleans, who, if France had a 
king, would be that king, a big, blue-eyed, blonde- 
bearded man going out with his physician for big game 
hunting in British East; and, conspicuous among them, 
the tall, military figure of General Smuts returning 
from the alleged Peace Conference with Ireland. 

My first and instant impression was of the soldier in 

Smuts, the air of authority, of responsibility, of quick 

and stem decision. I saw a strong, dignified face CKf 

16 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

guarded reserve, blue eyes with tiie keen gknce of a 
scout, bushy brows, gray hair, a closely trimmed yellow 
mustache, the cropped suggestion of an imperial, an 
aquiline nose, and firmly molded mouth and chin. 

It was the face of a man who has fought and f ouj^t 
hard and is unwearied. It had the restraint and 
thou^tfulness and indomitable tenacity of statesmiui- 
ship, and in everything about him was the soundness 
and vigor of a splendid ph^ique in the prime of power. 

We did not go ashore that morning, warned of the 
difficulty of the return in small boats against a seventy- 
mile-an-hour tide. If we had gone we should have seen 
the inhabitants wending to their eighty-six churches — 
8(»ne churches have congregations of only three and 
four — clad frequently in white night shirts and silk 
hats. I yearned for the sight. 

Freetown was founded some eighty years ago by the 
slaves returned from slave ships by English gunboats. 
It has a population of forty-one thousand blacks of 
conglomerate races and sixty whites. There is a black 
London barrister, and a black editor who is a B.A. of 
Cambridge. It could not have been that editor who 
wrote the advertisement which I saw in a Freetown 
paper, the Sierra Leone Echo and Lata Chronicle of 
August 20, 1921: 

BUNGIE 

The General sympathetic undertaker, 
builder for the living and the dead, con- 
tractor, etc 

16 



THE WEST COAST TRIP 

Refuge and refreshing bungalow, 15 Eiss^ 
Street, Freetown. 

Ready-made coffin supplied with hearse and 
uniformed men at any mranent, corpse washed 
and dressed. Ready-made hammock always 
in stock for sale. 

Trucks, Venetian blinds, etc., all repairs and 
payment after satisfaction. 

And I'll bury your dead by easy system, 
only be honest to your sympathetic last friend. 

Bungle's advice : Do not live like a fool and 
die like a big fooL Eat and drink, pay your 
honest debts — that's Gentleman, always pray- 
ing for a happy death then a coffin by Bungie. 
Will bury the dead Book of Tobias I'll feed the 
living, that's Bimgie. 

Contracts taken for Carpentry, Masonry, 
Fainting Tombstones, etc., at moderate 
charges. 

R. Lumpkin alias Auhant Bungib. 

Our sympathetic friend had evidraitly joined no union 
and was no specialist. 

From an old English resident of Freetown I gleaned 
the information that native wives cost five shilhngs, ten 
for a "starched one," and in the event of no offspring 
after a year the wife is returned to her father who re- 
funds the shillings. It seemed to us that the father 
might have been allowed a sli^t deduction for rent or 
depreciation, but no, he had to refund the price entire. 
17 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

In all our preparation for the trip, in all our moun- 
tainous equipment, it had never occurred to us to plan 
for a Fancy Dress BalL Only the experienced English 
came provided. But for the Barber Shop we should 
have been lost. The Barber Shop supplied everything 
for just such unknowing ones. Miss Hall, however, 
would have none of the o£Ferings and with burnt cork 
and s gunny sack she carried off the hiunorous prize 
as Topsy, much to General Smuts' delight. 

The children had as social a time as we, with tiieir 
own field sports and games fmd their masquerade. 
Alice went as a French doll in a box supplied by the 
obli^ng ship's carpenter and, to her frank joy, won a 
prize. For her birthday, which fell on the twenty- 
fourth, she had a party and a marvelous cake, arranged 
for by shipboard friends, the Days; and we, who had 
feared rather a lonely voyage for her, now looked for- 
ward to the conclusion of the excitement of the trip. 

We crossed the Line the morning of the twenty- 
third. There were no ceremonies. It was not hot and 
the night after a girl was wearing a fur coat between 
dances, although the deck was screened with bunting. 
Not a day of the eighteen was uncomfortable; thou^ 
lacking a breeze, they might have been warm. For a 
diaracter firm enough to eschew deck sports it would 
be an ideally restful trip. 

Our last celebration was the second concert, followed 
by the distribution of prizes to the athletic ones and an 
ebullition of speeches. General Smuts held forth so 
glowingly on the high moral rewards of living the 
simple hfe in South Africa that we were almost per- 
18 



THE WEST COAST TRIP 

suaded to leave the effete cirilizations and come out and 
Kve it. 

A whisper saved us. "The simple life of a Prime 
Minister," said a South Africander in our ears. 

But it was a good speech. It had the force, the 
humor, the magnetism and inspiring enthusiasm which 
showed us GenenU Smuts in action. The shipboard 
days had ahready given us vivid pictures of htm. He 
was genuinely interested in the serious scientific possi- 
bilities of the expedition and a little amused and ap- 
palled at women and a child venturing into the wilds. 
He called us his "dear gorillas." 

"At the end of the Boer War," he said, one after- 
noon, "we had irregular fighting — ^what the English 
call guerilla warfare. But the Dutch did not under- 
stand that word. 'The damned English called us 
gorillas.' they said," and the general laughed heartily 
in reminiscence. There was good-natured banter but 
not a touch of rancor in him. Wise Smuts, they call 
Ttim. 

.There are no dull phrases in his conversation. He 
cuts to the heart of a subject. His questions are in- 
dsire and direct, his speech is vigorous, animated, shot 
with humor. He asked interestedly of America, of the 
problems there, of prohibition, immigration, and the 
wtnnen of America, their activities and their home life. 

"To succeed, a nation must have fine women," he 
said, "big, splendid women," and you saw in him the 
strength of his hearty Dutch blood and the pride of 
strong, self-reliant ancestry. 

"Pne looks to America," he said earnestly, and that 
W 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

brou^t us to the Peace Conference and President 
Wilson. 

"He came as God," he said. "The people of Europe 
iwere hungry for good, for the things of the spirit. You 
understand? That was the thing he was to them. It 
>ras the secret of his enormous prestige. But no man 
could do it. It was beyond human power — the passions 
of men that had to be reconciled. I was there. My 
wife and children were in Africa, and for six months 
I fought the terms of the peace treaty as hard as I 
could fi^t. I saw much of Wilson and House. I 
know the whole story. But it was too much for man 
to do. Only God could do it. I said that one night at 
a meeting. I said, *Kow is the time for the Griqua 
prayer.' " 

He explained that the Griqua is a mixed race, some 
Hottentot, a very little white. But they are Chris- 
tians. "Now there was to be a battle between the 
Griqua and the blacks the next day and the Griqua 
came to Grod in prayer. You ought to hear it in broken 
Dutch. But it was like this. He told C^od he had 
often prayed before and been disappointed. God had 
failed him. Now to-morrow was to be the great battle. 
'Blood will flow,* said the Griqua. 'It will be a terrible 
thing. Now, God, you be there. Come yourself. Don't 
send your Son. This is no place for children. Come 
yourself.* 

"I told the Peace Conference that night, 'This is the 
time for the Griqua prayer I' " 

He lauded, his eyes twinkling. TTi?^ laugh, his 
humor, is a great reason for his success. You can seg 



THE WEST COAST TRIP 

him winning' over his opponents, heartening hia tired 
soldiers, joking with bluff Dutch farmers. 

"Humor is the saving of us," he declared. "It is the 
salvation of our race." 

Of Wilson he said again, "He was not God, and no 
one but God could have done it — not a mere erring 
mortal like ourselves." 

I said that I thought in America the time had ccone 
for the Griqua prayer, and the talk went back to 
American problems again. 

*'I am reading Mmn Street," said General Smuts, 
and he asked about the truth of the picture it drew. 
He found the doctor in the story magnificent, operating 
away with the tools at hand, at night, on a farmhouse 
table; while the wife, who escaped from it all, did noth- 
ing after she got away — nothing but talk. 

"Main Streetf he said, humorously. "All my life 
I have been a Main Streeterl" and he chuckled. "All 
Main Streeters, we fellows who are trying to get things 
done — trying to do something besides talk about it — 
working away with the things at hand; and the other 
fellows, who would make such a different world of it 
if they were God, criticizing and tearing away) If 
they were God— they would make a fearful mess of iti" 
he flung out with a flash of sternness. 

Several times he spoke of his convictions of the sepa- 
rate origins of life. 

"Unquestionably it has had separate origins," he said, 
"You understand ?" 

He had a way of saying, "You imderstand?" or 'Do 

jaa follow?" witii an intent look hcaa those searching 

21 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

ey.es of his as if he were saying, "If you are at sea, 
speak out. Life b too short to talk incomprehensibly." 

He went on, "It has sprung up and died out and 
sprung up in other places. And we may go— just as 
the Neanderthal man has gone. We may go. The 
problem of life is too much for man. We are in this 
frame of earth and God has given us a soul . . . and 
yre strive and fight . . . and the consciousness of the 
world and the sorrows of it wear us out." 

He stopped. "The only happy man I know is the 
black. He is a distinct race. The black will work all 
day, work as hard as you can make him. But night 
comes, he eats his bellyful, he sings. He has ihe secret 
of happiness." 

He touched his breast, half smiling. "We others, 
we hare too much here. It is too much for us, and we 
may go and another race take our place." 

It struck me as characteristic of the man that he 
should have this feeling so strongly, should accept this 
with scientific detachment as a possible conclusion to 
all our human endeavors and yet be, in his infinitesimal 
span of Ufe, not at all detached, but one of the hardert 
workers to achieve results that no hope of his couM 
call permanent. 

There was nothing tragic, nothing frustrate, in his 
face. He has the steady courage of the man who had 
looked life and death in the eyes and marched through 
defeat to continued eCFort. 

He is a man who believes in the old substantial f oim- 
dations — country, home, and family. He believes in 
hard work, in enthusiasm, in endeavor, in good cheer. 
22 



THE WEST COAST TRIP 

His roots go deep into the soil, into the good, strong, 
warming earth. Well educated — it was Cambridge, I 
think, that be went to — it is his native endowment of 
sound, penetrative good sense, disciplined in a hard 
sdiool, that is his unfailing inspiration. 

A South Africander gave me a very vivid picture of 
the General's wife. ' 

"She's independent," he told me. "Not a bit proud. 
But independent I mean, she'd do anything she liked 
about h^ house — she'd do the washing if she thou^t 
she wanted to and if the King of England should come 
to call she'd not be a bit put out, but make him wel- 
crane and go right on. She's got eight children. 
There's usually been a baby in one arm and a book 
in the other. She's a great reader of very serious books." 

I don't know how true a picture that is — I didn't ask 
the €reneral — ^but I thought it a deli^tful one. 

The youngest of those eight children is a little girl 
about Alice's age, and for Alice and her care in the 
interior the General gave me a great deal of good ad- 
vice. At the very moment of disembarking, I remem- 
ber, he came back from some official group with a last 
word of recommendation about her. 

The night of that last concert was what might be 
termed blowy. It reminded us that we were approach- 
ing the Cape and that the Cape was first called the 
Cabo Tormentoso, or Cape of Storms, by its sorrowful 
discoverer Dias as his mutineers drove him back past 
it in 1486. 

Bou^ weather was generously predicted. And the 
next morning seemed to us rough. The ship's o£Scer 
23 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

denied it. It was too heavy a sea for a life boat to be 
launched, and a strong swimmer's agony could not pos- 
sibly last two minutes — but it wasn't roug^ It wasn't 
officially rough until the fiddles were on the table. Now 
our fiddles were not on. The ship had an end-for-end 
plunge with a sJiuddering whirl and list which kept the 
soup swirling round and roxmd so no racks were needed. 
But there were many aboard who did not know that 
it was not rough. Some one should have told them. 



CHAPTER HI 

the tourist thail 

Cafbtown. Bulawato, the Gbate op Cecil 
Rhodes, and Victoria Faujs 

Capetown haa a magnificent approach. It ranks 
witii Rio de Janeiro, Naples, and San Francisco as 
one of the most beautifully situated seaports of the 
world. I have never seen Rio de Janeiro, but I can 
imagine no more stirring entry than to sail throu^ 
the Cape*8 hlue waters into mountain-guarded Table 
Bay, flung round with the peaked Apostle Range but 
dominated by the dark, precipicelike height of Table 
Moontain. The town lies at its feet, between the rocky 
outlines of the Lion's Head and the Devil's Peak. 

The white tablecloth of cloud was rolling off the 
mountain's level top as we came in; flags were flying 
in honor of General Smuts* arrival, reception com-<^ 
mittees stood waiting, mounted police in line. There 
was a festive air to the disembarking. 

Leaving the men to stru^le with the luggage and 
interview the courteous customs ofiBcials, we four fem- 
inines drove to our rooms at the Grand Hotel for 
which we had wirelessed. The Mount Nelson is gen- 
erally frequented by tourists, but it was a httle too 
far away for our multitudinous errands. 

It was the end of August, still Capetown's winter, 
a day of lovely sun outdoors, but within the hotel we 
25 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

guarded reserve, blue eyes with the keen glance of a 
scout, bushy brows, gray hair, a closely trimmed yellow 
mustache, the cropped suggestion of an imperial, an 
aquiline nose, and firmly molded mouth and chin. 

It was the face of a man who has fought and fought 
hard and is unwearied. It had the restraint and 
tiioughtfulness and indomitable tenacity of statesman- 
ship, and in everything about him was the soundness 
and vigor of a splendid physique in the prime of power. 

We did not go ashore that morning, warned of the 
difiScuIty of the return in small boats against a seventy- 
mile-an-hour tide. If we had gone we should have seen 
the inhabitants wending to their eighty-six churches — 
some churches have congregations of only three and 
four — clad frequently in white night shirts and silk 
hats. I yearned for the sight. 

Freetown was founded some eighty years ago by the 
slaves returned from slave ships by English gunboats. 
It has a population of forty-one thousand blacks of 
conglomerate races and sixty whites. There is a black 
London barrister, and a black editor who is a B.A. of 
Cambridge. It could not have been that editor who 
wrote the advertisement which I saw in a Freetown 
paper, the Sierra Leone Echo and Law Chronicle of 
August 20, 1921: 

BUNGIB 

The General sympathetic undertaker, 
builder for the living and the dead, con- 
tractor, etc 

16 



THE WEST COAST TRIP 

Refuge and refreshing bungalow, 15 Eiss^ 
Street, Freetown, 

Ready-made coffin supplied with hearse and 
uniformed men at any moment, corpse washed 
and dressed. Ready-made hammock always 
in stock for sale. 

Trucks, Venetian blinds, etc., all repairs and 
payment after satisfaction. 

And I'll bury your dead by easy system, 
only be honest to your sympathetic last friend. 

Bungie's advice : Do not hve like a fool and 
die like a big fool. Eat and drink, pay your 
honest debts — that's Gentleman, always pray- 
ing for a happy death then a coffin by Bungie. 
Will bury the dead Book of Tobias I'll feed the 
living, that's Bungie. 

Contracts taken for Carpentry, Masonry, 
Fainting Tombstones, etc., at moderate 
charges. 

R. LuHFKiN alitu AuuANY Bungie. 

Our sympathetic friend had evidently joined no union 
and was no specialist. 

From an old English resident of Freetown I gleaned 
the information that native wives cost five shilhngs, ten 
for a "starched one," and in the event of no offspring 
after a year the wife is returned to her father who re- 
funds the shillings. It seemed to us that the father 
might have been allowed a slight deduction for rent or 
depreciation, but no, he had to refund the price entire. 
IT 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

tains rising on one side and the bloom and glitter of the 
sea below. 

I can think of no drive more beautiful than the one 
past Sea Point and Camp's Bay, edging the Twelve 
Apostles' range to Hout's Bay, then crossing the Penin- 
sula to Constantia and Wynberg and back to Capetown 
through the Rhodes Estate. The day we went all the 
trees were in leaf except the oaks; calla lilies were 
blooming by the wayside; the mountain sides were rosy 
with heather; the sea was half a hundred blues. At 
Constantia Bay there was a lovely stretch of silver trees 
against the jade green of the Indian Ocean. 

Those trees, whose pointed leaves were like velvety 
silver, are peculiar to the Cape. The southern and eas- 
tern slopes of Signal Hill are clothed with them, while 
they can hardly be induced to grow on the other side of 
the mountain. 

Some day, before so very long, there will be a swift 
passenger service from New York to Capetown and 
those South African roads will be fiUed with a swift 
succession of motorists. It will be a paradise for the 
first-comers. 

Outside of Capetown is Groote Schur, an old-fash- 
ioned white-washed residence of Dutch architecture, 
which Cecil Rhodes set aside in his will as the official 
residence of the Prime Minister of that South African 
confederation he foresaw. It is a quaint irony of history 
— which not even Rhodes could have foreseen— that the 
first two men to occupy it should have been of that 
people he so dreaded — General Louis Botha and Gen- 
eral Jan Smuts. 



THE TOURIST TRAIL 

From Capetown to the Congo runs the southern part 
of the road that was Rhodes' dream. Draw a line up 
from the Cape, along the very backbone of Africa, to a 
point almost under the equator, and close to the Eastern 
frontier of the Belgian Congo, and you have the way 
that we were going. Our objective, the three volcanic 
mountains — Mikeno, Karisimbi, Visoke — lay northeast 
of Lake Kiru in what was formerly German East 
Africa, now part of the Belgian Mandate. Rail and 
water would take us north and after that our feet. 

We left Capetown Saturday, September 3, in a com- 
fortable compartment train, with a good diner attached. 
We raited bedding and towels from the black boy who 
appeared each night to make up our beds. The train 
went twenty miles an hour and the comfort and quiet 
and cleanliness of it made the trip very much less tiring 
than one a quarter of the length in America, while the 
strangeness of the scenery kept us always at the win- 
dows or on the little seats on the platform's end. 

All the fost day we climbed through the Hex river 
valley among the mountains which form an apparently 
insurmountable barrier to the Great Karroo tablelands 
above. The next morning we looked out upon the wide 
expanse of veldt, grass and brush and flat-topped gran- 
ite kopjes — a few herds grazing, a few lone farms, a 
few stray ostrich, but no game — a graveyard of plains 
emptied of its old life by the Boer farmers who have 
not replaced it with cultivation. 

Dust was beginning to sift in and the cold morning 

had warmed to sultriness. We were exhausting the 

resources of the compartpient wash basins when a note 

29 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

was brought in from the private car at the end of our 
train. Sir Arthur and Lady Lawley, who had been on 
the boat with us, had learned of our presence on the 
same train and Lady Lawley wrote to offer us, not the 
tea alone which my mind foresaw at the first sentence, 
but a nap for Alice in her bed and baths f or ua all in 
her tub. I 

We restrained ourselves. We accepted the bath for 
Alice only and at a convenient stop at Orange River 
that afternoon Miss Miller and I raced back with her. 
It was the longest train I ever saw, bar none, not even 
the freights which roll past when motoring — and then, 
confronted by the Lawley tub in the flesh, we succumbed 
and bathed in grateful tiun and "as welcome as Lady 
Lawley's tub" became a familiar phrase with us. 

The end of the second day brought us to Eimberley 
where the diamonds come from. Kimberley is a snap- 
shot of impressions — an outline of diamond mines 
against the paling sky — ^wide streets, low buildings, and 
shady pepper trees — ^the hospitality of Kenilwortk Castle 
acquaintances ; a white tropic house and charming court; 
hasty motoring and farewells. 

In 1869 you could not find Kimberley on any map. 
In 1870 a shining little stone was picked up by a Boer 
farmer. In 1871 ten thousand men were digging fran- 
tically in that precious earth — sixteen hundred claims, 
each thirty-one feet square, were pegged out. 

Access to these claims was difficult, for the narrow 
strips required to be left for roadways soon became 
mere bridges as the ground was excavated; water filled 
in, slides occurred, dust fell from one claim to another, 



THE TOURIST TRAIL 

qiuirels and sbootmg affrays led to law-suits and the 
diners became impatient of the situation and resentful 
of increased taxes and rents. 

Exasperated or discouraged, they sold their claims, 
sold them to one or the other of two shabhily dressed 
men who happened invariably to turn up — and Cecil 
Rhodes and Barney Bamato had the diamond industry 
of South Africa in their hands. 

Their amalgamation, now known as the De Beers 
Consolidated Mining Company, is one of the greatest 
coups in the history of finance. The first thing they did 
was to close the greater part of the mines so that a 
limited output would preserve the high prices. 

The name of Maf eking got me out next morning, at 
what I then considered an unearthly hour of six-thirty, 
to see a long station of staUs, one huge pepper tree, two 
aloes, three palms in tubs, and four natives selling 
dusters. I strolled out and discovered the outskirts of 
the town, hot and empty streets, one-story stores, 
flagged sidewalks, when sidewalks there were, and came 
back to the stalls to imbibe bad coffee in a cracked cup 
from a cross-eyed proprietress. 

I felt an increased respect for that gallant band who 
had defended the town so successfully. Personally I 
should have surrendered it at the first opportunity, or 
even paid them to take it away. . . . But then the coffee 
was exceptionally bad. 

Little black boys in increasing d^ollet^ began to 
b^uile our stops with offerings of grotesquely carved 
giraffes — ^made in Japan I — and a few native huts ap- 
81 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

peared. We rushed out and photographed them as if 
the^ were the last huts we should see in Africa, la the 
brush and veldt I often caught a likeness to our western 
sagebrush country, but just when the scene appeared 
familiar some swift touch changed it utterly — a huge 
cone of a sun-baked ant hill, a scattering of little 
crooked trees, or a blaze of scarlet flowers on bare 
branches. 

The morning of the fourth day brought us to Bula- 
wayo where we motored thirty miles across the veldt 
through Matapos Park to World's View. 

In Bulawayo there stands Rhodes* statue — a stocky, 
Hiick-set, carelessly dressed man, hands behind him, legs 
apart, looking out to the north where his dream road 
stretched. The body of that man lies among the granite 
boulders on a mountain top, beneath a simply marked 
bronze slab. 

Forceful, hard-headed, dreamer and laborer, far-see- 
ing, indomitable, and unsparing, his name has become 
identified now with that [Empire for which he wrought 
with such passion of will in spite of her. It is one with 
tiiat dream of an All Bed railroad from Cape to Cairo, 
of which the world has heard so much that a good part 
of the world takes for granted the dream's accomplish- 
ment. 

He is not alone upon his moimtain top. Down at the 
beginning of the climb there is cut in the rock, 

This Place Is Coksbcbated 

And Set Apast Fokktxb 

To Be the Restino Fi^cb of Those Who 

Have DESxayxo Well or Theik Countkt 



THE TOURIST TRAIL 

snd a little way below Rhodes* grave, at one side, is a 
idiite marble memorial guarding the bodies and mem- 
ory of Allan Wilson and his thirty-three men who fell 
against the Matabele — ^gallant soldiers perishing for 
that Smpire for which the master spirit on the rock 
beside them wrou^t so unflinchingly. 

From the top the mountainsides sloped down into 
forest and brush, far-reaching until they met the hills 
on the horizon. As we were there, a troop of baboons 
came into the trees, their strange barking emphasizing 
the solitudes. 

It is a wonderful resting place, rock and height and 
eaidrcling view of his lored luid, and if his unresting 
^irit could lie quiet anywhere it is there in the place he 
had designated. He went unready and untired to his 
end — his life work, as he thou^^t, unfinished, but his 
soul has gone marching on, like John Brown's. 

"Keeping faith with Cecil Rhodes" will be the poli- 
tician's slogan for years, just as the name of Lincoln is 
with us. 

At Bulawayo we changed trains tmd discovered that 
an unfeeling power had removed the diner. We had 
spent at Rhodes' grave the time perhaps intended to be 
employed in collecting food, but at a small station far- 
ther on the kindly wife of lie station-master parted with 
some of her own supply for us and half her precious 
bread for our little giil. We lunched and dined upon 
these gleanings, and it might be said that we had a 
distinct interest in the breakfast at the hotel at Victoria 
Falls the next morning. 

Tbt very sight of the hotel was channing, a long, one- 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

story building with ra3nng wings. From the Tcrandas I 
at the back we could see the gorges of the Falls and the ] 
bridge which Rhodes had planned, which was completed | 
in 1904. The thunder of the Falls was part of the 
place hke the rhythm of heavy surf on the sea coast. 

The many views of the Falls themselves are at some 
distance and the way is covered by little trolleys, tiny 
cars for ten or twelve, on miniature tracks, operated by 
man-power. The man-power, a variable number of 
natives, seizes the car and pushes. It is simplicity itself, 
except perhaps for the natives. 

From the landing stage to which the trolley brou|^t 
us we took a native canoe out to Cataract Island. 
There are two large islands — Cataract and Livingstone 
— perched on the very brink of the Falls, and the Devil's 
'Cataract is that plunge of water between Cataract 
Island and the South Bank. 

It was an unforgettable first glimpse, a mad leap of 
water over savage rocks, into a deep and narrow gorge, 
with a barbaric blaze of red aloes on the banks against 
the white foam. The color and beauty of the country 
were all a part of the picture. It was utterly wild 
and lonely, as untouched and soUtary as when Living- 
stone in 1855 first solved the mystery of the Smoke that 
Thunders — Mosi-oa-Tunya — the native name for the 
Falls, bom of the white overhanging cloud of vapor that 
can be seen for twenty miles. 

There is no comparison between Niagara and Vic- 
toria. To say that Victoria has two and a half times 
the height, four times the volume of Niagara, and a 
width that is the reach of ten city blocks, tells nothing. 
84 





LUAI.ABA Rivca 



THE TOURIST TRAIL 

Niagara is a spectacle, an unchallenged spectade, for 
it has the distance and peTSpective from which it can he 
seen — Victoria is a sensation. 

The Zambezi, the second largest riTCT in Africa, 
amies rolling quietly out of the very heart of the con- 
tinent, and in a flash its whole width plunges blindly 
down into the deep and narrow chasm through which 
it ruahes, raging and storming, for more than forty 
miles. The wild and savage splendor of it makes Ni- 
agara a benign performance. The rocks on the brink 
of die plunge shatter the racing water into diamond 
pdnts. It is spray when it begins to fall, foam and 
fury and fairy crystals, outflung like powder from some 
l^ant gun, hurtling into air to nm together in sheer- 
dropping columns, that fall a shuddering depth into 
thundering gorges below, to rise as spray again shot 
with the gleam of double rainbows. 

At Victoria we donned oxu- gray pith helmets, com- 
panions of many days to come, and my fears for Alice 
were laid. No lynx-eyed native would be needed to 
stalk after her and prevent carelessness. She never for- 
got, she never objected, and she reminded the rest of us 
wHh fairly irritating consistency. 

On the eve of departure we left a call for five in the 
morning. The train to the Congo was due at six-twenty 
and an hour and twenty minutes was not too much time. 
Now while the dining room of the hotel was excellent 
and the main rooms were charming, the bedroom service 
had a certain negligence of attention from the manage- 
mart, betokening a mind preoccupied with other things. 
85 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

So ve were insistent that our call should be loud and 
punctual 

The management was amused. It said it never failed. 

I woke at six. A tropic dawn was lightening the 
world. My watch dial showed six. In twenty minutes 
the train would roll out of the station. In the moment, 
after the leap from the bed and the reach for the nearest 
garment, came a knock at the door. 

"Six o'clock," said the management's representative. 

We knew it. What we said there is no use to record. 
Mr. Akeley and Mr. Bradley were in the hall, shouting 
for porters for our trunks and bags and dressing be- 
tween shouts. I sped into the nearest things and while 
Miss Hall jammed down the suitcase tops I drew a coat 
over Alice's pajamas, thrust on sandals and socks, 
topped her with a helmet and in seventeen minutes, 
breathless but triumphant, we stood in front of the sta- 
tion, followed by galloping porters with luggage, and 
the rest of the party on their trail. 

We stood tiiere an hour and twenty minutes. We 
saw day dawn brighter and brighter, revealing our 
unwaged faces and sketchily done hair. The grass and 
flowers took on the color of li^it, the dogs came down 
to investigate our boxes, and play with Ahce who, with 
pajamas flapping beneath her coat, scrambled about 
the mound of luggage. 

The station was yet unopened and the station clock 
had stopped. I saw a black boy, sent by the curio 
dealer across the tracks, come with a clock in his hand» 
regard the station time-piece intently, and then, as be 
had been told to set his clock by the station doc^ he 
86 



THE TOURIST TRAIL 

pot the bands conscientiously at a quarter after four 
and ambled back again. 

Ultunately the train came, and a day and a night and 
iDotber day of it brougfat us to Sakania, the Belg^ 
frontier. 



CHAPTER IV 

IN THE BELGIAN CONGO 

From Elxzabethtili^ Down the Lttalaba 
Rites to Lake Taxgamtika 

We entered the Belgian Congo on September 10, at 
ten-thirty at night, and my first impressions were of 
darkness and confusion, of a long, low building with 
wanly glimmering lights, returning travelers bustling 
about, porters swarming round little fires on ibe earth 
by the tracks, and dogs shifting from group to group in 
the peculiarly apprdiensive manner of native dogs. 

Here we presented passports, arranged for the lug- 
gage to go through in bond to ElizabethviUe, and 
changed from the British railways to the Katanga rail- 
ways of the Congo. 

A night and more than half another day brou^t us 
to ElizabethviUe, the capital of Katanga province, 
where we were met by representatives of the absent 
vice-governor and motored to the hotel where rooms 
had been arranged. 

We had come now twenty-five hundred miles of the 
northward way and we knew one thing already about 
the equatorial gorilla. He was inaccessible. Ko 
casual sportsman, landing on the coast, was going to 
comer him. 

We waited a week in Elizabethvillei because tLe lug- 



IN THE BELGIAN CXINGO 

gage which had left Capetown with us, and for whidi 
we were paying higgage rates and not freight in order 
to have it accompany us, had disappeared. We had 
seen it last at Livingstone, just this side of Victoria 
Falls, and persistent telephoning disclosed that it was 
still there. We dislodged it at last and it arrived in a 
cattle car, too late for the first connection north, for 
only two trains a week run to the interior from Eliza- 
bethviUe. 

The Khodesian Railway, I may add, saw no reason 
whatever in the cattle car journey to rebate anything 
of the rate we were paying to insure the retention of 
Uiat luggage in a luggage van. Tbey are still refrain- 
ing from seeing it, althou^ we are continuing the cor< 
reqrandence in a public-minded spirit of enlighten- 
ment. 

Elizabethville is young and the early residents still 
talk of their first tin houses, but it is built now for the 
future, well laid out, with wide streets and attractive 
administrative buildings. There are clubs and tennis 
and golf and motors — in spite of the dollar and a quar- 
ter for gasoline — good shops and Belgian and English 
libraries. The copper mines have brought quite a few 
Americans there, and our wait was enlivened by every- 
Hung that the new acquaintances and the courteous 
acting vice-governor, Monsieur Serruys, could do for us. 

We were very comfortable at the Hotel de Bruxelles, 
our first characteristic tropic hotel, with its stretch of 
veranda before the dining room, reading room and bar, 
through \^ch one indiscriminately sauntered to reach 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

the bedrooms beyond, at right angles to the main build- 
ing on either side of a court. 

Madame Franzos, the proprietess, was a presiding 
genius, or rather an ambulatory one, and to see her 
march majestically up and down the court was to see 
a general on scout duty. Her shout of "Boy" meant 
violent retribution. 

"We were getting acquainted now with the boy sys- 
tem. If we wanted boots or a bath we put our heads 
out a window or door and shouted "Boyl" into the re- 
sounding coiurt. There is a directness about this lacking 
to the buzzer system. If you don't get your boy you 
can always raise your voice, but you cannot always raise 
your buzzer. Its drawbacks are for the other guests 
who may be wanting a nap when you want your boy, but 
no system is imiversally considerate. 

We got some boys ourselves in Elizabethville. We 
had hoped to find there a complete safari outfit for the 
interior, gun boys, tent boys, cook and interpreter such 
as Mr. Akeley had always obtained in British East, 
but there was nothing of the sort to be found. The 
Congo was not invaded by travelers and we would have 
to pick up what material we could as we went along. 

We found three house boys whom we took witii us 
— three with whom we were to spend many months of 
experience. Little they knew as they stepped oflF that 
Sunday morning in the glory of the private car which 
the hospitable Belgian government furnished us, again 
through the courteous ofiSces of Monsieur Serruys, 
what fate was holding in reserve for them. 

Mablanga, Kiani, and Merrick they were, new-shod* 
40 



IN THE BELGIAN CONGO 

dean trousered and shirted, check-capped, with Merrick 
gporting an artificial red rose upon his purple shirt. 
The rose was all that survived of his outfit. It had 
many transient backgrounds, but the most humorous of 
aJi was the suit of pink cotton pajamas which Miss 
Miller supplied at a Congo camp to reheve his very 
evident needs. 

We paid each of these boys the scandalously high 
wages of fifty francs a month — ^three dollars and fifty 
cents as the rate of exchange then stood — and thirty- 
five cents a week to provide food. Most Belgians, we 
discovered later, paid but half that and I am afraid that 
our trio had the bright idea of taking advantage of our 
inexperience. But considering all ttiat fell to their lot 
while they were with us I cannot feel that they were 
overpaid. 

The country through which we went was increasingly 
beautiful — a rolling country of wide valleys and splen- 
did slopes, overflung with forest like a Persian rug. 
There was a soft, rusty-rose tone of spring leaves that 
wove in and out like an elusive pattern; there were 
deeper notes of red from hanging tree fruits; there 
were gleams of gold and orange and crimson from 
flowering shrubs and trees, all interwoven in a tapestry 
of woodland greens and browns, soft and subdued, 
changeful with sunlight and cloud shadow. 

But for all the glory of color the charm of African 
landscape is tiie subtlety of it, the crooked trees, the 
spreading, flat-topped acacias that would delight a 
Japanese artist, the silver harmony of grays and 
tK^wnS} the fineness of every unerring line. 
.41 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

The most curious features were the gpgantic ant hills, 
huge, hard-baked cones made by the white ant that is 
the curse of Africa, eating out every wooden foundation. 
The cone is built up about a tree trunk, and in some cases 
the original branches of the trees are still sticking out 
of the top, but more often every vestige of the original 
support has disappeared. In ElizabethviUe we had 
seen one ant hill, in a garden, used as a storehouse, with 
a door set in place. 

A few antelope could be seen now and some secre- 
tary birds, but the country was as barren of game as 
the veldt, and we all began to wonder if we were 
really in the interior of Africa when, after a day and a 
ni^t, the little railroad — built within the last five years 
— ended abruptly upon the banks of the Lualaba River 
and oiu* adventuring began. 

The Lualaba River is really the Upper Congo, but 
it achieved a name of its own before Stanley discovered 
the connection. Bukama, the railway's end, was the 
highest point on the river to which light steamers can 
penetrate. Now it was dry season, before the Rains, 
and we were uncertain about any river transportation, 
so when our train came to its final stop by a thatched 
depot at the river brink we rushed out into the tropic 
dark and discovered that, though a regular steamer was 
not here, there was a small affair that cotdd take us 
and would start in the morning. 

Our deUght was great. It lasted just thirty seconds, 
until we received Uie answer to our second question. 
Our luggage? But there was no luggage. 

I never saw anything so sudden and so sickening^ 
42 



IN THE BELGIAN CONGO 

conplete as our despair. We stood there in the raying 
lantem li^t and looked tragically at each other and 
incredulously at the light-hearted Belgian who told us 
this. He had no conception of our anguish. He went 
on to say that while we waited for it we could live in the 
private car — they would leave it on the tracks when the 
train went back. 

But our own eyes, the masculine eyes of the party, 
had seen the luggage leave on a goods train before we 
left. That train had arrived. Therefore the luggage 
must have arrived. . . . But there was no luggage. 
Grimly Mr. Akeley spoke of trouble. Amiably the 
agent assured him that he lived on trouble and re- 
counted an anecdote, perhaps to woo us from our pri- 
vate griefs, of a Belgian doctor who had come from 
Brussels with a magnificent equipment which had been 
lost and never found, although he had waited five 
months. 

Urgently my husband insisted that the official was 
mistakoi and that the luggage had come but had been 
overlooked. I began to be ashamed of his insistence. 
To have overlooked that mountain of luggage suggested 
such bare-faced negligence on the part of the official 
who, after all, was not responsible for its nonarrivall 

But my husband is an insistent character and he de- 
scribed the luggage and repeatedly detailed its de^ 
parture in the car, and at last the word "car" had a 
revivifying effect. There was a car, it developed, but 
it had not been opened, for the papers for it had not 
come. So nothing could be done. 

But a great deal was done. We had papers enough, 
48 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

and the official obligingly met us halfway now that the 
mystery was solved, and the Bukama affair ended in 
tea and hospitality in the thatched depot and such 
exuberance of good feeling as only the reprieved at the 
gallows' foot can know. 

We were off next morning after a torrential down- 
pour, the first rain of the season, in an infinitesimal 
steamer, piled very full with ourselves and the wood 
fuel and the native crew and the Belgian captain; our 
luggage in an open scow lashed to one side, and some 
natives in a similar scow on the other side. We sat 
forward under a little iron roof and ultimately scram- 
bled up the rail and sat on the top of the roof. 

We had made no preparations for food, having been 
told at Elizabethville that the passenger steamer could 
provide that, and at the last moment the kindly official 
in charge of the freight depot came rushing down the 
bank with the hot and fairly kicking leg of a goat 
which he had just that minute despatched for us. How- 
ever, there was another passenger, another river cap- 
tain journeying as far as his own grass hut, where he 
and his wife contributed antelope and everything else 
we would accept, so the goat was a vain oblation, al- 
though appreciated by our boys. 

All that day we glided between groves of borassus 
palms, the loveliest trees in Africa, and past banks 
overgrown with forest, always with purple-peaked 
mountains against the sky. There were plains of ante- 
lopes and there were three elephants tranquilly feed- 
ing; there were crocodiles slipping silently from sand- 
bars at our approach; and there was a huge hippo 
44 



IN THE BELGIAN CONGO 

fwimming open-mouthed toward us. We were a long 
way yet frcan gorillas, but we began to feel that we 
were on the trail, really in Africa, headed up to the 
heart of it. 

Our traveling companions in the native barge were 
Congo belles returning down river clad in the latest 
thing in calico and beads. At Elizahethville a native 
woman with any pretension to fashion wore a regular 
dress with a yoke of white embroidery and with short, 
puffed sleeves. Now the girls wore a length of calico 
knotted tmder the arms — not any kind of calico, for 
Zanzibar set the styles and the vogue changed with 
the advent of fresh traders. A Paisley shawl pattern 
in maroon was particularly good this year. 

Across the smooth, dark shoulders and arms that this 
classic simplicity left bare, went the darker pattern of 
dcatrization marks — httle cuts made in the skin when 
a child is yotmg and filled with ashes to prevent healing. 
On the men the marks were often tribal in significance; 
on the women they were made apparently only for orna- 
ment — little flights of arrow heads crossing the shotd- 
ders or relieving the monotony of flat cheeks. 

The Congo style of hair dressing was elaborate; it 
took a girl an entire day to do her hair, dividing the head 
area into circles and segments with mathematical pre- 
cision and twisting the hair strands into black strings 
that she knotted tightly xmder her chin. Then, be- 
ing near enough to civilization to feel the influence of 
the bandana, she wound another piece of calico about 
the coififure and the emerging strands of hair had some- 
what the effect of bonnet strings. The native comb was 
4ff 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

of wood, narrow and deep and decorated with black 
paint. 

That ni^ we made connections with a freight 
steamer whose captain, frankly amazed at this invasion 
of Americans, gave us the freedom of the ship and we 
tucked ourselves away, the girls in the cabin of the 
absent mechanician, and Mr. Akeley in a room on the 
accompanying barge. Herbert and I set up our cots 
on deck. By day we sat forward on the barge in our 
steamer chairs, gliding along as luxuriously as Cleo- 
patra in a dhahabiyah and through more marvelous 
scenery than even the Nile can offer. Our three boys 
cooked for us over an open fire on the steel deck. As 
all the native passengers camped about the back of the 
barge had their own little cooking fires, too, we pre- 
sented the appearance of a floating picnic ground. 

We had opened one of our London chop boxes con- 
taining an assortment of good things in tins — coffee 
and tea, milk, butter, sugar, jam, cheese, prunes, 
deviled ham, tongue, etc., and at our stops at native 
villages we bought eggs and bananas and chicken — 
eggs at four cents the dozen, bananas at three and a 
half cents a bunch, and chickens at seven cents apiece. 
That was scandalously high for chickens; we rarely 
paid more than three and a half cents after that. 

We had to be careful of Ahee on this boat on these 
slippery, unrailed decks, but we never let her stir alone 
and found a safe comer where she spent her days at 
her favorite drawing and coloring. The river was full 
of crocodiles. Several times we saw them drifting past, 
like submerged logs, and twice, looking over the sid^ 
M 



IN THE BELGIAN CONGO 

I caag^t a, crocodile's goggle eyes looking up at me in 
nnister ezpectimcy. 

The captain of our first little steamer had just had 
a friend pulled under by the crocs while taking a rash 
swim. It seems to me the most horrible of deaths. 
There are several theories about the way the crocodile 
consumes its victim. Some hunters say that he crunches 
down his prey at once; others, that he holds it under 
until it is drowned and then often hides it away on the 
bank until it is what might be called riper and more 
flavored to his taste. 

Major Hamilton, for many years game warden in 
British East, is a partisan of the filed-for-reference 
theory. He vouches for the story of a young man who 
was pulled down and held under until the crocodile 
judged that he was drowned. The young man revived 
in a black, wet cave in the river bank, worn by the 
waters when hi^, but just now at the river level. He 
was uninjured but he did not dare try to crawl out to- 
waids the river where the crocodile might be, so he 
clawed at the earth above him and succeeded in break- 
ing his way throu^ the sod overhead and making his 
escape. 

I haven't the slightest right to an opinion, but after 
hearing a number of first-hand stories on the subject 
it doesn't seem to me reasonable that the crocodile is 
boimd by any hard and fast rule. If he is hungry it 
would be natural to eat at once ; if his appetite is satis- 
fied, but he has a chance at something, it would be 
equally natural for him to pull it down and thriftily 
hide it away. That he can ravenously bolt his food 
47 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

is shown by the photograph of a specimen shot by 
Major Flint of Uganda, where the entire arm and 
leg of a hastily consumed native were excavated from 
the croc and piled jauntily on his back as a photo- 
graphic exhibit. 

Five days on the Lualaba brought us to Kafaalo, a 
Belgian outpost, where there was an administrator 
and his wife, the young chef de gare, and two repre- 
sentatives of trading stores. Here we camped on the 
river bank to await the twice-a-week little train to Lake 
Tanganyika. While here the natives found a crocodile 
entangled in a huge fishing net and brought it ashore 
in front of our tents. They had tortured it brutally 
and it was nearly dead when I saw it, motionless and 
hardly breathing. It was all the more sickening be- 
cause it was not a man-eating crocodile at all but a spe- 
cies of gavial, a fish-eater, an Asiatic species not usually 
found in Africa. The snout is different from that of 
the true crocodile, thinner, and curving to a kind of 
knob at the end. 

From Kabalo our last reach of railroad brought us 
in a day's journey to Albertville on Lake Tanganyika. 
At Albertville I had a letter from a friend sent ahead 
to greet us. He hoped that we would like Main Street 
and that the hotel would not be all we feared. Hotell 
He had been misled by that "ville" in Albertville. Our 
hotel was a windy hiUside so hard-baked that it was 
impossible to pound a tent-peg into it, and the first 
night the men did not get their tent up at all hut 
slept on cots, where morning brought the magnificent 
'4S 





Coxao BiLtEi Tbavkumo 



'MiHfei 




^ 


■■IP 


i 


-J 


&^.^ 




p'. 



I Aim and Leo of Native He Had Jur Baten 




Gavial, Asiatic Species or Ceocodile, Caught 



LCALABA RlVE> 

[p»ee 481 



IN THE BELGIAN CONGO 

sunrise over Lake Tanganyika, that daylight revealed 
lying at our feet. 

Tanganyika is a glorious lake. It is four hundred 
and fifty miles long and about forty wide; with the 
exception of Lake Baikal it is the deepest fresh-water 
lake in the world, for soundings of over two thousand 
feet have been taken. It is twenty-two hundred and 
fifty feet above the sea. It is a great stretch of blue 
water, encircled with a golden rim of sand, backed by 
rocky headlands topped with a fringe of crooked trees. 
And behind the headlands, against the horizons, ware 
mountains. 

We had no more beautiful hours in Africa than those 
late afternoons we spent upon the beach watching the 
women, with their great water jars upon their heads, 
go back and forth, climbing the winding path to the vil- 
lages upon the cliffs. It was beauty itself, the perfect 
loveliness of beauty undespoiled. But it was beauty 
with a docsn on its bright head, for abeady the white 
man had come. There were steel tracks reaching in 
from the west to Albertville, and across the lake there 
were tracks stretching east to the coast at Dar Bs 
Salaam. In ten years, twenty or fifty, civilization and 
its gauds would be enthroned. The old Africa would go. 

Ete walked the TanganTiba beach, 
A slim yoong native, unconcerned. 
The wash of Tanganyika ronnd his feet. 
The roar of Tanganyika in his ears ; 
Behind the darkening headlands the set snn 
Flushed sky and sand with amber and with rose; 
EThe frii^ of flat-topped trees apon the top 
49 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

Wu silhouetted blacic; 

He walked serene, wet with the waves 

That for uncounted ages had washed out 

The footprints of his people on the sands; 

He did not know nor feel nor hear 

The wash of civilization round his feet, 

The roar of civilization in his ears ; 

He did not know that he was doomed, 

He did not know that soon 

The cuckoo's silver call would hush before the siren's s 

Factories would rear their belching necks upon the heights 

And poison the sweet air ; 

The trees that fed his frugal fires would fall for fuel 

And turning wheels make gauds and gears for smooth-tongued 

men to sell ; 
Money would clink, 

His solitude would he a prison and a market place 
Where sweating toil wipes sullen brows 
And dull eyes gape at reeling films depicting scenes afar. 
He and his race are doomed; 
The ancient land is doomed. 

The captain "ate" us. That was his word, not ours. 
It meant that our meals, served on the deck of the lake 
steamer Baron Dhania, by our boys on our dishes, and 
the meals of the twenty other passengers — Belgian ad- 
ministrators, fiscal agents, judges, missionaries — that 
we accumulated and hospitably accommodated upon a 
boat with staterooms for ten, were all prepared by the 
captain's mite of a cook in a galley whose confines 
resembled a Chinese torture box. 

His pi^ce de remtance was a pig, which hung fairly 

complete from the rail the first day out. No Congo 

boat is accoutered until it has some former live stock 

50 




GuxT Palm on Tanuasvika 



IN THE BELGIAN CONGO 

hanging like a thief in irons at the cross arms. Thatpar- 
ticular pig we remembered vividly. We had the last 
of him one breakfast, a headcheese effect, served with 
cuiions and mayonnaise. Our best meal was the four 
o'clock chocolate, which was rich and plentiful, and the 
captain, a genial character tram Sweden, used to 
chuckle at our strange passion for it. 

We were five days getting to the north end of the 
lake, tying up for two of than at Kigoma, on tibe east 
shore, in what used to be German East. After the war 
it was Belgian and then reapportioned to the British. 
Four miles from Kig<xna is the historic tree beneath 
which Stanley met Livingstone. My great-grandfather 
used to talk about that meeting, and I had always pic- 
tured it in some dark and damp African forest, mos- 
quitoes humming and danger threatening. I wished my 
grandfather could hare seen that place of stmshine and 
dancing waves I 

I heard here for the first time Stanley's exquisitely 
conventional greeting to the white man he had come so 
far to find, "Dr. Livingstone, I believe?" 

Ujiji, where the meeting took place, is a native settle- 
ment of about twenty-five thousand and was formerly 
a great Arab trading center in slaves and ivory. The 
first white men to visit Tanganyika — Burton and Speke 
— Biiived here in 1858. The first steamer on the lake 
was a missionary boat launched here in 1884. 

At Usumbura, the north end of the lake, to which the 

Baron Dhani$ eventually brou^t us, we camped five 

days waiting for the two hundred porters for our march 

north through the mountains to Lake Kivu. We had 

01 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

come now as far as rail and boat could take us. We had 
hopes of a boat on Lake Eiru, for a government launch 
made the round of the lake once or twice a month, and 
to avoid waiting for it, Monsieur Ryckman, the com- 
missioner at Usumbura, authorized us to use it whenever 
we arrived, if we would pay for the gasoline — but the 
gasoline was lacking. However, it was ordered and 
was somewhere on the road. This lent considerable 
uncertainty to our traveling, but uncertainty is a con- 
dition of safari life. We had left our last telephone 
far behind at Bukama on the Congo — and that was 
broken. There was nothing quicker now than the black 
feet of a runner. 

Our wait was enlivened by visits to the native market 
which was held early every morning in an open space 
about a mile from our tents. It was the largest and 
most voluble market I ever saw or heard; the natives 
streamed in to it daily from every direction; from the 
forest came the firewood venders, from the cane fields 
the sellers of sugar cane, from the village shambas tiie 
possessors of eggs and grain and meal and chickens, and 
from tibe lake the fisher folk with baskets on their heads 
— everything was carried on the head — heaped with tiny 
silvery fish, as microscopic as white bait. I never went 
through the market but I found somebody picking half 
a thousand of those fish out of the dust after a jostling 
episode. 

Our boys went to this market, without, or against, 

orders, with a persistency worthy of Mary's little lamb. 

We had now six boys and a cook. We paid the cook two 

dollars and eighty cents a month and food money, and 

52 



IN THE BELGIAN CONGO 

out of that the cook paid his helper. Our latest boys 
we paid only a dollar thirty-five a month and food 
mon^. Each boy had a book which we kept for him 
and in which we entered whatever he drew against his 
wages. Here at Usumbura the boys were drawing lav- 
ishly and one day we found why, and why they loved 
the market so. 

iThere was a bar — a row of huge earthen jugs holding 
pombe, the native banana beer, and behind the jugs 
sat the barmaids calling their wares. There were two 
classes of service; in the more expensive the buyer got 
his beer in a cup, in the cheaper he had a pull at a straw. 
Here the technic was for the buyer to draw a deep 
breath and suck as vehemently as possible while the 
Tender endeavored instantly to choke him off with loud 
revilings. 

We bought interesting baskets here, very simple cir- 
cular ones with rounded covers that fitted snugly. We 
never saw this shape farther on. And we bought many 
of the men's bags and pouches, of tightly knotted fiber, 
sometimes ornamented with knotted fringe, which the 
men wore slung over a shoulder and in which they car- 
ried pipe and tobacco and food and knife and perhaps 
firesticks and money. One day I bought a very elab- 
orate new one to the loud lamentations of the man's 
wife who had just finished knotting it, and now saw 
herself furnished with more occupation for long days 
to come. It must have been incredibly tedious and 
difficult. 

Another diversion of our wait was an elephant hunt 
on which tiie administrator took us, but in which the 
58 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

elephants failed to cooperate, altiiough we rose at 
three, bicycled ten miles to a river, and then walked till 
five o'clock in the effort to meet those elephants half- 
way. We saw beautiful country, elephant spoor several 
days old, but nothing alive save the gleam of a leopard 
or serval cat and the gray and scarlet of the **1Kng 
parrots. 

All the excitement of that day had occurred in Uk 
camp after our departure. For some days we had 
noticed the presence of what might be called C<nigo 
flappers about the place, provocatdre-eyed young things 
with the latest cut of hair and the latest pattern of 
Zanzibar calico knotted beneath their smooth-skinned 
shoulders, the latest sparkle of beads and anklets, and 
these flappers were lingering about the cook-tent un- 
doubtedly longer than it took to sell eggs or poultry. 
One was particularly in evidence. 

"Jim," said Mr. Bradley, Jim being our abbreviation 
for Gimway, a white-toothed roustabout of a "hay," 
"Jim, who is that woman — ^who is she?" 

Jim's English was usually inadequate, but this time 
he was primed. 

"Cook's sister," said he. 

"M'm, cook's sister . . . And is she" said Mr. Brad- 
ley, "by any chance also the cook's wife?" 

Jim could not forbear making the case stronger. 
"Yes, sare, cook's wife," 

"Well!" said Mr. Bradley. He added slowly and 
impressively, "She must not stay In camp. Tell cook he 
must send her away. We do not take women with us." 

"No, sare," said Jim earnestly, "We take, sarel" 
54 




Native Makeet, Usumbuka, Lxkz TAMa^HviifA 




tfATlYK BaBMAIIM AT UsOMBCmA 




PCSTBU OK TRB MaECH 




IN THE BELGIAN CONGO 

Somewhere in the tents Martha uid I snickered. But 
the champion of virtue did not crack a smile. 

"No, you don't take," said he, firmly. "We — don't 
— take — any — ^women — on — this — expedition I" 

Jim looked blank. . . . He must have thought it a 
white man's world. . . . "Send her away," repeated 
Herbert, adamantly. 

She went away, but when we were oflf elephant hunt- 
ing; die came back again, and after her came her hus- 
band. He came with a whip, the kiboko of hippopota- 
DUis hide, and dragged her out of the cook-tent and 
b^an to beat and choke her. The outcries brought 
Miss Hall from her tent, and she shouted vigorously at 
the man to stop and go away, but he paid no attention 
to her nor to the boys. The cook made no effort to 
interfere on behalf of his lady love and the husband had 
apparently no animus against the cook but directed all 
his feeling and blows at the girL 

Priscilla was prompt and intrepid. She got her 
revolver and marched out with it in her hand. "Tell 
him to go away!" she said vigorously to Eiani, and the 
vigor and the revolver had their effect. The man 
stopped, the girl fled crying to Miss Hall, the boys 
talked all at once and the man went away. Immediately 
the girl cheered up and showed every intention of re- 
maining, but finally she too drifted off and the place 
thereof knew her no more. 

But she was only the first of the cook's sisters. It 
was perfectly extraordinary how our line of march coin- 
cided with the spread of his family. Invariably the 
sisters were about fifteen, with silky-lashed eyes and 
55 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

soft, giggling voices and very, very expensive beads. 

Changing the cook did not change the phenomenon. 
It seemed characteristic of the Congo impuki to have 
sisters in every tribe. 

The administrator at Usumbura had sent out to the 
chiefs for porters, and early on the morning of October 
14 we saw the long line of blacks descending upon us 
and felt that we were on safari at last. We had come 
now as far as rail and steam could take us, and had 
nothing now to depend on but our feet. 



CHAPTER V 

ON SAFABI 

A Sudden Elephant Hunt; Mabtha 

Gets a Tuseeb 

In the Congo, the Eastern Congo, you sit upon a 
mountain peak and gaze out to other mountain peaks, 
like pastels with distance, and you do not wonder how 
you are going to those other peaks — ^you know. You 
walk. And everything that you want, tents, food, 
clothes, camp equipment, walks with you on the heads 
of black carriers. 

This caravan life is called being on safari. A safari 
day begins eariy — four or three, by starshine or moon- 
shine or black night. It takes courage to throw back 
the blankets — those African highlands give winter-cold 
nights — and grope for the candle lantern, which has 
always changed position since you staked it painstak- 
ingly at bedtime, and then plunge shiveringly into 
khaki. A^ you dress you hurriedly thrust the discards 
into the green linen bags beside the cot, and your final 
deed is to roll up your bedding, force that into the bag, 
cap it with your hnen bath tub and enameled wash 
basin, and add any little odds and ends left out, ere you 
saUy forth to breakfast. 

The table is outside in the blackness of tropic mom- 
ing, candles glimmering wanly upon it. Before you 
57 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

are through with the prunes or the pineapple or the 
oranges you are in a gray gauze world, from which veil 
after veil of gauze is being swiftly withdrawn, and by 
the last bite of bacon or burnt toast and marmalade, a 
scarlet fire is streaming over the mountain tops and a 
rush of light is mocking the feeble candles. 

Behind you the tents have been taken down and 
rolled up in bundles for carrying, the bags and boxes 
brought out, arid everything made ready for the mardi. 
The invariable last thing is the breakfast dishes, whidi 
the boys do unhurriedly, conversationally, and bring, in 
trickles of two or three, while you stand guard over the 
empty boxes and keep off the porters, who yearn to 
acquire the boxes in their empty state and make off with 
them. 

Our porters at Usumbura came in four lota, from 
different villages, with a headman from eadi village. 
The porter's status seems to be that of a voluble chatteL 
I don't believe any one ever volunteers for the position. 
In the Congo, porters are paid half a franc a day, which 
was three and a half cents for us, and ten centimes a 
day for posho, or food-money. The day's march is 
about four hotu's, though often more, and I have known 
it to be nine, and each man carries about forty to sixty 
pounds on his head. Our chop boxes were all made up 
in weights for carrying, and we tried to have all Uie 
loads of equal weight, but of course there were dis- 
crepancies. 

There was a strong interest taken by those porters 
In the loads they got that first morning of our march, 
for eadi man carried the same one for the rest of the 
S8 



ON SAFARI 

trip. With an unerring instinct for Uj^t boxei, they 
mrrounded the Ry tent where we were breakfasting in 
ihe gray dawn and the meal was made hectic by baring 
to whirl about and frustrate the long, black, snakelike 
arms reaching under the cuinTas to purloin some un- 
ready box. We finally got under way about seven- 
thirty the first morning, with a triumphant blaring of 
the curved horns the leaders loved to blow. The music 
resembles a Scotch bagpipe crossed with a mule, vocal, 
and a really musical safari en route sounds like a cal- 
liope gone mad. 

We Bradleys went ahead, to lead, or ratiier discover, 
the way, the five-year-old Alice in her basket carried 
by two natives. After us came the long line of blacks, 
two himdred of them, a picturesque frieze against the 
sky line, in girding goatskins and beads, on each high- 
held bead its load. Mr. Akeley followed at the end, to 
see that no loads were left, and to have the opportunity 
of taking motion pictures without halting the safari. 
We had bought bicycles at Elizahcthville, for no mules 
were to be had, owing to the difficulty of bringing ani- 
mals in through the deadly tsetse fly-belt, and though 
we knew nothing of the route, except that it mounted 
over two thousand feet in the eight days, every bit that 
we could ride would be a help. For Alice, Mr. Akeley 
had devised and practically built a seat low on the front 
wheel of one bicycle, and that was ridden by her boy 
Mablanga who was strong, reliable, and utterly devoted. 
She loved this way of traveling more than any motor, 
at home, and much better than the basket, carried by 
two natives, to which she was generally consigned. 
59 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

When riding was impossible, the porters carried the 
wheels on their heads. It had been said that one can 
ride all over Africa on a wheel, for the native paths, 
padded smooth by generations of bare feet, wind from 
village to village. In the administered territories the 
chiefs are required to have a certain amount of work 
done on the paths, cutting the side grass and so forth, 
so the ways are improved, and even a few miles of riding 
on a long march is tremendously worth while. 

I had no idea that I was a good rider — indeed, I bad 
no idea that I could remember how to ride a bicycle at 
all — until I had the choice between riding down a moun- 
tain and walking. Then I took goat trails and dried 
courses of brooks, rock slides and thickets with a dash 
and abandon that covered me with bruises, but certainly 
covered the ground. 

Our first day's march from Tanganyika was a long 
one, twenty-three kilometers, and the road that day was 
good, so we bicyclists reached the rest-house. Koto- Koto, 
at noon and sought shelter from the sun under the 
thatched roof, where it was always cool, and proceeded 
to wait for the safari. We had brought water bottles 
and some lunch in a bag, and we bought bananas from 
the chief, who promptly presented himself with the 
inevitable present of a chicken. 

These presents were a trial from the moment they 
urrived, heads hanging, legs tied, to the time of their 
assassination and ultimate appearance upon the table. 
To become a present, a rooster must have lived long past 
aU reasonable expectation of a Methuselah and appar- 
ently subsisted all those years upon what sustemmce he 
60 



f 


r 





Alic£ aho Hem Tekt 




ON SAFARI 

could pick up witiiin the radius of a two-indi teiiher. 
Xothjng stringier or more sinewy exists. 

In the Congo you shake hands with a chief twice, 
once pressing the hand and once the thumb; so we each 
shook hands solemnly, even the five-year-old, whom he 
greeted as the Sultana with special consideration. 
Alice's presence with us was a perfectly simple thing to 
the natives; evidently Alice and I were favorites and 
if I left her at home the other wives would naturally 
poison herl The mother of Musinga, the great king of 
Ruanda, is credited with having poisoned six of his 
little half brothers to clear the throne for her son. 

Our tent boys understood the relation of the party 
and the white man's ways, but to the natives I was 
always the "Wife-with-the-Child." One chief asked 
me how many wives my husband had at home — he him- 
self had sixty-five around his different villages — and I 
really felt I should be imperihng my husband's position 
in his eyes if I attempted any explanation. I have never 
yet revealed just what I did say, but that chief was im- 



That night and several others we slept in the grass 
rest-bouses built for traveling Belgian officials, for 
these looked fresh and there seemed no danger from 
the dreaded kimpootoo or spirillum tick. We always 
bad our nets over us in those houses, although we rarely 
saw a mosquito. The freedom from flies and mosquitoes 
was one of the joys of Africa, contrary to every one's 
belief about it. Sleeping in the houses did away with 
putting up tents, and when the porters came marching 
in, horns blowing, although the sweat was running down 
61 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

their black skins, we had only^ to see to sorting the stuif . 

The moment a porter arrives he sheds his load and 
rushes to find a sleeping place in one of the huts. Your 
duty is to stand over the loads and see that they are left 
in order and the bags sent where they belong. A head- 
man does this for you, but there were no safari head- 
men in the Congo, and we all pitched in and did a little 
of everything. About the time camp is settled and the 
bags and boxes distributed, the porters have brought in 
firewood and water, the cook has his fire going between 
the three stones, and you unlock the food boxes and hand 
out the precious rice and butter. Curried chicken was 
the usual mainstay of our meals, with rice as only the 
East can cook rice; if in camp, we invariably b^an with 
soup, but on the march our first course was hor$ 
d'ceuvrea of sardine and coldslaw. We could carry cab- 
bage for days, and we had potatoes, both white and 
sweet. When no fresh green vegetables were available 
we had asparagus in tins or fried bananas. Our 
dessert was any fruit available, pineapple or papaya, 
with crackers and cheese and jam. The Congo variant 
of pancake with honey or jam was another resource. 
By the time that dinner is under way the chief is gener- 
ally ready with posho for the men, usually plantains or 
coarse meal tied up in banana leaves, and the porters line 
up opposite and voice their objections. 

Life among the porters is always a commotion, but 
po$ko time sounds like a riot. We grew very casual 
about noises. An outcry that would have blanched us 
in America did not turn our heads. The conversational 
qiulities of porters are imequaled even by Venetian 
62 



ON SAFARI 

gondoliers, but actual fighting is rare. We had only 
one experience on the way. After the porters get their 
food they go back to the grass huts and wisps of smoke 
curl up from many fires fuid the chatter, chatter goes on, 
unending, in that strange tongue, which, being mean- 
ingless to you, becomes a part of the day's backgroimd. 
And you eat your own meal out of doors, in the lovely 
hour of waning light, and sit and watch the sun sink 
like a flaming disk behind the mountains, while the 
crickets and night noises begin, and a swift darkness 
pours over the land and the stars blaze overhead. And 
then you go to bed remembering that at four you will 
bear a call. 

Frcxn Tanganyika to Kivu we followed the Rusisi 
River, v^ch drains out of the southern end of Lake 
Eivu, and we crossed that river sometimes half a dozen 
times a day. The way of our crossing was simple. 
There were no canoes, no bridges, and the current was 
strong. We went over on the backs of the nearest 
natives — our own boys, if no one else was available, but 
generally we impressed a near-by loiterer. The first 
time I mounted I felt the qualms of the first man that 
ever ate an oyster, but in time I learned to survey my 
mount critically for strength and endurance and then 
spring lightly upon his shoulders and steady myself by 
his topknot. 

The country through which we traveled was beautiful, 
always among mountains, with wide outlooks over for- 
ested valleys and plains. There were tremendous num- 
bers of the dark, striking euphorbia trees and of the 
beautiful scarlet-flowered Eaffir-boom, which we had 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

seen all along the way from the Cape. The branches 
were inTariably bare, a silvery gray; and a network of 
these trees* gray branched- with brilliant flowers flam- 
ing against a sky of burning blue, is one of my vivid 
memories. 

On the second day's march our path was crossed for 
the first time by safari ants. These aie the traveling 
scavengers of Africa, crossing the continent in endless 
streams, consuming every dead and living thing that 
falls into their clutches. When the column pours 
through a native village, the villagers in the line of 
march decamp at top speed, and the invaders render 
them a valuable service by cleaning up the place, from 
fleas to refuse. They can kill a rat and pick it to the 
bones, it is said, in two minutes. 

The column we first saw was like a black ribbon 
winding across the path, a ribbon about four inches 
in width. It was a living, seething stream of ants. 
Along the sides were the soldiers, big fellows with pin- 
cerlike jaws, holding the lines, preventing any out- 
pourings and attacking any enemy, while down between 
the lines, in a tunnel-like groove, the unending army 
poured along in such dense crowdings that some were 
scrambling on the backs of the others. Straws that we 
dropped across the line were instantly seized and maneu- 
vered into position and carried on out of the way. When 
we stood a foot or two away the soldier ants did not 
bother us, but as we moved nearer they streamed out 
with menacing little jaws. When we poked at them 
with a stick some went for the stick but others went 
strai^t for our boots and up our puttees, 
64 



ON SAFARI 

A bite is a vivid sensation. I have seen a hardened 
porter, one who stood about on charred wood fires until 
bis feet smoked without appearing to experience any 
discomfort, leap like a deer when a safari ant got him in 
its bulldog grip. The numbers seemed endless. We 
watched that column for two hoiu-s that first day not 
knowing that three times more that day we were to cross 
them, and that scarcely a day thereafter would we be 
without a sight of them, and all those hours the stream of 
mites was like a racing mill stream of black waters surg- 
ing down that groove. Thousands — millions — ^billions. 
I could understand why sleeping men, surprised, had 
been swiftly bitten to death. 

Once, at Lulenga, a column passed near our camp, 
continuing for seven days, and not for an hour at day 
or night was there any cessation of that seething stream 
of them. But, seen in time, there was no danger. One 
could step over the column and be safe. 

It was the third day out that Martha Miller killed 
her elephant. We were in camp on a high bluff when 
the elephants were seen feeding in a plain about two 
miles away. It was four-thirty, and the light would be 
gime only too soon, so we set off, with guides, guns, and 
cameras, at a grilling pace. We reached a hill above 
the plains and crept cautiously forward through the 
bush till on the brow we had a splendid view of the 
elephants. There were six of them about two hundred 
yards below us, five full grown and one smaller, all feed- 
ing utterly unaware of us, their trunks swinging ia 
the bundles of grass, their tusks gleaming against the 
dark skins. There is something prehistoric looking 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

about a wild elephant that makes him seem mireaL He 
is a left-over from another ag«. His very size is archaic. 

They were a magnificent sight, the six of them, and 
we were able to watch them under unusual conditions. 
It was a good enough light for a picture, Mr. Akeley 
thought, and we crouched behind bushes and watched 
while he maneuvered forward and took some film. The 
light was going fast and the elephants working away 
from us across the plain. If we were to have any shoot- 
ing it would have to be in a hurry, so we crept forward 
after Mr. Akeley, until we were about a hundred yards 
from the dark shapes that were growing darker every 
instant. Mr. Akeley picked one for me to shoot at 
and one for Miss Miller. The men were to follow our 
shots with their heavy guns. 

When he said "Fire," the bull I was trying for was 
swinging about in the brush, and my only diance was 
the head shot. I tried to place it low, guided by the 
glimmer of the tusks, and I thought I had succeeded, 
for he staggered, and I thought he was down, but he 
recovered and made off, although my husband and Mr. 
Akeley opened instant fire and Mr. Akeley was sure he 
had placed five shots in the animal. 

Through the cannonading I heard Martha saying, 
"Mine's down," and so he was. She had placed a 
splendid side shot through the ear. She started to fire 
at the black dots of escaping elephant? when hers got 
up again, and was then brought down for good. We 
cut about in a circuit and made our way to him. He 
seemed enormous as he lay there. There was something 
sad about the helplessness of his great bulk. The only 
66 



ON SAFARI 

reooQcQing thought is that the elephant is doomed any- 
way, and this was a quick death. 

It was 9o dark that we turned back immediately to 
camp. We heard the wounded elephant trumpeting 
and heliered we should find him dead in the morning. I 
hoped so, for his sake and my own, for I hated to think 
of a wounded elephant coming to a slow death, and, 
now that I had wounded him, I wanted those tusks of 
his. But the night rains washed out every vestige of 
track, and the natives sent next morning to reconnoiter 
could not be stimulated by any offer of reward. They 
circled about and ended near the other elephant, where 
they wanted meat But, however much we regretted 
the escape of Adoniram, as I christened my lost 
elephant, we were elated over Martha's good luck, and 
had a dinner that night in her honor. 

The men spent the next day cutting out some skin 
and the ivory. It was a single tusker, weighing about 
fifty-eight pounds. The other tusk had been broken 
off from an old bullet wound, and there were sores from 
wounds on his body. The men had a hard time getting 
work from the natives, who were interested only in get- 
ting meat, and whenever the white men were obliviously 
occupied the men would sneak up and hack off choice 
morsels, to be conveyed by the grapevine route to the 
outskirts. There was one leprous-looking old chief who 
had a huge wash basin and a total disinclination to work, 
and one of the brightest moments of the day was a sud- 
den vision of that chief sailing through the air, followed 
I7 hii baiin, as my husband turned and caught him 
making a felonious assault upon the elephant. 
67 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

No work, no meat, was tiie order of the day, until the 
elephant was turned over to the chiefs and headmen 
for distribution. There was feasting and dancing all 
that ni^t and the dark was lit witili little fires over 
whidi the meat himg drying while in the smoky gleam 
the dark shoulders jostled and hare feet stamped in 
rhythmic frenzy. 

The next day we went on, ahandoning the wounded 
elephant, something which we would not have done un- 
der usual conditions; but until the gorillas were secured 
we could not afford to waste time on anything else. 

That day the men were wild and hilarious after the 
dancing of the night before and refused to go further 
than an old rest-house, which we reached at ten-thirty 
in the morning. The rains, which were happening vehe- 
mently and regularly every afternoon or night now, 
had turned the red clay paths to indescribable glue, but 
another night of rain wasn't going to make them any 
easier. The offer of double pay had no effect, so we 
put up our tents, as the house was oki enough to be 
unsafe because of the danger from infection. The 
porters went gayly off for an antelope hunt. 

Soon we heard them coming back in uigry excite- 
ment, dragging a man along with blows and yells. One 
of the porters had a cut in his forehead, made by this 
man's arrow, and he said the man had attacked him 
purposely. The man said it was an accident That was 
as much as we could make out with our inadequate 
Swahili and our boy's fragmentary misinterpreting. 
The prisoner was not one of our porters but one of half 
a dozen carriers coming through with gasoline for thq 
68 





Haitiia Milleb and Heb Elephant 



ON SAFARI 

Eivu boat — ^the gasoline we were delighted to know was 
arriving. 

The only thing to do under tiie circumstances was to 
take the man along under guard to the white adminis- 
trator at Kivu, four days away, and we told the head- 
men to guard him and keep the men from hurting him, 
and a little later Herbert and I went down to the huts 
to see what was happening. The porters were swarm- 
ing like angry bees in front of the prisoner's hut, and 
two hondred angry porters sound like a Russian village 
in its daily revolution. 

The hut seemed to be full of them, so Herbert and I 
crawled in to investigate and found the prisoner, moan- 
ing and crying, tied with cruel tightness, while about 
him bent several blacks in the act of desisting from 
whatever they had been doing before our arrival We 
laid the law down again, had them give him food and 
drink and tie him decently, and ordered the headmen 
to stand guard and be responsible for keeping the rest 
out, pTomiung to come down in the morning and see 
how tbey had followed instructions. 

That sounded all right, but we hadn't the slightest 
force to back us up. In British East a hunting safari 
has a couple of armed askaris to maintain discipline. 
We had our headmen, wild defiant creatures, and a tiny 
black soldier from the garrison at Usumbura, who was 
a child in the hands of those headmen. There was a 
furious storm that night, the thunder muttered and 
rolled and crashed and the two hundred porters' voices 
rose and fell with muttering and roarings like the thun- 
der till I went to sleep at last 
«9 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

I woke suddenly; out in the blackness among thosi 
porters, some one was screaming horribly. It was ore: 
in a moment; the chiill high voice was drowned in i 
babel of frenzied sound ... It did not come again. 

I didn't know what to do; to go and rouse Herber 
would be to hare him go down alone among those twi 
hundred crazy blacks. Mr. Akeley had gone to het 
before dinner with ferer. While they wouldn't han 
the courage to touch a white man in the daytime, ther< 
might be danger, at night, from a spear in the back 
Many of them had the filed teeth of the degraded can 
nibal tribes. And, whatever was done, was done. Ant 
very likely nothing was done — the porters alway 
sounded like a riot 

1 tried to dismiss it and after a time I went to slee] 
again. In the morning the man was gone. There weri 
three stories giren us to explain this. The first wai 
that he had escaped in the night, without any one's dia 
covering it. That was a remarkable achievement, sine 
the man was tied and the headmen were in the teni 
choking the entrance, and the entire safari was awaki 
all nigbt. The second story was that he had just tha^ 
moment got away, and several of the porters witl 
spears were staging a little retrieving party and run 
ning about the woodland looking behind rocks am 
bushes for as much as ten minutes. The third story 
told furtively by a frightened boy, was that they ha< 
killed the man in the night and eaten him. 

We nerer knew. 



CHAPTER VI 

THE SUMMIT OF AFRICA 

Laze Eitu; the Goeiixas at Eatana; 
IN Caup at Eibsenti 

We stood on a hill top overlooking Lake Eivu, feel- 
ing we were looking at last upon the promised land. 
For months we had dreamed of seeing this lake, re- 
peated the most beautiful in Africa. It was the last to 
be discovered of the large central African lakes. Ru- 
mors of its existence had been brought to Livingstone 
at Ujiji by Arab slavers, but the first accurate knowl- 
edge of it was obtained in 1894 by Count Grotzen, who 
visited its northern end. We were the first Americans 
to reach its shores. 

All that day, the eighth of the safari, we climbed end- 
lessly, higher and higher over the last great barrier of 
mountains. We had crossed the pastoral basins on the 
highlftnHa, an African Switzerland where we wound 
among grassy slopes dotted with hundreds of native 
cattle, picturesque black and white creatures, with wide 
brandling horns; past lush marshes, where the golden- 
crested crane were preening; past shambas of bananas 
nutling their suave fronds — an upland paradise for the 
dwellers in the little grass huts — ^then on, up and down 
and up again in switchback progress among the hills. 

Tbey are everlasting, those hills which surround Eivu, 
71 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

and they are extraordinary. They are grass-grown, 
innocent of forest or deforesting, curring crests of vel- 
vet softness between the shadowy mountains and the 
gleaming lake. 

Kivu has a beauty like nothing I have known. And I 
saw it first in a moment of sheer magic — a black storm 
cloud scudding across the lake with a purple drive of 
rain into waters that held every answering gleam of 
storm and sky — purple and jade and peacock blue 
against a silver mist of cloud shot with rainbows; and 
beyond the storm, sunshine — sunshine ineffably tender* 
ineffably radiant, shining upon those fairy hills and en- 
chanted mountains. 

The lake is the very summit of Africa, almost five 
thousand feet above the sea. To the north the country 
drains into Lake Edward and so to the Nile, to the 
east into Victoria Nyanza, to the west into the Congo 
basin, and the waters of the lake itself run south throu^ 
the Rusisi River down to Tanganyika. 

The lake is deep, over two thousand feet in places, 
and there is not a crocodile in it. We went down to the 
southeastern end, to Changugu, and sent a runner for 
the little laundi, which was across at Bukavu. 

Changugu is simply one of the tiny outposts that keep 
the white man's way open — a garrison of about twenty 
native soldiers and a Belgian officer. But Changugu 
was more than that. It was a home. It was Lieutenant 
Keyser and Madame Keyser and their little son, Jeui- 
Jean. They received this astonishing invasion with such 
cordial hospitahty that our cook took a complete vaca- 
tion tatd the children played so happily — despite the 
T2 



THE SUMMIT OF AFRICA 

difficulties of language — that when the launch came 
they parted with frank tears. 

The launch had space for our luggage in the hold, our 
boys in the bow, and our steamer chairs under cover at 
the stem. We were three days upon it, for the captain 
traveled only in the morning on accoimt of the storm 
wiadi came each afternoon. It was the last of October 
now, the height of the fall rains. 

The first day we tied up at Bukavu, on the southwest- 
ern shore, and camped upon the banks. The rain did 
not come until late, and all afternoon the native women 
danced before our tents. They danced in a half circle, 
advancing, receding, swaying, clapping, all to a monoto- 
nous singsong of weird chants, while the few men who 
danced did a muscular solo performance before them. 

It was jazz in its own home town. It was not the 
shimmy, but it was a recognizable toddle, and there were 
some other things that even our younger set haven't dis- 
covered yet. There was one little offering entitled 
"The Dance of the Young Girls," which I piously hope 
was misnamed, for half the participants joggled 
through it with "totos" (babies) slung in goat skins 
on their backs. They were not enticing looking young 
girls and they were clumsy appearing in Uie goat skins 
they wore bunched about their waists out of deference 
to European ideas. They were the Wania- Bongo. But 
there was one remarkable womim, a visitor, the wife 
of the cannibal chief, Kabaka, one of the Waregga. 

She was of royal blood herself, the wife who gave the 
c^ef his heir, they said, and she was certainly the most 
ro^ looking creature I saw in Africa, with the lines 
78 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

of a. Greek statue and the perfect aplomb of one, too. 
She discarded her goat skins and appeared in her royal 
regalia of copper armlets and leg-rmgs, with beaded 
necklaces and a trifle of girdle. Her skin was not black 
but a gorgeous coppery brown, and ^e had the carriage 
which is supposed to belong to a duchess but which is 
really the perquisite of carrying a huge water jar in 
calm balance on your head all your Ufe. 

And she had filed teeth, one of the signs of cannibal- 
istic habits. It is denied that cannibalism exists now 
to any extent among the natives, but I heard that day 
of a village back of the mountains which had made a 
raid upon another village, and, in the moment of ex- 
cited triumph, consumed its natives. In the light of 
that information, and with the memory of the missing 
porter, I looked upon all filed teeth with a certain grue- 
some interest. At the least they were a symbol of the 
good old days I 

A Congo administrator told me that fifteen years ago 
he used to see daves destined for eating led from hut 
to hut for prospective purchasers to chalk out upon the 
living flesh the particular cut they desired. Of course 
that was only in certain tribes, and it was fifteen years 
ago, and where the white man has power it is finished. 
But back of the mountains is still black man's Africa, 
and little can really be known of what goes on there. 

It was the business of the young agent territorial at 

Bukavu, Monsieur Massart, to travel from tribe to 

tribe, sometimes for months at a time, visiting the chiefs, 

persuading the refractory, strengthening the bonds of 

74 



THE SUMMIT OF AFRICA 

peace, personifying with all his power that vague but 
persuasive thing — the white man's administration. 

He invited us to accompany him and we should have 
dearly loved to do so, but there were the goriUas to get 
and Mr. Akeley's time was limited. So on we went 
with the boat next morning and stopped that night at 
Katana, a mission of the White Fathers, high on a 
hill on the western shore. Here we got the story of the 
gorilla invasion which had occurred just two weeks 
before. 

For the first lime in the memory of the mission the 
gorillas had come down from the forests on the moun- 
tains and had entered the plantations of the natives, 
where the natives found them in the morning busily 
feeding. 

Now, that tribe has a superstition against killing a 
"man-ape," believing that the man who does so will 
have childless daughters and that his son's wife will 
lose her son, so the men were chary about attacking the 
invaders. They tried first to drive them off with drums 
and shouts, and then, at the chief's orders, went in and 
tried to scare them off with sticks. 

The female did make off, apparently, at their ap- 
proach, but the male turned on them, tore one man to 
pieces, and wounded four others. The rest of the men 
rushed in with their spears, piercing the gorilla through 
and through. The skin was so badly torn that it had 
not been preserved; Mr, Akeley was sorry not to get 
the skull. 

He bad some thought of stopping here and starting 
off towards those mountains for his gorillas, but the 
75 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

rumors about them were too conflicting and the dis- 
tances too vague. It seemed wiser to keep on to the 
original objective, where the natives knew the gorilla 
range and had no superstition about hunting them. 

We heard another story about gorillas from Monsieur 
Dargent, a Belgian administrator on the little boat with 
us, going out to his post at Sake at the northwest end 
of the lake. He said that fourteen days' journey in the 
forest back of Sake there were gorillas which had so 
terrorized the natives that several villages had been 
abandoned. He had not seen the gorillas himself, but 
he had heard many stories from the natives. 

That sounded like the good old demon gorilla of Du 
ChaiUu's reports which attacks man on sight and car- 
ries off woman. But Mr. Akeley was unshaken in his 
conviction of the animal's natural inofifensiveness to- 
wards man. I could see that a gorilla was going to have 
to treat him rough to make any impression! 

And, of course, these were only native rumors, with- 
out any of the circumstances being given. It was per- 
fectly possible that a food shortage had led the gorillas 
to prey upon the village shambas, and where men and 
gorillas were brought into collision over food there was 
no question but that the gorilla was a terrible antag- 
onist. The great length of his huge arms gave him a 
tremendous reach and he was credited with being able 
to scoop out a man like a soft-shell crab. 

The question was, did he do this only in self-defense, 
or did he do it wantonly, and did he hunt man and at- 
tack him on sight? These were the questions on which 
we hoped for experience to throw a deciding light. A 
T5 



THE SUMMIT OF AFRICA 

little time more now and we should put our luck to 
the test. 

It was at Eantana that I began having the fever. 
Ever since entering the Congo it had been a question 
whether to take quinine regularly every day or not. 
Almost all Europeans in the interior took five grains 
a day on the theory that if you had enough quinine in 
your blood a stray bite wouldn't infect you, but there 
were others who did not take any at all until they felt 
ilL I rather liked that latter theory. I felt so supremely 
well that it seemed useless to take anything until I felt 
the need of it I did give two and a half grains a day 
to Alice to make her doubly sure and Mr. Bradley and 
the two girls took their five grains each day, but I 
did not. 

All I know is that I didn't take quinine and I did 
have the fever. And the same thing later happened to 
Mr. Akeley, who didn't take quinine regularly, while 
the others who did had none. That may not mean any- 
thing, but that is the way it happened. 

I must have been bitten at Usumbura or on our march 
up from Tanganyika, for Kivu is delightfully healthy 
and free from all mosquitoes and flies. Now a small 
boat is no place on which to have the fever. We three 
Bradleys had our cots on the deck of the launch that 
night, while the others camped at the mission, and next 
day I huddled in my steamer chair, gazing heavily at 
Ihe fairylike shores of Ejvu, and thinking that if no one 
knew the difference between sunbiun and a temperature 
of a hundred and four — it felt a himdred and forty 1 — I 
wouldn't enlighten them until I had to. The fever was 
77 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

accompanied by a headache which grew positively thun- 
derous, and when the real thunder broke over us — it 
came early that afternoon and caught us out on the lake 
— ^it seemed a mild echo of what was going on within. 

The storm that day was a tremendous gust of wind 
and rain, and the ship's engine broke, so we rolled about 
helplessly until it consented to go on again. We were 
a drenched-to-the-skin lot, in spite of raincoats, idien 
we finally landed at Eassenyi, at the northeast end of 
the lake. 

There, against the horizon, were the far, cloud- 
wrapped peaks of our objective — Mikeno, Karisimbi, 
Visoke. We were to camp at Kissenyi until we could 
collect porters, provisions, and information to go on. 
Kissenyi has the air of being quite a place. It was built 
by the Germans, for we were now in the kingdom of 
Ruanda, in what was formerly the very western frontier 
of German East Africa. The boundary between Ger- 
man East and the Belgian Congo used to run southwest 
to the lake, and a little north of Kissenyi ; the Belgians 
maintained a post at Goma. Now the Belgian occupa- 
tional post is Kissenyi. Along the shore runs an ave- 
nue, straight as a marine parade, shaded with eucalyptus 
and edged tidily with lava rock and shrubs. To the 
right were the clustering roofs of the native village and 
the soldiers' compound. There were two white families 
at Kissenyi, the chef de paste and his wife and the doc- 
tor and his wife. The doctor was a bacteriologist in 
charge of a laboratory investigating the rinderpest and 
other diseases. We had noticed their house coming in — 
a pretty one of brick in a lovely rose garden. 
78 



THE SUMMIT OF AFRICA 

We pitehed our tenta in the driest place possible, with 
the lake at our feet and the Tolcanic peaks all about the 
horizon. Our nearest neighbor, Chaninagongo, had a 
heavy cloud of steam overhanging its crater, colored 
with ruddy lights ; but the crimson glow which burned 
in the sky at night came from Nyamlagira, many miles 
away. 

All I saw of Kissenyi for some days I saw the first 
night, for I went to bed and had it out with the fever — 
and Monsiem* Van Saceghem, the bacteriologist, came 
twice a day, and he and his charming wife did everything 
in the world for us, sending us eggs and butter and milk 
each day, and filling my tent with roses. 

It was great good fortune to have him there, and it 
was a distinct relief when his blood tests told me I had 
only the regular African fever, from an infected mos- 
quito, and not the kimpootoo or spirillum fever, which 
comes from a tick bite, and is a recurrent blaze, often 
deadly, with danger of paralysis. The kimpootoo is 
found chiefly on the caravan routes, where the ticks are 
brou^it in on the carriers' feet, and for that reason old 
camping grounds are not desirable. 

But even malaria isn't so cheery while it lasts, and I 
felt that it was no moment for the news which reached 
us of a Belgian couple who had gone through the Congo 
just ahead of us. Dr. Deriddar and his wife. They had 
gone out to hunt on the Ruindi plains, where we were 
going after we had finished with the gorillas, and there 
Monsieur Deriddar had died of the fever and his wife 
was lying desperately ill, mauled by a lion. 

I made up my mind that if I lived through the fever 
T9 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

I would avoid lions — at least avoid going into gran 
after them, as Madame Deriddar had done. She had 
been finishing the hunt alone, after her husband had 
gone back to the camp, feeling the beginning of fever; 
she had come on several lions in a gully, had wounded ° 
three or four, who apparently made off, and in follow- 
ing them up she had been surprised by a wounded one, 
who sprang on her out of the grass. He had mauled 
her and then drawn back, and she had had the pluck to 
get out her revolver and finish him. 

I added to my good intentions the firm resolve to 
carry a revolver in lion country — and oh, how poig- 
nantly I remembered that resolve one night upon the 
plains! But lion country or fever coimtry or any coun* 
try, I was going to take my five grains of quinine a day. 
I was unutterably grateful that I had given it to Alice, 
who was blooming like a rose, plajring on the sand on 
the beach — ^the only beach on Kivu — and keeping Miss 
Hall extremely busy with a violent little pastime called 
spearing gorillas, which she played with native spears. 

We were very social, those days of waiting at Kis- 
senyi. While our friends at home were doubtless pic- 
turing us as sweltering in some lonely, pestilential 
jungle, we were enjoying a climate of June's loveliest, 
untroubled by flies or mosquitoes, and going to tea at 
the chef de poste's and to dinner at the doctor's in true 
European style I 

Our own table was greatly enriched at Eissenyi by 

vegetables and fruit from the Mission of the White 

Fathers at Nyunde, three hours' journey back in the 

mountains. For ten francs our boys brought back huge 

SO 



THE SUMMIT OF AFRICA 

baskets full of potatoes, leeks, <mions, cabbage, celery, 
and lettuce, and we had orangea, strawberries, citrons, 
and limes. Pineapples we bad not seen since Lake Tan- 
ganyika. Papaya — a sweet, native tree fruit, in sub- 
stuice like a melon — and bananas we were usually able 
to obtain from the natives, and there were always chick- 
ens and eggs to be had and often milk — ^although we 
preferred our own tinned Ideal milk. 

We had another neighbor who had been more than 
kind during my illness, a young Englishwoman, Mrs. 
T. Alexander Bams, the wife of an English hunter 
and collector. She was waiting at Kissenja for her hus- 
band to come down from the mountains, where he had 
gcme for gorillas for a group for the British Museum. 

Odd that two men, one for an American institution, 
one for an English, should have happened on the same 
spot in central Africa, for the same piu^ose at the same 
timel Mrs. Bams and I hoped, humorously, but fer- 
vently, that there would be enough gorillas to go round 1 

And the accounts which came down from the moun- 
tain of the cold and nettles, and the crawling on hands 
and knees made us realize that this was not exactly 
child's play on which we were engaged. I don't wonder 
that every one in the country thought the determination 
of women to see wild gorillas was distinct lunacy. But 
crawl or climb, Martha Miller and I were going on with 
it. We had not come the long trail to be turned back 
now, and if there was no diance on the mountains, Her- 
bert promised he would take the foiui;een-day trek to 
Walik^ to the gorillas Monsieur Dargent had told 
OS about 

81 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

But our greatest sociability in camp came from our 
native visitors. Rwakadiga, the chief of Kissenjri, was an 
inveterate caller. Every morning, just the busiest mo- 
ment of it, I would see the long procession of speara 
headed for the tents, Rwakadiga and his attendants in 
the lead. Then I would snatch at my phrase book of 
Swahili, the almost universal language of the Arab 
traders from Zanzibar, and scan it hurriedly in hope of 
injecting something in the nature of conversation into 
the ensuing call. 

My book was a hopeless affair. It abounded in such 
sterile offerings as "The foreigner has not received hts 
canoes. . . . The wizard has cheated the ten simpletons 
of their spoons. . . . My blister is not your boil." But 
I had added more useful gleanings to it, so that I was 
able to conduct a strictly centralized series of remarks 
concerning my desire to buy the skins of animals and 
small, clean, and beautiful baskets. 

The chief would head for the first tent, shared by 
Alice and me, and we would come out and shake hands 
ceremoniously with him. 

"Jambo, Mamma" (Greeting, mother), was his 
speech. 

"Jambo, mfalme" (Greeting, chief), was mine. 

I was Mamma to all the natives, except the tent boys, 
who said miss indiscriminately. Father is different in 
the different languages, but Mamma is the same, Africa 
over. 

Alice had always to trot out and shake hands with 
the chief, then she would trot back to her dolls or draw- 
ing. She was neither afraid of the natives nor particu- 
82 



THE SUMMIT OF AFRICA 

Uriy interested in them. She did not see tbe itrange- 
sess wbidi we did» or think them at all unusual. They 
were simply part of the amazing world which she was 
daily discovering and a oatural part of it to her. 

They were not at all frightening or repellent, but she 
did get tired of the way they hung about her tent, some- 
times trying to touch her yellow curls. Some of them 
thought the curls were ornaments and wanted to see if 
they would come off; others simply wanted to feel that 
Ktrange^ fair hair. But they were never intrusive or 
impertinent, and brought her gifts of baskets or eggs. 
None of them had seen a white child before. 

One day I saw a boy drop on his knees. He muttered 
over and over a lot of unintelligible things in which I 
caught the words Jesu Christ. I called the invaluable 
Mablanga. 

"What this boy say?" 

Mablanga took off his cap, his invariable respectful 
prelude to speech, and smiled in an abashed yet amused 
way. Then, as usual, when stuck for an explanation, 
he resorted to negatives. 

"No understand, miss." 

"I think he says *Jesu Christ.' " 

"Yes, miss. One time he go mission. He see little 
thing — made hke baby. He say that Jesu Christ." 

The boy had seen the colored image at a distant 
mission and to him Ahce was the living image. So pres- 
ently he went away and came back with a little basket 
for a present. We thought it very touching and 
thanked him fervently. But he was not satisfied. He 
made several emphatic remarks. 
88 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

"What he say, Mablanga?" 

"He say now time Jesu Christ make present/* re- 
sponded Mablanga. 

So Jesu Christ gave him fourteen cents and he went 
away reconciled. 

Rwakadiga had some distinctly advanced ideas. He 
wanted a white wife; he had heard there were many in 
the lands far away and he wanted the white people to 
write and get him one. He had sixty black ones, but he 
was willing to part with them— or most of them — for he 
imderstood the Europeans — all whites are Europeans — 
were conservative, and his men would build her a house 
in true European fashion. 

He had suggested this both to Mrs. Bams and Ma- 
dame Van Saceghem, and now he endeavored to con- 
vey it to me, but my phrase book was unequal to any- 
thing intime. I had heard what he wanted and I under- 
stood his words about writing a letter, but my boy was 
too scandalized to translate his request any further. 

There was no hint of race problem in Africa — not so 
far as white women were concerned. Not one of us ever 
had the feeling of personal timidity. 

We made another acquaintance in Kissenyi whidi 
we would have been glad to keep at a greater distance — 
the jigger or burrowing flea. This is not the jigger of 
the American woods. It is a microscopic insect, like a 
grain of black pepper, that without any social formali- 
ties of introduction dives into your foot, or more rarely 
yoiu" hand, preferably about the nail, and digs himself 
in for the winter. He — or I should say, she — lays a 
long chain of eggs. There was no pain attached to the 
M 



THE SUMMIT OF AFRICA 

entry, but at the egg stage the dugout has become a 
purple, painful blister, and this is the cue for an imme- 
£ate extraction. There was an Englishman once who 
wished to take his jigger back to his physician intact 
ID his toe for scientific inspection of the phenomenon; 
that Bnglishman died. This burrowing flea is not native 
African but was landed on the West Coast in the dirt 
ballast of an old Portuguese trading ship, and carried 
leross the continent on the bare feet of the carriers. 

Our first jigger was an event. Repetition staled the 
interest and evoked aversion. The mud-thatched mag- 
azine at Eissenyi where our goods were stored was 
loaded with the pests and after Mr. Akeley had un- 
knowingly entered the wardiouse and then returned to 
camp we had an invasion of them. Old market squares 
and native villages are their usual abiding places. 

There were no crocodiles in Eivu, and one could enter 
the waters without fear. At Kissenyi there was the only 
strip of beadi on the entire lake — the name Kissenyi 
itself means "sand" — and after four-thirty, when we 
could take oB our helmets, Martha and Alice and Fris- 
cilla and I had some delightful swims. 

Early explorers had stated there were no hippos in 
Eivu, but at Bukavu Monsieur Massart told me that he 
had seen one between Bukavu and Katana, and that he 
was going cut some day to kill it — and as my French 
was imequal to the work of persuasion I expect the last 
rare hippo has ere now disappeared. 

Of the climate of Eivu, every Belgian said. "It is 
Europe." The temperature is exceptionally equable, 
one day there rarely varying three degrees from another 
85 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

accompanied by a headache which grew positively thun- 
derous, and when the real thunder broke over us — ^it 
came early that afternoon and caught us out on the lake 
— it seemed a mild ecbo of what was going on within. 

The storm that day was a tremendous gust of wind 
and rain, and the ship's engine broke, so we rolled about 
helplessly until it consented to go on again. We were 
a drenched-to-the-skin lot, in spite of raincoats, when 
we finally landed at Eissenyi, at the northeast end of 
the lake. 

There, against the horizon, were the far, cloud- 
wrapped peaks of our objective — Mikeno, Earisimhi, 
Visoke. We were to camp at Kissenyi until we could 
collect porters, provisions, and information to go on. 
Kissenyi has the air of being quite a place. It was built 
by the Germans, for we were now in the kingdom of 
Kuanda, in what was formerly the very western frontier 
of German East Africa. The boundary between Ger- 
man East and the Belgian Congo used to run southwest 
to the lake, and a little north of Kissenyi; the Belgians 
maintained a post at Goma. Now the Belgian occupa- 
tional post is Kissenyi. Along the shore runs an ave- 
nue, straight as a marine parade, shaded with eucalyptus 
and edged tidily with lava rock and shrubs. To the 
right were the clustering roofs of the native village and 
the soldiers' compound. There were two white families 
at Kissenyi, the chef de paste and his wife and the doc- 
tor and bis wife. The doctor was a tacteriologist in 
charge of a laboratory investigating the rinderpest and 
other diseases. We had noticed their house coming in — 
a pretty one of brick in a lovely rose garden. 
78 



THE SUMMIT OF AFRICA 

We pitched our tents in the driest place possible, with 
the Uke at our feet and the volcanic peaks ail about the 
horizon. Our neu«st neighbor, Chaninagongo, had a 
heavy cloud of steam overhanging its crater, colored 
with ruddy lights; but the crimson glow which burned 
in the sky at night came from Nyamlagira, many miles 
away. 

All I saw of Kissenyi for some days I saw the first 
night, for I went to bed and had it out with the fever — 
and Monsieur Van Saceghem, the bacteriologist, came 
twice a day, and he and his charming wife did everything 
in the world for us, sending us eggs and butter and mUk 
eadi day, and filling my tent with roses. 

It was great good fortune to have him there, and it 
was a distinct relief when his blood tests told me I had 
only the regular African fever, from an infected mos- 
quito, and not the kimpootoo or spirillum fever, which 
comes from a tick bite, and is a recurrent blaze, often 
deadly, with danger of paralysis. The kimpootoo is 
found chiefly on the caravan routes, where the ticks are 
brought in on the carriers' feet, and for that reason old 
camping grounds are not desirable. 

But even malaria isn't so cheery while it lasts, and I 
felt that it was no moment for the news which reached 
us of a Belgian couple who had gone through the Congo 
just ahead of us, Dr. Deriddar and his wife. They had 
gone out to hunt on the Ruindi plains, where we were 
going after we had finished with the gorillas, and there 
Monsieur Deriddar had died of the fever and his wife 
was lying desperately ill, mauled by a lion. 

I made up my mind that if I lived through the fever 
79 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

I would avoid lions — at least avoid going into grass 
after them, as Madame Deriddar had done. She had 
been finishing the hunt alone, after her husband had 
gone back to the camp, feeling the beginning of fever; 
she had come on several lions in a gully, had wounded 
three or four, who apparently made off, and in follow' 
ing them up she had been surprised by a wounded one, 
who sprang on her out of the grass. He had mauled 
her and then drawn back, and she had had the pluck to 
get out her revolver and finish him. 

I added to my good intentions the firm resolve to 
carry a revolver in lion country — and oh, how poig- 
nantly I remembered that resolve one night upon the 
plains I But lion country or fever country or any coun- 
try, I was going to take my five grains of quinine a day. 
I was unutterably grateful that I had given it to Alice, 
who was blooming like a rose, playing on the sand on 
the beach — ^the only beach on Kivu — and keeping Miss 
Hall extremely busy with a violent little pastime called 
spearing gorillas, which she played with native spears. 

We were very social, those days of waiting at Kis- 
senyi. While our friends at home were doubtless pic- 
turing us as sweltering in some lonely, pestilential 
jungle, we were enjoying a climate of June's loveliest, 
untroubled by flies or mosquitoes, and going to tea at 
the chef de poste'a and to dinner at the doctor's in true 
Eiiropean style! 

Our own table was greatly enriched at Kissenyi by 

vegetables and fruit from the Mission of the White 

Fathers at Nyunde, three hours' journey back in the 

mountains. For ten francs our boys brought back huge 

80 



:i 



THE SUMMIT OF AFRICA 

laily interested in tbem. She did not see the strange- 
ness which we did* or tlunk them at all unusuaL They 
were simply part of the amazing world which she was 
daily discovering and a natural part of it to her. 

'Diey were not at all frightening or repellent, but she 
did get tired of the way they hung about her tent, some- 
times trying to touch her ^rellow curls. Some of them 
thought the curls were ornaments and wanted to see if 
they would come off; others simply wanted to feel that 
strange* fair hair. But they were never intrusive or 
impertinent, and brought her gifts of baskets or eggs. 
Ncme of them had seen a white child before. 

One day I saw a boy drop on his Icnees. He muttered 
over and over a lot of unintelligible things in which I 
caught the words Jesu Christ. I called the invaluable 
Hablanga. 

"What this boy say?" 

Mablanga took off his cap. his invariable respectful 
prelude to speech, and smiled in an abashed yet amused 
way. Then, as usual, when stuck for an explanation, 
be resorted to negatives. 

"No understand, miss." 

"I think he says * Jesu Christ.' *' 

"Yes, miss. One time he go mission. He see little 
thing — made like baby. He say that Jesu Christ." 

The boy had seen the colored image at a distant 
mission and to him Alice was the living image. So pres- 
mtly he went away and came back with a little basket 
f<ff a present. We thought it very touching and 
thanked him fervently. But he was not satisfied. He 
made several emphatic remarks. 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

But our greatest sociability in camp came frcHU our 
native visitors. Rwakadiga, the chief of Eossenyi, was an 
inveterate caller. Every morDing, just the busiest mo- 
ment of it, I would see the long procession of spears 
headed for the tents, Rwakadiga and his attendants in 
the lead. Then I would snatch at my phrase book of 
Swahili, the almost universal language of the Arab 
traders from Zanzibar, and scan it hurriedly in hope of 
injecting something in the nature of conversation into 
the ensuing call. 

My book was a hopeless affair. It abounded in such 
sterile offerings as "The foreigner has not received his 
canoes. . . . The wizard has cheated the ten simpletons 
of their spoons. . . . My blister is not your boil." But 
I had added more useful gleanings to it, so that I was 
able to conduct a strictly centralized series of remarks 
concerning my desire to buy the skins of animals and 
small, clean, and beautiful baskets. 

The chief would head for the first tent, shared by 
Alice and me, and we would come out and shake hands 
ceremoniously with him. 

"Jamho, Mamma" (Greeting, mother), was his 
speech. 

"Jamho, mfalm.e" (Greeting, chief), was mine. 

I was Mamma to all the natives, except the tent boys, 
who said miss indiscriminately. Father is different in 
the different languages, but Mamma is the same, Africa 
over. 

Alice had always to trot out and shake hands with 
the chief, then she would trot back to her dolls or draw- 
ing. She was neither afraid of the natives nor particu- 
82 



THE SUMMIT OF AFRICA 

larly interested in them. She did not see the strange- 
ness which we did» or think them at all unusuaL They 
were simply part of the amazing world which she was 
daily discovering and a natural part of it to her. 

They were not at all frightening or repellent, but she 
did get tired of the way they hung about her tent, some- 
times trying to touch her yellow curls. Some of them 
thought the curls were ornaments and wanted to see if 
they would come off\ others simply wanted to feel that 
strange, fair hair. But they were never intrusive or 
impertinent, and brought her gifts of baskets or eggs. 
None of them had seen a white child before. 

One day I saw a boy drop on his knees. He muttered 
orer and over a lot of unintelligible things in which I 
caught the words Jesu Christ. I called the invaluable 
Mablanga. 

"What this boy say?" 

Mablanga took off his cap, his invariable respectful 
prelude to speech, and smiled in an abashed yet amused 
way. Then, as usual, when stuck for an explanation, 
be resorted to negatives. 

"No understand, miss." 

"I think he says 'Jesu Christ/ "* 

"Yes, miss. One time be go mission. He see little 
thing — made like baby. He say that Jesu Christ." 

The boy had seen the colored image at a distant 
mission and to him Alice was the living image. So pres- 
ently he went away and came back with a little basket 
for a present. We thought it very touching and 
thanked him fervently. But he was not satisfied. He 
made several emphatic remarks. 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

the year around. The morning is spring, the noon 
July, and the afternoon spring again — ^the nig^ Ocb^ 
her. Every night in Africa we slept under blankets, 
except for a few hot ones on the Baron Dhanis on !Lake 
Tanganyika, in staterooms close against the hi£^ bank 
to which the boat was tied. The only variation in tiie 
Eivu climate is the alternation of wet ajid dry. 

The rains, which had begun the first day upon the 
Congo, September 20, were in full downpour now. The 
mornings were sunny and cloudless, but between noon 
and two o'clock a black thunderstorm would come scud- 
ding across the sky and the heavens would open with 
peals and crashings and all the water in the world, ap- 
parently, would come down. Sometimes the rain would 
last an hour or two; sometimes twenty minutes. We 
found the dampness pervasive, and tried to keep clothes 
well aired in the sunshine. When I was up after the 
fever I spread out the contents of my green bag, whidi 
had been standing on my tent floor untouched for over a 
week, and found that the articles at the bottom of it 
were green with mold — baskets and coin purses and a 
pair of my slippers. But that was something that a 
resident with a fire or a dry floor could avoid. These 
rains, called the light rains, lasted till the middle of 
December, then, after a dry month, were two months of 
heavier rain, and this was the usual yearly program. 

For mildness and healthfulness of climate, for fer- 
tility of soil and for enchanting beauty, Kivu is unex- 
celled among the Belgian outposts. It would be an 
ideal place for a colony of artistic and literary folk — for 
any self-sufficient group who wanted peace and beau^ 



THE SUMMIT OF AFRICA 

and leisure uid the comforts of life without spending & 
fortune for them. The fortune would be spent on the 
way in. After that, life at the present cost of boys and 
food could be maintained on unreasonably little. 

When we were in Kissenyi there were only two white 
families there— Monsieur and Madame Wera and Doc- 
tor and Madame Van Saceghem. It is those lonely 
couples, those exiles on the far outposts, that pay the 
price of colonization. Every home that I went into was 
a little bit of Belgium. Against the grass wall were 
innumerable photographs of the family — all the rela- 
tives, big and little, and the pet dogs and kittens. And 
almost always there would be a series of pictures of 
some little girl or boy — ^the child who was left at home. 
That was the tragedy of the Congo and of all far colo- 
nies. It had been a joy at Changugu to see the little 
seven-year-old Jean-Jean there with his parents. At 
Bukavu the administrator and his wife. Monsieur and 
Madame Mignolet, had two httle babies, a tiny one in 
arms and an older brother in pink rompers. ... A 
little later, as we left the Congo, we heard that Madame 
Mignolet had died very suddenly and the stricken hus- 
buid was trying to get leave to take his babies home to 
Belgium. The Dargents, who had been on the Kivu 
launch with us, bad been separated for many years ex- 
cept for Monsieur Dargent's visits to Belgium, for 
Madame had remained on the Continent with their little 
girl; now she was leaving the thirteen-year-old and com- 
ing out with her husband. "When I think of my little 
girl I am always in sad humor," she told me. Letters 
were three months reaching Eivu. 
87 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

The Van Saceghems had a little lad of about ten, 
home in Belgium. Eighteen months more and they 
would see faim. It was the women who paid coloniza- 
tion's highest price. The life had attracted the men, and 
all the officials that I met were a splendid class of men* 
most of them former officers in the war, responsible, di^ 
ceming, keenly interested in their work. The women 
were the loyal wives who followed and made a home in 
the wilderness. I never met one for whom the wilder- 
ness itself seemed to have the slightest attraction; I 
expect they thought we Americans were mad to come 
so far and go through with so much for the sake of 
ranging the jungles. When the Belgian women went 
from post to post they were carried along the beaten 
ways in a chair by four natives, and they went in white 
frocks and white shod. They were very domestic; and 
their housekeeping was infinitely more painstaking even 
than on the prudent Continent, for here the precious 
supplies were kept under lock and key and unlocked for 
each meal. 

Madame Van Saceghem got more out of the African 
life than the others She had a garden radiant with 
roses brought out from Belgiimi, which bloomed as roses 
bloom in Southern California; and she had inniunerable 
pets. We could hardly keep Alice away from this treas- 
ure house of httle rabbits and chickens and ducklings 
and goats. Madame had a pet antelope, Bichette, whidi 
she fed out of a bottle and often she came to call with 
the antelope bounding ahead of her, and a golden- 
crested crane flying overhead. These Kavirondo cranes 
were birds of beautiful plumage, with black, yelvetlike 



THE SUMMIT OF AFRICA 

beads from which springs the golden crest. I remember 
one ni^t ^en the great crane flapped about a tree in 
camp while she stood chatting, and the little dyker an- 
telope, enlivened by the evening breeze, dashed about in 
playful circles, skimming bushes and feigning flight. 
One could imagine how a band of the little wild things 
would romp. . . . 

Dr. Van Saceghem's work was extraordinarily varied ; 
fais real purpose was to investigate the animal dis- 
eases, but of course the natives wore a path to his 
door. While we were there the favorite wife of the 
chief across the lake brought her sick child to be cured. 
The wife was a pretty young thing wrapped in scarlet 
cloth and so heavily weighted with beads and anklets 
that she would have sunk like a stone in the lake; she 
never walked more than two steps but rode around in 
triimiph in her litter. . . . She made a social call on us 
of smiles and silences, for neither of us could make her- 
self understood. Her ornaments were all modem 
trader's stuff; the tiny white seed pearl beads that were 
the Togue in Kuanda and the small gold ones. ... It 
really is little use to bring beads for trading into the 
int^or, because each place has its own style and fash- 
ion and nothing else is of interest. These natives all 
understood the use of francs perfectly; salt and white 
American cloth were the only commodities for which 
they wanted to barter. We bought a little cloth for our 
own use at Eissenyi of an Arab trader and paid thirty 
tisffics for a piece of three yards. We had imagined 
that we should find a great deal of ivory in the Congo. 
It was in fact remarkably scarce. We saw very few 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

natives who wore irory ornaments; thia young queen, 
for instance, had none. The Arab traders, that came 
in after Stanley had made his way down the Congo, had 
combed the country and for years poachers and traders 
had drained the ancient supplies. On the Lualaba we 
saw girls wearing bracelets of a grain that appeared so 
like ivory as almost to deceive an expert; a limited 
match to the scrapings proved that they were celhiloid, 
part of some trader's supplies. At Eatana many of the 
children had ivory bracelets. They came from the moun- 
tains, where there were elephants, and where the natives 
undoubtedly failed to observe the Belgian order to bring 
in the ivory of any dead elephant. I saw only two chiefs 
wearing the old royal bracelets — huge ivory affairs 
rising to a point. The first time was at Usumbura mar- 
ket, and I was then too politely reserved in my dealings 
with natives to do more than take a photograph of him; 
the other time was on the way from Tanganyika, when 
we camped by the village of Kisaci, a Watussi overlord. 
Ruanda is inhabited by two tribes — the Wahuti and 
the Watussi. The Wahuti are the original inhabitants 
and they were conquered by the Watussi, a tribe that 
came down from the north at some dim date, probably 
during the same migrations of races that brought the 
Masai down into Central Africa. They are ascribed to 
Abyssinia, and they have a distinctly foreign air, tall, 
lean giants of men, often seven feet tall and so thin they 
appear emaciated, with oval faces and finely finished 
features. They are the overlords to whom the lands be- 
long; the Wahuti do all the work. The Watussi are 
not Mohammedans — ^they have an interesting religion 
90 





t^A 


^^Kfi^~ il 


^ml^li 




--^^■fHIJW^^IJI 





CATnEDKAL IK EBECnON AT N" 



THE SUMMIT OF AFRICA 

in wbash some analogies to the mediator of Christianity 
hare been traced by one of the White Fathers ; but their 
wmnen maintain a Mohammedan-like seclusion. No one 
sees a Watussi woman. Musinga is the King over all 
Bosnda; he maintains a court at Nyanza that is prob- 
ably the last barbaric court of any importance. 

An ancient superstition holds him a prisoner at court, 
for the medicine men have predicted that if the king 
crosses a certain mountain he will die and if he passes 
a certain river he will lose his sight. As a matter of fact 
neither the king nor the medicine men have any faith 
in this» for the king did visit Goma, a few miles from 
Kissenyi, just a little time before we came, though he 
maintained a strict incognito. The superstition is a 
convenient way to keep the king within bounds, for if 
be went traveling and visiting his various chiefs he could 
take whatever his fancy pleased; as it is, the chiefs go 
to him, bringing their own selection of gifts. Musinga 
is fabulously wealthy; every cow and goat and chicken 
in his kingdom is the king's; and his court has a lavish 
splmdor. He heard of automobiles and sent for two 
upholstered in red velvet that were brought to him un- 
told miles over the mountains on the heads of carriers 
and now sit in state at his palace door. 

Eisaci, he of the bracelet, was one of the Watussi, a 
lean old potentate with a scarlet blanket, with a royal 
assurance and an untiring interest in our camp. He 
evidently felt very civilized and liked to air a box of 
safety matches to light his pipe. As he smoked he used 
to beckon to his aide de camp or prime minister or who- 
ever it was, and when the man came, Kisaci leaned his 
91 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

elbow on his shoulder and draped himself against tiiis 
support for the next two hours. 

I noticed at once that he wore a perfectly stumuDg 
iTOry armlet of the royal shape, and asked to buy it 
but he firmly declined to sell. It had belonged to untold 
grandfathers and was worth two wives, but he would 
not sell it, no, not for the price of two wives. "But for 
the toto" said I and produced Alice, the Sultana. She 
was the first white child of course that he had seen, 
and he succumbed. He consented to give his bracelet 
to the little one — receiving, however, the francs I had 
offered — and he made quite a speech through an inter- 
preter, telling her always to remember that the great 
chief Kisaci of the Watussi had given his royal bracelet 
to the little white child. 

At Kissenyi we saw a few ivory bracelets and were 
able to obtain most of them through the energy of 
Madame Van Saceghem, and her own generosity pre- 
sented us with others. Here, too, we received some 
of the beautiful baskets made by the wives of the Wa- 
tussi chiefs which had been given to the administrators 
as the chief's gifts. Madame Keyser at Changugu, 
had given us her own. They were round and high with 
a peaked top, woven with intricate fineness, with 
bizarre jagged black lines of patterns. 

While waiting at Kissenyi for the porters to come in 
and take us up the gorilla mountains, and for provisions 
of dried beans to sustain the porters upon the expedi- 
tion, Herbert and Martha and I made a day's excur- 
sion into the mountains east of Kissenyi to the mission 
of Kyunde, from which we were drawing our generous 
92 



THE SUMMIT OF AFRICA 

atipply of vegetables and fruit. The way wound along 
rich slopes checkered with fertile fields where the women 
were working — ^it is the women and sometimes the chil- 
dren who do the field work among natives. 

Almost every woman had a baby tied in the goat skin 
on her back, and as the women would hoe away the little 
bead would bump and bump against the maternal back 
or else drop in sleep at an angle harrowing to our sym- 
pathies. Only twice during those months in Africa did 
I see a child laid in the bushes while the mother worked. 
I suppose the danger from wild beasts, leopards espe- 
cially, occasioned the custom. The father holds the 
mother responsible, so she carts even a good-sized 
youngster with her. She has a stoic endurance, but she 
has ^so a stoic indifference. I have seen women gos- 
siping and laughing while a baby was shrieking itself 
hoarse. The infant mortality is tremendously high; a 
great deal of it must be due to the native fashion of 
stuffing a child. When the baby is a few months old the 
mother begins to feed it a preparation of coarse meal; 
she forces it down in much the fashion that the Strass- 
burg goose is fed; filling her hand with the stuff she 
pushes it into the baby's mouth and holds the little nose 
until the gagging child swallows. Often the baby has 
spasms of coughing ending literally in convulsions; 
when it is exhausted, she begins again. Custom is a 
wonderful thing. A native mother would regard her- 
self as a moral derelict if she shirked this maternal duty. 
The Mission at Kyunde has a superb site, crowning 
a motmtain top; the outlook over the amazingly fertile 
valleys and mountains reminded one of scenes in the 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

Alps. For twenty years the Mission has been there; 
the Father Superior had been there for thirteen years. 
Before the war, he told me, there were five thousand 
bkck Christians in the vicinity, now famine has reduced 
the number one-half. I do not know exaetty what be 
meant by a black Christian. The Catholic Encydo- 
piedia for 1911 reported that there were 4823 blacks in 
the Congo baptized by the White Fathers and 18,797 
catechumens. The fathers grew the vegetables and fruits 
of Europe in their gardens, experimented constant^ 
with grains and seeds, cultivated coffee and tobacco, and 
made thousands of cigars. They had taught the natives 
brick making and a large brick cathedral was in course 
of construction. 

At the foot of the hill were the buildings of the White 
Sisters. One of the four was from Canada, but being a 
French Canadian she spoke no English. Another was 
German. The order is an international one, founded 
by Cardinal Lavigerie. French is the universal lan- 
guage. 

We lunched with the Fathers, then visited the Sisters 
and photographed them among their roses; they had the 
sweet and tranquil faces of women who have yielded 
every personal expectation. They were disappointed 
that I had not brought Alice. "To have seen a white 
child I" said one of them. 

Another interesting excursion that we made about 

Kivu was to the lava flow at the end of the lake. The 

north end of Kivu is the fringe of that volcanic field of 

which the eight distant separate volcanic peaks, the 

94 








Mt, C ITAKTITAaOIiaO 




Fm>w of l^VA AiauM Imke Ki 



THE SUMMIT OF AFRICA 

BTftimbiro, dispute with the Ruenzori the I^endary 
title of Mountains of the Moon. 

Certainly these mountains are the farthest source of 
the Nile, for cm the southern slopes of the Sabinio, 
M*gabinga, and Mlutvura Tolcanoes, the Nyjawaronga 
Birer takes its rise, drains first to the south, becoming 
known as the Eagera River, then flows north and finally 
eaopties into the Victoria Nyanza. Also the Ruchuru 
JUme rises not ten miles north of Sabinio and flows 
into Lake Edward, thus uniting with the Nile system. 

It was the three highest peaks of these Moon Moun- 
tains that were our objective — Mikeno, Earisimbi, 
Visoke. The two others were Chaninagonga and Nyam- 
lagira, whose craters stUl guarded that deep fire which 
had flung them into being. East and west of this group 
run the bastionlike mountain ruiges that shut in the 
length of the Kivu-Edward Rift valley, and these moun- 
tains are neither of volcanic origin nor connected in any 
way with the volcanoes which rise from the floor of the 
valley itself. 

The north shores of Kivu are of lava rock, giving an 
utterly different aspect to the lake than that of the green 
grass hills of the southern setting. This M'fumbiro 
region is probably the area of some of the most recent 
volcanic activity in the world, but practically nothing 
of its history is known and but very little yet recon- 
structed. We are indebted to the fortunate chance of a 
visit of Sir Alfred Sliarpe, formerly governor of Nyasa- 
land, to the shores of Kivu in December, 1912, for the 
account of an eye-witness to a violent eruption which 
altered the entire northern extremity of the lake. 
95 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

From a fissure in the eairth about two miles north of 
the shore, a fissure that speedily developed into a small 
cone from the rocks and ash and cinder fitmg up, there 
had come sudi a tremendous outpouring of molten lava 
that the north end of Kivu, already an inlet in character 
through the irregularity of its shore line, was almost 
shut off. Entire tracts of the country were destroyed 
and hundreds of natives killed; it was the Last Days of 
Pompeii for many a luckless village. The boiling lava 
poured into the lake in such quantities that the water 
seethed for twelve miles out and many fleeing natives 
who escaped the fiery rocks and engulfing lava by 
launching their hollow log canoes were capsized into the 
scalding waters and fairly boiled to death. Walikali, a 
hundred and fifty miles west, was covered with ash and 
the sound of the eruptions was heard as far as Fili-Fili, 
two hundred miles away. 

Everything had been quiet now for ten years, so we 
felt it fairly safe to visit the devastations. By paying 
for the precious gasoline we obtained the privilege of 
using the governmental launch for the day, and with 
the Van Saceghems and Monsieur Jungas, the Pro- 
cureur du Rot, a judge of the highest court in Stanley- 
ville, who was making his rounds with his assistant, we 
made an excursion to it. It took about four hours by 
boat to reach the long tongue of lava reaching out from 
the rocky entrance to the Kabinia Inlet, as the north 
end of the lake is called; we managed after considerable 
difficulty to find a place on the rugged shore where we 
could make a landing. Then for some time we explored 
the extraordinary field of lava, soUdified in streams and 
96 



THE SUMMIT OF AFRICA 

swirls like frozen black whipped cream over which the 
green of lichen was creeping, and in whose crevices the 
first long grass and wild flowers were finding root, while 
wild morning glories spread out like an old-fashioned 
floral carpet before us. 

On our return we saw through the mists of the after- 
noon rain the shrouded outlines of Xjramlagira, whose 
fire made the ruddy glow each night on our horizon, and 
the cloud-wrapped peaks of Mikeno and Karisimbi, our 
distant gorilla heij^ts. 



CHAPTER VII 

the gorilla trail 
Into the Gorilla Forests of Mount Mjeeno 

It was November the ninth that my husband and I 
and Martha Miller and Priscilla Hall and little Alice 
and a string of one hundred and seventy porters left our 
camp at Kissenyi and started on the three-day march to 
the Mission of the White Fathers on the slopes of Mi- 
keno, from which we expected to make our ascent after 
gorillas. 

Mr. Akeley, with thirty porters, had left ten days 
before and was now encamped on the heights from 
which he sent down constant news by runner. His re- 
ports of the conditions under which he had been able 
to see gorillas were full of disheartening difficulties, but 
the fact remained that he had been able to see them and 
obtain some desired specimens for his group, so Miss 
Miller and I were undiscouraged. We were prepared 
to climb and crawl and freeze, but we were going to see 
gorillas. We had not come up the long trail from the 
Cape to be turned back by any hardships now. 

The reports which we obtained from Mr. Bams of 
the conditions on the other side of the mountain were 
more heartening. Mr. Bams had come down one side 
as Mr. Akeley had gone up the other. He passed within 
a few hours' journey of Kissenyi and Herbert and I 
went out to meet him. Mr. and Mrs. Barns were en- 
08 



THE GORILLA TRAIL 

camped near Nyunde drying the gorilla skins, and from 
there he was going on after some monkeys and chim- 
panzees. These English people were a very interesting 
couple; be was a tall, spare, black-haired man, about six 
feet two, who bad tired of a Bbodesian ranch and had 
turned bis bunting to collecting; his wife was young and 
vivacious, with bobbed, curly hair; for eleven years she 
had been in Africa with him, never hunting herself, but 
sharing the dangers of the life. 

Scsne years before be bad shot a gorilla that was 
mounted by Ward for the Rothschild Museum; and now 
he bad come for gorillas for the British Museum and 
bad secured three for a family group. They were beau- 
tiful skins, the female and young one very black and 
shaggy Vk& bears, the male with the distinguishing sil- 
ver-haired back. This male had an even larger bead 
than the one Mr. Bams had shot two years before; it 
stood five feet three and three-quarter inches high, 
measuring seven feet six and a half inches from the 
ground to the finger tip. From finger to finger it 
measured seven feet six inches and the chest measured 
fifty-seven inches. The chest measure of his former 
gorilla was sixty-three inches. 

He had come up with this old male in an open space 
on the edge of a precipitous ravine high on Mikeno, and 
the gorilla had started towards him, roaring and beating 
bis breast. This was quite like Du Cbaillu's description 
of their behavior and I asked Mr. Bams if be consid- 
ered this a charge on sight from a gorilla, and be said 
he couldn't say — the beast might have been acting from 
surprise or alarm and trying to intimidate bim. But 
M 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

he certainly started towards Mr. Bams. In the biute's 
excitement his progress on his hind legs was unstable, 
and after coming a little distance he stumbled fuid fell 
down the clifflike ravine he had been skirting. The fall 
knocked the fight out of him. Mr, Bams went down 
the ravine after him and followed throu{^ the jungle 
for an hour and a half before coming up with him. Then 
he killed him with a single shot. 

The perfection of the modem weapon does not give 
the gorilla the chance he had in the old muzzle-loading 
days. In almost every story I had heard of recent 
gorilla hunting the gorilla had been taken by surprise 
and shot at once. If wounded he would very naturally 
turn on his attacker; whether he would charge <m si^t, 
if imattaeked, was something we did not know. 

Mr. Akeley believed he would not. My husband and 
I had no pretensions to a conviction of any sort, but we 
were going to try to meet a gorilla on his native heath 
and find out what he would do about it. 

Mr. Bams had one bit of evidence as to the behavior 
of the female of the species. He told of crawling half 
an hour on his hands and knees through the bamboos 
and then coming suddenly face to face with an old lady 
gorilla. She was as much surprised as he was and evi- 
dently had no desire to continue the fdiance acquaint- 
ance, for she made off at all speed. He let her escape, 
for he was on the hunt for a male. 

After seeing the gorilla skins, the gorillas themselves 

seemed more real and less legendary, but there were so 

many difficulties in the way of discovering them, and it 

was all such a matter of diance in spite of the hardest 

100 







^V m ' 




^^^^^^ 


jhH 



The Wiiire Fjitiieis at Lulehoa Musion 




THE GORILLA TRAIL 

sort of pursuit, that we did not feel in the least sure 
whether we three amateurs would have any real luck 
or not. But we meant to stick it out imtil we saw some- 
thing of them. 

We marched through very beautiful country the first 
day out from Kissenyi, with magnificent views of the 
volcanoes. Monsieur Wera, the chef-de-poste at Kis- 
soiyi, had lent me his donkey for that first day's ride, 
much to Alice's joy, who confiscated it half the time. 
PrisdUa and Martha alternated walking with the 
machUa or hammock. The camp that night was at 
Kibati, with a marvelous view of the volcanoes and of 
Kivu. 

At Kihati a little enclosure of elephant grass shut 
in eleven graves of officers dead in the Great War, pa- 
thetic graves marked with wooden crosses rudely 
carved, weighted down with stones to keep the beasts 
away, encircled with the roses and geraniums from 
Europe planted by some kindly hand, and shaded by 
lemon trees and plums. We walked among them that 
afternoon. . . . 

Cl Ofx LE CaPTAINE I. J. DE FoiN 

TOlfB^ GLOSIEUSEMENT All TSANU JaBNWE 

27-11-1915 

LE 80UB-OFFICIEK J. L. DE VoUfER 

Ttrfe A L'ENNEMI en POHTAST SECOUBS a son CHfiF 

A LA MEMOIEE nu 80UB-0FFICIER AlFHED DuPUIS 

MOBT EN BEATE 

J. CORNEJSSE 

COKBtANDANT— MOBT POUB LA PATBIE 

101 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

How little those men expected, playing as abOTt- 
socked little boys in some trim Belgian garden, to come 
to their death on the African mountains ... to lie 
weighted with lava rock to keep the hyenas away. Mori 
pour la patriet . , . What forgotten courage and de- 
spair had played their hour in those trenches that zig- 
zagged the mountain sides, overrun already with oUir- 
ious green. 

Our second day's march brought us to Bubonde, the 
territory of Burunga, an independent old chief or sul- 
tan, who had an evil name among the missionaries for 
robbing caravans. The disorders of war times had 
given him quite a field for activities, but now he was 
reduced to cheating his neighbors in the matter of cows. 
It was rumored that he was to have a white man for a 
son-in-law ; that a German planter who had exhausted 
white credit and forbearance, who had tried everything 
in fact but work, after much lolling in an easy chair, 
drinking pombe, and overseeing his workers through 
opera glasses, had decided to "go native," and, for the 
sake of Burunga's cows and shambas, was taking one of 
his daughters in marriage. Usually a man pays the 
father for a wife. The planter was evidently getting 
his with a dower. . . . That was rumor. I tell the 
tale as it was told to me. 

Leaving Bubonde the third morning we went throu^ 
thick forest, up hill and down, on paths that were hiursh 
lava rock. Lovely pink flowers, like starry orchids but 
growing on silvery green bushes, edged our way. Two 
hours brought us up the last steep climb and to an 
opening on the lower slopes of Mikeno, where the 
102 



THE GORILLA TRAIL 

thatched roofs of the Lulenga Mission showed among 
the shambas. 

Three Fathers and a Brother occupy the Mission 
which has been in that vicinity twelve years; the P^re 
Superieur von Hoef, the Pere Provoost, the Pfere Van 
der Handt and the Brother Hyacinth. They hospitably 
installed us in the house prepared seven years before 
for the White Sisters, who were now expected each 
week; I said something about the seven years' wait 
for Rachel; kindly they overlooked it It was a long, 
low, mud house, whitewashed outside and in, with dirt 
floors and thatched roof. The windows had wooden 
shutters; there were no screens needed — any glass, of 
course, did not exist. At Kissenyi, Monsieur Van 
Saceghem's house had boasted actual window panes, 
some of glass from photographic plates, and some from 
the celluloid of old films. Little schoolhouses, three- 
sided mud affairs, had been built back of the Sisters' 
house; tilled fields stretched on the steep slopes before; 
roses were planted about and edged the straight way 
north to the Mission of the Fathers and the Church. 

It seemed heavenly to our feminine souls to have a 
room and a table again; we could imagine nothing more 
luxurious except a bureau with drawers. Really to 
appreciate a dresser drawer one should have lived in a 
tent, with all one's belongings incarcerated in barrel- 
hlce bags, and the desired belonging always eluding 
one's blind groping. 

Before the house stretched a marvelous view of the 
Rift Valley — ^green hills reaching down to wide- 
spreading lava-fields from which rose the small craters 
108 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

and cones of tihe valley floor, and across ftcan us the 
shadowy slopes of the mountains that guarded the west. 
South of them rose the beautiful outlines of Nyamlagira 
and Chaninagongo, above whose craters hung a ruddy 
smoke. Chaninagongo smokes rather lazily, but Nyam- 
lagira has been steadUy active since its last eruption 
seven years ago, and at night the glow from that crater 
was a flame in the sky. 

Lulenga Mission has been the lodestar of gorilla- 
seekers ever since the discovery of true gorillas in the 
heart of equatorial Africa. Gorillas had always been 
associated with low, west coast jungles of the Gaboon, 
but twenty years ago an Englishman, Quentin Grogan. 
on his famous two-year walk from Cape to Cairo found 
the skeleton of a true gorilla in the equatorial moun- 
tains. 

Later, occasional rumors of great apes up in the 
bamboos were carried by the natives to the white mm» 
but the apes were supposed to be chimpanzees whose 
presence was already known. 

Then about thirteen years ago an Austrian, Grauer. 
passed through Nairobi with some goriUa skins he had 
obtained in the mountains of what was then the western 
edge of German East. The first gorilla of which the 
Mission had any record was that shot by Coimt Pau- 
wels in the commencement of 1918. At the end of 
1913 Count Arhenius made a successful hunt in the 
bamboos. Eight years later he returned with Prince 
William of Sweden on an expedition which was just 
leaving the Congo as we came into it The Prince 
had made his camp here at the Mission and shot his 
104 



THE GORILLA TRAIL 

first gorilla here in the forest just an. hour from the 
camp. The other members of his party, even the sol- 
diers, had killed others, so altogether fourteen were 
slau^tered. 

There were moments when we wondered anxiously 
if there were any gorillas left for us, anything but lone 
widows and undergrown youths. Of course a gorilla 
was a gorilla, but it was the grown male who had given 
the legend of ferocity to his race. 

I had brought with me Du ChaiUu's description of hia 
first sight of one. 

The anderbnul) swayed slightly jnst ahead, and presently 
before as stood an immense male gorilla. He had gone through 
the jangle on all fours; but when he saw our party he erected 
himself and looted us boldly in the face. He stood about a 
dozen yards from us and was a sight I think never to forget, 
Nearly six feet high (he proved two inches shorter) with 
immense body, huge chest, and great muscular arms, with 
fiercely faring large deep gray eyes, and a hellish expression 
of face, which seemed to me like some nightmare vision; thus 
stood before us the king of the African forests, . . . 

His eyes began to fiasb a fiercer fire as we stood motionless 
on the defensive, and the crest of short hair which stands on 
his forehead began to twitch rapidly up and down, while his 
powerful fangs were shown as he again sent forth a thunderous 
roar. And now truly he reminded me of nothing but some 
hellish dream creature — a being of that hideous order, half 
beast, half man, which wc find pictured hy old artists in lepre- 
sentatdons of the infernal regions. 

In the hope of meeting the gentleman of this descrip- 
ticm we started ofiF up the mountain at six o'clock the 
morning after our arrival at the Mission. 
lOJE 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

It was a lovely morning, sweet and fresh, with thit 
feeling of spring that mornings hare in Africa. We 
were moimted on a mule and donkey belonging to the 
White Fathers, with guides running ahead and boyi 
coming after with guns and water bottles and camera. 
We rode nearly an hour up the steep foothills of 
Mikeno. 

Back of us the brown roofs of the Mission grev 
smaller and smaller, the waving fronds of the banana 
plantations merged into a sea of green darker and m«e 
glistening than the tender green of the fresh grass about 
them. The great plain of lava on the valley floor 
stretched wider and wider as we moimted higher, and 
across it the miles and miles of mountain peaks were 
blue against the sl^. 

Ahead of us the sharp, craggy peak of Mikeno stood 
out in bold relief, with glistening clouds floating below 
it, shining with the first sunli^t. It was a stiff climb 
and our hearts ached for the puffing mules struggling 
up the slippery, narrow path of mud, but we let our 
hearts ache and conserved our legs. 

At seven we were on the edge of the forest, and 
started on foot up a narrow path, tilted at a violent 
incline, a path like a greased chute of mud. It might 
have been a rush of water after a heavy rain, but now 
the mud was a smooth spread, sometimes a slippery 
smear over rocks, sometimes a slough of incrediUe 
depth. 

The trees shut us in, the vines netted us like basket 
work. The guides climbed ahead, my husband after, 
bis gunbearer behind, then I followed with my gun boy 
106 



THE GORILLA TRAIL 

I bdund me. We kept our eyes sharply on the path and 
suddenly I saw in it a print, perfect in the soft mud. 

It was a hand print, the fingers doubled under, show- 
ing the marks of four knuckles and a thumb. A little 
ahead were the outspread toe prints, where Herbert 
and guides were pausing as I saw the hand marks. 

They were gorilla prints, freshly made. The guide 
declared them "Kubwa, kubwa" (Big, big), which was 
stirring. The gorilla had been walking along the path, 
helping himself by his low hanging fists. He avoided 
the deep mud, keeping to one side of the chute where 
the groimd was what I should call mushy, but mere 
mush had no terrors for him. 

We followed with a feeling of tremendous exhilarar 
tion. It was the actual mark of the great beast we had 
come so far to see ; he was there somewhere ahead of 
us, hidden in a turning of the green thicket — any mo- 
ment a parting of the leaves might show us his black, 
twitching face and sparkling eyes. 

We ordered the camera boy to keep close and we 
kept the gun boys extremely close. We had been 
cautioned not to trust our guns to these carriers who 
were not gun boys in any sense of the word, and were 
quite likely to cast the guns away and run at a critical 
moment. However, the climbing was much too hard to 
do with a gun in our hands and we took our chances. 

At every turn we gazed about hopefully, remember- 
ing that the P6re Van Hoef , the Father Superior at the 
Mission, when hunting with the prince, had suddenly 
seen and shot a gorilla in the branches of the tree just 
by his head, but no ape disclosed itself. The path, how- 
107 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

ever, revealed interesting secrets. Here were antelope 
tracks; here was the sudden spring of a leopard, half 
dried in the sun. Suddenly it ceased to be a path and 
became a series of artesian wells. These were elephant 
tracks hke bottomless pits, freshly made, with water 
still slipping into them. 

They were difficult to negotiate if one tried to step 
across and balance on the mud ridge between, but we 
clung to the bushes at the side and got on. Finally the 
tracks crossed ofiF to ihe left where we saw tusk marks 
on a tree trunk. 

It made me remember poignantly that the large gun 
was at the Mission. Herbert and I were each carrying 
a Springfield. We had nothing heavier for a charging 
elephant. I remembered it again, even more poignantly 
when a tiny sound held us motionless. It was a snap- 
ping and tearing of twigs. 

The guide crept closer. His low-breathed "Tembo" 
(elephant) was almost inaudible in his anxiety not to 
be overheard. I stared hard at the bamboo screen, but 
it was impenetrable. I hadn't the faintest idea how 
far away that elephant was breakfasting, but I had 
no desire to find out. 

We were then entering the bamboos, a forest of tall, 
slender stalks and delicate leaves, all netted and inter- 
woven with vines. It was colder here, so gray that the 
sun seemed to be under a cloud. We pressed harder 
on the trail, trying to catch up with that gorilla, and 
suddenly came into a httle clearing, sun flooded, filled 
with delicious yoimg growth, a heavenly place for a 
picture of a gorilla at breakfast. 
108 



THE GORILLA TRAIL 

No applicant appeared. Instead the spoor vanished. 
We paused to let our guides munch some hard, berry- 
like grain and smoke their black clay pipes, while we ate 
chocolate and crackers; then we luged them to fresh 
effort. But the trail was lost. 

They led us at last to one of the innumerable little 
trails that led out from the morass through the creep- 
ing vines, and on we went into ever dimmer and more 
impenetrable solitudes. Hanging vines hung down 
like tapestries and a network of them veiled the under- 
growth. The guides hacked away with their sickles 
and we wormed our way along, often forced to crawl on 
all fours through some bad bits. This went on for 
hours. The guides had apparently given up all hope of 
a gorilla, but were going to earn their francs by exer- 
cising us. 

We kept on doggedly till at last, discoioaged by our 
persistence, they united in calling it a day and began 
to slide down t^e ravinelike sides. We got back after 
seven hours, heartily tired, having accomplished noth- 
ing of the morning's hopes but the sight of that gorilla 
trails yet we had spent a thoroughly fascinating day. 



CHAPTER VIII 

the big gorilla of kart5imbi 

The Gorilla Hunt in Which Hebbert Gets 
THE Bio Male of Kabisiubi 

We had intended starting again on Monday, but a 
runner from Mr. Akeley caused us to change our plans. 
He wrote that he was ill, that he had "broken some- 
thing." So, on Monday, Herbert and Martha Miller 
and I and sixty porters started up the mountain to his 
camp, leaving Alice and Priscilla Hall in the White 
Sisters' house. It was a great comfort to have them 
there, where the imtiring, kind Fathers did everything 
possible for them. 

Mr. Akeley had written that we had better take two 
days to the trip as only veterans might make it in one, 
but we felt decidedly veteranish by now, and, as his 
letter made us anxious, determined to get through at 
all cost. We had not gone more than three hours before 
we came up with the porters opening their loads with 
unusual alacrity; the cook was busy spreading out his 
magnificent red mattress which constituted an entire 
porter's load. 

This was in a damp glade on the mountainside, and 

the march we had made was not a day's work, so I — 

being ahead — told them to go on with all the vehemence 

and Swahili I possessed. "Fana. m(mu.ri kapa" (not 

110 



THE BIG GORILLA OF KARISIMBI 

good here) was repeated vigorously until they got up 
and hoisted their loads upon their heads. They didn't 
really hope to put it over, the headmen had heen told 
at the Mission they were to go all the way, hut they 
consido^d it decidedly worth trying. 

Later I was to hear that Pana mazuri flung back at 
me by a half a hundred of them as they slipped and 
sloshed and scrambled up that mountain's sides. 

We had thought we could go up in six hours. It took 
us nine. The last six hours were a steady, interminable 
climb, up through the forest, into the bamboos, throu^ 
the bamboos into a hi^er forest again. The path was 
the same sort of mud chute that Herbert and I had 
climbed before, and we bad to cling to the trees at the 
side for leverage. 

I understood then why soldiers at the Front had 
thrown away rations, water, anununition. Sometimes 
every step seemed h'terally the last possible effort. The 
altitude had its effect, of course, in conjunction with 
the continual struggle. 

There were times, about the sixth hour, when we 
found cheer in song, peculiarly suitable songs such as 
"There's a long, long trail a-winding," and "Smile, 
smile, smile," but after that our breath gave out and 
we saved it for such valuable speech as "Rest here — 
we can take the day to it." 

But our spirits did not flag. When Herbert, fol- 
lowing our steps and watching us, chuckled at the load 
of mud that went up and down with each foot and an- 
nounced that we wouldn't do for fairy-footed partners 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

at a dance, we looked at his own weighted feet and 
assured him of his complete unsuitability. 

At intervals he cheered us on by telling us we were 
going to be the only women in the world who had seen 
wild gorillas. We retorted that we hoped they'd appre- 
ciate the trouble we were taking and if a wild gmilla 
would only appear and perform that much advertised 
act of carrying women off we wouldn't offer any resist- 
ance. 

The end of the ninth hour we readied the camp, and 
found Mr. Akeley looking as if years instead of days 
had intervened. He was very worn; he had done t^e 
work of ten men under particularly trying conditions; 
he had started with a fever, infected by jiggers which 
he had not been able to extract; he had killed his gorillas 
in most inaccessible places where the natives had balked 
at following; he bad skinned and skeletonized and dis- 
sected without rest, and now energy and appetite had 
deserted him. What was broken, he said, was his vigor. 
We felt troubled when we first saw him, but a good 
dinner, an incentive toward appetite, began to make 
him feel better. 

The camp was high on Mikeno, the mountain's citadel- 
like crags above, a world of forest and valleys and 
mountains at its feet, with clouds floating up the chasms 
and stealing among the trees. There was only a tiny 
clearing for the tents with the porter's huts of grass 
tucked in behind; the gorilla skeletons were hanging 
from poles in grisly sociability, while from the tent of 
Mr. Akeley hung a small, mummified figure, a skinned 
112 





Gorilla Camp on Mr. Mikeno 



THE BIG GORILLA OF KARISIMBI 

uid dried two-year-old gorilla whom we christened 
"Clarence." 

Beside securing his specimens, Mr. Akeley had ful- 
filled the hope which had been only a dream of the expe* 
dition: he had taken motion pictures of wild gorillas — a 
mother and two little ones — something that had never 
bef<n« been done. 

The next day we spent quietly in camp. Wednesday, 
we left our boy Kiani in charge of things there and 
started off to make camp higher upon the ridge between 
Mikeno and Karisimbi. 

It was a two-hours* climb and we camped in a glade 
full of flowers, wild carrot, and buttercup, with a marsh 
before us, reaching to the forested side of Karisimbi. 

Balmy as that glade was in the noonday sim, the 
night was a revelation of Arctic chill. Our prepara- 
tions for bed were elaborate, but even so, the tempera- 
ture surprised us, and what it did to our scantily clad 
porters, huddling blanketless in grass huts about their 
smoky little fires, we could more than surmise from their 
conversation during the night and morning. 

It did not actually freeze. It was like northern Wis- 
consin in late October, when your breath hangs in a cold 
cloud in the air before you. We had no camp fire, for 
the wood was wet and smoky, and we had only an iron 
bucket of wood coals to warm the tents. 

Thtu'sday we started out for the gorilla pictures 
if^ch it was the hope to get before adding any other 
specimen to the group. The guides led us up the Kar- 
isimbi slopes — only slopes is too gentle a word — and 
we climbed and climbed. 

113 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

ever, revealed interesting secrets. Here were antelope 
tracks; here was the sudden spring of a leopard, half 
dried in the sun. Suddenly it ceased to be a path and 
became a series of artesian wells. These were elephant 
tracks hke bottomless pits, freshly made, with water 
still slipping into them. 

They were difficult to negotiate if one tried to step 
across and balance on the mud ridge between, but we 
clung to the hushes at the side and got on. Finally the 
tracks crossed oflf to the left where we saw tusk marks 
on a tree trunk. 

It made me remember poignantly that the large gun 
was at the Mission. Herbert uid I were each carrying 
a Springfield. We had nothing heavier for a charging 
elephant. I remembered it again, even more poignantly 
when a tiny sound held us motionless. It was a snap- 
ping and tearing of twigs. 

The guide crept closer. His low-breathed "Tembo** 
(elephant) was almost inaudible in his anxiety not to 
be overheard. I stared hard at the bamboo screen, but 
it was impenetrable. I hadn't the faintest idea how 
far away that elephant was breakfasting, but I had 
no desire to find out. 

We were then entering the bamboos, a forest of tall, 
slender stalks and delicate leaves, all netted and inter- 
woven with vines. It was colder here, so gray that the 
sun seemed to be under a cloud. We pressed harder 
on the trail, trying to catch up with that gorilla, and 
suddenly came into a little clearing, Sun flooded, filled 
with delicious young growth, a heavenly place for a 
picture of a gorilla at breakfast, 
108 



THE GORILLA TRAIL 

No applicant appeared. Instead the spoor vanished. 
We paused to let our guides munch some hard, berry- 
like grain and smoke their black clay pipes, while we ate 
chocolate and crackers; then we urged them to fresh 
effort. But the trail was lost. 

They led us at last to one of the innumerable little 
trails that led out from the morass through the creep- 
ing vines, and on we went into ever dimmer and more 
impenetrable solitudes. Hanging vines hung down 
like tapestries and a network of them veiled the under- 
growth. The guides hacked away with their sickles 
and we wormed our way along, often forced to crawl on 
all fours through some bad bits. This went on for 
hours. The guides had apparently given up all hope of 
a gorilla, but were going to earn their francs by exer- 
cising us. 

We kept on doggedly till at last, discouraged by our 
persistence, they united in calling it a day and began 
to slide down the ravinelike sides. We got back after 
seven hours, heartily tired, having accomphshed noth- 
ing of the morning's hopes but the sight of that gorilla 
traU> yet we had spent a thoroughly fascinating day. 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

the gun sounded as unreal in the silence as the si^A o( 
the gorilla. Ijnmediately the gorilla went crashing 
down into the welter of vegetation. We thought him 
dead and raced down towards him after Herbertf hot 
we then found he had made off, leaving a trail of crushed 
greenery and blood. For a few moments the waving 
bushes gave us the only clue, then he emerged on the 
slopes above and looked back over his shaggy shoulder 
as the gun crashed again, as if trying to compreheDd 
this sudden assault upon his solitudes. I shall never 
forget the humanness of that black, upturned face. 

Then he went plunging down the slope, passing near 
Herbert, who put in a finishing shot. The great body 
struck against a tree and lay stilL There had been no 
sound from him, no bark or roar. He had shown no 
instinct of fight, nothing but the rush of a wounded 
beast to escape. 

We found him dead against the tree, face down, a 
huge, shaggy, primeval thing, like something summoned 
out of the vanished ages. And the scene in which he lay 
had a beauty that was like nothing earthly. 

From that high place, whose forested slopes swept 
down, down. Bke a green fiood to the distant valleys and 
the blue sheen of Kivu, we looked out across to the pur- 
ple heights of Chaninagongo and Nyamlagira, crested 
with clouds that were golden with sun and rose with 
volcanic fires. To our right, sharply silhouetted against 
the distant azure and amethyst, stretched the superb 
slope of Mikeno edged with delicate little trees, ex- 
quisite miniatures relieving liiat long line, that wait 
116 



i THE BIG GORILLA OF KARISIMBI 

; up, up, to the citadel crag of the top, glowing with 
nmbers and emerald moss. 

The gorilla proved a huge gray-backed male. When 
he was tugged and propped upright I shall never for- 
get the impression he made. The great girth, the thick- 
ness and length of arm, the astounding shoulders made 
him a giant. 

His face was ferocious only when the mouth was 
open. The normal expression was of a curiously mild 
and patriarchal dignity. Without being sentimental 
you could see in that face a gleam of patient and tragic 
surmise, as if the old fellow had a prescience that some- 
thing was happening in the world against which his 
strength was of no avail — as if he knew the security 
of his high place was gone. 

For generations he had lived without fear. He preyed 
upon no one for his food; he ate the wild carrot and 
fresh greens, disturbing no one and disturbed by none of 
his world. He could have crushed a lion or strangled 
it, and an elephant, if gripped by the trunk, would 
have no thought but of escape. He had been indeed 
the King of the African forests. 

We took measurements and found his height to be 
five feet, seven and a half inches; the reach from his 
upraised hand to the groimd eight feet and two inches, 
and from hand to hand seven feet eight and a half 
inches. His chest was between sixty-two and sixty-three 
inches. He was, we feel sure, the big bull of Karisimbi, 
of which we had heard. This bull had been shot at be- 
fore and we found an old wound in the hip, which had 
117 



■' -2^% ,-' ^"mmf^^'^r.' 




^^^i 






^^^ 


iH^ 




The Bto GnBiu* of K 



THE BIG GORILLA OF KARISIMBI 

and dried two-year-old gorilla whom we christened 
"Clarence." 

Beside securing his specimens, Mr. Akeley had ful- 
filled the hope which had been only a dream of the exp&* 
dition: he had taken motion pictures of wild gorillas — a 
mother and two little ones — something that had never 
before been done. 

The next day we spent quietly in camp. Wednesday, 
we left our boy Kiani in charge of things there and 
started off to make camp higher upon the ridge between 
Mikeno and Karisimbi. 

It was a two-hours' climb and we camped in a glade 
full of flowers, wild carrot, and buttercup, with a marsh 
before us, reaching to the forested side of Earisimbi. 

Balmy as that glade was in the noonday sun, the 
night was a revelation of Arctic chill. Our prepara- 
tions for bed were elaborate, but even so, the tempera- 
ture surprised us, and what it did to our scantily clad 
porters, huddling blanketless in grass huts about their 
smoky little fires, we could more than surmise from their 
conversation during the night and morning. 

It did not actually freeze. It was like northern Wis- 
consin in late October, when your breath hangs in a cold 
cloud in the air before you. We had no camp fire, for 
the wood was wet and smoky, and we had only an iron 
bucket of wood coals to warm the tents. 

Thursday we started out for the gorilla pictures 
which it was the hope to get before adding any other 
specimen to the group. The guides led us up the Kar- 
isimbi slopes— only slopes is too gentle a word — and 
we climbed and climbed. 

113 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

chief on im expedition to Musinga's court, and aQothet 
remembered suddenly that a neighbor had threatened to 
kill bis son, and he wanted to go right away and exter- 
minate that neighbor. Others did not produce any 
reasons, but stated their intentions. 

But they were in no position to issue ultimatums. 
We could not control the guides but the porton had 
enlisted, as it were, for the duration of the war, and 
would not be paid until we came down from the hunt 
With all their pay coming to them and the extra back- 
sheesh they were to receive for staying, we felt fairly 
sure that they would not desert. 

But we did not feel that we could keep them another 
night in that high altitude, on the exposed saddle be- 
tween Karisimbi and Mikeno. They tried to keep them- 
selves warm with fires in their grass huts, but their chief 
resource was to huddle together like close packed cattle 
and exercise their lungs. They talked all night — gen* 
erally about us. You could not wake at any hour with- 
out hearing the "Wazungu" {Europeans) getting theirs 
from some impassioned orator! 

And often the hearty roars of laughter told us that 
the village wag was not overlooking any little thing 
they found quaint in us. 

They had no blankets — nothing but the goat skins 
and wisps of cloth they wore by day. And one man 
lost even these. It was the morning the guides left. He 
came over to us with a wreath of greenery about his 
waist, like a Russian dancer performing Spring, and 
amidst the hilarious laughter of his friends he delivered 
a long, pleading, and utterly imintelligible discourse. 
120 




Ml. An.£i^t WoauiMu uic (jurilia Sk 




GviDEi Uehuvixu Flesh I'auM Gumi 



A GORILLA BAND 

Being interpreted, it appeared that be had burned 
lis garment in the fire that night and was asking the 
oan of a dishcloth. Cloth was too precious for gen- 
Tosi^. We gave him half a dishcloth. He was quite 
pleased and abandoned his wreathing buttercups with 
•elief. 

We sent tbe porters on ahead of us with tents and 
aipplies to make camp in our former location in Mikeno 
tbout a thousand feet lower and much warmer than this 
flade, and then we scouted back over Karisimbi where 
fre had found the big one the day before, to try for 
jhotographs. We tried for five hours without a glimpse 
>f any living thing. Not even a leopard had visited the 
dlL We had seen leopard's tracks near our tent, and 
■he boys were in deadly terror of them at night; but 
iiey could not be plentiful or they would not have over- 
looked the gorilla meat which we found lying just 
irfaere it had been cut frcsn the skeleton. 

The natives did not eat the meat. We ourselves had 
»oked and eaten a little, just for the sake of doing it, 
md found it perfectly good meat, firm and sweet, but 
[ couldn't get over the family feeling of sampling grand- 
incle AfricanusI 

We came into the Mikeno camp that night feeling 
thoroughly exercised, as we had a habit of saying. The 
next day, my husband and I started off alone with the 
idea of locating a troop for a motion picture if possible, 
and, if the light should be too gray for the picture, of 
killing a female for the group. 

Having no guides we took our luckless tent boys 

and porters to carry our guns and plate camera. For 

121 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 1 

over three hours we led them a hard diase througli tiie 
nettles that burned like fire wherever they touched. At 
every rest the men scratched vigorously and told eadi 
other In tones that were perfectly intelligible, however 
unknown the words, their opinion of our excursion. 

There was one frank and thorny nettle that could be 
recognized and generally avoided, but there was a soft, 
plushy-looking plant, seemingly as mild as a nursery 
tea, that left a wipe of almost invisible bristles on you 
like a fairy shaving brush, and the touch of it burned 
a full hoiu-. The only consolation in getting another 
touch was that you then ceased to occupy yourself with 
the old one I 

Finally, after some hours, we struck an old antelope 
trail that promised easier going and we wound up and 
down the slopes on that, but found nothing but the 
antelope marks. Once we came on a small Inisb buck, 
but he did not stay to have his pictiure taken. Then we 
passed a gorilla trail leading off to the left, which gave 
some sign of promise, broken stalks showing where the 
gorillas had fed. 

Judgment told us to follow that trail, but when my 
husband asked me which way I wanted to go, I aban- 
doned judgment and ching to the easier footing of the 
antelope path, although it looked too much used here 
by the natives who came up from Burunga's into these 
heights for wood, for chances of gorilla. But I voted 
to keep on with the antelope path until we had found 
a good spot for lunch and rest, and so we sauntered 
easily on and then — ^just to show how luck and judg- 
ment differ — ^we rounded a mountain slope, passed 
122 



A GORILLA BAND 

around a fallen rock and tree and looked down into a 
lovely, open meadow where four gorillas were feeding! 

I saw only three at first. There was a huge silver- 
backed male, slouching along with his strange shamble 
among the waving green, and two females, recognized 
by their black backs, a little distance behind him. Their 
gait is extraordinary. They walk on their hind feet, 
assisting themselves with their hands, the fingers 
knuckled under, the thumb outspread, and, as their arms 
are enormously long, their backs are but slightly bent. 

It gave us a tremendous thrill to see those great beasts 
there in the glade. I felt a rush of exultation at our 
hick. Three of them I And one of them the very gen- 
tleman we had come so far to interview. "Now," I 
remember thinking excitedly, "now, we are going to 
know 1" 

We had frozen at attention the instant we saw tliem, 
signaling the porters to keep silent and out of sight; 
but some sound had already given warning of our ap- 
proach. The big male looked around straight up at us, 
rising as he did so. 

It was an imcannily human face that he turned up 
to us, but there was none of Du Chaillu's demon horror 
about it. I got an impression of a wary interest that 
did not intend to tolerate any intrusion, but there was 
not a flash of menace — nothing that the most prudish 
person could possibly call hellish. He simply conveyed 
the idea that he had been disturbed by a distinct out- 
sider, and started deliberately away, shambling along 
through his ancestral meadows towards an arch in the 
trees leading into glades ahead. 
123 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

The two females came after him, like hig duggy 
black bears, except for their peculiar gait. None of 
them did any barking or roaring and there was noth- 
ing to alarm the fourth gorilla, which I saw tfwn' for 
the first time, as she suddenly discovered the o^htst 
making off without her and came lurching impidly 
after them. 

I had already pulled out a bit of paper, a diocalate 
wrapping, from the convenient safari pockets, while 
Herbert thrust his pencil into my hands, and started a 
swift scrawl to Mr. Akeley telling him to hurry with 
the camera as we had come up to three gorillas— 4nd 
at that moment I crossed out the three and wrote four. 

The note was passed back to a porter who was 
ordered to go, paci/, pacy, a short cut to camp to bring 
Bwana Akeley with his camera here. 

It was just twelve-thirty. The sun was out and the 
light would be good for five hours, and if the gorillas 
were not hurried or frightened there was every chance 
of coming up to them. 

One after another, not running, but with quickness 
for all their seeming clumsiness, the four gorillas went 
on under the trees, looking back constantly in that ter- 
ribly human way. Then they disappeared. 

It was hard not to keep after them. We settled down 
in a thicket that commanded a view of the meadow, 
with our boy Aluma, who had been carrying my gun, 
beside us, and sent the men farther back on the path. 
While we watched we saw two or three of the gorillas 
appear in the opening into the glades beyond and cross 
back and forth, apparently feeding. We could see them 
124 




-B^^r'^?', 


'^^'K^^': 




• ,.' "'^ 




^i"' " 







UuiiLLA Bed and T%> 



A GORILLA BAND 

rery distinctly against the golden green of the meadow, 
for the opening was then flooded with sun. 

Poor Aliuna could not understand our inaction. He 
put his hand on the gun on my knee and tried to urge 
me forward. He could see no mortal reason in streak- 
ing through the forest for hours, stung by nettles and 
stiff with fatigue, if, after you caught up to your game, 
yani did nothing about it but sit down and look. 

Some minutes later he caught my arm excitedly, 
whispered, "Kuhwa" (big one), and pointed to the 
woods in front of us, not to the left where the others 
bad gone. We could see nothing but the waving of 
some faraway bushes, which might have meant antelope. 
Aluma insisted that he had seen a big one, and we were 
whispering about that, in checkered English and Swa- 
hili, when squarely out of the woods at our right a 
gorilla came in a great hurry and streaked through the 
bushes into the meadows beyond, like a half -submerged 
nibmarine plowing through green waves. 

All I could see was the great black hulk and swinging 
arms — the sunlight on the back was deceiving, but it 
seemed to me gray. The females are black while Uie 
males have the distinguishing silvery hairs. After the 
gorilla had disappeared, we heard several barks, like 
exaggerated dog barks. 

At any rate, there were five gorillas, six, if Aluma 
KKild be trusted, feeding there just out of sight, and 
we kept looking from the forest to our watches and mak- 
ing futile estimates of the porter's speed, and the time 
of Mr. Akeley's arrivaL 

We sent Aluma back to the others and Herbert and 
125 




UuBiLLA Bed xhd Tmjul 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

I proceeded to lunch somewhat sketchily upon chocoUite 
and cold beans. Once more we saw the black dots cross 
the opening, far ahead this time, and we thought d 
preserving our bean can for Mr. Heinz as tiie only 
variety eaten in sight of a wild gorilla. 

After an hour, Herbert went back to start another 
runner on the way. As I sat scooping up the beans I 
saw something begin to materialize on the slopes to the 
left and got a glimpse of black coming down the hill 
before it disappeared into the welter of hushes below. 
It might hare been one of the former band or it mi{^t 
hare been a new one. 

At any rate I had a strong conriction that the place 
was boiling with gorillas, and I took a cautious look to 
see if my Springfield was on Ready and not on Safe. 
And then I heard a noise at my extreme right. 

It was a very loud noise. It soimded just on the 
other side of the thicket. 

The only way I could see at that angle was to rise 
and look orer the top. . . . The crackhng came 
again. . . , Something was coming. ... I hastily re- 
called that little bit about gorilla hunting which told 
that the gorilla inrariably paused in its adrance to 
beat its breast and roar, and the hunter was advised to 
hold his fire until a desirable nearness had been ob- 
tained. 

The question at the moment was what constituted 
a desirable nearness. The stealthy, twig-snapping 
sounded quite near enough, although there had been no 
preamble of warning roars. And the reach of the 
gorilla's arms was considerably longer than my own. 
126 



A GORILLA BAND 

I bad a sudden vision of that arm of the big bull of 
Karisimbi . . . and I remembered another little bit 
about the derisive way the gorilla was said to have of 
snatching away your weapon and snapping the barrel 
just for exhibition purposes, before dealing its death- 
blows. 

I did all this remembering in about an instant of 
time, while I was rising out of the thicket, my gun 
pointed. In that instant I got the keenest thrills of 
gorilla hunting that I experienced. 

I looked out, expecting to see something big and 
black. ... A sort of partridge whirred up. . . . 

I sat down and finished the beans in my reaction, and 
when Herbert came back there were no beans but 
merely an episode. 

At two-thirty Mr. Akeley arrived with Miss Miller 
and the camera, accompanied by the guides who had 
been sent back by their sultan in great displeasure at 
their having abandoned the white man before he was 
through with his work. Good old Burungal Mr. 
Akeley certainly endowed him for life with backsheesh. 
We wondered how much of it the guides themselves 
ever got. 

We had heard the gorillas an hour before the guides 
arrived and I had seen that lone one within the hour, so 
we knew we were not far behind them, and we started 
out with high hopes. But we reckoned without the 
guides. They did not start along the traiL Instead, 
as they knew the country, they skirted the high edges 
and half an hour later cut down into the woods at a 
place where they hoped the gorillas would be — ^but the 
127 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

gorillas had been traveling. The guides struck tiK 
trail in the meadow and, instead of going on, followed 
it back to the very place where we had first seen them. 

It is very difficult to determine which way a gorilla 
is going, for the dense vegetation shows no m»ks of 
hands and feet, and you are chiefly guided by the swath 
that his great body makes in the bu^es and the broken 
stalks of the plants he has been feeding upon. 

It was then three-thirty and we had lost an hour. 
Aluma, who had been yearning to distinguish himself 
by guiding, was nearly weeping with rage, and I sym- 
pathized with his more direct methods. Now we fol- 
lowed the trail forward and wandered on and on, up 
and down, circling great clumps of trees, and winding 
in and out of dense shrubbery. 

There were fresh marks on the trail, also other, and 
older, ones. We passed many gorilla beds, some old, 
some recent. The gorilla makes a very simple sort of 
nest for sleeping — a scratched-together, temporary 
aflfair, which he is under no pains to keep clean. There 
was no skill shown in the construction of the nest; very 
often, but not necessarily, it took advantage of some 
hollow at the base of a tree. 

The trail we were following became more and more 
strenuous. The gorillas showed supreme disregard for 
impediments; they had an undergroxmd way of sliding 
through tangled tree roots or tunneling under branches 
that was distinctly hard on our hands and knees, but 
the excitement of the chase sustained us, and we stooped 
and slid and tunneled as fast as we could. 

As hope waned, our criticism of the gorilla's wander- 
128 



A GORILLA BAND 

ng and incondusive habits deepened bitterly. He was 
instable, erratic, and capricious 1 If he wanted to get 
mywbere why on earth didn't he go there, instead of 
-ambling and whipsawing all over a mountainside I 

Along the way we kept seeing single trails branching 
>£f as one after another of the band abandoned the 
nain trail, but the guides were not to be diverted, not 
iven when we passed a muddy way, where the print of 
■eeent knuckles and feet were clearly shown. It was 
he first print of a gorilla I had seen since the day 
Herbert and I had followed the mud chute up the Mis- 
aon forests. Here in the highlands there were no other 
laths where the earth ^owed through the greenery to 
-ereal a mark. 

We were rather inclined to this clearly defined spoor, 
nit the guides held to the main thoroughfare and by 
ind by I began to understand the reason why, for along 
he way they visited their native snares — a bent pole 
¥ith a loop for imwary antelope. I was nearly caught 
n one of them myself, but otherwise there were none of 
hem sprung. 

The fact that the natives came up to these forests for 
vood and for these snares armed only with their spears 
&owed that they were not in great fear of being at- 
acked by the gorillas. I heard of only one case of a 
(orilla attacking a native here. That was of a wood- 
nitter who was working obliviously when a gorilla 
iprang out and bit him furiously in the leg, then flung 
iway again, without fuiiher attack. The man, for- 
unately, was too terrified to make any attempt to de- 
fend himself. He afterwards recovered, and the 
129 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

incident certainly did not prevent his fellows from 
coming as freely as before into the woods — any mem 
than a seizure by crocodiles keeps the blacks out of tiw 
rivers. 

The sky was growing darker, with swift gusts of 
rain. The hope of a picture was gone and the guides 
were now hurrying along a path that clearly led to the 
camp. 

It was very thou^ful of the gorillas. We could 
see no signs of their travel on that way, but the guides 
insisted that they had followed the trail persistent^, 
only just in front of the camp the gorillas had left ihc 
trail and gone down a precipitous cliff across to the 
opposite mountain. 

Perhaps they had. At any rate the picture hunt wu 
over. It had been a vain chase for Mr. Akeley and 
Miss Miller who had not had the sustaining excitement 
of seeing the band in the first place. But if the gorillas 
were aloof, the exercise, Martha assured us gayly, had 
been unlimited. Martha had a pluck and cheer that 
no climb or cUmate daunted. 

The loss of the picture chance was not as disappoint- 
ing as it would have been if Mr. Akeley had not thready 
realized the dream with which he had brought his camera 
up to the mountains, for he had secured some hundreds 
of feet of motion picture film of wild gorillas — the 
first motion pictures of savage gorillas ever taken. He 
wanted to supplement this with more gorilla film and 
on another day, with Mr. Bradley, he came on a band, 
with some big males, that he was able to photograph. 

To Herbert and myself it had been a wonderful day. 
180 



A GORILLA BAND 

I had seen six gorillas, one of them, at least, axid protn 
ably two, the demon male, and five gorillas had cer- 
tainly seen us. And we bad not been attacked on sight. 
Not one had beat his breast or roared or tried to ambush 
us I That is our evidence, as far as it goes. When 
wounded or cornered the gorilla would be as terrible 
an antagonist as a giant of such strength and intelli- 
gence would naturally be, but we had no reason in the 
world to beheve that the gorilla hunts man, or attacks 
him unprovoked, or carries off women as in the good 
old story book tales. 

Here in the mountains tiie natives were constantly 
going up into the forests frequented by the gorillas and 
^et I heard only one story of attack — that of the wood- 
cutter in the bamboos — and that might have been some 
youthful gorilla's idea of a prank, or the ape might 
have been taken by surprise and beheved himself at- 
tacked. We never heard of any of the native shambas 
being raided by the gorillas, for here the gorilla food — 
the wild carrot and parsley and fresh succulent green 
growth of the high lands — was extraordinarily plenti- 
ful, and, below the upper forest, were the bamboos 
whose fresh green tips were always in season. The 
gorilla is a strict vegetarian like the elephant and 
buffalo — three of the four most dangerous animals of 
Africa, It behooves one to walk softly with vege- 
tarians I 

Altogether Mr. Akeley's belief in the essential char- 
acter of the gorilla was justified. He was simply 
th<; iHg numkey, the man ape, powerful beyond all 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL | 

words, dangerous when attacked, but not s bit tiie 
hellish demon or the malignant arch fiend t 

There is no excuse for keeping the gorilla on flw 
game lists. He is too valuable and too rare to be ex- 
terminated. He ought to have his own preserves and 
official protection on his mountain heights and if he 
doesn't have them, and that soon, he will go the way 
that so many great beasts have gone — ^the way that 
all are going fast now in Africa. We estinuted that 
not more than seventy-five or a hundred of the gorillas 
exist in those mountains. Though our licenses gave us 
ten gorillas, we killed only the five necessary for the 
Museiim group. 

It is extraordinary that the gorillas are not more 
numerous in this area for, until the last years brou^t 
the hunters I have mentioned, the great apes were en- 
tirely unmolested. They breed undisturbed, but evi- 
dently they do not breed very fast — or else srane un- 
known cause of mortality keeps the numbers down. 
That can hardly be credited, for there was not a hint of 
disease in any gorilla dissected; nor was a solitary 
parasite found in any gorilla, nor yet on a gorilla. Their 
hair was as soft and pure and free from insects as a 
freshly tubbed pet kitten. It is all the more astonish- 
ing when you think of the literal millions of ticks that 
are on lions and elephants and buffaloes and rhinos, and 
apparently every other jungle creature. Famine seems 
as much out of the question as disease, for if the food of 
these upland meadows failed, the gorilla had only to 
descend to the bamboo forests below where he would 
find plenty of fresh shoots. The fact that the gorilla 
182 



A GORILLA BAND 

had never gone down to the native shambas showed that 
food had not been a problem. Lacking any other fac- 
tors in the situation, it must simply be that the rate of 
increase is extremely slow. As far as is known the 
births are always single. The mother that Mr. Akeley 
photographed had two little ones with her of much the 
same size and from that one might conjecture them to 
be twins, but it would be sheer conjecture — no record 
of gorilla twins is known. 

Their longevity is said to be greater than that of man. 
Mr. Bams thought that his male gorilla had lived a 
hundred years, but he was frankly voicing a possibility. 
Mr. Akeley was inclined to think that the age limit was 
more nearly that of man. This question would be one 
of the interesting things that could be determined by 
an experiment station of naturalists in gorilla land. 

The organization seems to be the band rather than 
the family; our experience that noon and, later, the 
experience of Mr. Akeley and Mr. Bradley with a large 
band on the slopes of Mikeno, showed that the group 
might consist of two or more males with a larger pro- 
portion of females. The question arises whether those 
bands consisted of two or more respectable monogamous 
couples and their marriageable daughters — maiden 
gorillas yet unculled by roving gallants — or whether it 
consisted of a couple of gorilla gentlemen and their re- 
spective harems or of imassorted and liberally inclined 
ladies and gentlemen. . . . We can only offer the 
situation, not the solution. 

The gorilla sleeps on beds and not in trees as do the 
chimpanzees in bamboos, and whether they use the 
188 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

trees at all, except to climb up a slantmg trunk to t 
crotch, is a question which our evidence would have to 
answer in the negative. Mr. Akeley saw gorillas in 
the crotches of trees and so did the P^e Van Hoef, bnt 
that simply means that the great apes had climbed vp 
to a comfortable perch as a youngster climbs. It would 
be impossible for them to swing through the trees like 
their monkey kin, for the enormous weight of tbe 
beasts makes that legend tmtenable. Very few brandiei 
could support from three to foiu* himdred pounds I 

The tremendous strength of the gorilla is a mystery. 
Where does he get it and why does he have it? Not in 
a necessary circumstance of his life does he use it now. 
Those great shoulders and bulging arm muscles that 
could crush a lion have no more arduous work than 
breaking off wild parsley and scratching together 
branches for a nest. 

The morning after our experience with the band, Mr. 
Akeley and Mr. Bradley planned to go back after pic- 
tures and ran onto a band on the slopes of Mikeno 
while Martha Miller and I went down the mountain to 
rejoin Alice and PriscUIa HalL We made the descent 
in five and a half hours, with a constantly increasing 
wonder at ourselves that we ever made \he ascent at alL 

Out from the Mission an excited little girl with flying 
curls came racing to meet us and PrisciUa had cooling 
lime juice ready for us, then a midday meal that was 
the height of luxury — roast chicken and green com 
from Burunga, and Cape gooseberries, strawberries 
and bananas from the Fathers* gardens; then came hot 
baths and clean clothes, and another dinner that ni{^t 
134 



A GORILLA BAND 

■t the hospiUble Fathers'. Lastly we slept in our white- 
washed room with thatched roofs and mud floors with 
a sense of comfortable homecfmiing. 

We had attained our objective — ^tbat high triangle 
fviiich we had believed covered with bamboos and which 
^ored such an enchanted forest — and we should al- 
ways carry with us a picture of the wonderland of those 
bidden heights, the great, cloud-wrapped forests and 
Hieir giant denizens. 

It had been worth it all; the heart-breaking climb, 
the cold, the discomforts were merely incidents, a price 
one paid gladly — especially in retrospect! — for the rare 
experience of seeing gorillas in their savage sohtudes. 



CHAPTER X 

the pygmies come to camp 
Thanksgitino With the White Fathers 

The Batwa were coining. The Pygmies, the fugitive 
little forest dwellers, were coming to our camp. 

A hasty message from the White Fathers brou^ 
the word, and I was so afraid that they would change 
their fugitive little forest minds that I seized Alice, our 
star attraction with the natives, and with Martha and 
Priscilla hurried to meet them. 

Frer since we had reached Lulenga, before we westt 
up the mountains after gorillas, we bad been trying 
through the kindly offices of the White Fathers to get 
the Batwa to come in. They are the forest dwarfs, the 
descendants, in all probability, of those little bushmen 
who succeeded the kin of the Neanderthal giants, and 
who, a hundred thousand years ago, while Europe lay 
under glacial ice, were covering the rocks of Africa 
with their delicate paintings and drawings. 

They were nomads, shy, suspicious, often at war with 
the blacks. Later, in Uganda, we found that the Pygmy 
raids from the forest had wiped out the population of 
the southern shores of Lake Bunyoni, and though the 
British had conducted a punitive expedition against 
the Batwa, the natives did not settle there again. But 
here the relation between the dwarfs and the Banya- 



THE PYGMIES COME TO CAMP 

ruanda, the inhabitants of this region, was friendly, 
even to intermarriage, and the White Fathers had 
induced the chief to send into the forest for the Batwa, 
with a promise of salt from us for each one that would 
ccsne in. 

Mr. Akeiey and Mr. Bradley were still on Mikeno, 
planning to reach camp by noon, for it was Thanksgiv- 
ing Day, and as we hurried along towards the Mission 
we felt an anxious pang for fear the retiring Batwa 
would not stay to meet the men and be recorded in the 
motion pictures. 

We might hare spared that pang. Ahead of us we 
saw coming, not the shy two or three, advancing cau- 
tiously from bush to bush as our fancy had pictured, 
but an actual procession pouring along like a pilgrim- 
age, clapping and singing and followed by a mob of 
curious natives. 

Martha and I exchanged bewilderment. Were these 
our shrinking Batwa? . . . It could not be. 

It was the Batwa. Men, women, and children, the 
tribe of them was making holiday to see the strange 
white women and the child with the long, fair curls — 
and to receive the promised salt. Short, stocky little 
dwarfs they were, with round heads which had the effect 
of being driven too deeply between their shoulders, clad 
simply in leather aprons, the women supplementing the 
aprons with copper wire anklets and a head wreath of 
flowers, the men carrying bows and arrows. The chil-> 
dren were unencumbered. 

TSat that that was any distinction. No little African 
lias to be careful of his clothes. 
187 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

They poured into the cleared space before us aafl 
ringed Alice in, chattering their mookeylike cli(^ and 
grunts, and then they danced. They danced like mad 
for three hours. We tried to get them to wait till the 
Bwanas had come down the mountain, but no, the spirit 
was on them, and they clapped and sang and jaxied in 
oblivious excitement, while all the natives in the Tidni^ 
gathered and clapped with them, and in that pandemo- 
nium we finished breakfast and the preparation tar 
Thanksgiving dinner. 

When the men finally appeared, our Batwa had 
exhausted their first fine frenzy. For the sake of tiie 
salt, of which they are inordinately fond, they repeated 
the dance, but it was a much less spirited affair. 

These were the Batwa of the forests of the volcanoes. 
The name Batwa — Mutwa in the singular — means 
simply "Little Men." We had heard of three Batwa 
peoples in the Bastem Congo, the tribes in the Ruwen- 
zori forests, a tribe upon the Island of Kwijwi, the 
largest island on Lake Kivu, and these of the Eastern 
forests. The Kwijwi and Ruwenzori Batwa are identi- 
cal with the true Pygmies, from which all the Batwa are 
generally held to be descended; these of the M'fumbiro 
region present the dwarfish characteristics — the roimded 
head, the big eyes, the broad-rooted nose — ^but inter- 
marriage with the friendly Banyanianda, the neighbor- 
ing tribe, has undoubtedly modified the stock, especially 
in the matter of height. 

The Duke of Mecklenburg reported that he found 

these Batwa much taller than he expected, some were 

four feet seven, some even four feet eleven. We found 

188 



THE PYGMIES COME TO CAMP 

some men about that heigM — and in one case we found 
that there had been intermarriage in that family with the 
family of a negro diief — but other men were barely ova: 
four feet high, and the women, who were the ugliest 
creatures that I saw in Africa, were smaller, squat, and 
thick. We did not try to measure them for fear of 
intimidating them, but we had Alice stand by them, and 
measured the difference. Alice's height was three feet 
eight inches and there were women with children on their 
backs who were no taller and two much shorter. Their 
color was black, warm-toned, and many of the men 
seemed hairier than the negroes. 

Their origin and history are part of the mystery of 
Africa. They say of themselves tiiat they were "always 
here," the oldest inhabitants of the region. It has been 
considered a sign of the comparatively recent origin of 
the Bantu tribes that they live upon imported grains, 
while the forest dwarfs subsist on native fare. When 
there is a famine, as there was after the Great War, the 
Negro tribes die in millions, but the Batwa with their 
spears and bows and poisoned arrows rove the jungles 
and find food. They eat birds, rodents, and small game ; 
ants and caterpillars are not disdained; and nuts and 
berries and the roots of ordinary trees are helpful. Dr. 
Van den Bergh, a White Father of Uganda who jour- 
neyed to the Congo forests west of Albert Nyanza, 
stated that there they ate only the meat which tbe forest 
supplied and which was killed by themselves, or at the 
killing of which they had assisted, or at least had shared 
in the tracking, but this is not true of the Batwa of 
South Africa. There, General Smuts told me, the little 
189 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

men live often upon carrion, and one would lie out in 
the bush for hours, his unwinking eyes fixed upon the 
vultures high overhead, invisible to other eyes less keen; 
and when the vultures sighted a dying animal or a lion's 
kill, and began sailing towards it, the bushman would 
jump up and run to it, and after the lions taid jackals 
had feasted would creep in and pick the bones. 

A man known to General Smuts had put out a carrion 
bait and Iain in wait, and so had succeeded in capturing 
two Pygmy children. He kept them six months, but in 
spite of all he could do, they pined and sickened and, 
for fear that they would die, he let them go. 

The Batwa were all nomads, ranging their forests, 
building temporary huts of twigs and brandies, and 
seldom staying in them longer than two weeks. They 
cultivated no fields, no shambas ; they traded a little with 
the natives, usually for tobacco. Like all the natives 
of the re^on the men carried black clay pipes with 
wooden stems; these pipes were very finely made with 
something of the style and finish of the old Dutch ones. 
They obtained most of these pipes from a native of the 
vicinity who made them, but the Batwa East of Ejvu 
did make unglazed pottery of their own, either black or 
red, of which we had obtained some samples through 
the administrators we had met. 

Far from being excruciatingly shy they became so 
interested in us and our domestic details that they were 
underfoot like inquisitive kittens, and Herbert hastened 
to present them with the promised salt. We gave each 
one a good tablespoonful and a bowlful to the chief. 
The duef showed a strong sense of honesty, for he 
140 




A NiCllT OK THE Si 



THE PYGMIES COME TO CAMP 

brougbt back three women who had not danced for us 
and made them give up their salt. We then presented 
saJt to the native chief who had induced them to come 
in, and shook hands ceremoniously with all the chiefs 
we were sure of, and several who seemed to be sure of 
themselves, and wished them all "Kwaheri." Then, rest 
in camp being merely change of occupation, the porters 
were lined up and paid o£F, with all the promised back- 
sheesh. And then we had a real dance. 

The porters started down the slope, turned suddenly, 
with a shout of song that rose and fell like hammer- 
strokes, and came up the hill to us, their four headmen 
in the lead. I never saw men dance as those men danced. 
All their joy at release, their triumph of danger over- 
come, their exultation at fortunes made and the wives 
to buy, was in that leaping, stamping orgy. Four times 
they surged up to us and four times receded, a marvel of 
wild and savage motion. 

Thanksgiving dinner was on the porch of the mud 
house. It was a day like June, with only a sprinkle of 
rain — Thanksgiving with roses blooming and volcanoes 
glowing. Thanksgiving with chicken instead of turkey, 
and strawberries and Cape gooseberries from the Mis- 
sion instead of cranberries, with green com from Burun- 
ga's shambas, and plum pudding instead of pumpkin 
pie — plum pudding with a sauce that does not exist now 
within the three-mile limit, creamy and buttery and 
f fragrant I 

We had two dinners, the family affair at two o'clock, 
and another at seven to which we invited the White 
Fathers. Think of saying tranquilly to your cook, 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

"Two dinners to-day — ^the first for six people, and tf( 
second for ten, uid six courses to each dinner 1'* 

It did seem to us a fairly full day for the bjtcliai, but 
we did not know our cook. 

A six-course dinner — soup, diicken, potatoes, aapuir 
gus and com, salad, pudding, cheese, crackers, coffee, 
nuts, and candy . . . and four guests. . . . Only six 
courses. Well, he was a Congo cook. He had semd 
the chef de paste at Kissenyi, and he would save us &om 
ourselves and our shame if it could be done. 

Heaven knows how he gathered the oddments of haof 
and flour and lard and unreliable eggs — ^if I had known 
his intentions I would have given him the keys and let 
him do his best and not his worst — but out of his clan- 
destine this and that and what-not, he supplemented 
those six courses with six others of his own and served a 
meal that satisfied his ideas of state. 

He gave us croquettes of the beef of yesteryear, and 
vegetables matriculated from the soup; he gave us pie 
of cooking fat and discarded citrons with a meringe of 
hoarded eggs I He alternated his courses with the 
courses of our selection, but not in order, so that ^e 
green corn came after the dessert, but it all came, course 
after course, each with the complete change of plates 
and knives and forks, and a harrowing wait for the 
washing of those plates and knives and forks. 

Night deepened, stars brif^tened, volcanoes glowed 
redder and redder. Candles spluttered and burned out 
and were replenished. Conversation, our French con- 
versation, spluttered, too, in those awful waits, then 
revived in gales of laughter. 
142 



THE PYGMIES COME TO CAMP 

And stQl ibe boys came, serving and serving. . . . 

And one of them served, in honor of the occasion, in 
ihc imion suit that Mr. Akeley had given him on the 
gorilla mountains to supplement his shirt and khaki 
shorts. Then he had worn it invisibly, as custom pre- 
scribes for imion suits, but in these warmer regions Leo 
did not need so much clothing and discarded the shirt 
and trousers for the newest thing. Anything quainter 
than that sketchily buttoned union suit passing the pota- 
toes I have never beheld. Never, when buying tiie 
garment in New York, had Mr. Akeley contemplated 
its appearance behind his dining-room chair I 

The other boy, Mablanga, had gone to the other 
extreme. He had trousers, a coat but no shirt, and he 
pinned his coat scrupulously across and woimd about 
his neck a woolen mi^er. 

Merrick, the wash boy, aided the festivities prettily 
attired in pink pajamas donated by Miss Miller. 

And then Aluma, an unpopular young tent boy, the 
one with us during the gorilla hunt who shirked so badly 
that be was in disfavor even with our easy-going lot, 
suddenly appeared on the edge of the outer darkness and 
in a horridly exa^erated croak from mountain colds, 
like that of a dying frog, insisted upon enumerating the 
sorrows of his life to our guests who spoke his language. 

At the conclusion of the whining recital they waved 
him majestically away and all the translation their 
politeness gave us was that he was dissatisfied with the 
climate and the gorillas and that the other boys made 
war on him. 

He deserved war and we sent him bat^ to Kissenyi 
148 






ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

next day. Discharge is simple in the Congo. Tl 
reckon the time it will take ihe boy to walk back to 
place you brought him from and give him thirty ce 
for each week of the way. If a boat or train is to 
had, you give him the native fare. 

Our Thanksgiving evening concluded finally w 
games and gayety — and then from midnight to momi 
we devoted ourselves to packing and to the arranj 
ments for another expedition on which we plumed 
start the next day. 



CHAPTER XI 

a night in a crater 

The Ascension of Mount Nfamlagiba* 
Afsica's Most Active Volcano 

Fob weeks there had been the glare of volcanoes on 
IT horizon. We were in the most active volcanic region 
t Africa, the scene of the most recent upheavals. Here, 
orth of Kivu, the great Central African Rift Valley, 
hich stretches between the mountain walls from the 
mthem end of Lake Tanganyika over Lakes Kivu and 
Jbert Edward to Albert Nyanza, had been dammed at 
>me not distant — ^geologically speaking — date by the 
iirsting up of the M'fumbiro group of volcanoes, and 
le waters of Kivu were thus cut ofiF from the Nile 
asin, and raised to the remarkable hei^^t of nearly five 
lousand feet. 

The ei^t great volcanoes fall into three groups: 
abinio, Mgahinga, and Muhavura stretch east, one 
ehind the other; Mikeno, Earisimbi, and Visoke, our 
Id gorilla friends, form a central triangle; and, on the 
'estem side of the valley rise the separate slopes of 
lianinagongo and Xyamla^ra, the only ones that are 
ow active. All the others have been so long extinct 
lat the natives have no knowledge of them as fire moun- 
lios except Muhavura. There the natives refer to an 
ruptive fine upon the mountainside as "Kabiranjuma" 
the Last Boiler). 

145 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

From the lava flooded floor of the Bift Valley, Boaft 
and east of Xyamlagira, rise innumerable little cchks, 
many of which have been active or come into being 
within very recent years, stnne as late as 1013, quiet dov, 
their rocky sides beginning to green with lichm. Gtaxa- 
nagongo and Nyamlagira were the only guardians of 
the restless Are and over their flattened crater tops the 
clouds of steam himg rosy tinted. 

Chaninagongo smoked but sli^tly, but from Nyam- 
lagira went up a cloud of steam by day, and by nigbt a 
crimson blaze seen a hundred miles away. It was the 
most active volcano in Africa, probably in the known 
world, and no one had ever made the ascent since the 
last outbreak of Are. 

In ld04 it had begun to be active; in 1905 WoUaston 
reported a jet of steam escaping from the southern 
slopes; in 1007 Kirschstein of Mecklenburg's expedition 
witnessed eruptions and made the ascent to the crater. 
For some time then it smoked heavily, as far as we could 
learn; Monsieur Van de Ghiniste, the Belgian Conunis- 
sioner at Ruchuru, got up once to the summit but could 
see nothing on account of the clouds of smoke and 
fumes. Then fire broke out and no one had been up 
since that last eruption. 

Its ascent was now considered impossible on account 
of the fumes, but from the Mikeno camp Mr. Akeley had 
noted that the wind blew steadily southwest, so the other 
side seemed safe. There was difficulty in approaching 
that side as the moimtain was encircled by a great lava 
field, an outpouring from a tiny cone in the valley floor. 
146 



A NIGHT IN A CRATER 

Vubile was its native name, but after the eruption they 
called it "Chamunaniyo" (they shall not pass). 

That lava field \raa a mass of broken, porous rocks — 
dmmed-about blocks like dynamited pyramids. Plants 
were finding rootage, and the low waving branches of 
' gnen gave it the air of a field, but it was a desperate 
tiling to scramble over, and practically impassable for 
porters with loads. 

But P^ Van Hoef knew that the natives knew a 
way across to the opposite forests and when we decided 
to ascend the volcano, he got us guides and porters, 
though he had his doubts about the porters making any 
ascent. The day after Thanksgiving Day, Mr. Akeley, 
Miss Miller, the two Bradleys, and about forty luckless 
natives wound down through the banana groves, past 
the huts, and stuped to pick their way over the lava 
field. 

It was the world's worst going. The porters made 
grass sandals for their feet, and clung to stout sticks. 
They began to yearn volubly for hcmie. 

In the Congo your worst fears are never realized. 
Something that you didn't fear happens instead. We 
had expected a beating midday sun upon that lava plain 
— we got a freezing storm of sleet and hail, and the 
haU was literally the size of hen's eggs — Congo eggs. 
The Bradley raincoats were on the head of the porter 
somewhere out of reach— the porter with your personal 
belongings is always as elusive as Peter Pan, while the 
one with dried beans is always close at hand — so we had 
reached a shivering saturation point by the time we 
found shelter. 

147 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

We made camp in a glade on the lover slopes U 
Nyamlagira, and then for two days those guides led ui 
round and round that mountain — anywhere but up. 

The sides were cleft with fissures and ravines, so that 
we had plenty of climbing to do, and ihey must han 
cherished the fond hope that if they exercised us suffl* 
ciently we would call it an excursion and go hcKue. Tbef 
had a violent aversion to approaching the crater, and an 
equally poignant sentiment against walking up iJk 
mountainside on an elephant track with our luggage oo 
their beads. 

Our second camp was in the jungle, in forests utterfy 
unlike the gorilla forests of Mikeno and EarisimU. 
There were no evidences of gorillas here, and none of 
their food. There were elephants, and we ran into tbcm 
on the march. We heard them quite near. The green 
was too dense to see. We waited; there was a profound 
stillness, the snappings and rumbUngs ceased and the 
cessation told that the elephants had seen us and were 
waiting, too. 

Then some branches cracked. The porters pitched 
their loads — one of the loads being Mr. Akeley's pre- 
cious camera — and fled. Mr. Akeley shot at random, 
and the result was what he hoped for: the elephants 
crashed off. I got a glimpse of a gray back that looked 
as high as a bam. We woidd have liked an elephant 
hunt, but we could not take time from the ascent. 

The third day the porters decided to stop. They 

decided it every hour. At last Mr. Akeley got the 

kilangozi, the headman, far enough in advance to be 

out of ear shot and drove him up, while we shepherdedi 

148 



A NIGHT IN A CRATER 

the rest, like reluctant chamois. One or two bolted, but 
the others struggled up the elephant trail, through the 
jungle, on through barren heights of sparse grass till 
we found a camping place about half an hour's climb 
trora the summit. We weighted the tents down with 
lava rock and the porters made huts of grass. 

Mr. Akeley went up ahead to the crater, then went 
up again with us about four-thirty. Martha and I went 
hand in band to share whatever distinction there was in 
being the first women to put our heads over Nyamla- 
gira's fire. 

We stood on the brink of a great crater about eight 
miles in circumference. We looked down into a colossal 
dbasm blown out by three separate eruptions — ^table 
lands and bastion walls,cinder slopes and spouting steam 
and billowing sulphur clouds — a wild, demoniac place 
that was as beautiful and mad as a volcano ought to be. 

The fire came from the third crater, the only active 
one. We could see the glow and we made our way for 
three quarters of an hour about the summit, over jagged 
lava, until we could look through a break in the inner 
walls into the pit of boiUng lava from which came the 
explosions that thundered up like the roaring of surf. 
It was a gorgeous sight — the fire of the very heart of 
the world at our feet and all about ethereal distance 
and great mountains melting into space. 

East of us, across the wide valley, were Mikeno and 
Karisimbi, purple peaks with clouds streaming like 
banners from their pinnacles, and Visoke, the third 
mountain of the gorilla triangle, just visible on the left, 
and yet farther to the left Sabinio, Mgahinga, Muha- 
140 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

vura, so directly in line that they seemed one mountm 
Karisimbi was the highest of all — 14,638 feet — and • 
faint sprinkling of snow was powdering its peak. 

Northwards stretched the valley, a shadowy readi df 
forest and lava plains, guarded east and west by dm 
tain ranges; south were the slopes of Chaninagongm 
and across from us, like an azure doud against the 
crater's black edge, lay distant KiviL 

We looked too long. The sun set, nigfat swooped 
down like a bat, and up the mountainsides rolled en- 
veloping white cotton clouds of fog. We tried to save 
time by taking an obhque way down to camp and for 
three hours we floundered in fog and blackness and 
rocks and ravines and brush. 

It rained. It poured. We huddled under a faudi 
until the fury of the storm was spent, feeling we woe 
taking refuge in a watercourse, so tremendous a fall 
of water washed down that moxmtain's sides. Then 
we kept moving to keep warm. Ultimately an answer- 
ing "hallo" from camp brought us down to our wel- 
coming boys who were fairly pallid with fear that the 
devils of the volcano had us I 

The night ended in hot chocolate and dry dressing 
gowns. We had brought but one change of clothes on 
this volcanic expedition and both my suits had now 
been caught out in storms and hung dripping from a 
line in my tent. It seemed to me the next morning that 
they were wetter than when I had hung them up for 
the mountain dew had condensed like additional rain. 
I hesitated between them, but there was small choice. 
Anyone who knows the delight of drawing on a wet 
150 



A NIGHT IN A CRATER 

bathing suit on a dully sunless morning knows the sen- 
sation. Yet we never had a cold nor felt the least ill 
^ect from this dampness. 

We went up to the crater next morning, planning to 
spend the night at the point on the summit where we 
had stood the nig^t before. We sent some porters to 
the left to carry firewood and a chop box and some 
blankets and bags to that place and a piece of canvas 
for protection, and we ourselves, with other porters car- 
rying our cameras, started on an exploration trip to 
the right. We made our way slowly along the rim, at 
first over upthmst rocks which made the going fright- 
fully difficult; then we reached a place quite smooth 
with cinders, and marched until a dip in the rim enabled 
us to climb down to the level of an older crater floor, 
billowing Trfiite with clouds from yellow and green 
sulphur beds. 

Three distinct eruptions had blown the interior of 
the crater into three giant abysses separated by bastion- 
like walls of rock, stratified and colored like a mammoth 
layer cake. Almost in the center rose a citadel rock — 
the "Castle," we called it, amber in the sun. The ter- 
race on which we gained admission to the interior was 
an old crater fioor, blown up by the more recent erup- 
tions; it was ominously hollow sounding and we started 
across it with commendable prudence, clinging to a 
rope and testing every step. But after we found the 
crust supporting and the sulphur beds harmless, we 
grew fairly blase. 

That terrace ended abruptly in a clifflike drop with 
cinder slopes and fiats far below; we skirted the edge 
151 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 



1 



until we found a place from which we could clamber 
down to a little ledge, boulder strewn and wann witii 
issuing steam jets, leading to the left; to the ri^t ft 
long cinder slope stretched down toward the boiling 
lava; we saw that the cinders ended in another drop. 
A brief rain overtook us here and the unhappy earners 
attendants found opportune refuge among the boul- 
ders and warm recesses. Then we retraced our steps 
across the flats to the break in the rim, and contimied 
the circimif erence of the main crater. 

We estimated later that it was about eight miles 
around the crater. The Chaninagongo crater ^t^iidi 
has been several times ascended is held to be Ave miles 
around. For a time our way was up and down among 
cinders and boulders; then the rain, and this time a real 
rain, overtook us, and we found shelter in a huge cave, 
full of interesting stalactites. There was a warm cave 
next to it which attracted our camera bearers. As soon 
as it cleared we completed the journey, now over cin- 
ders, now over rough porous lava rock, tiU late in the 
afternoon we reached the place on the eastern side from 
which the night before we had looked down into the 
blazing lava between the portals of high rock. 

That night we camped there, beside a boulder, be- 
neath a canvas stretching from the boulder to tiie 
ground, weighted down with rock. The porters de- 
scended to the base camp, gladdened with a franc 
apiece for backsheesh, and after we had watched the 
distant fire and photographed it, we laid us down to 
sleep upon lava rocks lightly overlaid with torn up 
grass. 

152 



A NIGHT IN A CRATER 

It was a cold nij^t. We had dressed elaborately for 
it, discarding nothing and adding everything in the 
line of sweaters and raincoats that we had. It was none 
too much. That we slept was due to the day's gener- 
ous exercise rather than any cooperation on the part of 
the rocky beds ''and the weather. 

Sunrise was a gleam of gold behind amethystine 
peaks, and a sea of cloud rolling through the valleys. 
During breakfast our porters appeared with water and 
firewood, faithful to the rendezvous, although from the 
new faces among them we judged several originals were 
unwilling to brave the volcano again even for a franc. 

The cook came up with them from the base camp, 
out of curiosity to see the devil's fire, but he was too 
late to do anything for us but clean up; we had to be 
our own cooks on this camping party, and we learned 
what it meant to get any sort of meal on a fire between 
three stones. I knew then why the cook's eyes always 
looked red and inflamed. Our firewood on the summit 
was particularly trying for they had only flimsy stuff 
to bring up to us, and we supplemented that with brittle 
twigs gathered on the heights. The vegetation on the 
top was sparse. There were a few canelike stalks of 
stunted trees and a little brushwood down the slopes, 
but above that were only coarse grasses and white ever- 
lastings, and tiny, ground-gripping creepers with small 
bright blossoms. 

We went around the rim again to the spot from which 

we could descend into the crater, and marched out 

across the flats for half an hour, feeling well acquainted 

now with sulphur beds and not blanching when an un- 

163 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

waiy foot broke through the crust — the fact tlist mm 
and woman are two-legged beings saved some of m 
from total eclipse — and reached the edge of the tenaoe 
and skirted it to a point from which we could nuJa a 
further descent to a narrow ledge below. To the left 
this ledge clung against the precipicelike walls; to llie 
right were cinder slopes stretching dizzily down to end 
abruptly; and beyond the cinder slopes jutted a flat* 
topped cliff. 

On that ledge against the crater wall we stretdied 
our shelter cloth, weighted the lower edge of it vidi 
tied-oD rocks and dropped them over the brink. There 
was steam pouring from the cracks near us, and sifting 
up from the gravel whenever our heels scratched it. We 
had no fear of being cold that night. 

Here we made ourselves at home. The pewters 
clutched their francs and took what they clearly though 
the last look at the mad ones, and escaped. Mr. Akel^ 
proceeded to climb down the cinder slope to the ri^t 
and set his camera on the edge of nothing. We could 
look down now into the crater pit of boiling lava, a 
great mass crusted with cooler, darker lava, patterned 
with gleaming cracks of pure gold that shifted and 
changed as the stuff seethed and boiled and broke into 
fountains of fire or rolled into molten rivers of hissing 
flame. 

As night came on, the cloud above that cauldron be- 
came a glow of rose, vi\'id, unearthly, a rose of hell — 
a drifting, billowing radiance that made an Inferno of 
those rocky walls, throwing into weird relief every jut- 
ting ledge and rock, filling with mysterious shadow the 
154 






Lata iir EsupTtoir or NrutuujuA'i Ckate* 





Jig 




Tm 




K :M 


SI M 



A NIGHT IN A CRATER 

deep recesses and dark distance. High above the crater 
that rose-red cloud streamed out against a sky its fire 
made black. Half the night we sat out upon that ledge, 
the glory of that spectacle filling our eyes, the thunder 
of it in pur ears. . . . It was for us alone; we had been 
the first to look upon it. And for night after night, 
year after ye&r, that glory was blazing and thundering 
away, unseen, undreamed. . . . 

It was an unforgettable night. It was R<ane bum- 
iog. It was Valhalla ablaze. 

The next day we crossed the cinder slopes and went 
to the edge of the lower terrace, where we waited hours 
for the fogs to lift from the inner chasm so we could 
use liie cameras; then at noon Martha Miller and I 
started back to camp, our green bags on the heads of 
two porters and a boy, Leo, for guide. After our ex- 
perience that first night Martha and I had a strong 
feeling that it was best to go around the crater to a 
spot just over camp, then descend in a straight line, 
but the porters naturally hated the hard going over the 
stabbing rock edges of the rim, and struck down on a 
diagonal line. We thought that we could trust to their 
sense of direction; they were natives, they ought to be 
endowed with native instinct for direction; moreover 
Leo, the boy, had been coming up every day. Light- 
heartedly we followed them and emerged from a stretch 
of bnub to find one porter on one hillock descending to 
the left, and another on another hillock streaking it for 
the ri^t, and the boy Leo, a lost mariner on unchar- 
tered seas, shrieking questions at them both. 

And then, naturally, it rained. Bitterly we ceased 
155 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

to trust to their native instincts, and relying on our own 
we herded them ahead of us and ultimately gained the 
camp. Their deviations had cost us over an hour of 
hard going. We told them what we thought of than in 
all our English and Swahili, and then they presented 
themselves sheepishly smiling, for a present for their 
hard work! They didn't get that present. 

At four the men came down, having tried all day tat 
pictures and been thwarted by fog and clouds; that 
night was the coldest in the history of the world. Our 
provisions were running low; we could have hung on, 
ourselves, with what we had, and we had splendid 
mountain streams of water, but the beans on vdiich the 
porters subsisted were only enough to get us back to 
the Mission, so we started down the mountain the next 
day, our porters jubilant at leaving the Sheitani» the 
fire devils, behind and eager to boast their experience in 
their villages. Alone in Africa, they and we had 
looked into the pit of Nyamlagira's fire. 



CHAPTER XII 

THE THREE-STONE KITCHEN 

HoufiEEEEPiNQ, on an African safari, was a never- 
jDiding occupation. Out experiences had begun on the 
[iU^ba BiTer when we were precipitated violently into 
'3ae need of a cook, and our boy Mablanga assumed the 
rdle until we found a regular one. Mablanga cooked 
rell but he did not claim to be an "impishi" (a cook). 
Fhat was bis mistake — and ours. If be had, we never 
frould have allowed him to resign, but perhaps it was 
IS well, for there were other cooks and there was no 
nich useful general boy as Mablanga. 

At our first camp on the Upper Congo, Kabalo, we 
lad started getting a cook, and our first candidate was 
Tim. Jim might be described as husky. He had the 
robustness that would have made him king of Kentucky 
roustabouts, and a smile that would have won him a 
place in the Big Time. Jim was a cook. He said so, 
himself. We gave Him a day to prove it, challenging 
liim to breadmaking, and after we had seen the bread 
we gave him his choice of staying on as a tent boy or 
separating himself from any further obligation of serv- 
ice. Jim stajred. 

He developed, it may be Sfud, not as a cook, but as 

a sort of over-boy. He was as strong as an ox, but he 

167 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

seemed to be preserving his strength for some criai 
which never came — ^he produced others, who did what- 
ever work we were calling for. Where he got them 
was a mystery, but he never failed. Of course, on the 
march, where there were porters available, life was sim- 
plified for him; and pails were filled and pegs ti^it- 
ened and bags brou^t in by easily aviulable hands; but 
no matter where we were, forests, mountains, plaini, 
Jim never failed of his supply of help. He had alwayi 
a "mok6'* (a boy) or two, some httle grinning pick* 
auinny, squatting about with him, running for water, 
dubbining the shoes, and hanging the wash on the line. 
Of course there were a few things that Jim could not 
escape doing in person, but to do him justice they were 
very few. 

I own to a weakness for Jim. I liked to ascribe ibc 
whipping he got from the soldiers at Kissenyi to his 
belUgerent loyalty. When I had the fever Jim was 
sent to Nyunde Mission for vegetables and oranges 
for me, and a boy from the chef de paste went for things 
for him. On their retiu-n there was some dispute over 
the oranges and when the otber boy tried to take fifty 
for his master Jim resented the attempt especially as he 
had carried the oranges — and hit the boy. I expect he 
hit him hard. The next day the native soldiers came and 
led Jim to an official whipping and we never saw Jim in 
trousers again. They were new trousers, too. He had 
had fifteen francs, three weeks' salary, advanced wilh 
which to buy them, for the garb in which he came to us 
was chiefly patches and a huge safety pin. After the 
Kissenyi episode Jim girt himself kilt-wise with a tea 
158 



THE THREE-STONE KITCHEN 

towel, and anon, vfaen hb shirt was beyond all aid of 
dxread or safety pin, he split another ancient towel, 
dmist his head tlovugh, tucked in the ends, and was 
irrayed. 

But to go back to the cook and Kabalo— our next 
sxperiment after Jim's demotion, was Antoine. An- 
'xane did cook. He made bread of sorts and mayon- 
uise, for which he went secretly and begged vinegar 
htm the administrator's wife, who was yet imknown 
to me. He was enterprising and furtive and he had 
in assistant of a villainous cast, and when the Kabalo 
idministrator observed the precious pair, he warned us 
that they were probably robbers and not worth har- 
txiring. 

We didn't like Antoine ourselves and his bread was 
aothing to cling to, so we explained this to him through 
Afr. Akeley. Mr. Akeley spoke a vehement Swahili 
nrhile Antoine knew no Swahili and only a pidgin va- 
riety of French. Certainly something percolated to 
Antoine for he was absent from camp that night when 
we returned from a late dinner, and there was no break- 
fast for us next morning before our six o'clock train 
to Tanganyika left, but at train time Antoine tinned 
up, with his assistant and his wife and a bundle — and we 
weakly gave him three francs for solace and departed. 

At Albertville, our next camp, the administrator sent 
us a cook. Mr. Akeley liked his looks. He said so and 
he seldom was as sorry for anything else he said. For 
we kept the cook, and the cook's assistant, who played 
perpetually on a small musical instrument, the m*bichi 
159 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

or native piano, and we kept too, another tent-and-table 
boy who presented himself with them. 

He was a shrimpish boy in a yellow and black blansr 
that some one had given him and his name we took to 
be Sorrow and then amended to Shallow but either wu 
inspired. The cook may have had a name but he did 
not need it. We found others. A more utterly witlesi 
and useless individual never sat under a tree and drank 
pombe. Unfortunately we were well on our way be- 
fore we had a chance to discover his prochvities, and 
after we had disembarked from the Tanganyika boat 
and landed at Usumbura he developed fever, a real 
fever, which shielded his disabilities for some time, al- 
though the moral flaws soon became apparent as re- 
lated in the episode of the visiting lady. 

On the safari up from Tanganyika we tried not to be 
too hard on the cook and the cooking. Most of our 
food then came frran the chop boxes and took htUe 
preparation, but his own handiwork was nothing short 
of a calamity. 

His bread grew soggier and soggier. Fart of this 
was due to misunderstanding. He wanted "dower" or 
medicine, meaning native pombe, to make the bread 
rise, and Mr. Akeley was of the opinion that the flour 
he had ordered was of the self -rising sort, only needing 
mixing with water, and so we went about like parrots, 
saying "pana dower" (no medicine) to the cook and 
getting the English-and-Swahili-speaking boy to make 
it clearer, and every day the cook brought us heavier 
and stranger bits of dough sunk depressedly into some 
cavernous receptacle. 

160 



THE THREE-STONE KITCHEN 

Mr. Akeley explained that it was the lack of sun 
over a tent fly. His bread in East Africa had always 
risen beneath a tent fly. But after we had mixed the 
stuff ourselves with water and set it to rise beneath a tent 
fly — and buried it where the boys could not see — we had 
our suspicion, and I never said "pana dower" from that 
moment but ordered the native banana beer. 

However, if the cook's bread were not enough to con- 
vict him, his meat was a criminal offense. We gave 
him everything — chicken, oxen, elephant. We didn't 
blame him for the goat; we didn't blame him for the 
elephant, we didn't blame him for those chickens which 
chiefs had selected for presents because of their long 
and distinguished field service, and we didn't blame him 
wholly for the first ox — but the second was conclusive. 

We had reached Kissenyi, then, where we had fresh 
meat and vegetables in abundance, and on their behalf 
we interposed. It wasn't humane to allow even a cab- 
bage to be treated as that cook treated it. We remon- 
strated and he detached himself from all responsibility, 
withdrawing into a Buddhistic revery about meal time, 
letting the other boys do the work. He was accom- 
panied in his Nirvana by his assistant and Shallow. 

The night after Jim bad his falling out with the 
government, the other boys, in terror of the heavy- 
handed possibilities of the post, appeared in a body ask- 
ing for a dismissal which we totally refused. Then it 
dawned upon us that we had been undiscriminating. 
We decided to part with the cook and the cook's helper 
and with Shallow, and in another day told them that 
they could go. But they would not go. They had 
161 



^ttaa* 










He », 






HE THREE-STONE KITCHEN 

a of the launch at Kissenyi and the captain's 

boy had a black lady for whom the cook had a 

And the cook had just been paid. Knowing his 

can only attribute his success to his pocketbook. 
nly the next morning when he was fined twenty 

for a fight with the black lady's revengful first 
sor, a fight in which white man's property was 
yed, the cook had no francs left. We promised 
zf de paste to send them back as soon as the cook 
imed them and so we did, and the cook went aa. 
IS and remained with us throughout, 
did his procIiTities. Cook's sisters. He found 
1 along the route and one of the first activities 
loiga Mission was a descent by Herbert and the 

Brother upon the kitchen house, to rid it of its 
ig, head and calico encumbrances. Nominally 
ook counted as a native Christian. He wore a 

of the Virgin and he went to Mass. Some day 
ended to take a wife and one only. Meanwhile 
i undecided as to her indentity. 

whatever his romantic or religious excursions, 
3ok was a cook and a worker; and the masterly 
: got into camp on the march, set up his tent, and 
s fire going between the three stones inspired a 
ispect. We accepted him as a permanent institu- 
nd we accepted, too, his red mattress which went 
:amp to camp on the head of a staggering porter. 
s the most enormous mattress that I have ever 
uid mysteriously, from day to day, it assimied 
tnd more swollen proportions. 
tching it being heavily hoisted into position upon 
163 




i-mmm^iM 




ZjT:—- —.■v. ;*-:irT "Stac -i: --:aniliBB5r »* *Sfc IB 

"il-:— " ^ » X~ 'JtrxSnf ims err. iaL*K\'am ■»■ 
pcs-'isi*- tit T^rar >P'nai:9c fa- la ; 
sink viia iL ins '««ia'"*' 

3f* 



~ -THE THREE-STONE KITCHEN 

.^ Y es, sare," said Eiani, emphatically, "cook wash 

T^^^jjrery dean, sare." 

"^^^^^^^^errick, the third of the ElizabethviUe trio, was the 
iA boy, and a very black, smiling-toothed youngster, 
7 lieyond all competition. Merrick always felt that 
Bid done enough if he brought himself into camp; to 
> any work after he got in was an infliction of the in- 
able white man's providence. He would accept 
t bundle of washing and the allotted soap, and then, 
f little addition to the washing, the burden of the 
vld deepened upon him. ... It was just so much 
! taken from his beloved httle musical instrument 
wbadi he kept strumming between exertions. Our con- 
-ifersation was generally confined to "Pana mazuri" (no 
f[ood) on our part, anent his efforts, and "Table-cloth 
pma mazuri," on his. Later on, I regret to say, Mer- 
- nek fell under a deserred suspicion of theft. In camp 
ft boy mi^t pilfer a little soap or sugar but our be- 
Icm^ngs and our money we always felt were absolutely 
safe. 

Mablanga was the real backbone of the establishment. 
He was a very dark boy of a Congolese tribe found 
Bast of ElizabethviUe; he was Kiam's brother, but as- 
suredly of a very different mother. His age was about 
twenty-two for he figured that he was near fourteen at 
the time of the Great War. That boy had every de- 
sirable and reliable quality. He was quiet and respect- 
ful, and amazingly efficient; he cooked and served ex~ 
cellently; he was tidy and loved to keep things so; he 
had lived with two English families and longed to see 
Kngland and America and the WOTld beyond hb hori- 
165 



ON THE GORILLA Tl 

son. He nerer joined the oCber bofiT dm 
after an elephant was lolled when Ike boyi 

ing and stamping and dapping, 
the dining room tent in order, doiq 
To Alice he was devotion itself, ; 
gentle smile for her that showed the boy'sl 
I felt that Alice was as safe n-ith him i 
us. She though everything of htm, and mM 
I would bear her little voice, "Mablanga, ini 
we have very different Iwuscs — houses wilb rik 
side them, Mablanga," and Mablanga *s low, Ml 
quietly amused, "Yess, missy." He announcedl 
would not stay in Africa after we left but wm 
ways accompany us. "No leave baby, missy," i* 
continual assertion. I was sorry that at the ea 
were forced to decide against taking him. 

Our relation to these boys in thrae ntonths of i 
was very much, I imagine, the relaticm that exists 
fore the Civil War between kindly ownos and 
black possessions. These boys were at our servio 
any one of the twenty-four hours, for just as i 
service as we could get out of them. But they 
amply safeguarded from overwork— excepting al 
Mablanga the Untiring — ^by their native leisure] 
and lack of responsibility. There were so many of 1 
that they had much more social variety than we, a 
am sure that we afforded them much more interest 
amusement than we could get from them. 

For each boy we had a book in which Miss Milk 
secretary, put down the time of his engagement anc 
money he was to receive and entered every drawiq 
166 




The Thjiee-Stome Kitciiex a>d Its Aim 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

changed their minds about Kissenyi and had no notion 
of leaving us. They regarded themselves as permaneot 
investments, paying no dividends, but untransferable. 
Mr. Bradley actually forced the money upon them, and 
thrust them from the place, yelling like banshees. Then 
they hung about waiting for the twice-a-month laundi. 
and when it appeared it was unable to take them on, so 
they started back on foot to the melancholy music of 
the assistant cook's piano. As a matter of fact tbejr 
had a trip through lovely country, with plenty of money 
to make it. Our hearts were not wrung for than and 
their departure had a bracing influence upon the camp. 

We received a new impishi from Monsieur Wera, tiw 
Kissenyi chef de poate, who was discarding him after 
nine montbs for a better one. He was fair enou^ 
he said, but a robber, and we must look out for butter 
and salt. 

I believed every disparaging thing said about the 
donation. A more uninviting face I have seldom seen 
than the mistrustfxd defiance of the impishi. How- 
ever, we installed him over the three stones that made 
a kitchen, before the tent where the boys slept and 
wherein they cooked when it rained, and he installed as 
a helper a protuberant youngster whose figure was 
ruined by bananas, whom he paid out of hijs own forty 
francs a month and food money. 

Vigorously he seized on the meats and vegetables 
and did wonders with them. He gave us dinners, real 
Belgian dinners with two meats — often the same meat 
though differently prepared — ^and then he went to jaiL 

He went suddenly. It developed that there was a 
162 



THE THREE-STONE KITCHEN 

captain of the launch at Kissenyi and the captain's 
black boy had a black lady for whom the cook had a 
fancy. And the cook had just been paid. Knowing his 
face I can only attribute his success to his pocketbook. 
Certainly the next morning when he was fined twenty 
francs for a fight with the black lady's revengful first 
possessor, a fi^t in which white man's property was 
destroyed, the cook had no francs left. We promised 
tbe chef de poste to send them back as soon as the cook 
had earned them and so we did, and the cook went on 
with us and remained with us throu^out. 

So did his proclivities. Cook's sisters. He found 
several along the route and one of the first activities 
at Lulenga Mission was a descent by Herbert and the 
White Brother upon the kitchen house, to rid it of its 
giggling, bead and calico encumbrances. Nominally 
that cook counted as a native Christian. He wore a 
medal of the Virgin and he went to Mass. Some day 
he intended to take a wife and one only. Meanwhile 
he was imdecided as to her indentity. 

But whatever his romantic or rehgious excursions, 
that cook was a cook and a worker; and the masterly 
way he got into camp on the march, set up his tent, and 
had his fire going between the three stones inspired a 
just respect. We accepted him as a permanent institu- 
tion and we accepted, too, his red mattress which went 
from camp to camp on the head of a staggering porter. 
It was the most enormous mattress that I have ever 
seen, and mysteriously, from day to day, it assimied 
more and more swollen proportions. 

Watching it being heavily hoisted into position upon 
163 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

the head of a protesting native the morning of the start 
for Nyamlagira, Mr. Akeley thoughtfully called Kiani. 

'*Kiani," said he, "is there a woman in it?" 

Kiani eyed the mattress; then he looked at Mr. 
Akeley in earnest reassurance. "No, sare — no wcunan 
in it," said he. 

"Good," said Mr. Akeley, relievedly. 

Ultimately we tmderstood that mattress. Chickens 
were our daily repast and the mattress was augmented 
daily by a steady increase of chicken feathers. That 
explained, too, the featherless neatness of the kitchen 
which I had commended. 

With this cook we had a trifle of French for medium 
and a pair of English words and one or two SwahilL 
Our chief resource in interpreting were the Elizabeth- 
rille boys, Eiani and Mablanga. They knew a little 
Enghsh, Mablanga more than he vaunted, and Kiam 
much less than he tried to have it appear, but with- 
out them we should have been pretty helpless. Eianl 
had a mediumistic method; he got a word or two as 
clue and then tried to read your mind. You either 
wanted a thing or you didn't want it, and so you either 
got it or you didn't get it. There were happy occasions 
when your desire and his interpretation coincided. 
Among the boys he was a humorist and his 
high-pitched laugh rang out continually but with us 
his humor was of a more unconscious kind. 

"Kiani," said Mr. Bradley one day, survejring sus- 
piciously the water brought for tea making, "Eiani, 
cook wash in this water?'* 

164 



THE THREE-STONE KITCHEN 

"Yes, sare," said Kiani, emphatically, "cook wash 
him very dean, sare." 

Merrick, the third of the Elizabethville trio, was the 
wash boy, and a very black, smiling-toothed youngster, 
lazy beyond all competition. Merrick always felt that 
be had done enough if he brought himself into camp; to 
do any work after he got in was an infliction of the in- 
scrutable white man's providence. He would accept 
the bundle of washing and the allotted soap, and then, 
at every little addition to the washing, the burden of the 
world deepened upon him. ... It was just so much 
time taken from his beloved little musical instrument 
which he kept strumming between exertions. Our con- 
versation was generaUy confined to "Fana mazuri" (no 
good) on our part, anent his eflForts, and "Table-cloth 
pana mazuri," on his. Later on, I regret to say, Mer- 
rick fell under a deserved suspicion of theft. In camp 
a boy might pilfer a little soap or sugar but our be- 
long^gs and our money we always felt were absolutely 
safe. 

Mablanga was the real backbone of the establishment. 
He was a very dark boy of a Congolese tribe found 
East of Elizabethville; he was Kiani's brother, but as- 
suredly of a very different mother. His age was about 
twenty-two for he figured that he was near fourteen at 
the time of the Great War. That boy had every de- 
sirable and reliable quality. He was quiet and respect- 
ful, and amazingly efficient; he cooked and served ex- 
cellently; he was tidy and loved to keep things so; he 
had lived with two English families and longed to see 
England and America and the world beyond his hori- 
165 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

zon. He never joined the other boys* dances; the night 
after an elephant was killed when the boys were sway- 
ing and stamping and clapping, Mablanga was putting 
the dining room tent in order, doing the work of tiiree. 
To Alice he was devotion itself, and he had a sweet and 
gmtle smile for her that showed the boy's real affecti<»L 
I felt that Alice was as safe with him as with one of 
us. She thought everything of him, and on the mardi 
I would hear her little voice, "Mablanga, in Ameriai 
we have very diflFerent houses — ^houses with steps in- 
side them, Mablanga," and Mablanga's low, sometimes 
quietly amused, "Yess, missy." He announced that he 
would not stay in Africa after we left but would al- 
ways accompany us. "No leave baby, missy," was his 
continual assertion. I was sorry that at the end we 
were forced to decide against taking him. 

Our relation to these boys in those months of safari 
was very much, I imagine, the relation that existed be- 
fore the Civil War between kindly owners and their 
black possessions. These boys were at oiu* service for 
any one of the twenty-foiu- hoius, for just as much 
service as we could get out of them. But they were 
amply safeguarded from overwork — excepting always 
Mablanga the Untiring — ^by their native leisureliness 
and lack of responsibility. There were so many of them 
that they had much more social variety than we, and I 
am sure that we afforded them much more interest and 
amusement than we could get from them. 

For each boy we had a book in which Miss Miller, as 
secretary, put down the time of his engagement and the 
money he was to receive and entered every drawing be 
166 



) 




The TiiaEE-SioNE Kitviiex and Iia Aim 




KlLl.1,1. I.V I,1.,.N— tlBAVE «i- Mr. 1- 



*^He lion that came to life 

3| ^ which is the most dangerous, the lion, the elephant. 
^^* buffalo, or the rhinoceros. Drummond puts the 
^**ino first, the lion second; but Mr. Akeley has dis- 
credited the dangers of the rhino, beheving most of his 
^H*-called charges are simply blundering rushes, not 
^<tuated by any sight of the enemy. 

Mr. Akeley puts the buffalo first, with the elephant a 
^dose second, yet he said he would rather hunt elephant 
'tOian lion ; he knew he could stop an elephant — ^he demon- 
strated that the day on the plains — ^but that Leshe 
TTarlton's experience had shown that a charging lion 
could come fifty yards with a bullet in his heart. 

Stigand puts the lion first, the buffalo last. Freder- 
kik Selous, mightiest of big game hunters, puts the lion 
' first and the buffalo and elephant on a p^r. Colonel 
RooseTelt stated that the weight of opinion among those 
best fitted to judge was that the lion was the most 
formidable opponent of the himter under ordinary 
conditions. 

In the Congo we had not been in game country to 
any extent, so we accumulated few stories until we 
reached Kivu, and most of these were about leopards. 
We were warned to close our tents and never stir with- 
out a light at night for fear of prowlers, and the native 
runners were never sent alone, but always in pairs. 

If half the native stories were true, the leopards 
exacted an amazing toll. Even allowing for exaggera- 
tion, their terror was so real that it must have a good 
basis of fact. The Belgian officials and missionaries 
had many instances. At Lulenga the Father Superior 
pointed to a banana grove that we were passing one day 
169 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

zon. He nerer joined the other haya' dances; the m^ 
after an elephant was killed when the boys were sway- 
ing and stamping and clapping, Mablanga was putting 
the dining room tent in order, doing the work of three. 
To Alice he was devotion itself, and he had a sweet and 
gentle smile for her that showed the boy's real affedaon. 
I felt that Alice was as safe with him as with one of 
us. She thought everything of him, and on the mardi 
I would hear her little voice, "Mablanga, in Anxtks 
we have very diflferent houses — houses with steps in- 
side them, Mablanga," and Mablanga's low, sometinKS 
quietly amused, "Yess, missy.'* He announced that he 
would not stay in Africa after we left but would al- 
ways accompany us. "No leave baby, missy," was his 
continual assertion. I was sorry that at the end we 
were forced to decide against taking him. 

Our relation to these boys in those months of safari 
was very much, I imagine, the relation that existed he- 
fore the Civil War between kindly owners and thdr 
black possessions. These boys were at our service for 
any one of the twenty-four hours, for just as much 
service as we could get out of them. But they were 
amply safeguarded from overwork — excepting always 
Mablanga the Untiring — by their native leisureliness 
and lack of responsibility. There were so muiy of them 
that they had much more social variety than we, and I 
am sure that we afforded them much more interest and 
amusement than we could get from them. 

For each boy we had a book in which Miss Miller, as 
secretary, put down the time of his engagement and the 
money he was to receive and entered every drawing be 
166 





^ 


w 


N'Vg^ 


/ 


- 


/ 




» 


1 f1iR$j' 


-V— 


"*;■.■ s 


d 


fej^^' 


l^^i^HGIS 


!JA- 


■L 


mi^mm 


^ 


l^l-'w— 



l,EO ANH THE IfstO!! SciT 




The Tusee-Stone Kitciiex aiid Its Ana 



IE THREE-STONE KITCHEN 



against that. On the march they drew out but 
but at the time we paid off the porters at Lu- 
1^, Kianl came to her and wanted ail the wages due 
k — ^a hundred francs. It was n nuisance to get the 
ney box out and unnailed again, but we did, and 
re him his hundred franc note, and Martha made the 
by in his hook. Then he promptly tendered it back, 
e wanted her to keep it for him. He had no use for 
e money. All he had craved was the sensation of 
ing paid. 

Tbey cune to us for everything — clothes, thread, 
garettes, and medicine. It was a dull day when no 
ly had a thorn or scratch requiring plaster and band- 
[es. They were very much a part of our lives — cheer- 
il, grinning, tattered companions of the march and 
imp— black shadows of numy a mile — tiTrf ajling ap- 
iritions to the evoking shout of "Boyl" 



CHAPTER Xm 

the lion that came to life 
My Daylight Lion on the Ruindi Plainb 

Once the gorilla hunt was orer we had planned to 
turn our attention to some of the smaller fry of the 
African fauna whidi usually lure the adventurous over 
seas— the elephants, the buffalo, and the lion. 

We were not at all bloodthirsty, and we hadn't the 
slightest desire for indiscriminate slaughtering, but we 
did feel the lure of big game hunting, and I was con- 
vinced that I was offering any of the flnimiilg I mentioned 
a; more than sporting chance in the present state of my 
shooting. I had shot at one elephant, two targets, and 
three crocodiles in the three months in Africa. 

Mr. Bradley particularly wanted a buffalo. Miss 
Miller and I were eager for lions. Miss Miller already 
had one elephant to her credit and I was hoping for 
similar luck. We had very little time, for, althou^ Mr. 
Bradley and I were unhurried, Mr. Akeley had lecture 
engagements in America, and the constant delays of 
safari had reduced our hunting plans. 

The volcano had cut ten days from the schedule, but 
the gorillas and the volcano were the high spots of the 
expedition. Anything else was an after-climax. Still, 
a lion can be a vivid after-climax. 

There is distinct difference of opinion among hunters 
168 



THE LION THAT CAME TO LIFE 

as to which is the most dangerous, the lion, the elephant, 
the buffalo, or the rhinoceros. Drummond puts the 
rhino first, the lion second; but Mr. Akeley has dis- 
credited the dangers of the rhino, believing most of his 
so-called charges are simply blundering rushes, not 
actuated by any sight of the enemy. 

Mr. Akeley puts the buffalo first, with tiie elephant a 
close second, yet he said he would rather hunt elephant 
than lion ; he knew he could stop an elephant — he demon- 
strated that the day on the plains — ^but that Leslie 
Tarlton's experience had shown that a charging lion 
could come fifty yards with a bullet in his heart. 

Stigand puts the lion first, the buffalo last. Freder- 
ick Selous, mightiest of big game himters, puts the lion 
first and the buffalo and elephant on a par. Colonel 
Rooserelt stated that tiie weight of opinion among those 
best fitted to judge was that the lion was the most 
formidable opponent of the hunter under ordinary 
conditions. 

In the Congo we had not been in game country to 
any extent, so we accumulated few stories until we 
reached Eivu, and most of these were about leopards. 
We were warned to close our tents and never stir with- 
out a li^it at ni^t for fear of prowlers, and the native 
runners were never sent alone, but always in pairs. 

If half the native stories were true, the leopards 
exacted an amazing toll. £ven allowing for exaggera- 
tion, their terror was so real that it must have a good 
basis of fact. The Belgian officials and missionaries 
had many instances. At Lulenga the Father Superior 
pointed to a banana grove that we were passing one day 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

and remarked casually that there a leopard had eaten a 
young native woman about two months before. The 
beast had entered the hut at night, seized her, and 
dragged her into the banana grove. The natives had not 
attempted a rescue, but at daybreak had gone for tiw 
White Father, who came down with his gun, but tiie 
leopard made off and there was nothing left of the poor 
woman but evidence. 

At the Mission was a child with fresh leopard marks 
on its forehead. The leopard had entered the but, not 
for the child, but for something else, a dog, I believe — 
a leopard delicacy — and had wounded the child in Ha 
spring. 

It is rarely one sees a leopard. They are too wily and 
catlike. Men have lived in Africa for years without « 
glimpse of one. Most of those that are killed are got by 
gun traps at night. On the other band, Monsieur 
Flamand of Ruindi, ran into three one afternoon and 
shot two. 

For months we had heard of the Ruindi plains as one 
of the richest game fields left in Africa, where we could 
find antelopes by the thousand, and buffalo, elephants, 
and lions everywhere. There were no rhinos, but we 
were not after rhino. It seemed the very place for our 
needs and we planned to move out there with all speed. 

Moving with all speed in the Congo means going into 
camp and waiting for porters. Porters from Lulenga 
would go no further than Ruchuru, two days away, and 
at Ruchuru we would have to get fresh porters to take 
us out on the Ruindi plains, a three days' march. There 
we would hare to get porters from Luofu* two days 
170 



THE LION THAT CAME TO LIFE 

farther on» because the Ruchuru porters would not 
remain on the phiins. 

With real regret we bade farewell to our good friends 
at the Mission, uid on December 4 started north through 
the Rift Valley to Ruchuru. 

As usual, we had sent a runner ahead to notify the 
diiefs, and at noon of the first day we found a chief 
out to greet us, with the grass cut for a camping place 
and eggs and delicious bananas for a present. I spent 
ttiat afternoon writing on the Corona with the usual 
crowd of natives sitting curiously about; they believed 
the typewriter some sort of musical instrument, and 
must have marveled at the monotony of the air. 

Next morning we made a leisurely departure at seven- 
thirty, and about noon we crossed the wild-rushing 
Ruchuru River on a picturesque bridge and wound up 
the slopes into Ruchuru, one of the most important 
stations on the Bastern frontier of the Congo. It is on 
high ground, at an elevation of about five thousand feet, 
with Lake Edward on the north and the M'fumbiro vol- 
canoes to the south. From the elevation the climate 
ought to be very healthy, but it is not considered as 
excellent as Kivu. Its wide, spacious, flower-bordered 
avenues gave it the air of being quite a place. Like 
Eissenyi and Albertville, it seemed a stage setting wait- 
ing to be filled with the actors. 

There were several officials at Ruchuru, the Commis- 
aoaer, the chef de poatCj the agent territorial, a banker, 
and there had been a doctor, but he had left to escort 
Madame Deriddar home, leaving the infirmary in charge 
of native orderlies. It was here that Monsieur Deriddar 
171 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

had been brou|^t and had died and been buried. A 
domestic touch was given to the streets by seeing two 
Belgian babies being wheeled about in improvised i>er* 
ambulators, one by a black boy nurse, one by a black girl 
It was the first time since entering the Congo that we 
had seen a native woman employed by "Europeans" 
— the term for all the whites. Always it is the men, who 
are called "boys" to their last days, who are employed 
for cooking, baby tending, sewing, and washing. Alice 
was enchanted with the babies; the little blue-eyed 
Elizabeth Piquard was her especial delight. 

Here we camped in a grassy square, a former market* 
place, that became a muddy square through the rains, 
waiting our porters and making arrangements to leave 
Alice, for we heard that the Ruindi was too hot for her. 
Commissioner Van de Ghinste and his bride offered to 
care for her, but we borrowed the little two-room house 
that belonged to the Mission Church, hospitably vacated 
by our very kind P^re Van Hoef , who had come up from 
Lulenga for special services here, and installed her there 
with Priscilla. They had the devoted and untiring 
Mablanga for cook and caretaker, Jim for assistant, and 
all the resources of Ruchuru. Attached to every Bel- 
gian post is a herd of cattle, so fresh milk was obtained 
often from an official's private supply. Filtered water 
was also provided, and the Mission at Lulenga sent in 
fruit and vegetables. The thoughtfulness and kindness 
of the Belgians were unvarying in all these things, 
which mean so much — especially to the happiness of a 
cinld. We went over our suppUes here and stored the 
superfluous things in the warehouse, for we were to 
172 



THE LION THAT CAME TO LIFE 

return that way, and with seventy porters set out the 
morning of December 9, northeast toward Lake Albert, 
with a penciled map from Pere Van Hoef to mark the 
marches and the haunts of game. 

Down a long hill we coasted gloriously on our bicycles 
out onto the plains where a blue rim of mountains 
seemed pushed back against the horizon. But the 
bicycling did not last long. The elephant grass was 
high and the path through it a winding tunnel. Ele- 
phant grass is so called because you never find 
elephants in it; it is an inedible, giant grass, in its earlier 
stages a flat, sharp-edged, green blade and when 
matured and dry it is like young bamboo. 

At the foot of a long climb we abandoned our bicycles 
for the following bicycle boys to carry — ^that is, we be- 
lieved there were following bicycling boys. But they 
had abdicated. We never saw them more. They had 
melted away to their villages, and probably figured 
among those taken by leopards. It took time for us to 
be convinced of their departure, and no amount of time 
reconciled us to it, for we were forced to retrace our 
steps and push those wheels the rest of the day. 

That morning we passed a group of natives in great 
excitement. They said one of their number had been 
seized by a leopard in broad daylight, not an hour before 
our arrival. In the story which reached Ruchuru, the 
leopard had taken one of our men. 

That night and again the next night we camped on 
the banks of the Ruchuru River, a swiftly rushing 
stream, whose banks were so netted with tropic luxu- 
riance of palm and vine that we had great difficulty in 
173 



!^i 













"■V -M. :i»* V . ' •— «a *■,■» ,__ 







E LION THAT CAME TO LIFE 

t Water, streams of really scalding water smelling 

lotted hydrogen, gushing from a rock. It was 

I the Duke of Mecklenburg experienced his most 

^ lion hunts, and here a leopard had sprung like 

ti at him from a bush, even as he aimed at the gleam 

fhes. His shot had pierced her neck and she roUed 

I at his feet. . . . 
f. We^ however, saw no leopards and heard no lions 
t night; we saw only antelope and heard nothing 
t the incessant snorting of the hippos as they splashed 
K the river or stumbled in the darkness against our tent 
scopes. 

The third day's march brought us into the territory 
of the Ruindi. Here Monsieur Flamand, the adminis- 
trator of the territory and until the last month the only 
. vrfiite man within its borders, came striding towards us* 
baring walked a day and a night and half another day 
from Luofu, his residence beyond the mountains, to 
greet us. 

Out camp on the Ruindi was on a high plateau, cleared 
like a parade ground for fear of lion and encircled by a 
moatlike ravine through whose jungles rushed the 
Ruindi River. Across the ravine we looked out on a 
wide sweep of plains, with a range of mountains against 
tJie sky. It reminded me of some Colorado highland, 
and we began to wish that we had brou^t Alice. 

Our tents were strung in a military line with the 
grass rest houses, one of which we used for a dining 
room. Across from us, on the edge of the plateau, was 
a mound weighted with stones and embellished with 
antdopes' horns, the grave of a young Englishman, 
173 







nv-sr- Kill t ~mnia*!s£ i«saoiEsflrw«r4el 

-jv-v; L-X'.'.. \ .u,r .-vr K-cv 7> r," rac on 

a r£^« oner dc kv^ Azki ro tV nmmtai 
17< 




fHE LION THAT CAME TO LIFE 

^ dry browns of the burnt grass the green of the scat- 
I thickets stood out darkly. 
i plains were simply alive with antelope. There 
I the graceful Thomas cob, a lovely dun creature, 
I conspicuous wiiite markings and boms like a big 
[e, moving off at our approach, then pausing to 
I us; there was the little reed buck, green-gray, 
i|iringing away with a sharp whistle of ^arm; there 
iirere droll, dark topis, slant backed, tivning to stare, 
',]liien with a comical plunge breaking into a gallop and 
-^making off in a line like race horses. The topi is a rare 
^ antelope, and it was extraordinary to see it in such 
' numbers; it is from four to five feet high, with deeply 
' grooved, backward curving boms. The skin is marvel- 
ous, fine and brilliant as watered silk — a dark, warm- 
toned brown on top, brightening to cinnamon below, 
wiUi splashes of black on shoulder and thigh, all overlaid 
with a sheen of bluish gray. 

For a few miles we went along the path, tiien struck 
out across the plains where the tree clumps and thickets 
wa« frequent and might house a lion lying up after the 
nig^'s hunting. It was necessary to have meat for the 
men, and Monsieur Flamand brought down a cob buck 
at about three hundred yards, a perfect shot, but it was 
sad to see the lovely creature sink down with a swanhke 
lift of its head. I knew then I should never be able to 
kill one — and I never did. It was sheer shirking on 
my part, though, for some one had to kill them for meat 
and for the skins which we wanted. 

At Monsieur Flamand's suggestion we strung out, 
the better to cover the ground. Mr. Akdley, seeing no 
177 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

forcing our way through to see the hippos who woe 
snorting and Mowing all about. 

Our only way was to follow the hippo trails, whidi 
were wide enough, but very low, like tunnels throuj^ 
the thick green, and raked by every imaginable thorn. 
Possibly the thorn produced an agreeable tickling in 
the hippo's bide. It did something else to mine. 

The hippo comes out at night to feed, and the ground 
was crisscrossed by these trails. I shall never forget 
the first hippo I saw climbing out of the water. His 
back was towards me and I tbou^t that it must be an 
elephant. They are huge beyond behef. 

They were not at all shy, and one old lady wiio came 
snorting and blowing down the river with the current, 
whirled about at sight of us, her eyes rounded, her small 
ears cocked, her wide mouth set with astonishment. She 
faced us while the current bore her away, then she sank 
and either swam back to us imder water or galloped 
on the bottom, and came up nearer than before. She 
did that half a dozen times, then appeared with a ctHnical 
replica beside her — her baby — as big as a yoimg bull 
She had probably been keeping the baby on her back 
all the time. They kept coming back delightedly until 
we wearied of their entertainment and remarking, "kwa 
heri" (goodbye), strolled away. 

The porters wanted one killed for meat, but fortu- 
nately for the hippos and our feelings, the animals did 
not show themselves on land where we could get them. 
A hippo shot in water sinks and is carried o£F by the 
current. 

On the second day's march we came to Maji ja Moto, 
174 



THE LION THAT CAME TO LIFE 

or Hot Water, streams of really scalding water smelling 
of sulphuretted bydrogen, gushing from a rock. It was 
here the Duke of Mecklenburg experienced bis most 
stirriiig lion hunts, and here a leopard bad sprung like 
a flash at him from a bush, even as he aimed at the gleam 
of her. His shot had pierced her neck and she rolled 
dead at his feet. . . . 

We, however, saw no leopards and beard no lions 
that night; we saw only antelope and beard nothing 
but the incessant snorting of the hippos as they splashed 
in the river or stumbled in the darkness against our teat 
ropes. 

The third day's march brought us into the territory 
of the Ruindi. Here Monsieur Flamand, the adminis- 
trator of the territory and imtil the last month the only 
iriiite man within its borders, came striding towards us. 
having walked a day and a night and half another day 
from Luofu, his residence beyond the mountains, to 
greet us. 

Our camp on the Ruindi was on a high plateau, cleared 
like a parade groimd for fear of lion and encircled by a 
moatlike ravine through whose jungles rushed the 
Ruindi River. Across the ravine we looked out on a 
wide sweep of plains, with a range of mountains against 
the sky. It reminded me of some Colorado highland, 
fmd we began to wish that we had brought Alice. 

Our tents were strung in a military line with the 
grass rest bouses, one of which we used for a dining 
room. Across from us, on the edge of the plateau, was 
a moimd wei^ted with stones and embellished with 
antelopes' horns, the grave of a young Englishman, 
175 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

R. C. Foster, killed hy a lion two years before. He an! 
his brother, both experienced hunters from British East, 
had gone in long grass after a lion, shoulder to shoulder. 
The lion had charged, and the older brother's gun missed 
fire, and the lion seized the young brother by the neck, 
bit him savagely, then sprang away. The young man 
lived for two hours. 

It was a melancholy reminder with a strong personal 
interest to those about to seek the lion in its lair. It was 
here, too, at Ruindi, that Mme. Deriddar had been so 
savagely mauled. It was this same Monsieur Flamand 
who had cared for Foster's grave, nursed Mme. Derid- 
dar, and tried to save her husband who had died of the 
fever. 

It was December 12, the day aft«r our arrival, that 
Monsieur Flamand took us out to tempt Providence and 
the lions. 

Now in British East Africa lion hunting is a cere- 
mony. Half a hundred beaters cover the brush for you, 
driving the game your way, and you have gun boys who 
can be relied on in critical moments, and you have 
horses whose four legs can be used to run the lions down. 
In the Congo you have no horses, no beaters, and no 
boys who can do more than carry your guns until you 
need them. Your only hope is to run on a lion in the 
daytime, lying up after the night's gorge, or to stay out 
in the biish all night with a bait to attract lions. 

This morning at dawn we struck across the plains, 
with Monsieur Flamand for guide. The trail ran like 
a ribbon over the level land to the mountains. Against 
17« 



THE LION THAT CAME TO LIFE 

e dry browns of the burnt grass the green of the scat- 
red thickets stood out darkly. 

The plains were simply alive with antelope. There 
as the graceful Thomas cob, a lovely dun creature, 
ttti conspicuous wiiite markings and horns like a big 
izelle, moving off at our approadi, then pausing to 
gard us; there was the little reed buck, green-gray, 
'ringing away with a sharp whistle of alarm; there 
ere droll, dark topis, slant backed, turning to stare, 
en with a comical plunge breaking into a gallop and 
aking off in a line like race horses. The topi is a rare 
itelope, and it was extraordinary to see it in such 
imbers; it is from four to five feet high, with deeply 
■ooved, backward curving horns. The skin is marvel- 
is, fine and brilliant as watered silk — a dark, warm- 
ned brown on top, brightening to cinnamon below, 
ith splashes of black on shoulder and thigh, all overlaid 
ith a sheen of bluish gray. 

For a few miles we went along the path, then struck 
it across the plains where the tree clumps and thickets 
ere frequent and might house a lion lying up after the 
£^*s himting. If was necessary to have meat for the 
en, and Monsieur Flamand brought down a cob buck 
: about three hundred yards, a perfect shot, but it was 
d to see the lovely creature sink down with a swanlike 
ft of its head. I knew then I should never be able to 
31 one — and I never did. It was sheer shirking on 
y part, though, for some one had to kill them for meat 
id for the skins which we wanted. 
At Monsieur Flamand's suggestion we strung out, 
le better to cover the ground. Mr. Akeley, seeing no 
177 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL I 

signs of lion, went off with Miss Miller to photograph 
the antelojie, but Herbert, Monsieur Flamand, and I 
walked on, some distance apart, scrutiniziiig the tangles 
and little hollows. 

"Be careful," Monsieur Flamand had warned me. 
"Remember Mme. Deriddar." 

I wondered, as I strolled along, clasping my gun and 
eyeing the innocent looking thickets, how I was to be 
careful and get my lion. It was a lovely morning. The 
freshness of dawn was in the air, the dew sparkling cm 
the grass. Golden-crested crane preened themselves in 
a little marsh. There was a pastoral sweetness to the 
scene, with its grazing herds of antelopes, that was 
unrelated to anything like lion. I felt a self-conscdous 
humor in my scrutiny of the bushes for the waving tail 
and pricked ears I had been told to look for. 

Lions were unreal — fantastic. But here and there a 
pile of bleached bones told of their nocturnal suppers. 
Certainly lions had been here. I had no idea how old 
the kills were, for the vultures pick the bones in a day. 

It was eight o'clock. We had walked a little over two 
hours. I was just speaking to Monsieur Flamand, 
whose path had neared mine, when a call came from 
Herbert: "Here's your lion, Mary — ^lookl" 

We whirled about and at our left, a little distance 
away, were a hon and lioness going through the grass. 
We raced towards them and they went up a little slope 
and paused on the crest to look back at us. They were 
the most marvelous picture of wild life that Africa 
can give. 

For the moment they stood unmoving — ^green-gray 
178 



THE LION THAT CAME TO LIFE 

statues, cast in verdigris. The lion seemed tremendous^ 
his ruffled mane crisp against the sky. Then they made 
off, with a supple rippling of muscles, heading for a 
long reach of brush at our right. We ran as hard as 
we could to cut them oflF, but they were out of sight 
among the thickets when we reached the edge of the 
depression in whidi the thickets were scattered, sur- 
rounded by fairly long grass. The grass was tawny and 
the thickets rusty leaved, and as we peered and watched 
we felt the matter of protective coloring was decidedly 
overdone. 

As we stood on one edge, Herbert watched the other 
nde, sure the lions had not escaped that way. The wind 
was blowing from that direction, so we went around and 
started a fire to try to drive them out. But the grass 
burned only a little way, then died at the first green 
creeper. 

We circled the rim, and a native who had joined 
us told us he had just seen the lions, and in another 
moment we bad a glimpse of the big fellow, slouching 
across a little opening, his tail waving. We saw the 
lioness a little farther away, gliding from one thicket to 
another. They were getting farther off and we were 
afraid we might lose them, so we went down into the 
brush, our guns ready, scrutinizing every tangle and tree 
clump. It was a popular covert. GJenerous piles of 
antelope bones told of cob and topi that had been 
dragged there to conclude an evening of small joy to 
them. 

Monsieur Flanuind, advising extreme caution, would 

seize one of these bones and hurl it nondialantly into a 

170 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

thicket, observing hopefully, "Now he may be therel" 
When I did the same, trying to keep my gun pointed 
at the bombarded thicket, "I have sudi fear for you— 
you are so imprudent," he told me. "Remember Mme. 
Deriddarl" 

We went on through the grass, trying to be as sharp- 
sighted as possible. There is a real thrill to life when 
you know that at any moment the rusty leaves and the 
tawny grass may part before a hurtling form. We 
glimpsed the lioness some distance ahead and started 
hurrying along on a little trail. Monsieur Flamand 
ahead and Herbert and I following. 

"Keep midway between bushes," Herbert advised. 
"That lion might be anywhere," and just that moment, 
eyeing the thicket at my left, I saw the lion. He was 
about twenty feet away. It was a green thicket, for a 
wonder, and through a hole I saw the ruddy mane, the 
ears pricked forward. His right side was towards me, 
as he was facing the place where the little trail ran 
towards the thicket. 

I did not have time for any fear except the ignoble one 
tiiat I might not get the lion before the men did. It 
was to be my lion — they had made me a present of the 
first one met — ^but it was so near, so ready to spring, 
that their guns went up with mine. 

I fired as fast as I could, sighting by that ear and 
neck. Monsieur Flamand fired immediately after, but 
the Hon had gone down at the first shot with a roar that 
reverberated with the crashing of the guns. 

We waited. There was absolute silence. Not a snarl. 

Holding our guns in readiness we made our way to 

180 



THE LION THAT CAME TO LIFE 

where we faced the opening in the thicket which the 
lion had been facing, waiting for us to pass. 

A deep growl greeted us and I fired again. There 
was a gurgling roar that died away to silence, a silence 
unbroken, even when we tossed in experimental stones. 

We tried to wait a decently cautious interval, but we 
didn't overdo the matter of caution. We went in, guns 
ready, and there in the cavehke interior a large lion was 
stretched on his side, motionless, apparently having just 
breathed his last. 

If ever a lion looked dead that one did. He wasn't 
stirring, he wasn't breathing. We examined the wounds ; 
my bullet had gone in the neck at the base of the skull. 
The frontal one had gone between the eyes. He had a 
beautiful skin and mane, and his appearance was majesty 
itself. I had to remind myself that his death was salva- 
tion for three hundred gentle antelope each year. 

It was just eight-thirty, and Monsieur Flamand 
triumphantly reminded me that he had promised me a 
lion by half past eight. He was certainly a man of his 
word. Hastily we cut down the overhanging branches 
and I propped the lion's head in my lap and Herbert 
took my picture. 

Now that picture shows that the lion had his eyes 
screwed up. If I had known as much about dead lions 
then as I did a little later I should have known that 
when they die the eyes are open — not with the lids drawn 
in a paralyzed sort of wink. The shade was too thick 
for a good picture and we had the boys, who had now 
come up, drag him a little bit more into the light. Then 
I knelt l^ him for a second picture. In that picture 
181 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

the eyes are wide open — a change I did not happen to 
notice. I made ready for a third picture by kneeling 
bdiind him and trying to hold up the heavy head. 

It was a magnificent head. It had a dignity so impres- 
sive that somehow it forbade sympathy. A wounded 
antelope sinking down is poignant, but a lion's life is 
swift and violent, and a sudden death is no unfit con- 
clusion — it is better than the hyenas. 

X was thinking all this and trying to keep the head up 
when suddenly tiiat lion growled. It was a low gurgling 
growl, and for a moment I was sympathetic as I held 
him. 

"Is it the death rattle?" I asked. Monsiem- Flamand 
assured me the lion was certainly finished, he wasn't 
moving, so we went on to get the picture, the lion growl- 
ing a little more and more. And then — ^just as that 
picture was taken — the lion roared! The roar isn't 
audible in the picture, but it is visible in my expres- 
sion. It was the most astonished moment of my life. 
I left the lion, left him abruptly. I joined the men, and 
we stared at him. We saw that his eyes were open and 
he was breathing with a regularity and vigor that would 
have been reassuring to an anxious nurse. 

Just then Mr. Akeley, who had heard the shots, came 
luurying up with Miss Miller, and I shall never forget 
the astoundedness of his expression nor the vigorous 
disapproval of his remarks. Fortunately for the entente 
cordiaJe, he spoke no French. He was conveying that 
tile lion was very much alive and would recover from his 
temporary paralysis at any moment and kill us all. 

Anthony, as I had christened him — quoting, "I am 
182 



THE LION THAT CAME TO LIFE 

dying* Egypti dying" — ^had ceased growling; he was 
breathing naturaOy and his eyes full of intelligeoce, 
followed us watdiMly. His expression was positively 
benign, but I did not know how far one could trust to 
it. So far he had not stirred, and recklessness inspired 
me, and while Mr. Akeley kept the gun on him, we took 
one last photograph, and then I shot him through the 
heart His conTuIsive boimd before he fell back on his 
side was proof of astonishing vitality, and then the swift 
glassy change told me how death really looked. 

He was a young male, with a fine skin and mane, the 
only mane of any lion we got that was not alive with 
ticks. 

The lioness had gone out of sight and, after the grim 
business of skinning, we went on after her and later 
walked unending hours across the dry stubble of the 
plain or through longer tangling grass trying for a 
litm for Martha or Herbert. We saw three others in 
the early part of the morning, but they got into wood 
so dense there was no hope in following. 

I^ater, after a conservative estimate had placed otur 
walk at twenty miles, we felt a positive indifference to 
finding anything more — unless we foimd it right in 
front of us and in a recumbent attitude ! We came back 
to camp after nine hours of exercise and found a herd 
of elephants squealing and racketing in the woods by 
the river. They had chosen their time welll 

We matabeeshed (rewarded) the gun boys Mid por- 
ters and bathed and changed, and f oimd a black runner 
had brought in a packet of mail from home. With 
devouring eagerness we read our three-montfas-old let- 
183 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

ten, then dined outdoors in a lorety sunset, wfaik tiK ] 
elephants trumpeted about and the baboons came out ] 
on the ravine slopes for food. Then as nij^t came chi ' 
a fire in the brush spread out in blaong splendor for i 
mile, flin^ng the acacias in ebony silhouette. The 
cracklings came across to us like firecrac^rs. Then 
the flame died to an amber glow. The moon swung sud- 
denly out from the clouds overhead and turned the world 
to silver. Out of the stillness came the hunting grunt 
oi lions on the plains. 



CHAPTER XIV 

LION HUNTING AT NIGHT 

"Niawts IN A "Boha"; Nellie, the 
Faithful Lioness 

The moon was bright now, a tropic moon directly 
overhead, casting inky pools of shadow beneath our feet. 
Every nig^t we heard the distant roaring of lions and 
that hungry hunting grunt of theirs. Their hunting 
noise is really a series of grunts, beginning with one low 
one, followed by six or more hurried ones, ending, after 
an instant's pause, with about three long-drawn-out 
grunts, generally increasing in loudness. Um — 
tmi-um-um-um-um-um ttm — um — Um I 

It is almost impossible to tell how far away those 
grunts are. Whenever you hear them you are always 
inclined to think the Hon is behind the next bush. To 
hear them from our camp made us eager to spend a 
night in the brush and see the night life of the jungle 
and try for lions. 

The way to try for Kons at night is to kill an antelope 
about half a mile from where you want to use it and 
have it dragged that half mile to leave a good trail; 
then you stake it down in front of the thicket where 
you conceal yourself and wait. 

You try to arrange the scene so the moonlight will 

be on the bait, with a clear background against which 

185 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

the lion will show up well when he comes to dine. Ton 
pile as much fresh brush aa you can artistically upon 
your thicket or "homa," as the hiding place is called, 
for the lion can see as well by night as by day, and you 
leave a peephole for outlook and yom- gun. Tou have 
to get into the boma by sundown for the moment the 
first gray shadows creep over the plain comes that 
hoarse grunt. And then you sit perfectly still and 
wait for twelve hours. 

Before Monsieur Flamand left us Mr. Bradley went 
out one night with him, but though they heard lions all 
night they had no chance at a shot, except at mosquitoes. 
We had no mosquitoes at all in our camp, but this boma 
was six or eight miles away from camp, by a water- 
hole in the brush. However, a waterhole was a good 
place for game, so the next night Mr. Akeley, Miss 
Miller, and we two Bradleys went again to the same 
bcana to try our luck. 

It was a natural thicket, reenf orced with greenery so 
the lions wouldn't see us too easUy, and the clearing 
within the thicket was so absurdly spacious that we 
spread bou^is for taxy weary ones to lie upon during 
the ni^t. 

We had our porters carry out a chop box uid blankets 
to this retreat. Then the porters left and we ensconced 
ourselves and dined sketchily within it. I had a fore- 
boding at the time that the flavor of green onions and 
cheese was not likely to help conceal our presence. We 
were surprised, as always, by the swiftness of the tropic 
night, for at five-thirty by our watches the sun dropped 
bdiind the mountains, and at six o'clock Martha, 
18S 



tlON HUNTING AT NIGHT 

Serbert, and I were sitting in the dusk, guns in hand, 
peering out throu^ loopholes in the boughs at the 
mournful nose of a poor dead topi. 

The moon rose, the dark turned silver clear, the lions 
grunted and roared but not one came near us. But 
tiie mosquitoes came. They came humming io swarms 
and settled on erery Tulnerable inch of us. But for the 
strangeness of the scene, I could have beliered myself 
back in dear old Wisccmnn on a June night. But we 
were handicapped here as we were not in Wisconsin. 
There we could at least attempt to protect ourselves. 
Here to lift a hand and deal a slap was to bring reproach 
upon yourself from your fellow, and equally tormented, 
hunters. Any nmse at any moment might cost a lion. 
With grim self-control we learned to blot mosquitoes 
in slow silence. 

Mr. Akeley was not trying for a licm. He reposed 
peacefully most of the time upon the boughs, and frcsn 
time to time the two weary Bradleys took their turns, 
bat Martha Miller sat uostirriDg upon her camera box 
for nine long hours until the moon sank and the morn- 
ing £gkt began to steal over the far-away mountains. 

We decided that tke location was not a happy one, 
and that we would abandon tke neighborhood of the 
waterhole. A day later, Mr. Bradley took out the tiny 
pup tent, at Mr. Akeley's suggestion, and squeezed it 
into the center of another thicket some distance away, 
eat three portholes in the sides for guns and set up three 
steamer chairs within it whidb filled it to repletion. 
Thca, leaving a porter to guard the antelope he had 
187 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL | 

killed and staked out in front, he came hurriedly hoA: 
across the plains for Martha and me. 

We dined at five and at five-thijrty we started off. 
Our camp was encircled by such a deep ravine that ve 
had always a sharp scramble down and then a long 
climb up the perpendicular sides of it before we gained 
the opposite plains. Three luckless porters carried our 
bicycles up for us and once on the plains we mounted 
them and set out along the tiny ribbon of native path 
running out to the western mountains. 

The world was bright with color when we started; 
we were riding strai^t into the mountains of azure 
through fields of grass that seemed like waving golden 
grain. Here and there the scattered trees and brush 
glinmiered with that lovely green that comes just after 
the sun has gone. 

We cycled as fast as we could but the light went 
faster. The moimtains grew darkly purple, then coldly 
gray. The grass lost its gleam of gold and became 
vague and mysterious with blotting shadows of forest 
reaches. The path ceased to glimmer whitely. The 
world was spectral gray. 

At our left we heard a lion grunt. Um, um-um-um- 
um-imi-iun — um — um — Um I 

It was uncannily near. We cycled a little faster, re- 
membering that there was but one gun in the group and 
that was on Herbert's wheel and difficult of access. 
There was no use getting it out until we stopped cy- 
cling. Martha's wheel and mine were a little short for 
carrying guns so we had left our Springfields for the 
porteri to bring on, and the porters were trotting after 
188 



LION HUNTING AT NIGHT 

us SMnewhere out of sight. It was but a few minutes 
after six but the mountains had shouldered the day so 
quickly out of the way that it seemed Jike midnight at 
home. 

The lion was keeping right up with us, grunting 
away, somewhere out on those plains at oiu- left. It 
was no use for us to tell each other that he was probably 
a mile, a half mile, away — he wasn't. And he could 
see us. Probably on our wheels he took us for a new 
species of antelope. It seemed to me that our crouch- 
ing pose, our apparent flight, would just naturally in- 
vite him to the chase, and I realized that being on horse- 
back was no bar to an attack by lions; I had heard 
innumerable stories of men set upon when riding casu- 
ally homewards. Even with my frail memory for 
names I could remember that there was a Mr. Pease, a 
former ma^strate in the Transvaal, who had been 
pulled from his horse by a lion. 

I wished I hadn't remembered his name. It seemed 
to make it more real. 

And, then, at our right, another lion grunted. There 
are people to whom a lion's roar is the most terrifying 
thing in the world, but I think that a lion's grunt, that 
businesslike hunting grunt, is the most chilling sound 
that I have ever heard. And these grunts, hard as they 
were to place, sounded unmistakably close. 

Just why the lion grunts when hunting no one knows. 
One theory is that it is done to start up the game and 
I can easily believe it — ^that sudden reverberating inti- 
mation of a lion's presence would send every panic- 
strickm little hoof flying in revealing clatter. Later, 
189 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

when the lion has his prey located and is ready to strike, 
there is never a warning ncHse frcnoi him. 

We cycled so fast that we soon reached the brush and 
in a few minutes we thought we had come to the right 
place to leave the path and our wheels and strike off 
for the boma. There was a lone tree to our left, the 
landmark that Herbert was watching for, with a hask 
at the rig^t, and beyond the scattering of thickets. We 
abandoned our wheels at the pathside and Herbert got 
out his gun with a speed considerably accelerated by 
the increasing concert from the lions, an4 then we 
plunged into Ihe grass towards the thicket where tiie 
ambush ought to be. Herbert had left a boy to see 
that nothing made o£F with the bait before we arrived 
and we began to whistle to this boy. No boy responded. 
We tried again. Then we called. He couldn't be asleep 
— not with those lions about. My immediate theory 
was that he had been eaten by lions — not the present, 
grunting lions, but other previous lions, now silent and 
replete. 

We stared about in the darkness at the dimly loom- 
ing thickets. They were all utterly unidentifiable. 
Any one of them might be our boma. Any one might 
be the retreat of some lion lying up during the day and 
just ready to saUy out afresh. I remembered the lions 
I had seen starting from thickets just two days before 
on the plains, the day I had killed my lion. And when 
Herbert began plunging briskly about up to the black 
thickets to find the dead antelope and the ambushed 
tent I remonstrated feelingly, while keeping close to 
him and the protecting gun. I r^ninded him that the 
190 



LION HUNTING AT NIGHT 

Foster brotharsi faa<^ to back with two guns, had not 
been able to ward off a lion in broad dayli^t. 

But Herbert waa not concerned with warding off 
lions. He was only afraid that our conrersation would 
fri^ten them away before we found the boma. The 
bcma was apparently & little further on. It was cer- 
tunly not here. 

We stood there in the sinister gray dark with the 
nnnffli'n g grunts craning a little closer all uround us. 
I carried Mr. Akeley's little flashlight worked by a 
dynamo which threw a spot of Ught a few feet ahead, 
but I did not feel that it was bri^t enough to aimoy 
a lion — it was nothing but a little wink of light. As 
I stared out in the vague reaches beyond us stsnething 
moTcd. It melted quickly from bush to bush. 

I said in an extremely flat and quiet tone which I 
trusted indicated perfect calm and absence of tremor, 
"There is a lion just ahead of me. Point the gun that 
way." 

And then in a similarly unmoved and casual voice 
Martha remarked, "There's a hon on this side, too. Bet- 
ter keep the gun circling." 

We sounded as if we said, "Why, there's Mrs. 
Brown-Jones coming for tea. Better put on an extra 
cup." 

"They won't come near while you're talking," said 
Herbert, and he added in a discouraged way, "Now 
they probably won't come near us all ni^t." 

I thought his discouragement was premature. Those 
two hons were calling across us to each other in a more 
and more intimate understanding. I can jest about it 
191 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 






DOW — I could jest about it then — but I had a i 
feet understanding of what terror was. It was in the 
helplessness of it all — not having a gun, not having a 
revolver, knowing that if anything did come I hadn't 
the defense of a stricken antelope. And the whole ^t- 
uation was shot through and through with a feeling of 
responsibility for Martha. 

Wholeheartedly I advocated abandonment of die 
brush and a return to the path. Back we went and ai 
we stood there in the path between tiie grass fields and 
a stubble of burnt ground, where a heap of bleadied 
bones glimmered with wan reminder, I felt a surge of 
remorse. That very morning I had laughed lightly at 
runners who wanted to go in threes instead of twos — 
I had been skeptical of their tales of a lion attacking 
them the previous night and felt they were trying to 
make a social excursion of their errands. 

Now I knew that three runners were none too many. 
Not three times three. And I knew why they kept such 
fires at their camps. 

I tried a little fire myself but the grass would not 
bum, so we kept the searchlight swinging and talked 
in loud, nonchalant tones, while the lions grunted back 
and forth, apparently heartening each other to have the 
first go at us. "No, you have the first choice. . . . 
After you. ..." 

Then we heard another noise, faint, far away. . . . 
More lions, I thought for a moment, but it was the 
babble of the porters coming on down the path towards 
us. Nothing was ever such music to my ears. 

There, on those backs, were our guns. And there 
192 




MU. BlADUT A 



y 






J. 

■ 1*- ■■-■* j 


'": * 


i^ 


1 


mm 



Thb "Diad" LioM That Roaied ai Hh Picttm! Was Takek 




Topi Staked Ui;t fob Lium Bait 



•^.^ . " 




1 


1 


1 


HK ' 8& 


f- -^s^. 


HIM 


*B^. - 



Natitu oir THE RciNDi Puuiri 



LION HUNTING AT NIGHT 

in those black heads, was the native geography to lead 
us to our boma. The men came on, half a dozen of 
them huddled together in a din of talk. We knew then 
why pcvters axe so conversational. It is their life in- 
surance policy on lion nights. 

Faddhng swiftly along they soon reached us, in the 
lead a wizened old mite, spear in hand, my camera strap 
acron his fordiead, my camera bmnping his bare back. 
We clutched our guns and a blessed peace enveloped us. 
That awful helplessness was gone. We fell in behind 
the leader and that grizzled mite led us on and on for 
half an hour, then struck into another stretdi of scrub. 

There was an extraordinary similarity of marking — 
the same tree at the left, the same bush at the right, the 
same scattering of thickets. We went farther and far- 
ther along, then the guide gave a hyena call which 
brought a swift echo from ^e boy on guard in the 
ambush. 

There was our dead topi and there, in the thicket, 
our waiting tent. Martha and I squeezed in, thrusting 
our breakfast box and bags with coats and sweaters un- 
der the chairs; Herbert hurriedly dragged the kill to 
a spot a little more in view, staked it down so no lion 
could drag it away — and the porters fled. 

Before we could get comfortably settled, the lions 
were roaring around us. We crouched in the chairs 
trying to peer out the peepholes, which were sagging 
too much with the weight of the brush piled outside and 
the drag of our guns in the apertures, and wished that 
we had necks like flamingoes. 

It was seven-twenty when we were inside, black dark, 
193 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

with the kill scarcely duscemible. We heard coutsnt 
grunting ... we beard the whistle of a reed budc 
leaping with alarm, then a hard patter of racing ante- 
lopes flying for their lives. A lion must be near. We 
maintained a positive torture of silent, neck-breakiiig 
attention. 

The moon slipped out from the clouds at last, a blood- 
red circle bringing the foreground to scnnethiiig like 
distinctness. And then I relaxed, leaving the watdi 
to the others. I was at the right end and my view wu 
very circumscribed. Martha was in the middle. The 
first lion was to be hers, and after she fired the first 
shot we were all to fire as fast as we could to give him 
all the lead we bad. 

I was just resting my neck, which had been curred 
like an Arab steed, when I heard Martha's gun go aS 
into the stillness like the incarnation of all noise. I got 
a glimpse then of a huge lion, heavy maned, looming 
before us at an angle to which I tried in vain to jerk 
my gun, and that same instant the roar of Herbert'i 
big gun followed Martha's Springfield, and the white 
smoke from it obscured the scene. 

Then was a thud of galloping feet. Whai a Umi 
stalks in to you be is silence itself, but when he gallops 
off his padded feet hit the ground as hud as a horse's. 
And then we heard roars, horrible roars. He was at 
our left, in the brush, evidently badly wounded. The 
roars became groans, dying down iTpasmodically. It 
is a wretched thing to hear a wounded beast groan, but 
one can fortify oneself by remembering the violence 
by which he lives, the ruthless clawing down of ante- 
194 



LION HUNTING AT NIGHT 

lopes. And to-nig^t, remembering those encircling 
gnints, those dim shapes gliding from bush to bush, I 
Imew just how the poor antelopes felt, milling about be- 
witderedly, their noses strained, their flanks quivering 
with fearful expectation. 

We heard fainter and fainter noises from the 
wounded han and shrill above them the vixenish yelp- 
ing of jackals teasing him. Then the groans died away. 
We pressed Martha's hands excitedly. She had her 
lion, we felt sure. And he was a big fellow with a fine 
nume. 

Thb was at nine o'clock. One by one the other hours 
went by, with lion calls now far, now near. The moon- 
light was marvelous. We saw jackals steal out to the 
kin and hyenas and two swift cat-like creatures, either 
leopards (n* serval cats. Out in the brush a hyena 
hn^ed horribly. All the night noises and all the 
night life of the jungle went on about us as they had 
been going on from the beginning of time. 

It had a wild fascination that stirred the blood. It 
was Beauty and Night and Violence. . . . Kvery time 
a lion sounded near, excitement held us tense. . . . 
At twelve I was holding the watch alone and I waked 
the others silently to see two leopard-Iike forms run- 
ning in about the kilL They suddenly fled and then 
we stiffened. 

At our left a Uon appeared, walking past the thicket 

to the kill, as silent as a picture on a screen. He seemed 

tr«nendous. The dark outline of him against the 

moonlit grass and sky was a perfect thing, a great, 

lOfl 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

calm, arrogantly assured presence. Majestic is tiie 
word for lions. They appropriate it. 

Herbert waited till he had sure aim and shot. Tbe 
lion never knew what struck him down. The gum 
drowned his roar. 

There is no way to tell of the tense excitement of 
such a moment. The nerves thrill with the old* primi' 
tive passions of the time when life was cast on a die. 
The cotmtless generations that have stalked their prey^ 
stir through us. And the blood that loves to race and 
thrill and is tired of beating tamely through a safe life 
quickens to exhilaration. 

Night shooting has not the danger of the daytime, for 
unless the wounded beast happened to charge directly 
at our ambush we had nothing to fear. But it has the 
element of uncertainty, and the constant edge of expec* 
tation that any moment will come the instant upon 
which all your chances of success are staked. 

We saw other lions that night, but far away. One 
that we took to be the faithful lioness kept running back 
and forth in the dim distance and calling her dead mate. 
She flitted by again in the morning dark, and Herbert 
risked a sudden shot, but we couldn't see what happened. 

About dawn a terrific roaring sounded on our left, 
and we feared that Martha's lion was coming to life 
again. Then the roaring grew farther away. As soon 
as we could see in the dimness, Herbert squeezed out 
of the ambush and glimpsed a lioness off at the left 
making into a thicket. He fired, but without result. 
There was no sign of the wounded lion. He had appar- 
ently revived, like Anthony, and made off. 
198 



LION HUNTING AT NIGHT 

Out in front lay Herbert's lion, a very fine male, and 
behind him, so directly in line as not to be visible from 
the thicket, the creamy, soft-furred, graceful creattu-e 
whom I christened Nellie, the Faithful Lioness. 

In each case Herbert's bullet had penetrated the 
heart, severing the arteries. Death had been instant. 

I felt a little sentimental, looking down on Nellie. 
Her faithfulness had cost her her life, but I was glad 
that she had gone with her mate and not been left to 
mourn. . . . But the jungles are ruthless to illu- 
sion. Naturalists have no pity. Nell was Nimrod — a 
yoimg two-yearKild male, who had hung about, not from 
sympathy but for his dinner, and run in for a snatdi 
at the antelope. 

Lions are strangely indifferent to other dead lions on 
the bait. We heard of five that had been shot over the 
same kill and here we had three that came in, one after 
another. Several young males often hunt in bands with 
one or two older, and the) apparent lioness that Herbert 
had seen making off at dawn might have been another 
such young maneless two-year-old as the erstwhile NelL 

We never did get that first lion of Martha's, although 
we searched the coverts and watched for days to see if 
the vultures gathered. 

For three more nights we went out again, with one 
night in between for sleep, but, though the lions roared 
all about us, not one stepped out where we could get a 
shot until that third night. 

That night the moon was not due imtil after one. 
From six to twelve-twenty we had been watching stead- 
ily and uselessly throu^ the dark. A lion had been 
197 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

grunting on our right, and apparently ifimjng Jo t^ 
wards the kill, but for some time we had not faeazd Ibid. 
We had alternated tense concentration with rdaxmg 
disappointment. 

l^en, just at twelve-twenty, from the right came a 
great shadow, black against the lig^itening ni^bt, atiD 
as silence itself. Not a twig cracked under the padded 
paws. Kot a leaf rustled. 

It was Martha's lion. I held my gun on him waiting 
for her to fire first. It seoned an eternity until she shot; 
she chose her aim with care. Then I followed. There 
was a tremendous roaring and the lion was down. We 
saw the great bulk of him in the shadow before us; his 
roaring filled our ears. He was fatally wounded — 
Martha's shot had penetrated the brain — ^but, to prevent 
an escape and a difiScuIt chase, we flashed the searchlight 
out one peephole while Herbert gave him the big gun 
in the heart. 

He was a splendid lion. I think he had really the 
finest mane of all. It was our last lion. Herbert and I 
went out again and we took out Friscilla Hall, who 
had reached us now with Alice. We sat up in vain. 
Though we continued to hear lions every night, we got 
no more shots at them here — the moon gave us only an 
hour or two of light now, and the lions were more wary. 





^^^Vf 1 


-m^ 


%:^.^»? iJ 






^\ 


m^^^^Jl^^^j^^^ 


'■^''■^'^ag 




m 


^^P^^K^^^^^ ' ^^TSr"'i. „ — J 



Ovi Nuht'i Kill — Mb. Bhadley i 




MiaB MiLLKK AND HcK Ll 



X .-' 



^0- '^ 



» MaKIKO I'iRE WITH FwE STICKS 




KeADV rOB THE M, 



CHAPTER XV 

ELEPHANTS AND BUFFALO 

Bio Gahk HuNxiNa ik the Junqlis of the 

RUINBI RlTER 

Teb Ruindi plains, when first penetrated by sports- 
mm about fifteen years ago, must hare been one of the 
world's richest game fields. The plains lie south of 
Lake Albert Edward and stretch west to a range of 
nameless peaks beyond which live the imowrUg, the 
natives who refuse to accept the Belgian rule. The level, 
grassy tract is broken by light acacia growth and occa- 
sional patches of brush often thickening into forest, and 
it is cut by a deep, wide ravine choked with jimgle, 
through which wanders the Ruindi River on its way to 
the lake. 

The plains are simply swarming with antelope, cob, 
topi, and reed buck, grazing in literal thousands, but 
tlie buffaloes, which a few years before had been discov- 
ered feeding boldly on the steppe, have been made wary 
by occasional shooting and have taken to the tangled 
jungles and the deep marsh of elephant grass on the 
river edge. 

Through those same jungles and adjoining uplands 

the wide elephant trails tell a story of the past that 

must have been wealth amazing to the first poachers; 

now onfy fluids of the old herds travel those trails, and 

199 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

these are ready, at the first alarm, to stampede bac^ 
to the impenetrable retreats in tiie western mountaiiu. 

To get an elephant or a buffalo now on the Ruindi 
means luck and work. We thought that luck had played 
into our hands the night after I killed the lion vrbisii 
refused to stay dead, for on our return to camp we 
heard elephants trumpeting on the slopes below. 

Mr. Akeley inquired of the natives if the herd were' 
on this side of the river, and the answer, throu^ intei^ 
preters, was that it was not. An after examination of 
the country proved that the interpreter — or the inter- 
preting — ^was wrong, and that the elephants had been 
just below us. 

If we had known it, we would certainly hare gone 
down after them, amply exercised as we were after 
twenty miles of lion searching, but, believing that we 
should have to make a great circle and cross the river to 
get them, we let the occasion go by and dined with their 
squeals and trumpetings in our ears. 

We planned to go down on them next morning, and 
Monsieur Flamand had natives out to locate the herd. 
We arose at dawn and after breakfast started off after 
the guides, crossing the deep ravine that encircled the 
camp and climbing up to the plains on the north and 
east of the river. 

There were plenty of baboons in this ravine, and we 
met them nearly every day scurrying about the slopes or 
crossing a log bridge of their own. They were aloof 
but not particularly intimidated and on one occasion a 
huge fellow remained in the path in front of Herbert 
and myself, with a menacing air that made us look about 
200 



ELEPHANTS AND BUFFALO 

for our guns. The gun boys, with the light-hearted lack 
of responsibility which made their cooperation so desul- 
tory, had chosen that moment for a merry bath in the 
rirer and our guns were somewhere along the shore. By 
the time we had snatched them up and advanced again 
liie big baboon had decided not to dispute our way and 
went o£f across the log bridge with rery grumpy barks. 
One of them who felt mischievously inclined would make 
a wicked antagonist for an unarmed man. 

This morning we followed the edge of the plains, 
skirting the canyon through which the river wandered 
unseen in its jungles. We looked down on bits of forest 
that were marvelously beautiful and utterly unhke any- 
thing else that we had seen. Instead of the crooked, flat- 
topped trees, so characteristic of African landscape, in- 
stead of the low-branching, moss-laden giants of the 
gorilla forest, we had trees that were fantastically tall 
and straight, and the effect of hundreds of them in a 
luxuriance of festooning vine was of indescribable 
grace. 

Among these towering varieties were the gigantic 
false fig trees. From the bark of this tree the natives 
make bark cloth. They cut out a piece of bark from the 
living tree and hammer it with scored ivory tools until 
it has stretched to surprising dimensions and worked to 
suppleness. It is very strong when pulled against the 
grain, but at the least strain in the other direction it 
shreds like fiber. It has a beautiful reddish color — ^that ~ 
is, when first worn. Most of it that our porters wore 
was indistinguishable from a black rag. The men 
201 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

draped it Tnth classical grace, catching it nondudantfy 
on the left shoulder. 

With a bit of bark cloth, a gourd) a bag knotted of 
fiber, a clay pipe, a bundle of fire sticks, a knife (s 
spear, all home made, the native is ready for any emer- 
gency, and will hare warmth and food where your 
white man could die for lack of matches and tinned 
meat. 

The fire sticks are a precious possession and are 
usually carried within four or five tightly fitting cases 
of skin to insure dryness. A hole is cut in a bit of soft 
wood and into that a piece of hard wood is fitted and 
twirled about with a rapid, downward motion of the 
hands. I have seen a skillful man have the soft wood 
fired in three trials. Sometimes a bit of tinder or 
charred rag is kept at the junction of the sticks to 
catch the spark, but the Ruindi natives made fire with 
only the wood itself. 

We walked idong the edge until the rim began to 
break down into slopes and brush covered declivities, 
leading into the jungles. We passed water buck and 
topi and cob, who moved off and turned to stare in big- 
eyed surprise, and at a distance we saw the grasses 
close over the fiitting shapes of a lion and lioness going 
home after a night's hunting. Our guides began to 
lead us to the left, into brush that grew thicker and 
thicker, motioning us to extreme caution and silence 
in our advance. 

The herd was in the jungle ahead. The wind was 
blowing from us to them — a circumstance that yx)ur 
Congo native takes into no accoimt at all. Mr. Akeley 
202 



ELEPHANTS AND BUFFALO 

felt decidedly that the element of surprise was going 
to be lacking in our attack. He was anxious to get 
motion pictures of elephants before we tried for our 
hunting, but pictures could be obtained only by maneu- 
vering about with the greatest regard to wind and direc- 
tion, so he merely followed along with his gun in his 
hands and his camera men at his heels. 

Monsieur Flamand led with Herbert following, and 
I came after with Martha next and then Mr. Akeley. 

The trail grew fresher and fresher; here several ele- 
phants had been milling around; here one had stood 
under a spreading tree. Branches were torn off, bark 
peeled, a tusk rubbed against the trunk. . . . If ow the 
green grew denser. It was difficidt to see Herbert's 
figure ahead; I had to walk fast to keep up with the 
men. The difficulty of walking fast over tangled 
ground, of trying not to let a twig crack beneath you, 
and at the same time keeping a keen outlook for a 
shadowy spot of elephant showing through the leafy 
screens is do mean task for an amateur. 

Suddenly everything happened — it happened all at 
once The hnish came alive and snapped and cracked 
in every direction. It was fidl of thrashing, unseen 
shapes. A gun behind me boomed — Martha's Springs 
field. I whirled about and saw Mr. Akeley's gun go 
up and off. And at the same time I saw what he was 
firing at — sameibhig big and black opening over the 
bushes at us — the outstanding ears of an enraged cow 
elephant swinging in on us. 

I didn't have time to revel in the sensation of an 
elephant diarge. I merely had a feeling of blank sur- 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

prise as if I had seen a large umbrella open over mj 
head. Then the umbrella collapsed. Mr. Akeley's 
shot directed through the ear into the brain Invug^t her 
down in her tracks. 

Back of them loomed the back of another elephant, 
a cow, and I fired at her, Martha joining, and after a 
wavering moment she turned and crashed off. Ahead 
of me a cannonading told that Herbert and Flamand 
were having their excitements. Flamand was shooting 
at an elephant ahead of him; Herbert turned an old 
bull with a shot in the head. He saw him throw up his 
trunk, spread bis ears and make off. The fall of the 
cow, who was apparently the leader of the stampede, 
turned the herd. 

We had the glimpse of a baby elephant, a streak of 
black running away from the dead cow. For some 
time that httle one kept thrashing and blundering 
about the brush. 

We had been coming straight down the trail which 
was the elephants' way out from that jungle, and, with 
the wind at our backs, they must have known for an 
hour that we were on the way. We concluded that all 
the elephants had bolted and that the hunt was over 
for the day. The bull that Herbert had fired at had 
small ivory, so there was no use in pursuing that one, 
and we certainly did not want to kill another cow. 

We went over to the dead elephant and found her a 
splendid animal with a very noble looking head. She 
had also a tail with more hairs and longer hairs than 
Mr. Akeley had ever seen. I measured one — twenty- 
one inches long. These hairs are black and wiry and 
204 



ELEPHANTS AND BUFFALO 

very much sought after by the natives for bracelets. 
By soaking they can be rendered pliable enough to 
twist and knot. The tusks of the cow could be left till 
it was easier to cut them out, but the men set to work 
at once upon the ears and portions of skin that they 
wanted to save, and Martha and I were sitting down 
to wait in the shade some distance away, when a thrash- 
ing behind us made us reach convulsively for the guns 
left negligently against a tree. 

Either the wounded cow or the toto — the baby — 
was coming back to investigate, but we fired in the air 
and the noises grew farther and farther away. Once 
or twice more the elephants came back, and once we 
saw the toto cruising about in the brush. We kept our 
guns near while we lunched in a nearby glade. 

The marabou storks were winging in from every 
direction to feast upon the kill and Mr. Akeley re- 
mained that afternoon to try for a picture of them. 
Coming home that night he discovered that our ele- 
phants had not all bolted, that the natives had not led 
us to the main herd. On the slopes below him eleven 
elephants came shouldering through the green, one 
after another, and he got the camera in position and 
photographed them. There was a huge bull among 
them with splendid ivory. In order to get the last bull 
to turn and face the camera Mr. Akeley fired across 
his path and got his picture as he swung around. From 
the camp we had heard the distant trumpeting, so we 
hoped for another elephant hiuit. 

We should have gone that next day. We heard 

them only one more ni^t. When we went into the 

205 



.TV -HE GORILLA TRAIL 
—^ "= * *ptant, had bolted, taTdinglri 
. , ^c^::^ OnJy the wounded cowrZid 
_^ - T -.r-r; .-e heard her trumpet Md milr 
,. , ^ -,.-. r :»u-e m our buffalo hunts 

> «.>..'- r:?; to the jungles and marshe, .w 
^ ^ . a- =rj m the late afternoon we usdl. 
, a, «i- .:: to feed on a faraway dope It 

»u- •'••^""""'^onlywaytogetabiiM 
^^ ■ r - !■ - '-ie jungle after it. 

^ ,. ^-inc^led, even for Teterans. Ik 

^ ^.^-K-'unter himself. Although a strirt 

^— - -" =^ ■' "" """St dangerous Af ot 

_^- ' -••■-"- ™ dephant and the buflalo 

,-— « «* ^'""^ '" 'feognize man »• 

_^_» ,.-«s^u. ind meet his hostilities half wjy, 

—^ .. -"WK. not as readily as a lion, but 

i .->>.'•». >" '*«■*■ I '""■e talked wiUi > 

'< ''^ — ■»» itvrally stamped into nothing- 

».«. ■- !» »«i of several other hunten 

^^ — —" ^ -.: '^y the buffalo's quiet habit of 

tl ■ ' ., ■■■-■'■ the herd has gone on, to 

Ilii - " 

tlu - , . >vss reluctant to take in the 

for • ■■, lirailley started alone on 

sm:i ^ ■ \ "'.ft follows is told by 3Ir. 

:in(l , ' ^ . ■.;: ■. not mine. 

A\ ^ ^ ■ V .-:" two. crossing the ravine 

spl.ii, ,^ ;:.' follow the cliff for a 

li;u! ai _ ^.> .•■ ihf lluindi river. The 

Mv. .A. ^ . <\<r3l d.-i.vs. In three- 

one ini-i . " ■ ■'■'*■' the steep side of the 



Q ELEPHANTS AND BUFFALO 

^^-tiine into a gulch-like valley, a jiingle of a forest, 

Habere we came upon the fresh trail of a single buffalo, 

._. jDowing an old, well-wom path. 

^. **The jungle was so dense we could see only a few feet 

__, jMttd on the path. We took three boys in with us, two 

Z^^ carry our guns and the third for rain coats. After 

^oflowing the trail up the gulch, the wind being towards 

~aa, ve heard a sound that might be buffalo. We took 

. our guns — ^the four seventy-fives — from our boys, and 

^made them stay back at a good distance while we crept 

'forward cautiously, step by step, our guns on ready. 

^ "After ten minutes of this Mr. Akeley indicated a 

r spot of gray through the tangled leaves, about fifty to 

■erenty feet ahead. The grayness of the spot made it 

.' aeem more an elephant than a black buffalo — but the 

geajneas might be dried mud. I looked hard. It was 

tbe back we saw. I thought I recognized the switching 

of his taO. 

*1t had been decided that if we saw a spot of black, 
may glimpse at all of buffalo, we were to fire and take 
our chances about getting the animal or inviting a 
cliuge. Maneuvering to a good position for a diot 
mij^t mean letting the animal get our scent, and this 
lone bull was one of a wily herd that had been shot over 
often enough to teach him to take no chances. At the 
first hint of our presence be would undoubtedly get 
sway without giving us a chance at a shot. 

"So now I raised my gtm, took aim at that piece of 
gray, and fired. 

'*I struck the hip; he went down instantly with a bel- 
low that resoimded through the jungle. Mr. Akeley 
207 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

jungles agaia the elephants had bolted, traTeling hack 
to the mountains. Only the wounded cow remiuned, 
lying up to recover; we heard her trumpet and nearfy 
ran on her once or twice in our buflfalo hunts. 

The buffaloes kept to the jungles and marshes ^ong 
the river by day, and in the late afternoon we used to 
see them coming out to feed chi a faraway slope. It 
was fairly inaccessible and the only way to get a buffab 
seemed to be to go in the jungle after it. 

That is not reccnnmended, even for veterans. The 
buffalo is a cunning hunter himself. Although a strict 
vegetarian — and three of the most dangerous African 
antagonists, the gorilla, the elephant and the buffalo 
are vegetarians — he has learned to recognize man as a 
nondesirable intrusion, and meet his hostilities half way. 

A buffalo will charge, not as readily as a lion, but 
with as devastating an effect. I have talked with a 
man whose friend was literally stamped into nothing- 
ness by such a charge. I heard of several oibet hunters 
who had been "blotted" by the buffalo's quiet habit of 
coming back stealthily, after the herd has gone on, to 
investigate the alarm. 

Altogether Mr. Akeley was reluctant to take in the 
feminines, so he and Mr. Bradley started alone on 
December twenty-first. What follows is told by Mr. 
Bradley, for it was his hunt, not mine. 

"We left camp at a quarter of two, crossing the ravine 
to the plains, then descending to follow the cliff for a 
mile overlooking the jungles of the Ruindi river. The 
buffalo had not been seen for several days. In three- 
quarters of an hour we went down the steep side of the 
206 



ELEPHANTS AND BUFFALO 

Tsrine into a gulch-like valley, a jungle of a forest, 
iriliere we came upon the fresh trail of a single huffalo, 
following an old, well-worn path. 

"The jungle was so dense we could see only a few feet 
ahead on the path. We took three boys in with us, two 
to cany our guns and the third for rain coats. After 
following the trail up the gulch, the wind being towards 
us, we heard a sound that might be buffalo. We took 
our guns — ^the four seventy-fives — from oiu* boys, and 
made them stay back at a good distance while we crept 
forward cautiously, step by step, our guns on ready. 

"After ten minutes of this Mr. Akeley indicated a 
spot of gray through the tangled leaves, about fifty to 
seventy feet ahead. The grayness of the spot made it 
seem more an elephant than a black buffalo — but the 
grayness might be dried mud. I looked hard. It was 
the back we saw. I thought I recognized the switching 
of his taiL 

"It had been decided that if we saw a spot of black, 
any glimpse at all of buffalo, we were to fire and take 
our chances about getting the animal or inviting a 
charge. Maneuvering to a good position for a shot 
might mean letting the animal get our scent, and this 
lone bull was one of a wily herd that had been shot over 
often enough to teach him to take no chances. At the 
first hint of our presence he would undoubtedly get 
away without giving us a chance at a shot. 

"So now I raised my gun, took aim at that piece of 
gray, and fired. 

"I struck the hip; he went down instantly with a bel- 
low that resounded through the jungle. Mr. Akeley 
207 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

fired right after me. The bull went on bellowing and 
crashed out of sight among the trees. His amaa 
sounded to me like those of a wounded elephant— I 
thought for a few minutes that we had run on to de- 
phants instead of buffalo. All I had seen was that 
patch of gray. 

"Heiuing a loud crashing and thrashing we kneh in 
the path, expecting a charge, our guns reloaded and 
aimed. For some minutes it sounded as if the buffalo 
were coming back our way, then things quieted. 
Everything was perfectly stUl for a few seconds. 

"Another crash and another bellow. We waited in 
this position for fifteen minutes, minutes in which there 
was not one second of dullness. We kept a keen out- 
look on ereiy side, for the buffalo will often return by 
- another path to turn the tables on his hunter. 

"Presently we heard a succession of roars and then 
very heavy breathing sounding from a place about 
twenty feet from the spot where we had first seen the 
buffalo. We were then sure that he was down and 
probably fatally wounded. 

"We moved a few steps forward and waited cau- 
tiously for another ten minutes, all the while hearing 
the breaking of the bushes, the heavy breathing and the 
bellows. 

"Then we crept up and Mr. Akeley fired another shot 
at what seemed to be the neck. After a few minutes 
we took another path, and came in on the same side, 
and saw a big, black bull buffalo down on his side in a 
watery marsh. He was very much alive, so I put a shot 
208 



ELEPHANTS AND BUFFALO 

Uirouj^ the shoulder, and Mr. Akeley followed with 
one through the back of the neck. 

"The old chap straightened out and died immedi- 
ately. We found that my first shot had broken his right 
hand thigh, shattering every bone in the leg. It was a 
fatal shot and he would have bled to death, but he might 
have held out in strength for a charge, even on three 
legs, if we had not hastened to finish him. 

"He was a big old bull, the scarred veteran of many 
fights. As head of the herd he had held his position 
with heavy cost to any who disputed it. He had not 
gone without punishment himself — his right horn had 
been broken off and its surface polished smooth, his 
right eye was gone, and he bore many marks of battle. 
The head was a magnificent trophy. Under the gray 
mud his hide was black and heavily haired. I should 
judge he weighed over two thousand pounds. 

"Until one comes into close relation with an African 
buffalo, one has no conception of the power and size 
of the great animal. He is beautifully formed; there 
is clear-limbed grace in his fine lines as well as strength 
and power; he has virility and combativeness in every 
suggestion, massivity without awkwardness. The 
elephant has a certain antediluvian grace; the buffalo 
has a smartness of finish, an air hostilely alert and 
inimicaL 

"It was then three-thirty and it would be two hours 
before the porters could be brought. I sent a note back 
to camp to have the porters hurried out, then we set 
to work at once to skin the head. 

"We skinned one side of it, then realized that we 
209 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

would hare to cut the entire head off to get it done be- 
fore dark. There was no time to wut for the camera. 
While Mr. Akeley was skinning the head I cut the rest 
of the skin off, cutting down the inside of the frmt 
legs and the back of the hind legs. Before I had gone 
a foot my knife was dull and I had to sharpen and re- 
sharpen every few strokes. 

"It was a huge hide, black and thick, not woolly as 
our American bison, but covered sparsely with coarse 
hair. I was sorry not to hare a photograph of him. 
but that splendid head, mounted, would be an enduring 
trophy." 

One day after Herbert's encounter with this buU 
we saw a herd of buffalo come out late in the af temoca 
on the slopes of the canyon not far away from us. We 
could see them grazing and strolling about, and with 
glasses we could observe them minutely. It was a woo- 
derful picture, and Mr. Akeley hurried off with the 
motion picture camera to circle the plains to a point 
above them and then descend. We saw him disappear 
from sight and knew that he was making his way 
through bush to maneuver for a position, and then 
suddenly we saw the herd begin to leave. 

One by one those buffaloes streaked across the open 
space and vanished in the forest below, a massive 
homed bidl being the last of all to disappear. Stnne- 
thing had given the alarm just as the camera was be- 
ing put in place, so one of the rarest pictures in the 
world, superb wild creatures in a rich beauty of back- 
ground dissolved without a film record, leaving the pbo* 
tographer only the memory and the exercise. 
210 



ELEPHANTS AND BUFFALO 

Three times after that the four of us went into the 
jungle after buffalo, putting in nine hours a day up and 
down the trails that wound through the network of 
thickets. We went into marshes where the grass closed 
over our heads and we had to force our way through the 
tou^ stalks; we skirted pools on old hippo runs. 

Twice we heard buffalo without seeing them, heard 
them as they bolted past us, unseen, on trails screened 
by thickets. Once we thought we saw them when we 
didn't, and fired — finding we had been cunningly fooled 
by shadowy leaves. And once — once when we had given 
up all hope, when we had seen the marks of the herd 
(3t)ssing the river and thought that all the herd had gone 
and were walking along a path we felt no longer event- 
ful — we came upon them. 

I saw the black back through a filigree of trees at my 
left; I raised my gun and pulled the trigger — and the 
cartridge failed to explode. For a minute I thought it 
was a bit of vine that jammed the trigger, and tore at 
it with a whispered warning to Mr. Akeley, who was 
just ahead of me. 

He had heard the click of my gun, then seen the buf- 
falo. He fired, but just as the herd bolted. I flung out 
that dud cartridge, then began shooting; so did Martha, 
who had held her fire to give me first shot, but the buf- 
falo were far on their way. Just one moment of relaxa- 
tion on the path and one dud cartridge had undone nine 
hours of rigorous care and stalking. 

It was a typical buffalo day. 

Nine hours of hard work and one-naif second of hard 
hickl 

211 



CHAPTER XVI 

santa in the jungle 
Alice Has a Congo Christhas 

The Ruindi plains had been reported so hot and 
feverish that, as I said, we had left Alice with Miss HiH 
at Ruchiiru, but as soon as we saw the Riundi we real- 
ized that its reputation had merely suffered, like so 
many other reputations in Africa, and succumbed to 
slander, and that it was no more unhealthy, at least our 
particular place in it, than a Colorado plateau. 

Hot, it certainly was, hunting at noon tmder tiie 
downpouring rays of the sun a few miles from the 
equator, hot with a dry, burning, brazen heat that made 
the dream of tinkling ice in a glass of grape juice — 
grape juice in any stage — an irresistible mockery and 
the mention of it a criminal offense; but one could id- 
ways be comfortable in our tents or grass houses, even 
at noon, so as Christmas approached and our departure 
was postponed, we sent a runner in to CtMnmissioner 
Van de Ghinste, asking him to try to find a white escort 
to send out with Miss Hall and Alice to reunite the 
family. 

We had hope that the agent territorial or the chef de 

poate might be abstracted from his duties, but it was 

not a strong hope, eren for the honorarium we were only 

too glad to offer, so we were tremendously exhilarated 

212 



SANTA IN THE JUNGLE 

when a runner brougfat the news that "la petite" and 
Friscilla Hall would be sent out to us with a white 
escort 

It was a three-day march and we did not expect them 
until the twenty-second, but on the twenty-first the 
boys' cry of "Toto hapal" (baby herel) brought me out 
of my tent, and there, across the plain, Hashed the green 
and scarlet of the "machila" (the hammock) of the 
Littlest Explorer. Through the glasses we cau^t the 
dark line of the porters and then the gleam of a robe — 
and there came the White Father, the Father Superior, 
jfallantly walking, in new shoes, too, it developed — with 
Friscilla mounted upon his donkey — and a donkey is 
the most priceless animal in the Congo. 

In this wise they had made the journey in two days, 
the only difficulty having been to keep Alice in her luun- 
mock. She always loved to walk with the rest, though 
her small legs could not keep up so hurried a pace, and 
as fast as we changed porters and languages she in- 
variably learned the new words for "Put me down" and 
used them busily. 

But though Alice made Christmas for us, the problem 
remained of how to make Christmas for Alice. We 
were a month behind in our plans. We had expected 
to reach Nairobi in Kenya Colony, as British East Af- 
rica was now named, by Christmas, and now in Nairobi 
there was Christmas mail and Christmas packages and 
stores and abops; and here in the heart of Africa we 
had only two trivial toys — ^long cherished-for emergen- 
cies — and a six-year-old's unfaltering trust in Santa 
Glaus. 

218 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

Laboriously she spelled out her letters to him, delv- 
ing the things she longed for, and dismayedly we read 
them to each other. Then diplomatically we began to 
explain; Santa was so far away. . . . Africa had no 
snow for his sleig^. . . . The packages would be in 
Nairobi. . . . 

But Alice would have none of that. "He'll get as far 
as he can and then send a nmner," she announced, and 
as our explanations grew more pessimistic, her trust 
grew more passionately clinging. 

"Oh, Mummie, let's hang up stockings anyway— -and 
see what he will dol" 

We hung up the stockings and Santa did a great deal 
It was the most exciting Christmas the small girl re- 
membered. There was a tree on the breakfast table in 
the grass house, which the boys had lined with jun^ 
green, a tree trimmed with scarlet kindergarten paper 
and bright with tallow candles shining away among the 
piles of packages — and the stocking was bulging. 

There was Daddy's long-hidden candy, and there was 
some of Martha's modehng clay, and Martha's own gold 
chain and locket, and Mummie's sacred pastels, and 
home-made painting books and picture books and stoiy 
books, and ivory bracelets, and elephant's hair brace- 
lets made by Uncle Akeley, and there were native stoob 
and baskets from PrisciUa, who had been preparing a 
most bountiful Christmas for every one — and we aU 
managed to produce and exchange a great many aui^ 
prising and amusing gifts. 

Later another runner came from Santa Claua — 
this time by way of Luofu, where the Father Supexicff 
214 



SANTA IN THE JUNGLE 

was now with Monsieur Fkmand, the Administrator 
of the Ruindi, bringing gifts from them both to all of 
us, rare spears and unusual ornaments and feathers, 
baskets and bells. 

The boys entered heartily into the occasion. Eadi 
one of them, down to the cook and the last grinning 
little helper in a dirty tea towel, presented himself at 
each tent on the first call for hot water, each with an 
offering, a cluster of the red-gold flowers of the place 
thrust in a can or a bottle. By the time we were through 
dressing every tent looked like a flower show, and Uie 
boys were expectantly awaiting the returns. 

Previous counsel had decided upon a lump sum to 
each boy from us alL It was given, and the explanation 
that it was from us all was harped upon, but the boys 
promptly pursued every individual of us, yearning vol- 
ubly for tokens. It was our continual experience that 
a personal gift, however slight, was much more appre- 
ciated by the native than any collective generosity. 

We spent Christmas day in a vain nine hours of buf- 
falo hunting. On the way to the jungles, crossing the 
plains, we had frequent glimpses of wild pig. Thesa 
were the famous wart hog variety, and anything wartier 
and boggier than one of these savage boars cannot be 
imagined — "Mad Pork," as one Belgian attempting to 
speak English had called them. Several times we tried 
to stalk them, but they are wary and trotted off at a gait 
that without apparent effort took them past running 
antelope; when they really stretched their short legs and 
ran they were nothing but a streak of dark. Once I 
worked my way about a quarter of a mile ttoax bush to 
215 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

bush after four pigs, and then stumbled upon a little 
reed buck, who sprang oflF with a whistle of alarm and 
sprang, of coiu'se, in the direction of the pigs. They 
saw him running, and began to trot, looking canniljr 
back; I risked a shot and the hunt possibilities were 
over; the pig was about a block ahead of the bullet. 

They are great delicacies, esteemed by whites and 
natives and lions. We had an excellent roast from one 
Mr. Akeley killed. The warts that give the animal its 
name were very pronounced in this specimen, two pairs, 
one below the eye and one about the mouth, and these 
huge warts, the long-pointed ears, the straggling, bris- 
tling bunchy of black hairs on top of the head and on 
the sides of the cheeks ami the gleaming white curve 
of his tusks gave the boor an inimitable air of brisk 
ferocity. When he goes into a burrow he goes in back- 
wards, so as to present the intimidating tusks to the 
pursuer. Wild pigs can, however, be tamed, and make 
pets as safe as gazelles; at Eigoma, on Lake Tangany- 
ika, we had seen two of different species kept as pets. 
Wilhehnina had pushed her unhandsome nose to one 
side manipulating the door of her stockade, adding a 
curious twist to her appearance ; when she was drinking 
her portion of milk from a bottle the eflFect was enou^ 
to make one cross-eyed. 

Three days after Christmas, the twenly-eighth of De- 
cember, we abandoned our hope of another buffalo, and 
started to march back across the plains to Ruchuru. We 
had received word from the East Coast, sent in by tele- 
graph and telephone and then by a pair of black run- 
ners, that a boat would leave Mombasa, in British East 
216 



SANTA IN THE JUNGLE 

Africa, scsne time about the last of January or early 
in February, and we were trying to make the boat. In 
the old days, before the war, boats had regular sailings 
from Mombasa, and could be depended upon to feel 
some responsibility towards their dates, but now the 
only way to get out of Africa was to get to the coast 
near the time when a boat was expected, lay in a supply 
of literature, and wait until that boat or another put 
in at the port. This continued the state of suspense in 
which all traveling was accomplished — it was certainly 
the Dark Continent in this respect. We knew that, 
lacking definite information, we did not dare lose a day 
because that day mig^t cost us a boat. 

So we bade farewell to the plains, and took our last 
look at grazing herds of antelopes, shadowy shapes in 
the morning gray, their horns glinting in the level rays 
of morning, and commenced the long trail out of the 
interior. 

Three days brought us back the familiar way through 
Mai ja Moto, the streams of boiling water, and altmg 
the Ruchuru River to Ruchuru, where fresh porters 
were already waiting to take us out of the Congo. For 
two days camp was a furious activity of packing, casing 
the gorilla skins in waxed cloths, and winding the skele> 
tons with straw, listing the trophies and ivory for the 
obhging customs, and seeing to the sealing of the guns, 
for we were going east into British territory, where we 
had no license to hunt. 

The Belgian officials were more than kind in helping 
us off; they were amused at our lack of time, the com- 
modity which is 80 universal in Africa, but their hcn- 
317 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

pitality did everything in their power. We were very 
much impressed by the fine type of official we found 
everywhere in the Congo, by iJie sense of responsibility 
towards the native and the seriousness of their coloniza- 
tion. Far tTom perpetrating atrocities, the Belgian 
Government is now considered to err on the side of 
ioiiency, favoring the black against the white. 

Toward us their hospitality was the sort that would 
have put the early days of the open-hearted West to 
shame, and never in any dealing, official or business 
relation, was there the slightest attempt to profit by us. 

We had an instance of the scrupulousness of their 
attitude at Kivu. There we had been allowed the gov- 
ernment boat for an excursion to the lava fields if we 
would pay the price of the gasoline. We paid the pre- 
sented bm without remark, for the gasoline cost did not 
seem excessive for the heart of Africa. Nearly two 
months later the black runner brought in a letter with 
some hundred francs from Kivu — the chef de potte had 
discovered that the gasoline had been billed to them at 
a less price and sent on to us our benefit of the reduction. 

Our next experience with gasohne, in Uganda, was 
less heartening. 

The last day of the year 1921 was consecrated to 
packing and good-bys, our last social occasion in the 
Congo being tea with Madame Van de Ghinste, the wife 
of the Commissioner. They had a very attractive brick 
house, reminding me of a bungalow in California, with 
a lovely veranda whose great charm to us was the lack 
of screens and glass. Roses bloomed in bowls every- 
where about it and the coolness of the shade was de- 
218 



SANTA IN THE JUNGLE 

licious after the heat of the afternoon sun in whidi wti 
had been walking. We found everywhere in Africa 
that at our altitude a thatched roof gave delicious cool- 
ness even in midday heat; we knew nothing there of the 
sweltering, inescapable heat that American summers 
can give. 

Alice's most poignant farewell was with the Van de 
Ghinste monkey, Uttle Camembert. At every post or 
camping place she had found some pet, some Mission 
cat or native dog or monkey and taken it to her heart 
and arms, and to all our remonstrances anent certain 
fleas, "It's worth it," Alice would say stoutly. I could 
have got her a monkey for her own, but a monkey is a 
serious responsibility, not to be undertaken lightly by 
any one who knew Mrs. Akeley's experience with that 
sensitive, clinging, babylike J. T. of hers. And to any 
one who has known the little creatures in the freedom 
of their jungle trees the very sight of one, captive, shiv- 
ering, apprehensive, chained to some lonely perch, is a 
sorry thing. Their sensitiveness makes them capable 
of keen suffering, and no country can call itself civilized 
that allows one to be jerked about the streets, whipped 
to perform by some organ grinder, or boxed in tiny 
cages in a Zoo. 



CHAPTER XVII 

ACROSS UGANDA 

Out fbom the Intebior; the End of a Thousani>- 
Mu^Walk 

New Yeab*s morning, 1922, we started to mardi out 
of the Congo, leading our two hundred porters east 
towards the British protectorate of Uganda on a way 
that could only be vaguely defined by the Belgians. It 
was the way used by runners with the East Coast Mail, 
but it happened that not one of our porters had be^i 
over it before. 

We left Ruchuru on a native path that wound down 
between banana plantations and then, after half an 
hour, started to cHmb on harsh outcroppings of lava 
rock, over ever higher and higher mountains. Some- 
where to those mountains that day we crossed the east- 
em frontier of the Congo and passed into British 
Uganda, but when and where it was, we had no idea. 
We went on forever in search of water by which to 
camp. The country was wild and soUtary, no villages 
on Ibe way and but very few natives to be met. These 
few told us that there was water farther on, so on we 
went, and at last, late in the afternoon, a blue green 
gUmmer in a far-away hollow made us believe that we 
were approaching a lake, but when we reached it we 
found that the lake was a field of peas, whose blue green 



ACROSS UGANDA 

foliage among the darker African green produced an 
extraordinaiy illusion of water. On the other side of 
that field we found our water in a mud hole and our 
camp by it could only be designated as Somewhere in 
Uganda. 

For the first time in our safari experience water was 
both scarce and bad. Before we used it that night Her- 
bert himself bailed that mud hole to the bottom, allow- 
ing no black within it, and then we boiled the water, 
as we always did when we did not have spring water, 
and in addition put in alum. We carried six loads of 
water on with us, in case conditions were worse ahead. 

Next morning we were up by starlight, breakfasted 
by candlelight and were o£f at the first rays of the six 
o'clock Sim. Up and down and around the mountains 
we wound on roads so excellent that our bicycles were 
a real assistance. A great deal of work was done on 
those roads during the war under white supervision, and 
for hundreds of years before that the natives had main- 
tained them, for Uganda had a highly organized gov- 
ernment before the advent of the whites and roads were 
a matter of pride to the old kings. 

We met more natives that day, and now Instead of 
shaking hands with a sultan be clapped his hands in 
apparent delight at sight of us, and any one we met 
along the way promptly squatted down and clapped 
vigorously as we went by. As we wobbled along on 
some of the imeven ridges of the roads to the sound of 
the clapping, we felt as if we were a trick riding act 
being applauded and that something in the nature of 
an encore was expected of us. But it is extraordinary 
221 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

how soon one becomes accustomed to this royal recep- 
tion. When we met an Arab trader, striding llirougb 
the country in his white nightgown-like shirt, called 
Eansu. his goods on the heads of a few blacks trotting 
after him, and he merely salaamed or said "Jamba" 
(greeting), we felt defrauded. There was scnnetlung 
very soothing in the good old reverential ways. 

Inadvertently, we did two days' marches in one that 
day through abunduit misinformation furnished us by 
one of these traders and some stray natives, and we were 
ten hours on the march, with lime juice and crackers on 
the way for lunch. It was astonisliing to see how all 
these irregularities of hours and food agreed with Alice. 
She throve on them. She had peaked and pined our 
last year at home on all the sensible routine of her 
nursery fare. But here, wakened rudely into a cold 
world at three or four in the morning when we were on 
march, breakfasting on prunes and a monotony of 
cereal and tinned milk and tou^ toast uid jam, tucked 
into a hammock with her doll and a book and water 
bottle and canvas bag containing a cold hinch — bananas, 
crackers, chocolate, and chicken — and joggled along 
all day on the shoulders of the men, dining at Ttdiat- 
ever hour we dined, four or six or seven, on whatever 
we had, generally chicken and rice on march and 
more crackers and jam and cheese, she was as hearty 
and healthy as a child could be. She never had an 
instant's illness. Not a cold, not even a sneeze. Life 
was a continual excursion, an everlasting picnic. She 
was tired, sometimes; we were all tired sometimes, for 
from choice we would never have traveled as fast and 




The Acacia Ii Paxtasticallt Flat Tofped 



'^ 






1 


i^ii 


UMm 



Binuio Babk Cloth 



ACROSS UGANDA 

hard as we did, but with her it was the healthy tiredness 
of a Httk gypsy. 

We climbed higher and higher among the mountains 
that day <hi a road that at times bectune rudely con- 
steiicted steps ; up and up till space seemed to flow round 
us like a sea. It was the dry season and the air had 
lost the crystal clarity of the rains ; a haze of blue veiled 
every perspective. Great mountain ranges lay lightly 
as gauze against the horizon; azure gleams of rivers and 
lakes sparkled from the shadowy hollows. Far to the 
southwest the dim peaks of the Sabinio group and old 
Visoke lifted above a floating web of gray lace clouds. 

We camped that night at Befaungi, a mountain top 
eight thousand feet in elevation, where a clean little 
grass rest house saved us from putting up the tents, and 
we slept late next morning — as late as five o'clock. I 
could remember when five o'clock seemed an hour at 
whidi you got up if the house were on fire or the baby 
cried, but those days were gone forever. 

Down went the wide road that morning, and then up 
again, winding along the mountainside, through forests 
of bamboo and marshes of papyrus, past marvelously 
beautiful country, and then the third night we came to 
Lake Bunyoni. 

I still think that £iTu is the most beautiful lake in 
the world, but if there were another lake more beautiful 
than £ivu, Bunyoni would be that one. It is a fairy 
of a lake, with indented shores fringed with papyrus 
and bamboo and lotus — the only place in Africa where 
those three meet. In and out the papyrus flashed birds 
that seemed a thousand colors, blue and purple, gold 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

and scarlet, black and orange; white ducks drifted in 
flocks upon the water like white clouds; and all along 
the shore ran the purple line of the lotus of the Nile with 
fringed petals and a golden heart radiating a heady 
sweetness. 

It was the southern shores of this lake tiiat had been 
depopulated by the pygmy raids from the forests, and 
no natives lived there now, but on the western shore, 
where we were, were clusters of grass huts so pictur- 
esquely perched on the highlands that it was hard not 
to believe in the artistic feeling of the builders.- But 
inaccessibility in case of war had been the inspiration. 

We had sent for canoes and the men paddled along 
the shores sending out ringing calls until a flotilla of 
twenty-seven was assembled. The canoes were dug out 
logs, and the paddles bad long, straight handles and 
heart-shaped blades. To maintain yoiur balance in one 
of those dugouts forbade changing even your mind. 
We sent most of our goods across the lake that after- 
noon with a boy to guard them, and then spent the night 
at the rest house, on a tiny point of land cut across by 
a line of black euphorbia trees. There was something 
theatric in the beauty of that camp ; those dark dramatic 
trees against a backdrop of pale, shimmering water had 
an artistry so palpable, so evocative of mood, that one 
waited for the tuning of violins and the poignant sweet- 
ness of music. Tristan and Isolde ,. . . Romeo and 
Juliet. . . . 

The next morning was gray and overcast, and our 
paddlers were so slow in coming that we felt they were 
going to fail the rendezvous, but eventually the canoes 
224 



ACROSS UGANDA 

came stealing in through the soft mists and took over 
the rest of our two himdred loads and all of our two 
hundred porters. Then we had a desperately hard time 
getting a tribe whose only knowledge of money was of 
rupees to accept Belgian Congo francs in payment. We 
had a row that would have put the Tower of Babel to 
shame, but finally we lined up the disputants, put the 
despised francs in each fist and shut the resisting 
fingers. Then something in the actual feel of those 
francs operated soothingly and assuaged the racket. 
Then we tried to buy a paddle, at first in vain, hut after 
one man sold his the rest all crowded around, and we 
had all that we wanted. 

Only one man would have none of the francs. He 
had otter skins for sale that I wanted for a coat for 
Alice, really lovely skins, much thicker haired than one 
would have imagined an otter in that climate to be, aad 
I had struggled to bargain with him the night before. 
He wanted either rupees or cloth, the white "American" 
cloth that the Arabs have made fashionable for gowns. 
I had no rupees and no cloth. I had a French muslin 
ni^tgown, but that was too sheer for his needs; he con- 
sidered it seriously, impressed, hesitant, hut judgment 
went against it; he wanted stouter stuff. So I per- 
suaded him to take his skins and come with us to 
Kabale, the first English post, where at the administra- 
tive Boma of the Englishman I would give him his 
rupees. 

AU we could learn of tiie way was that somewhere 
after Lake Bunyoni, two days or two hom-s according to 
differing informants, we should come to Kabale. For 
225 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

an hour after we left the lottu-f ringed shores of tbe lake, 
Martha, Herbert and I, and Mablanga with Alke 
cycled rapidly down a road on which we passed increas- 
ing numbers of natives in the white gowns of Arab fash- 
ion, and at last, on a height before us, we saw a duster 
of roofs and the fluttering colors of the Union Jack. 
This was Kabale. 

On one hill was tiie Church of England missimi, tm 
another the Mission of the White Fathers, and on the 
elevation between them the gOTemment Boma and die 
bungalows of the officials. Up the hill and into the 
Boma we marched, dusty, khaki-clad figures, greeted by 
very astonished, white-clad En^^ifAimen. We had sent 
a runner ahead asking for porters to be in readiness, 
but nothing in our mention of a party of six had pre- 
pared them for this feminine invasion from the interim 
of the Congo, and the presence of a little six-year-old 
girl, carried along on the wheel of her boy with a doU at 
her side was distinctly unexpected. 

Commissioner Adams and Captain Persse divided 
our party for luncheon and in our dusky khaki and mud- 
stained boots we entered a bungalow California-deep in 
roses and sat down to luncheon amid the chintz and 
china and silver and crystal of old England. Martha, 
Alice, and I lunched with Commissioner Adams in a 
home from which the young and lovely mistress had 
been taken just two weeks before. A little baby boy 
only two months old was being cared for at the English 
Mission until the Commissioner's sister could come out 
from England. At the table with us was the Commis- 
sioner of the Province, Mr. Cooper, a thin, bronzed man 




WAmNO rra Canobs on Lake Bumyoic 




Native Duuuuts on Bu 




The E>-i. or S, 



^ 



ACROSS UGANDA 

of many years* service ; he told me that in England were 
his motherless twins of fire and a half that he had not 
seen for nearly three years now. He looked at Alice 
and estimated how his little girl would look. At every 
post, Belgian or British, that price of empire was 
brought hrane to us. 

After luncheon we scurried for our tents and hot 
baths and the white raiment io our "air-tights" and paid 
ofif the porters and then began on the formalities of 
cu8t<Hns inspection. The formalities were solemn ones 
here; and we made innumerable lists, and estimates of 
everything left in our supplies to the last prune. At 
intervals I sent a boy out for the native with the otter 
skins, who seemed to have melted from Kabale before I 
could secure my rupees; we discovered that he brought 
his skins to the Boma, the white man's place of adminis- 
tration, and finding a visiting white man who wanted 
skins, had promptly sold them and retired. Captain 
Persse saved the day — and Alice's coat — for he kindly 
sent out and had other skins brought in for me. 

The porters for whom we had sent a runner ahead 
were ready for us and next morning, after the last cus- 
toms list was checked over, we sent them off with a 
headman, and we followed at one o'clock after more 
sociability. After the first downward plunge of the 
road we could ride our wheels, and the fact that the 
march was estimated at from sixteen to twenty-six 
miles did not daunt us. 

For six days we went on good, red grave] roads 
through a very beautiful country, mountainous though 
with none of tiie great single p^ks that we had grown 
227 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

accustomed to in our M'fumbiro friends, but a con- 
tinual succession of ranges and ridges and valleys. The 
slopes were deforested, firewood was scarce and watei 
was scarcer, and we guarded our precious pails of it in 
the tents, as the boys used it with the same prodigality 
as if the land were flowing with it. Their unconcern 
when they knew the facts in the case as well as we did 
was a marvelous application of the take-no-tbou^t-fo^ 
the-morrow admonition. 

At Lubando, where water was scarcest, I saw a little 
black tent boy, the "boy" of our Jim, calmly empty oul 
one of the two paUs of jealously hoarded water in ordei 
to use the pail to stand on to arrange the hed nets I 

We had heard that there was water five miles awa} 
and we thrust that empty pail handle into his hand and 
sent him forth to verify the rumor. 

Natives everywhere had been eager for "dower" 
(medicine) , but on this march they were simply clam- 
orous and we could never get settled in camp an after 
noon before the procession of sultans and cohorts and 
private citizens would begin to trickle in and come tc 
attention before the tents. 

"Nataka dower, Mamma" (want medicine. Mother) 
was the invariable request to me, accompanied by illus- 
trative showings of scratches and ulcers and rubbings 
of the stomach and various seats of pain. For reallj 
serious cases we consulted the medicine book and Mr 
Akeley's experience, but in general our remedies did 
not vary much and our prescription rule was simple— 
we gave a chief three times as much of anything as we 
gave a minion. 



ACROSS UGANDA 

I drew the line at wires. When they began on the 
ymptoms of the dear ones at home I said "Kwaheri" 
'Good-by), for the dear ones were unlimited. Cattle 
ind wives were a sidtan's wealth; cattle were a loxury, 
mt wives were an asset, for the wives worked 

A thrifty citizen could acquire several wives in the 
KMirse of time, but a really thriving sultan would have 
I lot of them scattered about his villages. The customs 
varied extremely from tribe to tribe. 

The great struggle of the missionaries, Protestant 
ind Catholic, is to make the natives accept the monog- 
unous marriage. When they have been successful the 
niperfiuous women have created a new problem — and 
iften a new class — abandoned ladies in every sense of 
he word. Mohammedanism, with its plural marriages, 
las a tremendous advantage. In the old days the tribal 
itandards of morality were hi^i — at least the execution 
)f Uie laws was rigorous — but along the white man's 
vay the natives have acquired habits that certainly 
lavor of promiscuity. The boy that in his native village 
vould buy a wife and keep house with her, here strolled 
nto the outposts or the towns, flirted, made indiscrim- 
nate and highly successful love, and strolled out again. 

. . And scHnetimes the white man, in the lonelier 
jlaces, made love. I have seen more than one strange 
afari streaking its way across die solitudes, unmindful 
)f the glasses trained upon it — porters, cook, boys, a 
vbite man in his chair and at the end a flutter of red 
•alico that said, "There she goes." Many an old timer 
n the wilds, losing the hope of return or the compan- 
229 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

ionship of his own kind, solaces himself with what the 
savage land offers. 

!N^o one will ever write a "Butterfly" about those littk 
girls. They lack the soft, silken stuff of romance. They 
are impudent little episodes, smart, giggling, un- 
ashamed. I don't imagine one ever died of a broken 
heart. I don't imagine a man would die for love of one. 
But I knew of a man that married one — he had a 
quixotic sense of responsibility toward a coming cafi 
au lait generation — and sent a bullet tiirough his head 
the year after. I know, too, of other cases where a 
father has sent his illegitimate mulatto girl to Europe 
for an education. 

Near Kabale I heard a very dramatic story of a 
native woman. In Rukiga country the native tribes, 
the Batiga, were overrun by the Baganda, whcHn they 
hated. The Batiga had always been divided by petty 
jealousies and feuds, but at last, in this common hate, 
they held together. They set a night. That night a 
knife was to go home through the heart of all the Ba- 
ganda. Now those Baganda men had Batiga wives, 
who were the mothers of their children, and those wives 
knew that plot, but not a woman warned them — not s 
woman but one. 

That one must have sat a long while by her fire 
watching her sleeping husband. At last she waked 
him, swore him to secrecy and told. He fled like a 
shadow down the road to safety, and like another 
shadow, unseen of him, she followed after. His way 
went by a hut to which a path branched off. It was his 



ACROSS UGANDA 

brother's hut, and the man stopped, hesitated, and then 
swerved towards it. The woman sprang upon him from 
the shadows and her knife went through his back. 
There was not a sound to give warning. . . . Him she 
would have saved, not his people. . . . She sells com 
now, a worn old woman of thirty years. . . . Hard to 
re-create from that flabby flesh the flerce young thing 
whose swift leap cost her son his father's life. 

On January 10 we reached Mbarara, in Ankole, a 
British post of two families, where we had arranged 
for automobiles to meet us, sent out from Kampala, a 
hundred and eighty miles away. Seven cars came for 
us, trucks and four five-passenger touring cars, Reos. 
Dodges, and Fords. One good truck could have held 
our loads, but the bridges were so frail that lig^t loads 
had to be used. 

Here we paid o£f our porters, the cook and all the 
tent boys except the three from ElizabethviUe whom we 
were to take on with us to the coast and return to Eliza- 
bethviUe via Dar Es Salaam. We saw the long line of 
blacks start down the way back to the interior with a 
keen pang of regret. The old days with them were gone. 
Our walking was over. We had walked a thousand 
miles in all, marching and hunting, over plains and up 
and down mountains, and some of those mountain miles, 
we felt, ought to count as two. 

We did the next hundred and eighty miles in two 

days and then, at Kampala, we waited two weeks for 

the last car, which had broken down and had to be sent 

out for and brought in. It was of course the car with 

281 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

the gorilla skins and the things without winch we could 
not leave. At our former pace of fifteen miles a day 
we could have marched the goods in, in less time — and 
those seven cars for two days cost us twenty-four hun- 
dred dollars. 



CHAPTER XVIII 

the tomb of king mutssa 

Sixty Yeaius Ago and Now; the Toubist Trail 
Again 

Kampala, built on seven lovelier hills than Rome, is 
a thriving place of about two hundred whites and thou- 
sands of natives and Indians in the teeming bazaar 
streets. At Kampala our safari was really over. Here 
were shops and hotels and clubs and telephones and ice 
tinkling in tall glasses — ^that ice we had dreamed about 
on the Ruindi — here were movies and private dramatics 
and dinners and dances and everything. 

We put away our khaki and hobnails and put on 
fdiite silks and rode about luxuriously in rickshaira 
drawn by one boy and pushed by another, on our excur- 
sions to the bazaars or to the tops of the neighboring 
hills. Namirembe Hill is crowned by the English 
Church Mission and a huge cathedral to accommodate 
seven thousand is being built there now to replace the 
old building whose thatched roof and conical towers 
were a part of the old Uganda landscape. Near by is 
the famous hospital of Dr. Cook. Nyasemba HiU has 
St Joseph's Mission, and Rubaga Hill is occupied by 
the White Fathers, and another great cathedral is being 
erected there. On Mengo Hill is the residence of the 
King of Uganda, a yoimg man, King Daudi, with 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

an hour after we left the lotus-fringed shores of the lake, 
Martha, Herbert and I, and Mablanga with Alice 
cycled rapidly down a road on which we passed increas- 
ing numbers of natives in the white gowns of Arab fash- 
ion, and at last, on a height before us, we saw a duster 
of roofs and the fluttering colors of the Uni(xi Jade. 
This was Kabale. 

On one hill was the Church of England misaim, on 
another the Mission of the White Fathers, and on the 
elevation between them the government Boma and Ae 
bungalows of the officials. Up the hill and into the 
Boma we marched, dusty, khaki-clad figures, greeted hy 
very astonished, white-clad Englishmen. We had sent 
a runner ahead asking for porters to be in readiness, 
but nothing in our mention of a party of six had pre- 
pared them for this feminine invasion from the interior 
of the Congo, and the presence of a little six-year-old 
girl, carried along on the wheel of her boy with a doll at 
her side was distinctly unexpected. 

Conunissioner Adams and Captain Fersse divided 
our party for luncheon and in oiu* dusky khaki and mud- 
stained boots we entered a bungalow California-deep in 
roses and sat down to luncheon amid the chintz and 
china and silver and crystal of old England. Martha, 
Alice, and I lunched with Commissioner Adams in a 
home from which the young and lovely mistress had 
been taken just two weeks before. A little baby boy 
only two months old was being cared for at the English 
Mission until the Commissioner's sister could come out 
from England. At the table with us was the Conunis- 
sioner of the Province, Mr. Cooper, a thin, bronzed man 



fu 


li 



Waitiko roa Canoes ok Lake Bh; 




Native DfQcn.-T8 OS Bu» 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

whom much pains in education have been taken. He 
lives behind the grasa stockade of bis fathers, in a bun- 
galow well furnished in English fashion, but sur- 
rounded by the native huts of his attendants, thatched 
and woven in an intricate and beautiful manner. The 
court of Daudi is merely a flourish of the old tradition. 
Royalty lies dead in his grandfather Mutesa's tomb cm 
Kasubi HilL 

We made a visit to the tomb wiacb used to be a place 
of pilgrimage, scrupulously maintained by the natives; 
now it was die tourist trail, with a caretaker and a price 
of admission. But it was an empty trail; no Europeans 
had come for a very long time, we were told. There was 
, a deserted air to the ancient enclosures behind the hi^' 
stockades woven in the royal pattern; in the last court a 
sun-baked parade ground stretched to the door of the 
house which had been a great king's palace; left and 
right circled the smaller huts that had been the treasure 
houses or the homes of wives. Everything was vacant 
now save for a stooping beggar and a naked child or 
two; only the white-robed caretakers strolled about the 
empty spaces. 

It was interesting to re-create the scene of Mutesa's 
lifetime ; the four inclosures thronged with the courtiers 
whom etiquette — an etiquette whose infringement was 
death — required to pay incessant court upon their king. 
Here were powerful lords and overlords and their at- 
tendants, warriors reporting their last raids, the 
wretched captives in their train, hunters with the spoils 
of the chase and the animals snared in their nets, fishers 
with their gifts, potters with their finest jars for trib- 
234 



THE TOMB OF KING MUTESA . 

ute, disputing men with cases to be heard, men with 
violent accusations, accused men haled along in bonds, 
medicine men, bands of musicians — the flute players, 
the pea gourd rattlers, the harpists, the drummers, — a 
jostling throng interspersed with dogs and flocks of 
goats and sheep offered for commutation of the death 
penalty — exchanging the death penalty for a fine was 
a great source of royal revenue — a motley mob threaded 
by the little pages of the king, who darted like wasps 
on every errand, not daring to walk lest they should 
be killed for sloth — a world of fear and hope, pride and 
ambition awaiting a despot's favor. . . . No naked 
savages in goat skins these; here were shrewd, in- 
genious pohticians, netted in a mesh of meticulous con- 
ventions. The men's care in clothing was extreme; to 
show an inch of naked leg was disrespect punishable by 
death. Yet, curiously enough the king's valets were 
women, utterly unclothed. 

Through the babel of this gathering throng woul<^ 
come the roU of the king's great drums announcing his 
appearance, and the crowd would surge forward, pour- 
ing in the inclosures after the lords of Uganda, making 
their way into the king's presence to prostrate them- 
selves in wriggling admiration and then squat at devout 
attention in a dense half circle before the sovereign. 

The king's reception house was the vast beehivelike 
building which we were nearing now as we walked 
across the empty square; it was marvelously woven of 
the canelike elephant grass, or the tiger grass as it 
was called here, tied intricately together, with an elab- 
orately thatched roof. Within the doorway the king 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

used to show himself sitting on a hianket spread on a 
reed throne, by his side his white dog, spear, and woman 
— ^the Uganda cognizance, for the father of his line and 
the conqueror of the country, Kigima, had come with a 
dog, spear, and woman — some favorite pages in attend- 
ance, and behind him, in the back of the hut facing the 
entrance, a cluster of his women. 

It was death for a man to gaze upon the king's 
women. So the courtiers presented a stooping, slant- 
eyed, cross-eyed look; it was death to touch the king's 
robes or throne even inadvertently; no man might stand 
in the presence while the king was sitting or standing; 
he must sit lower than the king, on penalty of death. 
It was death, in fact, for anything or nothing; a favorite 
wife who bad the presumption to offer Mutesa fruit 
was promptly killed upon the spot. 

Caprice and cruelty, a nonchalant barbarity that 
makes our blood run cold with its bideousness of torture, 
power, dizzying, absolute, that was Mutesa's existence. 
No Caligula or Nero could compare with him. He was 
supreme. Ko man dared speak unless he spoke. No 
man dissented. The gay, sunny hill was a shambles 
and a furnace. 

I looked into the interior of the old palace. It was 
so dark after the blazing sunlight of the court that it 
took time for my eyes to distinguish the outlines of the 
dim interior. I saw a perfect forest of ebony poles 
reaching, like a sea of masts, up to the high roof, leaving 
a lane to the big block of the tomb itself, which was cov- 
ered with bright cloth of many colors. Many poles 
nearest the tomb were wound with bunting and bright 



THE TOMB OF KING MUTESA 

doth. Here, beneath the calico, in a metal-covCTed cof- 
fin, made by the mission^y, Mackay, wound with white 
cloth of honor, lay Mutesa, son of Sunna, seventh heir 
of his invading line. 

Mutesa's was the last great reign. After him came 
swift confusion and disorder, civil war among his sons, 
and about them the struggle of rapidly growing power 
of the invaders, Mohammedans and Christians, Prot- 
estants and Catholics, until an Anglo-German treaty 
assigned Uganda to Great Britain, and in 1803 die 
British flag flew from the grass peak of the palace. 

It was sixty years ago exactly, that the first white man 
to penetrate these wilds, Captain J. M. Speke, was re- 
ceived here at King Mutesa's court. Sixty years is not 
a man's lifetime. . . . And now, sixty years after, our 
small Alice, the first little American to travel this road, 
was standing in the dark hut, staring at the deserted 
tomb. Back of us from the shadows cune whining sup- 
plications and gnarled arms of beggar women held tim- 
idly out. . . . On either side, among the forest of ebony 
columns, we discerned forms croudiing on bits of 
mats. . . . 

Sixty years since the first white man. . . . Those 
crawling creatures with white wisps of hair falling over 
their wrinkled faces could recall Mutesa in his unbridled 
power. . . . From this place they had seen his victims 
dragged off to torture, to dismemberment, to roasting 
fires. . . . They had seen the proudest chiefs of the 
kingdom prostrating themselves in sycophantic adora- 
tion on the ground. They mi^t well have been present 
when that first white man strode forward, opening hia 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

strange, mirth-provoking umbrella. . . . And i 
their sunken eyes gazed out with a flash of wonder at 
the little white girl with the fair curls who came to look 
at the tomb of their dead king, and then danced so fear- 
lessly out into the spaces where once it had been deatb 
to approach. 

The administrative center of the Protectorate of 
Uganda is at Entebbe, on the shores of Victtnia lUf 
anza, twenty-five miles away. We motored to "Kntehbt 
in a fraction of a Ford with an Indiui driver whose 
aberrations brought us nearer death than any lion or 
elephant. It may have been the fervid gratefulness of 
our escape from his clutches and the miraculous sense 
of renewed life, but Entebbe seemed to us one of Ihe 
fairest spots imaginable, a bower of a place on Uk 
shores of the great lake, which every writer hastens to 
speak of as the inland sea of Africa. The word Xyanza 
means lake or sea or sometimes simply water. 

On a slope above the lake was the government arbo- 
reum where a great variety of tropic trees was grown. 
There were palms whose hidden chambers yielded clear 
water to the traveler in distress; there were huge incense 
trees with sweet scented gum oozing through the 
wounded bark; there were groves of chocolate trees with 
hard, dark, shining fruit, like an oval orange in shape; 
there were rubber trees where from a tiny cut the pale, 
strange fluid stole out ... to be rolled into a true 
rubber ball. 

In and out the trees, over the shores of the lake, there 
darted a winged multitude of birds, glittering little 



THE TOMB OF KING MUTESA 

sun birds, preening luid darting, golden weaver birda 
who build huge, hanging tenements of community nests, 
shrikes and thrushes, finches and warblers, and many, 
many otiiers for which we bad no name. 

Africa had given us a wealth of bird life from the 
Lualaba River days when the black ibis and white egrets 
had streamed like raying clouds before our boat; we 
had seen blue heron and white heron, bustard and 
ostrich; storks hke picture postcards of Holland; and 
the Egyptian goose by its low-hanging nests through 
which the young drop into the water when hatched; bul- 
buls and cuckoos and bell birds had been the music of the 
silent places. We had watched the white Battleor 
eagle on his lonely flights; we had heard at many night- 
falls the hoarse calling of the Eavirondo cranes as they 
winged their way past camp, and in sunny marshes we 
had come upon the gleaming beauty of them, their velvet 
black and whiteness crowned with its radiant golden 
crest. We had known the marabou stork with his pre- 
cious fluif of white feathers beneath the bronzed blue- 
green sheen of his broad feathered tail; we had glimpsed 
the jeweled blue and crimson of gorgeous plantain 
eaters and the demure gray of parrots. We had grown 
familiar with the great vultures who came streaming to 
roost above our kills; and our intimates were the hand- 
some, white-necked black crows who frequented our 
kitchen and the little black and white nameless fellows 
who walked so fearlessly about us at every camp. 

We felt that we were just beginning to make many 
interesting acquaintances, and now it was already grow- 
ing time to say good-bye to thenu 
239 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

We had luncheon and tea and "Sundown" as the 
guests of Dr. Fiske, an American physician for muj 
years in the service of the British government here. Dr. 
Fiske has a tremendously interesting work before Um 
now, the repopulation of the Sese Islands. Tbai 
group of lovely islands, about sixteen in all, was so 
ravaged by the sleeping sickness that ten years ago 
the British government removed every surviving native 
and isolated the islands, to stamp out the appalliEig 
plague. Now the infection is gone and the remaining 
natives are being taken back to their former haunts. 
"Each man," said Dr. Fiske, "wanted exactly- the place 
he had before; if he tilled a zigzag plot on an incon- 
venient hill he wanted that precise field, not the tax 
nearer or richer." In many cases it was difficult tQ 
determine the old boundaries for much of the vegetation 
had disappeared. In places it had been cut down to 
remove the shade which was so favorable to the deadly 
tsetse fly, and in other places the antelopes had de- 
voiM-ed it. 

In those ten years that the Sese Islands have been 
given back to an utterly manless nature, an interesting 
fact about the situtunga antelope has been revealed. 
This antelope, which is closely related to the bush buck, 
but larger, with long hoofs and shaggy hair, has been 
considered by naturahsts exclusively a creature of the 
marshes, making its home in thick, reed beds. It was 
very shy and wary and few white men have shot or 
even seen it. There were several living in the marshes 
on the Sese Islands. Now in the ten years of utter 
peace, the situtunga has come out of the marshes and 
240 



THE TOMB OF KING MUTESA 

frequents the highlands, graztng in flocks like any 
plains antelope — a swift reversion to what must hare 
been its natural environment before the pressure of 
danger drove it timidly into the swamps for refuge. 

No cure has yet been foimd for the victim of the 
sleeping sickness, though physicians have been busy 
with it ever since the sickness came out from the dark 
forests of the Congo like a blight upon the dwellers on 
these peaceful shores. Infected areas can be controlled 
and isolated by cutting down the shade in which the fly 
loves to dwell and planting the citronella grass to which 
it is so averse; and by removing all the population, as 
was done in the Sese Islands, the disease will die out 
for want of reinfection. 

The fly is a sinister thing, longer and narrower than 
a bluebottle, gray and black with crossed wings. We 
had seen several on the Lualaba Hiver in places that 
had formerly been sickness areas but which were now 
considered safe, and while these flies were undoubtedly 
uninfected, they were distinctly disquieting things to 
have about. It has a near relative of similar appear- 
ance, which is as deadly to domestic animals as this one 
is to human beings. When the human biting fly does 
not have man to live upon it is supposed to subsist on 
the blood of crocodiles. It was bt Entebbe that I first 
heard the news that a cure for leprosy had at last been 
discovered and that lepers were actually being dis- 
charged in Hawaii from Molokai Island. . . . What a 
day for Africa when a remedy is found for the deadly 
plague of sleeping sickness I One bite of a swift dart- 
241 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

ing By and the victim is doomed to lingering torment 
and certain death. 

After the Entebbe trip, life in Kampala for Mr. 
Akeley was a pleasant memory of the peaceful hospital 
to which he betook his malaria while waiting reports of 
the missing gorilla skins. It was more varied for the 
rest of us. 

There was a daily descent upon the Trading Com- 
pany, with the invariable report that the car sent back 
for the other car had also broken down but that a new 
man was going out that very day; there were constant 
descents upon Smith, Mackenzie & Co., Limited, the 
shipping agents, who knew nothing of the possibilities 
of a steamer but did know that the Union Castle 
steamer, advertised for the end of February, was not 
coming for another month at least; there were frantic 
interchanges of telegrams with the agents in Mombasa 
to discover the whereabouts of our trunks, shipped three 
months before from Eigoma in Tanganyika to Dar Es 
Salaam to meet us at Mombasa. We appeared to have 
neither ships nor clothes in which to return. Being 
safely in Africa there seemed every reason to remain 
there, and I admit that but for certain necessities at 
home we should have liked nothing better for some time 
to come. 

Kampala for Herbert meant the multitudinous 
details of disbanding the equipment and selling the 
tents, bicycles, etc., and the packing of our various ac- 
ciunulations. As he wrestled with baskets and tusks 
and elephant feet, and the disposition of spears and 
gourds, and the problems of poisoning skins for their 
242 



THE TOMB OF KING MUTESA 

incarceration in a ship's hold for a long, hot voyage orer 
seas; and with getting men to agree to make boxes and 
getting the men to make the boxes, and getting the 
things into the boxes, and getting the boxes into th^ 
train on the ultimate afternoon when the skins finally 
came in and we raced to catch the weekly steamer, his 
ideas for the equipment of his next African trip 
dwindled to the simplicities of the native, and his next 
collection of trophies, he resolved, would be of the dodo 
or the unicorn. Kothing less remarkable was ever going 
to be packed. . . . 

The great difficulty of getting anything done in the 
tropics is that the working day is so short. The day 
itself begins early enough, heaven knows. It begins at 
five-thirty with a cup of tea brought to your bedside. 

I loathed tea at five-thirty. I loathed five-thirty. 
After the strenuousness of safari I wanted sleep — ^lazy, 
comfortable sleep stretching on into the forenoon — say 
until seven. I told the hotel boy about myself and my 
desires in explicit Swahili. When he brought the tea 
the next morning at five-thirty I sat up and said, 
"Fana chi" (No tea) , in fierce rejection and that ni|^t 
I locked my door. 

"Now!" said I, triimiphantly. 

But no. Five-thirty — and a tentative trying of the 
handle. I lay still. A knock. A louder knock. A 
rattle. Then receding, frustrate steps. ... I smiled. 
... I prepared to drift beatifically off — and then a click 
from the French windows opening on the verandas and 
a white clad form shpped stealtiiily in, approached my 
bedside with pantherine celerity and deposited in 
248 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

triumph the tray of tea. Honor had been vindicated. 
His job was to bring me tea and he brought it. 

I succumbed. The motto of that hotel was Service 
and except in the matter of the tea we appreciated it 
It was the most comfortable hotel that I ever found in 
Africa, or in America for that matter, and we hare 
most pleasant memories of its spacious, airy rooms, tbe 
cool verandas, the delightful meals, and the services of 
the boys who paddle about like barefoot, white-robed, 
ministering angels. The name of that hotel is the 
Imperial and I want to record it. 

The tea was only the first intrusion. It was all very 
well to ignore its steaming presence and drift off to 
sleep, but the sleep was momentary — another knock 
preluded the entrance of the boy to take your shoes 
to clean and after that the boy came back for the tea 
cups and the shoe boy came back with the shoes and 
the bath boy came with the bath. We had kept our 
three Elizabethville boys and foimd them useful for 
errands and for our washing and pressing. The ver- 
andas outside all the bedrooms were often a scene of 
great domestic activity, a big black boy ironing away 
on a little table or sitting cross-legged sewing expertly. 
The flat iron of Africa has a hollow filled with glowing 
charcoal so it could be used anywhere. 

The house boys of East Africa wore invariably the 
Arab robe falling to their feet and the small embroidered 
cap of Zanzibar, while many natives we saw on the 
streets aspired to the white man's "shorts" and a pukka 
shirt and — last flight of opulence and aristocracy — shoes 
and puttees. Often they wore the puttees witfiout the 
244 



^ THE TOMB OF KING MUTESA 

_,^Xg. Our own boys who had come in the bizarre tatters 
safari now beggared themselves for white shirts and 
^siorts made by the Indian tailors. 
___-^lfter the advent of bath you resigned yourself and 
__^fc up as you ought to do to enjoy the lovely freshness 
^ .^morning. After breakfast we used to stroll out on the 
. JilKinda to see what the traders had brought for the day. 
^3ader a shady tree the renders spread their wares 
r^^sSeopard skins and bowls of black Uganda pottery, 
::;^l^ bark doth so abundant in the region, the typical 
%3l drums, brightly colored baskets from the Soudan, 
^ ^9id beautifully made musical instruments with sound- 
^^M|g boards covered with lizard skin. . . . Only Herbert 
?*hM stCTnly cold to these enticements, and when we 
'^^elded to bowls and baskets we approached him with 
i^te qualms of the confessional. 

The business life of the tropics begins about ten, the 

.^^^al life at eleven when morning cidls and lemon 

Squash or anything else are vogue; from twelve to two 

:^esta reigns, and then business matters may be trans- 

fc%cted until four-thirty when the sacred rite of tea con- 

r-.i3udes the strenuous day. The waning hours of sun, the 

■^jhefanetless hours, are consecrated to golf and tennis, and 

c;!^, six-thirty the world gathers for its "Sundown." 

That' ceremony needs no explanation to any old travelers 

f in the tropics; to explain it to an American audience 

would only wake the regrettable resentment against 

Law Enforcement too often noted in these United 

States. The rite, however, is often celebrated in ginger 

ale or lemon squash — ^but it is always celebrated. 

After sundown the social drift is towards the club, 

245 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL ' 

and after dinner to the club again unless there is a 
dance somewhere else. Between packing and sociability 
and reports to the invalid at the hospital, life was varied 
at Kampala. Major F. A. Flint was our frequent host 
a tea, sundown, and dinner, and we shall not soon for- 
get his heartening help in any difficulty and his fund 
of stories — ^the generous way he detached any admired 
trophy from his walls and sent it over on his boy's head 
next morning made us hesitate to utter a word of 
admiration. From him we secured the rare situtungi 
horns and a pair of the wide-branching horns of the 
Ankole cattle. 



CHAPTER XIX 

good-by to africa 

Victoria Ntanza to Naisobi; Mombasa akd the 
East Coast 

January 24 saw us off at last, by train, to Fort Bell 
seven miles away and then on the Susinga, an attractive 
steamer, across the serene Victoria Nyanza, blue and 
calm and smiling about us. The low-lying wooded 
shores were very different from our memories of Tan- 
ganyika and Kivu. They were charming but we missed 
our moimtains. 

There was a stop at Jinja, a breakfast with the Com- 
missioner and his wife, Mr. and Mrs. Henry, and a rick- 
shaw ride to Ripon Falls where the waters of the Nile 
take their first plunge from out the lake. The cascades 
are not tremendous but they are very lovely; a little 
cormorant-studded island around which we saw otters 
swimming gives picturesqueness, and the first glassy 
flow of the deep waters over the submerged rocks baa 
unfailing fascination. 

This was the tourist trail again, and here were tourists 
from Boston, two enterprising ladies who had been told 
by Messrs. Cook of Cairo that they could come into 
Africa as far as the Birth of the Nile without set- 
ting foot to the ground. Here was the Birth of the 
Nile and here they were, and I gathered that set foot 
247 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

to ground they had not. Judging from the siiig-aong 
plaints of the riskshaw boys who pushed them away, 
a httle exercise would not have been unappreciated. 

Off across the Nyanza again, and at noon of the thizd 
day we reached Kisumu or Port Florence in the Km- 
rondo country and changed to the train for the high 
dimb to Nairobi. 

We woke to see a band of zebras staring at us, so 
close we could fairly see their eyelashes — fat^ nh iinty 
little fellows like painted polo ponies. Bver stnce 
Swi«» Fa-mUy Bobiruon days, I had been nurtured in 
the belief that the zebra was fleeter than any horse. It 
was pain to learn that a good horse could run one down. 
All day we went through a beautiful onintry, vast 
plains alternating with woods of the Austrahan eucalyp* 
tus, planted in close packed rows. At intervals we 
stopped at stations for breakfast, luncheon, and tea. In 
the plains we saw our first kongoni; he was a quizzical 
looking old antelope, his long face of bland curiosity 
keeping watch over any particular friends, antelopes 
or zebras, grazing at hand. We passed Naivasha, a 
lovely lake with a floating island. Hippos abound in 
its waters. 

The country grew flatter and flatter. Suddenly tin 
houses appeared — the little corrugated shacks of our 
west. The train ran through a cluster of them and came 
to a stop in a station of hurry and bustle, stalls and 
papers and magazines — ^Nairobi. Nairobi, whose wide 
street of shops and rickshaws had so foreign a flavor to 
us, during our week of waiting at the Norfolk hotel, 
but where the old-timers gather at that Norfolk bar and 
248 



GOOD-BY TO AFRICA 

"Them days is gone forerer," is the burden of their 
song. Nairobi of stone country houses and private 
racing stables, — and tea and terraces and sunken gar- 
dens and dinners and dances': Nairobi, where a motor's 
ride away lions are roaring and the glistening Kikuyus, 
naked but for leaves and paint, are dancing beneath 
their sacred tree. 

We met there many whose names are familiar through 
books of travel, Sir Northrop McMillan and his wife, 
both American bom, whose Juja ranch is famous. 
We did not get out to the ranch ; the McMillans' Nairobi 
bome is a most attractive, delightful, gray stone place, 
covered with the blue blossoming plumbago, and Lady 
McMillan's racing stable houses about fifty lovely 
thoroughbreds. 

We met, too, these well-known outfitters, Messrs. 
Newland and Tarlton, whom other expeditions usually 
meet on entering the country; we gazed upon the 
trophies of that Due d'Orleans who had been on the 
KenUworth Cattle with us, going with his physician 
after big game ; we heard the gossip of all recent expedi' 
tions. We met Major Dugmore, whose African pictures 
are so well known, just starting with the expedition of 
Mr. Harris of Detroit, a young graduate of Yale, anx- 
ious to obtain beautiful pictures of African animals. 

A party of us motored to see a dance of the Kiku- 
yus. Although they live the closest to the encroach- 
ing civilization, these men wear less than any savages 
we encountered in the interior; in many cases a string 
of beads and a literal fig leaf sufficed, and at times the 
fig leaf was omitted, ^iie emphasis was entire!^ upon 
^49 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

strange, mirth-piovoking umbreU&. . . . And now 
their sunken eyes gazed out wiUi a flash of wonder at 
the little white girl with the fair curls who came to look 
at the tomb of their dead king, and then danced so fear- 
lessly out into the spaces where once it had been death 
to approadi. 

The administrative center of the Protectorate of 
Uganda is at Entebbe, on the shores of Victoria Ny- 
anza, twenty-five miles away. We motored to Entebbe 
in a fraction of a Ford with an Indian driver whose 
aberrations brought us nearer death than any lion or 
elephant. It may have been the fervid gratefulness of 
our escape from his clutches and the miracidous sense 
of renewed life, but Entebbe seemed to us one of the 
fairest spots imaginable, a bower of a place on the 
shores of the great lake, which every writer hastens to 
speak of as the inland sea of Africa. The word Nyanza 
means lake or sea or sometimes simply water. 

On a slope above the lake was the government arbo- 
reum where a great variety of tropic trees was grown. 
There were palms whose hidden chambers yielded clear 
water to the traveler in distress; there were huge incense 
trees with sweet scented gum oozing through the 
wounded bark; there were groves of chocolate trees with 
hard, dark, shining fruit, like an oval orange in shape; 
there were rubber trees where from a tiny cut the pale, 
strange fluid stole out ... to be rolled into a true 
rubber ball. 

In and out the trees, over the shores of the lake, there 
darted a winged multitude of birds, glittering little 
238 




AUCE *T A CeIEMOVUI, DaITCE or THE Kl 




Natwm Sawixo 


X Nai»»i 


IVtt 3Gt] 


^^I^BP^^HM^^^^ .[^ 


r^% 


:li 




P^ 


m 




^■ii'ii ■ 1 


I ' ""«! 


^^^^Br^^^ • •%'^m 


^^^^t^sM 


I. .^ 



A Rickshaw at Mombasa 



GOOD-BY TO AFRICA 

that story developed, in its strength and simplicity, I 
found myself believing in it, believing utterly. There 
was no reason why that story should not have happened 
to Cherry Kearton — ^he had been long enough in the 
country to have almost anything happen. I accepted it. 
I accepted all six of the hons. And then he added a 
detaiL He spoke of seeing the light of their eyes — six 
pairs of gleaming eyes in the dark. 

Xow there is a school of romance that encourages 
belief in the gleam of a cat's eyes at night, but ihe only 
time that a cat's eyes gleam at night is when there is 
& light directly reflected by them. If there is a light in 
the room behind you and you look under the bed in a 
dark room your cat's eyes under the bed may gleam 
back at you. And if you are up a tree and have six 
lions around you and you flash a hght down into the 
darkness, it may happen to be reflected from the eyes 
of a lion directly in front of that light; the other five 
pairs of eyes are glearoless. And if you are up a tree 
and you flash no hght you get no gleam from any Hon. 

I do not say that this discredits the complete drama 
of Mr. Keorton's story. He may, like many another 
artist, have gilded his original lily. He did not think we 
knew the truth about a cat's eyes at night. But he knew 
it. . . . And somehow I find myself not beheving in all 
six of the hons. Say about one and a half. 

But we did believe in his tame chimpanzee, for he 
brou^it him to the hotel and the chimpanzee and Alice 
promptly cuddled up together. 

There was another and grimmer lion story I heard 
from an old surveyor whose business led him among the 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL; 

native villages where he was on very friendty terms. | 
One ni^t he was being entertained in the diiers hut, 
where he slept with the chief who was remarkably fat, 
and two of his sons. In the middle of the ni^t swne* 
thing, some pricking prescience of danger, made ibe 
white man stir. The tiny aperture of a door, the only 
entrance to the hut, framing a light square of sky, wu 
suddenly blotted out. The next instant there was a 
scream, and then a growl and cracking of bones. A 
lion had entered and struck down one of the little blad[ 
boys. 

It was a horrible situation. And the \diite man in 
order to show his trust had left bis gun in another hut 
with his other belongings. . . . Nor had the chief a 
knife. The three of them lay there quaking and silent, 
not daring to stir, while the lion munched down the 
chief's son, leisurely, hour after hour, it seemed. The 
beast was between them and the door; sometimes they 
could see his head silhouetted against it. Finally, 
gorged and replete, he rolled over against it, by the 
body of the boy and went oflF to sleep. He slept there 
all day. And those three lay there unstirring, afraid 
to move a finger. They could not dig themselves out 
through that bricklike floor; they could not break the 
reeds of the hut. The one thought in the surveyor's 
mind was that the lion would surely get thirsty and go 
out for a drink — he kept telling himself that over and 
over again. He would lie up all day and go out and 
drink at evening. 

Evening came — ^the lion began to sfrefcH and stir. 
. . . Then came a sound like a cat lapping milk — blood 



GOOD-BY TO AFRICA 

— the Ik^s blood was his drink — then a sniff. It oc- 
curred to the surveyor that he mi^t be hungry again, 
but there must surely be enou^ of the lad left for a 
second meal. He made horrible calculations. Then 
the lion began to walk silently about that hut. The 
door was visible again. 

They made a dash for it, but fat as he was the native 
chief reached the door before the boy or the white man 
reached it and made a plunge and stuck. The door 
was edged with sapling uprights, through which it was 
always a squeeze to go in, and somehow in this crucial 
moment he stuck. He hadn't an instant's grace; the 
lion was after him. What followed is not pretty. The 
lion simply ate him, gradually and completely, while 
the boy and the surveyor, utterly helpless, lay there 
sick with terror. The only merit in the situation, and 
the surveyor admitted that he was callous with the thing 
by then, was that the lion was headed outward and was 
eating himself finally out of the hut. But, alas, the 
dimensions of the chief, that had caused him to stick, 
were no smaller in the Hon. As the gorged beast 
pressed forward, he, too, felt himself caught; he pushed 
— ^the saplings gripped him, he coidd go neither forward 
nor back. He was caught, trapped with his swoUen 
avoirdupois. And there he was stuck until he should 
starve down to thin dimensions again — with the sur- 
veyor and the remaining boy bottled up behind him. 

The surveyor stopped. "And he did starve down?" 
I demanded at that point. 

"Ultimately," said the surveyor. "But it took days." 

I thouj^t of the two imprisoned there in that horrible 
2!» 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

hut. "But you — what did you live on?" I thought to 
ask. 

"Oh, — that" said the suireyor. "I lived on the 
boy." 

From Nairobi the tourist trail runs down to the sea, 
three hundred and thirty miles to Mombasa and a de- 
scent of five thousand feet. Fast Kiu and Tsavo and 
Simba it runs, names that are starred with anecdotal 
interest in the tourist's lexicon, across the wide plains, 
Kapiti and Athi, through the famous preserves where 
herds of wild game ramble past the rolling car windows. 

This is the tourist's usual introduction to Africa 
coming in from the East Coast, but we found the trail 
as interesting on leaving the country as if we were see- 
ing Africa for the first time — in fact there is a poignancy 
to last times that made every crooked little thorn tree 
an object of tender afFection. 

In these sun-burned reaches we saw none of the cob 
and topi that covered the Ruindi; in fact the topi is so 
rare in Kenya Colony that the himter is hmited to two, 
but we saw kongoni and waterbuck and gazelles, the 
large and graceful Grants with its splendid sweep of 
horns and the frohcking little Tommy, or Thompsons, 
with his black and white striped sides and his ever flirt- 
ing tail. More novel and interesting than these to us 
were the zebra, of which we saw fifty in one herd, and 
the giraffe. 

Our first glimpse of giraffe was of a procession of 

them rocking along against the sky line for all the 

world like little mechanical toys; then we passed a long 

line very close to the train, twenty-four of them strung 

254 



GOOD-BY TO AFRICA 

along the way with their unusing heads hung up in the 
sky as if suspended from nothing at all, staring down 
earnestly upon us. Then one by one each turned and 
galloped away. The gait of the giraffe is the final 
joke of its appearance, a trot with the first two legs and 
a rocking gallop with the last. This sounds as if it 
were intended for a joke like the gait itself, but its 
truth is vouched for by no less a naturalist than Mr. 
Akeley, who affirms that he is its discoverer, and after 
the constituent elements are pointed out, you can 
easily distinguish the paces for yourself. 

Mombasa was a blaze of white coral — a little island 
three miles by two, glittering like a frosted birthday 
cake with that white rock of which its foundations and 
its buildings are made. It was as tropical as a dream 
of the South Seas, tufted with the cocoanut palms and 
baobabs, — giants of trees with huge bottle-shaped 
trunks — spangled with scarlet bloom and brilliant with 
sunshine from a fervid blue sky. 

It was a pocket of contrasts. It rattled with rick- 
shaws and motors. Green golf links stretched out to 
crumbling ruins of old Portuguese forts. On a street 
comer an English girl and a black bibi in a yard of cal- 
ico and a veil-shrouded woman of the East. . . . Tennis 
and tea shops . . . tourists . . . tailors sewing cross- 
legged and yellow Indian babies with pearls dripping 
from nose and ears minded by patient black boys . . . 
a swimming club and a lone row of cocoanut palms and 
a white beach where the Indian ocean rolls lazily in, 
and painted dhows rock in the tide and cattle bellow in 
their holds. . . . 

255 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

Out across that Indian Ocean ran the trail for Home. 
Up from Mombasa to Guardafui, through the Gulf 
to Aden on its barren rocks, over to the sunbaked camel 
squares of Jibouti, the mouth of Abyssinia, up through 
the Red Sea and the ribbon of the Suez Canal, through 
the Bitter Lakes, past Fort Said, where the Bast and 
West meet in unholy traffic, and across the Mediterra- 
nean to Marseilles, and a racketing train throu|^ 
France to a blowy channel Then England. Then 
America. Then Home. 

Ahead of us ran the trail. Bdiind us was the old 
Africa that we knew and had learned to love, the Africa 
that had been going on from the beginning of time, the 
wild and lovely land untouched of man. Lost to us 
were the vast spaces, the splendor of waters, the mad 
glory of volcanoes, the fairy isles of hidden lakes, the 
enchantment of cloud- wrapped heights; lost the solitude 
and the beauty and the freedom that make our civiliza- 
tion seem a prison and a market place. 

Gone, too, was the kindly security of the wilderness, 
the open tent flap, the money box left carelessly with- 
out, the unguarded ways. I was sorry to take the Lit- 
tlest Explorer back to charging motors and barred doors 
to face with her again the perils of civilization. 

Africa had been so worth while. And no after-years 
can take the memories from us — the black outline of a 
lion against the moonlight . . . the sheen of the golden 
crested crane . . . women with water jars crossing the 
opal sands of Tanganyika . . . the long, superb line 
of Mikeno cutting the tropic sky ... a glade in a fairy 
forest and a great gorilla in the sun. 
256 



CHAPTER XX 

LISTS AND EQUIPMENT, ETC. 

EQUiFMEcrr is of interest only to those contemplating 
an African trip and then it becomes of feverish impor- 
tance. Every one's experience is different and some- 
times contradictory, but the accimiulation of individ- 
ual detail often throws light on a subject. For the 
benefit of those who want to know, I am adding some 
lists of what we took with us and trying to answer the 
questions of what we really wore add ate and needed 
en such an expedition. 

Our experience was unlike that of the usual traveler 
who enters the country by the East Coast and engages 
the services of such a firm as Newland, Tarlton and 
Company, Limited, from whom he can obtain any part 
or all of his equipment and the services of porters, gan 
boys, tent boys, and cooks for the entire time that he 
is in the field. In the past Mr. Akeley had got his 
things from England and engaged his men from New- 
land, Tarlton. Colonel Roosevelt had outfitted in 
America and got his men from Newland, Tarlton. I 
met men who outfitted personally at the Nairobi stores 
and engaged their men themselves. 

For our safari we brought everything from America 
and England, picked up boys as we got into the Congo 
and carried them through with us, and obtained por- 
237 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

ters at different posts and villages. We dumged pof 
ters eight times. We took our goods up the long way 
north from the Cape as excess baggage instead c^ 
freight, in order to have it travel on the same trains with 
us. Mr. Akeley was already provided with some of 
his bags and nets so the orders in the ensuing lists are 
often for odd numbers. The following supplies were 
all obtained from Benjamin Edgington, 1 Duke Street 
London Bridge. 

Camp EauiFHBNT 
1 "Whymper" tent complete. 

8 doable roof ridge tents, 10 b; 8 — four feet walls, in valisefc 
1 extra fly, with uprights, ropes, complete. 
8 ground sheets from heavy green rot-proof canvas 11 by 9: 
4 mosquito nets, fine mesh, for half tent. 
8 circular canvas baths, 
6 holdall bags with bars and padlocks. 
6 green round bottomed bags fitted with eyelets and cords, 

48 by 80. 
6 enamel wash basins. 
6 "Uganda" waterbottles, 8 pints. 

3 Machilla hammocks, green canvas, with awnings, doable 
strength. 

12 Bath towels. 
18 Face towels. 

6 Ibea folding chairs. 

6 best quality deck chairs. 

6 air-tight boxes. 

6 small green hair pillows, 

4 candle lanterns. 

Our cots were the Gold Medal, Racine, Wisconsin, 
extra size. Our dining tables were a special design of 
2S8 



LISTS AND EQUIPMENT. ETC. 

Mr. Akel^'s made for us by a friend, Mr. Clarence 
Dewey, in New York. Our kitchen ware, tools, sucb 
as hammer and hatchet and rope — it is essential to have 
a good deal of rope — were bought at Elizabethville 
where we bought our bicycles. We were unable to ob- 
tain the desired petrol lamps in the Congo so we were 
obliged to depend on our candle lanterns. It would be 
wise to come provided with a good light. We had both 
the ordinary type of flash li^t with extra batteries and 
the type that creates its power by constant squeezing 
and both are desirable. 

Our food supplies were all obtained through Edging- 
ton's, and came put up in "chop boxes," wooden boxes 
with lock and key, packed not to exceed a porter's 
weight of sixty pounds, and marked for identification. 
These supplies were the following: 

TjrrsTY Casbi, Each Contaimiho 

2 tins cbeeae, Cheddar, Gniyere, Camembert. 

1 pound tin Ceylon tea. 

4 pound tin granulated sugar. 

4 tins sardines in oil. 

2 1-pound tins rolled ox tongue, 
8 tins Underwood deviled ham. 

5 tins jam, assorted, no currant. 
2 tins Dundee marmalade. 

4 one half-pound tins Danish butter. 

5 one half-poimd tins beef dripping. 
5 half-pound tins Ideal milk. 

2 number 2 tins small captain biscuits. 
4 tins Heinz baked beans and tomato. 
1 small tin Cerebos salt. 

3 one-pound tins plain chocolate. 

2fi9 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

1 one-abd-a-half pound tin Scotch oatmeaL 
1 one-half pound tin baldng powder. 

1 box £^ut two-and-a-half pound primrose laun- 
dry soap. 

TwxNTT Casks, Each Contjunino 

2 tins Heinz baked beans and tomato. 
2 tins smoked sardines in oil, 

2 tins smoked brisling in oQ. 
2 tins camp pie. 

5 tins jam assorted, no currant. 
2 tins Dundee marmalade. 

6 one-half pound tins Danish butter. 
6 one-half pound tins dripping. 

6 half-pound tins Ideal milk. 

2 tins cheese, Cheddar, Gruyere, Camemberi. 

1 one-pound tin Ceylon tea. 

1 three-quarter-pound tin ground pure coffee. 

1 four-pound tin granulated sugar. 

1 one-quarter-pound tin pure cocoa. 

4 No. 1 tin camp biscuits, plain, various. 

1 small tin Cerebos salt. 

1 one-and-a-half-pound tin Scotch oatmeaL 

2 two-pound tin prunes. 

1 one-ounce castor ground white pepper. 

2 sponge cloths. 

12 quire kitchen paper. 
2 one-pound tins plain chocolate. 
1 bar primrose laundry soap. 

Eight Cases, Each Containing 

6 seven-pound tins flour, special export!. 

Two Cases, Each Containing 

15 bottles Montserat lime juice. 



LISTS AND EQUIPMENT, ETC. 

Tto Cases, £ach Containino 

SO poundB Wiltshire bacon. 
canvas and salt. 

FtTB CaBSB CONTAINrNO 

4 tins whole Edam cheese. 
20 2-ounce tins Bovril. 
10 2-pound tins Sultana raisins. 
10 l-pound tins macaroni. 
80 4-ounce tins Underwood's deviled ham. 
20 bars carbolic soap. 
10 bottles Enos fruit salt. 
10 1-pound tins Christmas pudding. 

6 one half-pound tins curry powder. 
10 one half-pound tins yellow dubbin. 
20 bottles of Chutney (10 Bengal, 10 Major 
Grey). 

4 pound tins veterinary vaseline. 

6 1-pound tins castor sugar. 

6 Knight's patent tin openers. 
24 tins asparagus tips. 
24 tins Black Leicester mushrooms. 

6 large bottles Pond's Extract. 
12 10-yard epools Z.O. surgeon's tape, 1 in, wide. 

4 bottles Worcestershire sauce. 

6 tins beet mustard. 
12 dish towds. 
Theee Cases Containiho Caxulbs, Fuutbb ot Paxh 

AND TRB FOLLOWTNO TabLEWAKZ ; 

12 white enamel plates, light weight. 

12 white enamel dinner plates. 

8 white enamd v^etable dishes, medium size. 

6 one-pint caps (mugs). 

6 white enamel oatmeal dishea. 

6 cups and aaaeers. 

13 extra saoeen. 

261 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

Of that collection of food, only two boxes were un- 
touched when we came out of Uganda. We were well 
pleased with the assortment and the Danish butt« and 
Ideal milk were exceptionally good. Some of us ate 
our tinned butter and milk by preference, eren when we 
could have fresh milk and butter at the posts. Aitother 
time we should want more coffee, and add oil and Tine- 
gar to the lists; we should want more of the Sdam and 
less of the tinned cheese, less drippings and beans and 
omit the mushrooms altogether. Going into the Congo 
again it would be well to bring in some tinned fruits; 
in Kenya Colony on the East Coast, these are usualfy 
obtainable from Indian renders. In the C(mgo we 
were always able to obtain chickens and eggs from the 
natives and, almost invariably, bananas; our table from 
time to time knew green com and fresh tomatoes, 
onions, leeks, cabbages, peas, beans, marrows, potatoes, 
both white and sweet, pineapples, oranges, papayas, 
mangoes, limes, strawberries, and gooseberries. 

Medicines 

Our medicine kit was a Burroughs and Wellcome 
medicine case, supplemented with ample oxide adhesive 
plaster, bandages and hypodermic syringe in case of 
wounds and blood poison. Iodine, quinine, and adhesive 
tape are essentials. A dental kit is advisable, made 
up of the simplest remedies and amalgam, put up by 
one's own dentist — and it is an excellent idea to have 
one of the party spend an hour with a dentist imbibing 
first aid to the aching. 

262 



LISTS AND EQUIPMENT, ETC. 

Cahebas 

Mr. Akeley's equipment was elaborate* uid induded 
two Akeley motion picture cameras, one being "The 
Gorilla," a stereoscopic camera, a Graflex camera, and 
a dark room and equipment for developing negatives 
and making motion picture film tests in the field. Mr. 
Bradley used a Graflex plate camera of Mr. Akeley's, 
and Miss Miller and I had each a 3 A Kodak. Mine in- 
explicably collapsed in the middle of a film in Uganda. 
Miss Hall used a Brownie. Our films were brought 
from America done up in lead. We could have bou^t 
than at Elizabethville but no one ou^t to depend upon 
the chance of getting the right film at the last moment. 
Neither our plates nor fihns suffered any deterioration. 
The plates are extra trouble on safari but the results are 
well worUi it. I can say that unqualifiedly, not having 
been the one to take the trouble I For quick snaps about 
camp a universal focus is a good thing to hare at hand. 
We had four porters carrying plates and five porters 
carrying motion picture film. 

Guns 

Mr. Akeley and Mr. Bradley each carried a Jefifery's 
.47fi, two rifles which had already made one trip to 
Africa with Mr. Stevenson and Mr. McCutcbeon. The 
.475 is a heavy double-barreled, cordite rifle, of tremen- 
dous stopping power, an invaluable thing for emergen- 
deSs The men endorsed it heartily. Any gun of that 
type is considered too bard in recoil for a woman. Mr. 
Bradley used an extra rubber pad on the gun stock 
268 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

and never felt any lameness although he fired as often 
as twelve times on some days. 

Xiadb one of us was equipped with a Springfield army 
rifle, wilh sport stock built to ordn and special Lyman 
sights. Mine was directed against so few ftnimRU that 
I can do little more than give it a good character for 
the times when I needed it — against lions. We sup- 
plemented this arsenal by the purchase of a 16 gauge 
shotgun at Elizabethville, 

Cloteiko 

My outfit for safari was modeled on that of the moL 
I had two khaki suits, coats and knickers with loose 
knees, an extra pair of riding breeches and a khaki skirt. 
In the field I used flannel shirts, but on the march I 
usually wore a white silk or heavy crepe blouse with 
the khaki coat and knid^ers. I never wore a spine pad; 
Alice wore hers only on two days. I had a belt, two 
leather pockets, a knife, a compass. I had three pairs 
of leather boots, two heavy, hobnailed, leather-lined 
and one of softer leather, and one light pair of rubber- 
soled canvas, which were very useful, especially on the 
bicycle. I wore cloth puttees, of which I had three pairs. 
I had eight pairs of Jaegar stockings, four heavy and 
four fine, two pairs of bicycle stockings, and two pairs 
of long bed stockings. I wore silk underwear except 
for the days on ihe gorilla mountains when I wore Jae- 
gar wool. I had two suits of warm pajamas, a heavy 
Sweater, a rain coat, a pair of mosquito boots, soft, 
leather topped boots for camp wear, a gray pith helmet, 



LISTS AND EQUIPMENT, ETC. 

ai^ the usual toilet articles, faandkeichief s, writing ma- 
terials, etc 

Alice wore exactly what she wore in Wisconsin wilds 
— Uiaki knidcers and middies, over cotton and silk un- 
derwear or sometimes over the lig^itest wei^t wooL 
Her stockings were the finest and softest wool; her 
boots were stout elkskin and ponyskin, and she wore 
canvas leggings. 

The field outfit was simple. The lists that were 
really appalling were for the rest of the journey. We 
Iiad to plan for both cold and heat. For the voyage 
over, one wants plenty of white sport things and eve- 
ning clothes. Capetown was cold enough for coats at 
times, hut generally a silk frock was warm enou^j^ On 
tiie long trip north on trains and steamers, I found that 
a predominantly dark sport skirt and a dark blue silk 
sweats with white blouses vrere usefuL All through 
tiie Congo I carried one air-tight packed with the eve- 
ning dresses that I should need when I came out on the 
Kast Coast, and with white afternoon wear when we 
struck an official Boma. Seven dresses, two sports 
skirts, four blouses, and six pairs of slippers and ^oes, 
and the various "undies" lived in that 10 inch by 14 by 
82 air-tight I For the survival of the fittest in evoiing 
gowns I recommend lace ones and heavily beaded 
georgette — ^the beads wei|^t down the wrinkles. But 
this is becoming a feminine chapter. 

"DAK^as" 
Many questions have reached me about the dangers 
of an African trip. I can only say that except for the 
265 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

greats distance from phyadans in case of a broken ann 
or leg an African camping trip doesn't seem to me 
more dangerous than one in California or the Rocky 
Mountains. There is danger from sun, but not if you 
^rear your helmet. There is a chance of fever, but 
ordinarily nothing that quinine won't take care of, and, 
the immunity from colds and influenzas and the con- 
tagions of civilization is well worth having. I saw onfy 
two snakes In six months in Africa; one was dead, and 
one was an infant. Neither was harmful. We had to 
go out and hunt hard for all the dangers that we had — 
elephants and lions and gorillas. These can easily be 
avoided by any one who wants to see the coimtry and is 
not anxious for combat. The natives along the line of 
march we found peaceful, and I do not believe tiiat 
there woidd have been much chance of trouble even 
among the insurrectionists for they axe not in a state of 
violent insurrection but merely hold ^oof from the 
white man's rule. 

With time and money and health any one can see 
Africa. To see the hidden Africa, the wild Africa, that 
swiftly vanishing savage land, takes more time and a 
little more money, a passion for exercise and an en- 
thusiastic digestion. Our experience certainly showed 
that with these and with good care, not only men but 
women and a little chil4 niigbt go safely into the very 
heaxt of the Continent. 



INDEX 



:A11>erMlle. 48. 
Antelope (gasellea), 284. 

Earisimbi, 122. 

Kenya Colony, 199, 248. 

Pet, 88. 

Roindi Plaini, 177, 187. 

Sitotnnga, 240, 241. 
Ant hilla, 42. 
Antt, ufari, 0*, 65. 

Babooni, 200, 201. 

Baganda, 280. 

Bambooi, 108, 228. 

BaA dotb, 201, 202. 

Banu, T. Alexander, 81. 

Saron Dhamit, 51. 

Badcets,92. 

Batlga, 280. 

Batwa, 186, 187, 188, 189, 140. 

Belgian Admlnirtratlon, 217, 

218. 
Blcydea, 59, 60, 178, 188, 190. 
Big Game, dangers of, 168, 169. 

on Rnindi, 199. 
Birds, 288, 289. 
Boiaisai palma, 44. 
Jtoya, characterlatica of, 16S, 
166, 228, 248, 244. 

coatnmea of, 148. 

dlsdiarge of, 144. 

pajment of, 41, 162. 

zebtlons to, 166, 167. 



Bobonde, 102. 

Buffalo, dangers of, 168, 169, 

2oe. 

hunUng, 208, 209, 210, 211. 

on gorilla moantains, 114. 

on Rniadi, 206, 207. 
Bokavn, 78. 
Bnlawyo, 82. 

Bonyoiu, Lake, 228, 224, 225. 
51. 



Camp life, 61, 62, 68, 157. 
Cannabalism, possible case of, 
70. 

former, 74. 
Capetown, 25, 26, 27. 
Cecil Rhodes' grave, 82, 88. 
Cbongugn, 72. 

Chanlnagongo, Mt., 79, 95, 104. 
Chiefs, greetings of, 61, 221. 

Ivory of, 84. 

presents of, 60. 

sociability of, 82, 88. 

wives of, 62, 84. 
Chimpansees, 104, 188, 2S1. 
Christmas, 218, 214, 21S. 
Cicatrisatioii marks, 46. 
Cob, 177. 

Cold, 119, 120, 156. 
Cooks. 167, 168, 169, 160, 168, 

164. 
Crocodiles, 46, 47, 48, 72. 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

1 one-and-a-half pound tin Scotch oatmesL 
1 one-half pound tin baking powder. 

1 box aboat two-and-a-half pound primrose laun- 
dry soap. 

TwBNTT Cases, Each CoKTAnnNO 

2 tins Heinz baked beans and tomato. 
2 tins smoked sardines in oil. 

2 tins smoked brisling in oil. 

2 tins camp pie. 

6 tins jam assorted, no currant. 

2 tins Dundee marmalade. 

6 one-half pound tins Danish butter. 

5 one-half pound tins dripping. 

5 half-pound tins Ideal milk. 

2 tins cheese, Cheddar, Grujere, Camonbert. 

1 one-pound tin Ceylon tea. 

1 three-quartei^pound tin ground pure coffee. 

1 four-pound tin granulated sugar. 

1 one-quarter-pound tin pure cocoa. 

4 No. 1 tin camp biscuits, plain, various. 

1 small tin Cerebos salt. 

1 one-and-a-half-pound tin Scotch oatmeaL 

2 two-pound tin prunes. 

1 one-ounce castor ground white pepper. 

2 sponge cloths. 

12 quire kitchen paper, 
2 one-pound tins plain chocolate. 
1 bar primrose laundry soap. 

Eight Cases, Each Containing 

6 seven-pound tins flour, special export. 

Two Cases, Each Containino 

15 bottles Montserat lime juice. 
260 



LISTS AND EQUIPMENT, ETC. 

Two Casks, Each Containins 

80 poundfl Wiltshire bacon. 
canvas and salt. 

FiTB Cases Contaimiks 

4 tins whole Edam cheese. 
20 2-oiu)ce tins Bovril. 
10 2-pouitd tins Sultana raisins. 
10 l-pound tins macaroni. 
80 4-ounce tins Underwood's deviled ham. 
20 bars carbolic soap. 
10 bottles Enos fruit salt. 
10 1-pound tins Christmas pudding. 

6 one half-pound tins currj powder. 
10 one half-pound tins yellow dubbin. 
20 bottles of Chutney (10 Bengal, 10 Major 
Grey). 

4 pound tins veterinary vaseline. 

6 I'pound tins castor sugar. 

6 Kni^t's patent tin openers. 
24 tins asparagus tips, 
24 tins Black Leicester mushroonia. 

6 large bottles Pond's Extract. 
12 10-yard spools Z.O. surgeon's tape, 1 in. wide, 

4 bottles Worcestershire sauce. 

6 tins best mustard. 
12 dish towels. 
Thbee Cases Coittainino CANnLxs, Pi.asteb aw Paki* 

AND THE FoLLOWINO TabLBWARB: 

12 white enamel plates, light weight. 
12 white enamel dinner plates. 

8 white enamel vegetable dishes, mediom size. 

6 one-pint caps (mugs). 

6 white enamel oatmeal dishes, 

6 cups and saucers. 
12 extTA saucers. 

261 



ON THE GORILLA TRAIL 

Of that collection of food, only two boxes were un- 
touched when we came out of Uganda. We were well 
pleased with the assortment and the Danidi butter and 
Ideal milk were exceptionally good. Some of us ate 
our tinned butter and milk by preference, even when we 
could have fresh milk and butter at the posts. Another 
time we should want more coffee, and add oil and vine- 
gar to the lists; we should want more of the Edam and 
less of the tinned cheese, less drippings and beans and 
omit the mushrooms altogether. Going into the Congo 
again it would be well to bring in some tinned fruits; 
in Kenya Colony on the East Coast, these are usually 
obtainable from Indian renders. In the Congo we 
were always able to obtain chickens and eggs from the 
natives and, almost invariably, bananas; our table from 
time to time knew green com and fresh tomatoes, 
onions, leeks, cabbages, peas, beans, marrows, potatoes, 
both white and sweet, pineapples, oranges, papayas, 
mangoes, limes, strawberries, and gooseberries. 

MJE3)ICINES 

Our medicine kit was a Burroughs and Wellcome 
medicine case, supplemented with ample oxide adhesive 
plaster, bandages and hypodermic syringe in case of 
wounds and blood poison. Iodine, quinine, and adhesive 
tape are essentials. A dental kit is advisable, made 
up of the simplest remedies and amalgam, put up by 
one's own dentist — and it is an excellent idea to have 
one of the party spend an hour with a dentist imbibing 
first aid to the aching. 



LISTS AND EQUIPMENT, ETC. 

Cauebas 

Mr. Akeley*s equipment was elaborate, and included 
two Akeley motion pictiue cameras, one being "The 
Gorilla,'* a stereoscopic camera, a Graflex camera, and 
a dark room and equipment for developing negatives 
and making motion picture film tests in the field. Mr. 
Bradley used a Graflex plate camera of Mr. Akeley's, 
and Miss Miller and I had each a 3 A Kodak. Mine in- 
explicably collapsed in the middle of a film in Uganda. 
Miss Hall used a Brownie. Our films were brought 
from America done up in lead. We could have bought 
than at Elizabethville but no one ought to depend upon 
the chance of getting the right film at the last moment. 
Neither our plates nor films suffered any deterioration. 
The plates are extra trouble on safari but the results are 
well worth it. I can say that unqualifiedly, not having 
been the one to take the trouble I For quick snaps about 
camp a universal focus is a good thing to have at hand. 
We had four porters carrying plates and five porters 
carrying motion picture film. 

Guns 

Mr. Akeley and Mr. Bradley each carried a Jefferjr's 
.475, two rifles which had already made one trip to 
Africa with Mr. Stevenson and Mr. McCutcheon. The 
.475 is a heavy double-barreled, cordite rifle, of tremen- 
dous stopping power, an invaluable thing for emergen- 
cies, The men endorsed it heartily. Any gun of that 
type is considered too hard in recoil for a woman. Mr. 
Bradley used an extra rubber pad on the gun stock 



■uUn, 74, 188, 141, 

S40, S50. 
Dsndl, King of Uguda, 288, 

884. 
Derlddar, Dr., 79. 

Eleplunts. djmgen of, 168, 180. 

fannting, S9, 6B, 68, 800, 808, 
208, 204j 20S. 

preaence of, 44, 108, 808. 
EUBflbethville, 88, 89. 
Entebbe, 288. 
Equipment, cunens, 268. 

camp, 268, 259, 261. 

clotbing> 264, 266. 

food, 269, 260, 268. 

gmu, 268, 264. 



Fercr, 77, 79, 242. 

Filed teeth, 70, 74. 

Fire •Udu, 202. 

Flies, 81. 

Food, in the Congo, 46, 68, 80, 

81, 141, 142, 161. 
Forota, on gorills mountains, 

114. 
Freetown, 14, 16, 17. 

Gavial, 48. 
Gaselle, 264. 
Giiaffe, 264, 266. 
Goma, 78. 

Gorilla, band of, 128, 124, 126, 
188. 

beds, 128, 183. 

difficolties of seeing, 81, 109. 

Dn Chaillu's description of, 
4, 106. 

eqnatoria), 104. 



OorfDs (Coai) 
food of, 181. 
forests of, 114. 
hunting, 106, 107, 108, lOf. 
kflled by Mr. Bradley, 118, 

116, 117. 
UA of information about, 4. 
meat, 121. 
necessity for preservation of, 

182. 
Prince of Sweden's ezpeditkn 

for, 104. 
raids by, at Eatana, 76. 
raids by, at Wallkali, 76. 
shot by Mr. Bama, 99, lOa 
tra<^, 106. 
Groote Schnr, 28. 
Grotaen, Coont, 71. 

Hail, 147. 

Hairdresdng, natlTe, 45. 
Hippopotamas, 46, 86, 174, 848. 
Hooaekeeping In Ote Congo, 88. 

Ivory, 89, 90. 

Jai^ala, 196. 
Jiggers, 84, 86, llS. 

Eabale, 226, 227. 

Eabslo, 48. 

Eaffii-Boom, 63. 

Eampala, 281, 282, 288, 24S. 

Earisimbi, Mt., 78, 114, 148. 

Eatana, 76. 

Eavirondo crane, 88, 89, 389. 

Eibati, 101. 

Eigoma, 81. 

Eikoyna, 249, 200. 

Ehnberley, sa 



yi, 78, 87, 88, 98. 

D, tlnee-stone, 161, 162. 

Lake, deKilptioii of, 7S. 

onry of, 71. 

ate of, 8S, 86, 87. 

oi, S«8, 2U. 

[oto, 60. 

fields, 147. 

of, at KiTO, M, 9S, 96. 
ids, 169, 170, 178, 178. 

duigera of, 169. 

'igtit bnntiiig of, 177, 178, 

79,180,181, 182, 188. 

tUngof, IBS, 188. 

xdby, 188, 189, 190, 191, 

a. 

,t banting of, 186, 186, 

)8, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198. 

lea of, 2fiO, 201, 253, 2S8, 

}«. 

■tone, 84,81,71. 

w BiTcr, 42, 44, 45. 

(a Mission, 108, 104, 184, 

n. 

ra, 12. 

lng,81. 

I Moto, 178,217. 

'JO Cimgo, 87. 

on, 20S, 280. 

ra, 281. 

,biio Monntains, 9S, 145, 

W. 

0, Mt., 78, 106, 107, 108, 

LI, 112, 145. 

na. See White Fathers. 

•sa, 258. 

ijs, S19. 

ittoes, 01, 73, 



Motort, 281, '988. 
Mountains of the Moon, 98. 
Mnsinga, king of Baanda,'61, 91. 
Mntesa, tomb of, 284, 288, 286, 
287. 

Nairobi, 248, 249. 
Maivasha, Lake, 248. 
Nettles, 122. 
Nile, sDorces of, 95. 
Nytanlagira, Mt., 148. 

ascent of, 146, 147, 148, 149. 

camp on, 152, 158. 

cave in, 152. 

crater of, 149, 181, 152, 168, 
154, 155. 

eraptions of, 146, 154, IBS. 
NTtmde, 80, 98, 94. 

Otters, 225, 247. 

PapTTOs, 228. 
Papaya, 63. 
Polygamy, 229. 
Pombe, 58, 160, 161. 
Porters, clothing of, 62. 

engaging of, 58. 

fighting amongst, 70. 

food of, 62. 

status of, 88. 

vagei of, 58. 
Posho, 62. 

Provisioning. See Equipment. 
Pygmies, 186, 187, 188, 189, 140. 

Qtiinine, 77, 80. 

Rains, 44, 86, 150, 178. 
Reed bock, 1Z7. 



Khinoeeroi, dangert e>i, 198, 169. 

lume on Boindi, 170. 
Bif t VaUey, Cential African, 96, 

145. 
Roanda, king of, 61. 

kingdom of, 78. 

inhabitants of, 79. 
Rnchnni, 171, 216, 220. 
Bnchnrn River, 173, 174. 
Baindi, plains of, 17S, 177, 199, 

212. 
Bnindi River, 175, 199, 201. 
Roaisi Mountains, 71. 
Rnsisi Bivei, 68. 

Sake, 76. 

SecreUry bird, 42. 
Serval cats, 196. 
Sese Islands, 240. 
Sharpe, Sir Alfred, 96. 
Silver trees, 2S. 
Sitatmiga, 240, 241. 
Sleeping sickness, 240, 241. 
Smuts, General Jan, 16, 19, 20, 

21, 22, 28. 
Speke, 61, 237, 288. 
Spirillum fever, 79. 
Stanley, 42, 61. 
Swahili, 82. 

Tanganyika, Lake, 48, 49, 60, 61, 
Thanksgiving, 141, 142, 148. 



TidtlereT^fll'. 

Topi, 177. 

Tsetse fly, 69, 940, 241'. 

Uganda, boundary of, 220. 

march through, 221, 222, 227, 
228. 

water, scarcity of, in, 221, 228. 
Ujiji, 61. 
Uanmbura, 61, 62, 68, 64. 

Victoria Falls, 88, 84, 86. 
Victoria Nyansa, 288, 247. 
Viaoke, 78, 95. 
Volcanoes, 79, 96, 146, 140. 

Wahnnde, 119. 

Wahuti, 90. 

WalikaU,76. 

Waregga, 78, Ti. 

Wania-Bongo, 78. 

Water, Scarcity of, 228. 

Watnssi, 90. 

White Fathers, at Katana, 76. 

at Lolenga, 108, 104, 186, 148. 

at Nyunde, 80, 98, 94. 
White Sisters, 94, 108. 

Yubile, 147. 

Zambesi, 86. 
, ^Eebra, 241. 



TRAVEL IN PICrUBESQUE AND 
INTERESTING REGIONS 



Bosidu ha value ai a picture of a great Eorilla hunt, 
thii book haa nmunal intemt becansc of We pretence 
of die atithor'a six year old daughter with the expedi- 
tion. 

CAMPS AND TRAILS IN CHINA 
Br Roy Chafhar Ahiuws and Ynm Boatir An- 
mws 

Zoological explorationi along the frontiers of "nbet 
and Burma and in the little known province of Ynn-Nan, 
China, a wild and unknown region where the Blue Tiger 
Iain. 

ACROSS UONGOLIAN PLAINS 
By Rov Chapman Avntxws 

A naturalist's experiences in China's ^eat Northwest, 
where the sons of Genghis Khan's warriors walk under 
electric lights, uid camels and motor cars meet in the 
Gobi Desert 
VIVA MEXICO 
By Cbakus U. Flakouut 

The lif^ the people, and the country of Mexico de- 
scribed by an ^nerican, who has Ured in the country 
and who relates deftly and refreshingly what he has 
obsetved. 

KIPLING'S SUSSEX 
By R. Thubston Hdfkiks 

The quaint and picturesque Old World county, which 
forms the setting of some of Kipling's finest tales, 
studied with leisurely, charming intimacy. 
THOMAS HARDVS DORSET 
By R. Tbdbston Hopkins 

The countryside whose influence is woven into much 
of Thomas Hardy's work, and the country folk iriiom 
he knew and loved and wrote about, all presented in 
engaging discourse. 

TRAMPING WITH A POET IN THE ROCKIES 
By Stbpbeh Gbahau 

A remarkable account of a remarkable joomey — Gra- 
ham's hike with Vachel Lindny through Glader Park 
and nearby districts. 



APPLETON'S RECENT FICTION 



THE VAGRANT DUKE 

Br GEORGE GIBSS 

The author of "Tbt Splendid Ontntt" hu here wrlm aitad»r 
BiiBihiti( adreature Dorel. A Rnadan Doke, flaeing the Bol- 
■hcriki, mult work hi* way in America. Myttcrj and ramanca 
are whai be findi aa ■upcrintciideoi of a qaeer old iBalti-aA> 
tioDaire't citite. 

THE INNOCENT ADVENTURESS 

Br MARY HASTINGS BRADLEY 

A familr of the Italian nobilitr are hard up and aa n aoltttiaa 
■cod their roungcat daughter to learch for a huibaod, wealftr, 
in America. She ii a brire and attractire little thing, and tha 
author of "^he Fortieth Door" haa known how to laake her 
adTCnture* trulr r*f''"'g, 

THE RAPIDS 

Br ALAN SULUVAN 

A uorel of the rigoroaa north, whtdi tella the atorr of a man 
who leeki to traniform a timple villuc into a atigh^ citr. 
In th« voice of the rapida he heart the arging toward* Ua 
ambition and the great lore which eome* to him. 

THE COUNSEL OF THE UNGODLY 

By CHARLES BRACKETT 

A direrting comedy of lociety life. Peter Tan Hoeren, an eld 
■odety man nfao findt himtelf pennilew, take* a potition a* 
butler to a very DevT-iich lady. Unoniat and dram"'' 



D. APPLETON AND COMPANY 

NEW YORK LONDON 



NEW NOVELS OF PRIBfB INTEREST 



FAIR HARBOR 

By JOSEPH C LINCOLN 

Cap'a Sears Rend rick, worthy cotnpanioii of 
tnimeroos delightful Lincoln creatiani, attempt! the 
management oi a "retreat" for "Marineri' women," 
therebjr providing his genial author with splendid op- 
portunities for eArdaing his wonderful gift of wbole- 
■otne, heart; humor. 

AT SIGHT OF GOLD 

B7 CYNTHIA LOUBARDI 

A colorful and dramatic romance with scenes laid 
in Italy and in New YoHe's social and operatic dr^lea. 

THE GATS PAW 

By NATALIE SXMNER LINCOLN 



THK AMAZING INHERITANCE 

By FRANCES R. STERRETT 

Hilarious tale of a department store salesgirl who 
inherits a group of South Pacific Islands. 

ROGUES* HAVEN 

By ROY BRIDGES 

Picturesque and gripping romance of adventire, re- 
Tolnng round a store of fHrate wealth. 

MXORD O* THE WHITE ROAD 

By CEDRIC ERASER 

A brisk romance of the gallant days when sword- 
play was in high fashion.
