THE POWER OF THE MIND OVER THE BODY: An Experimental Inquiry into the Nature and Cause
of the Phenomena attributed by Baron Reichenbach and others to a "New Imponderable."
By James Braid. London: John Churchill, 1846.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/b30382142).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE


POWER  OE  THE  MIND


OYER  THE  BODY :


AN  EXPERIMENTAL  INQUIRY  INTO  THE  NATURE  AND  CAUSE
OF  THE  PHENOB1ENA  ATTRIBUTED  BY  BARON
REICHENBACH  AND  OTHERS  TO  A
“NEW  IMPONDERABLE.”


BY  JAMES  BRAID,  M.R.C.S.E.,  C.M.W.S.,  &c.

“TRUTH  IS  WHAT  IT  BECOMES  US  ALL  TO  STRIVE  FOR.”

LONDON :

JOHN  CHURCHILL,  PRINCESS  STREET,  SOHO  $
ADAM  &  CHAS.  BLACK,  EDINBURGH,


MBCCCXLYI.


k>


THE


POWER  OE  THE  MIND  OYER  THE  BODY.


Few  publications  have  lately  issued  from  the  press  so  well
calculated  to  excite  general  interest  and  inquiry,  as  Baron  Yon
Reichenbach’s  “ Researches  on  Magnetism.”  The  high  reputation
of  the  author,  as  well  as  that  of  his  learned  translator  and
annotator,  Professor  Gregory,  who  has  furnished  a  condensed
view  of  the  subject  in  an  English  dress,  were  all  calculated  to
produce  an  effect — the  greater,  because  the  subject  discussed
was  represented  as  bringing  under  our  notice  “  a  new  imponder¬
able,”  through  which  we  should  realize  a  clear  and  satisfactory
solution  of  many  problems  in  the  mental  and  physical  consti¬
tution  of  man,  which  had  puzzled  and  perplexed  alike  the
savage  and  the  sage  from  the  earliest  ages.

The  vast  interest  which  the  above-named  brochure  has  created,
is  evinced  by  the  extent  to  which  it  has  been  quoted,  referred
to,  and  reviewed  in  our  numerous  periodicals.  Nor  is  it  devoid
of  interest  to  observe  the  various  awards  of  these  different
authorities.  Thus,  one  quotes  at  great  length,  and  not  only
with  seriousness  sets  down  the  whole  as  fully  established,  but,
moreover,  with  much  self-complacency  exults  in  the  proof  thereby
adduced  of  the  correctness  of  all  the  most  extreme  views  he
and  other  Mesmerists  may  have  promulgated  on  certain  points


4


THE  POWER  OF  THE


of  this  keenly  debated  science  ;  whilst  another  writes  a  clever
burlesque  article  holding  up  the  whole  speculation  as  worthy
only  of  unsparing  ridicule.  Between  these  two  extremes,
again,  we  have  every  grade  of  approval  or  scepticism.

On  the  first  announcement  of  Dr.  Gregory’s  abstract  of
Baron  Reichenbach’s  “  Researches  on  Magnetism,”  I  lost  no  time
in  procuring  a  copy,  which  I  perused  with  intense  interest.  I
had  not  proceeded  far,  however,  when  my  experience  with
hypnotic  patients  enabled  me  to  perceive  a  source  of  fallacy,  of
which  the  Baron  must  either  have  been  ignorant,  or  which  he
had  entirely  overlooked.  From  whatever  cause  this  over¬
sight  had  arisen,  I  felt  confident  that,  however  carefully
and  perseveringly  he  had  prosecuted  Ins  experiments,  and
however  well-calculated  they  had  been  for  determining  mere
physical  facts,  still  no  reliance  could  be  placed  upon  the  ac¬
curacy  of  conclusions  drawn  from  premises  assumed  as  true,
where  especial  care  had  not  been  taken  to  guard  against  the
source  of  fallacy  to  which  I  refer — viz.,  the  important  influence
of  the  merMl  part  of  the  process,  which  is  in  active  operation
with  patients  during  such  experiments.*  I  therefore  resolved

*  Let  it  not  be  supposed  that  I  intend  by  these  observations  to  impute  to
Baron  Reichenbach  any  want  of  ordinary  caution,  or  even  the  strictest
desire  to  guard  against  sources  of  fallacy  of  every  sort.  From  what  is
recorded  at  pp.  13,  50,  and  81,  of  the  “Abstract,”  it  is  obvious  that  he
had  taken  great  precautions,  and  such,  indeed,  as  would  have  been  quite
adequate  'to  effect  such  purpose  under  ordinary  circumstances.  More¬
over,  I  most  cordially  admit  that  a  better  devised  series  of  experiments,
or  a  more  laborious  and  painstaking  effort,  for  determining  the  question
on  strictly  inductive  principles,  I  have  never  met  with  in  any  department
of  science.  Nor  is  small  praise  due  to  Professor  Gregory,  for  the  mas¬
terly  manner  in  which  he  has  performed  his  part  of  the  task  ;  still,  when
the  extraordinary  acuteness  of  the  organs  of  special  sense  are  taken  into
account,  to  which  reference  is  made  at  p.  2,  of  the  “  Abstract,”  where  it
i3  admitted  that  “  smell  and  taste  become  astonishingly  delicate  and
acute ;”  vision  so  irritable  that  patients  “  are  able,  in  very  dark  rooms,
to  distinguish  not  only  the  outlines,  but  also  the  colours  of  objects,
where  healthy  people  cannot  distinguish  anything  at  all;”  and  that
“  patients  hear  and  understand  what  is  spoken  three  or  four  rooms  off
I  say,  when  these  facts  are  taken  into  consideration,  coupled  with  the


MIND  OVER  THE  BODY.


3


to  repeat  his  experiments,  paying  the  strictest  attention  to  this
point  ;  and,  as  I  had  anticipated,  the  results  were  quite  opposed
to  the  conclusions  of  Baron  Reichenbach.  It  is  with  consider¬
able  diffidence  that  I  venture  to  publish  an  opinion  opposed  to
such  high  authority  ;  but  I  shall  briefly  state  the  grounds  of  my
own  opinion,  and  leave  it  to  others  to  repeat  the  experiments,
and  determine  which  opinion  is  nearer  the  truth.  The  obser¬
vations  which  I  have  to  submit  may,  moreover,  prove  sugges¬
tive  to  others,  and  enable  them  not  only  to  avoid  sources  of
fallacy  with  which  I  am  familiar,  but  may  also  lead  to  the
detection  of  many  which  may  have  escaped  my  own  observa¬
tion.

The  great  aim  of  Baron  Reichenbach’s  researches  in  this

excitable  state  of  their  minds,  it  will  readily  be  admitted,  that  with  all
the  precautions  resorted  to  by  Baron  Reichenbach,  various  ideas  may
have  been  conveyed  to  his  secluded  patients,  through  the  ordinary
channels,  of  which  he  had  no  suspicion.  For  example,  slight  sounds
in  conducting  the  experiments,  may  have  been  overheard  by  the  patients,
and  indicated  to  them  changes  in  the  arrangements,  of  which  the  operator
had  no  notion  ;  tones  of  voice,  in  proposing  questions,  may  have  had
an  equally  certain  and  unintended  influence  ;  and  it  is  an  undoubted  fact
that,  with  such  subjects,  the  slightest  change  in  the  concomitants
always  suggests  a  change  in  the  fundamental  or  previously  existing  idea.
Such  being  the  case,  I  can  imagine  no  satisfactory  mode  of  determining
the  subject  with  such  patients  as  the  Baron  experimented  with  in  the
stair-case,  but  having  them  placed  beyond  the  range  of  hearing,  even  to
their  quickened  ears.  The  conducting  wires  should  be  securely  fixed  by
thumb-screws  near  their  distal  ends,  so  as  to  prevent  any  vibration
taking  place  beyond,  when  changing  arrangements  ;  which  should  be  per¬
formed  with  the  least  possible  noise  ;  and  a  single  sound  of  a  bell  should
be  the  only  signal  for  an  a-nswer,  unless  the  patient  should  wish  volun¬
tarily  to  express  some  intelligence  as  to  impressions,  which  he  ought  to
be  at  liberty  to  do  at  any  time.  I  would  also  suggest  that  there  ought  to
be  no  regular  order  in  the  experiments;  and  that  changes  should  be
made  without  sounding  the  bell ;  and  occasionally,  that  the  bell  should
be  sounded  repeatedly  udthout  any  change  having  been  made.  On  no
account  should  the  experiments  be  conducted  where  the  patients  can
have  ocular  observation  of  the  features,  or  gestures  of  the  investigators,
even  in  apartments  apparently  dark.  Such  are  the  rigorous  conditions
I  should  consider  requisite  in  the  investigation  of  this  subject,  so  as  to
guard  against  all  obvious  sources  of  fallacy.


6


THE  POWER  OE  THE


department  of  science  has  been  to  establish  the  existence  of  a
new  imponderable,  and  to  determine  its  qualities  and  powers  in
reference  to  matter  and  other  forces,  vital  and  inanimate.  It
unfortunately  happens,  however,  that  the  only  test  of  this  al¬
leged  new  force  (with  one  solitary  exception,  and  that  as  I
thought  by  no  means  a  satisfactory  one)  is  the  human  nerve  ;
and  not  only  so,  but  it  is  further  admitted  that  its  existence  can
only  be  demonstrated  by  certain  impressions  imparted  to,  or  ex¬
perienced  by,  a  comparatively  small  number  of  highly  sensitive  and
nervous  subjects.  But  it  is  an  undoubted  fact  that  with  many
individuals,  and  especially  of  the  highly  nervous,  and  imagina¬
tive,  and  abstractive  classes,  a  strong  direction  of  inward  con¬
sciousness  to  any  part  of  the  body,  especially  if  attended  with
the  expectation  or  belief  of  something  being  about  to  happen,  is
quite  sufficient  to  change  the  physical  action  of  the  part ,  and  to
produce  such  impressions  from  this  cause  alone ,  as  Baron  Beichen-
bach  attributes  to  his  new  force.  Thus  every  variety  of  feeling
may  be  excited  from  an  internal  or  mental  cause — such  as  heat
or  cold,  pricking,  creeping,  tingling,  spasmodic  twitching  of
muscles,  catalepsy,  a  feeling  of  attraction  or  repulsion,  sights  of
every  form  or  hue,  odours,  tastes,  and  sounds,  in  endless  variety,
and  so  on,  according  as  accident  or  intention  may  have  sug¬
gested.  Moreover,  the  oftener  such  impressions  have  been  ex¬
cited,  the  more  readily  may  they  be  reproduced,  under  similar
circumstances,  through  the  laws  of  association  and  habit.  Such
being  the  fact,  it  must  consequently  be  obvious  to  every  intelli¬
gent  and  unprejudiced  person,  that  no  implicit  reliance  can  be
placed  on  the  human  nerve,  as  a  test  of  this  new  power  in  pro¬
ducing  effects  from  external  impressions  or  influences,  when  pre¬
cisely  the  same  phenomena  may  arise  from  an  internal  or  mental
influence,  when  no  external  agency  whatever  is  in  operation.

In  order  to  guard  against  this  source  of  fallacy,  therefore,  I
considered  it  would  be  the  best  mode  to  throw  patients  into  the
nervous  sleep,  and  then  operate  on  such  of  them  as  I  knew  had
no  use  of  their  eyes  during  the  sleep  (for  some  patients  have),
and  to  take  accurate  notice  of  the  results  when  a  magnet
capable  of  lifting  fourteen  pounds  was  drawn  over  the  hand  and


SlIND  OVER  THE  BODE.


other  parts  of  the  body  without  contact,  after  the  manner  des¬
cribed  as  performed  by  Baron  Beichenbacb  in  his  experiments.

I  experimented  accordingly,  and  the  results  were,  that  in  no
instance  was  there  the  slightest  effect  manifested,  unless  when
the  magnet  was  brought  so  near  as  to  enable  the  patient  to  feel
the  abstraction  of  heat,  (producing  a  sensation  of  cold),  when  a
feeling  of  discomfort  was  manifested,  with  a  disposition  to  move
the  hand,  or  head,  or  face,  as  the  case  might  be,  from  the  offen¬
ding  cause.  This  indication  was  precisely  the  same  when  the
armature  was  attached,  as  when  the  magnet  was  open;  and  in
both  cases,  if  I  suffered  the  magnet  to  touch  the  patient,  instantly
the  part  was  hurriedly  withdrawn,  as  I  have  always  seen  mani¬
fested  during  the  primary  stage  of  hypnotism,  when  the  patients
were  touched  with  any  cold  object.  Now,  inasmuch  as  patients
in  this  condition,  generally,  if  not  always,  manifest  their  percep¬
tions  of  external  impressions  by  the  most  natural  movements,
unless  the  natural  law  has  been  subverted  by  some  preconceived
notion  or  suggested  idea  to  the  contrary,  and  as  I  have  operated
with  similar  results  upon  a  considerable  number  of  patients,  we
have  thus  satisfactory  proof  that  there  was  no  real  attractive
power  of  a  magnetic  or  other  nature,  tending  to  draw  the  pa¬
tient,  or  any  of  his  members,  so  as  to  cause  an  adhesion  between
his  body  and  the  magnet,  as  between  the  latter  and  iron,  as
Baron  Beichenbach  had  alleged.  I  conclude,  therefore,  that
the  phenomena  of  apparent  attraction  manifested  in  his  cases
were  due  entirely  to  a  mental  influence ;  and  I  shall  presently
prove  that  this  is  quite  adequate  to  the  production  of  such
effects.

But  I  must  now  give  an  extract,  so  as  to  state  Baron  Beichen-
bach’s  views,  as  expressed  in  Professor  Gregory’s  abstract.
“Magnets  of  lOlbs.  supporting  power,  when  drawn  along  the
body,  without  contact,  produce  certain  sensations  in  a  certain
proportion  of  human  beings.  Occasionally,  out  of  twenty,  three,
or  four  sensitive  individuals  are  found  ;  and  in  one  case,  out  of
twenty-two  females  examined  by  the  author,  eighteen  were
found  sensitive.


8


THE  POWER  OF  THE


“  The  sensation  is  rather  unpleasant  than  agreeable,  and  is
like  an  aura :  in  some  cases  warm,  in  others  cool ;  or  it  may  be
a  pricking,  or  the  sensation  of  the  creeping  of  insects  on  the
skin  ;  sometimes  headache  comes  on  rapidly.  These  effects
occur  when  the  patient  does  not  see  the  magnet,  nor  know
what  is  doing  ;  they  occur  both  in  males  and  females,  though
more  frequently  in  females  ;  they  arq  sometimes  seen  in  strong,
healthy  people,  but  oftener  in  those  whose  health,  though  good,
is  not  so  vigorous,  and  in  what  are  called  nervous  persons.
Children  are  frequently  found  to  be  sensitive.  Persons  affected
with  spasmodic  diseases,  those  who  suffer  from  epilepsy,  cata¬
lepsy,  chorea,  paralysis,  and  hysteria,  are  particularly  sensitive.
Lunatics  and  somnambulists  are  uniformly  sensitive.  The  mag¬
net  is  consequently  an  agent  capable  of  affecting  the  living  body.
The  object  of  the  author  is  to  solve  some  of  the  disputed  ques¬
tions,  and  to  bring  a  number  of  phenomena  under  fixed  physical
laws.

“  Healthy  sensitive  subjects  observe  nothing  farther  than  the
sensations  above  noticed,  and  experience  no  inconvenience  from
the  approach  of  magnets  ;  but  the  diseased  sensitive  subjects  ex¬
perience  different  sensations,  often  disagreeable,  and  occasionally
giving  rise  to  fainting,  to  attacks  of  catalepsy,  and  to  spasms  so
violent  that  they  might  possibly  endanger  life.  In  such  cases,
which  generally  include  somnambulists,  there  occurs  an  extra¬
ordinary  acuteness  of  the  senses  ;  smell  and  taste,  for  example,
become  astonishingly  delicate  and  acute  ;  many  kinds  of  food
become  intolerable,  and  the  perfumes  most  agreeable  at  other
times  become  offensive.  The  patients  hear  and  understand
what  is  spoken  three  or  four  rooms  off,  and  their  vision  is  often
so  irritable,  that,  on  the  one  hand,  they  cannot  endure  the  sun’s
light,  or  that  of  a  fire  ;  while,  on  the  other,  they  are  able,  in
very  dark  rooms,  to  distinguish,  not  only  the  outlines,  but  also
the  colours  of  objects,  where  healthy  people  cannot  distinguish
anything  at  all.  Up  to  this  point,  however  strange  the  pheno¬
mena,  there  is  nothing  which  may  not  be  easily  conceived,  since
animals  and  men  differ  very  much  in  the  acuteness  of  the  senses,
as  is  daily  experienced.”


HIND  OVER  THE  BODY.


9


Having  met  with  a  patient,  Mdlle.  Nowotny,  who  was  subject
to  catalepsy,  who  possessed  such  a  high  degree  of  acuteness  of
the  senses,  that  “  she  could  not  endure  the  daylight,  and  in  a
dark  night  perceived  her  room  as  well  lighted  as  it  appeared  to
others  in  the  twilight,  so  that  she  could  quite  well  distinguish
colours from  a  consideration  of  this  circumstance,  and  re¬
membering  that  the  aurora  borealis  appears  to  be  a  phenomenon
connected  with  terrestrial  magnetism,  or  electro-magnetism,  it
occured  to  the  Baron  “  that  possibly  a  patient  of  such  acuteness
of  vision  might  see  some  luminous  phenomenon  about  the
magnet.”

“  The  first  experiment  was  performed  by  the  patient’s  father
no  doubt  by  the  suggestion  of  the  Baron,  and  with  the  idea
conveyed  to  him  that  some  luminous  appearance  was  likely  to
be  discovered  by  the  patient.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know
whether  the  patient  had  not  also  been  led,  by  some  means,  to
understand  the  object  of  the  inquiry,  as  such  expectation,
according  to  my  own  experience  with  such  subjects,  was  quite
adequate  to  the  production  of  the  expected  phenomenon  ;  and,
moreover,  once  realized,  it  would  be  liable  to  recur  ever  after,
under  the  same  combination  of  circumstances.

“In  profound  darkness,  a  horse-shoe  magnet  of  nine  elements,
capable  of  carrying  80lbs.,  was  presented  to  the  patient,  the
armature  being  removed  ;  and  she  saw  a  distinct  and  continued
luminous  appearance,  which  uniformly  disappeared,  when  the
armature  was  applied.

“  The  second  experiment  was  made  on  her  recovery  from  a
cataleptic  attack,  when  the  excitability  of  her  senses  was  greatest.
She  saw  two  luminous  objects,  one  at  each  pole,  (the  magnet
was  open,)  which  disappeared  on  joining  the  poles,  and  re¬
appeared  on  removing  the  armature.  At  the  moment  of  break¬
ing  contact,  the  light  was  somewhat  stronger.  The  appearance
was  the  same  at  both  poles,  without  any  apparent  tendency  to
unite.  Next  to  the  metal,  she  described  a  luminous  vapour,
surrounded  by  rays,  which  rays  were  in  constant  shooting  mo¬
tion,  lengthening  and  shortening  themselves  incessantly,  and
presenting,  as  she  said,  a  singularly  beautiful  appearance.


10


THE  POWER  OP  THE


There  was  no  resemblance  to  an  ordinary  fire  ;  the  colour  of
the  light  was  pure  white,  sometimes  mixed  with  iridescent
colours.”

The  next  patient  “  was  far  more  sensitive  to  the  magnet  than
the  former.  She  declared  that,  at  the  moment  the  armature
was  withdrawn,  she  had  seen  fire  rise  from  the  magnet,  the
height  of  a  small  hand,  white,  but  mixed  with  red  and  blue”

Mdlle.  Maix. — “  As  often  as  the  armature  was  removed  from
a  large  magnet,  in  the  dark,  she  instantly  saw  the  luminous
appearance  above  the  poles,  about  a  hand-breadth  in  height.
But  when  affected  with  spasms,  she  was  more  sensitive,  and  the
phenomenon  increased  in  her  eyes  amazingly.  She  not  only
now  saw  the  magnetic  light  at  the  poles  much  larger  than  be¬
fore,  hut  she  also  perceived  currents  of  light  proceeding  from
the  whole  external  surface  of  the  magnet,  weaker  than  at  the
poles,  hut  leaving  in  her  eyes  a  dazzling  impression,  which  did
not  for  a  long  time  disappear.”

“  Mdlle.  Barbara  Reicliel  saw  the  magnetic  light  not  only  in
the  dark,  hut  also  in  such  a  twilight  as  permitted  the  author  to
distinguish  objects,  and  to  arrange  and  alter  the  experiments.
The  more  intense  the  darkness,  the  brighter  and  larger  she  saw
the  flaming  emanations ;  the  more  sharp  and  defined  their  out¬
line,  and  the  more  distinct  the  play  of  colours.”  In  the  dark
she  saw  the  magnet  giving  out  light,  when  shut,  as  well  as  when
open,  with  this  difference,  that  in  the  former  case  there  wrere  no
points  where  the  light  appeared  concentrated ;  but  all  the  edges,
joinings,  and  corners  of  the  magnet  gave  out  short  flame-like
lights,  uniform  in  size,  and  in  a  constant  undulatory  motion.
Trom  the  large  magnet  these  were  about  as  long  as  the  thick¬
ness  of  a  little  finger;  when  the  armature  was  removed,  however,
the  light  was  concentrated  at  the  two  poles,  from  which  the  flames
arose  to  about  the  height  of  eight  inches  and  a  half,  rather
broader  than  the  bar,  “  At  each  depression,  where  two  plates  of
the  magnet  were  laid  together,  there  appeared  smaller  flames
ending  in  point-like  sparks  on  the  edges  and  corner.  These
small  flames  appeared  blue,  the  chief  light  was  white  below,
yellow  higher  up,  then  red  and  green  at  top.  It  was  not  mo-


MIND  OVEE  THE  BODY,


11


tionless,  but  flickered  and  undulated,  or  contracted  by  starts
continually,  with  an  appearance  as  of  rays  shooting  forth.
There  was  no  appearance  of  mutual  attraction,  or  mutual  ten¬
dency  towards  each  other  of  the  flames,  or  from  one  pole  to  the
other ;  and  as  in  the  case  of  Mdlle.  Nowotny  both  poles  pre¬
sented  the  same  appearance.”

Mdlle.  Eeichel  tested  with  a  straight  magnet.  “  At  the  pole
pointing  to  the  north,  or  negative  end  of  the  magnet,  the  flame
was  larger  than  at  the  opposite  end;  it  was  sometimes  undula¬
ting,  sometimes  starting,  and  shot  out  rays  as  in  the  horse-shoe
magnet ;  it  was  red  below,  blue  in  the  middle,  green  at  top.”

In  order  to  enable  the  reader  to  form  a  correct  estimate  of
what  is  represented  in  these  several  narratives,  I  have  quoted
the  more  important  parts  verbatim;  and  by  comparing  the
results  recorded  by  the  different  patients,  no  one  can  fail  to  be
struck  with  the  remarkable  discrepancy  in  their  description  of
what  has  been  alleged  as  a  physical  fact.  All  expected,  as  I
presume,  to  see  light,  and  they  saw  light  or  flames  accordingly;
but  let  us  remark  another  result :  Mdlle.  Nowotny,  in  her  most
sensitive  state,  saw  luminous  vapour  surrounded  by  rays  which
were  in  a  constant  shooting  motion.  “  The  colour  of  the  light
was  nearly  pure  white,  sometimes  mixed  with  iridescent  colours.”
The  appearance  was  the  same  at  both  poles ;  the  length  of  the
flames,  about  one-half  or  three-fourths  of  an  inch.  Mdlle.  Maix,
in  her  ordinary  state,  saw  flames  (from  the  same  magnet  I  pre¬
sume,)  a  hand  breadth  in  height,  and  when  in  the  more  sensitive
state  they  were  much  larger;  and  she  now  saw  currents  of  flame
proceeding  from  the  whole  external  surface  of  the  magnet,  but
weaker  than  at  the  poles.

Mdlle.  B.  Eeichel  saw  the  magnet  giving  out  light,  not  only
when  open,  but  also  when  closed.  When  open,  the  flames  from
the  poles  were  about  eight  inches  high,  those  at  the  joining  of
the  plates  of  the  magnet  about  a  finger’s  breadth  in  length.
“  These  small  flames  appeared  blue,  the  chief  light  was  white
below,  yellow  higher  up,  then  red,  and  green  at  top.”  As  with  the
the  others,  both  poles  seemed  to  have  given  out  similar  appear¬
ances  of  light  and  flame.  This  same  patient  being  experimented


12


THE  EOWEK  OF  THE


on  with  the  above  straight  bar  magnet,  about  a,  foot  and  a  half
long,  we  are  told  that,  “  at  the  pole  pointing  to  north ,  or  negative
end  of  the  magnet,  the  flame  was  larger  than  at  the  opposite
end;”  and  we  are  further  told  that,  “  it  was  red  below,  blue  in
the  middle,  and  green  at  the  top.”  When  we  advance  to  the
flames  seen  to  he  given  out  by  crystals,  from  the  human  hand,
and  other  forms  of  matter,  we  have  equally  discordant  descrip -
^  tions  as  to  colour  and  size  of  the  flames  as  seen  by  different
sensitive  subjects.  Now,  to  my  mind,  these  discordant  state¬
ments,  as  to  the,  colour  of  the  flames,  are  quite  fatal  to  the  notion
of  such  representations  proving  a  physical  fact ;  and  in  an
especial  manner  is  that  remark  applicable  to  the  statement  of
Mdlle.  Reichel,  who  not  only  saw  the  colour  different  which  was
emanating  from  a  straight  bar  magnet  from  that  of  the  horse¬
shoe  variety,  hut  also  described  the  size  of  the  flame  as  larger
from  the  north  pole  of  the  straight  bar  magnet  than  from  the
other  end,  whereas  it  was  always  seen  by  her,  as  well  as  by
others,  to  be  the  same  size  at  both  poles  of  a  horse-shoe  magnet
If  there  be  a  physical  reality  in  these  alleged  flames  and  colours,
there  ought  to  be  no  discrepancies  of  this  sort;  and  the  fact  of
such  discordant  statements  having  been  made  will  tend  to  pre¬
pare  the  mind  of  the  reader  for  the  solution  of  the  problem
which  I  have  now  to  submit.

In  prosecuting  the  inquiry,  Baron  Reichenbach  considered  he
had  not  only  proved  the  existence  of  this  new  force,  which  pro¬
duced  all  the  physical  effects  enumerated,  with  streams  of  light
from  the  poles,  and  the  power  of  attracting  the  human  body,
and  adhering  to  it,  as  steel  to  the  magnet — I  say  he  alleged  that
he  had  established  such  a  force,  not  only  as  residing  in  the
magnet,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  magnetic  force,  but  more¬
over,  that  it  was  found  equally  active  in  crystals,  where  it  existed
quite  pure  and  distinct  from  ordinary  magnetism.  He  also  now
ascertained  that  his  subjects  could  discover  “that  from  the  fin¬
ger  points  of  healthy  men,  fiery  bundles  of  light  streamed  forth,
exactly  as  from  the  poles  of  magnets  and  of  crystals  visible  to
the  sensitive.”  He  alleges,  moreover,  that  he  had  proved  that
where  it  was  passive,  it  could  be  excited  into  activity  by  the


MIND  OVER  TEtE  BODY.


13


sun’s  rays,  by  the  moon’s  rays,  by  starlight,  by  heat,  by  chemical
or  mechanical  action,  and  finally,  that  this  luminous  or  phos¬
phorescent  appearance,  and  certain  other  peculiar  properties,
might  be  discovered  by  the  highly  sensitive  in  almost  every  place,
and  from  nearly  every  object  or  form  of  matter,  solid  or  fluid,
animate  or  inanimate.  Also,  that  it  could  be  conducted  through
all  other  matter,  and  that  all  substances,  not  naturally  actively
'Charged  with  it,  could  be  so  temporarily,  by  proximity  and  con¬
tact  of  those  which  Were  actively  charged.

I  have  already  stated  the  wonderful  power  of  the  human  mind,
when  inward  consciousness  is  strongly  directed  to  any  part  of  a
sensitive  person,  in  changing  physical  action,  and  leading  the^
subject  to  attribute  to  an  external  cause  what  may  have  arisen
entirely  from  an  internal  or  mental  cause.  It  has  also  been
stated  that,  when  I  resorted  to  a  mode  of  operating  which  ren¬
dered  the  subjects  more  highly  sensitive  to  external  influences,
and  at  the  same  time  was  calculated  to  obviate  any  source  of  fallacy,
as  to  mental  emotion  or  expectation  being  directed  to  the  pint
from  their  seeing  what  was  being  done,  the  results  were  in  direct
opposition  to  what  was  represented  as  having  been  realized  by
the  Baron.  I  have  particularly  adverted  to  this  in  respect  to  the
alleged  attraction  of  the  magnet  for  the  human  frame ;  I  have
proved  it  to  be  equally  so  in  respect  to  the  human  hand,  and
crystals,  &c.,  where  all  sources  of  fallacy  are  guarded  against.
In  my  experience,  moreover,  with  such  cases,  no  light  or  flames
have  been  perceived  by  patients  either  from  the  poles  of  a  mag¬
net,  crystals,  the  points  of  the  fingers,  or  other  substance,  unless
the  patients  have  been  previously  penetrated  with  some  idea  of
the  sort,  or  have  been  plied  with  such  questions  as  were
calculated  to  excite  notions,  when  various  answers  were  given
accordingly,  and  when  in  the  sleep,  there  appeared  an  equal
aptitude  to  see  something  when  neither  magnet  nor  fingers  were  in
the  direction  indicated ,  as  when  they  were— a  clear  proof  that  the
impressions  were  entirely  imaginary,  or  mental  in  their  origin.

I  shall  now  proceed  to  detail  the  results  of  experiments  with
patients  when  wide  awake,  and  when  they  had  an  opportunity
of  seeing  what  was  being  done,  and  expected  something  to


14


THE  POWER  OF  THE


happen ;  and  also  when  the  same  patients  saw  nothing  of  what
was  doing,  but  supposed  I  was  operating,  and  consequently
expected  something  to  occur.

With  nearly  all  the  patients  I  have  tried,  many  of  whom  had
never  been  hypnotised  or  mesmerised,  when  drawing  the  magnet
or  other  object  slowly  from  the  wrist  to  the  points  of  the  fingers,
various  effects  were  realized,  such  as  a  change  of  temperature,
tingling,  creeping,  pricking,  spasmodic  twitching,  catalepsy  of
the  fingers,  or  arm,  or  both ;  and  reversing  the  motion  was
generally  followed  by  a  change  of  symptoms,  from  the  altered
current  of  ideas  thereby  suggested.  Moreover,  if  any  idea  of
what  might  be  expected  existed  in  the  mind  previously,  or  was
'  suggested  orally,  during  the  process,  it  was  generally  very
speedily  realized.  The  above  patients  being  now  requested  to
look  aside,  or  a  screen  having  been  interposed,  so  as  to  prevent
their  seeing  what  was  being  done,  and  they  were  requested  to
describe  their  sensations  during  the  repetition  of  the  processes,
sinjplar  phenomena  were  stated  to  be  realized,  even  when  there
was  nothing  whatever  done,  beyond  watching  them,  and  noting
their  responses.  They  believed  the  processes  were  being  re¬
peated,  and  had  their  minds  directed  to  the  part,  and  thus  the
physical  action  was  excited,  so  as  actually  to  lead  them  to  believe
and  describe  their  feelings  as  arising  from  external  impressions.

The  above  fact  was  most  remarkably  evinced  in  a  young
gentleman,  twenty-one  years  of  age.  I  first  operated  in  this
manner  on  his  right  hand,  by  drawing  a  powerful  horse-shoe
magnet  over  the  hand,  without  contact,  whilst  the  armature
was  attached.  He  immediately  observed  a  sensation  of  cold
follow  the  course  of  the  magnet.  I  reversed  the  passes,  and  he  felt  it
less  cold ,  but  he  felt  no  attraction  between  his  hand  and  the  magnet.
I  then  removed  the  cross-bar,  and  tried  the  effect  with  both  poles
alternately,  but  still  there  was  no  change  in  the  effect,  and
decidedly  no  proof  of  attraction  between  his  hand  and  the
magnet.  In  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day  I  desired  him  to
look  aside  and  hold  his  hat  between  his  eyes  and  his  hand,  and
observe  the  effects  when  I  operated  on  him,  whilst  he  could  not
see  my  proceedings.  He  very  soon  described  a  recurrence  of


MIND  OVER  THE  BODY.


15


the  same  sort  of  sensations  as  those  he  felt  in  the  morning,  but
they  speedily  became  more  intense  and  extended  up  the  arm,
producing  rigidity  of  the  member.  In  the  course  of  two  minutes
this  feeling  attacked  the  other  arm,  and  to  some  extent  the  whole
body,  and  he  was,  moreover,  seized  with  a  fit  of  involuntary
laughter,  like  that  of  hysteria,  which  continued  for  several
minutes — in  fact,  until  I  put  an  end  to  the  experiment.  His
first  remark  was,  “  Now  this  experiment  clearly  proves  that
there  must  be  some  intimate  connection  between  mineral  mag¬
netism  and  Mesmerism,  for  I  was  most  strangely  affected,  and
could  not  possibly  resist  laughing  during  the  extraordinary  sen¬
sations  with  which  my  whole  body  was  seized,  as  you  drew  the
magnet  over  my  hand  and  arm.”  I  replied  that  I  drew  a  very
different  conclusion  from  the  experiments,  as  I  had  never  used
the  magnet  at  all ,  nor  held  it,  nor  anything  else,  near  to  him  ;  and
that  the  whole  proved  the  truth  of  my  position  as  to  the  extraor¬
dinary  power  of  the  mind  over  the  body,  and  how  mental
impressions  could  change  physical  action.  >  .  U  y  <,

I  operated  on  two  other  gentlemen  the  same  day,  who  were
much  older,  and  with  decidedly  marked  effects  in  both,  though
less  so  than  in  the  last  case.  The  experiment  being  tried  with
a  lady  of  fifty-six  years  of  age,  by  drawing  a  gold  pencil-case
slowly  from  the  wrist  to  the  finger  ends,  a  creeping,  twitching,
sensation  was  felt,  which  increased  until  it  became  very  un¬
pleasant,  and  excited  a  drawing,  crampy  feeling  in  the  fingers
of  that  hand.  On  causing  her  to  look  aside,  watch,  and  describe
her  feelings  during  my  subsequent  operations,  the  results  were
similar,  and  that  whilst  I  had  done  nothing ;  and  the  whole,
therefore,  was  attributable  to  the  power  of  the  mind  in  changing
the  physical  action.

Another  interesting  case  of  a  married  lady,  I  experimented
with  in  presence  of  her  husband,  as  follows.  I  requested  her  to
place  her  hand  on  the  table,  with  the  palm  upwards,  so  situated
as  to  enable  her  to  observe  the  process  I  was  about  to  resort  to.
I  had  ^previously  remarked,  that  by  my  drawing  something
slowly  over  the  hand,  without  contact,  whilst  the  patient  con¬
centrated  her  attention  on  the  process,  that  she  would  experi-


16


THE  POWER  OF  THE


ence  some  peculiar  sensations  in  consequence.  I  took  a  pair  of
her  scissors,  and  drew  the  bowl  of  the  handle,  slowly  from  the
wrist  downwards.  I  had  only  done  so  a  few  times,  when  she
felt  a  creeping,  chilly  sensation,  which  was  immediately  fol¬
lowed  by  a  spasmodic  twitching  of  the  muscles,  so  as  to  toss  the
hand  from  the  table,  as  the  members  of  a  prepared  frog  are  agi¬
tated  when  galvanised.  I  next  desired  her  to  place  her  other
hand  on  the  table,  in  like  manner,  but  placed  so,  that  by  turning
her  head  in  the  opposite  direction,  she  might  not  see  what  was
being  done,  and  to  watch  her  sensations  in  that  hand,  and  tell
us  the  result.  In  about  the  same  length  of  time,  similar  phe¬
nomena  were  manifested,  as  with  the  other  hand,  although  in
this  instance  I  had  done  nothing  whatever,  and  was  not  near  her
hand.  I  now  desired  her  to  watch  what  happened  to  her  hand,
when  I  predicated  that  she  would  feel  it  become  cold ,  and  the
result  was  as  predicted,  and  vice  versa,  predicating  that  she
would  feel  it  become  intensely  hot,  such  was  realized.  When
I  desired  her  to  think  of  the  tip  of  her  nose,  the  predicated
result  either  of  heat  or  cold,  was  speedily  realized  in  that  part.

Another  lady,  twenty-eight  years  of  age,  being  operated  on
in  the  same  manner,  whilst  looking  at  my  proceedings,  in  the
course  of  half-a-minute,  described  the  sensation  as  that  of  the
blood  rushing  into  the  fingers ;  and  when  the  motion  of  my
pencil-case  was  from  below,  upwards,  the  sensation  was  that  of
the  current  of  blood  being  reversed,  but  less  rapid  in  its  motion.
On  resuming  the  downward  direction,  the  original  feeling
recurred,  still  more  powerfully  than  at  first.  This  lady  being
requested  now  to  look  aside,  whilst  I  operated,  realized  similar
sensations,  and  that  whilst  I  was  doing  nothing.

The  husband  of  this  lady,  twenty-eight  and  a  half  years  of
age,  came  into  the  room,  shortly  after  the  above  experiment
was  finished.  She  was  very  desirous  of  my  trying  the  effect
upon  him,  as  he  was  in  perfect  health.  I  requested  him  to  ex¬
tend  his  right  arm  laterally,  and  let  it  rest  on  a  chair  with  the
palm  upwards,  to  turn  his  head  in  the  opposite  direction,  so  that
he  might  not  see  what  I  was  doing,  and  to  concentrate  Ms
attention  on  the  feelings  which  might  arise,  during  my  process.


MIND  OVER  THE  BODY.


17


In  about  half-a-minute  he  felt  an  aura  like  a  breath  of  air  pass¬
ing  along  the  hand  ;  in  a  little  after,  a  slight  pricking,  and  pre¬
sently  a  feeling  passed  along  the  arm,  as  far  as  the  elbow,  which
he  described  as  similar  to  that  of  being  slightly  electrified.  All
this,  while  I  had  been  doing  nothing,  beyond  watching  what  might
be  realized.  I  then  desired  him  to  tell  me  what  he  felt  now,' —
speaking  in  such  a  tone  of  voice,  as  was  calculated  to  lead  him
to  believe  I  was  operating  in  some  different  manner.  The  result
was  that  the  former  sensations  ceased  ;  but,  when  I  requested
him  once  more,  to  tell  me  what  he  felt  now,  the  former  sensations
recurred.  I  then  whispered  to  his  wife,  but  in  a  tone  sufficiently
loud  to  be  overheard  by  him,  observe  now,  and  you  will  find
his  fingers  begin  to  draw,  and  his  hand  will  become  clenched, —
see  how  the  little  finger  begins  to  move,  and  such  was  the  case ;
see  the  next  one  also  going  in  like  manner,  and  such  effects
followed;  and  finally,  the  entire  hand  closed  firmly,  with  a  very
unpleasant  drawing  motion  of  the  whole  flexor-muscles  of  the
fore-arm.  I  did  nothing  whatever  to  this  patient  until  the  fin¬
gers  were  nearly  closed,  when  I  touched  the  palm  of  his  hand
with  the  point  of  my  finger,  which  caused  it  to  close  more
rapidly  and  firmly.  After  it  had  remained  so  for  a  short  time,
I  blew  upon  the  hand,  which  dissipated  the  previously  existing
mental  impression,  and  instantly  the  hand  became  relaxed.
The  high  respectability  and  intelligence  of  this  gentleman  ren¬
dered  his  testimony  very  valuable ;  and  especially  so,  when  he
was  not  only  wide  awake,  but  had  never  been  either  mesmerised,
hypnotised,  or  so  tested  before.

Another  gentleman,  twenty-one  years  of  age,  was  tried  by
drawing  a  gold  pencil-case  along  the  palm  of  the  hand,  without
contact.  At  the  fourth  traction,  he  looking  at  the  part  and  my
process,  he  described  a  cold  aura  following  the  course  of  the
pencil,  then  a  pricking,  and  after  a  few  more  courses,  he  des¬
cribed  it  as  rather  a  warm  pricking  sensation;  such  as  that
experienced  from  the  sun’s  rays  concentrated  on  the  skin  by  a
lens.  By  reversing  the  passes,  from  the  points  of  the  fingers
towards  the  wrist,  the  aura  was  changed,  and  he  described  the
sensation  as  that  of  forcing  back  the  blood  in  the  veins,  when


18


THE  POAVEXt  OF  THE


they  are  much  distended.  I  then  proposed  to  experiment  on
his  other  hand,  whilst  his  head  was  held  aside,  when  similar
sensations  were  realized,  although  on  this  occasion  I  had  done
nothing, — the  whole  results  having  arisen  from  his  own  concen¬
tration  of  inward  consciousness,  changing  the  physical  action  of
the  part,  and  recalling  his  former  association  of  ideas  in  refer¬
ence  to  the  other  hand.  I  thereupon  explained  to  him  the  law,
(for  he  was  a  very  acute  young  gentleman,)  which  seemed  to
obtain  in  the  production  of  such  phenomena,  and  desired  him
to  satisfy  himself  of  the  fact,  by  concentrating  his  attention  on
the  upper  part  of  his  foot,  and  watching  the  result.  Here,  also,
he  experienced  similar  sensations  to  arise,  even  whilst  he  was
aware  that  I  was  doing  nothing;  but  the  effects  took  place  less
rapidly  than  was  the  case  in  the  former  experiments  with  his
hands.  It  is  also  worthy  of  remark,  that  this  gentleman  ex¬
perienced  very  severe  headache  to  result  from  these  experi¬
ments,  which,  however,  I  was  enabled  very  speedily  to  remove
by  another  process.

A  lady  thirty  years  of  age  was  requested  to  hold  out  her  right
hand  over  the  arm  of  an  easy  chair,  whilst  she  turned  her  head
to  the  left,  to  prevent  her  from  seeing  what  I  was  doing,  and  to
watch  and  describe  to  me  the  feelings  she  experienced  in  the
hand  during  my  process,  which  was  to  be  performed  without
contact.  She  very  soon  felt  a  pricking  in  the  point  of  the  third
finger,  which  increased  in  intensity,  and  at  length  extended  up
the  arm.  I  then  asked  her  how  her  thumb  felt,  and  presently
the  same  feeling  was  transferred  to  it ;  and  when  asked  to  attend
to  the  middle  of  the  forearm,  in  like  manner  the  feeling  was  pre¬
sently  perceived  there.  All  the  time  I  had  been  doing  nothing ;
the  whole  was  the  result  of  her  own  mind  acting  on  her  hand
and  arm.  I  now  took  the  large  magnet,  and  allowed  her  to
watch  me  drawing  it  slowly  over  the  hand,  when  the  feeling  was
much  as  before,  only  that  she  felt  the  cold  from  the  steel  when
brought  very  near  to  the  skin.  It  wras  precisely  the  same  when
closed  as  when  opened,  and  the  same  sensations  occurred  when
the  north  pole  alone  was  approximated,  or  the  south  alone,  or
both  together.  She  experienced  no  sense  of  attraction  betAveen


MIND  OVER  THE  BODY,


19


her  hand  and  the  magnet  from  either  pole,  nor  from  both  com¬
bined.  I  now  requested  this  lady  to  keep  a  steady  gaze  upon
the  poles  of  the  large  horse-shoe  magnet,  and  tell  me  if  she  saw
anything,  (the  room  was  not  darkened  nor  was  the  light  strong)
but  nothing  was  visible.  I  then  told  her  to  look  steadily,  and
she  would  see  flame  or  fire  come  out  of  the  poles.  In  a  little
after  this  announcement  she  started,  and  said,  “  Now  I  see  it,
it  is  red ;  how  strange  my  eyes  feel,”  and  instantly  she  passed
into  the  hypnotic  state.  This  lady  had  been  repeatedly  hypno¬
tised.  I  now  took  the  opportunity  of  testing  her  as  to  the
alleged  power  of  the  magnet  to  attract  her  hand  when  asleep,
but,  as  in  the  other  cases,  the  results  were  quite  the  contrary — -
the  cold  of  the  magnet  (and  of  either  pole  alike)  caused  her  to
withdraw  her  hand  the  moment  it  touched  her.  I  now  requested
her  to  tell  me  what  she  saw  (she  being  still  in  the  sleep.)  She
said  she  still  saw  the  red  light.  I  desired  her  to  put  her  finger
to  the  place  where  she  saw  it.  This  she  declined  to  do,  being
afraid  that  it  would  burn  her.  I  thereupon  assured  her  that  it
would  not  burn  her,  upon  which  she  pointed  to  the  same  place
where  the  magnet  was  held  before  she  went  into  the  sleep,  instead
of  to  where  it  was  now  held,  which  was  near  to  her  face,  but
towards  the  opposite  side  of  the  chair.  This  lady  does  not  see
from  under  her  closed  eyelids  when  hypnotised,  as  some  patients
do ;  and  the  evidence  her  testimony  affords  in  support  of  my
opinion  upon  this  subject  is  very  conclusive,  as  she  is  a  lady
of  very  superior  mental  attainments,  and  one  whose  testimony
merits  unlimited  confidence.

I  beg  to  call  particular  attention  to  the  fact,  that  in  this  latter
case,  as  with  the  fifth  of  the  vigilant  cases  narrated,  the  first
experiments  were  tried  without  any  magnet  or  other  object
being  pointed  at  or  drawn  over  them,  and  still  the  mental
influence  was  quite  sufficient  to  change  the  physical  action,  and
produce  decided  and  characteristic  effects,  where  there  could
be  no  influence  from  without,  of  the  nature  alleged  by  Baron
Reichenbach  and  the  mesmerists.

A  lady,  upwards  of  fifty-six  years  of  age,  in  perfect  healtb,
and  wide  awake,  having  been  taken  into  a  dark  closet,  and

B


20


THE  POWEK  OF  TIIE


desired  to  look  at  the  poles  of  the  powerful  horse-shoe  magnet
of  nine  elements,  and  describe  what  she  saw,  declared,  after
looking  a  considerable  time,  that  she  saw  nothing.  However,
after  I  told  her  to  look  attentively,  and  she  would  see  fire  come
out  of  it,  she  speedily  saw  sparks,  and  presently  it  seemed  to
her  to  burst  forth,  as  she  had  witnessed  an  artificial  representa¬
tion  of  the  volcano  of  Mount  Vesuvius  at  some  public  gardens.
Without  her  knowledge,  I  closed  down  the  lid  of  the  trunk
which  contained  the  magnet,  but  still  the  same  appearances  were
described  as  visible.  By  putting  leading  questions,  and  asking
her  to  describe  what  she  saw  from  another  part  of  the  closet,
(where  there  was  nothing  but  bare  walls)  she  went  on  describing
various  shades  of  most  brilliant  coruscations  and  flame,  accord¬
ing  to  the  leading  questions  I  had  put  for  the  purpose  of
changing  the  fundamental  ideas.  On  repeating  the  experiments,
similar  results  were  repeatedly  realized  by  this  patient.  On
taking  this  lady  into  the  said  closet  after  the  magnet  had  been
removed  to  another  part  of  the  house,  she  still  perceived  the
same  visible  appearances  of  light  and  flame  when  there  was
nothing  but  the  bare  walls  to  produce  them  ;  and,  two  weeks
after  the  magnet  was  removed,  when  she  went  into  the  closet
by  herself,  the  mere  association  of  ideas  was  sufficient  to  cause
her  to  realize  a  visible  representation  of  the  same  light  and  flames.
Indeed  such  had  been  the  case  with  her  on  entering  the  closet
ever  since  the  few  first  times  she  saw  the  light  and  flames.  In
like  manner,  when  she  was  made  to  touch  the  poles  of  the
magnet  when  wide  awake,  no  manifestations  of  attraction  took
place  between  her  hand  and  the  magnet,  but  the  moment  the
idea  was  suggested  that  she  wordd  be  held  fast  by  its  powerful
attraction,  so  that  she  would  be  utterly  unable  to  separate  her
hands  from  it,  such  result  was  realized  ;  and,  on  separating  it,
by  the  suggestion  of  a  new  idea,  and  causing  her  to  touch  the
other  pole  in  like  manner,  predicating  that  it  would  exert  no
attractive  power  for  the  fingers  or  hand,  such  negative  effects
were  at  once  manifested.  I  know  this  lady  was  incapable  of
trying  to  deceive  myself,  or  others  present ;  but  she  was  self-
deceived  and  spell-bound  by  the  predominance  of  a  pre-conceived


MIND  OYEH  THE  BODY.


21


idea,  and  was  not  less  surprised  at  the  varying  powers  of  the
instrument  than  others  who  witnessed  the  results.

In  like  manner  several  other  patients  whom  I  took  into  the
dark  closet  could  see  nothing,  until  told  to  look  steadily  at  a
certain  point  and  they  would  see  flame  and  light  of  varying
colours,  proceeding  from  it,  which  predictions  were  speedily
realized,  whilst  they  were  wide  awake,  and  with  nothing  hut
bare  walls  towards  which  to  direct  their  eyes.  Not  only
so,  but  I  have,  moreover  ascertained,  that,  even  in  broad  day¬
light,  a  strong  mental  impression  is  adequate  to  produce  such
delusions  with  certain  individuals  of  a  highly  imaginative  and
concentrative  turn  of  mind.  This  fact  was  beautifully  illus¬
trated  in  the  case  of  a  gentleman,  twenty-four  years  of  age,  who
had  suffered  severely  from  epilepsy,  for  eleven  years,  (notwith¬
standing  the  persevering  use  of  medicine  of  various  sorts,  pre¬
scribed  by  many  of  the  most  able  members  of  the  profession,
but  who  is  recovering  very  satisfactorily  under  the  hypnotic
treatment,)  was  taken  into  the  above  closet  and  tested  as  the
latter.  He  likewise  saw  nothing  till  I  suggested  that  he  would
see  flame  and  light,  after  which  predication  he  very  speedily
saw  it  accordingly,  not  merely  where  the  magnet  was,  but  also
from  other  parts  of  the  apartment.  Now,  this  patient,  and  the
last  two  referred  to,  when  taken  into  the  closet  after  the  magnet
had  been  a  long  time  removed  to  a  distant  part  of  the  house,
still  saw  the  flames,  and  changing  colours  as  before — a  clear
proof  that  the  whole  was  a  mental  delusion  arising-  from  an  ex¬
cited  imagination,  on  the  point  under  consideration,  changing
physical  action.  The  same  gentleman  being  made  to  look  at
the  point  of  a  piece  of  brass  wire,  could  be  made  to  imagine
that  he  saw  any  sort  of  flame  or  colour  indicated  issuing  from
it,  even  in  broad  daylight;  and  when  made  to  touch  it  with  a
finger,  and  then  told  he  would  find  it  impossible  to  draw  it
away,  the  mere  idea  was  sufficient  to  paralyze  his  volition,  the
whole  muscles  became  rigid,  and  he  looked  with  astonishment
at  his  condition  ;  but  the  moment  I  said  now  the  attraction  is
gone ,  and  his  hand  will  separate,  such  results  followed.  More¬
over,  now  that  his  finger  was  a  little  withdrawn,  by  simply


22


THE  POWER  OT  THE


saying  confidently  that  it  would  now  be  found  that  he  could  not
touch  the  wire,  as  it  would  repel  him,  the  idea  once  more  para¬
lyzed  his  volition,  and  he  again  manifested  his  incapacity,  and
in  spite  of  his  anxious,  but  misdirected  efforts,  there  he  remained
fixed  as  a  statue.  On  hinting  that  now  the  influence  was  sus¬
pended,  the  hand  and  arm  became  limber,  when  I  told  another
person  watching  the  experiment  that  now  he  would  find  the
hand  irresistibly  drawn  to  the  who  ;  and  such  result  was  pre¬
sently  manifested.  No  one  had  touched  this  wire  for  hours  ;
it  was  merely  a  piece  of  bent  brass  wire  which  was  lying  loosely
and  projecting  from  the  chimney-piece.  This  power  seems  to
have  been  understood  by  Virgil,  when  he  said —

*•  Possunt,  quia  posse  videntur.”

In  like  manner  having  intimated  to  a  friend  the  remarkable
vividness  of  this  patient’s  imagination,  implicit  belief,  and
credulity,  which  rendered  him  liable  to  believe  that  he  had  an
ocular  perception  of  an  external  change,  according  to  whatever
idea  might  be  suggested  to  him  by  others,  I  requested  this
friend,  when  we  went  into  the  room,  to  look  at  the  end  of  the
above  wire  at  the  same  time  with  the  patient,  and  that  the  former
should  pretend  to  me,  when  asked  what  coloured  flame  she  saw
emanating  from  it,  to  give  a  new  idea  at  each  inquiry.  By  this
mode  the  patient  caught  the  ideas  suggested,  having  no  notion
that  he  was  deluded  in  the  way  indicated.  He  left  with  the  full
conviction  of  the  physical  reality  of  all  he  had  seen  and  des¬
cribed  ;  and*  he  has  manifested  like  phenomena  as  frequently
as  he  has  been  so  tested.

I  have  detailed  the  above  case  so  much  at  length,  because  it
is  a  very  good  type  of  a  class  of  patients  to  be  met  with,  who
readily  become  the  dupes  of  suggestions,  in  the  manner  pre¬
sently  to  be  explained,  without  the  least  desire  to  deceive  others,
or  the  most  distant  idea  that  they  are  themselves  deceived.  I
have  proved  all  I  have  advanced  by  so  many  concurrent  ex¬
amples,  with  individuals  of  the  utmost  probity  and  competence
to  describe  their  feelings,  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  facts.

But  not  only  may  patients,  in  the  waking  state,  be  made  to
believe  that  they  see  various  forms,  and  colours,  and  perceive


MIND  OVER  THE  BODY.


23


variable  sensible  impressions  and  irresistible  powers,  drawing,
repelling,  or  paralyzing  them,  from  a  strong  mental  impression
changing  the  physical  action  of  the  organ  or  part  usually  en¬
gaged  in  the  normal  manifestation  of  such  function  ;  but  I  have,
moreover,  ascertained  that  the  same  influence  may  be  realized
in  respect  to  sound,  smell,  taste,  heat,  and  cold, — so  that  sug¬
gested  ideas,  and  concentration  of  inward  consciousness  are
competent,  with  some  individuals,  to  excite  ideas,  not  merely  of
hearing  vague  sounds,  but  particular  tunes,  the  smell  of  parti¬
cular  odours,  and  to  discriminate  particular  tastes,  and  feel  heat
or  cold.  All  this  I  have  proved  may  be  realized  with  some
excitable  subjects  when  they  were  wide  awake  ;  and  when  there
was  neither  actual  sound,  nor  odour,  nor  taste,  in  the  situations
and  substances  to  which  they  were  referred  ;  and  by  merely
asking  what  tune,  what  colour,  what  animal,  or  what  substance,
they  perceived  now,  I  clearly  proved  that  ideas  may  be  thus  excited
in  the  minds  of  subjects  totally  different  from  those  existing  in
my  own,  at  the  time.  The  subjects  with  whom  I  made  these
experiments  were  worthy  of  implicit  credit  as  to  their  integrity
in  describing  their  feelings  and  belief ;  and  the  whole  results,
therefore,  are  attributable  to  the  remarkable  reciprocal  actions
of  the  mind  and  body  on  each  other,  to  which  I  have  so  often
referred.*  Indeed,  one  of  the  most  beautiful  examples  I  have
had  of  these  “  vigilant  phenomena,”  in  respect  to  all  the  senses,
occurred  in  the  case  of  a  gentleman  of  high  classical  and  mathe¬
matical  attainments,  as  well  as  in  general  science.  He  had  seen

*  For  remarkable  examples  of  the  extent,  to  which  mental  impression
is  capable  of  changing  physical  action,  I  beg  to  refer  to  my  papers  in  the
Medical  Times  for  December,  1844,  and  January  and  February,  1845.  It
is  particularly  gratifying  to  be  able  to  refer  in  confirmation  of  most  of
the  views  I  advocate,  to  Dr.  Holland’s  “  Medical  Notes  and  Reflections” —
one  of  the  most  masterly  works  I  ever  read,  which  I  had  the  pleasure  of
perusing  for  the  first  time  in  June,  1845.

Farazi,  the  Persian  necromancer’s  answer  to  Firuz  Shah,  is  also  quite
corroborative  of  my  views.  When  asked  how  it  was  possible  for  him  to
bring  a  person  immediately  to  that  spot,  who  was  known  to  be  at  the
time  800  or  900  miles  distant,  he  replied  that  “  he  could  not  bring  her

IN  PERSON,  BUT  COULD  PRODUCE  SUCH  A  LIKENESS  OF  TIER  THAT  HE  COULD

swear  to  her  being  his  own  wife.” — Late  Right  Hon.  Sir  Gore
Ouseley’s  Biographical  Notices  of  Persian  Poets.”


24


TIIF.  1*0 WEB.  OF  THE


no  experiments  of  the  sort  before  1  tested  himself.  On  finishing
my  round  of  experiments  with  him,  he  begged  of  me  to  explain
the  rationale  of  what  had  occurred.  I  requested  him  to  read
what  I  had  written  on  the  subject,  which  he  perused  with  great
attention ;  after  which  he  expressed  himself  perfectly  satisfied
that  I  had  hit  upon  the  true  solution  of  the  problem.  Indeed,  he
was  so  kind  as  to  authorize  me  to  refer  any  one  to  him  for  a
confirmation  of  the  rationale  I  had  given  of  the  phenomena,  as
experienced  by  him  in  liis  own  person  when  wide  awake,  and  in
the  bright  light  of  day.

It  is  stated  by  Baron  Keichenbach  that  the  sensitive  can  uni¬
formly  detect  water  which  has  had  the  magnetic  current  passed
through  it,  by  having  an  open  magnet  brought  over  and  in
contact  with  the  opposite  sides  of  the  glass  in  which  the  water
is  contained.  I  have  tried  this  experiment  in  such  a  manner  as
was  calculated  to  guard  against  various  sources  of  fallacy  which
I  knew  were  likely  to  mislead  the  unwary;  such  as  the  varied  tone
of  voice  or  look  of  the  experimentalist,  when  investigating  the
subject,  and  trying  to  elicit  from  the  patient  his  candid  opinion
as  to  the  qualities  of  each  glass  of  water.  The  results  'were,
that  none  of  the  patients  tried  could  detect  either  by  smell,
taste,  or  any  other  sensible  effect,  any  difference  between  the
magnetised  and  the  immagnetised  water.  At  each  trial  I  made
use  of  four  similar  glasses,  filled  to  the  same  height,  two  of
which,  by  the  contact  to  the  glass  of  a  powerful  magnet  for  a
minute  or  two,  were  magnetised,  the  other  two  not  magnetised.
The  patients  were  all  first  tested  in  this  way  when  awake,  and
then  when  asleep.  Magnetising  by  passes,  or  breathing  on  the
water,  I  should  not  consider  a  fair  experiment,  and  for  this
reason,  that  the  halitus  of  the  breath,  or  from  the  skin,  might
very  readily  be  detected  by  a  highly  sensitive  patient,  by  smell ,
and  probably  also  by  taste.  I  have  met  with  a  patient  who  could
very  readily  detect  water  so  treated  from  that  which  had  not,
and  I  ascertained  that  she  did  so  by  smell.

The  extreme  acuteness  of  the  organs  of  special  sense,  under
certain  circumstances,  is  well  illustrated  in  certain  states  of
disease,  and  by  what,  is  realized  in  the  feats  of  some  savage  tribes.


MIND  OVER  THE  BODY.


25


They  appear  quite  as  exalted  as  anything  I  have  met  with,  in
the  hypnotic  or  mesmeric  state  ;  and  which  has  been  sufficient
to  enable  me  to  account,  on  natural  principles,  for  what  others
have  attributed  to  some  new  faculty  or  sense  developed  by  their
processes,  and  distinct  from  the  ordinary  organs  of  sense.

However,  I  have  never  met  with  any  case  of  accurate  thought¬
reading,  where  the  patients  could  generally  and  accurately
interpret  my  unexpressed  thoughts  and  desires  regarding  him,
without  some  sensible  sign  to  indicate  my  ideas  to  him  ;  but,  as
already  stated,  I  feel  confident  that  there  are  many,  who,  from
their  excited  and  concentrated  state  of  mind,  and  quickened
senses,  will  catch  ideas  far  more  quickly  than  in  the  ordinary
condition,  who  may  be  thus  imposed  upon,  and  excited  to  act
by  means  of  impressions  received  through  the  senses,  which
would  entirely  escape  them  in  the  ordinary  condition.

In  consequence  of  the  statement  made  in  the  third  section,  of
the  tranquillising  effect  of  causing  highly  sensitive  patients  to  lie
with  the  head  towards  the  north,  and  the  extreme  discomfort  of
other  directions  of  the  body,  in  reference  to  the  magnetic  meri¬
dian,  I  had  a  patient  who  had  been  long  an  extreme  sufferer,
and  in  whose  welfare  I  felt  the  deepest  interest,  to  submit  to
the  trouble  of  such  a  change  in  the  position  of  her  bed,  but,  I
am  sony  to  say,  it  was  followed  by  no  beneficial  effect.

I  am  perfectly  aware  that  the  results  of  a  single  case  are  not
competent  to  refute  what  has  been  alleged,  as  proved  by  a  num¬
ber  of  others.  However,  I  have  stated  my  fact  on  the  point ;  and,
whilst  I  readily  admit  my  firm  conviction  that,  with  sensitive
patients,  who,  from  whatever  cause  they  may  have  imbibed  notions
that  certain  directions  of  the  body,  either  when  asleep  or  awake,
might  be  followed  by  feelings  of  physical  as  well  as  mental  dis¬
comfort,  the  mere  idea  would  be  adequate  to  the  production  of
such  effects;  still,  I  do  not  believe  there  is  any  adequate  physical
cause  for  such  results,  merely  as  regards  the  polarity  of  the  earth
and  human  frame.  The  following  are  the  grounds  for  this  opinion.
The  constituent  parts  of  the  human  frame  are  dia-magnetic,  that
is,  under  the  magnetic  influence,  they  have  a  tendency  to  assume
the  equatorial  axis,  instead  of  the  polar  direction ;  and  it  there-


26


THE  POWEB  OE  THE


fore  appears  to  me  extremely  improbable  that  a  combination  ot
dia-magnetics  should,  merely  in  consequence  of  their  combination,
become  invested  with  the  very  opposite  qualities  of  the  constituent
parts .  To  say  the  least  of  it,  this  would  be  at  variance  with  all
which  has  yet  been  ascertained  of  such  powers  in  the  inanimate,
physical,  and  chemical  world.  It  therefore  appears  to  me,  that
the  peculiarities  referred  to  by  Baron  Reichenbach,  under  this
head,  are  more  likely  to  have  arisen  from  a  mental  than  a
physical  cause.

A  few  days  after  the  above  paragraph  was  written,  I  read  it
to  a  most  intelligent  friend,  who  told  me,  that  she  had  just
received  a  letter  from  her  brother,  who  had  been  attending  some
lectures  by  Professor  Faraday,  and  kindly  offered  to  send  me  an
extract  from  his  letter,  corroborative  of  what  I  had.  read  to  her.
The  following  is  the  extract  which  I  received  the  following
morning,  and  is  particularly  grathying,  coming  as  it  does  from
the  very  highest  authority  we  have  on  this  subject.  “  I  have
been  greatly  interested  lately,  with  a  course  of  lectures  by
Faraday  on  Electricity  and  Magnetism,  which  I  am  sorry  to
say,  is  just  concluded.  You  will  no  doubt  be  gratified  to  learn
that,  in  common  with  the  whole  human  race,  you  are  a  magnet !
with  this  peculiarity  only,  that  if  you  were  suspended  by  the  mid¬
dle,  you  would  point  East  and  West,  instead  of  North  and  South
— with  which  interesting  fact,  I  leave  you  to  your  meditations.”

That  some  of  Baron  Reichenbach’s  patients  should  have
manifested  the  power  of  seeing  luminous  emanations  in  the
dark,  over  the  graves  of  the  dead,  more  especially  of  those
recently  buried,  I  think  admits  of  a  more  probable  explanation
than  that  propounded  by  the  Baron.  We  know  that  during
certain  stages  of  decay  of  vegetable  and  animal  matter,  a  phos¬
phorescent  appearance  is  manifested  in  the  dark  to  ordinary
vision,  and,  of  course,  it  must  be  still  more  so  to  the  highly
sensitive.  But  there  is  another  result  of  such  organic  decay
still  more  powerfully  felt  by  all,  namely,  its  disagreeable  odour.
Few  can  escape  the  recognition  of  this,  even  in  the  bright  light
of  day.  Again  :  we  are  so  much  in  the  habit  of  associating
visible  or  tangible  forms  with  impressions  which  are  conveyed


MIND  OVER  THE  BODY.


27


to  our  minds  through  any  of  the  organs  of  sense,  that  the  blind
are  in  the  habit  of  expressing  themselves  as  seeing  such  and
such  persons,  whom  they  recognise  approaching,  merely  by  the
sound  of  their  voices,  or  tread  of  their  steps,  and  so  on.

In  like  manner  a  smell  of  any  sort  suggests  corresponding
ideas ;  and  I  have  found  hypnotic  patients  who  recognised  indi¬
viduals  of  their  acquaintance  quite  readily  by  smell,  who  always
said,  when  asked  how  they  knew  who  was  present,  “  I  see  him
or  her,”  and,  when  the  nostrils  were  stopped,  thought  the  party
had  gone  away.  The  sympathy  which  exists  between  the  eyes
and  the  nose  is  well  proved  by  a  strong  light  producing  sneez¬
ing  ;  and  the  converse  of  this  is  very  natural,  that  a  strong
impression  on  the  olfactory  nerves  might  excite  in  the  mind  of
a  highly  sensitive  and  imaginative  person  the  idea  of  some
visible  appearance.  This  will  account  for  the  ghost-story  quite
as  readily  as  the  theory  of  the  Baron,  and  will  be  found  more
generally  available,  as  few  people  are  so  constituted  as  to  be  able
to  pass  through  such  places  without  being  painfully  reminded,
through  then  olfactory  organs,  that  they  are  treading  on  the
mortal  remains  of  friends  departed.

But  I  may  be  met  with  the  objection  to  my  arguments  by  an
appeal  which  has  been  made  to  the  Daguerreotype,  which  could
not  be  influenced  by  mind, — for  an  experiment  has  been  recorded
by  Baron  Reichenbach,  where,  by  the  mere  exposure  of  a  sensi¬
tive  plate  in  a  box  with  a  magnet,  all  light  being  excluded,  an
impression  had  been  made,  as  if  it  had  been  exposed  to  the  full
influence  of  light,  which  did  not  happen,  when  another  plate
was  so  confined  without  the  magnet.  It  appeared  to  me  that
such  an  important  deduction  ought  not  to  have  been  arrived  at,
from  one  or  two  experiments  of  such  a  ticklish  nature  ;  and
more  especially  so,  when  the  iodised  plates,  were  so  long  kept
before  being  exposed  to  the  mercurial  vapour;  for  it  was  natural
to  expect  some  chemical  change  might  take  place  with  them
irrespective  of  light.  I  have  repeated  these  experiments  with
nine  plates,  prepared  at  different  times  with  the  greatest  care
by  Mr.  Akers,  the  patentee  of  the  Manchester  photographic
gallery,  (one  of  the  most  correct  professors  of  his  art,)  and  the


28


THE  POWER  OF  THE


experiments  varied  so  as  to  guard  against  error,  by  mutual
correction.  The  experiments  have  been  tried  by  close  and  free
exposure  of  three  plates  to  the  poles  of  a  powerful  horse-shoe
magnet,  (originally  of  80lbs.  lifting  power,  but  somewhat
reduced  from  use,)  and  of  other  three  similarly  situated,  only
with  two  sheets  of  black  paper  interposed  so  as  to  intercept  the
rays  of  light,  if  any  were  emitted  from  the  magnetic  poles,  and
another  was  enclosed  in  a  box  at  a  distance  from  the  magnet,
and  all  kept  from  66  to  74  hours  ;  but  in  no  instance  was  there
any  appearance  of  them  haring  been  acted  on  by  light, — the
only  change  being  such  chemical  changes  as  generally  arise
from  keeping  prepared  plates  for  some  time  before  being  expo¬
sed  to  mercury.  The  latter  process  was  also  performed  by  Mr.
Akers  for  the  purpose  of  insuring  greater  accuracy  from  his
daily  practice  of  the  art.  Two  other  plates  were  enclosed  in  a
camera  and  exposed  at  such  a  distance  as  must  have  given  a
picture  of  the  poles  of  the  magnet,  and  flames  issuing  from
them — for  the  camera  was  adjusted  to  4^  times  the  distance  of
ordinary  light,  and  one  left  66  the  other  35^  hours — but  no  such
indications  manifested  themselves.  I  think,  therefore,  that  I  am
warranted  to  conclude  that  no  light,  capable  of  affecting  an
iodised  plate,  is  given  out  at  the  poles  of  magnets,  as  alleged
from  the  experiments  referred  to  by  Baron  Reichenbach.*

Having  thus  far  investigated  Baron  Reichenbach’s  speculations,
and  proved  the  major  propositions  to  be  erroneous,  as  respects
proving  the  phenomena  he  refers  to  as  resulting  from  a  new  im¬
ponderable,  I  consider  it  unnecessary  to  prosecute  the  subject  in
the  minor  details.  I  may,  however  remark,  that  I  can  readily
imagine,  from  the  exalted  sensibility  of  particular  individuals,
and  their  highly  concentrative  state  of  mind,  that  they  may  be
competent  to  detect  electric,  calorific,  and  physical  qualities  of
objects,  which  would  escape  the  observations  of  themselves  and
others,  when  in  the  ordinary  and  less  sensitive  condition.  And
again :  whilst  I  deny,  that  we  have  any  satisfactory  proof  of  this
new  imponderable,  passing  from  the  operator  to  the  patient,  as

*  Mr.  Dancer,  the  optician,  kindly  lent  me  apparatus,  and  saw  and
approved  of  my  arrangements,  as  well  adapted  for  the  purpose.


MIND  OVER  THE  BODY.


29


alleged,  during  the  processes  of  the  mesmerists,  still  I  readily
admit  that  the  operator,  for  the  reasons  already  assigned,  of
mental  impression  changing  physical  action,  is  very  likely  to
feel  an  aura  in  his  finger  ends,  the  position,  action,  and  mental
direction,  all  tending  to  excite  in  them  turgesence  and  increased
sensibility.  I  can  also  easily  conceive,  that  the  passes,  through
their  physical,  electrical,  and  other  effects,  tending  to  draw  the
patient’s  attention  to  particular  parts,  thus  exciting  their  func¬
tions,  and  withdrawing  it  from  others,  thereby  depressing
their  functions,  and  especially  if  the  patient  expects  such  results
to  ensue  from  such  processes,  are  very  likely  to  be  followed  by
such  results,  irrespective  of  any  special  influence  being  trans¬
mitted  from  the  operator  to  the  patient,  of  the  nature  alleged  by
Baron  Reichenbach  and  others.

The  mesmerists,  who  have  entertained  the  notion  that  the  sleep
and  other  phenomena  occurring  during  their  processes  arose
from  a  magnetic  fluid,  or  some  special  influence  issuing  from
them  persons,  and  passing  into  that  of  the  patient,  of  course  hail
these  speculations  of  Baron  Reichenbach  as  demonstrative  proof
of  the  correctness  of  their  theory  of  mesmerism.  Some  of  their
patients  having  declared  that  they  saw  blue  or  variegated  sparks
passing  from  the  fingers  of  the  operator,  when  making  passes  in
mesmerising  a  patient,  water,  or  other  inanimate  object,  or  that
they  saw  a  blue  fluid,  or  one  of  still  brighter  hue,  issuing  from
the  eyes  of  the  operator  and  darting  towards  them,  when  gazing
fixedly  for  the  purpose  of  mesmerising;  or  that  they  perceived  a
luminous  halo  surrounding  the  head  of  a  person  engaged  in  deep
thought,  must  have  felt  gratified  by  the  announcement,  con¬
sidering  it  well  calculated  to  confirm  in  their  minds,  the  notion
of  the  physical  entity  of  the  agent.  But,  when  those  patients
have  further  described  that  when  the  operator  has  been  engaged
in  silently  willing,  for  example,  that  a  patient  should  be  made
to  come  towards  him,  there  is  seen  by  the  patient,  a  stream  of
something  passing  from  the  head  of  the  operator  to  that  of  the
patient,  like  a  rope,  and  that  he  not  only  sees  this,  but  feels  its
influence  as  a  rope,  or  innumerable  threads  drawing  him  irre¬
sistibly  towards  the  operator,  the  entity  must  now  appear  fully


30


THE  POWER  OF  THE


confirmed.  But  again,  when  some  of  these  subjects  become*  at
length,  so  accomplished  and  susceptible  as  to  be  able  to  perceive
these  visible  appearances  in  the  wide  waking  state,  it  cannot  be
wondered  at  that  those  whose  long  cherished  opinions  lay  in  that
direction,  should  jump  to  the  conclusion  that  now  the  point  is
fully  and  satisfactorily  settled.  Under  such  a  combination  of
circumstances,  individuals  may  be  excused  for  overlooking  what
to  others  is  a  very  obvious  source  of  fallacy~viz.,  the  tendency
of  a  continued  fixed  gaze  to  confuse  the  vision,  and  of  a  fixed
idea  and  expectation  to  confuse  and  bewilder  the  mind.

It  is  well  known  that  the  undue  excitement  of  an  organ  dis¬
turbs  the  normal  functions  of  surh  organ;  and  that  in  a  state  of
fever,  as  delirium  tremens,  and  various  morbid  states  of  the
nervous  system,  and  even  in  the  healthy  state  during  dreaming,
the  patient  imagines  that  he  feels  and  sees,  or  hears  all  sorts  of
forms,  colours,  sounds,  &c.  We  do  not,  on  that  account,
subscribe  our  belief  in  the  reality  of  the  objects,  or  peculiar
attributes  he  has  seen,  heard,  or  felt,  or  the  imaginary  feats  he
has  accomplished.  In  this  case  we  estimate  the  phenomena  as
mental  and  morbid  delusions;  and  such  I  apprehend  ought  to
be  our  conclusion  in  reference  to  these  extraordinary  and
startling  allegations.

Inasmuch  as  patients  can  throw  themselves  into  the  nervous
sleep,  and  manifest  all  the  usual  phenomena  of  mesmerism,
through  their  own  unaided  efforts,  as  I  have  so  repeatedly
proved  by  causing  them  to  maintain  a  steady  fixed  gaze  at  any
point,  concentrating  their  whole  mental  energies  on  the  idea  of
the  object  looked  at ;  or  that  the  same  may  arise  by  the  patient
looking  at  the  point  of  his  own  finger,  or  as  the  Magi  of  Persia
and  Jogi  of  India  have  practised  for  the  last  2,400  years,  for
religious  purposes,  throwing  themselves  into  their  ecstatic  trances
by  each  maintaining  a  steady  fixed  gaze  at  the  tip  of  his  own
nose;  it  is  obvious  that  there  is  no  need  for  an  exoteric  influence
to  produce  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism.  The  agency  may  be
entirely  personal  or  subjective,  and  in  such  cases  as  I  have
illustrated  by  extracts  from  Ward’s  History  of  the  Hindoos  and
the  Dabistan,  through  certain  associations  of  ideas,  such  self-


MIND  OVER  THE  BODY.


31


mesmerised  patients  can  see  and  imagine  as  great,  or  indeed
far  greater  wonders  than  are  recounted  by  our  most  successful
mesmerists  of  modern  times,  with  the  additional  aid  of  their
alleged  mesmeric  fluid.  In  proof  of  this  I  beg  to  refer  to  my
paper  in  the  Medical  Times,  page  272,  vol.  xi.  The  great  object
in  all  these  processes,  is  to  induce  a  habit  of  abstraction  or  con¬
centration  of  attention,  in  which  the  subject  is  entirely  absorbed
with  one  idea,  or  train  of  ideas,  whilst  he  is  unconscious  of,  or
indifferently  conscious  to,  eveiy  other  object,  purpose,  or  action.

I  had  long  been  familiar  with  the  fact,  that  during  a  certain
stage  of  hypnotism,  patients  may  be  made  to  give  various  mani¬
festations,  or  declarations  of  their  feelings  and  emotions,  according
to  previously  existing  ideas,  or  suggestions  imparted  to  them
during  the  sleep  ;  and,  moreover,  that  such  associations  once
formed,  were  liable  to  recur  ever  after,  under  a  similar  combi¬
nation  of  circumstances.  As  occurs  in  ordinary  dreaming,  they
seem  generally  at  once  to  adopt  the  idea  as  a  reality,  without
taking  the  trouble  of  reasoning  on  the  subject  as  to  the  proba¬
bility  of  such  ideas  being  only  imaginary;  and  their  extreme  mo¬
bility  in  the  hypnotic  state  at  a  certain  stage  renders  them  prompt
with  their  corresponding  physical  response.  In  proof  of  this,  and
how  readily  those  inattentive  to  these  facts  may  misapprehend
what  they  see  realized  in  such  cases,  I  beg  to  submit  the  following
interesting  illustration.  When  in  London  lately,  I  had  the
pleasure  of  calling  upon  an  eminent  and  excellent  physician,
who  is  in  the  habit  of  using  mesmerism  in  his  practice,  in  suit¬
able  cases,  just  as  he  uses  any  other  remedy.  He  spoke  of  the
extraordinary  effects  which  he  had  experienced  from  the  use  of
magnets  applied  during  the  mesmeric  state,  and  kindly  offered  to
illustrate  the  fact  on  a  patient  who  had  been  asleep  all  the  time
I  was  in  the  room,  and  in  that  stage,  during  which  I  felt  assured
she  could  overhear  every  word  of  our  conversation.  He  told
me,  that  when  he  put  the  magnet  into  her  hands,  it  would  pro¬
duce  catalepsy  of  the  hands  and  arms,  and  such  was  the  result.
He  wafted  the  hands  and  the  catalepsy  ceased.  He  said  that  a
mere  touch  of  the  magnet  on  a  limb,  would  stiffen  it,  and  such
he  proved  to  be  the  fact.

B  2


32


THE  POWER  OE  THE


I  now  told  him,  that  I  had  got  a  little  instrument  in  my
pocket,  which  although  far  less  than  his,  I  felt  assured  would
prove  quite  as  powerful,  and  I  offered  to  prove  this  by  operating
©n  the  same  patient,  whom  I  had  never  seen  before,  and  who
was  in  the  mesmeric  state  when  I  entered  the  room.  My
instrument  was  about  three  inches  long,  the  thickness  of  a  quill,
with  a  ring  attached  to  the  end  of  it.  I  told  him  that  when  put
into  her  hands,  he  would  find  it  catalepsize  both  hands  and  arms
as  his  had  done,  and  such  was  the  result.  Having  reduced  this
by  wafting,  I  took  my  instrument  from  her,  and  again  returned
it,  in  another  position ,  and  told  him  it  would  now  have  the  very
reverse  effect — that  she  would  not  be  able  to  hold  it,  and  that
although  I  closed  her  hands  on  it,  they  would  open,  and  that  it
would  drop  out  of  them,  and  such  was  the  case, — to  the  great
surprise  of  my  worthy  friend,  who  now  desired  to  be  informed
what  I  had  done  to  the  instrument  to  invest  it  with  this  new  and
apposite  power.  This  I  declined  doing  for  the  present ;  but  I
promised  to  do  so,  when  he  had  seen  some  further  proofs  of  its
remarkable  powers.  I  now  told  him  that  a  touch  with  it,  on
either  extremity  would  cause  the  extremity  to  rise  and  become
cataleptic,  and  such  was  the  result ;  that  a  second  touch  on  the
same  point  would  reduce  the  rigidity,  and  cause  it  to  fall,  and
such  again  was  proved  to  be  the  fact.  After  a  variety  of  other
experiments,  every  one  of  which  proved  precisely  as  I  had
predicted,  she  was  aroused.  I  now  applied  the  ring  of  my
instrument  on  the  third  finger  of  the  right  hand,  from  which  it
was  suspended,  and  told  the  doctor,  that  when  it  was  so  sus¬
pended,  it  would  send  her  to  sleep.  To  this  he  replied  11  it  never
will but  I  again  told  him  that  I  felt  confident  that  it  would
send  her  to  sleep.  We  then  were  silent,  and  very  speedily  she
was  once  more  asleep.  Having  aroused  her,  I  put  the  instru¬
ment  on  the  second  finger  of  her  left  hand,  and  told  the  doctor
that  it  would  be  found  she  could  not  go  to  sleep,  when  it  was
placed  there.  He  said  he  thought  she  would,  and  he  sat  steadily
gazing  at  her,  but  I  said  firmly  and  confidently  that  she  would
not,"  After  a  considerable  time  the  doctor  asked  her  if  she  did
not  feel  sleepy,  to  which  she  replied  “  not  at  all;”  could  you  rise


MIND  OVER  THE  BODY.


33


and  walk?  when  she  told  him  she  could.  I  then  requested  her
to  look  at  the  point  of  the  fore-finger  of  her  right  hand,  which
I  told  the  doctor  would  send  her  to  sleep,  and  such  was  the
result;  and,  after  being  aroused,  I  desired  her  to  keep  a  steady
gaze  at  the  nail  of  the  thumb  of  the  left  hand  which  would  send
her  to  sleep  in  like  manner,  and  such  proved  to  be  the  fact.

Having  repaired  to  another  room,  I  explained  to  the  doctor
the  real  nature  and  powers  of  my  little  and  apparently  magical
instrument, — that  it  was  nothing  more  than  my  portmanteau-key
and  ring ,  and  that  what  had  imparted  to  it  such  apparently  varied
powers  was  merely  the  predictions  which  the  patient  had  over¬
heard  me  make  to  him,  acting  upon  her  in  the  peculiar  state
of  the  nervous  sleep,  as  irresistible  impulses  to  be  affected,  accord¬
ing  to  the  results  she  had  heard  me  predict.  Had  I  predicted
that  she  would  see  any  flame,  or  colour,  or  form,  or  substance,
animate  or  inanimate,  I  know  from  experience  that  such  would
have  been  realized,  and  responded  to  by  her ;  and  that,  not
from  any  desire  on  her  part  to  impose  upon  others,  but  because
she  was  self- deceived,  the  vividness  of  her  imagination  in  that
state,  inducing  her  to  believe  as  real,  what  were  only  the  figments
of  fancy,  suggested  to  her  mind  by  the  remarks  of  others.  The
power  of  suggestions  of  this  sort  also,  in  paralyzing  or  energising
muscular  power  is  truly  astounding;  and  may  all  arise  in  perfect
good  faith  with  almost  all  patients  who  have  passed  into  the
second  conscious  state,  and  with  some,  during  the  first  conscious
stage;  and  with  some  weak-minded,  or  highly  imaginative  or
credulous  and  concentrative  people,  even  in  the  waking  condition.
The  latter  constitutes  that  class  of  subjects  who  manifest  what
are  called  the  “•  vigilant  phenomena.”  The  true  cause  of
these  “  vigilant  phenomena”  is  not  a  physical  influence  from
without,  but  a  mental  delusion  from  within,  which  paralyzes  their
reason,  and  independent  volition,  so  that  for  the  time  being  they
are  mere  puppets  in  the  hands  of  another  person  by  whom  they
are  irresistibly  controlled,  so  that  they  can  only  see,  or  hear,  or
taste,  or  feel,  or  act,  in  accordance  with  his  will  and  direction.  .
They  have  their  whole  attention  fixed  on  what  may  be  said
or  signified  by  this  alleged  superior  power,  and  consequently


34


THE  POWER  OF  THE


perceive  impressions  through  the  excited  state  of  the  organs
of  sense,  called  into  operation,  which  they  could  not  perceive
in  their  ordinary  condition ;  and  this  sort  of  clairvoyance
or  thought-reading,  the  mesmerists  attribute  to  some  special
influence,  such  as  the  new  imponderable  of  Reichenbach.  So
soon  as  patients  can  he  made  to  believe  that  in  the  waking  state,
the  evidence  of  their  senses  is  more  trust-worthy  than  mere  ideal
or  suggested  impressions ;  and  that  they  can  really  exercise
their  own  independent  powers  in  opposition  to  the  alleged
power  of  the  will  of  another,  through  his  auricular  suggestions
or  passes,  and  other  manoeuvres,  it  will  instantly  be  found  that
the  spell  is  broken,  and  that  rational  beings  can  no  longer  he
magnetically  tied  together,  or  to  chairs,  or  tables,  or  the  floor;
or  made  to  see  an  object  of  every  colour  and  hue,  or  metamor¬
phosed  into  every  nature,  form,  or  creature,  the  operator  may
incline  and  indite.  It  may  have  been  interesting  enough  to
have  demonstrated  that  the  human  mind  could  he  so  subjugated
and  controlled ;  but,  as  I  have  formerly  said,  and  now  repeat,  I
do  not  consider  the  continual  repetition  of  such  experiments  in
the  waking  state,  as  at  all  proper,  or  free  from  the  danger  of
throwing  the  faculties  of  the  mind  of  such  subjects  into  a  per¬
manently  morbid  condition.

It  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  scope  of  this  paper  to  enter
into  an  elaborate  detail  of  my  views  as  to  the  philosophical
explanation  of  the  modes  of  exciting  and  varying  certain  trains
of  ideas,  and  their  consequent  manifestations  during  the  nervous
sleep.  The  inquiry  is  not  only  curious,  but  also  one  of  great
interest,  in  respect  to  the  power  of  the  mind  in  controlling  phy¬
sical  action,  and  of  physical  impressions  in  re-acting  on  the
mind.  I  have  given  a  pretty  ample  discussion  on  these  topics
in  a  second  edition  of  my  little  work  on  hypnotism,  now  pre¬
paring  for  the  press,  to  which  I  beg  leave  to  refer  those  who
feel  desirous  of  prosecuting  the  inquiry,  and  particularly  those
who  desire  to  do  so  for  curative  purposes.

In  conclusion,  I  beg  particularly  to  remark,  that,  whilst  my
experiments  and  observations  are  opposed  to  the  theoretical
notions  of  Baron  Reichenbach  and  the  mesmerists,  in  all  the


MIND  OVER  THE  BODY.


35


more  important  points,  they  directly  confirm  the  reality  of  the
facts,  as  to  the  power  which  we  possess  of  artificially  producing
certain  phenomena  by  certain  processes ;  as  also  of  intensifying
effects  which  arise  in  a  minor  degree,  spontaneously,  or  by  the
patient’s  own  unaided  efforts.  They  allege  that  the  exciting
cause  is  the  impulsion  into  the  body  of  the  patient  from  without
of  a  portion  of  this  new  force  ;  whilst  I  attribute  it  to  a  subjec¬
tive  or  personal  influence,  namely,  that  of  the  mind  and  body
of  the  patient  acting  and  re-acting  on  each  other  in  a  particular
manner,  from  an  intense  concentration  of  inward  consciousness
on  one  idea,  or  train  of  ideas,  which  may,  to  a  certain  extent,
be  controlled  and  directed  by  others.  The  latter  power,  how¬
ever,  merely  arises  from  the  mental  and  physical  impressions
producing  still  greater  concentration  of  the  patient’s  attention
in  a  particular  direction ;  that  is  to  say,  by  concentrating  their
attention  to  the  point  over  which  they  see  anything  drawn,  or
upon  which  a  mechanical,  calorific,  ffigorific,  or  electric  impres¬
sion  is  made,  whereby  a  greater  supply  of  nervous  influence,
blood,  and  vital  action,  is  drawn  to  the  part  from  the  physical
and  mental  resources  of  the  patient  himself  and  not  from  the
person  or  substance  exciting  those  physical  impressions.  They
enable  the  patient  more  effectually  to  concentrate  his  own  vital
powers,  and  thus  to  energise  function  ;  on  the  same  principle
as  a  patient  afflicted  with  anesthesia,  or  loss  of  feeling,  is  able
to  hold  an  object  in  his  hand  whilst  he  looks  at  it,  but  will  allow
it  to  drop  when  his  eyes  are  averted.

It  is  worthy  of  particular  remark,  that  my  researches  prove
the  power  of  concentration  of  attention,  as  not  only  capable  of
changing  physical  action,  so  as  to  make  some  patients,  in  the
wide  waking  state,  imagine  that  they  see  and  feel  from  an
external  influence  what  is  due  entirely  to  an  internal  or  mental
cause  ;  but  I  have  extended  the  researches,  so  as  to  prove,  that
the  same  law  obtains  in  respect  to  all  the  other  organs  of  spe¬
cial  sense,  and  different  functions  of  the  body.  My  theoretical
views,  therefore,  instead  of  diminishing,  rather  enhance  the
value  of  this  power  as  a  means  of  cure.  They  strikingly
prove  how  much  may  be  achieved  by  proper  attention  to,  and


36


POWER  OF  THE  MIND  OVER  THE  BODY,


direction  of,  this  power  of  the  human  mind  over  the  physical
frame,  and  vice  versa,  in  meliorating  the  ills  which  flesh  is  heir
to.  I  beg  further  to  remark,  in  support  of  my  views,  that  in
the  experiments  of  Baron  Reichenbach,  and  the  mesmerists
generally,  all  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  prove  as  requisite
for  the  production  of  the  phenomena  referred  to,  is  necessarily
brought  into  play  during  their  processes,  in  super-addition  to
their  alleged  mesmeric  fluid ,  or  new  force ;  of  the  latter,  therefore,
under  such  circumstances,  I  maintain  that  we  have,  as  yet,  had
no  direct  and  satisfactory  proof ;  and  it  is  unphilosophical  to
attribute  to  a  new  and  extraneous  force  what  can  be  readily
accounted  for  from  the  independent  physical  and  psychical
powers  of  the  patient,  which  must  necessarily  be  in  active
operation,  along  with  their  processes,  and  alleged  new  impon¬
derable.

The  results  of  my  experiments  satisfactorily  prove  the  unity
of  the  mind;  and  the  remarkable  power  of  the  soul  over  the
body.


3,  St.  Peter’s  Square,

Manchester,  July ,  1846.


GRANT  AND  CO


k


j  PRINTERS,  l’ALL  BIAI.L,  MARKET  STREET,  MANCHESTER.
