MAGIC, WITCHCRAFT, ANIMAL MAGNETISM, HYPNOTISM, AND ELECTRO-BIOLOGY;
being a Digest of the Latest Views of the Author on these Subjects.
By James Braid. Third edition, greatly enlarged. London: John Churchill, 1852.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/magicwitchcraft00braigoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

MAGIC,


WITCHCRAFT, ANIMAL MAGNETISM,


HYPNOTISM,


AND ELECTRO-BIOLOGY;


BEINa A DIGEST OF THE LATEST VIEWS OF THE AUTHOR

ON THESE SUBJECTS.


BT


JAMES BRAID, M.R.C.S. Edin., C.M.W.S., Ac.

THIRD EDITION, GREATLY ENLARGED,

XMBBA.CINO OBSBBVACIONS ON

J. C. COLQUHOU]SrS "HISTORY OF MAaiC," &«.


"amicus PLATO, AMICUS SOCBATES, SED MAGIS AM1CA TBBITA8.'


LONDON:

JOHN CHURCHILL, PRINCES STREET, SOHO.

ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK, EDINBURGH.

1852.


^?^^. c., ^i ^


! TirDBPENSEirr EASITB <


OAH BK BBrrsK


r lssi."—Brit. and For. Med.-Clar. Bmiao.


PREFACE.


In the first edition of these " Observations/^ I merely

intended to shield myself against the more important

points upon which I considered Mr. Colquhoun had

misrepresented me. In the second edition I went

more into detail, and quoted additional authorities

in support of my theory of the nature, cause, and

extent of hypnotic or mesmeric phenomena. In the

third edition I h^ve gone, so much more into detail,

»
as to furnish a j^riscope or vidimus of my views on

all the more important points of the hypnotic and

mesmeric speculations. By this means, after perusal

of a mesmeric manual, any intelligent person can

easily compare the two systems, and determine for

himself which he most approves of; and by this means,

moreover, I am making up, in some measure, for


I


PREFACE.

the delay in the publication of another edition of
my work on hypnotism, which has long been out of
print, and so frequently called for. That call I hope
shortly to be able to respond to, with such fulness
of detail as the importance of the subject merits ;
more particularly as regards its practical application to
the relief and cure of some forms of disease, of which
numerous interesting examples will be adduced.


BUELINGTON HorSS,

Oxford Street, Manchester, Feb. 20, 1852.


OBSERVATIONS ON


J. C. COLQUHOUN'S HISTOEY OF MAGIC, Ac.


A work in two volumes has just issued from the press, entitled
"An History of Magic, Witchcraft, and Animal Magnetism,
by J. C. Colquhoun, Esq., author of 'Isis Revelata,* &c.'*
The author has brought a flood of light to bear upon his
subject, and has produced a book which will amply repay
any one for its perusal, being agreeably and ably written,
and embodying much matter which is both entertaining
and instructive. Still there are some parts of the book
which I must dissent from, both as to the matter and
manner in which subjects are treated, and the inferences
which the learned and ingenious author has drawn &om
certain premises.

There is one topic, in particular, which Mr. Colquhoun
has undertaken to discuss, which, in my humble opinion, had
better have been left in a profound magnetic slumber, — and
that is his attempt to prove that there is no reality in the
belief in the mythos of the Devil — that there is no such per-
sonage as his Satanic Majesty — and that his existence is a
mere allegory of Pagan or Zoroastric origin, borrowed by
the Jews from that source, and introduced by them into
the sacred scriptures. At pp. 258-9, Vol. I., Mr. C. says : —

'* We formerly obserred that the actual existence of such a personage
as the Devil was not originally a Jewish, but a Zoroastric notion — a


Chaldean or Babylonish hallucination — which had been borrowed by
that people (the Jews) and transferred into their religious code at or
after their captivity and exile. Even the doctrine of good and bad
angels, and their continual interference in the affairs of this sublunary
sphere, appears to have been derived from the same source. Ideas of
this nature, however, besides being unwarranted, are calculated to per-
vert religion, and to embarrass and distort the minds of mankind. * *
The metaphorical notion of the Devil himself, in the conceptions of
mankind, is generally admitted, by all cultivated minds, to represent the
evil and perverse dispositions which deform the nature of man, or the
diseases, moral or physical, by which human beings may be afflicted."

For my own part, I cannot see how these views can be
entertained, without rejecting the obvious interpretation of
various important parts of scripture. Nor can I approve of
his contrasting cures by prophets and apostles with mesmeric
processes and cures. MV. Atkinson and Miss H. Martineau
lately attempted to persuade mankind that their mesmeric
researches had enabled them to come to the conclusion that
there was no God, that man had no immortal soul, and that
there was no future state of existence after death. For this,
Mr. Colquhoun rated them light well, and most deservedly so,
as I thought. Now, however, he himself, although a reli-
gious and Christian man, puts forth the above opinions,
which will be startling to many, and may raise an unmerited
prejudice in the minds of some against the whole inquiry, as
leading to unchristian, uuscriptural principles ; and will, no
doubt, ensure for the learned gentleman and his science,
the benefit of clergy.

The great object of Mr. Colquhoun's investigations has
been to prove, by drawing from the history of all people, and
of all times, that phenomena, similar to those which have
been recognised in later times as producible at will in cer-
tain individuals, by what have been termed the processes of
al magnetism, have existed and been recognised from


the earliest ages, in every clime, and amongst every people,
under various designations ; occurring spontaneously, or from
unknown causes occasionally; at other times brought into
play from religious or political excitement, and then diflPused
extensively through the power of sympathy and imitation ;
on other occasions and places, as the result of mystical pro-
cesses, as in the temples, for the purposes of divination,
soothsaying, or the cure of diseases, &c. &c. Having proved
the existence of such conditions for so long a period, and
occurring under such divers circumstances, and so univer-
sally diffused, the learned author contends that they ought
the more readily to be admitted in our own time, when so
much better understood, and more readily produced by known
processes. Mr. C.'s examples, instead of opposing, actually
furnish strong support to my subjective or personal theory.
In the case of the Convulsionaries of St. Medard, in
particular, I would beg leave to ask how a nervous or
vital force could have passed from the ashes of the
buried saint, and produced the effects realised at the grave
of the Abbe Paris? Mental emotion, imitation, and faith
or confidence, however, were quite adequate to account
for all which was there manifested.*

* Allusion to this extraordinary epidemic has recalled to my mind
certain reflections which occurred to me on reading Mr. Newnham's
well-written work on " Human Magnetism," which was published in
1845. Whilst I willingly admit that Mr. Newnham's work was agree-
ably and pleasantly — indeed, elegantly^ written, and that he made the
most of the materials at his disposal for the support of the magnetic
theory, still, I suspect that he was then more of a theoretical tlian a
practical magnetist, — that he had read much on the subject, and taken
for granted, as true, the objective theory of the mesmerists, and con-
tented himself with merely substituting the phraseology, " communi-
cation of the exuherarU life of the healthy, to repair and sustain the
deficient vitaUty of the sick," for the old term, the transmission of a


In a little brochure which I published in 1850, entitled
" Observations on Trance, or Human Hybernation," the
following remarks occurred : — " I believe that the great

magnetic or mesmeric fluid from the body of the operator to that of the
patient. Thus, at page 17, Mr. Newnham says : — ** Magnetism may be
said to be the medicine of nature — to consist in the communication of
the exuberant life of the healthy, to repair and sustain the deficient
vitality of the sick. * * * * This is a most important principle
(Mr. N. adds), and in various ways will come before us, in several
stages of our future remarks ; but as it is the key-stone of the arch
upon which rests the security of all future reasoning, it is now especially
mentioned, that at every subsequent page it may be carried with us as
our guide through doubtful or intricate passages." Mr. Newnham was
well aware of the scenes enacted at the grave of the Abb^ Pdris,
at St. Medard. He knew that it was notorious that numerous
important cures occurred there to patients whose cases had resisted all
ordinary treatment; and even after the cemetery was shut up, that
cures occurred to patients at their own homes, simply by addressing
fervent prayers to the Saint, in firm faith and confidence in his power
and will to cure them ; that in other cases the cures were effected by add-
ing to the prayers the efficacy of some visible and tangible agency, such as
a sacred relic, or a particle of earth said to have been taken from his
grave, or by drinking a little water said to have been brought from a
well near the resting place of the mortal remains of the Holy Deacon.
Now, with a perfect knowledge of all this, did it never occur to Mr.
Newnham to ask himself the question — How could there have been,
in these recorded cures, a ** communication of the exvherant life of the
healthy" passing from the ashes of the dead scdnt^ " to repair and sus-
tain the deficient vitality of the sick?" If "the key-stone of the arch
upon which rests the security of all the future reasonings" of Mr.
Newnham be what he has stated in these words — " the conununica-
tion of the exuberant life of the healthy, to repair and sustain the
deficient vitality of the sick" then, most assuredly, the above-recorded
cures by the ashes of a dead saint prove that the reasonings and super-
structure must be frail indeed, which are reared upon such a fragile
" arch," as one provided with such a " key-stone."

But not only were many important cures effected, as above narrated,
<m individuals visiting the tomb of the Holy Deacon, but the verj


cause of the opposition which has been offered to the accep-
tance of the truth of the genuine phenomena of hypnotism
and mesmerism^ has arisen from the extravagance of the

opposite effects were also manifested to a much greater extent ; for it
is recorded that immense numbers of individuals who went to the
cemetery of St. Medard, merelj as spectators of the marvellous scenes
being there enacted, although previously apparently in good health,
became afifected with the most violent convulsions. It is, therefore,
obviously absurd to suppose that both a sanative and pestiferous in-
fluence of this sort could have flowed from the same cause — viz., from
the ashes of the dead saint. The power of mental emotion, however, a
lively faith, hope, and confidence were sufficient to account for the cures
in the one class ; whilst fear, terror, sympathy, and imitation were quite
adequate to account for the eonvtUsions in the other class. On this
subject the learned Hecker observes, — "Every species of enthusiam,
every strong affection, every violent passion, may lead to convulsions —
to mental disorders — to a concussion of the nerves, from the sensorium
to the very finest extremities of the spinal chord. The whole world is
full of examples of this afflicting state of turmoil, which, when the mind
ia carried away by the force of a sensual impression that destroys its
freedom, is irresistibly propagated by imitation. " Meeker's Epidemics
of the Middle Affes.^—^Sige 142.

If Mr. Newnham would only condescend to consider the simple
subjective theory which I have ventured to propound, I tliink lie
might readily comprehend how the new modes of excitement, or depres-
sion, or peculiar distribution of the nervous or vital influence within the
patient* s own hody^ might arise through the influence of his own mind
aeting on his own physical orgamsm^ and might thus account for all
which is realised without the transmission of any occult influence from
one human being to another. I readily grant, however, that the looks,
words, and actions of a second party may furnish suggestions influential
upon others — just as a word of encouragement, spoken or written by a
friend, may nerve our arm with greater power, and inspire our tongue with
greater doquenee — and that a lively companion, or encouraging expres-
sion may excite us ; whilst a grave companion, or doubtful expression,
would chill and depress— and that hope and confidence, or the contrary in
the means used, may modify, to a remarkable extent, the results under
m^ mode of treatment. Still, I beUeve that there is no positive inter-
ehuige or transference of nervous or mtal force J)rom the operator to


mesmerists, who have contended for the reality of datrvoytmce
in some of their patients — such as seeing through opaque
hodies, and investing them with the gifts and graces of osmi-
science, mesmeric intuition, and imiversal knowledge — ^pre-
tensions alike a mockery of the human understanding, as
they are opposed to all the known laws of physical science.'*
It api^ears that these remarks have excited the bile of my
ingenious, learned, and esteemed friend Mr. Colquhoun, to
such an extent as induced him to give vent to such " sensitive
ebullitions" as compel me, in self-defence, to offer a few
observations on his slashing lucubrations^ Had the strictures
referred to been of the ordinary character of legitimate criti-
cism, or even had they exceeded these bounds to any reason-
able extent, the great respect which I entertain for the author,
as a scholar and a gentleman, and as one with whom I have
personally, and more particularly by letter, had much agree-
able intercourse, I should most willingly have allowed his
remarks to pass without note or comment. These very cir-
cumstances, however, which would have induced me to be
silent under an ordinary, a severe, or merited castigation from
the pen of this gentleman, render it the more imperative a
duty for me to repel the aggression, and endeavour to set

the patient as (he actual cause of these results, as has^ been alleged by
the mesmerists. I do not believe Ihut^ in such ix^tances, A loses an
amount of power equivalent to what B gains. I do md believe that a
preacher, an orator, or an author loses tm amount of vital force in ex€^
ratio to the numbers influenced by his spokea or printed ideas, sentiments,,
and illustrations, — which would necessarily be the case were the magnetic
theory true. On the contrary, I do believe that the perusal of a posthu*
mous work may be equally influential as if the book had been printed when
the autlH)r was alive — and that the simple suggestion ofnewideaa to the
mind of the reader, through the printed symbols of thou^t, i» the real
efficient cause of the future results. Such is the " keystone of the arch
upon which rests the security of all my reasonings" regarding hypnotism.


9


myself right with the public, when he has gone so far as
even to merge me with the materialists — namely, with those
who maintain that the mental functions are a mere secretion
of the brain, as the bile is of the liver. Now, that any man
should attribute such opinions or sentiments to me — and more
particularly a friend like Mr. Colquhoun — passes my compre-
hension, because, in all my writings — and Mr. C. has had pre-
sentation copies from me of the tvhole of them, I believe — I
have ever stoutly contended for the vety opposite sentiments.

In proof of this I beg leave to refer to pages 81, 8-7, 88,
89, and 91 of my work on "Hypnotism," published in 1843,
where I entered into a rather elaborate refutation of the doc-
trine of materialism^ adducing various arguments as the basis
on which mv dissent £:om that doctrine was founded. I also
quoted the opinions of Drs. Brown and Abercrombie, Dugald
Stewart and Plato, in support of my opposition to the doctrine
of materialism.

Now, in the face of all this, was it not an unwarrantaWe,
inconsiderate imputation in Mr. Colquhoun to represent me
as a materialist ? And what else but this could he hope to
convey by the inuendo contained in the following sentence : —
"Does Dr. Braid, then, acknowledge no science but the
merely physical F " After having promulgated in my writings
such sentiments as those referred to, I am sorry to say that
I cannot see how Mr. Colquhoun, or any one else, should
endeavour to rank me amongst the materialists, unless from a
reckless perversion of legitimate inference, or a determination
to misrepresent and injure me, because I would not accept
their transcendental notions about the higher phenomena, as
they style them, of mesmerism or animal magnetism.

In July last I published a pamphlet, entitled, " Electro-
Biological Phenomena considered Physiologically and Psy-
chologically," a copy of which was sent by me t^iMx.Q.^^ajS^'SQcsv


10

several months before the publication of bis book containing
the strictures of which I complain. The object of that publi-
cation was to prove the subjectivity of the hypnotic, mesmene,
and the so-called "electro-biological" condition, in opposition
to the theory of the mesmerists and electro-biologists ; the
former of whom contended for an occult or special influence,
or the "od force" of Reichenbach as the cause; whilst the latter
attributed it to an electrical influence, excited and directed by
the will and manceuvres of a second party. My theory was
this — that the phenomena resulted from the concentrated
mental attention of the patient acting on his own physical
organism, and the changed condition of the physical action
thus induced reacting on the mind of the patient. I contended,
and endeavoured to prove that, by the patient concentrating
his attention on any part of his body, the function of the part
would, to a certain extent, be altered or modified, according
to the predominant idea and faith which existed in his (the
patient's) mind during the continuance of such fixed attention.
I proved — and I had done so, indeed, more than five years
previously — that these ideas might arise in the minds of
patients, and become operative on them, through their own
unaided acts, or from the mere remembrance of past feelings,
without any co-operation or act of a second party ; and that,
in certain subjects, they might also be excited by audible,
visible, or tangible suggestions from another person, to any
extent whatever— even before they passed into the state of
sleep. My object, then, was to prove, by these results, the
wonderful *' power of the m«W" of the patient over his owir
body. Did this look as if I recognized " no science but the
merely physical?"

But, farther, had I not devoted three pages and a half of
the appendix to the above-named pamphlet (an 8vo., small
Q^, closely set,) to expose the folly and impiety of the


n


infidel, atheistical principles set forth by Mr. Atkinson and
Miss Harriet Martineau, in their late publication "On the
Laws of Man's Nature and Development," in which, as the
enlightenment which they had drawn from their mesmeric
clairvoyants, they denied their belief " in a God or the future,"
and declared that " philosophy finds no God in nature — ^nor
sees the want of any ;" in short, that they acknowledged *' no
science but the merely physiraV^} Was this of itself not
enough to have convinced Mr. Colquhoun (whose daily avoca-
tion, as a Barrister and Sheriff of a county, is to sift evidence)
or any other candid and rational man, that my sentiments
were the very reverse of those of the materialists ? It is
therefore matter of astonishment to me, that a learned and
ingenious man like Mr. CJolquhoun — ^professing himself to be
my friend too — should have been so excited by my remarks
regarding the transcendental mesmerists, as induced him to
publish such an unjust and injurious attack upon me, merely
because my theoretical views, and limited extent of my confes-
sion of faith, as to the higher phenomena of mesmerism, were
at variance with theirs, and I had presumed to say so. And,
be it observed, my remarks were made with reference to the
transcendental mesmerists as a class ^ whilst Mr. Colquhoun* s
attack is made against me as an individual^ which, of course,
greatly aggravates the injury, both as regards the apparent
intention and the fact.*

Had I not been compelled to defend myself against the

* That the sole cause of this attack was merely a splenetic ebullition
as I have alleged, excited by the perusal of the observations above quoted
from my work on " Trance," will be obvious to any one who shall take
the trouble of comparing the style in which the author referred to me
and my writings, at Vol. I. page 112, and Vol. II. page 118, which had
been written hefore reading said remarks, with what he wrote iu the
preface after their perusal.


12


charge of being a materialist, I should not have deemed the
other charges of my learned friend of sufficient importance
to demand a formal reply. However, having been forced to
enter the lists, it may be as well to take a brief glance at the
other charges this gentleman has brought against me. He
charges me with having been "imcandid, uncourteous, and
unjust towards my fellow-labourers in the magnetic mine."
To the first count in this indictment I plead not guilty, and
for this reason, that it cannot be " uncandid " to declare what
ono honestly believes to be the truth ; and such, assuredly,
was the case with me in all which I said on that occasion.
To the second count, " uncourteous," I must plead guilty, but
with justification of the oflPence, in consequence of certain
circumstances connected with my observations. I am aware
that it may be considered " uncourteous, " on some occasions,
to speak the truth ; still, circimistances may arise to render it
requisite that the truth should be spoken, and such I con-
sidered was the case in that instance. To the third count,
" unjust," I plead not guilty^ because that the views which
I have taken, in opposition to those of the animal magnetists,
I believe to be much nearer the truth than theirs. I might,
with much more proprietjs apply the term " unjust " to the
conduct of Mr. Colquhoun, in reference to myself, not merely
on the point already discussed, but also when he says, " Is he
(Mr. Braid) acquainted with all the laws even of physical
science, with all their various modifications under peculiar
circumstances ?" Mr. C. had no right, by such an iiiuendo,
to impute to me any such arrogant pretensions, seeing that,
in the very words he had quoted from my work, only two
sentences before this charge, I expressed myself thus: —
" Pretensions alike a mockery of the human understanding,
as they are opposed to all the known laws of physical


13


science." I spoke only of " all the known laws," therefore it
was both uncandid and unjust in the learned gentleman to
impute to me any greater pretensions than I had actually
alleged myself possessed of.

Mr. Colquhoun sr*ys he has not had the good fortune to
meet with any scientific mesmerist who invested his patients
" with the gifts and graces of omniscience.'* But what else,
let me ask, is investing them with the clairvoyance which
the mesmerists contend for (which Mr. C. declares, at page
47, he conceives " equally capable of being demonstrated as
any other portions of the science,") but investing them "with
the gifts and graces of omniscience?" The grand scope of
Mr. C.'s book is to prove, by drawing from the records of all
people and of all times, that the phenomena of catalepsy,
trance, somnambulism, extase, the gift of prophecy, magic,
witchcraft, the second sight, divination, universal knowledge
by intuition or inspiration, thought-reading; the power of
seeing from the pit of the stomach, or any other part of the
body, without the use of the eyes ; of seeing through opaque
bodies ; of tasting and feeling through the physical organs of
others instead of their own ; of enabling them to see and
describe what may be transacted at any moment of time,
past, present, or future, by any party, at any part of the
habitable globe, or even throughout any part of creation ; to
invest parties uneducated in medical science with the faculty
or power to discover the nature, cause, and cure of any dis-
ease, even without seeing or touching the patient, but merely
by sending the clairvoyant a lock of the absent patient's hair,
or his hand-writing — such as the address of a letter written
by him — to the entranced Sibyl; — all these marvels, and
much more, Mr. Colquhoun endeavours to prove have existed
in all ages and in all countries, arising spontaneously occa-


14


Bionally, or from unknown causes ; and he contends that a
similar condition may be produced, in certain subjects, at aaj
time by the mesmeric processes. Now, if this really is a
fact^ that the mere exercise of the silent will of the mesmerigt,
or the wafting of his hand through the air, so as to make a
few mesmeric passes, can impart to his patients all these
alleged wonderful powers, is it not very like investing their
subjects " with the gifts and graces of omniscience ?" And,
be it remarked, Mr. Colquhoun repudiates the notion that
any of these wondei'^1 feats are accomplished by a process
of reasoning from known facts to probable results, but seems to
suppose that they acquire "universal lucidity" ('Clairvoyance,*
page 108,) as an instinct, or " immediate intuition of the soul,
without any assistance from the reasoning feculties." — P. 51.

I cannot better express my views regarding the presumed
mestneric-clairvoyance than by the following quotation from
my recently published pamphlet. At page 27, 1 said: —

" Professor Gregory thinks that I have gone too far in denying the
existence of clairroyance and what are called the higher phenomena. It
is quite possible that it may be my misfortune to have such a constitu-
tion of mind as requires too great an amount of evidence before I can
be convinced that certain phenomena are facts ; still, vrhen I state thiB
fact, that I have had many opportunities of investigating the pretensions
of alleged clairvoyants of the first water, and, from knowing and attend-
ing to the sources of fallacy requiring to be guarded against, that I
found every individual elawvoyaiid vsanting^ even including trials by
myself and others, on several occasions, with a subject who has been
adduced by the Professor, in his recent work, as one of the most lucid
examples on record; under such circumstances, I think few can feel
surprised that I should still be somewhat sceptical as to the hand fides
of these transcendental phenomena, which are said only to manifest
themselves occasionally ; and that, again, only in a few individuals ;
and, moreover, before those only whose foregone conclusions incline
them, unwittingly, to overlook sources of fallacy of vital importance jn
fueh an investigation, and to accept vague generalities as clear and


15


satisfactory replies, on points which ought to . be determined with the
utmost rigour and unmistakeable accuracy. To say that ninety nine
negatives will not gainsay or disprove one positive fact, as many argue,
I readily admit ; but I admit it only on the following conditions —
provided always that the assumed pontive fact can be clearly and satis-
&ctorily proved to be 2, fact. In such a case as that, however, I would
look very charily at the solitary alleged fact, from a fear that, after all,
it might not be a real^ but only a spurious result — a mere illusion —
arising out of the numerous chances of error, having deceived me, in
some way, in this soUtary successful case. From all which I have seen,
read, and heard, on the subject, I think I am fully entitled to say that,
if we are not warranted to pronounce the tilings supposed to be performed
by clairvoyants impossible — feats which never can be proved by any
possible amount of evidence — still I consider myself justified in saying,
that it is highly improbable that such a power or faculty will ever be
realized so as to be satisfactorily proved to the conviction of mankind
at large."

It has always appeared to me as a strong argument against
such a power being delegated to man, that it would upset the
whole fabric of society, in the present state of its existence —
in which so much depends on each individual being able to
confine a knowledge of the state of his affairs and intentions
to himself and his friends only, and give his chief attention
to his own concerns.

However, I most cordially agree with the judicious remarks
of the reviewer of Mr. Colquhoun*s book in the " Critic," of
the i5th January, page 32, where he says — "Obviously, science
is a question of /act. It is useless to assail asserted facts by
reasons for their non-existence. There is but one way of
disproving them, and that is by trying the experiment. * *
* ♦ Verbal controversy is a most wasteful method of trying
physical truths. It takes so much more time. The expei-i-
ment may, probably, be tried in a few hours ; an argument at
probabilities and possibilities may extend over years." In
reference to the veritable clairvoyance of the mesmerists,


16


according to the above canon of the reviewer, I am entitled
to offer an opinion, because " I have tried, and found them to
fail. I have put the asserted experiment to the proof, and it
has not yielded the result." And, moreover, I have made these
experiments honestly and fairly, and frequently, with my own
patients and friends, as well as with some of the most noted
clairvoyants of others ; still nothing satisfactory was realised
by such investigations.

The following was the result of a trial with a noted clairvoy-
ant — so noted, that her fee, when in London, was^y* guineas
for a single consultation when she called on the patient, or
three guineas when consulted at her own residence. In order
to prove to my satisfaction, and induce me to give a certificate
of her wonderful powers at detecting and prescribing for
diseases by mesmeric-clairvoyance, her husband offered to
put her to sleep ; and, when in this state, she voluntarily
offered to prove her clairvoyant powers, by describing and pre-
scribing for mg own complaints. As she had never seen me
before, I considered this was an unexceptionable offer. She
then made the examination by applying the tips of her fingers
to various parts of her own person, raising them again and again
before her face, as if reading the required information from
the points of the fingers. I determined to watch carefully
all that was said and done, and say nothing which could either
lead or mislead the clairvoyant sibyl. She detected and
described minutely, and prescribed for, three grave complaints,
which she discovered me labouring under ; but, more satis-
factorily for myself than the clairvoyant and her husband, I
was bound in candour, at last to declare, that neither then,
nor at any period of my life, had I suffered fi'om any one of
the three grave diseases she alleged I was afflicted with.

But what, after all, let me ask, would be the value of the


17


clairvoyance contended for by the mesmerists, in a practical
point of view, even if they could satisfactorily prove its exist-
ence in certain cases ? For, according to their own showing,
the capriciousness and uncertainty of this alleged faculty
would render it worthless, because of the difficulty of deter-
mining when the enunciations of clairvoyants were true, and
when they were erroneous, lilven Mr. Colquhoun admits this
at page 216 of volume II., where he says, — " We cannot always
depend upon the same accuracy of instinct ; for there are
many confused magnetic states in which truth may be mingled
with error ; and such annunciations, therefore, may mislead
the by-stander ; and, for this reason, they ought always to be
received with great caution!'' And, again, at pages 218-19,
he says, — " The conclusion, therefore, to which we are dis-
posed to come, in regard to this matter of instinct of remedies,
is this-— that, in many cases, this instinctive feeling is natural
and just, and may be depended upon ; but that, in other cases,
it may be impure and merely fanciful ; and that it requires a
great deal of tact and experience on the part of the observer,
in order to enable him to distinguish the true from the false."
This is also fairly admitted by Dr. Haddock, regarding
his subject Emma, who is held up for admiration by Professor
Gregory and others, as being one of the most remarkable
clairvoyant subjects who has been met with ; and the reports
cf her alleged visits to Sir John Franklin at the North Pole,
of course, invested her with no ordinary degree of notoriety.
At page 114 of the second edition of his work, entitled
** SomnoUsm and Psycheism," the author says, — " I would
by no means wish the reader to suppose that Emma was
always successful. In some eases there have been no means
of proving or disproving her statements ; in others, she has
apparently mixed up the past foith iht pre^ent^ ^^^^ ^Qq^s>&

o


18


presented a confused and erroneous jncture." Then, after
enumerating other sources of error in her reyelations, the
doctor adds : — " The reader will thus see the difficulties
attending these inquiries, and obserre the many sources of
error. Clairvoyance has its uses ; and, unfortunately, fix>iii
the enthusiasm of some parties, and knavery of others, its
abuses. But it ought, by no means, to be considered as
equalling, much less of superseding, the investigations and
conclusions of the normal, rational faculty."

Such an admission as the one contained in the last sentence
of the above quotation, coming as it does from a gentleman
who makes constant professional use of said clairvoyant, far
the purposes of diagnosis, prognosis, and the treatment of
diseases, is highly significant, and fully justifies the humble
estimate which I made of its practical value at the beginning
of the paragraph, page 17. It is, obviously, merely a
dream spoken and acted out, directed and modified by sug.
gestions of those present, and partakes of the pecidiar charac-
ter of dreaming, which is to accept every idea arising in the
mind, or suggested to it through impressions on the senses,
as present realities, with a tendency, as in insanity, to reason
correctly, occasionally, from the erroneous premises which
had been assumed as true. Like dreaming and fortime-teUing,
moreover, the answers, like those of all oracular predictions,
are given in very vague phraseology ; so that they may admit
of any variety of interpretation which may best suit the £moy
of the parties interested in the issue of the inquiry.*

* Another point in which it seems to resemble dreaming is this, that
through the multipUcity of ideas rushing through the mind in a confused
manner, it is easy for the person who remembers his dreams on awaking
to allege that such and such occurrences are foreshadowed or revealed to
him in this manner ; or to imagine to himself after their actual oooor-


19


The observations contained in the paragraphs pages 36-7
of Mr. Colquhoun's "Preface/' are calculated to convey most
erroneous notions regarding me. They implicate me in
making imdue attempts to claim for myself the credit of
being an " original discoverer," and endeavouring to supplant
mesmerism by its younger brother, hypnotism, Mr. Colqu-
houn was as well aware as myself that the method devised by
me for demonstrating the fallacy of the mesmeric theory, about

rence, that such and such things really had been prefigured to him.
Moreover, there are not wanting occasional instances of indiyiduals
having in their sleep exercised a process of reasoning, so as to solve
difficult problems, or complete and perfect literaiy compositions, with
which they had been puzzled and perplexed and were unable to accom-
plish during their waking moments. This actually occurred with myself,
when I was a school-boy ; and it has abo occurred to several of my
friends, and to others of whom I have read accounts, some of whom had
recorded in their sleep, or spontaneous somnambulism, the result of
their labours, unknown to themselves on awaking, whilst others remem-
bered all which had occurred during their sleep. Still, these are such
rare exceptions to the general stuff of which dreams are made up, that
I believe few individuals would be rash enough to hazard important
enterprises by a minute and strict adherence to the revelations commu-
nicated to them in dreams. Just as there are always some who attach
great importance to ordinary dreams, through the occasional coinci-
dences and alleged successes which occur, so will the Uke occasional
coincidences and apparent successes always secure a certain class as
beUevers in the importance and truth of clairvoyant revelations. Even
mesmeric clairvoyants, however, with all the aids which they enjoy over
the natural dreamer, by suggestions caught from the leading questions,
observations, looks, and gestures of those around them (for many of
them are seeing through their pcirtiall^ closed eyelids^ and scrutinizing
all which is going on, by the aid of the ordinary organ of vision, and
other organs of sense, whilst the bystander is not at all aware of this
important fact) — I say, even with all these aids, one of the most
noticeable things about the instinct of mesmeric clairvoyants, compared
with that of animals, is this — that the instinct of animals is generally
rights whereas the instinct of mesmeric clairvoyants is generally wrong,

c 2


20


a magnetic flnid or force being the cause of the phenomena
educed by these yarions processes, tn tis far as I was aware
at that time, was entirely new— or, if he prefer that term, it
was a discovery ; for I was not then aware of it haying been
resorted to by any one else. However, haying undertaken
the inyestigation of the habits of the Hindoos and Magi of
Persia, in 1844-5, 1 was enabled to publish a series of papers
in the Medical Times, on '* Magic, Mesmerism, Hypnotism,
&c.. Historically and Physiologically considered." In these
papers I stated that I had found in the writings referred to,
** many statements corroborative of the fact, that the eastern
saints are all self-hypnotizers — adopting means essentially
(but not identically, I wish it specially to be observed,) the
same as those which I had recommended for similar pur-
poses." I added, that it was '' a curious and important fEUst,
clearly demonstrated by my investigation, that what observation
and experience had led me to adopt and recommend as the most
speedy and effectual mode of inducing the nervous sleep and
its subsequent phenomena, had been practised by the Magi of
Persia for ages before the Christian era — ^most probably from
the earliest times ; was known to Zoroaster, who followed in
their steps, 550 years before Christ ; and from this foimd its
way into India in those days, where it has been employed by
the Hindoo saints and religious mendicants, Jogees, Fakirs,
and others." I farther added : — '* Whilst there is this
remarkable coincidence, however, between my own views and
theirs, as to the mode of inducing the sleep and some of the
phenomena, in the sequel it will be found that our theoretical
views as to the nature and cause of the subsequent and ulterior
phenomena, ' are wide as the poles asunder.' " Now, these are
the very pi^rs which Mr. Colquhoun has referred to in such
flattering terms at page 1 12, vol I. ; and oan he i«aUy think,


21


under such circumstances, that he was warranted in making
such remarks as those contained in his Preface^ imputing to
me a desire to conceal what I knew had been long ago done
by others, in order that I may appropriate to myself what
1)elongs to them ?

Strictly speaking, perhaps there is really nothing new
under the sun — that is to say, there may be no idea of the
present day which may not, in some shape or other, be alleged
to have occurred to the mind of some other human being, long
deceased or still alive. But it is not the vague, and confused,
and dreamy idea which is of importance and of real practical
value. It is only when an individual has been enabled, in
some measure, to explain the nature and cause of certain
phenomena, or at least to devise means for gaining such cer-
tainty and precision to processes and their sequences and
relations, as shall give a definite form and practical bearing to
the ideas, that they really come to merit the appellation of a
discovery. Now, all which I have ever laid claim to, was
simply the discovery of more certain and speedy modes of
producing the hypnotic state, and of applying it with the
more advantage for the relief and cure of disease, than by
'^ the old-established modes of mesmerising ;" and also that
my method has enabled me to demonstrate that the influence
is subjective, or personal, and not objective, or the result of
tiie transmission of an oecult, magnetic, or odylic, or vital,
or nervous influence or fluid, passing from the operator to the
patient. In respect to the attempts of mesmerists to give the
merit due to me in this matter, and to this extent, to any dead
or living man, rather than to the author of hypnotism^ I may
be consoled, perhaps, by reflecting on the following shrewd
remark : — " In the progress of improvements, it is always a
good sign of their appreciation when attempts are made to
rob the authors of the merit due to them.."


22


Throughout the whole of my inquiries my chief desire hfw
been to arrive at what could be rendered most practically
useful for the relief and cure of disease ; and I hesitate not
to say, that, in the hands of a skilful medical man, who
thoroughly understands the peculiar modes which I have
devised for varying the effects in a manner applicable to
different cases, hypnotism^ besides being the speediest method
for inducing the condition, is, moreover, capable of achieving
all the good to be attained by the ordinary mesmerising pro-
cesses, and much more.

However, after the susceptibility has been fairly stamped
upon patients who are naturally highly impressionable, I adopt
either my own usual process, or the common mesmerising
modes indifferently, because either will so speedily induce
the state favourable for varying the mental and physical con-
ditions, according to the indications in each particular case.
After the susceptibility has been engendered, the modes of
working out the subsequent results, so as to produce the
specific effects required in each case, I consider the most
important part of the whole affair. There is obviously one
remarkable result of a fixed act of attention, and which I
insist on, if it does not arise spontaneously, from the simple
act of gazing steadily at some unexciting and empty thing,
and that is — ^the suppression of the respiration which accom-
panies such act. The infiuence of suppressed respiration on
the state of the oxygenation of the blood, and in preventing
the elimination of carbonic acid, I doubt not, plays an im-
portant part in making the slight organic changes on which
the hypnotic and mesmeric condition is d^t first engendered.
Subsequently, however, habit and expectation play the most
important part for inducing the sleep.

Of course there is one point which renders hypnotism less


23


an object of approbation with a certain class of society — ^viz.,
that I lay no claim for it to produce the marvellous or tran-
scendental phenomena ; nor do I allege that the phenomena
manifested have any relation to a magnetic temperament or
some peculiar or occult power possessed in an extraordinary
degree by the operator. These are all circumstances which
appeal powerfully to the feelings of the lovers of the marvel-
lous, and therefore tell in favour of mesmerism ; and, more-
over, seeing that, for conducting the hypnotic processes with
any degree of certainty and success, I contend that, in many
cases, a knowledge of anatomy, physiology, pathology, and
therapeutics are all requisite, it is obvious that such require-
ments must be less calculated to secure the approbation of
non-professional mesmerists and amateurs, whose magnetic
creed taught them to believe that the mere possession by
them of the magnetic temperament, — of a surcharge by na-
ture, within their own bodies, of a magnetic fluid, or odyle,
— is quite sufficient to enable them to treat any ease as
efficiently as the most skilful medical man in the universe,
simply by walking up to the patient with the will and good
intention of doing him service, or by adding thereto, occa-
sionally, the efficacy of mesmeric touches, passes, or manipu-
lations.

All I claim for hypnotism is now willingly admitted by the
great majority of scientific men, who have investigated the
subject without previous prejudice in favour of mesmerism;
and even Mr. C. himself admits, at page 188, vol. ii, that,
in the course of my researches, in hypnotism, I have
brought forward " many curious facts and illustrations which
well deserve the attention of all who take an interest in the
investigation of the subject."

But further, in reply to Mr. Colquhoun*s remarks at pages


24


36-7 (preface), I beg leave to state, that the sole object which I
had in view, in undertaking the experimental investigatioii o£
animal magnetism, was to devise a simple and satisfactory mode
of demonstrating that the real cause of the phenomena mani-
fested was subjective or personal, and not objective, or the
result of any magnetic fluid or force passing from the operator
to the patient ; and, as I succeeded by this attempt in producing
all the ordinary and useful phenomena, (useful in a curative
point of view, I mean) more speedily and certainly than by
the ordinary mesmerising methods, whilst I never succeeded
in producing clairvoyance and the higher phenomena, I
thought it better to discuss the phenomena producible by mj
method imder a new name, and adopted the term hypnotism,
fx nervous sleep.^ By this means I hoped that hypnotiBm
might be prosecuted quite independently of any bias or pre-
jiHlice, either £:>r or against the subject as connected with
mesmerism, and only by the ^cts which could be adduced^
like the originators of all new views, however, hypnotism has
subjected me to much contention ; for the sceptics, from not
perceiving the difference between my method and that of the
mesmerists, and the limited extent of my pretentions, were
equally hostile to hypnotism as they had been to mesmerism |
and the mesmerists, thinking their craft was in dangei^— that
their mystical idol was threatened to be shorn of some of
its glory by the advent of a new rival, — buckled en th^
armour, and soon proved that the odiwn mesmerietnn was
as inveterate as the odium theoiogicum ; for they seemed even
more exasperated against me for my slight divergence fronk
their dogmas, than would have been the case had I oontif

* The original term which I had adopted was " Neuro-Hypnotirai ;**
but, for the sake of brerity, I proposed to omit the prefix "Neuro.*
Kj adopting the term 'hypnotism,' therefore, co«ld be no intonded
plagiarism.


ad


nued aa entire sceptic, denying the whole as a mere juggle
or imposture.*

Notwithstanding all the opposition which I have had to con-
tend against, however, I have persevered in my course, with
firm determination to hold to that which I believed best and
nearest the truth ; and I shall now adduce a few quotations from
our leading reviews and other sources, which will show the rela-
tive position in which the two theories or systems now standi
in the estimation of men in all respects well qualified to be
arbiters in this scientific strife.

In a review of my work "On Trance," which appeared
in the October number of " The Edinburgh Medical and
Surgical Journal," 1850, they say : —

" Some four years ago, Mr. Braid published a yerj ingenious treatise
on what he denominates hypnotism ^ that is, a stat« of induced sleep,
different from natural sleep. Mr. Braid rejects altogether the doctrine
of what is called animal magnetism and mesmerism ; but he admits the
facts such as they are observed to take place, and these he refers to the
fttate to which he gives the name of hypnotism, or nervous sleep, by

' - — - - ■ - — ■ ■ ■ ■ . ■ . ^__^__ . _____ ...■■ _ ■ ■_. ..__■_ Ill — -

* I could furnish ample proofs of the persecution and misrepresenta^
tion to which I have been subjected by the mesmerists, but the follow-
ing example shall suffice. In consequence of my hjfpnotic heresy ^ and
my honest aideavours to protect myself and hypnotism against the
most unfair and wilful misrepresentation by a chief in the mesmerie
school, this gentleman, who, as well as his friends, had raised a mighty
outcry against the cruelty and injustice, illiberality and persecution
which the medical profession had manifested towards Mm^ in cons^
quenoe of his having adopted the mesmeric notions and practice ia
tome cases, carried his spleen and persecuting spirit against me to suck
a pitch, that he raised such determined opposition at head quarters as
defHrived me of an official appointment, which had been most kindly
and voluntarily offi^ed to be secured for me by the chairman of a publip
board ; and which election, I have good reason to believe, would have
been decided in my favour, but for the implacable opposition to me, for
the above-named causey of this Uliberal, vindictive^ and persecuting
mesmeric Autocrat.


I


26


"whicli he understands a peculiar condition of the nervous system, into
which it may be thrown by artificial contrivance, and which differs, in
several respects, from common sleep, or the waking condition.

" Since the pubhcation of that essay, Mr. Braid has been considering
all those facts, and classes of facts, which might illustrate the doctrines
therein proposed." — Page 421. #******

" Mr. Braid has also evinced great ingenuity in referring the alleged
fiwjts to a general principle. » » * His book deserves attentive
perusal, both for the statements which it contains, and for the reason-
ings with which the author has connected them." — Page 443.

Then in "The British and Foreign Medico- Chirurgical
E«view" for October, 1851, which gives an elaborate and
able article, embracing the whole speculations of animal
magnetism, mesmerism, hypnotism, the "od" force of Baron
Reichenbach, and electro-biology, &c., the following passages
occur in support of my views : —

*^ Although many of the phenomena are real, the * od ' force is ima-
ginary, and the scientific basis altogether unsound."

" Animal magnetism presents to the medical practitioner a new means
of investigating the functions of the brain and nervous system, and of
elucidating their physiology, pathology, and therapeutics ; and, there-
fore, the phenomena and alleged phenomena are most deserving the
notice of the profession." ****#***

" We cannot omit this opportunity of congratulating Messrs. Braid,
Bennett, and Wood upon their efforts to place mesmerism and mesmeric
doings in their true position, in a way calculated to reach and enlighten
the popular mind." — Page 383.

" It cannot be doubted that * electro-biology' (that is, the power of
suggestion, and expectation, and beUef) is not only amply sufficient to
show that all the phenomena described by Baron Yon Eeichenbach as
objective phenomena are really subjective, but that all the phenomena
of animal magnetism belong to the same category." — Page 406. * *

" We ask Dr. Gregory, with ample reason for the inquiry, why he
ha8 not pointed out the striking similarity between * electro-biologicaV
and ' odylic* methods and phenomena T'

" Yet a greater fault remains to be noticed. Mr. Braid had already,
la 1B4B^ demonstrated, in his essay, entitled *■ The Power of the Mind


27


over the Body,* that the phenomena of the * od ' force, as described by
Von Reichenbach, could be prodvced to any extent hy suggestion alone.
Now, Dr. Gregory not only has omitted to notice the analogies referred
to, and neglected to analyse and investigate those phenomena by the
light which the experiments of Dr. DarUng and others have thrown
upon them, but has made no reference whatever to these conclusive
experiments of Mr. Braid. In the 'Edinburgh Monthly Medical
Journal ' for June, 1851, Mr. Braid has published a very interesting
paper on this subject, recalling attention to his researches, and restating
the results of his experiments. We subjoin one or two illustrations ;
and first as to the * od' power of magnets : — "

* With nearly all the patients I have tried, many of whom had never
been hypnotised or mesmerised, when drawing the magnet or other
objects slowly from the wrist to the points of the fingers, various effects
were realised, such as a change of temperature, tingling, creeping,
pricking, spasmodic twitching of muscles, catalepsy of the fingers or
arms, or bothj and reversing the motion was generally followed by
a change of symptoms, from the altered current of ideas thereby sug-
gested. Moreover, if any idea of what might be expected existed in
the mind previously, or was suggested orally during the process, it was
generally very speedily realised. The above patients being now requested
to look aside, or a screen having been interposed, so as to prevent their
seeing what was being done, and they were requested to describe their
sensations during the repetition of the processes, similar phenomena
were stated to be realised, even when there was nothing whatever done,
beyond watching them and noting their responses.'

" Then as regards the odylic light and the aurora borealis : — "

* A lady upwards of fifty-six years of age, in youth a somnambulist,
but now in perfect health, and wide awake, having been taken into a
dark closet, and desired to look at the poles of the powerful horse-shoe
magnet of nine elements, and describe what she saw, declared, after
looking a considerable time, that she saw nothing. However, aflier I
told her to look attentively, and she would see fire come out of it, she
speedly saw sparks, and presently it seemed to her to burst forth, as
she had witnessed an artificial representation of the volcano of Mount
Vesuvius, at some public gardens. Without her knowledge, I closed
down the lid of the trunk which contained the magnet, but still the
same appearances were described as visible. By putting leading questions,
and asking her to describe what she saw from another part of the closet
(where there was nothing but bare waLLei)) &\ie ^exi\. opa. ^«aRiT^\si%^«rtfs<»


28


shades of most brilliant corruscations and flame, according to the leading
questions I had put for the purpose of changing the fundamental ideas.
On repeating the experiments, similar results were repeatedly realised
bj this patient. On taking this lady into the same closet after the
magnet had been removed to another part of the house, she still per-
ceived the same visible appearances of light and flame, when there was
nothing but the bare walls to produce them ; and two weeks after the
magnet was removed, when she went into the closet by herself^ the mere
tusodation of ideas was sufficieni to cause her to realise a visible repre-
sentation of the same light and flame.* " — Page 410-11

" Mr. Braid details, in his essay just mentioned, a number of experi-
ments like those made on persons in the waking state, to the complete
overthrow of all the more important experiments and observations oi
Yon Beichenbach, and the extinction of the whole odylio philosophy
based thereon ; yet Br. Gregory takes no notice whatever of them, so
that he has neither experimented crucially himself nor noticed the
crucial experiments of others." — Page 411,

** It now only remains for us to draw the general conclusion, that the
phenomena described by Von Eeichenbach and Dr. Gregory afford no
proof whenever of the existence of the newforce^ and that, consequently,
aU the theories and hypotheses founded upon the assumed demonstration
of its existence are altogether baseless. The phenomena themselves have
long been recognised, more or less, by those physiologists and patholo-
gists who have specially directed their researches to the nervous system ;
ttiid although curious and interesting, they have never been thought
inexplicable, provided aU the conditions under which they occur be
stated. Mr. Braid, Professor Simpson, Br. Bennett, Br. Wood, and
others, who have carefully investigated the matter, aU agree in this.
Mr. Braid veiy justly observes," &c.

Here a quotation is given from my essay, limiting the
extent of phenomena which I have met with to those " in
accordance with generally admitted physiological and psycho-
logical principles." The reviewer then adds: —

" Br. Gh*egory, indeed, allows this, as it res^pects the greater proportion
ei the phenomena (as we have already seen), but, at the same time, he
maintains that in those of clairvoyance there are a number of residual
phenomena, to the explanation and classification of which modem
MiBWfohogy is iinequaL Now, this ooncluuoa we not only altogether


29


Aeaji but we assert that it is reached by the same ansatisfactory method
by which Dr. Gregory has attained to other conclusions, palpably erro-
neous."— Page 412. • *******•

**The slightest consideration of this matter will excite the de^
conviction that a duty has devolved on the medical profession which
has hitherto been foreign to it. The medical practitioner must now
be so fully acquainted with the physiology and pathology of the nervous
system as not only to treat its diseases, but to demonstrate the origin
of the popular delusions, which those diseases (when artificially excited)
will (with the general circulation of the works before us) inevitably
oause, even in the minds of otherwise highly-educated persons. He must
be able to demonstrate the scientific and pseudo-scientific fallacies, and
to assign good and sufficient reason for a lai^e number of phenomena,
that to the non-prolessional person appear nothing less than super-
natural ; he must be equally able to say when the practices by which
those phenomena are produced are dangerous to the healthy action of
tile cerebrum ; when beneficial to the cerebrum, if functionally or stme-
turally diseased ; when applicable to the alleviation of pain. The three
assays last on our list (Wood's, Bennett's, and Braid's) have each their
respective value for these ends, and will be useful to the practition^.
We here propose to add something to the views their writers hare
advanced, and to criticise others."

'* Mr. Braid has given the most useful index to the causation of these
phenomena by his special inquiry into the physiology and pathology of
{Attention. In looking at the methods by which that morbid condition
of the cerebrum is produced, which Mr. Braid designates hypnotism (a
term we propose to use generally, in place of the words mesmerism,
fuoimal-magnetism, &c.), it is obvious that they all, without exception,
are calculated to excite the attention^ This point Mr. Braid has seized,
and has expanded and elucidated views respecting the physiology of
attention, and its influence on the cerebrum and system generally, which
had been already advanced by several writers, but especially by Dr.
fioUand. The examination of the matter is, however, only oursofy and
miperfieiaL Dr. Alexander Wood notes another point in the methods
by which hypnotic phenomena are excited, namely, that the volition or
will, of the individual is particularly brought into action; omitting,
however, to consider the ooncurrent influence of attention. Dr. Ben-
nett eonsiders the influence of both the attention and the will but rerj
(generally. Dr. Mayo, we ought to add, now and then gets a ^^impse
•f the true state of things, although, unfortanflAel^^YA tf)i<^^ vm^ ^


30


after some will-o'-the-wisp of an ' od' force or mesmerio influeDce. He
can see the nature of the relations which attention bears to ordinary
sleep ; but when we hope he will carry out the analogy so as to illus-
trate the trance-sleep, he stops. The following passage regarding sleep
is interesting — page 416 : —

" * The attention alone slumbers ; or, through some shght organic
change, it is unlinked from the other faculties, and they are put out of
gear. This is the basis of sleep. The faculties are all in their places ;
but the attention is off duty — itself asleep, or indolently keeping watch
of time alone."*

" Each nerve having special endowments, and each portion of the
encephalon its appropriate powers, the phenomena will vary according
to the nerve upon which attention is concentrated, or the class of ideas
which are suggested or attempted to be realised." — Page 424.

" The group of diseases induced by hypnotism (for diseases they are"
in the same sense as any alteration of the normal action by medicine
may be called so), " is constituted of a well-marked class of cerebral
affections, long known to pathologists. The novelty regarding the
majority is, that they can be artificially produced; and regarding
several, that they can be excited temporarily and evanescently by
operating on the brain by means of the attention. This is a real and
soUd addition to the physiology and pathology of the nervous system."
—Page 425.

As my article on " Electro-Biology" was written as the
basis of a conversazione at the Manchester Royal Institution,
I was compelled to compress my observations so that the
whole could be read in little more than an hour, which will
account for the subject of attention having been treated by me
much more cursorily than its importance merited.* I have,

* Whilst this httle tract was going through the press, an interesting
report of an " Examination of Mr. Lewis's Experiments on Mesmerism,
at the Medical School of the University and King's College, Aberdeen,"
has come under my notice in the "Monthly Journal of Medical Science."
The committee consisted of three professors, two medical men, and a
clergyman, who undertook the investigation at the earnest soHcitation
of the pupils at the medical school, for whose benefit the inquiry was
instituted. The expenxnents seem to have been conducted in a


31


therefore, great pleasure in referring the reader to the above
very able article, from which I have made so many extracts,
where he will find the author has gone into a minute analysis
of the hypnotic phenomena, as well as of the normal pheno-
mena of attention ; and this he has done with so much
ability, as will amply repay any one for a careful perusal of
what he has written on this curious and important subject.

fair and liberal spirit, due care being taken to guard against all obyious
sources of fallacy, but with every desire to give ample justice to the
experimentalist. Three of the committee remained in the class-room
vfhere the patient was seated, whose duty was to consist in record-
ing the time and the character of the movements performed by the
patient, whilst the other three were in an adjoining room with Mr.
Lewis, to suggest the various movements they wished him to excite by
his silent will and physical gestures at different times, which were also
correctly recorded. When the round of experiments was finished, these
three gentlemen and Mr. Lewis returned into the room where the
patient and audience were, and then both reports were read aloud and
compared. The results I give in the words subscribed by the whole
committee : — " There was a total want of correspondence in point of
time and character between the volitions and acts of the operator and
of his subject, when in different rooms, which shows at once that Mr.
Lewis exercised no influence whatever over the person whom he had
deliberately chosen for that purpose, after he had tested his suscepti-
bihty. It is only necessary to point to Mr. Levds's attempt to over-
come the influence of gravitation, in his effort to make Mr. M. stand
on one leg, with the same side of his body and his foot pressed close
to the wall, to prove that in this case, at least, not the slightest in-
fluence of the kind was exerted. These experiments, therefore, afford
no ground whatever for the opinion, that either Mr. L. or any other
person can influence another at a distance fi*om him, or in the least
degree counteract the influence of physical laws." These results and
inferences are in entire accordance vfith my own experience and deduc-
tions on this branch of the inquiry, as may be seen recorded in various
parts of my published observations. Regarding the pretensions of Mr.
Levds to overcome gravity ^ so as to enable him to raise a man from the
ground, and hold him suspended in the air for a 6h.OT:t ^xs&&^ ^\ss£^\s^


83


.«ii


The North British Review" for May, 1851, contained a
very able article on animal magnetism, in which the writer
supported my views in the warmest manner, in preference to
those of the mesmerists ; and he narrated the results of
experiments, made by himself, which completely disposed of
the self-deceiving " Odometer " of Dr. Mayo.

In fact, in the whole of their experiments, the mesmerists
are never in a position to be able to prove that the expectant

holding his haaad above tke man's head, and willing such a result, in
my publication of July last (page 27), I distinctly stated t]|Bt, for the
reasons thero adduced, such pretensions involved " a physical itnpos'
nbilUy" and that such attempts would fail, whenever the experiment
should be ** fairly tested, before sceptics as well as converts to this
odyUc faith^'^ To the Aberdeen committee's report I am now enabled
to refer for a complete eonfirmation of this prediction. Moreover,
according to Mr. Lewis's own admission to the committee, as recorded
by them at page 172, the indications which he and others had mistaken
for his power of overcoming the laws of gravitation, so as to enable
him to suspend a man in the air by his odylic power, simply by elevat-
ing his hand over him, turns out to be precisely as I had alleged at page
27 of my last publication, viz., " purriy sulj^eotive or personal acts."
In proof of this, I may remark that, after £Euling in his trials in the
above experiment, Mr. L. admitted '* that he had no such power, and
l^t he could only influenee a person lying on l^e ground so as to make
him start up, though others were endeavomnng to hold him down.**
The inference, therefore, is obvious.

In reference to the^/Erv^ experiment, I may remark that only 6ne act was
proposed by the committee, namely, that Mr. Lewis should " make Mr.
M. lie on the floor, with his fSeice on the floor." Instead of exhibiting
this characteristic act, however, winch was proposed exactly at i^iree
O'*elock, before any eiher manifestation was proposed by the committee,
Mr. M. had madefowrteen movements, not one of which corresponded,
eilher in time or character, with that desired, as will be seen by the
following extract from the report : —
h. m.

8 li, P Jf. — Baiaed himself up in the chair, and shook himself
8 2. «~^lq)fieddo«n.ftlittlD^-^iip4Uida«itdowB — diangedhiaMat


33


idea, or influence of habit, in the patient, may not be the real
producing cause of the phenomena realised ; because the
crucial experiments of myself and others have satisfactorily
demonstrated, that these subjective influences alone are quite
adequate for their production, without any influence whatever
passing to the subject from another person ; whereas the mes-
merists cannot prove that these subjective influences are not
in operation during the exercise of their mesmeric processes.

h. m.

3 2|. — Eubbed his hand (on his thigh), and his left arm with the right

^hand.
3 3i. — Stamped on the floor and moved his feet sideways — then got

up and changed his seat again.
3 d|. — Folded arms — put left liand behind.
3 4i. — Booked his body from side to side.

At five minutes past three, and at nine minutes past three, other
suggestions were proposed by the committee, with like results — fully
warranting the inferences above quoted from the report of the committee,
that " there was a total want of correspondence, in point of time and
character, between the volitions and acts of the operator and of the
subject, when in different rooms," &c. It is worthy of remark, more-
over, that when Mr. Lewis left the class-room, the audience was desired
to remain quiet for a Uttle, as another experiment was about to be tried.
Hereupon most of the company directed their attention to Mr. M. and
Mr. H., who liaving been previously acted upon, it was therefore con-
jectured that they would be the parties acted on in that instance. At
twelve minutes past four, being seven minutes after the time Mr. L. was
to mesmerise Mr. M. from a distance, Mr. M. went down to the chair
on which he had previously been seated, and having gone through certain
manoeuvres, he rushed out of the room and went to Mr. L.'s apartments,
impelled, as he beUeved, by the irresistible and silent will of Mr. L. to
draw the patient to him, from such a distance as he could neither be
seen nor heard through the physical organs. It was proved, however,
that the intended experiment was quite different from what Mr. M.
manifested. Mr. H. also became affected in a peculiar manner, and
could not be induced to go home without paying a visit to Mr. L.'8
lodgings, feeling himself irresistibly drawn thither by the sileni wiU
of Mr. L. It was ascertained, however, that aU ihxt occwrre^ un^iw^fc


34


The "Critic" for the 1st Navember, 1850, in reviewing

my work on " Trance," says : —

" As Mr. Braid is rather opposed to the mesmerists, whom he accuses
of going too far, and asserting too much, our readers will feel the more
confidence in the following statement of his experiences of the condition
of patients in the mesmeric sleep."

After a long quotation, describing the extraordinary exalta-
tion of the senses of smell, touch, hearing, and the muscular
sense, and the gift of phonic imitation, which enabled an
uneducated girl to imitate Jenny Lind in singing songs in
Swiss, German, and Italian, catching the sound of both words
and music, and imitating them so quickly, that it was scarcely
possible to detect that both were singing, so perfectly did
they accord in giving both words and music simultaneously —
as if each had previously been equally familiar with the
songs, the reviewer adds : —

"Such statements are the more valuable, as coming from such a
quarter. It is the testimony of one who has at least looked into the
subject with an impartial e,ye. Some other cases collected in this
volume are extremely interesting and curious, and will reward perusal
by all who desire to unravel the mysteries of existence." — Page 526.

In like manner I could refer to many of the most scientific
and able writers of the day, in support of my views. Amongst
these, I have much gratification to know that Professors
Alison and John Hughes Bennett, men of world-wide reputa-

Mr, L. having directed his mind to this patient at all ! It was known
to many present, as well as to Mr. H., that Mr. Lewis had, on former
occasions, presumed that certain individuals had been drawn to him, at
his lodgings, ^y the power of his silent will; and hence the origin of the
idea in the mind of the patient, as also of jnany of those present on this
occasion. The result, however, proved how readily some enthusiastic
parties may be deceived, through overlooking very obvious sources of
fjEdlacy . These are certainly remarkable proofs of Mr. L-'s alleged power
<;^ iafiueiMfiog patients at a distance, simply by the power of his sHeni
*e^ andphynctH gesticulations.


as


tion, are to be ranked. The latter gentleman has said in his
published lectures, vide page 175: —

" In ail these and various other oases which might be cited, it must
be evident that the effect is produced by operating on the mind of the
individual, and through that on his bodily powers. In short, predomi-
nant ideas, whd;her originating spontaneously, or suggested by the
words and actions of others, seem to be the exciting cause in individuals
.affected with a pecuUar condition of the cerebral functions. As regards
the nature of this condition, it seems analogous to that of sleep or
dreaming, in which certain faculties of the mind are active, and may be
stimulated into excessive action, whilst others are suspended. Hence,
it has been very appropriately called hypnotism by Mr. Braid," * *

** The labours of Dr Esdaile in India, and of Mr. Braid, of Man-
chester, exhibit a worthy commeaoeraent in the rational treatment of
disorders by the means now alluded to ; and there can be little doubt
that in no long time its influence, when further studied, will be
acknowledged."* — Page 178.

Having been constantly engaged in the study and practice
■of the medical profession for nearly forty years, I presume I
ought to be as competent to express an opinion upon th€ matter
referred to in the note below, as Mr. Colquhoun, whose
chief study has been law, literature, and science. Under

* Whilst I have had the most satis&ctory proof of tlie value of the
hypnotic mode of treating some forms of disease, when it is judiciously
applied, I repudiate the notion of holding it up as a panacsea or univer-
sal lemedy ; or believing that the efficacy of medicines maiuly depends
upon **ihe peculiar idiosyncrasy, or magnetic temperament," of the
prescriber, as alleged by Mr, Colquhoun, in the foUowing extraordinary
paragraphs — "For our own part, we are disposed to be of opinion
that, in many cases of disease, much less of the ultimate effect depends
upon the character of the medicines prescribed than upon the peculiar
idiosynomsy of the physician who prescribes them. The magnetic
^mperament is of more ^ffioaey in the cure of diseases than aH the
drugs enumerated and dassified in our pharmacopoeias ; and the mag-
fDOtic method of euro is of .&r more general use in practice, in as mueh
, 4»B it 33aay .be employed in almost idl ithe diseases to which the antaal
Irameis . subject."— -Yol. II, page 286.

i> 2


36


the tenns "literature and science," I ought to include an
intimate knowledge of the anatomy and physiology of the
nervous system, which I understand Mr. Colquhoun has
studied with great care and attention, and, consequently, must
be intimately acquainted with. Moreover, having devoted a
considerable share of his time and attention, for many years
past, to the study of mesmerism, with the aid of his splendid
collection of books on that subject, he may safely be pronounced
one of the best informed, as far as regards the literature of
that science, of any magnetist in Europe. I am not aware,
however, that Mr. Colquhoun has devoted so much attention
as myself to the study of the therapeutic effects of medicines,
therefore, I venture to say, whilst I most readily admit that
the efl&cacy of medical treatment may be greatly aided by the
peculiar manners, looks, and language of the person who
prescribes the medicines, and the confidence engendered by
these means in favour of his prescriptions, still, I feel assured
that there is a positive and obvious effect to be expected from
some medicines^ altogether irrespective of the physical or mental
qualities and manners of the individual who prescribes them.

Were I not thoroughly convinced of this, as a matter of
course, I should consider it quite unnecessary for me to pre-
scribe active medicines in any case ; since it is alleged by the
mesmerists themselves that, by nature, I possess an unusually
powerful magnetic temperament^ and that it is through the
influence of this peculiar temperament that I have been so
successful in producing the hypnotic or mesmenc state with
my patients.* According to this theory (to wLich, howeyer, I

* In proof of this, I may mention the following anecdote: — On
calling, for the first time, on a chief in the mesmeric ranks — one who
applauds the speculations of Baron Yon Keichenbach to the echo,
urging every mesmerist to procure and read his work, and who was


37


by no means subscribe) and Mr. Colquhoun's expressed opinion
in the note above quoted, and the theory of other mesmerists
referred to by him at pages 292-3 of vol. I, the whole effi-
cacy of the means used is attributable to the magnetic tempera^
ment and the etiergettc Will and good intentions of the mes-

•

meriser or medical presenter, Mr. C. writes thus at page
292-3, vol. I :—

" The magnetists hold it as a fundamental principle, that the inten-
tion of doing good is the very soul of their art. The verbal foruiulsB
(and passes and manipulations also, of course) are merely the accessories
which ignorance, quackery, and superstition have elevated into real
causes."

I say then, according to these theories of the mesmerists,
all which I ought to have occasion to do in any given case,
in order to insure the recovery of my patient, would be
merely to approach him and exercise my will and good in fen-
tions in his behalf. This assuredly would be making short
work of it, and would save me a vast deal of mental labour, as
well as pecuniary outlay, in devising, as well as procuring, the
requisite medicines for my patients. It is well known, however,
that I use hypnotism alone in a certain class of cases only,
to which I consider it adapted; and that, in some other

willing to stand sponsor for it, having distinctly recorded that he felt
that every word said by the Baron must be true, and that every one of
the phenomena had been confirmed by his own experience years before —
this gentleman told me he had read accounts of my doings and remark-
able success in hypnotizing patients. He then added, moreover, tliat,
on reading the results of my experiments, he had attributed my success
to the possession by me of an unusually powerful magnetic temperament ;
and that he had expressed himself sure that I had a large brain, a
large, capacious che«t, and great mental energy, i. e. that I possessed
A determined will. He farther added, as a proof of his sagacity, — " And
now that I see you, you are just the person I supposed, for you have
them all." I attributed my success, however, to a very difiAiv^vA.^ "«sAw
less mystical or special cause.


38


caaes, I use it tn conjunetion with medical treatment ; but
tliat, in the great majority of cases, I do not use hypnotism at
(dl, but depend entirely upon the efficacy of active medicines,
which I prescribe in such doses as are calculated to pro-
duce sensible efTects. I can honestly say that, whicheyer of
tliese modes I am adopting^in any given case, it is always
done, not merely with the tciU, but also with the earnest
intention and desire, for the speedy relief or recovery of my
patient ; still, notwithstanding aU this, I am bound to admit
that, with neither method, nor evoi with all these means
combined, can I always succeed in curing some of my patients;
Like other medical men, I have found that death will come at
last; in defiance of all human efforts to oppose it ; for it is the
law of nature — ^man is bom to die.

" Nascentes morimnr, fimsqne ab origine pendet.*'
Nevertheless, I feel convinced that with implicit faith, hope,
and confidence on the part of the patient, many disorders may
be recovered from, even whilst the patients are merely taking a
drop of plain water occasionally, or a particle of bread, or any
oiher harmless substances, which shall suffice, as visible and tan-
gible agents, to keep their minds involuntarily fixed on the idea
that the innocent ingredients used, are agents fi aught with great
virtues for effecting certain purposes. The stronger the intellect;,
the more certain are the results to be realised, provided the-
imagination is sufficiently brilliant, and the faith propor-
tionately fervent, to fix the mind steadily on the confident and
pleasing contemplation of the certainty of the cure. Every
strong mental impression produces a concussion on the centres
of the nervous and circulating systems, and by thus changing
physical action, in many instances, acts as an alterative ;
but, whether for good or for evil to the individual, depends;
rery much upon the character and persistency of the pre-


39


dominant idea. I believe that this is the real philosophical
explanation of the temporary suceess of certain medicines
and fanciful modes of treating some disorders, — they rapidly
rise in the estimation of a certain class of society, whilst novelty
and ardent faith itispire their votaries ; but, at length, having
attained to the culminating point of their fame and favour, as
they have no root in them, they speedily wane, to give place
to some fresh novelty or nostrum.

Still, all patients are not susceptible of being so influenced,
and hence the inefficient visible appliances, which, through
fixed mental impression, and giving time for nature to mani-
fest her powers of conservation, prove successful with the
former, would utterly fail with the latter and larger class.
Nor is it wise in the former exceptional class to hazard their
safety, in important cases, in such a frail bark, when they
might, in addition to the influence of the mind and fixed
attention, hope, and confidence, add thereto the certain aid
of active medicines. Those who act in this manner are
stiU more indiscreet than the other class, who content them-
selves with simply prescribing drugs, without paying the
slightest attention to the management of the minds of their
patients. For my own part, it is always my endeavour to
combine both agencies, so far as is consistent with truth and
honour, and a sincere desire to benefit my patients. I am
aware that, in some cases, it might be possible to enhance
the eflfect and apparent importance of hypnotic processes,
by involving them in mystery, and alleging that I could
bring some occult or special influence into play, and thereby
produce extraordinary effects ; but, inasmuch as I entertain
no belief in the existence and transmission from the operator
to the patient of such an agency, I could not honestly do
so; and I therefore prefer trusting to tK^ «wx!c^^ ^t:<$«»sv.-


40


tion and modes of changing physical action already advanced
by me, which are so much more susceptible of definite control,
and are level to the comprehension of most men, and conse-
quently are the more likely to secure the approbation of those
who are not hopelessly enamoured by the love of the marvellous
and transcendental. The advantages of combining moral and
medical means have been well expressed in the following
remarks — the first paragraph by Professor Alison, the present
eminent Professor of the Practice of Physic in the University
of Edinburgh : —

" However minutely the physician may have examined the anatomy
of the brain and nerves, and however accurately he may have noted
the effects of injuries of these parts in experiments on animals and in
observations on disease, still, unless he has carefully considered and
generalized the mental pabt op the fbooesses, of which the brain and
nerves are the instruments^ he has done but half his work." * * •

" The generality of medical men attach too exclusive an importance to
the mere drug. They deal with people as if there were nothing psychical
in them. If their diagnosis be correct, they write their prescriptions,
and there is a stop to their operations. If part of the frame be diseased,
there is no reason why the whole should not combine against the enemy.
Faith saves physically as well as morally ; and to lull the trembling
mind to ease is to stay the heart's rapid pulsations, to allay the blood's
fever, and to stop life in its quickening flight, with strengthened wings
from the human tenement." — Medical Times.

Many sceptics have endeavoured to throw discredit on the

importance of hypnotic processes as a means of cure, by

attributing the whole results to the power of imagination.

They are willing to admit that certain effects are produced,

and are content if they can only damage the importance of

the facts, by associating them with what they consider a bad

name. Their admission of the facts^ however, is something ;

and we shall now devote a few moments to the consideration

of the power of imagination over the physical organism of

man. Those who suppose that the power of imagination is


41

merely a mental emotion, which may vary to any extent
without corresponding changes in the physical functions,
labour under a mighty mistake. It is notorious to those who
have carefully studied this curious subject, that imagination
can either kill or cure ; that many tricks have been played
upon healthy persons, by several friends conspiring, in suc-
cession, to express themselves as surprised, or sorry, or shocked
to see them looking so ill ; and that very soon a visible change
has come over the patients, and they have actually gone home
and been confined there for days from bodily illness thus
induced. Not only so, but there are even cases recorded, in
which we have the best authority for the fact, where patients
who were previously in perfect health, have actually died from
the power of imagination, excited entirely through the sugges-
tions of others. Nor are the suggestions by others of ideas of
health, vigour, hope, and improved looks less influential with
many people for restoring health and energy both of mind and
body. Having such a mighty power to work with, then, the
great desideratum has been to devise the best means for regulat-
ing and controlling it, so as to render it subservient to our will
for relieving and curing diseases. The modes devised, both
by mesmerists and hypnotists, for these ends, I consider to be
a real, solid, and important addition to practical therapeutics ;
and not the less curious and important that it is done simply
through appeals to the immortal soul, to assert and demonstrate
its superiority and control over the mortal body.

The following remarks upon this subject, from the pen of
that eminent philosopher, Dugald Stewart, are interesting
and important : —

'* It appears to me, that the general conclusions established by Mes-
mer's practice, with respect to the physical effects of the principle of
imagination (more particularly in cases where they co-operated to^etl:Lex\^
are incomparably more curious thaai V£ Yio "VxaiQi bsXiXMaScj ^«a\s5iisi«»^R^


42

the existence of his boasted science : nor can I see any good reason why
a physician, who admits the efficacy of the moral ag^its employed bjr
Mesmer, should, in the exercise of his profession, scruple to copy what-
ever processes are necessary for subjecting them to his command, any
more than that he should hesitate about employing a new physiciQ
agent, such as electricity or galvanism." — Elements of the Philosophy of
the Human Mind,

The experiments in what has been so absurdly styled " elec-
tro-biology," lately exhibited publicly, fully demonstrated that,
with some individuals, predominant ideas and fixed attention,
whether arising spontaneously or from the suggestions of
others, are sufficient, of themselves alone, even in the waking
condition, to change physical action, and produce the expected
results ; whilst they also demonstrate the important fact, that,
through the influence of suggestion, existing predominant ideaa-
may be removed, and any other ideas whatever produced in their
steady which the operator chooses to indicate by word, look, or
gesture. This at once points to an important practical fact, as
regards the the most rational, simple, and successful mode of
treating monomania — ^viz., by engaging the mind of the patient
so strongly on some net^ idea, as shall, as much as possible,
withdraw it from the previously existing morbid delusion.
By the temporary suspension of the morbid delusion thus
effected, its activity and power become less and less enthral-
ling, and the mind more and more cs^iacitated for entertaining
new and healthy trains of thought. In this manner, I- have
succeeded very speedily in curing sev^al cases of monomania
and delirium tremens. Of .course, there are some cases' which
will not yield to this method; but, I believe that, in almost*
aU cases of monomania in patients who pass into the second*
conscious state of hypnotism, a far more speedy cure may be
calculated on by this mode of treatment than by any other.

It is A curious fact, and tells strongly in support of my^
sBfl^ecdve or persons} mental theory-, that, whilst many* indane^'


m


patients, particularly cases of monomania, may be readily
enough hypnotized, I have never yet been able to affect an
idiot. Where there was no mind capable of being aroused
to an act of sustained, fixed attention, I have never succeeded
in hypnotizing the patient, although I have made many per-
severing attempts to do so. The following is also an important
feet, bearing on the same point : — In the case of a patient,
who was highly susceptible, and had been frequently hyj^r
notized with decided benefit, on one occasion, when she wa»"^
delirious from fever, and had not slept for several nights and'
days, as it was highly desirable to procure sleep for her with-
out the administration of opiates, I made a persevering
attempt, with the strongest desire on my own mind to put
her to sleep ; but it was all in vain — the men taV chord of the
patient was unstrung, and hence there was not the wonted'
harmonious response, even to my most anxious and strenuotts
efforts. Could a better proof than this be adduced, that suc-
cess depended neither upon my will 2in^ intentions^ nor physical
efforts^ but on the influence which could be produced by
the m^W of the patient OA^r her own body?

Hie truth of all the above statements was demonstrated by
my experimentSv published in 1 845, and still more extensively,
in. 1846 *

•' A^6r the amomit of evidence which has been furnished, both through"
the' press and by public exhibitions, for any one to deny the power of*
audible suggestion, sympathy, and imitation to affect some individuids '
ifresistibly, according, to the import of the words they hare heard spokeiF,
or' the physical acts they have witnessed exhibited before them, no mair^
with a candid 'and competent mind could deny the fact after fair invesH^
ffotion. The- power of influencing patients at a distance, however, wher©
th^ can neither see nor hear, in the common acceptation of these terms,
thfi suggestions intended to be conveyed to them, is entirely a different'
affkir, and it would require much deaarat «dA. xasyBC >\Tx«^.^is^*C^ssB^!S^


44


In the Psychological Journal for July last, in a most able
and acute article on " The Progress of Thought, or Electro-
Biology," the following quotations from my writings with
comments by the reviewer occur, in refutation of the doctrines
of Von Reichenbach : —

* It is an undoubted fact,* " observes Mr. Braid, and the profession
win agree with him," * that with many indiyinuals, especially with the
highly nervous, imaginative, and abstractive, a strong direction of inward
consciousness to any part of the body— especially if attended with the
expectation or belief of something being about to happen — is quite
sufficient to change,* * or rather, we should say, to modify the physical
action of that part, and produce such impressions from this cause alone
as Baron Reichenbach attributes to the new force." — Page 357.

Then regarding the alleged odylic lights, and their diflferent
sizes and colours, as seen by different patients, the author
comes to the same conclusions as myself, viz. : —

" That there would clearly not have been this discrepancy had there
been a physical reality in the alleged 6ames and colour." He then adds :
" All doubt on the subject is, however, set at rest by the fact, that, in
several of Mr. Braid's experiments, when he deceived the patients
by pretending to use a magnet, all the abnormal sensations were pro-
duced by the mere imagination of the patient ; as in Dr. Haygarth's
case — the key of his portmanteau — when the patient imagined it to be

evidence to establish the existence of such a faculty than has yet come
under my notice, either by reading or personal observation. The report of
the Aberdeen committee, referred to at page 30-4, is a good illustration
as to what value is to be attached to the alleged facts of less cautious and
searching inquirers. I by no means wish to deny that the Almighty
may cause an influx of ideas into the minds of men through spiritual
agency ; or that, on special occasions, and for important purposes, he
may exhibit remarkable manifestations of a sort of inspiration — far
exceeding the ordinary current of events — but, for my own part, I can-
not, without indubitable evidence to the contrary, bring myself to believe
that the Almighty Creator of the universe woidd condescend to confer
such gifts, as alleged, upon a few individuals, for such paltry purposes as
those for which they are generally represented as called into requisition.


45


a magaet, produced effects as singular as if it had been endowed with
the new imponderable magnetic force discovered by the Baron*8
patients."

In like manner, my mental theory of explaining the cause
of hypnotic phenomena has the unqualified support of this
able writer, in preference to the special-influence theory ; and
he gives, as an example, the experiment tried by me before
800 people, when I invited strangers to come forward who
had never submitted themselves to any mesmerizing process,
of whom ten out of fourteen male adults were reduced to a
state of sleep more or less profound — some even remembering
nothing of what had happened during their sleep ; and all
this was accomplished simply by their gazing at inanimate
objects, and the subjects fixing their attention as much as
possible upon the simple act of looking attentively at the end
of corks tied on their own heads, so as to project horn- ways
from the middle of the forehead of each; and some others of the
patients were desired to fix their gaze and attention on points
of the gas apparatus, or other parts of the room, by which
means, all commencing the operation at the same time, ten of
the fourteen went to sleep, although I never touched any one
of them until their eyelids had closed involuntarily. None
of them seemed able to open their eyes ; some became cata-
leptic, others were insensible of pain from the prick of a pin,
and one or two forgot all that had occurred. Moreover,
during these proceedings, three more of the audience threw
themselves, of their own accord, and without my knowledge ^
into a state of profoimd sleep, by fixing their gaze and
thoughts in the same way, upon other single points in the
room. The reviewer, then, very justly remarks : —

' But supposing, instead of the piece of cork, a disc of zinc, or a
oonunon brass button were substituted, and the same attention to it
eigoined, would it be at all wonderful if the same effect were i^r<^d»£ftA.1


46


Certainly not. Naj, we can easily understand that, when the yision
becomes confused and the mental faculties bewildered, erroneous
impressions and illusions, ocular and aural, fand tactual, motorial,
olfactiye, and gustatiye, he might have added,] may easily be suggested."

In the numbers of Fraser's Magazine for June, 1844, and
July, 1845, two very able articles appeared on the subject of
"Animal Magnetism and Neuro- Hypnotism," from which
-essays I might make many quotations furnishing most
'important support to my yiews. I prefer, however, referring
the reader to a careful perusal of the entire articles^ where
much will be found both to amuse and instruct him regarding
'Ifee -subjects brought under consideration. In my book on
"Trance," at pages 38-9, 1 cited from these dissertations some
remarks which, to me, appeared lucidly expressed, and were in
exact accordance with my own convictions, as to the mode of
•explaining, upon natural or generally recognised principles,
•many results which, by the magnetists, are alleged as clairvoy-
ant feats, or direct " intuitions of the soid," instead df being the
results of a process of reasoning, regardingthe natural relations
-of things, presented before the mind during their entranced
'0tate. Mr. Colquhoun took occasion, in his Preface, to
animadvert upon the quotation referred to with far greater
severity than, in my opinion, legitimate criticism warranted,
^n a eareful consideration of the real import and obvious
flaeaning of that part of the said artides which I thought
•so appropriately illustrated my views. Inasmuch as Mr.
^Sowler, barrister-at-law, is known to the public as the real
author of these papers in Fraser, and many remarks have
'%een made to the prejudice of that gentleman, in reference
to the sharp ^astigation which Mr. Colquhoun had dealt out
to the ..alleged anonymous author from vhexn I had quoted,
I flhould be wanting in iiie duty which I owe to Mr. Sowler,


47


las a scholar and a gentleman, and one who is well versed in
the science of hypnoloyy, and who had been drawn into the
of&ay by my having quoted and annoimced him as the author
of said articles in Eraser — he being, moreover, as well as
'Mr. Colquhoun, a personal fiiend of mine, of many years
•standings-were I not to a£Ebrd him an opportimity of saying
a word or two in vindication of himself, (as I have done in
my own behalf,) by publishing the subjoined letter which he
Jbas addressed to me on the subject : —

" Clarksliill, Stand,

"February 2nd, 1852.

" Mt peab Braid, — I am very much obliged to you for affording me
jm opportunity of perusing Mr. Golquhoun*s brace of volumes on
"Mf^c, Witchcraft, and Animal Magnetism." I haye read them with
pleasure and profit — as I always read every thing from the pen of Mr,
,Golquhoun. He appears to me to have produced, out of his large and
Tarjed e:^perience, in this particular branch of physiological and psy-
chological investigation, a very valuable " History," that must be read
with intense interest. The only part of the book to which I object is
the Prefdce. You did me the honour, in the course of your very
admirable " Observations on Trance," ( a ^^ book in a small compass,)
to refer to certain observations which I made in Frctser's Magazine^ in
June, 1844, and July, 1845, and to mention me hy name as the author
of those articles. This was a compliment to be appreciated, coming, as
it. did, from a "master" in the empire of psychological science, whose
theories have been most triumphantly sustained in practice. You made
some extracts from the articles in question, and {proclaimed your assent
to the principle and the reasoning therein contained. This appears to
have given Mr. Colquhoun great offence. He thinks that I have not
shown sufficient gallantry towards the Pythoness^ and that I have treated
her rather peculiar blandishments with undue contempt. I can only
very deeply regret that her ladyship does not live in tiie days of Alexis
and Mr. Colquhoun ; for I imagine that, if she had been bodily amongst
us, you and I might have been able to detect and rout her sorceries —
^eren if Mr. Colquhoun had been her first lieutenant. 1 regret deeply
tlhat Mr. Colquhoun has not given me an opportunity of replying U^^^
0ttack upon noe imder my own name and ;by my own authoiiity, for he


48


has carefully avoided any mention of me bj name — although you, in
your book, had given my name, as the author of the obnoxious articles —
and although he had written to me a very handsome letter on the subject of
the first article, and inscribed to me a copy of his book, " Isis Beyelata.**
I cannot imagine that "professional courtesy" has deterred our Edin*
burgh friend from addressing his strictures directly to me, because I do
not see in what respect the subject he has taken so ably in hand is
related either to the law or to private intercourse. Surely I may attack
Mr. Colquhoun, or he may attack me, on an abstruse subject of curioni
investigation, without violating the rules of the one or the courtesies of
the other ! and my deliberate opinion is, that he has not treated either
of us with that fairness and candour which his high character, as a
scholar and a gentleman, entitled us to expect. However, I am glad to
hear that you intend to answer him. I should have done so too if he
had attacked me by name. I am prepared to do so whenever he shall
think fit to transfer his strictures and his sneers from the shoulders of
an incognito in IV<uer's (not an incogiuto to him !) to the shoulders of
the real " Simon Pure." Even a giant in this particular department is
not entitled to play such tricks as he has played in his Preface; and
that he if a giant I most loyally confesji — reminding us of Homer's and
Virgil's monster —

Iliad, A. 448.

*< Mox sese attollit in auras,

** Ingrediturque solo, et capit inter nubila condit."

.S!n,, lib. iv., 177.

** I give you leave to make what use of this note you may think fit. I
hope to receive an early copy of your reply to ** Magic, Witchcraft, and
Animal Magnetism."

" Believe me, my dear Braid,

'* Ever yours fiuthfully,

*' BOBXBT S. SOWLKB.

<*To James Braid, Esq., &c., &c.,
« Burlington House."

No man knows better than Mr. Colquhoun that the ancients
believed in two modes of divination— one " by means of the
intellect, the other by inspiration ;" for, in Vol. I., page 60,


49


he has referred to Plato, and Cicero, and the Stoics, in proof
of this, as the following quotation will show : —

'* Pkto, in his P.*miru9y as is well known, distinguishes two modes of
diyination— the one by means of the intellect, the other by inspira-
tion. Cicero mentions that the Stoics also assume two modes of the
exercise of this faculty : unum fynnusj quod pariicep^ erat artU^
alterum quod artecareret; the former derived from observation of the
present, and a conjecture founded upon this observation, in regard to
the future ; the latter being produced solely by a peculiar exaltation of
the mind, or spiritual faculties, to a presentiment of futurity : i. e., either
a conclusion drawn from given premises, or an immedijte intuition of
the soul, without any assistance from the reasoning faculties. The
latter — the immediate intuition of the future — was the most highly
appreciated by the ancients, as the most pure and infallible — the more
immediate and more precious gift of the gods. Cai*ent atttem arte tt,
says Cicero, qui non ratione aut vonjectura, observatis ac notaiit signis^
ted eoncitatione quadam animi, aut soluto liberoque motu futura
praseniiunty

Now Mr. Sowlcr was cited by me, because he had so well
expressed opinions which I had long avowed, and siill believe
to be true — viz., that the whole of the really striking: achieve-
ments of mesmeric clairvf^yants — which were not simply occa-
sional coincidences and shrewd guesses— were merely results
of concentrated attention, quickened memory, exaltation of
the natural organs of special sense, with self-confidence, and
accurate deductions as to what might be calculated upon
regarding the future, from contemplation of the circumstances
in the existing case, compared with what was known from
past experience. We believe that the whole is derived from
observation of the past and present, and that all regarding the
future — and what of the present is not cognisant to the
quickened organs of special sense — is mere conjecture,
founded upon these observations, from a process of reasoning
—in fine, that they are conclusions drawn from givea
premises, when contemplated mlVi a c^\^\i^^j& ^"l ^^'l^:^'^^oss^^


60


conception, and memory, and with a force of reason; unkaowfi
to us during the ordinary diffused, and distracted, or ever-
Tarying state of our attention during the ordinary waking
condition. Mr. Colquhoun, however, and the magnetists
generally, who contend lor elairvoyance and the higher pheno-
mena of mesmerism, seem to wish us to infer that these
achievements are accomplished by a sort of in^iration, —
or through '' an immediate intuition of the soul, with<Mii any
assistance from the reasoning faculties." Having thu» endea-
voured to set both views fairly before the public — for I wish,
as far as possible, to do full justice to Mr. Colquhoun and all
who coincide with him — I leave it to my readera to decide
which theoiy is more likely to be true.

That eminent philosopher, Sir David Brewster, has expressed
his entire concurrence with the explanation given by me of
the phenomena of " electro-biology." Sir David also informed
me, in confinnation of the correctness of my views, that he
had lately had occasion to talk over the subject with Sir
Benjamin Brodie and an eminent London physician, both of
whom most willingly admitted the wonderful power of fixed
mental attention in changing physical action in some abnor-
mal conditions of the nervous system. This is entirely in
accordance with my views, as stated at page 10. Mr. James
John Garth Wilkinson, in his interesting book, "The Human
Body," after giving certain details, adds —

" We presume it is evident to the reader what a power Mr. Braid has
methodized and called into play for the treatment of disease. As a
curative agent, hypnotism sontains two elemects, each valuable in its
kind : — 1. Where it produces tranoe, it has the benefits of the mesmerio
sleep, or furnishes ^o strong a dosoof rest, that many cases are cured by
that alone. But 2. The suggestion of ideas of health, tone, duty, hope,
which produce dreams influential upon the organization, enables the
O]»^rator by this means to falffl the iiidioation of directly ministering to
^mt jsind diseased, which. al\»4j« Moompanies and f^ggnwataa piiyiionl


4»


dt8Prder9« We liave a direct proof of the oontinuation of the mmd
through the body, in 'the way in which suggestions, directed to the
mind, respecting the organs, operate upon the hitter. In the hjpnot io
state, the operalor can play upon the emotions by a variety of suggestive
means, andin thi^ ^ay give power to impotent parts, and hand ^hem.
over to the ^l* Mr. Braid's devices for these ends stamp him as a
man of inventive genii^s ; and we are surprised that such a piece of
combined intellectual and scientific sagacity as hypnotism has not placed
him, long ago^ in the first rank of metropolitan physicians. The virtue
^ l^ypnc^tism, where it succeeds, U just this, that for t^e paoment it
unweeds the human soil so completely, that whatever faitlji ;s impressed
can work and grow. We regard hypnotism as the most intellectual
phenomenon whidi has yet been produced by the phrenopatkUts " —
Pages 476-80.

Without at all wishing to arrogate to myself that I
desen-e the amount of approbation and praise Mr. WiUpnsun
has here accorded to me, still, I have quoted these
remarks with those of others, as a set off against the
observations respecting the prospects of hypnotism which
Mr. Colquhoun had presented to my consideration, in
the passages of his " Pre/bcc," pages 36-7, above referred
to.* Regarding Mr. Wilkinson, however, I may observe that
he possesses a mind of the very highest order^ and was, there-
fore, peculiarly fitted for dealing successfully with the psij-
chohgical part of the question. Another circumstance which

* I cannot deny myself the pleasure, ^nd Mr. Colquhoun the justice,
pi publicly acknowledging thivt gentleman's great Hherality and kind-
ness to me 01^ all former occasions, and qf thanking him for the
xjespectful terms in which he alluded to my labpurs in wjuit he terms
^*the magnetic mine,'* both in t:is works fmd his private correspon-
dence — which latter has been most interesting to me. I have also
^o thank him for presentation Qopies of al) his valuable and highly
interesting wprks^ including his lately publisl^ed ** History of iMagio,
Witchcraft, and Ai^mal Magneti^ip," i^hich w;is heralded by ft very
kind letter from the ^u^thor, received some time before the furival
of the book, in whiph he ^ltimat^ ^.9 -9? ihat^ ixiV^ 'ST«&»Afe)'V>!b\N^

£ 2


52


gives so much greater value to his opinions, is his practical
experience of hypnotism in his own person as well an in others.
Mr. W. not only carefuUy watclied many cases when operated
upon by me, and has continued ever since to practise the art
when suitable, but he also submitted himself to me several
times to be hypnotised; and, as he is one of those who
remember when awake all which occurs during the condition,
he was enabled to describe, with the greater accuracy, not
only what he sato but also what he/elt.

Mr. Wilkinson is the gentleman to whom reference is made
in the following remarks by Dr. Carpenter, the eminent phy-
siologist (Examiner in Physiology and Professor of Medical
Jurisprudence, in University College, London), in his article
on sleep, in the **' Encyclopeedia of Anatomy and Physiulogy.*'
After describing my experiments and confirming my views
on various points. Dr. Carpenter adds : **' It is one of the
most curious and important of Mr. Braid's du^coveries,
that the suggestions conveyed through the muscukr sense
are among the most potent of any in determining the current
of thought. Not only ha^'e we witnessed all these effects
repeatedly produced upon numerous ' hypnotised ' subjects,
but we have been assured by an intelligent friend, who has
paid special attention to the psychological part of this inquiry,

made some strictures on my " Observations," which he hoped I would
take ffood-naturedfy. There are few men to whom I should be dis-
posed, ffood-naturedly^ to submit so much as to Mr. CoIquhouTi, for
reasons akeady stated at page 8 ; still, the nature of the charge in
which I was implicated — unintentionally or inadvertently, probably,
on his part — ^was of such a grave character, that justice f o in)rseir, to
my fim^y, and friends, compelled me to endeavour to rerufe it as
publicly as it had been diffused by ifs publication in the work of a
gentleman of the high position, and great talents and attainments, of
^e ingadon» and learned anthor of *' Isis Revelata."


53


that having subjected himself to Mr. Braid^s manipulations,
and being only partially thrown into the 'hypnotic' state, he
distinctly remembers everything that was done, and can
retrace the uncontrollable effect upon his state of mind, which
was produced by this management of his muscular apparatus."
Dr. Carpenter gives his testimony still further in favour of
hypnotism thus : — " We consider that the experimental re-
searches of Mr. Braid throw more light than has been derived
from any other source upon the phenomena of Mesmerism.

" That there is much of reality mixed up with much impos-
ture in these phenomena is a conclusion to which most candid
persons have arrived who have given their attention to them ;
and we have little doubt that a searching investigation, carried
on under the guidance of his results, would lead to something
like a correct discrimination between the two."

With such testimony in support of my views, I feel no
great anxiety for the fate of Hypnotism^ provided it only has
" a fair field and no favour." I am content to bide my time,
in the firm conviction that truth, 'for which alone I most
earnestly strive, with the discovery of the safest, and surest,
and speediest modes of relieving human suffering, will ulti-
mately triumph over error.

I feel pretty confident that whoever will imdertake the
investigation of hypnotic phenomena with a candid mind,
and untrammelled by any previous prejudices in favour of the
mystical and transcendei^tal, may very soon satisfy himself
that the real origin and essence of the hypnotic condition, is
the induction of a habit, of abstraction or mental concentra-
tion, in which, as in reverie or spontaneous abstraction, the
powers of the mind are so much engrossed with a single
idea or train of thought, as, for the nonce, to render the indi-
vidual unconscious of, or indifferently conscious to, aU other


5i

idea^, itopressioris, 'or tmtti bf di6n^t. Hiie h'^pnotic tlhep-i
tJierefote, is tite very iditithe^ii or opposite mental atfft
physical 'comditioii to tSbat wfefch precede* and accompanied
cofnmon^ep; fdr th6 latftcfi* aris^ from a diffdsive ^tate t>f
mittd, or comp!et6 loss o# J>owet trf fixing: the ailtemion, witii
^spension'of yoluntery po^^"r.

" The attention alone slumhera ;: or; through some slight' orgahio
change, it is unlinked froin the o^r faculties, and the j are put out olT
gear. '1!fai6 in the basis of «9eep. Uto ikctilties aii9 ^11 ih their '^^aaea %
but the attention ib off ^b)r<^tBeif iasleep^' or inddently keeipaig Watch
otf time alone." — Dr, Me^yo.

Hie following temarks^ iirom' the pen of Mr. J. J. O.
WiUdnSott, ai*e inlerestingj as wett te el6gandy and luoidlf
cttLpresK^ :-^

" The atom of sle^ is diffusion ; il%ie tbindimd bodj aifv disseHyed in
lAidonsoiousn^s ; ilheyge off into nothing, thnough th^-ffne pavrdar of
infinite yariety, aind die of no 'attentiim ; common sleeps-is impersonaL
The unit of hypnotism is intense attention, abstraetion — the personal
tgo pushed to nonentity. The unit of mesmerism is the common state
of the pHtient, caught a^ he stimdBi, ttnd subjected to thfe radiant idea»
of another person ; it' is 'mMiKte— ^n* both personal and impdrsona^
Patientb can prodaee the hypnotux -state upon themselves, ^itliout •»
second party ; although a second wiU often strengthen the result by
his acts Off presence, Just as one who stood hy and told you that joui*
Wdf« to liticccfed in 'a ceii»iii tr(i)pk wbakl/nerve your arm. •with frCsh<
oonfidencbi**

Hife stotfe tif mentat ctthdfefatratfon, liotr^ef, wMch i&.
tlie "badis ^ the %/7fio^iVileep, ennobles the subject to exhil^
taribiii^ 'pa^ive <^ active l&anlfbsta't2dnd« such 'as iitsensr-
bitfty 6t dialled sensibility?, Yi^dity bf agilfty, and eiftii^
pi-o'st^tion Or inordlmitfefeliergy of jSiydical power, accordittg:
to the trains of idea»tthd itibtiVe^ ^hidh Xa^i^ arilse Spontan-
eously iik ^is tnih&, or be adili*etoed to It by others, thvou^^
iinpt^onto onlii^ {ihysidl otgmiB.


SB


^Tlie^iidiinittarj state (of1ij|moliMri) If that of abstract ion, and thia
tbaliNiction is the logical premioe o^T^i^wl IbUows. Ab»traetion fiends ito
become more and more abatract, nurrowejr and narrower ; it tends t^
unity, and afterwards to nullity. Tberq, then, the patient is, at the
summit of attention, with no object left,— a mere atatue of attention,— a
tisteuing, espectant life,^a perfectly undistracted faouUv, dreaming of a
Itsaemi^ and lessening mat heraiatieikl point, t^cmd of i\i« mind sharps,
•ned away to nothing. What happens ? Any sensation that appeals is metk
by this brilliant attention, and receives its diamond glare, being petceived
with a force of leisure of which our distracted life ntfords only the
nidifli0Bts. Estemai inffuences are sensaled, sympftthi/ed with, to aa
estmordinary degr^ ^ harmenious musie sways the b*H\\' into graces thf
most affecting; discords ja,r it as though they would tear it limb froo^
Hmb^ cold and heat are perceived with equal exalt ation, so nl'^o smelU
and touches. In short, the whole man appears to he given to eueli
pereepition ; the bod? trembles like do«rai with t)ie wafts of the atmo-
i|>he]«B.; the world plays «j»on it a» upon a cqpirilual instrument finel|(f
attuned.**^ — Wilkinsen,

The above ie a benutifiil deficiiption, pnintod in elegant
and most Micitous language, of tke phenoint*na nuuiifested
by a certwn chss of patients^ and at a eeriatn staye of iis
A^; but, at aaotber stage, the verj opposite state manifests
itBetf;: lor t^e absferaetwa may be ao intense us to render tbe
palaent uneoneciious even of inAietions the most severe ; and
Hus tauficbis may be lodced in iiumovable, cataleptic rigidity,
«r diflflohied in tke most entire passive fliieeidity, aceoiding
to predconiuant ideas or impressions on the senses, wliidi
iannediati^ preceded the full intensity of the ull<absorbing
^Mtraetion.

As is the ease in reverie or abstraction, so also is it in the
hypnotie «tate-^here are different daffi^eHS of mentad concen-*
tDSiion ; so that, fnom same of them, the patient may be
aroused by the slightest impression— ^w4ulst, in othcT stages,
he ean ^uily be iiafluenced hy very powerful impressions on
the Qi^;au8 of sense. Moreover, in the hypnotic condition,


56


80 in the state of reverie or ab^traetion, tlie subject may be so
partially engrossed in his train of thought as to be susceptible
of receiving sii^;estion8 from others — through words spoken
or movements made in his presence — which shall involun-
tarily or unconsciously change his current of thought and
action, without entirely dissipating his condition oi mental
abstraction.

My usmil mode of inducing the sleep is to hold any small
bright object about ten or twelve inches above the middle of
the forehead, so as to require a slight exertion of the attention
to enable the patient to mafntiiin a steady, fined g^azc on the
object ; the subject being either comfortably seated or standing,
stillness being enjoined, and the ]iatient requested to engage
his attention, as much as possible, on the simple act of
looking at the object, and yield to the tendency t(» sU*ep which
will steal over him during this ap|)arent}y simple pi*ocess.
I generally use my lancet case, held iK^tweeu the thumb
and first two fingers of the left hsmd; but any other
small bright object will answer the puq)i>se. In the course of
about three or four minutes, if the eyelids do not close of
themselves, the first two fingers of the right hand, extended
and a little se[)tirated, may be quickly, or with a tremulous
motion, cjunied towards the eyes, so as to cau-^e the patient
involuntarily to close the eyelids, which, U' he is highly sus-
ceptible, will either remain rigidly elosi^d, or assume a vibra-
tory motion — the eyes being turned up. with, in the latter
case, a little of the white of the eye visible through the par-
tially closed lids. If the j)iitient is not highly susceptible, he
will open his eyes, in which ease rc*quest liim tt) gaze at the
object, &c., as at first ; and, if they do not ivmuin closed after
a second trial, desire him to allow them to remain shut after
you have closed them, and then endeavour to fix his utlentioa


67


on muscular effort, by elevating the arms if standing, or both

arms and legs if seated, which must be done quietly, as if

you wished to suggest the idea of muscular action without

breaking the abstraction, or eonoentrative state of mind, the

induction of which is the real origin and essence of all which

follows.*

There is great difference in the susceptibility to the

hy])uotie impression, some becoming rapidly and intensely

affected, others slowly and feebly so. Moreover, those who

are natinally highly susceptible, at length beconre so much

so ns to he liable to be affectt»d entirely through the i)ower

of imagination, belief, and habit, «. «., the expectant idea

will produce it in such subjects when no process whatever,

either near Or distant, is gt)ing forward; whereas, if they are

made to believe the contrarj-, through the requisite attention

and expectjition' being otherwise engaged, they may not

I

* J^y.lirst experiments were devised for the purpose of proving the
falldey 1 1 the, m^^gnetic theory, — of the phenomena of the sleep depend-
ing iip'jn the transmission from the operator to the patient of some
peciiiiar inHuenee during his processes of thumbing and staring, pointing
with' lis fntgers at the eyes of the patient, or making passes near to liis
person. By causing patients, to produce the sleep on themsehes, by
maoita^ning a :^tea()y, Bxed ga^e at any inanimate objogt, it apj^eared to
me that this was clearly demonstrated ; for not only were single indivi-
duals tluis tlirown into the sleep, at first trials, but, on one occnsion,
before eight hundred people, out of fouvteen male adults, ten were bo
afiec-te(^ — all commencing at the same time to fix their thoughts and
sight, some upon co/ks, bound sjo.as to project from their own ibi^eheads,
others by looking at fixed points in the room. Within ten minutes,
the eyelids oi' ten of tiiese subjects becaine involuntarily closed ; some
remained conscious, some were cataleptic, others insetisibie to pain from
the urick o( a pin, and some forgot all which had occurred during their
sleep, xi-.ree more of the audience sent themselves to sleep, unknown
to me, bv the same proce;is of £xed gazing at points in the room. — Vids
pages 10 aud 45.


88


become aff^otecT hj. piocesses irhicln (iroald naturally l^iroir
ifacm into tkie sleep.

Whartercr mode is adopfeedfor prodiicing sleep at ifirst (trials^
wJiether mf URual mode just described, wliidi is the moat
i^eedy and mott generaUy sneoessfcd method, or tbat of cau»^
ing the patients to look steadily and attentively at fixed points,
or the ordinary^ mesmerising processes may have been resorted
to, there esm be no doubt of die fnot that they will be rendered
HMiohmore effieient by prerioosly a£&>pdtng the patients an
opportunity of wateluag others w^hen submitted to the pnv
eesses. The iofiuenoe of f^mpathy and imitation are thui
brought into piay, and increase tihe susceptibility in a marked
degree. Of iMs ikot I^ have had many striking proc^
Where patients- exhibit considerable resistance, therefore, it
is always deHirabie ta bring the power of Bympathy and imita-
iioik to hear upon them, as well as the influence of direct
auricular suggestion and expectation, excited by the confident
tone and deportment in the operator, so as to inspire them^.
as far as possible, withthe conviction that the influence can-
not be resisted^

I am. satisfied that aU: the mesmeriaang -piooesses produce
flieir effects from Miiat is essentially the same exciting cause
as that which indaces hypnotic phenomens^ vk., by producing
aifitateof mental iooacentration, through the ajfetentaon becoming
se engrossed -by waftching the nuHKBuvres or suggestions of
flie operator, as, for the nonce^ to render the subject dead
or iudifE^rent teall other ficubible im^^i^essions or trains of
thoagbt.*

^ The ordinary jQ^giMtisiogipvoQeEises mn fory numerDus. Thoae m<Ml
CMomoaljr.reflortodftOiSBe— daying hM of Ihu patiunt'B band after ha
Imh bt»ea comibrttihly Mated in>Aii ;e»Myi£haiE,fi7>Qf iha tmo hand«, or
the thumbs^ the operator and patient maintaining «. ttead^r^ ^xfid


in tilts tondttioh the whole aftti^wtion of tfie Mlbfc^st »
given to ^terjr existing or wa^ig^cd H^sl*; and tbu« it woite^
wonrlers itt^ changing or mbd^i«g:^e ^xistifug ocsvdition et
Are physical frame. Moneorer, ^uggeiBtt^itii «iay be gtviettt:

ehhet throt^h words 'Spoken- or senbibib* rmproraions made oH^

f ' • • ■■.■■■■■■ ...

gM6 into t\ii% eijea of ieaoh, other intil.th«i|yes of the paticut become
dim, the eight confosed, and the eyelids drooping. When this i^eriod
arrives the two flrciVingers olthe right liand, extended and hi Id a liffld
apatt, tire daifhid toUnrrdB tlie eyes ; tnid, nvlieU th^ hate closed, th^
operator ooaimenae»^iiiakhig.{paa0as — that m, he draws one or both handi
slowly, and with a tremulous motiot^ orerithe head, face, chesty or upper
extremities, or evenv.over the legs also. They may be near to, but not
touching the lx)dy ; or they may 'be gently pres^d on the body ; in whidl
latter case tdiey areoalied contadt passes. Or the patftent and operator
may siinply stare into teach 'otheln*'^«s unltl the tendeiu^ to cloee fhs
^•es sii{>er?iMies^ op ha ^ra^y desire the patient to 1oo]l steadily at the
operator's fingers, pointed at his ^es ; or he may aimply make passes
with the fingers drawn slowly tvom the head 'down t>efore the face, or
behind iiis-back:; .or tins ma^ he done whO^the left hand is held ok
the natieotls ifaead« tHiefmtioHt ia ffio %e« conseaitng party, or, as muoh
at possible, ^^o-remain {}a8aiYei,'which greatly aids the result — the operator
concentrating his energies and will, apparently with great determination
to pvoduee the effects. So soon as sleep manifests itself^ the passes ate
Msofted to; -uhA vfhten lAie passes sie mede, wliil!* ths pettentt remains
SWflfke,.they are still considered, -by ilke Biagii^ffsts, ^ -be hlflueDtial^
en .the patient by the trMsttHSsi0ii^te4)im,.from Ihehody of the operas
torof ^e e^tfberant life, nenN:>tia er o^yiie iiiAuenoe,«o as to modify awl
sttStSiA.^ deficient vitality or lBM>rtHd«onielltKm of tibe patient, lify
itie^df eipkming'tlie inSueBoe.of passes i» set forth <at |»ges 10 andv.
61<^; ^ which Llieg te rejfer my«i«adeFS. Sy calling muscles into plsj:
byv'l^levStiBg the 3ksba,.'or itouehmg, or tiekling, or making sensible am*
p-.es'ions u; on the integuments over them, bypasses or otherwise, thef^
besome ri^fAior 'eatile^ic-^'ihen tfhe -Oiroulation ^heeoaies jqwidiened in^:
••"Tatio eorrespotiding to !f)ie dsss ^and number of muscles so affiM!fted|.
cud the intemslty of the 'rigidity or4he oStaleptic eonditisfncan gentnral^.
bo more readily produced, at first trials, when the hypnotising tnethodS.
web adOfkikly'thatLMrhsnllhey^re aetedon in' the lass aetive 8tMevor meiftaL
cliliecriiftratte8i;#bisk^[<esult8 fitom the ordinary mssaierisnig (pvooesaes^


60


any of the organs of special sense — for the mind is naturally
drawn to the part signified or impressed, and thus ideas are
excited connected with, or corresponding to, the function of
that organ or part ; and the appeal heing made to the mind
at the very summit of its abstraction, every sensjition is
met by the ** diamond glare" of this " brilliant attention," and
consequently is ** perceived with a force of leisure of which
our distracted life aifords only the rudiments. Kxteriial in-
fluences are sensated, sympathized with to an extniordinary
degree." In this stiige of the sleep the power of suggestion
on the patient is excessive. Wliatever idea is sujjgested to
his mind, whether by the natural import of the words spoken,
or modified by the tone of voice in which they are uttered,
is instiintly seized upon by the subject, and interpreted in a
manner to surprise many, and lead them to believe it has
been accomplished by a sort of intuition or inspiraticm. In
tiiis way you may vary or modify the ideas suggested in the
most remarkable manner, and the patient sees, and feels, and
speaks of all as real, without the slightest desire to impose
upon others. Thus, if you say, —

^ * What animal id it ?* the patient will lell you it is a lamb, or a rabbit,
or any other anifiial or thing. Does ho w^ it? *¥*».' 'What animal
is it nomV — putting depth and gloom into the tone now^ and thereby
suggesting a difference. *0h!* with a shudder, 'it is a wolf.* * What
colour is it?' — still glooming the phrase. 'Black.* ' What colour is it
nowV — giving the now a cheerful air. 'Oh! a beautiful blue,' spoken
with the utmost delight. And so you lead the subject through any
dreams you please, by variation of questions and of inflectious of voice,
and he sees and feels all as real.

"Another curious study is the . influence of tlie patient's postures on
his mind iu this state. Whatever posture of any passion is induced, the
passion comes into it at opiuct, us weU as iikto .t-he mind, and dramatises
the whole body.

" Moreover, t be patient's mind, directed to lii^ own body^ does phy-
sical marvels : he can do, in a nuuiuer, what lie thinks he can. Place a


61


handlcerchief on a table, and beg him to try to lift it— obsetTing, how-
CTer, that you know it to be impossible — and he will groan and sweat
over the cambric as though it were the anchor of a man-of-war. On
the other hand, tell him that a fifty*six-pound weight is a light cork,
to be held out at arm*s length On his little finger, and he will hold it out
with ease. Tell him that a tumour on his body is about to disappear,
and his mind will often realize your prophecy.

"A patient in the full state obeys all motives in the most natural
direction. If the arm is placed up, there it will stay; but a waft of
air w^ill can.^e it to fall down. Why ? Because it is already up, and the
new motive changes the direction. If the arm be down, another waft
or touch will raise it. If down, and prevented from moving up, the
impression will send it sideways. When the frame is erect, a touch
behind the bend of the knees will send it into genuflexion, which will at
once suggest prayer, as noticed before, &c."

The last four paragraphs are all but verbatim quotations
from Mr. J. J. G. Wilkinson's interesting book, " The Human
Body," as descriptive of what he saw manifested in some of
my hypnotized patients, as illustrations of what I had told
him could be exhibited according to the theoretical views
which I had propounded to him.

From all this it may readily be perceived that the efficacy
or influence of mesmeric passes and touches, — of the tractim
tantjere of the Romans,-^oe8 not arise from any special in-
fluence or virtue passing from one human being to another ;
but that they act merely as sensible impressions, assisting the
patient in concentrating or drawing the mental attention vividly
to parts, and thus increasing their action beyond the natural
activity of their functions, or diflusing or withdrawing ilfrom
certain parts, and thus diminishing the natural activity of
function of such organs or parts from wliich the attention has
been withdrawn. Curiously enough, however, these results,
which should natui-ally be calculated on to arise according, as
I have here stated, may each and all of them be modified or
subverted by a spontaneous or %\x^^\i&^ p» tdA>wi«vatv\. >A.w^ \


80 thai the Tesnlt shall be in nocordanoe tliicrewith, rather
than with what otherwise would be the mtural or spon^
taneous result. The instinctive fueling which every one
has to rub any part which has sustained a blow or otheir
injury, and l^ which the pain is moderafed, does not pr(>-
duce its soothing or salutary influence from any Kpecnll
virtue imparted to the injured parts from the hand, either of
the patient or other pai'ty who inibs it, but from milking a
sensible impression on an exiettfied surface, and thus diffuninf
or loithdrmving the attention from the injured petnt. Such is
my mode of explaining the efficacy of the tractim tam/ere, or
gentle rubbing, or touching with the human hand.

To quote from a. former publication of my own on this
subject: —

" That there is nothing occult or speeifio in the pass with the hand, is
manifest from this, that a similar agitation of the air hj the blast from
a pair of bellows will produce precisely simitar results as the like cur-
rent of air from the wafting of the human hand, as I haff e proved to the
satisfaction of hundreds of intelligpnt iadividuals.

** A pass, therefore, as a risible or sensible impression, aids the patient
in concentrating his mental attention to a given organ or part, and thus
influences the function, through giving a special direction to a power
residing within the patient's own frame ; bat it do more imparts a virtue
of an occult nature from the operator to the patient, tha« the lens |Mr^-
4uces the light and heat which it malted visible and perceptible to the
senses, through concentrating the luminous and calorific rays <^f the sun,
and drawing them to a focus. Both the pass and the lens aid in coa-
oentrating and manifesting the respeotive iuflaenees; hot neither the
operator nor the lens is the sourpts eat or^g^ of t^e fower pr iiffipem^
90 mofUfiested.^*

It is quite possible, however, to subvert the whole of the^e
mUural suggestions, by a system Qf tmining— such m \xj
speaking aloud in the hearing of the patieots» a^d in a
laEnguage known to them, the ide^ you wish to make pr^-
dmminant in their miud^^ by jsMggc^stiom ^s^pcinU^ with


6S


certain sensibte impresstons* Hie Bssociationt once formed
will always thereafter come r.p and be ixredominant, whenevet
the like sensible impressions are inftde. Wkale^-er faith ib
imprinted, at the proper filage of the sleep, will work and
gi*ow, either for good or for evil to the sul:feet, and will be
recalled to mind, in the most susceptible, as mere acts of
memory (according to the law of doable consciousness), whem
in thai stage of the skep subsequently. And in this way, also,
some patients having predicted that certain effects will be
manifested in their personsy at a certain time specified, the
predominant idea wiU often realize the prophecy.

If tranquillizing is the object in view, let the patient
remain in a recumbent and easy posture, with all the muscles
relaxed to the utmost, and let the mind be sustained by enco»-
rnging expressions, and such a» shall withdraw attention ^om
the pnrt most requiring to be tranquillized. If stimulation lis
required, then the limbs must be extended, and they wiU
speedily pass into a rigid state, during which the circulation
and respiration become much quickened, and by directing tlue
patient's attention and expectation to any organ of sense, its
function will naturally be quickened ; and so of the function
of any other organ or part of the body. Still, even in the
state of excitement of the circuktioa and respiration, a sug^
gested idea may be made so completely to engross the {mtient^s
attention, as to subvert results which ought to have followed,
and would have followed, but for this all-absorbing suggested
idea.

The first point to be determined^ therefore, in this hyp-
notic mode of treating suitable caees, is the same aa is
required in any other mode of treatment— \'iz., to endeavour,
by c^ireful exannnation,, to ascertain what is the retd natuine
ft&d cause of thie existing sjfmptoms, and y.'h&\.\v^ ^S^r*^


64


require sttmulatin^ cr depressing inea5mres to be adopted,
locally or generally ; and to what extent, in either direction,
the excitement or depression ought to be carried. It is also
requisite^ in order to determine this, to make out whether the
disease is of an acute or chronic character ; for, in such cases,
not only have we similar symptoms arising from different
causes, but they can only be successfally treated by the very
opposite modes of acting. It must, therefore, be obvious, to
any sensible person, that the superintendence and direction of
medical men are as requisite for conducting the hypnotic
mode of treating disease, with anything like precision and
general success, and adapting it in the best manner to each
individual case, as for treating them by ordinary medical
means. Not but that those ignorant of medical sciehce could
be made to stimulate or depress locally or generally, accord-
ing to the methods which I have de>*i8ed for that purpose,
when they had been instructed hoiv and to what extent they
were to conduct the processes in each individual case^ under
the superintendence and direction of some skilful medical man,
who understands the hypnotic system, the pathology of the
disease, and the therapeutic indications to be fulfilled. Until
a number of assistants have been provided, who could be
employed by medical men to act under them in this manner,
I have no hope of the hypnotic mode of treatment having a
foir trial ; because it takes up too much time for medical men
in general to adopt it, even in suitable cases, when they must
operate personally ; and, for those ignorant of medical science
to do so, without professional su])eriiitendence, is a mere hap-
hazard mode of procedure, which never can be expected to
become so successful as it might be, when conducted on
Boientific principles. This is one of the very reasons why I
h»ye ventured to say that when skilfully conducted, hypnotism


65


18 capable of producing all the good to be effected by the
ordinary mesnxerismy processes^ and much mrtre ; and the
other is that they have so much reliance upon the efficacy
of their alleged magnetic or odylic influence, that they over-
look the important effects, and the certainty of their pro-
duction, which are attainable by regulating the state of
the circulation in the various mcides which I have methodised,
through the influence of the muscuhir system and manage-
ment of the minds of the patients, effected by sensible impres-
sions and auricular suggestions.

These various modes of suggestion are most successful when
riesorted to with patients who pass into the full or double
conscious stage of the sleep; but they influence all, to a
greater or lesser extent, who submit themselves honestly and
fairly to the processes for inducing a state of mental concen-
tration, whether they remain with their eyes wide open, Ci
have their eyes involuntarily closed, but retain their conscious-
ness, and remember, on awaking, all that was said or done ;
or pass into the double conscious stage of the sleep. By the
latter terrti, 1 should observe, is meant, a condition in which
they forget, on awaking, all which was done or said during the
sleep, but which they will have a perfect recollection of
when they pass into the sleep again. I have had striking
iiistanees of this in most respectable and intelligent patients,
ykho have a minute recollection of what took place during thiB
sleep six years ago, and have remembered and described the
same fkcts many times since, when hypnotized, but who have
never had the slightest recollection of the subject, when
awake, duritijg these six years.

The most curious and important fact of all, however, is
this, — that by engendering a state of mental concentratrdii,
by a simple act of sustained attention^ ftxftd \Sl'^xi\l^tfi\s^^^JK^€^^


66


citing and empty thing, — " for poverty of object engenders
abstraction," — the faculties of the minds of some piitients are
thereby thrown out of gear, («.e., their ordinary relations are
changed,) so that the higher faculties — ^reason, comparison,
and will, become dethroned from their supremacy, and give
place and power to imagination, (which now careers in un-
bridled liberty,) easy credulity, and docility or passive
obedience ; so that, even whilst apparently wide awake, and
conscious of all around, they become susceptible of being in-
fluenced and controlled entirely by the suggestions of others,
upon whom their attention is fixed. In fact, such subjects
are in a sub-hypnotic condition, — ^in that intermediate state
between sleeping and waking, when the mind becomes waver-
ing, the attention off duty, or engrossed with a predominant
idea, so that, in reality, the subjects are only half conscious of
what is passing around ; and their minds, therefore, become
easily imposed upon by any suggestion, audibly expressed or
vjisibly exhibited before them. Thus they may be made to
perceive, and mistake for realities, whatever mental illusions
or ideas are suggested to them. In common parlance they see
and /eel as real, and they consider themselves irt'esistihly or
involuntarily Jixedy or spell-hound, or impelled to perform what^
ever may he said or signified hy the other party upon tvhom their
attention has hecome involuntarily and vividly ri4Jetted until a
new idea has been suggested, by which the spell is broken, and
the subject is left in a condition again to be subjugated and
controlled by other suggestions of his temporary fasciijator.
This is just similar to what we see occurs to any one sponta-
neously engaged in deep abstraction, who is instantaneously
aroused to consciousness of all ai'ound by a tap on the
shoulder, or by a word sharply addressed to him.
It requires considerable tact to manage this, adroitly and sue.


67


cessfully, with ^ome patients ; for the will and belief of certain
subjects can only be successfully subjugated and controlled by
an earnest and energetic, and confident and authoritative man-
ner, on the port of the operator ; such as by his insisting that
such and such must be the case, according to his audible
suggestions, or visible manoeuvres for influencing the subjects
through the power of sympathy and imitation. I have had
ample evidence to convince me of the fact, that, in cases where
these waking illusions and delusions could not be excited by
giving the suggestions in an apparently doubting tone of
voice, or with a hesitating manner, they became quite
efficient for the purpose, the instant I assumed a commanding
and confident tone of voice and deportment. By these means
the Reason and Will become temporarily paralysed ; they lose
their freedom of action, through the mind being so much
engrossed by the suggested thought, as to allow every idea
which has been vividly and energetically addressed to such
individual, to assume all the force of present reality, — just as
we know occurs, spontaneously, in cases of monomania and
delirium Iremefis*

Such are the effects realized in this sub-hypnotic or partial
state of the nervous sleep ; but with all who pass into the full
or second-conscious stage, the power of suggestion is still more
prompt and almost unlimited. Curiously enough, however,
(and, as it appears so ordained by a special providence,) any
suggestion involving a grave assault upon a moral principle,
in persons with well constituted minds, will instantly arouse
consciousness and self-control, and induce and enable the
subject to protect himself against the real or imaginary moral
assault or suggestion.

Nor, after all, is this power of suggestion, or persuasion, or
concealed fascination, so remarkable or unaccoumtbl^ ^>& ^

Y 1


69


first sigbt it appears Uy be. The secret of success witb aJt
sophistical writers and oratory i* of a similar nature. They
make repeated appeals to the feelings, as well as to the reason,
untn the minds of their readers or hearers get bewildered
and withdrawn from the true bearings of the main points of the-
case ; and the assumed, and apparent sinceritj and energy, of
the writer, and still more so of the orator, who, to his other aidd
of words and arguments, adds that of his physical manifes-
taticms, to captivate and cany his entranced hearers^ along
with him, through the power of sympathy and imitation^
and fixed attention, at last irresistibly moulds them to his will.
In support of this I might appeal ta the personal feelings
and experience of most people who have watched the efiect
Upon a jury of a powei*ful and eloquent special pleader;
or observed the e£^ct of an accomplished actor or actress
on the stage, over an audience excited and entranced by
the felicitous impersonation of fictitious dangers and diffi-
culties, pains and perils, joy or sorrow, fear or courage, com*
passion, hatred, or revenge. The historical fact, however,
recorded of the powerful efiect of eloquence upon the whole
House of Commons, by the brilliant speech of Sheridan, in
the trial of Warren Hastings, is more than sufficient for ikiy
purpose ; for it is recorded that, in that instance, it was deemed
requisite to suspend the sitting of the house, and postpone it
till another day, as it was felt that no one could be expected
sooner to have the power of emancipating himself from t&e
spell thrown over the senators by such a fiood of eloquence,
and prepare himself for exercising sober judgment, in voting
upon that important case.

All who have duly considered the workings of the hlimaiv
mind must have observed that, for forming a correct judgment
upon any important matter, it is requisite that an individuid


«9


should be able so to control his attention, that it can be
constrainedly fixed on any one point, and from that directed to
any other, and every point in succession, bearing upon the
issue «f the inquiry, as he may consider requisite for forming
a correct appreciation of the bearings of the whole. The
intense abstraction of hypnotism, therefore, whidi, at one
«tagc, rivets the attention to a single idea or train of thought,
without the power of voluntarily directing it to the various
points in succession, is obviously as inimical to correct rea-
soning and the exercise of sound judgment, as the discursive
«tate of mind, which renders it impossible for the person to
fix his attention sufficiently on any given point of the subject,
but permits it to roam, hurriedly and vaguely, or inattentively
from one idea to another.

When in that stage of the sleep, however, which gives a more
healthy tone to the power of fixing attention than obtains in the
waking condition, or in that which gives a degree of bril-
liancy to the imagination, and more rapid flow of ideas, with
a revivification of memory, which thereby recals thoughts and
actions long forgotten — all these circumstances, combined with
^e self-confidence in their own powers, which such patients
generally possess, may prove mighty aids in enabling them intel-
lectually to trace out the relation of things and circumstances
with so much greater facility and fdicity than in the waking
condition, as to lead many to imagine such feats are achieved
through intuition or direct inspiration. So is it as regards
their powers of writing con-ectly without the use of their
eyes, entirely through the quickened muscular sense, and
their attention firmly fixed on the one subject in hand. So
also the power of phonic imitation, by which one of my sub-
jects, who, when awake, was even ignorant of the grammar
' of her own language, and had very little kuowleid!^ ^^^s^s^ss^..


70


but naturally possessed of a good voice, was enabled,
wben in tbe hypnotic sleep, to imitate Jenny Lind so accu-
rately, in songs sung by that lady in different languages^ never
before heard by the somnambulist, that she caught the sound
so promptly as enabled her to give both words and music so
correctly and simultaneously, that several parties present could
not discriminate whether there were only one or two voices,
so entirely did they accord, both in tune and vocal enuncia-
tion of the foreign languages. Thia patient has frequently
done so with equal success before others, and I have had
other patients who could do the same ; but not one of them
comprehended the meaning of the words which they uttered so
correctly in the foreign language. Su<;h i& my experience on
these points.

I am well aware that all subjects- are not susceptible of
being affected in this manner, either in the partial or coiir-
plete hypnotic state ; for some are speedily and intensely
affected— others slowly and feebly so. Moreover, compliance
with certain conditions is generally required at first trialsw
Enough, however, has been ascertained, incontestably to
prove, that there is a considerable number of individuals,
in every community, who may be thus completely subjugated
and controlled; whilst there are many more who may be
influenced in a slighter degree. I wish, however, particularly
to record, as my own present conviction, that these means
can only prove efficient for producing such results whea
the patients hear the ideas suggested when uttered in a
language known to them; or when they see them written;
(which i& sufficient to affect many,) or when they can see, by
ordinary vision, the movements made in their presence which
it is intended they should be forced ta imitate, through the
j>ower of sympathy and imitation ; or when they feel sensible


71


impressions, associated with certain ideas or previous feelings,
or which call subjacent muscles into action, or direct attention
to the special organs of sense, which excites ideas corresponding
with the functions of these different organs, or arouses former
ideas arbitrarily or accidentally associated with such and such
sensible impressions. Of the power of influencing patients at a
distance, however, through sileni willing, I have had no satis-
factory pi-oof in my own patients ; nor, from all which I
have seen, read, and heard on the subject, do I believe such a
power is possessed by others. I am familiar with so many
sources of fallacy, requiring to be guarded against in such
inquiries, from the power of imagination, habit, and the
expectant idea over certain susceptible 8ubj(»cts, that, without
the least desire to impugn the testimony either of patients or
operators who have alleged that such influences have been
manifested in their cases, T beg respectfully to say, that I
consider it far more probable that they have been deceived, in
some of the ways which I have pointed out, than that the
phenomena manifested were bond fide the pi-oduct of the
silent loill and gesticulations of the operators, on patients at
considerable distances from them.

The following is the resuinS of the result of my experience
on these points, which \i*as quoted with approbation in the
article in the '*^ British and Foreign Medico- Chirurgical Re-
view," page 412, from my Essay on " Electro- Biology ;" after
the remark, " Mr. Braid very justly observes f —

" I have never yet seen any phenomena during either the hypnotic or
mesmeric sleep, or during the state for manifesting vigilant phenomena,
which were not in accordance with generally admitted physiological and
psychological principles. The senses and mental powers may be torpi-
fied or quickened to an extraordinary degree ; but I liave never seen
anything to warrant a belief that individuals could thereby become
gifted with the power of reading through opaque bodies, * • * and


72


other transcendental phenomena, called by the mesmerists the htgLtr
phenomena. The power of a strongly fixed attention, vivid hnagination,
and self-confidence, however, enables them to perform some extraordi-
nary feats of phonic imitation, and writing and drawing by touch,
without the use of their eyes ; discovering parties who own certain
articles worn by them, through the quickened sense of smell; over-
hearing conversation in a distant apartment, which they could not do in
a waking condition ; of recalling to mind things long forgotten when
awake ; and also of deducing conclusions, manifesting uncommon
ehrewdtiess, from premises suggested to tliem, or arising in their minds
spontaneously from recollection of past events, to wliieh they have
directed theu* concentrated attention."

Having described the modes of inducing the full condition
of sleep and the sub or partial condition for manifesting the
waking phenomena, I must now state the modes of arousing
patients from these states. If I wish any predominant idea, or
physical change which has been induced, to be carried strongly
into the waking condition, I arouse the patient abruptly^ by a
clap of my hands near his ear, when at the full height of the
desired condition ; if tranquilliyjng is intended, then he had
better be aroused slowly and softly — ^such as by gently
wafting with the hand, or a fan, or open handkerchief, over
the face, or by placing the thumbs gently on the ey^
of the patient, or on his eyebrows, and carrying them
laterally a few times, so as to produce gentle frictipn, tjo
which may be added gentle fanning when required* If
the patient is in the sub or half-waking condition, a woi;d
spoken, or a visible movement of any sort made, so aa V>
break his abstraction, excited temporarily by previous sug-
gestion, will suffice.

The mesmerists divide passes into mesmerising and danes-
merising j)asses — those made longitudinally, from the head or
f^ce downwards, over the body and extremities, being called
v^smerisiny passes, those made qrossways, demesracrising


73


passes. The first are considered to induce certain effects ;
the others, to remove them when existing. I have reason to
believe that the patient may be aroused as readily by one
sort of pass as by another, unless when he has got a mental
impression, somehow excited, that there is a speciality in eapl^.
In that case the result will be according to the faith of the
individual.

One decided advantage in favour of hypnotism is this — that
T have never expei'ienced the slightest difficulty in arousing any
of my patients, even fron^ the most profound stage of the sleep
-which thoy may pass into ; nor do they experience any annoy-
ance from other persons than the operator approaching to, or
touching them, during the sleep — both of which inconvenience
frequently manifest themselves, in a marked degree, in the
ordinary ipesmeric state ; for some mesmerised subjects will
be thrown into the most violent agitation, with intense cata-
lepsy or convulsions, merely by another perspn touching them
— which is called cross-mpsmerism — or they may remain for
many hours, and sometimes even for dai/s. in the sleep, with-
out being able to be aroused. I consider this merely ari^e^
from a predominant idea or conceit in the mind of the patiei^j
and, the operator not knowing the key to the puzzle, pre^ntjS
the great diffici^ty of unlocking hina from the condition.

I was once called upon to arouse a mesmeric lecturer frojgi
'the sleep induced in h^m by a friend, wl^o became alarmed
when he comM not arouse him after l^e had been twenty-fpij^
hours in the condition. After some trouble, I Quco^eded la
arousing him, for twenty minutes, from his maniacal excit;e-
' ment ; but he spontaneously passed into it again, and remained
^, with only one or two §hort snatches of consciousness, foy
nearly two days more. No such distressing event ever oct-
vcurred to any of my hypnotized ^patients; they hav^ always
been capable of being aroused a\mo%\. \\i%\a»X>c^-


74


I am not ignorant that there are many men with great ahiE-
ties, distinguished alike for their high rank and superior attain-
ments in literature and general science, as for their moral
worth, who avow their belief in magnetic or mesmeric clair-
voyance. But, inasmuch as the feats alleged by them as
facts are of such an extraordinary nature, so much opposed
to the generally recognized laws of mind and physical organi-
zation, I consider it is the imperative duty of every man to
investigate such a subject with great care and caution, be-
fore accepting as facts, what, from the difficulty of the in-
quiry, and the numerous sources of error with which it is
surrounded, are very likely to be fallacies or illusions. Such
has been the case with myself; for, knomng as I do, so
many of th€ fallacies requiring to be guarded against, I
have soon been enabled to prove the alleged clairvoyant
powers of some of the most noted of the class, were mere
illusions, shrewd guesses, or ingenious frauds on the part of
the entranced subjects, contrived by them fram a passion for
notoriety, arirf^a' desire to excel and astonish others by their
apparently wonderful powers. Moreo^-er, some of them may
actually resort to these artifices, during the sleep, without any
recollection-, on their awaking, of such tricks having been
perpetrated by them during their entranced condition.
Amongst the marvels alleged by the > Hindoos, as resulting
from this condition-, was the power of walking on tfee water;
and Professor Gregory has recorded his belief that Mr. LeWls
could suspend a man in the air, through his magnetic powert,
merely by holding his hand above the patient^s head ; and
Dr. Ashburner has declared, in print, that the material force
emanating from bis brain, by the power of his w«7/, is such as
to enable him to compel the precious metal, gold, to ignore the
vulgar law of gravity, and actually advance towards him when.


75


in tbe form of a ring, it has been suspended by a thread from
a glass rod, securely attached across the top of two upright
glass rods fixed in a table. These experiments admit of easy
proof, if rightly set about ; and combining the two first would
be the most ch?ar mode of determining whether any man
could suspend another in the air, through the mere force of
magnetic attraction ; for there could be no doubt of the fact,
if he could so elevate and hold him suspended above a good
sized eight- feet- deep water-cistern.

The remarkable discrepancies in the mesmeric camp, how-
ever, and that even amongst some of the chief officers, on
points of vital importance as regjxrds the first principles of
their science, certainly do not inspire one with the notion of
their infallibility, Thus Baron Reichenbach Uiys it down as
one of the remarkable properties of odyle, that it is so subtile
as to pass through every form of matter, including y/ «», in
which particular it differs from eleitncity, Ta all this Pro-
fessor Gregory, the translator and sponsor of Reichenbach's
work, gives in his adherence ; whilst Dr. Ashburner, the other
translator (?) and expounder of the Baron's views, dechires that
be can, by the mere power of his silent wlll^ extrude odyle
from the points of his fingers, or send it direct, by the farce
of his will " into a wide-mouthed phial of a pint capacity,"
in which he can carry it into another room, and pour the
fluid or substance upon the body of a patient aud thereby pro-
duce its specific eflfects. It is certainly ludicrous to hear
this gentleman gravely telling us that he can mil this fluid
into a vessel, and carry it into another room, in what, accord-
ing to Reichenbach and Gregory, must have been a bottomless
vessel — a mere-sieve — since they declare that, unlike electricity,
it passes thrmigh glass and evenj other substame!

An unsuspected but fertilb source of fallacy is this^ that 'v^


76


all receive suggestions, both when asleep and when awake,
from impressions in the waking state so slight as never to
have aroused consciousness ; or from suggestions of othera,
or ideas arising spontaneously during sleep, which have long
lain dormant, bat become active when certain exciting causes
er correspondences come into play to arouse the silent chord te
harmony. This will frequently resemble prevision or intui-
tion. It is quite certain that suggestions may be given duiing
the hypnotic or mesmeric sleep, of which the subject ^luiH
have no remembrance on awaking ; but, through the inflnence
of which, nevertheless, when the time fixed on ft)r the mani*-
festation arrives, he will feel a sort of desire or instinctive
impulse to act according to previous suggestion. Nor is thi^
more wonderful than the fact that some individuals can go to
bed and sleep soundly, and awake at the exact moment which
they had determined upon the previous evening.

There may, no doubt, be some self-sufficient* dogmatic
sceptics who, glorying in their shame— for thcgr avowedly
speak and write auihoritiitively, without having practically
investigated the subject regarding which they set themselves
up as censors or judges — who will be ready to poQ, pooh, — all
this alleged power of producing either the mq;or or the minor
phenomena, especially the waking phenomena, unless upon
credulous, ignorant, and weak-minded men, and kysfericci
women, I take the liberty to tell such individuak that their
merely theoretical notions ore not worth a rusba when brought
to opj>ose the stern facts of cautious experimentalists. I have
myself hypnotised a noble lord, who, for intellectual attain-
ments and moral worth, is one of the most distinguished and
influential of the British Aristocracy; and I have both suo-
ceeded in producing the full or double-conscious conditiou,
and the sub or waking 8tate« for eliciting the vigilant or


rr


waking phenomena, itr some of the most intellectual and
strong-minded men and women in the kingdom; whereas,
I never yet could hypnotise an idiot ! The hoasted power
ef resisting such influence, therefore, may be of a very equi-
ffocal character, and the very opposite of what such indi-
viduals wish should- be inferred, fi'om their vain-glorying
about their non-susceptibility.

As a proof of the unmitigated folly, and ptesumptibn, and
thoughtless inhumanity of those self-conceited obstructors of
human progress in the relief and cure of their suffering fellow-
creatures, I shall adduce a single example, about which there
can be no reasonable ground of cavil, as the whole proceed-
ings to which I allude took place in a public hospital, where
there was free access to all honest inquirers ; and the opera-
tions and experiments were not performed upon paid servants,
or those known to the intrepid and excellent man who so
gallantly fought and so nobly triumphed over every obstacle
which prejudice, cabal, and combination had raised against
him and his humane efforts. The most important surgical opera-
tions were performed on utter strangers, and that even from dis-
tant provinces throughout a great part of British India. Dr.
Esdaile is the gentleman to w^hom I refer — a man who, by
his intrepid £tnd indomitable courage and success, in intro-
dticing painless Surgery into India, on a large scale, by
operating upon patients reduced to the State of mesmeric
unconsciousness, has raised for himself '* a monument more
enduring than brass." In a most interesting and friendly letter
which I received from Dr. Esdaile last October, he kindly
furnished me with a remmi 6f his niesmeric expetieftee in
India, with permission to make any use of it which I chose.
I therefore gladly avail myself of this privilege on the present
Qtecasion ; and as that gentleman's theoretica) notions, and


78


the extent of his confession of faith in the higher phenomena^
are more in favour of mesmerism than of hypnotism, (although
he ad Kits the influence of hypnotism too, but has not tried it
extensively,) the reader will thereby perceive that the prin-
ciple by which I am swayed in conducting scientific inquiries
is — " Nought conceal, nor set down aught in malice."

After acknowledging the receipt of some of my publications
on hypnotic phenomena, and thanking me for them. Dr.
Esdaile says : —

" I shall find much in the books to interest and instract me, as I did
in your first work on Hypnotism ; but I shall not wait to read them
before replying to your communication.

" I have not seen any of the papers you allude to in the journals ; but
am glad to hear that the doctors are, at last, condescending to turn their
attention to one of the most interesting and important subjects ever
submitted to the consideration of the physiologist, the metaphysician,
and natural philosopher. • * » Begarding the reality and cause of
the mesmeric phenomena, if I venture to differ from you even, who are
so much better prepared to investigate the subject [than certain indivi-
duals to whom the Doctor had referred], it is for reasons which I hope
you will consider worthy your attention. I am fully aware that there are
various modes of inducing the mesmeric symptoms, to a certain extent,
without the probability, or even possibility, of any vital force proceeding
from the operator being concerned in the matter. But I have never
(except for experiment) produced the mesmeric state of the system by
the exhaustion of any organ, such as the eye, [here the Doctor has over-
looked the important part which the mental act of fixed attention
plays in this matter, vide page 53—7,] or by acting strongly on th
imagination, or by any means that could favour self-mesmerization, as^'ou
will perceive from the following resume of my practice : —

"During the last six years I have performed upwards of 300 capital
operations of every description, and many of them of the most terrible
nature, without inflicting pain on the patients ; and, in everj/ ifistance,
the insensibility was produced in this fashion.

" All knowledge of our intentions was, if possible, concealed from the
patients ; and if they had never heard of mesmerism and painless opera-
tions, BO much the better. They were taken into a darkened room, and


79


desired to lie down and shut their eyes. A young Hindoo or Mussulman
then seated himself at the head of the bed, and made passes, without
contact, from the head to the epigastrium, breathing on the head and
eyes nil the time, and occasionally resting his hands for a minute on the
pit of the stomach. This often induced the coma deep enough for the
severest surgical operation in a few minutes ; but the routine was for
me to examine the patieut at the end of an hour, and if he was not
ready, the process was repeated daily. Taking the average, the opera-
tion, of whatever description, was usually performed on the fourth or
fifth day.

"Probably as many more cases were subjected to the trance for
medical purposes, and were usually treated in the same way, for its con-
venience to both parties.

" The enclosed remarkable case of clairvoyance, with transference of
the senses to the epigastrium, will shew that the mesmeric control of
the system may be obtained, when the patient is not only asleep, but
in a state of intense natural coma,

** I have also entranced a blind man, and made him so sensitive, that
I 'Could entrance him however employed, (eating his dinner, for instance,)
by merely making him the object of my attention for ten minutes. He
would gradually cease to eat, remain stationary a few momenta, and
then plunge, head foremost, among his rice and curry.

"Numbers of madmen have been entranced in the lunatic asylum of
Calcutta ; and I performed a mesmeric operation on one man who had
cut his throat.

" I frequently desired the visitors of my hospitals to pretend to take
the portraits of patients, and to engage their attention as much as pos-
eible, by conversing with them. I then retired to another room, and
reduced them to statues, without the possibility of their suspecting my
intentions.

" h ow such phenomena can be accounted for, without presuming the
existence of a physical power transmitted from the operator to the sub-
ject, passes my comprehension, 'i hat the mesmeric virtue can be com-
municated to inanimate mutter, is a physical fact, of which I am as well
convinced as of my own existence. It was my common hospital practice
to entrance patients Jbr the purpose of having their sores burned with
Ifitric Acidj by giving them mesmerised water to drink.

" Community of taste, and thought-reading, are among the most com-
mon of the higher mesmeric plienomeuai and how they are to be ex-
plaineJ, except by the transmission of the operator's seusations, through


80


Ms thouyht'Stamped^ nervous duid, sent to the brain of the subject, 1
cannot conjectuise.

" * Important, if true,' you will probably say. I can only say, that
healthy senses, a natural power of seeing things as they really are, and
an earnest desire to know the truth, whatever it may be, are perfectly
useless for the acquisition of knowledge, if all I have related is not per-
fectly true.

" Till such facts are known to medical men and natural philodophem,

it is surely premature to dogmatise about the only source of the mes-
meric phenomena.

**^^It happened, curiously enough, that the Sleeping Faqpieer of Lahore

had attracted my attention about the Very time your interesting account

of him appeared, and I had actually written to Sir Henry Lawrence,

begging him ta procure us information on the subject; but my departui^

from India, shortly after, prevented my prosecution of the subject.*


»


Such was the experience of Dr. Pisdaile, whose firmness of
nerve, and dexterity of hand, and scientific skill, in every way
stamped him as a man eniinently qualified for being a leader in
his profession. Most sincerely do I wish that the like processed
could be rendered equally available in this country as they
i/^re in India, for annulling the pain incident to surgical
o^erdtions. I am well aware, from my owh experience, as
also from what I have read as the results with others, that
mesmerism, or hypnotism, may be successful for this end with
8bme patients ; but, I fear it will not become io generally
sticcessful in this country as in India, or as chloroform has
been proved to be in Europe. Mesmeric anesthsesia, however,
has this great supeiiority when it succeeds — that no injury
has ever resulted to the patient from its use ; for the recoveries
uihder mesmeric surgical opeiratibtis in Dr. Esdaile's hospital
were far beyond the average success. Why, therefore, should
it not be fairly tried in this country as well as in India, when
no' danger to the patients can result from such trials ? My own
Gf^victions, from trials of both methods, are in favour of
cMoroForm, as being more speedy and certain in its effects with


81


patients in this country/ ; and I know that, with due care and
caution, it may generally be used with safety in surgical
operations, as well as in midwifery ; but I should think it
interesting, in every point of view, that the mesmeric or hyp-
notic modes should be fairly tested, so that we may know how
far Dr. Esdaile's method, described above, can be made avail-
able in this country, with British subjects on British soil, for
suspending the anguish of mind and body, during surgical
operations, by such a safe and simple process.

Agreeing, as I so cordially do with Dr. Esdaile, as regards
the great value of the practical application of mesmerism, I
am sure he will forgive me if I venture to differ somewhat
from him, theoretically, in the conclusions which I have come
to regarding some of the results which he has particularised,
as proofs of " the existence of a physical power transmitted
from the operator to the subject" ; because it is only by
examining and comparing with each other, the different modes
of explaining phenomena, which occur to different minds,
that we can hope to arrive at a true solution of such difficult
problems.

In the case of the blind man, I am so weU aware of the re-
markable quickness of hearing which many acquire from loss
of sights and being compelled to rely upon that, and the sense
of touch and smell, that I can easily imagine that he might
perceive the doctor's presence, and fixed position, and sup-
pressed respiration, concomitant upon a fixed act of attention,
and thus catch the idea of his intention, and then the power
of imagination and habit would produce the result named.
Then, in respect to entrancing the patient from another room,
many such patients become so quick in catching the requisite
ideas from the slightest peculiarity in the looks and tone of
voice and manners of those around them, that the individual


82


referred to might readily have caught the idea of something
being intended, from the manners and looks of the pretended
artists^ and then the usual result would naturally follow. The
efficacy of '' mesmerised water" admits, if possible, of still
easier explanation ; for there is an aroma peculiar to every
individual, both as regards the exhalation from the lungs and
skin ; hence the dog can trace his master through a crowd, by
smell, or any one else he has been set on the trail of. Either
breathing on water, or wafting over it with the fingers, there-
fore, might readily impart a physical quality to suggest, by
means of smell, ideas connected with some individuals, such as
the doctor's mesmerisers and the ideas thus excited, through
the laws of association, would produce the wonted results. Nay,
even the very mode of presenting it might be sufficient, of
itself alone, to produce the sleep in highly susceptible subjects,
after having been impressed. Hearing, and sight, and smell,
would require to be annulled, before I could readily believe
in community of taste and feeling, which all will easily
comprehend, who have closely observed the powers of sugges-
tion, in giving such vividness to ideas as shall delude the
patients, even in the wide-waking state, and make them
mistake mere ideas for realities.

The above are merely my opinions on these points ; but I
shall now state what I know to have been a positive fact. I
had heard much of an interesting case of a highly susceptible
lady — so susceptible to ordinary mesmeric processes, that she
might be sent off into the sleep by the most simple attempt
to i)rodiice it — and so sensitive of the influence of magnets,
that she was quite uncomfortable if a magnet were near her, in
any room ; and in the dark she could point out any part of the
room where a magnet of very moderate power was placed,
from YiQY seeing the light it produced, streaming all around it.


83


I was kindly invited to spend an evening at this lady's house,
to a£Pbrd me an opportunity of seeing and hearing more par-
ticulars of these wonders. I had the pleasure of sitting vei-y
near the lady, and of enjoying a long and interesting conver-
sation with her and her husband, who was a most respectable
and intelligent gentleman, and no manifestation whatever took
place during the whole time, until after I had explained my
views regarding the power of an act oi fixed attention, directed
to any part, in modifying the natural condition of the part so
regarded. She was requested to direct her fixed attention to
her hand, and watch the result, without anything being done,
either by her husband or any one else. She did so, and very
quickly fell asleep, and the arm to which she had directed
her attention became rigidly cataleptic. Some time after being
aroused, and when the shades of deep twilight had set in, the
most interesting experiment was proposed, which was this, —
that she should walk round the room and find a magnet, which
had been hidden behind some pictures when she was out of the
room, in order to prove to me her power of seeing its light, and
thus detecting it. She walked cautiously round the room
(wide awake, for she did not require to be asleep to manifest
this faculty), her husband repeatedly urging her to seek about
and persevere until she should find it. I feel satisfied that he
had no intention of aiding her; but, from his long silence
when she approached the place where the magnet was hid, /
should myself have caught the suggestion that I was near to it,
or, in nursery phraseology, that it was then getting very hot.
After she had passed it a little, she sat down on a chair, but
said she could not see it to-night, and then came up to where
we were, shortly after which we sat down to supper. The lady
showed no symptom of being uncomfortable from the proximity
of a magnet, imtil requested to look at, and fix her attentloxL

Q '2


84


upon, her hand ; and, after being aroused, all seemed right
again, until she was told that the dreaded magnet was hidden
somewhere in the room^ and she was requested to go round in
the dark and endeavour to find it. The husband thought her
sitting down in the chair proved that ^h^felt the influence of
the magnet, although she could not see the light from it ; but,
what seemed conclusive evidence to my mind that it was the
mere idea, and not any physical influence in the magnet, which
affected the lady, was this, — that all the time I had been
sitting so close to her, conversing with her and her husband,
I had had a fourteen-pound lifting magnet, with the armature
unattached, in my side pocket next to the lady, — and that was a
magnet of more than double the power of her husband's ; and
yet no visible effect was produced by my powerful, but ur^us-
pected magnet.

As regards sympathy and imitation, every medical man is
well aware of their wonderful power, especially on certain
temperaments. From the wag who sets a whole company a
yawning, against which the very dog below his master's table
cannot protect himself, to the recent public exhibitors of ex-
periments in " electro-biology," we have abundant proofs of
their power, as well as of the influence of audible suggestions.
In particular, we have the history of its extensive prevalence
in the middle ages, in the dancing mania, the St. Vitus's and
St. John's dancers. Again, the dancers who had the disease,
induced by the alleged poisonous bite of the Tarantula, or
venomous spider, likewise spread extensively in Italy, " where,
during some centuries, it prevailed as a great epidemic."

" From the middle of the fourteenth century, the furies of the Dance
brandished their scourge over afflicted mortals j and music, for which
the inhabitants of Italy now, probably for the first time, manifested
susceptibility and talent, became capable of eioiting extatic attacks in
those affected, and then furnished the magical means of exorcising their
mehmcholf. " — Meeker's Epidemics,


85


I have already referred to the convulsionnaires in Paris.*
Even in recent times, however, and in our own country too,
the power of sympathy and imitation was vividly pourtrayed
in the south and west of England, where, from this influence,
within a short period, about 4000 people became affected by a
violent convulsive malady. It is recorded of this epidemic
that " hundreds of people w^ho had come thither, either
attracted by curiosity, or a desire, from other motives, to see
the sufferers, fell into the same state." The like condition
was also manifested very lately in the Shetland Isles ; and
the power of suspending moral and physical maladies of the
sort, by moral means, is beautifully illustrated by the following
anecdote : —

" An intelligent and pious minister of Shetland informed the physician
(the late Dr. Samuel Hibbert Ware), who gives an account of this dis-
order as an eye-witness — that, being considerably annoyed, on his first
introduction into the country, by those paroxysms, whereby the devo-
tions of the church were much impeded, he obviated their repetition by
assuring his parishioners that no treatment was more efifectual than
immersion in cold wat^r ; and as his kirk was, fortunately, contiguous
to a fresh water lake, he gave notice that attendants should be at hand,
during Divine service, to ensure the proper means of cure. The sequel
need scarcely be told. The fear of being carried out of church and into
the water acted Uke a charm. Not a single naiad was made." — Keeker' 9
JSpirdemics.

Let those who deride the notion of their being susceptible
of such impressions, fi'om such causes, have a care that they
do not trifle too confidently at the attempt to prove how far
they can surrender their self-control, for a time, for the pur-
pose of imitating others. They may very probably, in the
end, find to their cost and sorrow, that the will having been
for a time surrendered into another's keeping, may not return


* For an interesting account of the convulsionaires, and cammisards
and nuns of Loudun, vide Mr. Colquhoun'a " H.\%\«t^ " ^SflLQ^^^^s^^-t.


86


at their bidding ; and that what they believed to be a mere de-
lusion or fraud in others, has proved to be a grave reality with
themselves. They ought to remember the fate of the distin-
guished prelate, Jo. Baptist Quinzato, Bishop of Foligno, who
*' having allowed himself, by way of a joke, to be bitten by a
tarantula, could obtain a cure in no other way than by being^
through the influence of the tarantella, compelled to dance."
Now, it is fullv ascertained that the bite of the tarantula i»
not at all poisonous, and the bishop was fully persuaded oi"
this when he perpetrated the joke ; still, the idea having at
length taken possession of his mind, that it possibly might be
poisonous after aH, he became a victim to this imaginary
poison. From the state of public opinion in that age, it has^
moreover, been recorded, " that even the most decided scep-
tics, incapable (^guarding^ themselves gainst the recollection
of what had been presented to the eye^ were subdued by a
poison, the powers of which had been ridieukd^ and which
was IN ITSELF INEET w> its effects'


»»


Even at the end of the seventeenth centmy, Tarantfsm ** sliowed svoh
extraordiikary symptoms, that Bagliyr, one of the best physicians- of that
time, thought he did a serfice to science by making them the subject of
a dissertation. He repeats all the observations of Feriiinando, and
supports his own assertions by th& experience of hi» father, a physi-
cian, at Lecce, whose testimony, as an eye-witness, may be admitted a»
unexceptionable.*' — Heeket^a Epidemics,

*^ Against the efik^ produced by the tarantula's bite, or hy the sight
of the sufferers, neither youth nor age afforded any proteotieti ; so that
even old men of ninety threw aside their crutches at the sound of tho
tarantella (the name giyen to- the music played to those seized with th&
dancing mania, excited through the bite of the tarantula) ; and, as if
some magic potion, restorative of youth and rigour, were flowing
through their reins, joined the most extravagant dancers. Ferdinand(^
saw a boy of five years old seized with the dancing mania, in consequence
of the bite of the tarantula ; and, what is almost past belief, were it
not supported by the testimony of so credible an- eye-witness, even


87


deaf people were not exempt from this disorder — bo potent in its effect
was the very !>ight of those affected, even without the exhilaration caused
by music." — Ibid.

The powers of sympathy were also strikingly manifested,
in 1787, at Hodden Bridge, in Lancashire, where a girl put
a mouse into the bosom of another girl, who had a great
dread of mice.* The girl was instantly thrown into a fit, and
continued in it, with the most violent convulsions, for twenty-
four hours. On the following day three more girls were
seized in the same manner ; and on the second day there were
six more attacked. The alarm was now so great that the
whole works — where from 200 to 300 hands were employed —
were totjilly stopped, and the idea prevailed that the plague
had iH'eii introduced among them from opening a bag of cot-
ton. On the two following days fourteen more were seized —
making, in all. twenty-four victims to this excitement of terror
in sport. Of this number, twenty-one were young women,
two girls under ten years of age, and one man, who had been
much fatigued by holding the girls. The symptoms were so
violent as to require four or five persons to hold the patients,
80 as to prevent them from tearing out their hair and dashing
their heads against the floor or walls. So soon as the public
became assured that the complaint was merely a nervous dis-
order, easily cured, and not introduced by any poison from the
cotton bale, no other person was affected, although previously
several persons had become affected when at several miles
distance from the centre of excitement, merely from hearing
reports of the symptoms manifested in others.

" To dissipate their apprehensions still further," it is added, " the best
effects were obtained by causing them to take a cheerful glass and join
in a dance. On Tuesday the 20th, fi^e days after the first case occurred,
they danced, and the next day they were all at work, except two or
three, who were much weakened by their fits." — Hecker'» Epidemics.


88


The beneficial effects of dancing, for dissipating the baneful
influence of fixed morbid impressions and associations, is
proved by the experience which has been had on this point,
since this mode of amusement and exercise has been intro-
duced into some of our public lunatic asylums.

The effects of sympathy and imitation and excessive ex-
citement, manifested amongst certain religious sects at their
camp meetings in North America, in recent times, prove
that, with all our boasted advancement in civilization, beyond
those who inhabited Europe during the middle ages, the
human mind is still susceptible of these strange mental de-
lusions and physical manifestations, excited entirely through
the power of sympathy and imitation in those who place them-
selves in circumstances favourable for their development.

The following curious and exciting scene occurred, a few
years ago, in a maritime town well known to me : — ^Two
captains of merchant vessels arrived in port at the same time,
and both went to take up their quarters in their usual lodgings.
They were informed by the landlady of the house, however,
that she was very sorry that she could not accommodate them
on that occasion, as the only bed-room which she could have
appropriated for their use was occupied by the corpse of a
gentleman just deceased. Being most anxious to remain in
their accustomed lodgings, almost on any terms, rather than
go elsewhere, they offered to sleep in the room wherein the
dead body was laid out. To this the landlady readily gave
her assent, considering it better, so far as she was concerned,
to have three such customers in her room than only one, and
he a dead one. Having repaired to bed, one of the gentle-
men, who was a very great wag, began a conversation with
the other by asking him whether he had ever before slept
in a room with a corpse in it, to which he replied, " No."


89


" Then," said the other, *' are you aware of the remarkable
circumstance, that always, in such cases, after midnight, the
room gets filled with canaries, which fly about and sing in the
most beautiftd manner ?" His companion expressed his sur-
prise at this. But no sooner said than realized ; for, the candle
having been put out, presently there was a burst of music, as
if the room really was full of canaries, which were not only
heardy but at length the horrified novice in the chamber of
death avowed that he both saw smd/elt the birds flying in all
directions, and plunging against him. In a short time he
became so excited that, without taking time to do his toilet,
he rushed down stairs in his night-dress, assuring the aston-
ished household of the fact, and insisting that the room really
was quite full of birds ^ as he could testify from the evidence of
his senses, for he had not only heard them, but also seen and
Jielt them, flapping their wings against him.

The origin of this extraordinarj^nd exciting scene was
simply this : his companion had provided himself with a straw
or small reed, cut so as to imitate the notes of the canary,
when blown through, the end of it being dipped in a glass of
water. Here, then, the ear alone was impressed, but the
mind superadded thereto illusions of two other senses, — sight
and touch, — and that in the case of a brave sea captain too.

The powei*s of sympathy, imitation, and suggestion were
remarkably evinced in the extraordinary delusion which
occurred to a multitude of people, on the banks of the Clyde,
below Lanark, Scotland, in 1686, when

" Many people were gathered together, for several afternoons, where
there were showers of bonnets, hats, guns, and swords, which covered
the trees and ground ; companies of men marched in order on the water
side — companies meeting companies, going all through each other, and
then falling to the ground and disappearing j other companies immediately
reappeared, marching the same way."


00


Now it is recorded that two-thirds of those who went to
witness these strange sights bore testimony to their reality^ not
merely by their words, but also by their physical manifesta-
tions of fright and trembling, which were visible to those who
could see nothing of such apparitions and martial array them-
flelves. No doubt all this apparent marvellous appearance
resulted from excited imagination, and the confusion of
yision consequent on overstraining the eyes, by constant and
persevering eflforts, to see the invisible phantasms. Had
there been any reality in the objects of observation, they
ought to have been obvious to the whole spectators. The
concluding remark in Walker's history of the transiictioa
merits particular attention : —

"Those vrho did see them there, whenerer they went abroad, saw a
bonnet or a sword drop in the way."

I shall now advert to one of the most important points
connected with my hypnotic investigations, and that is, to
record the result of my experience, corroborated as it is by
the experience of others who have fairly tried my method, as
regards the most simple, speedy, and certain, and safe mode
for inducing sleep at will, without the use of opiates. It is
well known that there are many who dare not use opiates in
any form, from their baneful influence, in some way or other,
on their constitutions, their damage, in other respects, being
greater than can be compensated for by the disturbed sleep
induced by their aid. As I have already said, I consider the
hypnotic mode of treating certain disorders is a most important
ascertained fact, and a real solid addition to practical therapeu-
tics, for there is a variety of cases in which it is really most
successful, and to which it is most particularly adapted ; and
those are the very cases in which ordinary medical means
are least successful, or altogether unavailing. Still, I


91


repudiate the notion of holding up hypnotism as a panacsea
or universal remedy. As formerly remarked, I use hyp^
notism alone only in a certain class of cases ^ to which I
consider it peculiarly adapted — and I use it in conjunction
with medical treatment^ in some other cases ; but, in the great
majority of cases^ I do not use hypnotism at all, but depend
entirely upon the efficacy of medical, moral, dietetic, and
hygienic treatment, prescribing active medicines in such
doses as are calculated to produce obvious effects. A method
of producing sleep at will, however, without the use of opiates y
may be most advantageously resorted to, on certain occasions,
by most people ; and I shall, therefore, briefly describe the
method devised by me for that purpose.

In my work on hypnotism, published in 1843, I explained
how " tired nature's sweet restorer, balmy sleep," might
be procured, in many instances, through a most simple
device by the patient himself. All that is required for this
is simply to place himself in a comfortable posture in bed,
and then to close the eyelids, and turn up the eyeballs gently,
as if looking at a distant object, such as an imaginary star,
situated somewhat above and behind the forehead, giving
the whole concentrated attention of the mind to the idea
of maintaining a steady view of the star, and breath-
ing softly, as if in profound attention, the mind at the same
time yielding to the idea that sleep will ensue, and to the
tendency to somnolence which will creep upon him whilst
engaged in this act of fixed attention. Or it may be done with
still more success, in certain individuals, by their placing
some small, bright object in a similar aspect, with a distant
light falling thereon, the party looking at the object with
open eyes, fixed attention, and suppressed respiration. Other
modes of producing a state of mental concentration, directed


92


to some unexciting and empty thing, and thus shutting out
the influence of other sensible impressions, may also prove
successful for inducing calm sleep, by monotonizing the mind,
— just as we see effected in the case of children, who are sent
to sleep by rocking, patting, or gentle rubbing, or monotonous,
unexciting lullabies, — but none are so speedy and certain in
their effects, with patients generally, as the modes which I
have briefly explained. Mr. Walker's method of procuring
" sleep at will," by desiring the patient to maintain a fixed act
of attention, by imagining himself watching his breath issuing
slowly from his nostrils, after having placed his body in a
comfortable position in bed — and which was first published
to the world by Dr. Binns, a few years ago — ^is essentially the
same as my own method, which I had promulgated some time
prior to the publication of the first edition of Dr. Binns's
work on sleep.

In reference to my hypnotic devices, Professor Gregory
makes the following gratifying observations, at page 200 of
his " Letters to a Candid Inquirer:" —

" Let us now attend for a moment to the hypnotism of Mr. Braid.
I have had the pleasure of seeing that gentleman operate, and I most
willingly bear testimony to the accuracy of his description, and to the
very striking results which he produces."

After describing my usual process for hjrpnotizing, the Pro-
fessor adds : —

" In a short but variable time, a large proportion of the persons tried
are not only affected, but put to sleep. Nay, there is, as I have proved
on my own person, no plan so effectual in producing sleep, when we find
ourselves disposed, in spite of our wish to sleep, to remain awake in bed."

After describing the induction of sleep effected by reading
a class of books of a dry, imexciting character, he adds : —

" But let these persons try the experiment of placing a small, bright
object, seen by the reflection of a safe and distant light, in such a posi-


93


tion that the eyes are strained a little upwards or backwards, and at
such a distance as to give a tendency to squinting, and they will probably
never again have recourse to the venerable authors above alluded to.
A sweet and refreshing slumber steals over the senses; indeed, the
sensation of falling asleep under these circumstances, as I have often
experienced, is quite delight&il, and the sleep is calm and undisturbed,
though often accompanied with dreams of an agreeable kind. Sir David
Brewster, who, with more than youthful ardour, never fails to investigate
any curious fact connected with the eye, has not only seen Mr. Braid
operate, but has also himself often adopted this method of inducing
sleep, and compares it to the feeUng we have when, after severe and long-
continued bodily exertion, we sit or lie down and fall asleep, being over-
come, in a most agreeable manner, by the solicitations of Morpheus, to
which, at such times, we have a positive pleasure in yieldmg, however
inappropriate the scene of our slumbers."

Such testimony, from two such philosophers, regarding the
efficacy of my method of inducing sleep at will, in their own
persons, by such a simple process, I consider a boon to the
public, as well as gratifying to myself to have had it recorded
by Professor Gregory, and thus diffused so much more widely
than when confined to my own publications alone.

Before concluding these " Observations," I shall briefly
record the results of two classes of experiments, which must
convince any unprejudiced person that the changed or modi-
fied action which takes place during hypnotic processes, is
due entirely to the influence of the mental concentration of
the patient over his own physical functions. At the same
time, however, I fully admit that another person being
present may modify the results produced by audible, visible,
or tangible suggestions, in the manner explained at pages
61-2.

I requested four gentlemen, all in perfect health, and vary-
ing from 40 to 56 years of age. to sit down, and lay their arms
on a table, with the palms of their hands upwards, and each
to look at the palm of his own hand for a few minutes with


94


fixed attention, and watch the result, entire silence being
enjoined. In about five minutes, the first, one of the
present members of the Royal Academy, stated that he
felt a sensation of great cold in the hand ; another, who is a
very talented author, said that, for some time, he thought
nothing was going to happen, but at last a darting, prick-
ling sensation took place from the palm of the hand, as
if electric sparks were being drawn from it ; the third
gentleman, lately mayor of a large borough, said that he felt
a very uncomfortable sensation of heat come over his hand ;
and the third, secretary to an important association, had
become rigidly cataleptic — ^his arm being firmly fixed to the
table. Now, here all commenced the operation at the same
time, and all were sitting round the same table, and not a
word was spoken, not a movement made by any one, to aid
or influence the results which followed. In this instance,
therefore, of the four senses in the hand, viz., common feeling,
heat and cold, and the muscular sense, the one which was
naturally most active manifested itself in each case ; but, had
I suggested what should be expected in each case, the pro-
bability is that, in some of them, the suggested idea might
have been realised instead of the natural one. It is obvious
that my will could not have produced four such different
results at the same instant of time, and at first trial too.
At page 58 of my book on " Trance" I recorded the case

of Mrs. , thirty years of age, married, and the mother of

three children, whom I had speedily cured, by hypnotism, of
epilepsy of a most formidable character, and of four years'
standing. All ordinary treatment had previously utterly
failed. I stated the fact that, within four days of my first
hypnotizing her, one of the most important of the female
functions, which had been suspended for many months,


95


reappeared, and recurred regularly every month subsequently
for the next six months ; and when it again became suspended,
the value of hypnotism was beautifully illustrated, as the
following quotation will show : —

" At six successive periods I had occasion to resort to hypnotism, for
this purpose, and in every instance with ei^re success^ by a single opera-
tion of from ten to eleven minutes each. Moreover, I ascertained that
this important result could be efifected without either touch or pass, but
by mental concentration and direction of the mind of the patient, and
the management of the circulation alone, without farther mental or
physical aid on my part, beyond simply requesting her to put herself to
sleep, and elevate her limbs — ^her attention being directed to the expected
result. On two or three other occasions, when I hypnotized this patient
for neuralgic or rheumatic pain in a leg or arm, through the mode of
managing and directing the attention and expectant idea, the pains were
immediately removed, without exciting any visible manifestation on any
special organ or function."

Subsequently to the publication of that report, on six other
occasions I resorted to the same process in this case, and with
the like success on ever^ occasion. It now occurred to me that,
inasmuch as it was my opinion, that the change in the physical
action resulted entirely from the fixed mental attention of the
patient, with a predominant idea and her faith in the power of
the processes, it would be interesting to asceitain whether the
result might not be realised by mental concentration alone,
when she remained wide awake. On the 4th of April, 1851,
I proposed to test this. The requisite means were had
recourse to for determining, with the utmost accuracy, the
actual physical condition of the patient before commencing
the experiment. Four ladies and one gentleman were present.
Having requested the gentleman to note the time accurately,
the patient being seated in an easy-chair, I addressed her in
the following words, which were heard by all present: —
" Now, keep your mind firmly fixed on what you know should


96


happen." All remained silent; and, in order to withdraw
my own mind as much as possible from the patient, I took up
a Tolume of " Southey's Life," and engaged myself in reading
it. At the end of eleven minutes I asked her if the desired
effect had been produced — to which she replied she did not
know; but, upon proper examination, I had incontestable
proof of the success of my experiment. Next month she did
not require a repetition of the process ; but, on the 2nd of
June, it was again tried, in the presence of two professional
gentlemen, and with equal success as on the 4th of April.
On the 28th of July, I again had occasion to resort to the
process with this patient ; and I was then particularly anxious
that it should succeed, as a lady was present who required
similar aid, and a good example in point was likely to assist
me considerably in influencing her the more certainly. My
mind, therefore, was unusually intent on the accomplishment
of the desired result. At the expiration of eleven minutes I
inquired if it had taken effect, when she replied she could
not tell. On examination, however, it was ascertained that
it had been a failure on this occasion. The patient hereupon
remarked that, before sitting down, she thought it would
not ensue that night, I enquired, why ? to which she replied,
'* Because I could not Jix my mind on it to-night^ from having
been put out of my way just before I came here." To this
I replied, " Well, if you cannot fix your mind on the idea when
awake, I know that I can command the requisite attention when
you are asleep, and therefore I will hypnotize you. This I
did, at the same time exciting the circulation. It very soon
became apparent, from the expression of her features and the
movements of her body, that the spell was in active opera-
tion ; and on arousing her in eleven minutes, there was
positive proof adduced that the experiment had not been
led in rain ; nnd all went on stitisfactorily subsequently.


97

It merits special attention that, notwithstanding my mind
was particularly active in willing the desired effect when the
patient was awajne, no success followed, because the irequisite
mental condition of the subject was wanting. This failure,
therefore, was as positive proof in support of my theory as
the successful results ; in feet, it was even more so. For, on
pther occasions my mind had not been so intently desiring
^e immediate result, and now I was most actively engaged
in willing it, and even with greater confidence, because of
former successes ; but I was doomed to be disappointed, be-
cause the requisite mental condition of the patient was absent.

Next month my assistance was not required, but on the
Rth of October, in the presence of her mother, the waking
experiment was again tried with complete success. On the
8th of November, 1851, her mother, and my esteemed Mend
Dr. William Stevens, well known as the author of the Saline
Treatment of Cholera and Yellow Fever, being present, I
once more tried the experiment, with most complete success,
in eight minutes. From that period it has never required ^
to be repeated, as all has gone on in the i^ttural course. <^ "^c^i^l^;

It appears to me that nothing could be more conclusive
and interesting for determining the correctness of my sub-
jective ov personal, psychical or mental theory, than the
evidence furnished by these cases ; nor more important than
the last for proving the value of hypnotism for curative pur-
poses. I may also add that, on the 2nd of Juue, after ex-
citing the function by mental concentration, whilst the
patient was simply reposing in an easy chair, by causing her
to try it for two minutes more with the legs and arms ex-
tended, so as to quicken the circulation, a greatly increased
effect was produced ; proving the importance of regulating
the circulation, for modifying the subsequent results.


98


Another point worthy of remark, in support of my snlv
jective or mental theory, is this — ^that not only may the
requisite mental concentration be induced by the personal
acts of the patients alone, as already explained, — such as by
keeping their minds engaged in the continuous act of con-
templating some part of their own bodies, or some ideal or
inanimate objects, or the mere remembrance and expectation
of the recurrence of past sensations, — ^but I have caused
patients to hypnotize themselyes, or each other, at the same
instant of time, simply by staring at each other, or joining
hands, &c., after the fashion of the ordinary mesmerising
processes. On one occasion I requested twenty-two patients
to lay hold of each others hands whilst standing in a semi-
circle, and watch the result, and the whole twenty-two
subjects speedily passed into the sleep, which is decidedly
subversive of the polar theory of the magnetists ; for, accord-
ing to that theory, those only should have passed into the
condition who had become surcharged with their alleged occult
force passing iGrom one set of patients into the others ; and,
consequently, those who supplied this mesmeric, magnetic,
odylic, nervous, or vital charge to the others, having thereby
sustained a diminution^ and thus being under par, ought to
have remained awake. It is obvious that the same effect of
sleep ensuing in every case, at the same time, could not have
flowed from two such opposite physical causes.

Another proposition of Baron Von Reichenbach is this —
that sensitive patients sleep better when in bed, and feel
more comfortable in other places, when nestled in bed with
their heads towards the north, or when seated elsewhere, such
as in church, in a similar aspect. In my work on '' The
Power of the Mind over the Body," I stated that I had tried
ihis experiment with a highly sensitive patient — and I know


99


of others who have been so tested — without any such result
following as the Baron had indicated. At the same time, I
directed attention to the strange anomaly which this would
present in the constitution of man, if proved to be true;
because his most agreeable posture would be in direct opposi-
tion to what it ought to be, according to the physical con-
stitution of his nature. For, according to Faraday, the very
highest authority we have upon such speculations, the body
of man is c^ea-magnetic, so that, were it hung up by the
middle, it would naturally point east and west, instead of
north and south, like the mineral magnet. A predominant
idea or conceit, however, in the patient's mind may, no doubt,
cause some individuals to realise such results as the Baron
supposed ; but were it a physical and physiological fact, as
he alleged, what an amount of misery must people have
entailed upon themselves, especially in large towns, where
they nestle themselves in bed in all points of the compass ! Is
it conceivable that experience would not have taught them
better, in the course of six thousand years? Moreover,
would it not seem strange that the clergy, with all their
learning and natural sagacity, should have built their churches
in the very opposite direction which they ought to have
placed them in for comfort and attraction, according to the
Baron's views ? and that public halls and private dwellings
should have been built without due regard to the Baron's
alleged natural laws ?

Baron B,eichenbach has given the result of two experiments
with the daguerreotype, by Carl Schuh, as a physical proof of
the optical nature of the odylic flames, threads, and smokes,
described as seen, by sensitives, issuing from the poles of
magnets. Regarding these experiments, the reviewer in the
North British says they are —


100

"Utterly unsatisfactoiy. Certainjlj these two poor experiments
prove nothing. The experiment with two plates lasts a few hours ; the
experiment with only one, and therefore without a check, lasts sixty-
four ; the check in the former was rendered nuU by want of care about
the box and the drawer, and there was no check provided in the latter.
The experiments of Mr. Braid are much better.

" They were made with nine plates, prepared by Mr. Akers, of the
Manchester Photographic Gallery — a man professionally engaged in
daguerreotype experiments, and therefore quite as likely to be an adept
as Herr Schuh. Three of the plates were exposed to the action of a
powerful horse shoe (originally able to lift eighty pounds, but somewhat
reduced by use) in seclusion from light. Other three were treated pre-
cisely in the same manner — only two sheets of black paper were placed
between the magnets and the plates, so as to intercept the real or sup-
posed radiance of its poles. A seventh was conned in a box at a
distance from the magnet. They were all kept in these several circum-
stances from sixty-six to seventy-four hours ; but in no instance was
there any appearance of the photographic action of light — the only
changes being such chemical modifications of the surfuces * fks generally
tanae from keeping prepared plates for some time before exposing them
to mercury.' "

The other plates were inclosed in a camera, and exposed at such
distance as must have given a picture of the poles of the magnet, and
fiames issuing from them, according to the Baron's statement regarding
the focal distance of odyle. One was left sixty-six, the other thirty-five
and a half hours so exposed ; but no photographical indications were
manifested.

" Now," adds the reviewer, " it is to be noticed that these are three
(four) positive results. Those of 8chnh, such as they were, were at the
best only negative ones. In his two experiments, it is not the least
impossible but that common light reached the plates ; and it does not
appear that he was on his guard against those chemical changes which
' generally arise from keeping prepared plates for some time.' But in
i^e experiments of Sraid and Akere, metallic sensitives w^re positively
and indubitably submitted to the prolonged action of a powerful mag-
netic force, but no photographic effects ensued. This is the positive
observation, not that ; although, at first sight, it seems to be the reverse.
In every point of view, in £ict, the experiments of the Manchester
surgeon are groatly superior to those of the Viennese authority on
meteoric stones ; and they settle this part pf the question in the metin-
^ tune. "—Pp. 14$, 146.


101


1^egar£iig t^ ex{>erhnents with the lens, the reviewer raises a very
reasonable objection to them, as embracing such yagneness of testings as
are '* far below the mark of scientific accuraoj, as it is practised and
demanded in these days.*' And he then adds : '* But here appears the
avenging Nemesis of Kachenbach's contempt for the older mesmerists.
If he had studied their works, he could neither have made nor published
this set of his expetiments. Braid, the hypnotist, would more especially
have famished him witii both Hacta and thoughts for his guidance. Dr«
Holland, who is neither hypnotist nor mesmerist, would have put him
on his guard against the effects of expectant attention on certain excep-
tional nervous systems. In fine, otir otherwise accomplished investigator
would have been ail the better for a little more knowledge of the physi-
ology and pathology of the cerebro'spinal axis, considered as the instru-
ment of the mind, and a little less knowledge of meteors. At all events,
these experiments with the lenses will carry conviction into the judgment
of neither physicist nor physiologist, especially if he is cognizant of the
phenomena to be evoked in the mesmerised nervous system by a word,
by a sign, by absolutdy next to nothing ; and still more especially if
he have seen how perfectly self-conscious the possessor of such a nervous
system may appear to be, even when seeing water become white, a
handkerchief turning into paper, and so forth." — F. 147.

According to Baron Keichenbach's own admission, a

magnet suspended from one end of a beam, and balanced by

weights at the other end, never moved when a cataleptic

hand was advancing towards it with much force, even when

allowed to approach close to it, and was hindered from

tonching and clinging to it only by the stronger arm of the

operator or others holding the patient. It must be obvious

that, were the attraction mutual, the magnet would advance

towards the hand when the latter was restrained, after being

near it. I, therefore, quite concur with the reviewer, when

he says —

" It is astonishing that, knowing, as he does, that there is no mutual
4dfcraetion between the magnet and the cataleptic limb, he should not
have defined it as an irresistible following of the removed magnet on the
part of the limb. This phenomenon, in fitct, considered as a pheno-
flSfiDon of motion, is altogether subjective in the patient. The magnet


I


102


does not draw the hand, but the hand aeAa towards the magnet ; and
an ezpenmenter^s fist^ or a large crystal, is as good as a magnet."

I have hitherto omitted to adTert to the alleged mesmeric
influence of certain metals and the non-mesmerising quality
of others. Dr. EUiotson had set fcnrth that nickel was power-
folly magnetic, so that drawing it along the palm aS the hand
would send a patient to sleep, and produce catalepsy ; whilst
lead had no such quality — ^in short, that one class of metals
enumerated would produce specific effects, whflst the others
would reduce them, or proTC neutraL He offered to prove
this to the satisfiiction of T. Wakley, Esq. M.P., by giving him
the respectiye metals into his own hands to operate with.
According to this gentleman's statement, when he operated
with the lead, the patient belicTuig it to be nickel, the effect
of nickel came ; and when he used the nickel, the patient
supposiDg it to be lead, no effect followed. The effects were
thus active or passive, according to the expectation or belief
of the patient ; and this exactly coincides with my own
experience on this point — either that there are no such
opposite effects in the different metals, or that the difference
is so insignificant that it may be entirely superseded by the
power of suggestion, or by a predominant idea. By this means
I could, with most patients, invest metals, or any other sub-
stance, with whatever qualities I might imagine and audibly
suggest to them. These experiments of Mr. Wakley have
always appeared to me as well devised and adroitly managed,
for determining the physical faLCt, as to whether or not Dr.
EUiotson was correct in mAintaining that nickel was power-
fully mesmeric, whilst lead was wholly inert; and they
dearly proved that Dr. Elliotson's hypothesis was erroneous
in this respect. It was an unwarrantable, hasty condusioB,
liowever, for Mr. Wakley to assume that the patients gave


103


the manifestations realized from sheer deception, and, con-
sequently, that the whole of what has been designated the
mesmeric state and mesmeric phenomena, was a tissue of
unmitigated imposture. Even supposing the Okeys had b^en
impostors in what resulted in these trials, (which I believe
was not the case, but that the manifestations resulted from
the powers of belief, habit, imagination, and the influence of
predominant ideas over them, as explained elsewhere), surely
it would have been a most unwarrantable deduction that there
could not be an honest person in the world, merely because
Mr. Wakley had met with two rogues ? It was perfectly
natural, however, for a person of enthusiastic mind, to impugn
the honesty of the patients, and draw inferences unfavourable
to the hand fides of the whole phenomena, when the results
were so subversive of Dr. EUiotson's theory or explanation,
and when the real state of the matter was then so im-
perfectly understood. Now, however, that we have so much
clearer a comprehension of the real nature and cause of these
phenomena, it behoves every candid minded man, and honest
inquirer after truth, to modify his hostility and opposition
accordingly.

My investigations, supported as they are by the researches
of many men of the highest rank and intelligence, fully
prove that the solution of the problem is this — that many
patients, who are naturally highly susceptible of such influ-
ence, become, at length, liable to be affected entirely
through the force of imagination, belief, and habit, and that
they do not exhibit these manifestations from any desire to
deceive others, but because they are self-deceived, through
their implicit credulity, belief, and fixity of their attention on
the ideas suggested in their hearing, or in any way associated
in their minds with certain processes and combinations of


104


circumstances. The late public experiments, on a large scale,
in wbat has been called " electro-biology," and of which I
gave examples, as well as my rationale in 1846, in my Work
on •" The Power of the litind over the Body^*' fully demon*
strated this influence over many patients, even in the waking
condition ; and my own experiments on a mesmerised patient,
recorded in that work, in which every variety of result which
I audibly suggested was manifested on tiie said patient,
merely by touching her with my portmanteau key, or plading
it in her hand, or suspending it from her fingers, all proved
the same feet. In Mr. Wakley's experiments in 1638, he used
different substances, and the results changed according to hiii
suggestions or the expectation of the patient ; in Dr. Hay-
garth's experiments with the wooden tractors in 1799, restdts
were realised similar to those wheii Mr. Perkinses metalliift
tractors were lUred, whatever variety of wood Was tried,
painted so ad to represent the metallic tractors ; but^ in iny
experiments with my portmanteau key, in 1846, many diJGferent
results flowed from using the iiame article, and these effects
were always in exaet accordance with my audible Suggestions.
All these three classes of experiments, therefore^ although
tending to prove the same ultimate feet, viz., the power of
expectation, belief, and a predominant idea, over certain
patients, were, in themselves, essentially diJSerent from each
i)ther.

In conclusion, I beg leave to remark that, frtnn ample
experience, I feel pretty confident that all the phenO'
mena alleged by ttie as producible in the aboye>>named
manner are veritable /w?/* — that they are KOt /(^h&hs.
I believe, moreover, that the explanation which I hav«
endeavoured to propound is quite adequate to account fbi^
all which I represent as true, without violating any of tho


105


recognized laws of physiology and psychology. From a consi-
deration of the whole, therefore, 1 aln led to infer that my sub-
jective or personal theory is, at all events, a step in the right
direcitioti, and somewhat nearer the truth than the theories of
the mesmerists and electro-biologists. Even the mesmerists
thi^nselves are >9nlling to admit that^ in the ptoduction of
the phenomena of " electro-biology," there id no more elec-
iricity than there is in all the operations of nature ; and that
^ere is nothing of a special influence^ a magnetic fluid, att
" odi* force, or transmission of a nervous or vital force from
one human being to another, as the efficient oaxtse, either of
I3ie phenomena of " electro-biology" or the ordinary pheno-
inena of mesmerism, I consider the experiments and obser-
vations whidi t have published during the last ten years,
together with liie experience &nd opinions of others quoted
in this little treaitide, should be sufficient to demonstrate, to
the conviction of all whose minds are not sealed by dogmatic
scepticism, or hkhgized by some previous predominant idea
^bKMit the e^stence of an " od" force or mesmeric influence.
For my own part, however, I am quite open to receive
instruction and guidance in my search after truth, from
whatever qtiarter it may be presented for my consideration \
because I believe that, a^ yet, we are only on the threshold
of this curious^ interesting, and most important inquiry.

'* It is the great rule of the inductire hypothesis, that the inyestigator
inrent nothing new if possible ; it is the second, that he adduce the
minimum of causation for the maximum of effect ; and it is the thirds
that he ptooeed from thd known to the unhioWn. It is humbly sub-
mitted that the doctrine now explained fulfils these condition8."-^^or<i
BHHah Meview,


APPENDIX.


It has been remarked by some one, and frequently repeated
by others, that the most important part of a lady's letter is gene-
rally to be found in the postscript. Whether or not such may
be the fact in respect to the letters of the fair sex, I pretend
not to decide ; but I have no hesitation in saying, that the most
pleasing part of the duty which has devolved upon me con-
nected with the subject of this discussion, will be found in my
concluding remarks, which are written for the purpose of fully
and freely exonerating Mr. Colquhoun from the imputation of
having published the remarks which I have criticised, with any
desire or intention whatever, on his part, to injure me. In the
note at page 52, 1 had alleged it as probable that the charges of
which I complained might have been written by him " unin-
tentionally or inadvertently," merely from a little momentary
irritation, arising out of my remarks against what appeared
to me to be extreme views of the mesmerists, of whom he
was one of the most distinguished, and which had roused his
enthusiasm, and excited him to take up the gauntlet and fight
in support of a theory which he had long espoused, and ably
and warmly supported. Now, I have that gentleman's earnest
and candid declaration to that effect, which was so promptly
given (for he wrote the moment he heard I considered
fiiat he had misrepresented me), and so frankly ex-
pressed by him in the subjoined letter, as to require neither
note nor comment from me to bespeak for it a favourable
reception and due appreciation, by every honourable-minded
man, as it does equal credit to the heart as to the head of
the ingenuous, as well as ingenious and learned writer:—

"Edinburgh, 14th February, 1852.

My Deab Sib, — Our friend, Mr. S , has just mentioned to me

that you are displeased with what 1 have said oi you in my last work.
I regret this very much, if it be so. But you must reooUeot that you
had, upon different occasions, made certain pretl^ severe remarks upon
the magnetists for believing in the higher phenomena of their science ;
and I thought it fair to defend myself, and those who entertain the
same views. Nothing could be farther from my intention than to give
you serious cause of offence ; for, besides the friendly terms which hftve
always subsisted between us, I have ever been disposed to look upon
j^ourlahonrB as valuable, and always expected that you would ultimately


107


arriye at the same results as the mesmerists. Mr. S mentioned

that you seemed to think that I had charged you with being a
materialist. I am not aware of this, and certainly had no such inten-
tion. You had said, when speaking of the pretensions of the mesmerists,
that they were " alike a mockery of the human imderstanding, as they are
opposed to all the known laws of physical science." I then asked, " Does
Mr. Braid, then, acknowledge no science but the merely physical ? "
I ne^er thought of such a thing as charging you with being a materialist.
I merely wished to remind you that there are moral as well as physical
laws ; and, it appears to me, that both are co-operative in producing
the higher phenomena of animal magnetism. I trust, therefore, that
you wiU take no offence at these expressions. They are surely less
seyere and objectionable than those you have used in speaking of the
mesmerists, of whom I am one. Let there be no quarrel, then, between
you and me. I should sincerely regret such a thing.

You are probably aware that the higher phenomena of clairvoyance
have recently been most clearly and beautifully developed in this city.
My friend, Mr. Napier — whose first nase I printed, at his request, in
the appendix to my late book — has since, in association with Professor
Ghregory, brought out similar, and even more striking phenomena in
other cases, of which, perhaps, you may be aware.

From a conversation I lately had with Dr. Esdaile, of Indian
celebrity, I find that he is perfectly convinced of the reality of clair-
Toyance — has himself produced the phenomena in many instances — and
laughs at those who deny them. I think it likely that he will publish
something upon this subject before long.

I repeat, then — let there be no dryness or coolness between you and
me. Let each prosecute his own researches, and I have no doubt that
the truth will idtimately emerge out of free and open discussion ; and I
sincerely trust, without any breach of friendship. I should be exceed-
ingly sorry to have any quarrel with you i^pon this or any other subject.

I am, my dear Sir,

Very sincerely yours,

J. 0. Ck)LQUHOTJN."

Most Leartily do I reciprocate the kindly feelings and
desire expressed by Mr. Colquhoun, that there should be no
coldness or diminution of friendly feeling between us, arising
out of our doing battle for the support of our respective
theories, or modes of explaining the nature, cause, and extent
of magnetic or hypnotic phenomena. Notwithstanding Mr.
C. had no unfriendly intention against me in publishing his
remarks — ^particularly the unfortunate query which, by inu-
endo, implicated me in the charge of being a materialist —
still, that would not have been enough to slCield me against
the evil effects which might result therefrom, in the minds of
those who perused what he had published. It would, there-
fore, have been requisite for me to have replied, in


108

d^If- vindication of the erroneous impressions regarding me,
which might have originated with those who perused Mr.
Colquhoun's interesting and learned book, (the great merits of
which will insure for it an extensive circulation and eager perU"
i*d,) even had I privately received that gentleman's letter before
I had gone to press. Had I received that letter sooner, 1
certainly should have modified some expressions made use of
by me when criticising Mr. Colquhoun's remarks regarding
myself and hypnotism ; but it is particularly gratifying that
the said letter came to hand before the present edition was
completed, and, although it was not written with the inten*
tion of being published, that I was able to obtain Mr. C.'s
permission to publish it as an appendix to my " Observations "
on his History ; because it exonerates both parties from any
desire, wantonly and intentionally, to misrepresent or injure
6ach other personally, whilst entering into free and open dis*
cussion upon scientific subjects. For my own part, I believe
that truth, in such inquiries, can only be arrived at through
the collision of intellect, and the dmerent points of view
from which the subjects are contemplated by different minds^


I shali now cite firom a paper pubHshed by me in tho
Medical Times^ for December 28, 1844,' a few of the Wonders
recorded in Ward's " History of the Hindoos," which they
represent qb facts and as special gifts imparted to them iii
token of the great superiority of their religious system, of
inducing a state of self-hypnotism, or ecstatic trance. They
produce this condition by certain postures or modes of sitting
— ^the minds of the devotees being engaged in acts of fixed
attention, by looking at some parts of their own bodies, or at
inanimate or ideal objects ; at same time holding their breath,
ue,, suppressing their respiration. My modes of explaining
these alleged marvels d^e given within parentheses. I may
premise, however, that whatever idea occupies the mind of the
subject before he passes into the condition, or whatever may
have occurred to it accidentally or through the suggestion of
others subsequently, will ever after be realised, under similat
combination of circumstances, in consequence of the power of
suggestion and double-conscious memory, as manifested in
some patients even in the sub-hypnotic or waking condition,
mbea what have been called the vigilant or waking pheno-


109

mena axe producible ; and still more certainly during the Ml,

actiye, double-conscious condition. These principles alone,

and the viyid state of the imagination, explain most of the

marvels ; but, with the parenthetic explanations, I trust to

make them sufficiently obvious to any candid and intelligent

person.

** The Yogee who has perfected himself in the three parts of sung-
jamvL ohtaioiB a knowledge of the past and of the future (quickened
memory and excited imagination) ; if he apply sungyamu to sounds, to
their meaning and to the consequent results, he will possess, from mere
sound, universal knowledge (hypnotic patients imitate, with the utmost
precision and with the greatest facility, the vocal enunciation of any
language, but do not understand the meaning of the words which they
letter). He who applies sungyamu to discover the thoughts of others
will know the thoughts of all. (He will believe and talk as if he did so.)
^e who does the same to his own form, and to the sight of those whose
eyes are fixed upon him, will he able to render his body invisible, and to
mm the sight oi the observers. (Through the force of imagination, or
fixed attention, or suggestion.) He who, according to these rules,
meditates on his own actions, in order that he may discover how he may
most speedily reap the fruits of them, will become acquainted with the
time, cause, and place of his own death. He who, according to these
rules, meditates on the strength of the powerful, so as to identify his
strength with theirs, will acquire the same. (Through concentrated
attention and conviction of their physical energy, there is a most amazing
manifestation of increased musciuar power.) He who meditates, in the
same manner, on the sun as perfect light, will become acquainted vdth
the state of things in every place. (He will believe and speak as if he
really did.) By similar application of sungyamu to the cup at the bottom
of the throat, he will overcome hunger and thirst ; by meditation on the
basilar suture, he will be capacitated to see and converse vrith deified
persons, who range through the aerial regions ; by meditation on extra-
ordinary presence of mind, he will obtain a knowledge of all visible
objects ; by meditating on the seat of the mind, or on the faculty of
reason, he will become acquainted with his own thoughts and those of
others, past, present, and futiure ; by meditation on the state of the
Yogee who has nearly lost all consciousness of separate existence, he
will recognise spirit as unassociated and perfect existence. (Belief and
vivid imagination.) After this he will hear celestial sounds~.the songs
and conversations of the celestial choirs ; he will have the perception of
their touch in their passage through the air, his taste wHl become
refined, and he will enjoy the constant fragrance of sweet scents. (All
this I can easily cause hypnotic patients to realise, through suggestion
and their fervid imagination.) When the Yogee, by the ^ower of
Sumadhee, has destroyed the power of those works which retained the
spirit in captivity, he becomes possessed of certain and unhesitating
Imowledge ; he is enabled to trace the progress of intellect through the
senses, and the path of the animal spirit through the nerves. After this
he is able to enter into any dead or living body, by the path of the


no

senses — all the senses accompanying him, as the swarm of bees follow
the queen bee ; and, in this body, to act as though it were his own.
(Now, all this extravagance I can easily make hypnotic patients imagine
themselves accomplishing — but, of course, it is onU^ ima^inarif^ just aa
such feats are accomplished in dreams.)

** The collected power of all the senses is called the animal soul, which
is distinguished by five operations connected with the vital air, or air
collected in the body. The body of the Yogee who, according to the
rules of Dharanu, Dhyanu, and Sumadhee, meditates on the air pro-
ceeding firom * * to the head, will become light as wood, and will be able
to walk on the fluid element. He who, in the same manner, meditates
on the ear and its vacuum, will hear the softest and most distant sounds,
as well as those uttered in the celestial regions, &c. (This accords with
my proposition, that calling attention to any organ or function vnll
exalt the activity of the function positively, as well as excite ideas con-
nected with such organ or function.) He who meditates on vacuum
will be able to ascend in the air. (Imaginaiy ascent.) He who medi-
tates, by the rules of sungyamu, and in a per^ct manner, on the subtile
elements, will overcome and be transformed into those elements ; he
vnll be capacitated to become as rarified and atomic as he may wish, and
proceed to the greatest distance ; in short, he will be enabled to realise
m himself the power of Deity, to subdue all his passions, to render
his body invulnerable, to prevent the possibility of his abstraction being
destroyed, so as to subject himself again to the effects of actions.

" By applying sungyamu to the division of the four last minutes of
time, he who perfects himself in this will obtain complete knowledge of
the separate elements, atoms, &c., which admit not of division of species,
appearance, and place. This Imowledge brings before the Yogee all
visible objects at once, so that he does not wait for the tedious process
of the senses. (Imagination, lively faith, and fixed attention, until ideas
became too vivid to be corrected hy an appeal to the senses and sober
reason.)

The following paragraph is from the " Dabistan:" —

"The Sipasian and the historians relate that, whoever carries this
process to perfection, rises above death ; as long as he remains in the
body, he can put it off and be again reunited to it ; he never suffers
from sickness, and is fit for aU business."

So much for the lively fancy and fervid faith of these
religious enthusiasts, during their dreams, in the state of self-
induced hypnotism, through fixing their thoughts or sight upon
some part of their own bodies, or on some ideal or inanimate
objects, and holding their breath, or suppressing their respira-
tion. By an appeal, therefore, to the feats of the Hindoos, I
might claim for hypnotism, or self-induced trance, quite as high
pretensions for its capability of inducing clairvoyant marvels
asanytbing adduced by the animal magnetists or mesmerists,
all the exoteric or alleged aid -w^idci like^ igitofe^ txi


Ill

communicate or Impart to their subjects, by whatever name
they may call it — whether magnetic, mesmeric, odylic,
nervous, or vital force transferred from the operators into the
bodies of their subjects.

" A cluel*8 amang you takin' notes,
And faith he'll prent them.*'

I append the following narrative, believing that it may be
interesting to some of my readers, especially as it has a direct
bearing on the question regarding the truth or error of what
has been asserted as the special gifts of mesmeric clairvoyants.
It may also aid them in conducting similar investigations in
future, so as to guard against some of the many sources of
fallacy with which such an inquiry is necessarily surrounded.

Whilst the last sheet of this little book was passing through
the press, Mons. Lassaigne and Mdlle. Prudence Bernard, of
Hungerford Hall notoriety, made their appearance in Man-
chester, to astonish us by their wonderful mesmeric, clair-
voyant, and supersentient feats. In their circulars. Monsieur
Lassaigne was heralded as " The First Magnetiser in Europe,"
and Mdlle. Prudence as " the best Clairvoyante known ;'* and,
in support of these high pretensions, thirty-two paragraphs
were appended from the London Newspaper Press.

Under these circumstances, and having been urged by an
Edinburgh friend to test this lady's wonderful pretensions,
I did not see how I could refuse to go and witness at least
one of their public exhibitions, without subjecting myself to
the charge of acting like the philosophers in the days of
Galileo, who refused to look through his telescope, from a
dread that they might thereby be compelled to admit the
alleged fact, which they had so strenuously denied. I, there
fore, went to the stance announced for Friday, the 27th of
February, 1852, and secured one of the best seats on the
platform, so that I might have an opportunity of observing,
with the greater accuracy, all which might be said or done
by Mons. L. and his mesmeric clairvoyante.

I was perfectly well aware that many of the feats an-
nounced in the programme were capable of being accom-
plished by a system of collusion, so devised that it might be
difficult to detect the sources of fallacy, particularly on a
public platform; but there were others, and those the
more important pretensions, which I knew that I could


in

t^t in such ^ swple and satis&tctory maxpier as must con«
\mce every om in tl^ room, either that she possessed th^
Qup^rs^tie&t gi^ asserted, or that she possessed th^n not ;
and I, therefore, went prepared to test this fairly, should a
favourable opportunity offer.

The first point which arrested my attention, after the lady
was announced as being in the mesmeric state, was this, —
that she was one of those subjects who, during the mesmeric
condition, have the use of their eyes, i.e., seeing through, ox
rather from under, their partially closed eyelids. I am quite
aware that many of the mesmeric phenomena may be feigned,
98, indeed, every other condition may be, and daQy is, on th^
stage ; and it is, therefore, quite possible that Mdlle. Prud-
ence Bernard was not in the mesmeric state at all, which
some seemed to suppose was the case. For my own part,
however, I think it much more probable that she was in
the so-called mesmevic state, and for this reason, — ^that
during the state of mental concentration peculiar to that
condition, all the organs of sense which are called into
action become prodigiously quickened, so that they can
hear at much greater distances than when awake ; and some
have the sense of smell so exalted that they can readily de-
tect the owner of a glove in a room ftill of company, by smelly
— ^for, if their nostnls are stopped, they cannot do so. (The
blind boy, Mitchell, recognised people by smell in his ordi-
nary state ; and he formed a favourable or an unfavourable
opinion of them when first introduced to him, according to
the pecidiar odour from their persons.) The sense of touch
and resistance, and of heat and cold, and no doubt taste
also, are in like manner greatly quickened.

Many of the first experiments of the evening were, in my
opinion, quite vitiated, from the requests to do such and such
feats having been given to M. Lassaigne, or the interpreter,
in a whisper, which, I well knew, any attentive mesmerised
subject might over-hear, fr%m their quickened sense of hear-
ing. I caUed attention to this source of fallacy, and sug-
gested that all ftiture requests should be conveyed to M.
Lassaigne in writing. This proposal was at once most readily
acceded to ; and she stiU continued to give proofs of her
power of understanding M. Lassaigne, — ^although both myself,
and others near me, observed, in certain instances, that sugges-
tionsi were now given which were "not in the bond" — such


113

as, " you are near him," audibly expressed, before she gave
the flower to the reporter — which was the order proposed
on this occasion, and was to have been conveyed to the
clairvoyante silently, and by the mere force of Mons. Las-
saigne's will. At first she passed by the reporter, and went
up to several other persons seated behind him, and fenced
about as if she expected it should be some of them ; but, at
length, judging from their looks and manners that she was
off the proper scent, she drew back and stood still for a little,
as if quite at a loss what to do next ; but the instant the
words " you are near him" were audibly uttered, she turned
round and gave the flower to the reporter, who was the
person nearest to her at that moment. It was, therefore,
easy for her to ^ upon the reporter, seated at a table by
himself, and near to where she was standing, when the audible
suggestion was given regarding their proximity. A similar
hesitation took place before giving a book to the proper
person ; so that, instead of what I saw, being clear seeing, I
considered it dim seeing and artful dodging. Moreover,
Mons. L.'s mode of walking behind his clairvoyante when
he wished her to advance, and standing still when she had
gone to the extent desired, was a mode of suggestion which
did not escape observation. WTien to all this is added the
mode of giving suggestions through watching the eye of
another, and signals communicated through slight movements
felt and heard by the patient, though unobserved by the
audience, there is no difficulty in comprehending how Mons.
L. succeeded with almost all the experiments tried by him
and his clairvoyante whilst I was in the room, without the
possession by her of any supersentient gift of the nature
which he alleged. Even Mons. Bobin's experiments with
the bell, with his blindfolded clairvoyante, were still more
remarkable ; and yet he avowed that they were done entirely
by collusion, and by means so simple, too, that he could
scarcely restrain himself jfrom laughing outright when think-
ing of the ease with which the audience could be deceived by
those experiments.

But now arrived the experiment which I considered by far
the most interesting of all on the programme, viz., playing
at cards and reading, when her eyes were to be so securely
blindfolded that not a ray of light could reach them, in the
common acceptation of the term. To effect this, folds of


114

cotton waddinj^ were placed across the forehead, eyes, and
nose, and over the face as far as the point of the nose, and
then a white handkerchief folded several times, so as to be
about 2J inches wide, was bound round the head and eyes,
so as to maintain the cotton in its place. This done, M. Las-
saigne triumphantly asked any one to examine his subject,
and say whether it was possible for her to see through all
this apparatus. Some one having exclaimed " no," the lady
sat down at a table to challenge any one present to play a
game at cards with her. Whilst they were making arrange-
ments for the game, even without being mesmerised, I was
sufficiently clairvoyant to observe the lady pensively lay her
face upon her hands, so as to enable her very conveniently,
and bi/ mere accident no doubt, to give the proper twist and
finish to the apparatus for excluding light from her eyes. I
observed this manoeuvre by the lady twice, and called the
attention of some friends to it, who can also testify to the
fact. The clairvoyante now became very lively ; described
the personal appearance of her opponent, played dexterously,
and beat him. She also did the same by another gentle-
man who tried a round with her ; and with a third gentleman,
a friend of my own, who, by my suggestion, had taken a new
pack of cards with him, she proved her power of describing
his personal appearance correctly, and playing well, but she
lost on this occasion from having bad cards.

As the lady was now considered to have proved her clairvoy-
ant powers to the satisfaction of aU present, I stepped forward
and announced my desire to have the privilege of applying
a test which would be far more satisfactory to mj/ mind,
because I had no confidence in the supposed efficacy of the
blindfolding then in use, for effectually accomplishing what
it professed to do. I told the audience that I felt con-
vinced that the patient was seeing through interstices between
the cotton and the face, near the side of the nose. My pro-
posal for guarding against such a source of fallacy as this,
was simply to place a thin sheet of brown card board under
her chin and round her neck, so as to guard against the possi-
bility of the deception which I suspected. This I intended to
have accomplished by tying the sheet of pasteboard around
her neck, proceeding from the bottom of the throat upwards
Jn a conical form, after the fashion of the Elizabethan frill,
extending considerably higher than the head, so as to prevent


115

the possibility of her raising her hands or lowering her head
sufficiently for seeing over it, without exciting the attention of
the audience Indeed, whoever had had the opportunity of
observing the clairvoyante, as I did, during this card scene,
must have felt that he would be permitting an insult to be
perpetrated upon himself and upon the whole audience, were
he not to endeavour to expose what appeared to me to
be such an absurd force. I was aware that my test
would be objected to, on the groimd that she did not
profess to read through card hoard (although I must
confess my surprise that a person who can see and read
through stone or brick walls, should not be competent to
peneti'ate through thin card board), so I, therefore, offered to
remove that objection, by cutting out a piece of the card
board, and covering the hole with the cotton wadding and
folded handkerchief, which she actrmlly professed to see
through ; but, although the audience were almost unanimous
in their opinion that my proposed test was a fair one, and
such as they wished to see tried, M. Lassaigne well knew
that it was too certain and obvious a mode of testing to
answer his purpose, and, therefore, under various pretexts,
and in a most rude manner, he obstinately refiised to try it.
I therefore withdrew from the platform and left the room,
feeling the force of the remark, — " Ex uno, disce omnes,''^

Had Mr. Lassaigne, like M. Robin, admitted that his feats
were done by ingeniously contrived collusion, I should have
considered it perfectly fair for him to refuse submitting to any
mode of testing which might destroy the interest of his future
public exhibitions. Here, however, we had a different sort
of pretensions to deal with, for M. Lassaigne represented that
there was no collusion in the matter, but that all was accom-
plished by supersentient gifts imparted to his patient by his
mesmerising processes. According to this notion, that the
mind of the subject could hold intercourse with the outer
world without the aid of the physical organs required for such
purposes during the waking condition, I consider the audience
not only had a right to expect, but to demand, that they should
have satisfactory proof adduced, that all chance of the subject
deceiving us by using her natural physical organs of sight,
hearing, feeling, and smell, when we thought these excluded,
should be clearly demonstrated to be impossible, under
existing circumstances. Such was the sole purport of my

I 2


116


test, which was per fe c tly &ir, mud wonU not hxve heem
refiosed had she reaDv posBeased the power alleged : ftr, he it
obserred, I was wining to cot a hide in tiie pasteboaid. aid
corer it meielr with the wadding and handkerdiief whi^
she TeaDv professed to see tkromgk ; that is. to take them of
the eyes and coTcr the aperture in tiie mask with tiie smme
materials. Inasmneh, then, as tiie olijeets to he seen and
described and the light were still to remain in tiie same
relatiTe position to the eres, wherein existed a difference
between the mode she p r ofe ssed and tiie one I suggested —
unless in the fecilitr fer deceiving ns br the fanmer mode,
and the imposdbilitT of doii^ so br the latter ?

At their first seamee at Manchester, on the24th of Fefaraarr,
185*2, a gentleman went prepared to test the la^*s power of
reading without seeing throi^h intcr^iaces. He had urilte n
a short sentence firom a French book, in a pbin hand, and
folded and enclosed it in a coomion letter enrelope, so that,
including the enTek^, four felds of paper would haTe re-
quired to be read throi^h. The gentleman has written to
me, and enclosed the test unopened. After detaihng TarioiB
alleged cbirrorant feats done br the ladr, snch as iiiaTins at
cards, and reading written words with die eyes covered widi
cotton and a handkerchief he adds, ^ When diese experi-
moits were condnded, I rose and said, — Now that the balls
of cotton and the ckyth are ren^ored firom the ladr's eves, will
she read a few words, piainhr mrilten , on a slip of paps', aid
endosed in a common envdi^ ? ** Xo,* r^ied the inter-
preter, * that is a veiT diffimh experiment.' * Bat some of

Dr. ^s p a tients have done iL' ^It cannot be done,

except l^^ fells in some way on die words to be read.'
*Or said a gendeman in another part of the haD. *^at
throws Uyht on the proceediDgSw' I was of the same opimon,
and did not again interfere.'^

This gendeman's test was reaDv not a very severe one, had
die possessed any remarkaUe quickness of virion, fer I find
that, with the aid of tramsmitted light. I can myself see to
read the writing throogh two fiJds of the paper, and snr^

fomr felds ought not to be impossible fer a dairvoyante who
pretends to see through stone or faridk waDs innnmcrable, or
even through mountains, and to the other side of die globe.

^■^ wAa/ is heiiig transacted by living men or thdr departed
^iata, tbrot^Hmt an j put of iltiniitahle space ? Mddle.


117

Prudence Bernard, moreover, had the double chance of read-
ing the silent thoughts of the writer, which was one of her
professed feats J^

As my object in attending Mons. L/s siance was neither
simply to be amused, nor to be deceived by mere illusions,
but to investigate what was proposed for our consideration
with some degree of philosophical accuracy — ^although a
public platform is by no means a favourable place for doing
flo^when I found the latter was to be peremptorily denied
us, I could not condescend to remain and countenance a mere
^ham investigation, which might be set forth to the world,
hereafter, as having been exhibited before me and not de-
murred to. Had fair and fuU investigation been permitted,
there were several other experiments in the programme which
I wished to have tested, with as much accuracy as a public
platform would have permitted ; but I must have a fair field
and no favour when testing, or totally decline being a party
to any proposed scientific, but merely sham, investigation.

I understand, moreover, that, after I had left the room, it

* Many years ago reports were published of a remarkably clairvoyant

boy, in , who could see through a mask of nine folds of silk

stuffed with cotton wadding. Through all this his optics were said to
enable him to penetrate, when mesmerised ; so that he could play cards
*nd read any book, or print new from the press, more fluently and
elegantly than when awake. I wrote to the gentleman whose book this
account appeared in, told him what I suspected, and how he was
deceived. He could not beheve it possible to trick him, and the hun-
dreds of respectable people who had seen the boy, in the manner I sup-
posed ; but offered me an opportunity of testing him, by a Mend who
was visiting that city. The boy having played cards dexterously, as
usual, with his mask on, my friend took him in hand according to the
plan suggested by me, which was — to guard against interspaces near the
nose. The boy read the superscription of my letter to him, then opened
it and read on with fluency ; but the moment my friend placed his card
over the writing, or below the nose, the clairvoyance was gone— but
returned when he withdrew it, the same with a sheet of paper interposed;
and, finally, by carrying his hand, holding the letter, sufficiently high to
prevent any ray of light getting to the eye by the side of the nose,
it was a dead pause, without covering the writing with any sub-
stance. This opened the eyes and understanding of all present to the
source of fallacy through which they had been deceived ; and they wrote
and begged I would not publish the case, because the boy's father was
fluch a respectable man, being one of the town council. I consider that
Mademoiselle Prudence Bernard was clairvoyant on the evening when
I saw her through the same means, and the object of my test was simply
to prove this to be a fact.


118

was represented to the audienee that Mons. Lassaigne had
been so polite as to invite me to his sSance, and that, in return
for that kindness, I had rudely come and interrupted the
harmony of the meeting. The audienee must, naturally, have
inferred from this, that Mons. Lassaigne had presented me
with a free ticket of admission, but such was not the case.
The only civility of the sort which I am aware of was this —
that one of his circulars was left at my house, as they were
at other houses in Manchester, in order to tempt me to go
and pay the usual admission fee, which I did pay, and there-
fore was under no such obligation to Mons. Lasscdgne as he
wished the audience to believe.

From my anxious desire to guard against every chance of
misrepresenting, in any respect whatever, what really occurred
at said sSance of Mons. Lassaigne, before going to press, I
submitted a proof of the above narrative to the inspection
of three of the most intelligent gentlemen who engaged in
testing Mdlle. Prudence Bernard, that evening, who are
ready to vouch for its accuracy on everi/ point.


In conclusion, I would beg leave only farther to observe,
that the advanced state of physical and chemical science has
now enabled us to explain, on scientific principles, many phe-
nomena which, in former days, were looked upon as the results
of Magic and Witchcraft. When to these are added the peculiar
manifestations of nervous diseases, and the power of imagina-
tion, sympathy, imitation, predominant ideas, easy credulity,
fixed attention, habit, and suggestion in all its various forms,
in changing or modifying mental and physical, phenomena in
many individuals, even in the waking condition, and their
almost unlimited control over those who pass into the second-
conscious stage of hypnotism — ^as explained in the foregoing
pages — the whole of the well-ascertained apparent marvels of
Magic, Witchcraft, Animal Magnetism, Hypnotism, Electro-
Biology, Crystal-seeing, &c., become level to our apprehension,
and admit of explanation without violating any of the recog-
msedJawB of physiology and psychology.


119

An accidental circumstance having caused delay in printing
off the last sheet of this little book enables me to add the
following valuable testimony in support of my views, which
I extract from the newly published volume entitled, " Chap-
ters on Mental Physiology, by Henry Holland, M.D., F.R.S.,
&c. &c.. Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, Physician
Extraordinary to the Queen, &c." That gentleman has long
been well known as one of the most ingenious, scientific,
and learned writers, as well as accomplished practical physi-
cians, in Europe ; and his recent work fully maintains his high
reputation, being one of the most valuable and masterly produc-
tions which has issued from the press for a long period, both
as regards the important topics discussed by the author, the
facts adduced, and the ingenious reasonings and philosophical
deductions with which he has connected them. At page 30,
the learned author acutely and justly observes : —

" Are these phenomena — admitted by aU to be singular and striking —
derived from a peculiar agent or influence, transmitted fr jm one human
body to another by certain modes of communication ? Or are they the
effects of various external excitements on the sensorium and nervous
system of persons of a pecuUar temperament, analogous in nature and
origin to phenomena with which we are more familiar in sleep, trance,
hysteria, and other forms of cerebral or nervous disorder ?

" These questions, involving the very reality of the Mesmeric theory,
must ever be kept before us in aU observation or reasoning on the subject.
It is singularly important that this should be done wherever experiment
is concerned ; inasmuch as they suggest those particular tests which are
essential to complete evidence, but which have been, for the most part,
unaccountably neglected. In putting these questions, moreover, we
indicate the absolute need, for the right prosecution of this inquiry, of
familiarity with the natural phenomena of health and disease just adverted
to. Without this knowledge, and without the just perception of what
constitutes scientific evidence, we might as well be gazing at the feats of
a conjurer at a pubUc exhibition, as on those of animal magnetism in
similar assemblies.

* Another point in this question, not sufficiently kept in mind, is the
vast distinction between the two classes of Mesmeric phenomena —
sleep, reverie, trance, and certain acts arising from them — and the
uuraculous assumption of clairvoyance, prophecy, and other powers,
superseding all the physical laws of time and space of which we have any
knowledge. These things are presented to us as parts of the same pheno-
menon, and produced by the same manipulations or personal contact.
But they are in truth of very different nature, and totally incommen-
surate with each other. There is less distiuction between the intellect
of an infant and that of Bacon, Newton, or Laplace, than between the
conditions thus brought into pretended connection. If the miraculous
powers in question, for they admit no other name, be proffered to ows
behef, it must be upon evidence far moie ^a!cc?!ascv.e, «Ck.^ ^\jKa^fsc^'vicassi.


120

is needed to verify those other conditions, which are so closely allied to
the ordinary changes in health and disease. It is unnecessary to dilate
on the importance of a distinction which every man of understanding
will admit and appreciate."
Again, at page 34 : —

" Applying these facts to the more mysterious exhibitions of this influ-
ence, they cogently suggest the question, how it can happen that such
manifestations of new and exalted power — the knowledge of events far
distant in space and time — the instant recognition, without inquiry,
of the seat and nature of internal disease and of the befitting treatment—-
vision, or that perception which is equivalent to it, through other organs
than the eyes, &c. — how it happens, I say, that faculties so marvellous
should be given to those of feeble, vague, or distempered mind, and
wholly denied to men of the highest mental energy and intellectual
powers ? — given, moreover, by persons who themselves possess n»ne of
the facidties which they thus miraculously bestow? This question,
though stated merely as such, is in effect pregnant with argument ; and
deserves to be well weighed by all who incline to this separate and more
mysterious part of Mesmeric behef."

At pages 9, 10 ; 24—35 ; 83—94 ; 123—128 ; 155 ; 160 ;
169 ; 172, 173 ; 223 ; and 280, Dr. Holland has given many
admirable observations bearing on this subject, to which I
beg to refer, in addition to the following quotations : —

" The observations of Mr. Braid, more especially, have done much to
establish this fact of the altered character of sleep in effect of the man-
ner in which it is brought on ; and this may be regarded as a valuable
part of his researches." — P. 89.

" We must not quit this topic without noticing the striking results
of what has been termed Hypnotism — the sleep or trance produced, not
by mesmeric means, but by the act of the individual himself, made to
concentrate his vision fixedly for a certain time upon some one object.
It apparently facilitates the effect if this object be of small size ; and
Mr. Braid's interesting experiments would seem to show what may well
be understood, that the posture of the head further favours the results.
The simple fact, that the various physical character of the object gazed
upon does in no way alter the effect, will readily be received as suflicient
proof, that the trance induced arises from causes within, and not from
influences without^ the body of the person thus affected.

" The evidence, indeed, furnished by these experiments in relation to
mesmeric sleep, is simple and convincing as respects the main assump-
tion, that this state is brought on by the influence of one human body
on another. The effects are less in degree, inasmuch as the means
employed less powerfully excite the imagmation. But they are expressly
the same in kind ; and justify the conclusion, that all these states
depend on affections of the nervous system, in persons of a certam
temperament, and nnder certain modes of excitement. '*

"These researches of Mr. Braid on Hypnotism weU deserve careful
examination; aa do also his valuable experiments connected with •
Ji^lectro-Biology i each inquiry illustrating t\ie olYiet b^ iimlogous facts
^od jziferencea." — P. 92,


INDEX.


Aberdeen Committee's report in refutation of Mr. Lewis's asstmiption
of suspending a patient in the air by his magnetic power, and
of influencing patients at a distance, pp. 30 — 84, note,
Alison, Professor, pp. 34, 40.

Ashbumer, Dr., the alleged power of his will, pp. 74, 75.
Attention, its effects on the respiration and state of the blood, p. 22.
Bennett, Professor John Hughes, his opinions in support of Hyp-
notism, p. 85.
Braid, Mr., his svhjectwe or personal mental theory of Hypnotism, in

opposition to the objective theory of tlie Mesmerists and

Electro-Biologists, pp. 5—8, 10, 20, 21, 24, 48, 45, 53,

57, 93—98.
Object of his first experiments, and success of the method, pp.

45, 57.
Beason why he adopted the term " EJifpnoUsm^ or nervous

sleep" p. 24.
His refutation of various ohaxges by Mr. Oolquhoun, pp.

8—14, 20.
— His experiments in refutation of the alleged " od" force of

Eeichenbach, pp. 26—29, 99—102.
Limited extent of his belief in the curatiye efficacy of Hyp-
notism, pp. 35 — 87, 90, 91.

His usual mode of inducing Hypnotism, pp. 56^-^.

His opinion of the importance of combining moral with medical

means, pp. 89, 40.

His rational^ regarding the power of suggestion, pp. 66*— 9.

His Hmitation of this power to audible, Tisibfe, or tJangiUo

suggestions, when seen, hfiardor felt, in the ordinary aoo^

tation of these terms, pp. 70, 71.
BeiumS of the result of^his experience regarding the extent of

phenomena, pp. 71, 72.
' ffis methods ofarousing from the Hypnotic state, p. 72 ; always

speedy and certain, p. 73.
His proposed test for walking on the water or suspending a

man in the air by magnetic attraction and mere power of the

human will, pp. 74, 75.
His estimate of the relative value of CMoroform and Mesmerism

or Hypnotism for suspending pain, in this countiy, during

surgical operations, pp. 80, 81.
■ His mode of procuring refreshing sleep at will, without the use

of opiates, pp. 90 — 93.


120

Braid, Mr., his opmions regarding GlaiiToyanoe and the higher pheno-
mena, pp. 14—19, 71, 72, 81, 82, 108—110.

Sonroes oiM\acj, pp. 73, 74, 81—84.

His object chiefly the practical applK»tion of Hypnotism to

the cure of disease, pp. 22 — 24.

His mental theory proved by the non-susceptibility of idiots and

delirious patients, pp. 43, 77.

His rationale of influence of passes, touches, and suggestions,

pp. 59, 60—62.

' of mesmerising and demesmerising passes, pp. 72, 73.

■ His criticism of Mr. Newnham's Theory of Mesmerism, pp.

5 — ^8, note.

His experiments -with his portmanteau key, to prove the power

of imagination, beUe^ and habit, over certain susceptible
subjects, pp. 44, 100.

His observations on, what is ** a discovery ?" p. 21.

His observations on Mr. Wakley's testing the Okeys, p. 100.

Brewster, Sir David, pp. 50, 92.
Carpenter, Dr. W. B., pp. 52, 53.

Colquhoun, Mr. J. C, his " History," chief object o^ pp. 4, 5, 13, 14.
' Extent of his fiuth in the efficacy of Magnetiffln and niiagnetic
temperament in the cure of disease, p. 35.
— ^— His opinion of the importance of will and good intentions,
p. 37.

His firm conviction regarding the reality of supersentient

clairvoyance, pp. 13, 14.

His admission r^arding the uncertainty of the answers of

clairvoyants, p. 17.
■ His lettCT to Mr, Braid, p. 110.
Critic — Opioion as to proper mode of investigating physical £m^8, p. 15.

Opinion of Mr. Braid's work on " Hypnotism," p. 34.

Differences amongst Mesmerists regarding Odyle, pp. 74, 75.
Electro-Biology, or waking phenomena, pp. 26 — 28, 42, 66, 67.
Esdaile, Dr., his interesting letter, giving resume of his mesmeric experi-
ence in India, pp. 78, 79, 80.

Fakirs, self-hypnotists, p. 20.

Gregory, Professor, his testimony to the efficacy of Hypnotic prooesoes,

pp. 92. 93.
Habit, belief and imagination, their influence over certain patients —

real cause of success of ^certaia fEmcifiil modes of practice,

pp. 22, 57, 58.
Haddock, Dr., his admission regarding the uncertaiQty of " Emma's"

clairvoyant responses, pp. 17, 18.
Haygarth, Dr., experiments with fictitious tractors, p. 104.
Hindoos, self-hypnotists, pp. 20, 112.
Hypnotism, reasons for adopting that term, p. 24.

Approval of term by Professor Bennett, p. 36.

British and Foreign Seview. p. 29.


• Usiud modes of inducing it, pp. 56, 67.
Object ofSnt experiments, p. 57.


121

•

Hypnotism, essentially a state of abstraction, or mental concentration,

pp. 10, 53, 54.
^— — The opposite condition of miad and body from common sleep,

p. 54.

Different degrees of susceptibility, pp. 57, 70, 71.

Influence of habit, expectation, and sympathy, pp. 67, 68,.

80, 81.
Natural phenomena ofi may be subverted by a system of

training and suggestion, pp. 62— ;67.
State of mind and body during, and mutual action and reac-
tion upon each other, pp. 59^--61.

How to direct it so as to soothe or excite, p. 63.

— — Can only be applied scientifically to indiyidual cases by medical

men, or under their direction, pp. 63, 64 ; trained assistants

desirable, p. 64.
Seasons why it may prove more powerful and successful than

the ordinary Mesmerising processes for curing disease, p. 65.
Various modes of suggestion, pp. 59, 60 — 63 ; most influential

in the full or double conscious state, p. 65.

Double-conscious memory, pp. 66, 67.

Sub-condition ofi when patients may be controlled by sug-
gestion whilst apparently awake, p. 66.
Rationale of Phenomena, pp. 66, 67 ; particular manners and

deportment of operator requisite, p. 67.
States of mind fetv curable or unfavourable for exercising correct

judgment, pp. 55, 69.
■ Why at one stage certain functions are impaired, and why

at another stage they may be exalted, illustrated by writing

without the use of the eyes, and a girl imitating Jenny Lind

singing correctly both words and music of songs unknown to

her, pp. 69, 70.
Sources of fallacy regarding the higher phenomena, and resumS

of Mr. Braid's experience of genuine phenomena, pp. 71, 72,

81—84.
' Modes of arousing from sleep according to intention, p. 72.
Never experienced difficulty in arousing from, as occurs to some

Mesmerised patients, p. 72, 73.
' Power of resisting influence may be no compliment to the

boaster, p. 77.
— Folly and inhumanity of obstructors of such investigations

illustrated, pp. 77—^1.
Favourable opinions of, by The UdMurffh Medical and Sw'

ffical Journal, pp. 25, 26.

Britkh and Foreign Medico- Chvrwgical Seview,

pp. 26—30.

Psychological Jowmal^ pp. 44 — 46.

Frasei^s Magazine^ pp. 4(5 — 50.

North British Review, pp. 32, 100.

The Critic, p. 34.

Professor Bennett, p. 35.

> Professor Qregory, igi^. ^^^^.


122

Hypnotism, fSavourable opinions of, by Sir David Brewster, pp. 43, 60.

Dr. W. B. Carpenter, p. 52, 53.

Mr. J. J- Q-. Wilkinson, pp. 50 — 56.

Imagination, its power and importance, pp. 40— -42.

Imitation and sympathy, pp. 58, 84 — 92.

Magnetism or Mesmerism, ordinary processes for inducing, pp. 68, 59.

More acceptable to certain classes than Hypnotism,

and why, p. 23.

Dr. Mayo, pp. 32, 54.

Mesmerism, cross, p. 73.

Magnetists or Mesmerists never in a position to prove that their objective

influence is acting alone, and why, pp. 32, 33.
Metals, their alleged Mesmerising and Non-mesmerising qualities tested,

by Mr. Wakley, pp. 102—104.
Monomania curable by Hypnotism, p. 42.

Newnham, Mr., his Theory of Mesmerism criticised, p. 6 — 8. note.
Odometer, Dr. Mayo's, p. 32.

Passes, their nature and influence explained, pp. 61, 62, 72, 73.
Beichenbach, Baron Yon, his speculations impugned as subjective in the

patient instead of being objective, as he alleged, pp. 10, 26 — 30,

32,44.
Sceptics, unenquiring dogmatic, a few remarks aud remonstrances

addressed to, pp. 66, 67.
Sleep, common, its nature and cause, p. 54.

, Wherein it difiers from Hypnotic or Magnetic sleep,

pp. 54, 55.

Refireshing, at will, without the use of opiates, Mr. Braid's

method of producing, pp. 90 — 93.
Sowler, Mr. R. S., letter, pp. 47, 48.
Stages, difierent, and their peculiar phenomeni^ p. 55.
Subjective influence of concentrated attention in changing physical

action illustrated by four gentlemen trying the experi-
ment at the same time, pp. 93, 94.

' By an epileptic patient, pp. 94 — 97.

By twenty-two patients Hypnotizing each other by joining

hands, p. 92.
Suggestion, its power on certain individuals, pp. 62, 63, 65, 66.
Susceptibility, different degrees ol, pp. 57, 70, 71.
Sympathy, imitation, imagination, and predominant ideas, their power

with certain patients, pp. 83 — 93.
Wakley, T., Esq., M.P., his testing the Okeys, and inferences, pp.

102—104.

Mratum, — Page 80, ninth line from bottom— ;/br anesthsesia, reaid
ansesthesia.


THE END.


JkMj;M T. Parkxb, Printer by Steam Power, 21, Crow a\w«^ U«M3ttMfc«t.
