OBSERVATIONS ON TRANCE; or, Human Hybernation.
By James Braid. London: John Churchill, 1850.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/observationsont00braigoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

OBSERVATIONS ON TRANCE


OR,


HUMAN HYBERNATION.


BY

JAMES BRAID,

M.R.C.S. EmifBlJBan, CJ(.W.8^ ETC., ETC.


'* No affection, to which the animal frame id subject, it
more remarkable than this. (Catalepsy or Trance.) There
is such an apparent extinction of every faculty essential to
life, that it is Inconceivable how existence should go on
during the continuance of the fit."-~Macni»h,


BX ORXXNTE LUX.


LONDON:
JOHN CHURCHILL,

PRINCES-STREET, SOHO;

EDINBURGH :
ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK.

1850.


)


Q


PREFACE.


Some years ago I had a number of queries
published in the Medical Journals, and
also printed in a separate form for circula-
tion, both at home and abroad, with the
view of accumulating additional and accu-
rate information regarding the curious
points in Physiology treated of in this pam-
phlet. Through the kindness of my friend,
Georob Swinton, Esq. of Edinburgh, and
Sir C. E. Trevelyan, of the Treasury,
application was made to ^ir Claitde Mar-
tin Wade on my behalf, and a copy of the
said queries was given to him; to which
application Sir Claude kindly responded,
by furnishing me with the valuable narra-
tive now published, regarding what he was
an eye-witness of when acting as Political
Agent at the Court of Runjeet Singh, at
Lahore. The narrative bears internal evi-
dence that Sir Claude was a most accurate
observer, as well as a lucid '7JT\\jet» ^^ "^


IV PRSFACX.

of those gentlemen I beg to tender my very
best thanks for furnishing me with such a
valuable document. It was intended to
have appeared in a new edition of my work
on Hypnotism; but as the publication of
that work must unavoidably be postponed
for a short time longer, I have thought it
desirable to print the original information
which I have obtained immediately, in a
separate form, as it cannot fail to be most
interesting to all scientific men ; and
its publication may, moreover, stimulate
others to investigate and furnisb additional
evidence on the subject.

The second case, by an eye-witness of
the facts, was furnished to me by a retired
Major, who served as an officer for many
years in India. He requested me not to
publish his name, because he understood
the Directors disliked that any official men
in their service should be known to take a
prominent part in anything so far out of
the line of their special duties. However,
after I had written my narrative of the
transaction, from the facts which he had
communicated to me, he was kind enough
to hear it read over to him, in the presence
of several mutual friends, when he pro-
nounced it correct on every point. He
Assured us that he never could forget the


PREFACE. V

circumstances of that transaction, in as
much as the part which he took in it, and
his dread, in the end, that the devotee must
have perished in the enterprise, and he be
thereby rendered liable to be indicted as
accessory to his murder, had caused him
greater anxiety and horror than all the
actions and scenes of danger he had en-
countered during the whole of his military
career.

If medical gentlemen residing in India
would only take the trouble of investigating
a few of these cases systematically and
carefully, not merely with the view of
guarding against all sources of collusion
and fraud which might be perpetrated in
such exhibitions, but also hy weighing the
body of the Fakeer before his being shut up
or buried, and again on being exposed to
view ; and also by noting particularly the
relative degree in which respiration and
circulation become respeciively affected, both
as regards time and extent of change, by
the voluntary processes of the Fakeer for
inducing the Trance, we might very soon
be in possession of all the information on
the subject which we could desire. I should
feel muth obliged to any gentleman who
would be so kind as forward such in-
formation to me, av\d^ \^ \^\!^:JC\^\sv^^^ ^^


VI PREFACE.

should duly acknowledge the extent of my
obligation to each individual who might
entrust such information to my care.

It may here be requisite for me to ex-
plain, that by the term Hypnotism, or JVer-
vous Sleep, which frequently occurs in the
following pages, I mean a peculiar condition
of the nervous system, into which it may
be thrown by artificial contrivance, and
which differs, in several respects, from com-
mon sleep or the waking condition. I do
not allege that this condition is induced
through the transmission of a magnetic or
q/ccult influence from my body into that of
my patients ; nor do I profess, by my pro-
cesses, to produce the higher phenomena of
the Mesmerists. My pretensions are of a
much more humble character, and are all
consistent with generally admitted prin-
ciples in physiological and psychological
science. Hypnotism might therefore not
inaptly be designated. Rational Mesmerism,
in contra-distinction to the Transcendental
Mesmerism of the Mesmerists.

Arlington-house,

Oxford-street, Manchester,

July 1850.


OBSERVATIONS ON TRANCE.


In the year 1845 I published some observations
on the remarkable feats of the Fakeers of India,
who had been represented as haying acquired the
power of suffering themselves to be buried alive,
enclosed in bags, shut up in sealed boxes, or even
of being buried for days or for weeks in common
graves, and assuming their wonted activity on being
released from their temporary confinement or sepul-
ture.

Such extraordinary feats were naturally looked
upon with suspicion, and believed to be a species of
deception, accomplished entirely through collusion,
and not at all bond fide transactions, such as alleged.
Whilst I think it highly probable that this is the
true character of many of these alleged feats, still
there are others which admit of no such explana-
tion. The difficulties of eluding detection in several
carefully narrated cases, were evidently so great as
to have rendered deception impossible ; and it there-
fore becomes the duty of scientific men fairly to
meet the difficulty, and to endeavour to arrive at a
satisfactory solution of the phenomena on physio-
logical principles.

On careful consideration of the whole phenomena
narrated in connection with these cases, coupled with
my experience of the powers of hypnotism, by which
individuals can throw themselves into a state of
catalepsy or trance, more or less profound, in which
condition, like the hybemating animals, all the vital
functions are reduced to the minimum of what is
compatible with continued existence and restoration
to their former activity, I arrived at the coucl\3.s.v«v\^
that the individuals teferrc^ lo ^eew«^\^^^^^'^^
apparently impossibU feats \i^ >i)^\w<vcv% ^^w*"*^^^^


8

into this state of temporary hybernation or trance,
through suppressing the respiration and fixing the
mind, just as was manifested by the well-attested
case of Colonel Townsend in this country, and by
many patients whom I have myself witnessed, who
have acquired the like power in a minor degree.

The following is the narrative of Colonel Town-
send's case, as recorded by the late Dr. Cheyne of
Dublin; and, when we take into consideration the
deservedly high estimation in which Dr. Cheyne
was held, as a practical physician, possessed of high
talents and scientific attainments, and the high
character he bore as a Christian man and a gentle-
man, it is impossible to have had the Colonel's in-
teresting and uncommon case attested and recorded
more satisfactorily.

Dr. Cheyne narrates the case as follows : — **'He
could die or expire when he pleased, and yet, by an
effi)rt, or somehow, he could come to life again. He
insisted so much upon us seeing the trial made, that
we were at last forced to comply. We all three felt
his pulse first ; it was distinct, though small and
thready, and his heart had its usual beating. He
composed himself on his back, and lay in a still
posture for some time ; while I held his right hand.
Dr. Baynard laid his hand on his heart, and Mr.
Skrine held a clean looking-glass to his mouth. I
found his pulse sink gradually, till at last I could
not feel any, by the most exact and nice touch. Dr.
Baynard could not feel tbe least motion in the heart,
nor Mr. Skrine perceive the least soil of breath on
the bright mirror he held to his mouth. Then each
of us, by turns, examined his arm, heart, and breath,
but could not, by the nicest scrutiny, discover the
least symptom of life in him. We reasoned a long
time about this odd appearance as well as we could,
and, finding he still continued in that condition, we
began to conclude that he had, indeed, carried the
experiment too far ; and at last we viexe satisfied
that he was actually dead, and were ^u^t xe^^^^ Vo


9

leave him. This continued about half an hour. By
nine in the morning, in autumn, as we were going
away, we observed some motion about the body, and,
upon examination, found his pulse and the motion
of his heart gradually returning ; he began to breathe
heavily and speak softly. We were all astonished to
the last degree at this unexpected change, and, after
some further conversation with him, and among our-
selves, went away fully satisfied as to all the parti-
culars of this fact, but confounded and puzzled, and
not able to form any rational scheme that might
account for it"

In the " Dabistan," a learned work on the reli-
gious sects in India, translated a few years ago from
the Persic, reference is made to the power acquired
by various individuals of separating their souls from
their bodies, as they style it, and resuming their
wonted relations to each other again at will. One
individual is specially referred to by name, who had
attained the power of suppressing his breath for
three hours! another who could do so for tweive
hours ; another who could do so for two days : and
Balik Natha, who attained to above a hundred years
of age, could suppress his breath for a week. Here,
then, we have exactly^similar phenomena exhibited
by these Hindoos, as those recorded in the above
case of Colonel Townsend ; and the knowledge of
these facts will prepare the reader, in some measure,
for the reception of the still more astounding phe-
nomena recorded in the following narratives.

Since the above-named period, I have lost no
opportunity of accumulating additional evidence on
the subject ; and the result is, that I am now enabled
to publish two valuable documents from eye-wit-
nesses of the facts, which, together with the evi-
dence we formerly possessed, must set the point at
rest for ever as to the fact of the feats referred to
having been genuine phenomena.

Sir Claude M. Wade*&tv«;xt«.\AN«^^% ^•^wwwn'^'^xsnr^
by the following poWte note i


10


*4


Edinburgh, Sept 13, 1845.

•* Sir Claude Wade presents compliments to Dr.
Braid, and has much pleasure in enclosing, for his
free use and information, in the form of a narrative,
replies to the queries received from Dr. Braid,
through Mr. George Swinton, regarding the Fakeer
who buried himself alive at Lahore in 1837. Sir
Claude regrets, that in consequence of his being con-
stantly on the move, and unable to refer to his
papers for information, he has only now found
leisure to comply with Dr. Braid's application.
Should any pointbe omitted in Sir C. Wade's account,
he will be happy to supply the deficiency on a further
application, addressed to his usual place of residence,
Ryde, Isle of Wight

" To Dr. Braid, &c., &c., Manchester.'*

*• REPLIES TO DR. BRAID'S QUERIES REGARD-
ING THE FAKEER WHO BURIED HIMSELF
ALIVE AT LAHORE IN 18S7.

** I was present at the Court of Runjeet Singh
when the Fakeer mentioned by the Honourable
Captain Osborne was buried alive for six weeks;
and, although I arrived a lew hours after his actual
interment, and did not, consequently, witness that
part of the phenomenon, I had the testimony of
RuDJeet Singh himself, and others the most cre-
dible witnesses of his Court, to the tnith of the
Fakeer having been so buried before them ; and, from
my having myself been present when he was dis-
interred, and restored to a state of perfect vitality,
in a position so close to him as to render any de*
ception impossible, it is my firm belief that there
was no collusion in producing the extraordinary
fact which I have related. Captain Osborne's book
is not at present before me, that I might refer to
such parts of his account as devolve the authenticity
of the fact on my authority. I will, therefore,
briefly state what I saw, to enable others to judge of
the weight due to my evidence, and whether any
proofs cf collusion can, in theii op\n\OT^)ae ^eXftcXe^.


11

** On the approach of the appointed time, accord-
ing to inyitation, I accompanied Runjeet Singh to
the spot where the Fakeer had been baried. It was
in a square building, called a barra durra, in the
middle of one of the gardens, adjoining the palace
at Lahore, with an open verandah all round, having
an enclosed room in the centre. On arriving there,
Runjeet Singh, who was attended on the occasion
by the whole of his Court, dismounting fVom his
elephant, asked me to join him in examining the
building to satisfy himself that it was closed as he
had left it. We did so ; there had been a door on
each of the four sides of the room, three of which
were perfectly closed with brick and mortar, the
fourth had a strong door, which was also closed with
mud up to the padlock, which was sealed with the
private seal of Runjeet Singh in his own presence,
when the Fakeer was interred. Indeed, the exte-
rior of the building presented no aperture by
which air could be admitted, or any communica-
tion held by which food could be conveyed to the
Fakeer. I may also add, that the walls closing the
doorway bore no mark whatever of having been re-
cently disturbed or removed.

" Runjeet Singh recognised the seal as the one
which he had affixed, and as he was as sceptical as
any European could be of the success of such an en-
terprise, — to guard as far as possible against any col-
lusion, — he had placed two companies from his own
personal escort near the building, from which four
sentries were furnished and relieved every two hours,
night and day, to guard the building firom intrusion.
At the same time, he ordered one of the principal
officers of his Court to visit the place occasional] j,
and to report the result of his inspection to him,
while he himself, or his Minister, kept the seal
which closed the hole of the padlock, and the latter
received the report, morning and evening, from the
officer on guard.
"After our exammslioiv ^^ «%.\ft^ ««t^j^'^««'*^^


12

the verandah opposite the door, while some of
Runjeet Singh's people dug away the mud wall,
and one of his officers broke the seal and opened
the padlock. When the door was thrown open,
nothing but a dark room was to be seen. Runjeet
Singh and myself then entered it, in company with
the servant of the Fakeer ; and a light being
brought, we descended about three feet below the
floor of the room, into a sort of cell, where a wooden
box, about four feet long by three broad, with a
sloping roof, containing the Fakeer, was placed up-
right, the door of which had also a padlock and seal
similar to that on the outside. On opening it we
saw a figure enclosed in a bag of white linen,
fastened by a string over the head — on the ex-
posure of which a grand salute was fired, and the
surrounding multitude came crowding to the door
to see the spectacle. After they had gpratified their
curiosity, the Fakeer's servant, putting his anns
into the box, took the figure out, and closing the
door, placed it with its back against it, exactly as
the Fakeer had been squatted (like a Hindoo idol)
in tlie box itself.

'< Runjeet Singh and myself then descended into
the cell, which was so small, that we werb only able
to sit on the ground in front of the body, and so
close to it as to touch it with our hands and knees.

" The servant then began pouring warm water over
the figure; but, as my object was to see if any
fraudulent practices could be detected, I proposed
to Runjeet Singh to tear open the bag, and have a
perfect view of the body before any means of re-
suscitation were employed. I accordingly did so ;
and may here remark, that the bag, when first seen
by us, looked mildewed, as if it had been buried
some time. The legs and arms of the body were
shrivelled and stiff, the face full, the head reclining
on the shoulder like that of a corpse. I then called
to the medical gentleman who was attending me to
come down and insptct the body, wYAcYv \ve ^\^,\i>aX


18

could discover no puUation in the heart, the temples,
or the arm. There was, however, a heat about the
region of the brain, which no other part of the body
exhibited, (u)

" The servant then recommenced bathing him with
hot water, and gradually relaxing his arms and legs
from the rigid state in which they were contracted,
Rui^eet Singh taking his right and I his left leg, to aid
by friction in restoring them to their proper action {
during which time the servant placed a hot wheaten
cake, about an inch thick, on the top of the head, — a
process which he twice or thrice renewed. He then
pulled out of his nostrils and ears the wax and
cotton with which they were stopped; and after
gpreat exertion opened his mouth by inserting the
point of a knife between his teeth, and, while hold-
ing his jaws open with his left hand, drew the
tongue forward with his right, — in the course of
which the tongue flew back several times to its
curved position upwards, in which it had originally
been, so as to close the gullet.

'* He then rubbed his eyelids with ghee (ox clarified
butter) for some seconds, until he succeeded in open-
ing them, when the eyes appeared quite motionless
and glazed. After the cake had been applied for
the third time to the top of his head, the body was
violently convulsed, the nostrils became inflated,
when respiration ensued, and the limbs began to
assume a natural fulness ; but the pulsation was still
faintly perceptible. The servant then put some of
the ghee on his tongue, and made him swallow it. A
few minutes afterwards, the eyeballs became dilated,
and recovered their natural colour, when the Fakeer,
recognising Runjeet Singh sitting close to him, ar-
ticulated, in a low, sepulchral tone, scarcely audible,

(a) Might not this '* heat about the region of the
brain" have been caused by the warm water poured
over the head imparting the greatest de^ee oC Ke.«.t.
to the part with w\uo\\ \t catue ^\%x \w ^«cwvwx\— ^ •


14

* Do you believe me now ?' Runjeet Singh replied
in the affirmative, and invested the Fakeer with a
pearl necklace and superb pair of gold bracelets,
and pieces of silk and muslin, and shawls, forming
what is called a khelat ; such as is usually conferred
by the Princes of India on persons of distinction.

** From the time of the box being opened, to the
recovery of the voice, not more than half an hour
could have elapsed ; and in another half-hour the
Fakeer talked with myself and those about him
freely, though feebly, like a sick person ; and we then
left him, convinced that there had been no fraud or
collusion in the exhibition we had witnessed.(a)

*^ I was present, also, when the Fakeer was sum-
moned by Rui^'eet Singh from a considerable dis-
tance to Lahore, some months afterwards, again to
bury himself alive before Captain Osborne and the
officers of the late Sir William M'Naghton's
mission in 1838; which, after the usual preparation,
he offered to do for a few days, the term of Sir Wil-
liam's mission being nearly expired ; but from the
tenor of the doubts expressed, and some observa-
tions made by Captain Osborne as to keeping the key
of the room in which he was to be buried in his own
possession, the Fakeer, with the superstitious dread
of an Indian, became evidently alaimed, and appre-
hensive that if once within Captain Osborne's
power, he would not be allowed to escape. His
refusal on that occasion, will naturally induce a
suspicion of the truth of the transaction which I
witnessed ; but to those well acquainted with the
character of the natives of India, it will not be
surprising that, where life and death were concerned,
the Fakeer should have manifested a distrust of what

(a) These feats of the Fakeers in no way invali-
date the importance of the Gospel miracle of the
resurrection of Christ. In the latter case, the trans-
fixing of the heart by the soldier's spear was neces-
sarily a mortal wound, from which recovery was
impossible unless by a miracle.


15

to him appeared the mysterious iotentions of a
European who was a perfect stranger to him, while
he was ready to repose implicit confidence in Run-
jeet Singh and others before whom he had exhibited.
I am satisfied that he refused only from the cause
I have mentioned, and that he would have done for
me what he declined doing for Captain Osborne.

" It had previously been observed, also, by Sir
William M'Naghton and others of the party, truly,
though jestingly, that if the Fakeer should not sur-
vive the trial to which he was required to submit,
those who might instigate him to it would run the
risk of being indicted for murder, which induced .
them to refrain from pressing the subject further.

** I share entirely in the apparent incredibility of
the fact of a man being buried alive, and surviving
the trial for various periods of duration ; but how-
ever incompatible with our knowledge of physiology,
in the absence of any visible proof to the contrary, I
am bound to declare my belief in the facts which I
have represented, however impossible their existence
may appear to others, (a)

(a) There may be some hypercritical, suspicious
individuals ready to allege, as no direct declaration
to the oontrarv has been recorded in the narrative,
that some subterranean communication may have
existed, so as to have afforded access to the Fakeer
by accomplices during[ bis imprisonment in the
barra durra, and that without the possibility of their
being detected by the guards surrounding the ex-
terior of the buifdinff. When we reflect, however,
on the fact, that the object of Runjeet Singh was not
to prove, but to disprove, the possibilit;^ of the success
of such an enterprise, it is impossible for us to
imagine, with all the precautions narrated as having
been adopted by him for guarding against deception
exteriorly, that he should not have exercised equal
scrutiny and care to ^uard against sUbierranean in-
trusion; without which security, all the external
J>recaution8 would have been a gross absurdity In
iEict, such an oversight on a point regarding which
the most simple individual would not readily suffer:
himself to be deceived, NvouVd ViaN^ cx^ouft^ Yvxyxsj^-^
Singh, and the wboU oi \)!kftCo\xtx, v^ ^<& >\sss^ws5«w


16

" I took some pains to inquire into the mode by
which such a result was effected, and was informed
that it rested on the doctrine of the Hindoo physiolo-
gists, that heat constituted the self-existent principle
of life, and that if the functions of the other elements
were so far destroyed as to leave that one in its
perfect purity, life could be sustained for considerable
lengths of tiuie independent of air, food, or any other
means of sustenance. To produce such a state the
patients are obliged to go through a very severe
preparation ; for a description of which, vide the en-
closed note. — (Unfortunately this note did not come
to hand with the narrative. — J. B.)

*' How far such means are calculated to produce
such effects the physiologists will be better able to

of being accomplices of the Fakeer in the perpetra«
tion of a gross public imposture, — a most improbable
position for such a prince to place himself and his
Court in, for such a purpose.

And again ; that Runjeet Singh was sceptical up
to the moment of the Fakeer's restoration, is ob-
vious from the terms in which the Fakeer addressed
him when he recovered his sight, — " Do you believe
me now?" The mildewed state of the bag, as re-
marked by Sir Claude M. Wade, at the time when
the box was opened and the figure first exposed, was
most conclusive as to its having been buried for
some time.

Lieut. A. Boileau's case meets all the objections —
for the cell, or grave, was lined with masonry, and
large slabs of stone covered it, so as to render it
impossible for the Fakeer to escape.-— F«fc page 19.
Indeed at a subsequent interment of this Fakeer,
besides all the precautions enumerated above as re-
sorted to on that occasion, after the box containing
the Fakeer was deposited in the cell, locked and
sealed, earth was turned in and trodden down, so as
completely to surround and cover the box ; a crop of
barley was sown over it ; and a constant guard main-
tained on the spot. Moreover, twice during the
period of interment Runjeet Singh had the body dn^
up, when it was found to be in exactly the same posi-
tion as when interred, and in a state of apparently
entirely suspended animation. At the expiration
of this prolonged interment, the Fakeer recovered
under the usual treatment.


17

judge than I can pretend to do. I merely state
what I saw and heard ; and think, that when we
consider the incredulity and ridicule, and actual
persecution, with which some of the most wonderful
discoveries of modem times have heen regarded —
viz., galvanism, Harvey's system of the circulation of
the blood. Mesmerism, &c. &c. ; that it is presump-
tuous in any of us to deny to the Hindoos the pos-
sible discovery or attaintment of an art which has
hitherto escaped the researches of European science/'

Such, then, is the narrative of Sir C. M. Wade;
and when we consider the high character of the
author as a gentleman of honour, talents, and at-
tainments of the highest order, and the searching,
painstaking efforts displayed by him throughout the
whole investigation, and his close proximity to the
body of the Fakeer, and opportunity of observing
minutely every point for himself, as well as the
facilities, by his personal intercourse with Runjeet
Singh and the whole of his Court, of gaining the
most accurate information on every point, I conceive
it is impossible to have had a more valuable or con-
clusive document for determining the fact, that no
collusion or deception existed in the above case.

The next case I shall adduce is one furnished to
me by Sir C. E. Trevelyan, of the Treasury. He
was not an eye-witness of the transaction, but the
source of his information seems to be highly satis-
factory. He says : — " I perfectly well recollect, that
when I was acting as political agent at Kotah, in
1829 — 30, the Rajah Rana's Vukeel, (who was a very
respectable, and, for a native Indian, a very truthful
man,) told me one day, when he happened to be with
me on business, that he had been present that morn-
ing with the Rajah Rana at the digging up of a
Fakeer, who had been buried, as well as I recollect,
ten days ; and that after his resurrection he was in
good health, and when he had refreshed himself with
eating and drinking, was quite himself a^ain. T\\^
Vukeel also assured me, V\\*X.^'ft\^^^>a^^'**ofc'^^ ^'^^

^1


18

ception, because tho man had been buried in the
Rajah Rana*s presence, and a guard of trusty soldiers
had been constantly stationed over the place until
he was dug up.

** I also recollect that the commandant of my escort
and the surgeon to the political agency were fully
impressed with the belief that the facts of the case
were as stated by the Vukeel. They obtained their
information from the i^idependent source of some of
the Sepoys of the escort, who were present at the
digging up; and I received several additional par-
ticulars from this source, which I cannot now call
to mind, except that the Sepoys stated it as a fact,
that some Fakeers and others had a way of drawing
in their breath, and thrusting their tongues back
and clenching their fingers, which enabled them to
subsist for a long time without food, and with very
little air.

" I believe the man who was buried at Kotah to be
the same person who is spoken of in *Boileau's
Journal,* and that he went from one native court to
another to get money by a display of his powers.

" My own belief is, that he really did remain with-
out food, and with only so much air as could reach
him in his box underground, for a period of ten days
or thereabouts."

I feel deeply indebted to Sir C. Trevelyan for the
above valuable testimony relative to this curious
inquiry.

The following case occurred under the eye of
Lieut. A. Boileau, a British officer, and is recorded
in his ** Narrative of a Journey in Bajwarra, in
IStl/),*' and is that referred to above by Sir C. £.
Trovelyan :

"Just before our arrival at Jesulmer the BavtuI
had adopted a most singular expedient to obtain an
heir to his throne, and the circumstances of the
case are altogether so extraordinary that we should
hardly have given them credence had they not
occurred so immediately uwdei wxt xv<i\iR^» "W*


19

were told, soon after our coming, that a man had
been buried alive, of his own free will, at the back
of the tank close to our tents, and that he was to
remain under ground for a whole month before the
process of exhumation should take place. The pre-
scribed period elapsed on the Ist of April, 1835, and
in the forenoon of that day he was dug out alive, in
the presence of Goshur Lai, one of the ministers
who had also superintended his interment The
place in which he was buried is a small building of
stone, about twelve feet long, and eight feet broad,
built on the west edge of the large tank called
Gurressie, so often mentioned. In the floor of the
house was a hole, about three feet long, two and a
half broad, and the same depth, or perhaps a yard
deep, in which he was placed, in a sitting posture,
sewed up in a linen shroud, with his knees doubled
up towards the chin, his feet turned inward towards
the stomach, and his hands also pointed inward
towards the chest. The cell, or grave, was lined
iviih masonry f and floored with many folds of woollen
and other cloth, that the white ant, and such insects,
should be the less able to molest him. Two heavy
slabs of stone, five or six feet long, several inches thick,
and broad enough to covet the mouth of the grave, were
then placed over him, so that ?ie could not escape, and,
I believe, a little earth was plastered over the whole,
so as to make the surface of the ground smooth and
compact. The door of the house was also built up,
and people placed outside to mount guard duritig the
whole month, so that no tricks might be played, nor
deception practised, • • ♦ Lieut. Trevelyan
and I set ofl* together to see what might remain to
be seen. The outer wall of the house door had been
broken up, the covering of the grave removed, and
the body lifted out in the presence of Goshur Lai.
The moonshee arrived in time to see the opening of
the shroud, as above mentioned, and stated that he
was taken out in a perfectly sen&e\e%% ^\aXa,N*\^^s«»
eyes closed, his hands ctaiwpe^ mA, ^w««^««s»'»'^^


20

stomach very much shrunken, and his teeth joined
so fast together, that the hy-standers were ohliged
to force open his mouth with an iron instrument, in
order to pour a little water down his throat. Under
this treatment he gradually recovered his senses,
and was restored to the use of his limhs. ♦ ♦ ♦ •
He conversed with us in a loWf gentle tone of voicCf
at \f his animal functions were still in a very feeble
state ; hut so far from appearing distressed in mind hy
the long interment from which he had just been released,
he said that we MroHT bury him again for a

TWELVEMONTH IF WE PLEASED !

'* He is rather a young man, ahout thirty years of
age, and his native village is within five kos of
Kamaul; but, instead of remaining at home, he
generally travels about the country to Ajmer,
Kotah, Indor, &c., allowing himself to be buried
for weeks or months by any one who will pay him
handsomely for the same. ♦ ♦ ♦ • This
individual is said to have acquired by long practice
the art of holding his breath for a considerable
period, as during the time that one might coimt
fifty, and gradually increasing at intervals to one
hundred, two hundred, and so on, as the pearl-
divers may be supposed to do. He is, moreover,
said to have acquired the power of shutting his
mouth, and at the same time stopping the interior
opening of the nostrils with his tongue, which latter
feat is at times practised as a means of si^icide by
the negro slaves in the West Indies, when suffering
under the lash. ♦ ♦ • ♦ As a farther pre-
paration for tliis long burial, the subject of \j(he
present ex])eriment abstains from all solid £ck>d
some days previous to interment, taking no other
nourishment than milk, which is believed by the
natives to pass off almost entirely by the urethra, so
that he may not be inconvenienced by the contents
of the stomach or bowels while pent up in his
narrow grave/'

The next case I have to naii'dte, is, if possible


21

still more conclusive, inasmuch as the devotee was
buried in a common grave, within the military limits,
exactly in the same manner as they buried the common
soldiers— with this exception, that he had no coMn —
in an open space, where the whole transaction was
witnessed by thousands of Hindoos, who weie
anxiously watching to guard their sainted brother
against foul play which might be inflicted on him
by the Mussulman guards, who were appointed to
do duty at his grave, so as to prevent the possibility
of intrusion or collusion during the whole period of
his interment. There were thus a fair field and no
favour for the devotee ; abundance of witnesses, and
the contending interests and bitter religious antipathy
existing between the two parties at work, constituting
them a counter guard, thereby rendering collusion
or foul play in the transaction impossible.

The following is the narrative of the facts, as com-
municated to me by Major , a retired officer of

the Honourable the East India Company's service.
This gentleman requested me not to publish his
name, lest he might incur the displeasure of the
Directors, for having taken such a prominent part
in a transaction so much beyond the line of his
official duties. However, in order to give the
greatest possible authenticity to the facts which he
dared venture to do, under the circumstances, after
I had written my narrative from the facts which
he had communicated to me, he was so kind as to
hear the whole read aloud in the presence of se-
veral mutual friends, when he pronounced my
narrative correct on every point, and concluded with
the remark, that the case made too deep an impres-
sion on his memory ever to be forgotten by him,
from the fact of his having been personally so pain-
fully implicated in the transaction.

Whilst staff-officer of a British military station in
the Concon,in 1828, this gentleman had heard of some
of these strange feats of Fakeera b\ir3\xv^>^ctDx^c«^<&
aJivc in that neighbourliood, WX. Vw^ xtfi vci&fcx««J^ '""^


22

the reports, believing the whole alleged feats to be
mere hoaxes or tricks. However, the following cir-
cumstance occurred, which proved to him the reality
of certain individuals being veritably possessed of
such extraordinary powers.

One day this officer was waited upon by a Brah-
min, who held the public office of Chowdrie. — The
Chowdrie is a civil functionary who has the super-
intendence of Courts, and all public transactions
or feats within his district ; but he is subordinate to
the staff-officer in regard to all which occurs within
what is called the military limits or cantonments, so
that, in all which appertains to the said localities he
is, in the first place, obliged to obtain the sanction
of the British officer in command. — The Chowdrie
told the officer, that the object of his visit was to
obtain his sanction for one of his sainted country-
men, — ^who had come hither for the purpose of per-
forming one of those feats above referred to, — to
bury himself for nine days within the military
boundary. He moreover added, that an immense
number of people had assembled from the neigh-
bouring country to witness the holy man perform the
said feat. To this the officer replied, that he did not
believe any man was such a fool as to sui&r himself
to be buiied alive for nine days, because in such case
he must inevitably perish ; and, having said so, he
dismissed the Chowdrie abruptly, without complying
with his request.

Shortly thereafter, however, the Chowdrie re-
turned, to urge the officer to comply with the re-
quest of the Fakeer, assuring him that the holy man
was proposing it in good faith, and was most anxious
to be permitted to do so within the military limits,
as affording better proof that there could be no col-
lusion than if he did so elsewhere ; he also added,
that he had frequently done so before, and that his
sanctity would save him on this as on former occa-
sions. The Chowdrie even went so far as to say,
that bia sanctity had given "him wic\i ^vret ^V0\


23

God, that he could remain for any length of time he
chose underground with perfect safety. At length
the officer replied, " Well, if the man is determined
to hury himself, you shall have my sanction for him
doing 80 within the military limits : but remember
this, that I shall take care that no trick$ shall he played,
Imt that he shall he hurled in good earnest; and, the
more certainly to secure this, his grave shall be sur-
rounded the whole time by a guard of Mussulmans,
90 that no Hindoo shall approach it during his sepul-
ture." With all this the Chowdrie was perfectly
satisfied, seeming firm in his faith that the sanctity
of the holy man was quite sufficient to save him
during this extraordinary trial.

Hereupon the officer instantly gave instructions
to an orderl^f to send a corporal to see the man fairly
buried, and to set a sentry, to be relieved in the
usual manner, to keep strict watch over the grave
during the whole of the nine days, and to suffer no
one even to approach the grave ; and, the more cer-
tainly to secure this being faithfiolly accomplished,
none but Mussulmans were to be deputed as guards.
In a few hours after these orders had been issued
by the said officer, the corporal returned and an-
nounced to him, that, after certain pioceedings on
the part of the saint, and receiving many gifts from
the assembled multitude, he laid himself down and
passed into a particular condition, after which his
followers wrapped his body in a covering called
a "kumlee," and then laid him in a grave dug in the
ordinary way and of the usual size, from three to
four feet deep, and then turned in the earth upon
his body. No coffin was used. On this being done,
a Mussulman guard was placed, with orders to walk
round the grave, and on no account to suffer any one
even to approach it.

Every two hours reports were brought to the
officer or his orderly that fresh guards had been set
to relieve those on duty, and \^X «2\ T^\sv2fifiDkR.^'»&
when the earth was thxoYrxi o\«t ^^ ^«s^Nfe^« '^'^


24

invincihle was the hatred of the Mussulman guards
against the Hindoos, that they would not suffer any
one of them even to approach the grave to get a
particle of the sacred earth (a gift inestimable in
their opinion) which covered the holy man, whom
the Hindoos firmly believed would rise again on the
ninth day, as predicted by him.

On the evening of the third day, when other
active and important duties had entirely banished
from his mind the condition of the buried Fakeer,
the officer's attention was drawn to the subject by
the person who came to report to him that the sentry
had been relieved, and the " dead man all well ;"
that was to say, remained as at the time he was
buried, three days previously. On this announce-
ment being made, the officer, whose faith was less
vigorous than that of the Hindoos as to the sanctity
of the devotee being able to save him under such
circumstances, became alarmed, inasmuch as the
feat having taken place with his sanction, within the
military limits, and he having set a sentry over
his grave, should the man be really dead, as he
had no doubt must be the case ere then, he might
be brought into trouble and arraigned as accessory
to his murder, and lose his commission, with other
dire consequences.

The officer, therefore, hurried home, and instantly
sent for the Chow^ll^e, who applied to him for his
sanction for the feat to take place within the mili-
tary boundary, told him his doubts and fears, and
urged the instant disinterment of the devotee. The
Chowdrie hereupon begged to assure the officer
that there was no cause whatever for alarm about
the safety of the buried saint, as he had been fre-
quently buried in the same manner, and added, that
so great was his sanctity, that he would be perfectly
safe, and certain to recover were he to remain in his
grave for twelve months or for a hundred years, and he
therefore urged upon the officer to allow him to re-
main in hia grave for the fuW lexm ol tvYswc ^«^v


25

originally stipulated for. Military faith and couragCi
however, were by no means equal in this instance to
that of the Biahmin, and the soldier quailed whilst
this enthusiast stood firm, urging the full term of
the feat to be exhausted before the exhumation
should take place. The officer, however, would not
consent to this, but insisted on the instant disinter*
ment of the holy man ; and, moreover, by way of
self-defence, in case the worst of his fears should be
realised, he ordered the Chowdrie, in case the devotee
was found to be really dead, instantly to have his
body carried beyond the military territory.

The more certainly to guard against all further
mischance, my friend instantly ordered his horse
and rode to the spot, that he might be an eye-
witness of all the future proceedings. When he
arrived at the place, he found the grave surrounded
by an immense crowd of Hindoos, all anxiously
waiting to witness the result of this exhumation or
resurrection of tLeir sainted brother. The Chowdrie
having arrived also, orders were instantly given to
remove the earth and drag forth the body of the
holy man. To the horror of our military friend, forth
it came, wrapped in its camel-hair coverlet, on re-
moving which, he found the body cold and stiff as
a mummy. When he had satisfied himself of this
by personal examination, both by sight and touch,
he felt assured that his fate was sealed, that his
commission would be lost, and himself implicated
in the murder of this religious enthusiast.

There was yetone hope, although to him apparently
a forlorn one, that the Fakeer might be restored by
the use of those means of restoration which two of
the holy man's followers were about to apply, ac-
cording to instructions which he had previously
given to them. They began by rubbing some pre-
paration over his head, eyes, and eye-brows, and
also over the palms of the hands and soles of the
feet, and were particularly a«&\^\xQ\x<& ^1 ^«vx -k^-
pUcation of it, and fricliotv on« VVxfe x^w^ ^^ ^^^


26

heart. They had persevered in these attempts for
about a quarter of an hour without the slightest
apparent impression being made on the subject,
and the Christian's hope was now completely ex-
tinguished. Not so that of the idolaters of the
East. They plied their manipulations with unre-
mitting assiduity, and presently were enabled to
open the eyes. Still it was but the glassy look of
the eyes of a corpse. By degrees, however, slight
motion of the eyes was discernible, which increased
until he could slowly move the head ; and, after
lengthened manipulations and pummelling about
his chest, a visible heaving of the chest took place,
and still later he was able to articulate a few words,
to the unspeakable joy of the Christian master of
ceremonies, as well as of the Hindoos and Brahmins
assembled on the occasion.

In about an hour the Fakeer had pretty well re-
covered the use of his faculties, mental as well as
physical, and the major left the field quite as much
gratified to find he had escaped the loss of his com-
mission, and the risk of being arraigned as ac-
cessory to the murder of this devotee, as the latter
was to remain and receive the numerous presents
and mutual congratulations of his admiring and
adoring countrymen.

I think the evidence afforded by these narratives
proves, beyond doubt, that the individuals referred
to possessed the power they represented themselves
to have acquired, and performed the feats indicated
hand fide ; and that the true physiological explana-
tion is that which I adverted to at the commence-
ment of this paper ; namely, that they were self-
hypnotists, and that they were in a state of tempo-
rary hybernation, or trance, during which, although
the lamp of life was burning slowly, still it was
burning, otherwise death would have been the
inevitable result.

It does not appear that this practice has been long
known to exist, and it is Taihex a c\mo\3A «^w^^-


27

tion to detennine how it could have originated.
The following ideas have occurred to me, and I think
a quotation from the " Bahistan'' furnishes the key
to unlock this mystery :

" It is an established custom amongst the Yogis
(Fakeers) that, when malady overpowers them, they
bury themselves. They are wont, also, with open
eyes, to force their looks towards the middle of their
eyebrows, until so looking they perceive the figure
of a man ; if this should appear without hands, feet,
or any member, for each they have determined that
the boundaries of their existence would be within so
many years, months, or days. When they see the
figure without a head, they know that there certainly
remains very little of their life ; on that account,
having seen the prognostic, they bury themselves."
(Vol. ii. p. 138, 139.)

Thus, then, they die voluntarily, in order that
they may escape the ordinary pangs of dissolution ;
that is, they reduce themselves to the deep state of
self-hypnotism, which I have likened to trance or
hybernation in man, in which condition they are
committed to their tombs or graves, as their final
earthly resting-places. Now, it appears to me no
very improbable supposition to allege, that accident
had revealed to them the fact, that some of those
who were thus buried might be restored to life after
exhumation, — the action of the air restoring respira-
tion and circulation, on an accidental disinterment of
the body qfsome one thus interred; and the fact once
observed would encourage others to try how much
tJiei/ could accomplish in this way, as the newest
and most striking achievement which they could
perform in token of the divine origin and efficacy of
tfieir religion over that of all others.

We have the analogue to these feats of the Fa-
keers, not merely in the hybernating animals which
periodically pass into the torpid state, ftXk^ ^\^5^^
consequently, in them, w looked on «a ^xcict^^sv"*!^-
ter of conrse, and not at a!li to \ke ^oiftiftA'tt^ «^ % '^'^^^


28

we have it also occurring spontaneously, occasion-
ally, in the human species, in the disease called
catalepsy, or trance. Many cases of trance are upon
record, in which the patients remained for consider-
able periods of time in a state of apparent death,
during which preparations were being made for their
interment, but who were restored before being buried;
whilst there is no doubt of the fact, that, in many
others, they had been consigned to their graves
whilst yet alive, — for, in some such instances, acci-
dental circumstances have led to the opening' of
their graves, by which means they were released,
and lived for years thereafter. In the latter cases,
the feats of these Fakeers have been fully realised
in all but the intention and artificial contrivance of
the patients inducing the condition ; and, in the
former, had the subjects been actually interred, and
their graves opened in proper time, the like results
would have ensued.

Besides the numerous cases of trance already re-
corded, I have had the history of several others
communicated to me, in two of which the patients
remained in the horrible condition of hearing va-
rious remarks made about their death, and prepara-
tions which were making for their interment. All
this they heard distinctly, without having the power
of giving any indication that they were alive, until
some accidental abrupt impression aroused them
from their lethargy, and rescued them from their
perilous situation. On one of these occasions, what
most intensely afiected the feelings of the entranced
subject, as she afterwards communicated to my in-
formant, was hearing a little sister, who came into
the room where she was laid out for dead, exulting
in the prospect, in consequence of her death, of
getting possession of a necklace of the deceased.

In like manner, in cases of catalepsy, patients
have been known to be alive, and still to remain for
a great length of time in a state of iiv«euslblUty and
torpor of all the vital funcUons to wi •Vm«\Vr% ^^-


29

gree, and tq subsist for considerable periods of time
without food. This was strikingly illustrated in the
case of a patient of my late friend. Dr. John Mitchell
of this city, of which he furnished me with the fol-
lowing report. The patient was a poor married
woman, who was brought into the Manchester Royal
Infirmary, and placed under his care. She remained
in that Institution in such an intense state of cata-
lepsy, with her jaws locked, that she neither had
meat nor drink for fourteen days, after which
sht became so much relieved, that she could be
removed to her home, about seven miles in the
country.

During the period this patient remained in the
cataleptic state, the only visible signs of vitality
were, a slight degree of animal heat, and appearance
of moisture from her breath when a mirror was held
close to her face. Every variety of contrivance and
torture was resorted to by various parties who saw
her, for the purpose of testing the degree of her in-
sensibility, and for determining whether she might
not be an impostor, but without eliciting the slightest
indication of activity of any of the senses.

A most important fact has since been communi-
cated to me by this patient's friends, — a fact which
merits the most serious consideration of all who
come in contact with such cases, viz., that whilst
she had no voluntary power to give indication, either
by word or gesture, that she suffered from the said
inflictions, nevertheless she heard and understood all
that was said and was proposed to be done, and suffered
the most exquisite torture from various tests applied to
her ! ! A fact so important as this ought to be pub-
lished in every journal throughout the civilised
world ; so that in future professional men might be
thereby led to exercise greater discretion and mercy
in their modes of applying tests to such patients. It
may have been excusable to have done so when,
unaware that they might X\ieTe>a^\i<a \\\^\Ooxv%\ss«Nxsx'fc.
upon a helpless and passvve Vwtr»xjl n\sJCycsv\ VqS^n

c2.


30

after being made aware of this example to the con-
trary, they would be altogether inexcusable, (a)

The same discretion ought also to be extended
to the modes of testing somnambules. There is no
doubt whatever, that in certain stages of that con-
dition, whether occurring spontaneously or induced
by artificial contrivance, that some of these patients
are perfectly insensible at the time of inflictions the
most severe. However, if the means have been
sufficiently severe to lacerate, or in any way destroy
the tissues, the natural consequences of such infla-
tions necessarily manifest themselves after the patients
aie aroused. Thus, in a patient of my own, about
whom I was first consulted for an attack of sponta-
neous somnambulism, besides violent pinchings of
her fiesh and skin, needles and pins were thrust
under her nails, and so anxious was her father to
determine whether she might not be imposing on
them, as had been suggested to him by some kind
friend, that he so pinched and bruised the roots of
her nails as caused them subsequently to suppurate,
and that without her giving the slightest indication
of feeling pain at the moment of infliction, or during
the sleep. When the poor girl awoke, she wondered
what was the matter with her fingers, and what
could have made them so painful. This patient

(a) Through the kindnessof my excellent and truly
worthy friend, the late Rev. Geoffrey Hornby, rector
of Bury, I was informed, that this patient was stjU
alive in 1845, and might be seen by me, if I wished
to make personal inquiries regarding her state, be-
yond what he had kindl>[ obtained for me. This I
considered it better to avoid, for the following reasons :
She had been insane for some time immediately be-
fore and after the cataleptic seizure, for which she
was sent to the Infirmary, and was still in no very
bright state of intellect I therefore thought it just
possible, that, were her mind strongly directed to
these past painful occurrences, it might be the means
o\' exciting another paroxysm of active insanity, for
which I would be certain to get blamed, and, to guard
nga'mst such risk, I declined calling on her, — a degree
of caution which Mr. Hornby hVg,\\\y a\»^toN^^o^.


31

was very soon cured of her natural somnambulism,
simply by inducing a similar condition artificially
by the mode which I designate hypnotising. On
one occasion, when I had hypnotised her, I ex-
tracted one of her teeth without the slightest indica-
tion of her feeling pain, nor was she aware of it
after she was awoke, until her father asked her to
feel in her mouth. This patient has now been in
the enjoyment of good health for several years,
and has never been subject to spontaneous attacks of
soittnambulism since I first cured her by hypnotism.
The phenomena realised by the use of ether and
chloroform, in like manner, manifest similar states of
anaesthesia more or less profound, according to the
quantity exhibited and constitution of the patient,
and have given a ready credence to phenomena
realised by these means which had been by many
pronounced cases of rank imposition when induced
by mesmeric or hypnotic methods. The peculiar
conditions, also, induced by the use of Bangue,
Hachisch, and Dawamesc, in the East, all tend to
illustrate certain conditions of the nervous system
producible by artificial contrivances. Thus, a
slight dose of these produces mental hallucination,
with some degree of control over the train
of thought — a sort of half-waking dream. As
the effects advance, the imagination becomes more
and more vivid, and a rapid succession of ideas passes
through the mind, assuming all the force of present
realities. At this stage, as well expressed by Dr.
Carpenter, " The internal tempest becomes more
and more violent ; the torrent of disconnected ideas
increases in power, so as completely to arrest the
attention, and the mind is gradually withdrawn alto-
gether from the contemplation of external realities
being engrossed by the consciousness of its own inter-
nal workings. There is always preserved, however, a
much greater amount of self-consciousness tlv&xs.
exists in ordinary dreaming, — ^l\\fe <ioxv^\^otv \?>.^'et
corresponding with that Just xc^etie^ \q, vtv^wVvi^


32

the sleeper knows that he is dreaming; The suc-
cession of ideas has at first less of incoherence than
in ordinary dreaming, the ideal events not departing
so far from possible realities ; and the disorder of the
mind is at first manifested in errors of sense, in
false convictions, or in the predominance of one or
more extravagant ideas. These ideas and convic-
tions are generally not altogether of an imaginary
character, but are called up by external impressions,
which are erroneously interpreted by the perceptive
faculties. The error of perception is remarkably
shown in regard to time and space ; minutes seem
hours, hours are prolonged into years, and at last all
idea of time seems obliterated, and past and present
are confounded together as in ordinary dreaming;
and in like manner streets appear of an interminable
length, and the people at the other end seem to be
at a vast distance ; still there is a certain conscious-
ness of the deceptive nature of these illusions, whichj
if the dose be moderate, is never entirely lost.

The effect of a full dose, however, is at last to pro-
duce the complete withdrawal of the mind from any
distinct comprehension of external things ; the
power of the will over the current of thought is in
like manner suspended, and the condition of the
mind becomes the same in all essential particulars
with that of the ordinary dreamer, difiering in this
chiefly that the feelings 'are more strongly expressed,
and that they still take their tone almost entirely
from external impressions. Thus, says M. Moreau,
** It will be entirely dependent on the circumstances
in which we are placed, the objects which strike the
eyes, the words which fall on our ears, whether the
most lively sentiments of gaiety or of sadness shall
be produced, or passions of the most opposite nature
shall be excited, sometimes with extraordinary
violence ; for irritation shall pass rapidly into rage,
dislike to hatred, and the desire of vengeance and
tJie calmest afi[ection to the most transporting
passion. Fear becomes terror, coum^evs ^eNe\o^^^\


83

iBto rashness which nothing checks, and which sccnig
not to be conscious of danger, and the most un-
founded doubt or suspicion becomes a certainty. The
mind has a tendency to exaggerate everything.
Those who make use of the hachisch of the East
profit by all the means which the dissolute manners
of the East place at their disposal. It is in the
midst of the harem, surrounded by their women,
under the charm of music and of lascivious dances,
executed by the Almees, that they enjoy the intoxi-
cating Dawamesc ; and with the aid of superstition,
they find themselves almost transported to the scene
of the numberless marvels which the Prophet has
collected in his paradise." A still more intense
dose, however, reduces the patient to a state of pro-
found narcotism, during which painless operations
may be performed, as narrated by Mr. Urquhart in
his " Pillars of Hercules," ** Travels in Morocco
in 1848." He says on this point, " In a very short
time he (the patient) becomes so insensible that he
seems intoxicated or depiived of life. Then, ac-
cording as the case may be, the operations are per-
formed, of amputations, &c., and the cause of the
malady is removed. Subsequently, the tissues are
brought together by sutures, and liniments are em-
ployed. After some days the patient is restored to
health, without having felt, during the operations,
the least pain." Such is our daily experience of the
anaesthetic effects of chloroform during surgical
operations ; and in India the experience of Dr. Es-
daile has proved Mesmerism equally potent with the
population of the East for like purposes. Indeed it
has been proved so in many eases in this country,
but I still think that chloroform is the more certain
aud speedy agent for effecting such purpose in this
country ; and perfectly safe, provided care is taken
to procure pure chloroform, and to administer it with
due caution (a) All the above recited ^hevvc\^?^5£«cb.

(a) Mr. Urquhan, Vn v\\e i\Hxt«\v»^ o'l Vw^ ^vk^^^
in Morocco, in l»4A.Via* \\iT\\\^\ie^ waxvj ^^^vno^


34

are, in many cases, as genuine and as trnly the re-
sult of the hypnotic or Mesmeric processes, as when
induced hy the ingestion into the stomach or through

interesting remarks regarding the hachisch, from
which I extract the following. He says : — ** It ap-
pears as the potomantes of the Indus, the gelotaphylU
of Bactria, the achemenes of the Persians, the cphUnu
of Ethiopia, the neperUJies of the Greeks. The ap-
parently contradictory qualities ascribed to these
may all be found in the hachisch. Like the ophisnu,
it recalls consciousness of the past, and inordinate
fears ; on account of which it was given as a punish-
ment to those who had committed sacrilege; but
above all, it brings, too, that forgetful ness for which
Helen administered to Telemachus the nepenthes,
and which, no doubt, she bad learned in Egypt.
Equally does it become a poison which absorbs all
others. It will explain tne incantations of Circe,
and the mysteries of the cave of Trophonius. When
taken without suspicion, its effects would appear as
the workings withm themselves of the divinity. It
goes some way to account for the long endurance of
a religious imposture, so slightly wove and so in-
cessantly rebelled against Here was a means at
the disposal of the priest, diviner, and thaumatur^ist,
and beyond all appeals to the mere imagination.
The epithets which the Hindoos apply to their
Bangue might equally serve for the hachisch — 'as-
sua{p;er of sorrow,' * increaser of pleasure,' * cementer
of friendship,' ' laughter-mover.' Bangue, however,
when often repeated, is followed by catalepsy, or
that insensibility which enables the body to be
moulded into any position, like a Dutch jointed-doU,
in which the limbs are made in the position in which
they are placed; and this state will continue for
many hours."

It api)earB that Mr. Ur^uhart had much difficulty
in arriving at an^ certain mode of obtaining the
preparation, but still remained convinced that there
was such a plant as produced it. At length he ob-
serves, '* At Tangier, I observed a diminutive pipe,
about the size of a thimble ; I asked what kind of
tobacco they were smoking. I was answered kej
(literally, enjoyment;, — it was the hachisch. I found
that it was also taken inwardly. Either the leaves
are swallowed with water, after being crushed, or it
is prepared, and boiled with sugar, or honey, and
butter, like horehound, a great variety of seeds and
spheg entering into the compoiitU>n,^Ysac\i \% Vfe:^


35

the lungs of the medicinal agents referred to ; and
I believe the great cause of opposition which has been
offered to the acceptance of the truth of the genuine

said to vary in its effects, and to be gifted also with
medicinal powers. This preparation is the majoun.
Its efiiects were described as those of the laughing-
gas, except that) instead of a few minutes, it lasts for
many hours. Some cry, some laugh, some fail into
drowsy listlessness; some are rendered talkative and
funny. They see visions, imagine themselves re-
duced to poverty, cv become emperors and com-
manders or armies, the natural disposition predomi-
nating in the derangement. Men under its influence
were pointed out to me in the streets. Everything
that one hears of it has the air of fable ; and I should
have been inclined to treat it as such, but for the
evidence of my own senses."

Mr. Urquhart was evidently a thorough investi-
gator, and went to work in the best possible manner
for arriving at the truth regarding the preparation
and properties of this famous medicine, as the fol-
lowing quotation will prove. He says : — " Finding
that I could not understand from description either
the mode of preparing it, or the effects, Idetermined
to get those who were accustomed to make it to
bring the materials, and prepare it before me, and
then to try it myself, ana on as many others as I
could. I was so engaged for a week after my return
to Rabat, for I had successively the three most
noted confectioners to try their skill against each
other. They have not a regular or uniform process,
and the mf^joun is consequently of very unequal
strength and efficacy. Our first attempts were
failures. The first proof of the success of our pre-
paration was in the case of a young English clergy-
man, to whom some of it had been given as a sweet-
meat. Some hours passed without anv visible effects,
when a musician, who had the faculty of strangely
distorting his features, came in, dress^ as a muui-
mer. The Englishman took him for the devil, and
a most laughable scene ensued. Next morning, on
inquiries after his health, he said he had slept
tM)undly and agreeably, * as the windows and doors
were bolted.' Later in the day, the effect disap-
peared entirely* and he seemed to recollect the cir-
cumstances with a composed pleasure, describing
various things that had never happened."

Its effects upon him&e\t ate x>ci>» Xkaxx'axft.^". —
" The Ant time I look Vt ^aa «\io>3X w^«v\ V«^ ^^^


36

phenomena of hypnotism and Mesmerism, has arisen
from the extravagance of the Mesmerists, who have
contended for the reality of clairvoyance in some of

morning, and in an hour and a half afterwards I per-
ceived a heaviness of the head, wandering of the
mind, and an apprehension that I was going to faint.
1 thence passed into a state of half-trance, from
which ] awoke suddenly, and much refreshed. The
impression was that of wandering out of myself. I
had two beings, and there were two distinct, yet con-
current trains of ideas. Ima^s came floating be-
fore me — not the figures of a dream, but those that
seem to play before the eye when it is closed, and
with those figures were strangely mixed the sounds ot
a guitar, that was being played in the adjoining
room ; the sounds seemed to cluster in and pass
away with the figures on the retina. The music of*
the wretched performance was heavenly, and seemed
to proceed firom a full orchestra, and to be reverbe-
rated through long halls of mountains. These
figures and sounds were again connected with meta-
physical reflections, which also, like the sounds,
clustered themselves into trains ot thought, which
seemed to take form before my eyes, and weave
themselves with the colours and sounds. I was toU
lowing a train of reasoning ; new points would occur,
and concurrently there was a figure before me,
throwing out corresponding shoots like a zinc tree ;
and, then, as the moving figures re-appcared, or as
the sounds caught my ear, the other classes of
figures came out distinctly, and danced through each
other. The reasonings were lon^ and elaborate ;
and, though the impression of havmg gone through
them remains, every efibrt has been in vain to recall
them."

Such, then, is the interesting description of Mr.
Urquiiart's personal experience of the effects of the
hachisch.

There is no reasonable ground to doubt that the
Ckamabis Sativa^ or Ckofmdbis Jndica, or Indian hemp, is
the chief ingredient in the Hachisch or Bangtte, Like
all vegetable preparations, much will depend on the
condition of the plant at the time it is preserved,
and the mode of its preparation, and otlier ingre-
dients with which it may be combined, as to the
actual results realised from its use ; and also not a
little on the constitution of the patients, mental as
well aa physica), to whom it is exhibited.

The genenl effects on man, as aialcA \>>j \>c


H •


37

their patients, such as seeing through opaque bodies,
and investing them with gifts and graces of omni-
science, omnipresence, Mesmeric intuition, and uni-

O'Shaughnessy, from his own obserFations (at Cal-
cutta), are alleviation of pain (mostly), remarkable
increase of appetite, unequivocal aphrodisia, and
great mental cheerfulness. Its more violent effects
were delirium of a peculiar kind, and a cataleptic sfate.
These effects are so remarkable that I shall quote
some cases (says Dr. Pereira, from whose < Elements
of Materia Medica,' pp. 1097» 1098, I make this
quotation) by way of illustration.

<** At 2 p.m. a grain of the resin of hemp was
given to a rheumatic patient. At 4 p.m. he was very
talkative, sang, called loudly fur an extra supply of
food, and declared himself in perfect health. At 6
p.m. he was asleep. At 3 p.m. he was found insen*
sible, but breathing with perfect regularity, his pulse
and skin natural, and the pupils freely contractile on
the approach of light. Happening by chance to lift
up the patient's arm — the ' professional reader will
judge of my astonishment,' observes Dr. O'Shaugh-
nessy, ' when T found that it remained in the posture
in which I placed it. It required but a very brief
examination of the limbs to find that the patient
had, by the influence of this narcotic, been thrown
into that strange and most extraordinary of all
nervous conditions, into that state which so few have
seen, and the existence of which so many still dis-
credit — the genuine oatoHepsy of the nosologist. We
raised him to a sitting posture, and placed his arms
and limbs in every imaginable attitude. A waxen
figure could not be more pliant or more stationary
in each position, no matter how contrary to the
natural influence of gravity on the part, ^o all
impressions he was meanwhile almost insensible.
He continued in this state till one a.m., when con-
sciousness and voluntary motion quickly returned*

Another patient who had taken the same dose fell
asleep, but was roused by the noise in the ward. He
seemed vastly amazed at the strange aspect of the
itatue-like attitudes in which the first patient had
been placed. On a sudden he uttered a loud peal
of laughter, and exclaimed that four spirits were
springing with his bed into the air. In vain we at-
tempted to pacify him ; his laughter became momen-
tarily more and more uncontrollable. We now oV^*
served that the limbs ^eve t«l\\et tv^^^ ^\\^ vcv ^ K^&'h


38

versal knowledge, — pretensions alike a mockery of
the human understanding, as they are oj)posed to
all the known laws of physical science.

In support of the ahove sentiments I gladly avail
myself of the following quotation, from an article
in Frazer*s Magazine for July, 1845 (page 3), by a
most acute observer and forcible and clever writer.
When writing regarding the feats of the Pythoness,
the author says — ** Now we take it that the Pytho-
ness, not by the objective operation of magnetism
Jrom without f but by the subjective ox personal influence
of internal agencies, was enabled intensely to con-
centrate her cowceptive faculties (aided by the work-
ings of her jE7erceptive powers which had drank in
eertain transactions of the outer world, and stored
them up in her memory)^ from the thousand influ-
ences which must ever be at work around her in her
waking state, and concentrate them upon a given
purpose ; whether it were to forecast the probable
duration of a man's life or the fall of a kindom. By
throwing herself into the nervous sleep described by

minutes more his arms and legs could be bent, and
would remain in any desired position. He was re-
moved to a separate room, wnere he soon became
tranquil, his limbs in less than an hour gained their
natural condition, and in two hours he experienced
himself well and excessively hungry.' "

Br. Royle, in his '* Illustrations of the Botany of
the Himalayan Mountains," page 334, suggests that
the hemp may have been the " assuager of grief," or
the nepenthes {vfiirtvBkQ) of which Homer speaks ;
and, as already said in this note, it isknown in India
as the '* increaser of pleasure," the " exciter of de-
sire," the " cementer ot friendship," the " laughter
mover," &c. &c.

Some imagine that it is through the influence of a
large dose of hachisch that the Fakeers accomplish the
above-recorded feats of sufiering themselves to be re-
duced to a dormant state for various periods of dura>
tion; but I think a state of self-inauced trance, or
human hybernation, producible at will by artiflcial
contrivance, as I have elsewhere explained, is a fas
more rational solution of the phenomena.


39

Mr. Braid (and we mean to show how common this
has been practised from the earliest ages down to the
present time), she becomes, as it were, isolated from
the external world, her whole attention is abstracted
from external influences and transactions, and in-
tensely concentrated in the world within herself. In
this condition the memory is almost supernaturally
vivid ; she remembers circumstances in the charac-
ter of the man's life, and remarkable vicissitudes in
the history of the kingdom ; she reasons logically
from the petitio principii to the rational conclusion ;
all the material facts in both cases (that of the man
and that of the kingdom) pass in review before her ;
she weighs them with scrupulous nicety, in combina-
tion and in their relative bearings, and she arrives at
a conclusion which surprises everybody because it
is so much more accurate and positive than any
which could have been attained by faculties dis-
tracted and disturbed by the ever-varying and con-
stantly-succeeding events of the outer world. And
this is what the Mesmerists call clairvoyance ! At
this rate the sublime imagination of Homer himself
would be looked upon as the gift of a magician
rather than the gift of nature — a piece of witch-
craft rather than a concomitant of true genius."(a)
When, to the following circumstances recounted
in these acute observations, we add the aids which
the patients draw from the exalted state of smell,
hearing, feeling, heat, and cold, whereby they are
enabled readily to perceive impressions bearing on

(a) The article from which I have made the above
extract«and another in the June number of Froeer for
1844, entitled, ** Animal Magnetism and Neurhyp-
notism," were both published anonymously. They
were justly esteemed two of the able8t,most clever, and
agreeable articles which had appeared on the subject;
and I think it is much to be regretted that they have
not, long ere now, been published in a separate form.
The real author of these clever articles v^^ 'R.v:Xsiev\.
S. Sowler, Esq., Barriater-aV-\aw,oV'^wa.Oc«sxsx-


40

the sabject in which they are for the time interested,
which would be inappreciable to them in their ordi-
nary waking condition, together with the amazing
quickness with which they catch suggestions from
questions asked, or observations made within the
range of their quickened hearing at the proper stage
of the sleep, and the acuteness of the reasoning
power, quickened memory, and vivid imagination
in that state of mental concentration, excitement,
and self-confidence, we can easily perceive why they
may be enabled intellectually to arrive at striking
results occasionally, far beyond the waking capabi-
lities of the same individuals ; just as extraordinary
feats are accomplished occasionally in dreams (even
without many of the above recited aids), of which we
have many interesting and undoubted examples re-
corded. Nor should we overlook the tendency of
the human mind in those with a great love of the
marvellous, to interpret the slightest approach to a
correspondence in their replies into a literal descrip-
tion of their own mental impressions (as many do in
interpreting ordinary dreams), and even, uninten-
tionally, to give slight aids to the sleeper, who is very
quick to drink in and profitably to digest the slightest
suggestion, such as even from the tone of voice
of parties around ; as is every day done to a consi-
derable extent, and with wonderful success in many
cases by those wide-awake clairvoyants called/ortoii«-
tellera. In the one case as in the other, questions
put suggest corresponding answers, and these again
suggest fresh questions, and the tone of voice, looks
and gestures of parties engaged in this sort of
" Canning's game,*' (at which he undertook to tell,
at twenty guesses, anything which any one should
think of), form wonderful assistance in ultimately
arriving at an apparently satisfactory result That
an exaltation of functions or faculties which we all
possess in a minor degree when awake, may take
pUce during this sleep in the maimei ei^lained.


41

I readily admit ; but they do not amount to any-
thing like the extent and minuteness of detail to
warrant such conclusions as the Mesmerists contend
for. If true and unaided and vigorous as they allege
their powers to be, the answers ought always to be
right, whereas, it is notorious that they are far oftener
wrong than right. The results of carefully tested
cases seem to warrant no such conclusion as that of
a patient being able veritably to see through decidedly
opaque bodies. All the patients possessed of such
alleged powers, when tested with the rigour which I
adopted, or suggested as requisite for guarding
against all sources of fallacy which occurred to my
mind, have always decidedly failed; and I quite
concur in opinion with the formerly quoted acute
writer in Frazer, as expressed by him in the follow-
ing pithy paragraph — " To insist upon it that a per-
son can see through a thousand brick walls between
London and Gravesend, who cannot read plain print
covered by only a few sheets of writing paper with*-
in a few inches of his nose, is an insult to the un<t
derstanding."(a)


(a) In proof of the wonderful exaltation of the
natural faculties which may be realised at a proper
stage of the nervous sleep, X beg to call the reader's
attention to the following facts, which I have proved
in the most satisfkctory manner.

I have frequently proved the sense of smell to be
80 acute in some hypnotic patients, as enabled them
readily to detect, in the midst of a large company,
any person familiarly known to them ; or the owner
of any glove, although a stranger to the sleeper,
could in like manner be readily detected by gmeU^
the patient first smelling at the glove, and then set-
ting off round the room, and unhesitatingly and un-
errinffly presenting the glove to the proper owner,
and Uiat without touching him or her ; but, if the
nostrils were stopped, the clairvoyant faculty in>
stantlv ceased, and was recovered the moment the
nostrils were unstopped.

In like manner tne sense of toucl\tQA!l\.Vsk^ \s»s&rnv-


42

In cases of asphyxia from hanging or drowning,
if the action of the lungs is entirely suspended
whilst the heait's action continues in some degree,

lar sense, have been so remarkably quickened as to
enable persons to write with great neatness during
the sleep, without the use of their eyes, as when a
large broad book was interposed between their eyes
ana the paper — a far more certain test than any mode
of blindfolding with bandages or masks. With all
this precaution some patients would write neatly,
crossing the t's and dotting the i*s, and would even
go back a line, strike out a word or letter, and write
the correction in the proper place. I had one patient
who could go back, and correct with accuracy, the
writing on the whole of a page of note-paper ; but,
if the paper was moved from its relative position on
the table, all the corrections would be on the wrong
points of the paper, but correct as regarded their
position in space in relation with the table, {.e , if the
paper had been moved upwards the corrections would
be so much under the line, or if it had been moved
downwirda they would be so much above the line ; and
if to the right, or left, the correction would be so
mu0h wrong in the opposite direction. Curiously
enough, sometimes this patient took his ideas of rela-
tive position from the upper l^ hand comer of Me
paper y and, on those occasions, it did not matter for
the paper being moved to another j^art of the table,
as that did not disarrange the associations which he
had made in his muscular sense. He always, in those
instances, felt at the comer of the paper, and then
went on inserting all the corrections in their proper

§ laces. 1 once saw him do this even to the double
otting a vowel in a German word at the bottom of
the page, — a feat which greatly astonished his German
master, who was present at the time. Still, with all
this. I have never seen any patient in this condition
of sleep write as well vrithout the use of the eyes as
they were capable of doing when awake with tne aid
of ordinary vision ; but there are some patients who
have the use of their eyes during the sleep, that is,
seeing through their parUdUy closed eyelids, and if not
tested in the manner I have indicated, but only by
blindfolding them, they are very apt to contrive to dis-
place the bandages or masks, so as to seefiwn under
them, when they may read or write much better than
when in the wide waking condition, to the utter asto-
nishment of those who ao not compTe)&eYi^ \.)^9iX. ^•Vv^


43

in general, in a very few minutes, the patient is
irrecoverably dead. There are well-attested cases
on record, however, in which patients have been re-
natural organ of vision, the eye, is the real clairvoyant
instrument in such cases.

Again, the quickness of hearing and accuracy of
the muscular sense, together with their self-confidence
and tendency to sympathy and imitation, enables
them to perform feats of phonic imitation which are
truly astounding, and of which there can be no mis-
take. Many patients will thus readily repeat accu-
rately what IS spoken in cmy language ; and they may
also be able to sing correctly and simultaneously
both words and music of songs in any language,
which they had never heard before — Le, thev catch
the words as well as music so instantaneously as to
accompany the other singer, as if both had been pre-
viously equally familiar with both words and musia
In this manner a patient of mine who, when awake,
knew not the grammar even of her own language,
and who had very little knowledge of music, was
enabled to follow Madlle. Jenny Lind correctly in
song^ in different languages, giving both words and
music ao oorrectty and aimulUmeousl-y toUh Jtmny Lind,
that two parties in the room could not for some time
imagine that there were two voices, so perfectly did
they accord, both in musical tone ana vocal pro-
nunciation of Swiss, German, and Italian songs.
She was equally successful in accompanying Madlle.
Lind in one of her extemporaneous efiusions, which
was a long and an extremely difficult, elaborate,
chromatic exercise, which the celebrated oantatrice
tried bv way of taxing the powers of the somnabu-
list to the utmost. Wnen awake the girl durst not
even attempt to do anything of the sort ; and after all,
wonderful as it was, it was only pTumicimUaUon, for she
did not understand the meaning of a single word of
the foreign language which she had uttered so cor-
rectly, either when asleep or when awake.

All these phenomena, therefore, wonderful though
they be, are onlv exaggerations or exaltations of
functions or faculties which are possessed by all of
us in a less degree in the ordinary or waking condi-
tion. They do not, however, amount to universal
lucidity, or thought-reading, or community (^ ideas
with those with whom they are en rapport, for, whilst
exaltation of her naiuxaV lac\Ax.\«« q»C wjcoBl i^wwa^^iw*^
^ion enabled the somua\juV\«X^\t\v^\\sAVak\ft^'Grct^'^^^


44

covered after submersion for three quarters of an
hour. In these cases, which are not numerous, of
course, respiration must have been suspended from
the moment of submersion, and it is believed their
recovery has been due to a state of syncope or faint
(which consists in an entire suspension of the heart's
action) having taken place h^ore submersion.

In cases of syncope, without submersion, patients
may remain for a few seconds, or a few minutes, or
for some hours, in a state of apparent death, the
body being pale and powerless, and the action of
the heart and lungs being apparently entirely sus-
pended. Some few cases are recorded where this
has continued for several days ; but in such cases,
I believe, respiration, and circulation, and vital
action have not been totally arrested, but going on
feebly and imperceptibly, as in cases of intense
hybernation or trance.

The term hybernation has been adopted to desig-
nate that pecidiar state of torpor or profound sleep
into which some warm-blooded as well as cold-
blooded animals are liable periodically to fall, and
to which it seems as natural and regular in its access
as common sleep is to all other creatures. They
generally pass into this condition in autumn, and con-
tinue in it, entirely without food, during the winter
months; hence the designation, hybernation, or
winter sleep.

It seems quite obvious that temperature plays an
important part in relation to this condition; for it
has been proved that hybernation may be prevented
by keeping these creatures in an artificially elevated
temperature ; and, even when they have passed into

the words and music enunciated by Madlle. Jenny
Lind, she understood not one word of the language
they uttered, nor could she have imitated Madlle.
Jenny Lind's accompaniment on the piano-forte for
a single bar — these being arbitrary arrangements
dvfy to be acquired by training and practice.


45

the state, that they may be aroused from it, at any
time, by artificial heat, as well as by the genial
warmth of spring.

In warm-blooded animals which hybernate com-
pletely, such as the marmot, the power of generating
heat is so feeble, that the temperature of tiieir bodies
follows pretty nearly that of the surrounding air;
80 that, at a temperature a little below the freezing
point, the thermometer placed within the body falls
to S5**, and may remain at this point for some time,
without apparent injury to the animal, as it recovers
when subjected to a higher temperature. It is thus
obvious, that the vital properties of the tissues had
been preserved during this state of arrest or de-
pression of their usual vital activit} ; but when long
subjected to a much more intense degree of cold, it
has been found that there is not merely a temporary
suspension of activity, but that total loss of life is
the result.

During hybernation, all the vital functions are
proportionably depressed below the natural standard.
The pulse is reduced to one- tenth its usual number
of beats, and the breathing to about one- thirtieth the
number of respirations, whilst it is accomplished
with very little perceptible heaving or enlargement
of the chest Now the activity of respiration and
quantity of carbonic acid gas eliminated in a given
time being the surest test of the general activity with
which the vital functions are progressing, it thus
becomes obvious that they must all be greatly de-
pressed during this condition ; and that, conse-
quently, the disintegration and waste of tissue must
be going on at a very slow rate compared with that
of the normal active condition. Such is actually
found to be the case, and, consequently, these crea-
tures, when in that state, can subsist for a great
length of time without food, merely consuming a
portion of their own tissues, and that at a very slow
rate* They are thus ewa\Ae^\ft\\N^^\^w5!v.WAV!«.


46

a period far beyond what could possibly happen with
them during the active state of their existence.

When in an intense state of hybernation, more-
over, sensibility is so depressed as seems completely
to lock up all the senses ; but, when in a less in-
tense degree, there is merely diminished sensibility.

Even in the cold-blooded animals, the activity of
the functions and demand for oxygen are less at
low than at higher temperatures, as has been beau-
tifully shown by the experiments of Dr. Edwards.
Thus, during winter, as I have myself frequently
witnessed, frogs can live and move under the ice
without the necessity of coming to the surface to
breathe, the aSrated water surrounding their bodies
being sufficient to produce that change on their
blood through the skin, requisite to sustain the de-
mands of their feeble life at that low temperature ;
but, when the season advances, with the increased
temperature the activity of the animal ensues, when
it becomes indispensable that it shall be permitted
to come to the surface to breathe occasionally ;
and if prevented from doing so after the heat has
become considerable, the creature speedily dies.
As remarked by Dr. Carpenter, page 369 of his
''Manual of Physiology:*' — "When the tempera-
ture of the reptile is raised, by external heat, to the
level of that of the mammal, its need for respiration
increases, owing to the augmented waste of its tissues.
When, on the other hand, the warm-blooded mam-
mal is reduced, in the state of hybernation, to the
level of the cold-blooded reptile, the waste of its
tissues diminishes to such an extent, as to require but
a very small exertion of the respiratory process to
get rid of the carbonic acid, which is one of its chief
products." (a)

(a) The power, and propensity, and instinct for

migration has been given to certain classes of animals

as a means of preserving their lives, by inducing

ibem to roam to those climalca most cotv^emal to


47

As the tear and wear of the tissues, then, and
consequent demand for food to supply this waste,
are in exact ratio with the activity of the vital func-

their feelings, whilst affording an abundant supply of
appropriate food. When the season becomes cold,
and tne supply of food scarce, they congregate and
fly to warmer climes, Arom which to return again the
following spring. The class of animals which byber-
nate, being physically incapable of such locomotive
powers, must necessarily have perished for lack of
food had their demands for it continued equal during
winter to what it would have been in the ordinary
state of activity of their vital functions. Hybernation,
therefore, seems to be one of those wonderful and wise
ordinations of Providence for preserving the lives of
these creatures during the winter months, by reducing
their vital processes to such a low ebb that their lives
can be sustained at the minimum expenditure, and
which demand can be supplied from the absorption
of the fat with which their bodies had become loaded
from the abundant supply of food enjoyed by them
during the preceding autumn. The wliole of that
fat, and of the food required to produce it, would not
have been adequate to have sustained these creatures
during the winter months had they been in a state of
ordinary activity ; but, by being reduced to this state
of torpor and inactivity, the expenditure of tissue is
correspondingly small ; and thus the means and the
end are made beautifullv to harmonize with each
other. In fact, in animals which do not bybernate,
a greatly increased amount of food is required during
the intense cold of winter to keep up the tempera-
ture of their bodies to an adequate de^ee beyond
what is required for the like purpose m a similar
period daring the warm season.

But, again, there are other creatures which have
not the power of migrating from climes too intensely
hot for the normal exercise of their physical func-
tions, and the lives of these animals are preserved
tbrou^ a state of torpor superinduced by the want
of sutncient moisture — their bodies being dried up
from excessive heat This is the case with snails,
which are said to have been revived by a little water
being thrown on them after having remained in a
dry and torpid state for fifteen years. The vibria
Mtici has also been restored after petfefit \.«cvvwA^
and apparent death for ftve 'seax^ wwii «v<£ckX. xskssix^^


48

tions; and, as we have seen, these are so wonderfully
depressed during complete hyhernation, as to enable
the creatures to subsist /or many months on their own

by merely soaking it in water. Some small micro-
scopic animals have been apparently killed and
revived again a dozen times by drying and then
applving moisture to them. Tliis is remarkably
verified in the case of the wheel-animalcule. And
Spallanzani states, that some animalculi have been
recovered by moisture after a torpor of twenty-seven
years. According to Humboldt, again, some large
animals are thrown into a similar state from want
of moisture. Such, he states, to be the case with
the alligator and boa-constrictor during the dry sea-
son in the plains of Venezuela, and with other
animals elsewheie. It thus appears that the Al-
mighty has decreed to manifest His boundless wis-
dom and power by accomplishing the preservation
of his creatures bv analogous enects produced by
the two extremes (within certain limits) of heat and
cold.

The conservative powers of nature, manifested by
an arrest or temporary suspension of vUaL activUy,
superinduced through excessive heat or cold, as
above described, is not confined to the animal king-
dom. It is also displayed in a remarkable manner
in the vegetable kingaom. The almost universal
sterility of winter, in cold climates, is familiar to
every one who looks abroad over the face of nature,
and contrasts it with the rich verdure and bloom of
spring and summer ; and in hot climates, again, at
certain seasons, the face of nature is ec[ually barren
and withered from excessive heat. It is well known
that the seeds of various plants may remain almost
an indefinite period in a state of dormant vitality,
superinduced through aridity and seclusion from air,
and yet be capable of rinewing all their vital actions
when sufiScient moisture, heat, and air are again sup-
plied to them. Thus, there have been undoubted
instances in which tlie grains of wheat and peas
taken from the wrappers of Egyptian mummies nave
germinated and produced grain different from the
present produce of the country, although they must
nave been so preserved for at least three thousand
years. It is therefore impossible for us to set any
Jimit to the period of duration to which this dormant
vitality of seeds and germs might be eiileikded, ^to-


49

tissues, entirely without food, with a pulse at one >
tenth its usual number of beats, and respiration re-
duced to one-thirtieth its usual frequency, both of
which being still cognisable to the human senses,
we need be the less surprised that the Fakeer, who
has acquired the power, by artificial contrivance and
long training at a religious exercise, of throwing
himself into such an intense state of hybernation,


Tided they were securely secluded from those cir-
cumstances which are well known to expose them to
decay, or to call their vital properties into activity.

In like manner the mosses and liverworts do not
suffer permanently from being, to all appearance,
completely dead, dried up, and withered by heat;
but revive and vegetate actively so soon as they are
thoroughly moistened. Instances are recorded in
which mosses have been restored to active life by a
sufficient supply of moisture after they had been
preserved and completely dried up for years in a
herbarium. *' There is a lycopodivm (club- moss) in-
habiting Peru, which, when dried up for want of
moistnre, folds its leaves and contracts into a ball ;
and in this state, apparently quite devoid of anima-
tion, it is blown hither and thither along the surface
by the wind. As soon, however, as it reaches a
moist situation, it sends down its roots into the soil,
and unfolds to the atmosphere its leaves, which,
from a dingy brown speedily change to the bright
ffreen of active vegetation. The anastaUoa (rose of
Jericho), is the subject of similar transformations ;
contracting into a ball, when dried up by the burn-
ing sun and parching air; being detached by the
wind from the spot where its slender roots had fixed
it, and rolled over the plains to indefinite distances ;
and then, when exposed to moisture, unfolding its
leaves, and opening its rose-like flower, as if roused
from sleep. There is a blue water-lily, abounding
in several of the canals at Alexandria, which, at cer-
tain seasons, become so drv, that their beds are
burnt as hard as bricks by the action of the sun, so
as to be fit for use as carriage- roads ; yet the plants
do not thereby lose their vitality ; for when the
water is again admitted, they resume their growth
with redoubled vigour."— Z)r. Cktrpenter's Manual of
Physiology, p 91.


50

or trance, that neither the beating of the pulse nor
of the heart, nor the process of respiration can be
detected by the nicest scrutiny, should be enabled to
subsist without food several days, or even for six
weeks, as has been represented to have happened in
the case narrated by Sir Claude Martin Wade. Still,
&ere must, of necessity, be a limit to this state of ab-
stinence, even during the state of human hybernation,
as the available supply of fat and other tissues
would at length become exhausted, when death
must inevitably ensue, if not warded off by a suit-
able supply of food in due time. Whilst we may
readily believe it possible, therefore, for the Fakeer
to have existed in the state of trance or human
hybernation, for the space of six weeks without
food, the allegation of the Chowdrie to my friend the
major, that the individual to whom he referred
would be perfectly safe and certain to recover, were
he to be left in the condition for twelve months, or
for a hundred years, must be looked upon as a mere
fiction of his fervid imagination and unbounded re-
ligious faith. All hybemating animals, however
corpulent they may have been when they passed
Into the state of hybernation, are found to be quite
emaciated when they come out of it ; and we have
no reason to suppose that it could be otherwise with
man, when placed under similar circumstances.

Perhaps there could not be a more interesting
proof adduced in point, as regards the relation
which subsists between the amount of tear and wear
of tissue in a given time,, and the degree of vital
activity, than was afforded in the experiment with
the humble bee, which is recorded to have elimi-
nated moie carbonic acid in one hour, when in a
state of excitement, incident to its recent capture,
than it did in twenty-four hours subsequently, when
in a state of quiescence. This experiment, more*
over, proves, that as great a degree of increase in
waste of tissue in a given time may result from ex-


51

cessiye excitement and muscular effort beyond that
of a state of ordinary repose, as this latter exceeds
that more profound repose and inactivity realised
daring complete hybernation.

Moreover, we hare remarkable instances of pro-
tracted fasting during disease. Thus, Macnish, in
his chapter on Protracted Sleep, cites an instance of
a patient who remained eight days without food or
drink ; and of another who, on one occasion, " slept
three weekSf" and who, during that period, " took
not a particle of either food or diink; nothing
could arouse him, even for a moment ; yet his sleep
seemed to be calm and natural !" In his chapter
on Catalepsy, also, he refers to the case of a FoUsh
soldier, who fell into that condition from terror, and
who remained for twenty days without nourishment.
Whilst this pamphlet was going through the press,
I was favoured with the following narrative of a
case of trance, which occurred some years ago in a
patient of John Woods, Esq., surgeon, Newry, and
which he has kindly furnished to me for publica-
tion. Mr. Woods writes : — " The case of the young
lady. Miss F. C, related to you by my esteemed
friend, Mr. Waddell, was one of hysteria, terminat-
ing in trance of four days* duration. It was not
caused by her hearing df the death of her father,
or any unpleasant news ; her father was dead some
years at the time of her illness. She laboured under
chlorosis, and, in consequence of this and her
complexion being naturally very fair and pale,
with white flaxen haix, she had a very corpse-like
appearance. Her pulse, which was quick and chlo-
rotic before the trance commenced, became soft
and slow. Her breathing, although slow and weak,
was always quite perceptible. She would open her
eyes when pulled and shook by the arms, and then
close them and fall asleep again. It was with great
difficulty that she was forced to swallow a few tea-
spoonsful of drink for three ox i»va ^^^\ vbi^vsc<)


52

person looking at her without feeling her pulse, and
examining her closely, would say she was dead.
Although I, her only medical attendant at the time,
and her friends could not hut feel very uneasy and
anxious ahout her, yet we always entertained hopes
of her recovery, which did not take place suddenly,
as we learn that the greater number of cases of
trance do, but gradually; leaving her very weak
for some time, and, as well as I remember, totally
unconscious of anything that occurred during its
continuance."

About twenty years ago my friend Dr. Jarrold, of
this city, attended a gentleman forty-four years of
age, who fell into a state of trance, in which he con-
tinued for a whole week. During this period the
Doctor watched him closely, and informs me that
the vital processes were reduced to such a low ebb,
that he had no expectation of his patient's recovery ;
the pulse being scarcely perceptible, and the respira-
tion faint, and repeated only about once in three*
quarters of a minute. After continuing in this state
for a weekf without swallowing a particle of food or
drink, he awoke from his trance, and called for heef*
tteakSf when the Doctor had the pleasure of seeing
him make a hearty meal. He recovered from this
affection, and lived a year thereafter, when he died
from a different disease.

The following narrative of another case I give
verbatim from a letter of the patient's sister, fur-
nished by her to me for publication. The lady
writes : — " She and my eldest sister walked to
church, scarcely a mile through the fields from
their house. Without giving any intimation of
feeling unwell, she dropped down in a faint She
was carried out of church to the manse, and though
every possible means were tried to restore her to
consciousness, sJie lay from Sabbath mid-day till
Wednesday evening, without giving any sign qf Ufe.
It was exactly a fortnight from the day she fainted


58

before she opened her eyes; but from the fourth
day she gave occasionally signs that she knew what
was said to her/' She adds that two medical men
attended this patient throughout her illness, one of
whom remained with her on the night when a crisis
seemed to be approaching, of which she says:^
" Little hopes they had that it would terminate so
favourably ;" by which it appears that they expected
her death at liie period when she revived. She
took no food during the fortnight she remained in
the trance.

In an early number of " The Philosophical Trans-
actions/' Dr. Oliver has given an account of one
of the greatest sleepers on record. The patient was
Samuel Chilton, of Tinsbury, near Bath. He was a
labourer, twenty-6ve years of age, not fat, but mus-
cular, with dark brown hair. In 1694, he fell
asleep, and slept for a month, when he awoke, and
went about his work as usual. During this period,
he partook of food set beside him, and had the
usual evacuations, without awaking. In 1696, he
figain fell asleep, and continued in it for seventeen
weeks, during the last six of which he eat nothing,
Puring the former period, therefore, he was in the
sleep waking condition, during which there is pre-
sent a certain degree of consciousness and voluntary
power, resembling those animals which sleep most
of the winter, but rouse up sufficiently, occasionally,
to enable them to feel hunger, and satisfy the crav«
ing for food, which they do by partaking of a
portion of what they had stored up for themselves
during the preceding autumn. During the latter
period, however, like the animals which hybemate
completely, he must have survived entirely by
consuming a portion of his own tissues. It is much
to be regretted that no mention is made as to the
extent of emaciation which took place during the
latter six weeks, when he eat nothing , because in
all cases of long protracted fasting, whether thft


54

patient is asleep or awake, we may be quite certain
that some collusion is going on by which food is
clandestinely obtained by the faster, if there is not
some perceptible wasting of the body of the faster.
To believe the contrary, would be to admit an im -
possibility — namely, that we might abstract conti-
nually from a given quantity, without diminishing
the original amount.

Samuel Chilton again fell asleep in 1697» and
slept for six months. His habits, in respect to food,
during this period, are not recorded. Many extra-
ordinary and cruel inflictions were perpetrated on
his person during these periods, for the purpose of
gratifying the curious, and enabling them to deter-
mine whether he had any feeling, or whether he
might not be an impostor. He gave no indication
of feeling pain at the time, nor does he seem to have
had any recollection whatever of these inflictions
when he awoke.

In the Medical Gazette for 1835, page 264, Dr.
Sloan narrates the case of John Brown, aged 65,
who became imprisoned in a coal-pit in Ayrshire,
on the 8th of October, 1835, by the falling in of a
portion of the roof. He had gone to work without
breakfast, had no food with him, and only a quarter
of an ounce of tobacco. On the 31st of the same
month he was discovered alive, having thus existed
upwards of twenty' three days without food. He had
also been entirely withoiU water for the last thirteen
days, having lain down at some distance from some
water, and become so weak that he could not move
from the spot on which he lay. He was of course
emaciated in the greatest degree ; but he was con-
scious when taken out of the pit, and the following
day was able to give a detailed and distinct narrative
of his sufferings. He died on the fourth day after
his release from the coal-pit.

In the same volume of the Medical Gazette, Dr.
Tbornhill, of Darlaston, Staffordshire, gives the


55

history of eight men and a boy, all of whom were
imprisoned in a coal-pit for eight days, entirely
without food, and with only a very little water. All
oftliem recovered, and with the exception of the boy,
who subsequently got burnt to death, they were all
alive, and in the enjoyment of tolerable health,
twenty-two years after the above imprisonment in
the coal-pit. Sickness and excessive thirst were
the symptoms they complained most of.

These are remarkable proofs of the capabilities of
the human body for enduring starvation in the active
state of existence, and may tend to make us consider
it the less surprising at the length of time the
Fakeers can remain without food in their state of
self-induced human hybernation. I believe the case
of John BroMm is the most prolonged instance on
record in which a person in such circumstances has
subsisted entirely without food.

But again, besides the brown and polar bears,
which are well-known to sleep profoundly and with-
out food for many months every winter like other
hybernating animals, we have instances in our
own country of sheep surviving for several weeks
under wreaths of snow, when entirely deprived of
food ; and the fat pig recorded by Martell as having
been overwhelmed by a slip of earth, is a still
more remarkable instance in point, as it lived in
this situation 160 days without food, and was found
to have diminished in weight in that time 120 lbs. ;
being, as well observed by Dr. Lion Playfair, *' an
instance quite analogous to the state of hyber-
nation."

I am well aware that there were individuals in
this country, as well as elsewhere, who hastily pub-
lished observations, from limited data, pronouncing
the whole of these feats of the Fakeers as mere
Hindoo tricks ; and, consequently, who will now feel
themselves bound, in self-defence, to stand by their
former verdicts. I know humaiL \i«A.\3L\^\.Wi ^s^\a «--


56

pect to extort a confession of conviction to the con-
trary from such individuals, hy any amountof evidence
which could possibly he adduced, even if they were
permitted to be eye-witnesses of the facts them-
selves. To all unprejudiced persons, however,
possessed of minds capable of weighing the force of
evidence, — for ** unlimited scepticism is equally the
child of imbecility, as implicit credulity,'* — I think
the original proof which I have been enabled to
bring forward in addition to what we formerly pos-
sessed on the subject, must be sufficient to prove the
bond fide nature of some of these feats of the Fakeers,
and, consequently, that human hybernation (or a
state analogous to that of hybernation in the lower
animals) is a physiological fact, and is capable of
being induced by artificial contrivance, as well as
of occurring spontaneously occasionally in the con-
dition designated catalepsy or trance.

Three very important inferences may be deduced
from what has been said, namely, — 1st, That great
discretion ought to be used in applying tests for the
purpose of determining the extent of torpor of the
senses which may exist in any particular case,
because it is quite possible that the patient may
suffer intensely from such inflictions, without being
able, at the time, to give any sensible sign of doing
so, from the existence of a complete paralysis of all
voluntary power ; such as occurred in the case of
Dr. Mitchell's patient, and in many others whq
recovered after having been considered dead, and
who declared that they heard and understood all that
was said regarding them, and the preparations,
which were making for their interment, without
having the power to give any indication that they
were alive, until some accidental, abrupt impres-
sion, aroused them from their lethargy, and rescued
them from their perilous situations.

2nd. That all tests which would produce lacera^
ijon or permanent ii:\j.ury of tissue, should be


57

avoided, even in that class of patients in whom loss
of feeling is complete, or who remember nothing of
it afterwards, because, although not felt by the
patient at the time of infliction, nor remembered
afterwards, whether the state of loss of feeling may
be the consequence of spontaneons trance, or
anaesthesia induced by hypnotism, mesmerism,
chloroform, hachisch, or any other narcotic, such
inflictions are certain to manifest their natural
baneful influence on the patient, after he is restored to
the normal state of sensation, — as was evinced in the
case of the natural somnabulist to which I alluded.
3rd. And the third inference is of still greater
importance; namely, that in all cases of trance,
and indeed in every case of deaths no patient ought to
be interred until there have been indubitable signs
of decomposition of the body, because, without this
appearance, there is no certain sign of death ; — and
nothing could be more horrible, either to the sur-
vivors, or to the apparently dead, than the idea of
themselves or friends being buried alive, not as the
Fakeers, with the hope of being released at a stipu-
lated period, but with the certainty that there was
no hope of their escape from the grave to which
they had been consigned.

Tlie late Miss Beswick, of this city, from the
circumstance of having had a brother who made a
very narrow escape from being buried alive, became
so alarmed that she might run the hazard of being
so herself, as induced her to bequeath a large sum
to the late Mr. White and his heirs, on the express
condition that her body should not be buried, and
hence it has been mummified, and subsequently
presented to the Manchester Natural History
Museum, where it may be seen by the curious.

A very natural inquiry here forces itself upon the
mind of every intelligent individual, — namely, what
is die best mode of treating cases of catalepsy or
{ranee, so as to ward off t\\e ^^xv^^t ^A. \i€\\N%^^^^^


58

in such a painful and perilous situation as those
adverted to. In reply to thisj I heg leave to remark,
that it is well known that most of these cases have
occurred in females ; that they are closely allied to
hysteria ; and that they have an intimate relation
to irregularities in the female functions. Now, the
catamenial function, and various morbid phenomena
connected therewith, are so remarkably under the
control of the hypnotic mode of treatment, that
there can be no doubt whatever of its superiority
over all other methods in the treatment of such
affections. If any other functional derangement
exists which could be benefited specially by any
other established mode of treatment, — by the exhi*
bition of medicines, — I would by no means object to
their exhibition ; but, I maintain that the re-estab-
lishment of the catamenia by hypnotism is more
certainly realised by this method alone than by any
other ; and, in proof of this, I beg leave to sub-
join the following case, in addition to others which
have long ago occurred to me, and have already
been published.

In July, 1849, 1 was called to attend Mrs. - ,
thirty years of age, married, and the mother of
three children. She had suffered from attacks of
epilepsy for four years, for which she had been
under the care of several medical men. The
attacks became a little less frequent for some time,
but again increased in frequency and severity, until,
at the period when I was consulted, notwithstand-
ing she was under the constant care of a physician,
and was taking medicine prescribed by him repeat-
edly every day, still she was getting worse, so that
she had as many as twenty-eight fits daily, besides
what occurred during the night, when her attendants
were asleep. The day before I first operated on her,
she had thirteen violent fits in the space of eight
hours ; and, when I first saw her, she was jaw-locked,
as a sequel to one of these epileptic attacks. Her


59

friends told me, that whenever this state of locked*
jaw occurred, they were never able to open her
month for many hours, however much force they
might apply to effect it. They were, therefore, not
not a little surprised to observe that, by one of my
usual processes for reducing the cataleptic state of
muscles during hypnotism or mesmerism, I was
enabled, in a few secondSf to unlock her jaws and
open her mouth, without the slightest difficulty or
force. This patient was speedily thrown into the
hypnotic condition by my usual method, and the
result of my first operation, which was not more
than of a quarter of an hour's duration, was this, —
that the patient had only four fits in eight hours,
instead of the thirteen which she had during the
corresponding period on the day previous.

This patient was operated on by me twice each
day subsequently, and on the fourth day the cata-
menia, which had been absent for several months,
re- appeared, and, in the course of a week, the fits
were almost entirely arrested. Indeed, from that
period, she had only three fits, and these were
brought on by causes of considerable mental excite -
ment. The catamenia recurred regularly for the
next six months, and the results realised from the
use of hypnotism, when they again became sus-
pended, beautifully and conclusively illustrate the
value of this mode of treatment in such afiec-
tions.

At six successive periods I had occasion to resort
to hypnotism, for this purpose, and in every in-
stance with entire success, by a single operation
of from ten to eleven minutes each. Moreover, I
ascertained that this important result could be
effected without either touch or pass, but by mental
concentration and direction, and management of the
circulation alone. On two or three other occasions,
when 1 hypnotized this patient for neuralgic or
rheumatic pain in a leg or arm, 1\vxq\jl^ ^^ TCkRAa


60

of managing and directing the inflaence, the pains
were immediately removed, without exciting any
visible manifestation on any special organ or func-
tion.

Hypnotism is, therefore, not only a most efficient,
but also a perfectly safe mode of treating various
afiections, by those who understand its practical
application, and how to control and direct its
power: and here I shall adduce a few examples
in point

The first day I visited the epileptic patient, whose
case I have already narrated, her mother, who was
fifty>four years of age, and the mother of a nume-
rous family, told me she had been grievously afflicted
with headaches, so that she had not known what it
was to have been entirely free from headache for
the previous fourteen years. She stated, moreover,
that she suffered from pain and smarting of her
eyes, and that her sight had become so affected, that
she could not then see to read a sign across the
street I recommended her to try the effect of
hypnotism, which I believed calculated to afford
her relief for both affections. To this she readily
consented, and, to her great delight and surprise,
on being aroused from the first hypnotic sleep, she
found herself quite free from headache^ for the first
time for fourteen years. Next day I found she had
a slight return of headache, and, for a few days
thereafter, less and less of it daily, during which
period I hypnotized her daily, and, in the course of
one week, the headaches were entirely gone, and
never returned since, imless for a short time occa-
sionally, as will occur to any one ; and the pain and
smarting which she formerly felt in her eyes, also
entirely disappeared, and her sight became greatly
improved, and has continued so ever since.

Tn August, 1849, 1 called on the above patient
with my friend Professor Shaw, who was anxious
to witness the effects of hypnotism, and she hap*


61

pened to live near his residence, and was known to
nie as a trust-worthy person. She told me that she
had been severely afl9icted» during the previous
nighty with diarrhoea, and that she had had six calls
within the last two hours. I told her that I could
soon relieve her by putting her into the hypnotic
state. Notwithstanding the great benefit which had
been realised from it, both in her own case and that
of her daughter, she seemed quite sceptical as to
the power of hypnotism affording any relief to her
present affection. I thought otherwise, however,
and consequently she submitted to the operation,
and on being aroused from the sleep, all the griping
and feeling of sickness at stomach were gone, and
she had no return of the complaint subsequently.

Three days after the above occurrence I was sent
for, in consequence of my former patient, the epi-
leptic daughter, having been seized in the same
manner as her mother had been three days pre*
viously, and they were anxious to know whether I
could afibrd as speedy and effectual relief to her, by
the same means, as I had done to the mother. I
operated on her accordingly, in the manner calculated
to produce this effect, and with equal success as in
the case of the mother, all the unpleasant symptoms
being gone when I aroused her, and there was no
return of them subsequently.

In July, 1849, when visiting a child, the mother
of whom was forty years of age, and had had nine
healthy children, the mother stated that she herself
had been tormented for four days with the most dis-
gusting smell. The impression had arisen from her
going into the house of a relative whose body had been
kept till it was in a state of advanced decomposition.
From the moment the impression was made on her
olfactory nerves on entering the house of the de-
ceased, she had never been able to get rid of it,
whether within doors, or in the open air, notwith-
standing she had resorted to t\\e \3L&fe q1 «J^. %sst\3B. ^1

T?


62

fiagrant scents, to sal volatilei to snuff, and even to
the fumes of tobacco and burning lucifer-matches,
and every other contrivance she could think o£
Still all had proved in vain, the disgusting odour
being still as vivid as the first moment of its im-
pression. The patient, therefore, was glad to try
any method I might suggest, and consequently I
threw her into the hypnotic state, during which I
kept her mind constantly dwelling on the idea of
fragrant odoars, by exciting the idea in the mind
through auricular and muscular suggestion, accord-
ing to the principles laid down in my writings on
hypnotism. I took care to awake her with the
mind actively engaged with these agreeable ideas,
and the result was, that the moment she was aroused
from the sleep, she exclaimed with delight, that she
now enjoyed a smell as delightful as the former had
been disgusting. From that moment this patient
was never again annoyed with the disgusting odour,
not even when, on several occasions, she attempted,
by way of experiment, to recall it.

Can there be any ground to doubt the value and
power of hypnotism in such a case as this ?

On the 28th of March, 1843, I was requested by
a philanthropic gentleman (the individual here re-
ferred to was the late Hon. and Rev. William
Herbert, Dean of Manchester,) to extend my cha-
ritable sympathy to a poor woman of the name of
Barber, and by the power of hypnotism to relieve
her of a severe rheumatic affection, from which she
had been suffering for several months. She was
forty-four years of age, and a most pitiable object,
suffering severely from pulmonary affection, as well
as from rheumatism. With the latter affection she
became afflicted about the beginning of winter;
about the end of December, 1842, had been entirely
confined to her bed for five weeks, after which she
was able to get up ; but the flexors of the legs and
toes were so contracted that she could not extend


63

them, and it was with great pain, as well as with
difficulty, that she crawled ahout hei apartment.
Her hands, wrists, and iingers, were also much
affected ; so that she was very helpless. Her pain
was not only severe, hut unremitting either hy day
or hy night After being hypnotized the first time,
during which I endeavoured to regulate the irre-
gular condition of the muscles, she was enabled to
straighten her legs and toes, and move her wrist
and fingers, could walk with great freedom, and
expressed herself almost entirely free from pain
both of legs and arms before I left her house. After
five operations, as is well known to many, she was
80 well as to be able either to walk or run across her
room, and even to step on a chair, with either foot
first, without assistance. I operated on her thirteen
times altogether, and she remained, to my certain
knowledge, free from rheumatism up to the end of
December, 1843, and I have reason to believe had
no other attack of it subsequently, as I heard nothing
farther of her, and she had my assurance, as well as
that of the late Dean, that I was willing to give her
any further assistance of the sort she might require
at any time, as an act of charity.

It is commonly said that seeing is believing, but
fueling is the very truth. I shall, therefore, give
the result of my experience of hypnotism in my
own person. In the middle of September, 1844, 1
suffered from a most severe attack of rheumatism,
implicating the left side of the neck and chest, and
the left arm. At first the pain was moderately
severe, and I took some medicine to remove it ; but,
instead of this, it became more and more violent,
and had tormented me for three days, and was so
excruciating, that it entirely deprived me of sleep
for ihree nights successively, and on the last of the
three nights I could not remain in any one posture
for five minutes, from the severity of the pain. On


64

the forenoon of the next day, whilst visiting my
patients, eveiy jolt of the carriage T could only com-
pare to several sharp instruments being thrust
through my shoulder, neck, and chest. A full
inspiration was attended with stabbing pain, such
as is experienced in pleurisy. When I returned
home for dinner I could neither turn my head, lift
my arm, nor draw a breath, without suffering ex-
treme pain. In this condition I resolved to try the
effects of hypnotism. I requested two friends, who
were present, and who both understood the system, to
watch the effects, and arouse me when I had passed
sufficiently into the condition ; and, with their as-
surance that they would give strict attention to their
charge, I sat down and hypnotised myself, extending
the extremities. At the expiration of nine minutes
they aroused me, and, to my agreeable surprise, /
was quite free from paint being able to move in any
way with perfect ease, I say agreeably surprised, on
this account: I had seen like results with many
patients ; but it is one thing to hear of pain, and
another to feel it. My suffering was so exquisite
that I could not imagine any one else ever suffered
so intensely as myself on that occasion ; and, there-
fore, I merely expected a mitigation, so that I was
truly agreeably surprised to iind myself quite free
from pain, I continued quite easy all the after-
noon, slept comfortably all night, and the following
morning felt a little stiffness, but iw pain. A week
thereafter I had a slight return, which I removed
by hypnotising myself once more; and I have re-
mained quite free from rheumatism ever since, now
nearly six years. Was there the slightest room to
doubt the value and efficacy of hypnotism in this
case ?

I shall only give one more case here in con-
firmation of the value of hypnotism as a therapeutic
agent in certain forms of disease, and a more in-


65

tetesting example in point could not well be met
with.

In the beginning of spring, 1849, a young lady,
about fourteen years of age, was brought to me
from Armagh, in Ireland, for a case of permanent
tonic spasm of the left hand and wrist, of four
months* standing. She had been attended by two
eminent professional gentlemen from her first
seizure, and from the high character they bear I
doubt not but they exhausted the whole resources
of our art in her behalf. Still with all this the
case remained as bad as ever, or rather getting
worse by lapse of time. The spasm never relax^
either by night or day, asleep or awake ; and when
I first examined her, no force I was capable of
exerting made any impression on it, so firmly was
the hand locked. I hypnotized her, and on the
third day, whilst in the sleep, I was enabled to un-
lock her hand, and in a few days she could use it
in tying her bonnet, and in feeding herself; and
very soon was quite well, and has continued free
from any attack of the sort ever since. She neither
had internal medicine nor external application
from me, to aid in this happy result ; and therefore
there is no room to doubt the value and efficacy of
hypnotism in treating this interesting case, as the
change was efiected so speedily as to place hyp-
notism and the cure in the obvious relation of cause
and effect.

Nothing can be more preposterous and presump-
tuous than continually to hear professional men who
have had no practical experience of this mode of
treating disease, presuming to dogmatise, condemn-
ing it on mere theoretical grounds, and setting up
their theoretical and preconceived notions as of force
to countervail the results of the acttial practical ex-
perience of those who have studied the subject for
years with the greatest care and attention. In all
other matters practical expeiV^iivt^, «c& "w^"^ ^^ ^^^R\^r

¥2


66

tific kDowledge, is deemed requisite to constitute an
individual an authority upon a given subject, and
why not also upon this ? Such sceptics allege that
inasmuch as some of the phenomena realised by
hypnotism or mesmerism have a strong similarity
to certain forms of hysteria, that it must be a great
delusion to suppose that we can cure a disease by
inducing a state so like it. Have I not already
Btated the fact that I cured a case of natural somn-
ambulism very speedily by inducing an analogous
state by the process which I call hypnotising ? I
was equally successful in curing sleep-walking in a
near relative of my own, by hypnotism. He was
accustomed to rise in his sleep, and talk, and walk in
this state, so as to cause considerable anxiety for his
safety, but after being hypnotised a few times this
tendency vanished| and has not recurred for many
years past

Here, then, we have spontaneous somnambulism
by day, and sleep-walking and talking by night, both
cured by inducing an analogous condition by artificial
Contrivance. In many cases, inducing an analogousf
whilst it is 910^ an identical condition, seems to be the
most speedy and certain mode of curing various
affections, — as for example, a solution of nitrate of
silver applied to the eyes in cases of chronic ophthal-
mia. Some cases again are more benefited by an
opposite mode of treatment ; and I hold it to be the
duty of every medical man to adopt whatever mode
of treatment experience has proved to be most
speedy and certain in curing his patient, provided it
is also a perfectly safe method. At all events, I am
warranted to speak most confidently, as the result
of considerable extent of practice in both modes of
treatment, and that without the slightest desire of
holding up hypnotism as as a panacea or universal
remedy, that, when judiciously applied, it is capable
of being made one of the most efi^cient modes of


67

treating various forms of hysteria, spinal irritation,
spinal distortion, (a) epilepsy, and many other

(a) Apropog of spinal distortion. I should do great
injustice to a most talented and meritorious member
oi my profession, were I not to record the following
facts: About eighteen months ago, a metropolitan
surgeon, of high mental attainments, called on me
witii a letter of introduction from a mutual friend.
A principal object of int^uiry witli him was to obtain
a knowledge of my views of hypnotism and mes-
merism. I consequently explained and exhibited to
him my views of hypnotism, and especially its appli-
cability to the successful treatment of various forms
of disease. The better to illustrate its influence to
this gentleman, I also operated several times on
himself. This same individual was lately in attend-
ance on a family in which there were two daughters
severely afflicted with spinal curvature. The elder
daughter was sixteen years of aee, and had been un-
der constant treatment for this anection for nearly six
years. Under the care of one gentleman, celebrated
for his treatment of spinal affections, this young lady
had been made to recline night and day for sixteen
months; during which period she was subjected to
the counter extension ofpallies and weights attached
to her body, extending from under the chin, and both
arms, and opposed to those were others attached to
both ancles. This patient was also made to pull a rope
and lift a weight appended to it, with one arm, Pane
hundred times each day, for four years, besides other
gymnastic exercises; hut still she got worse, notwith-
standing this prolonged use of the proorustean bed, and
other appliances enumerated to boot. The advices of
professional gentlemen in the metropolis, eminent for
their reputed skill in the treatment of such affec-
tions, was had recourse to'; amongst others,.that of ^
tnost eminent for his reputed skill in joint and spine
affections. By the advice thus obtained, various
complicated and expensive mechanical apparatus
were obtained and persevered with for upwards of
Jbur years more: but the result was that, instead of
improvement, there was a decided and rapid progress
sion of the complaint for the worse. The younger
sister, now fourteen years of age, had also become
affected, and had been subjected to contjtant treat-
ment from the first moment she was discovered
to be so. She had persisted in treatmeat Coi: <.(w«a.


68

nervous disorders, including neuralgic and rhen«
matic pains, which are well known to he most
intractable according to the ordinary medical modes
of treating them.

yearSf but without the slightest im|)rovement ; on the
contrary, she had rapidly lapsed into a state of dis-
tressing and complicated distortion of both sides of
the chest. At this stage of the complaint the parents
became painfully convinced of the utter hopeless-
ness of benefit from further perseverance in a similar
course of treatment, as it had been commenced with
when the deformity was so slight as to be quite in-
visible when the patients were dressed ; whereas,
they had at length attained to a most distressing ex-
tent of deformity. As remarked in the mother's
first letter to me, notwithstanding all the means used,
" and reclining a great deal, the deformity has con-
tinued slowly but most surdy to gain ground, till it is
now very extensive. The instrument (she adds) holds
the fi^re wonderfully well, but when that is removed
there is evidently less and less strength in the tceaker
muscles to do ike dultyfoT fhemsetoes**

At this stage of the complaint the surgeon above
referred to lent the mother my work on hypnotism, and
expressed himself convinced that the hypnotic mode
of treatment was likely to be more successful than
any other with her daughters. This gentleman, had
he been selfishly inclined, might have retained the
two patients under his own care, as he had the en-
tire confidence of the family, and might have urged
that I had personaUy communicated to him a theore-
tical knowledge of my hypnotic mode of treatment;
but, with a rare degree of liberality and kind humane
feeling, he expressed himself ftilly convinced that
hypnotism was likely to do them more good than any
other mode of treatment, and alleged, moreover,
that I must more thoroughly understand its practiood
application than those who had only studied my
method theoretically. The consequence was, that
the two young ladies were brought to Manchester,
and put under my personal superintendence. I think
it only an act of justice to the individual who acted
thus nobly and generously and humanely to his
patients, to announce his name, viz., J. J. G.Wilkin-
son, Esq., surgeon, Hampstead, London.

Whilst this pamphlet was passing through the press,
the mother at these ladies, a most acute and talented


69

In the littlo brochure which I puhlished in 1846,
on "The Power of the Mind over the Body," abund-
ance of evidence was adduced to prove that, even
in the wide*waking condition, a constant fixed atten-

person, arrived in Manchester, to place her two
daughters under my care. My first hypnotic opera-
tion with them was on the 10th instant, when both
patients were rendered cataleptic, but on being
aroused they had a perfect recollection of all which
had occurred in the room during their sleep. Next
morning they were again operated on, when they
were not only rendered cataleptic, but also talked,
and wrote* and exhibited mental emotions through
muscular excitation, of all which they remembered
nothing when awake, but on being sent to sleep again
they remembered every particular, — thus manifestinff
double-consciousness. In the evening of that day I
had the steel apparatus removed before operating
on my patients, because I then intended to turn t9
account, in rectifying the spinal distortion, the pecu-
liar susceptibility which had been induced in my
patients by the two previous operations.

The instant the apparatus was removed, the result
of the erroneous mode of treatment which they had
been pursuing manifested itself; for there was no
muscular power to support the body in die proper
position ; and the falling down and distortion of both
patients was most painful to witness, the more so as
they were two most intelligent and sensitive girls.
The falling in or contraction of the left side, and
projection of the right shoulder, in the elder sister,
were most painful to look upon; and the dotMe
curvature or the younger sister, although of shorter
duration, was still more appalling to witness. Hav-
iug hypnotized these patients, and called a cata«>
leptiform degree of energy into the morbidly-
weakened muscles, and thus brought the body into
a more favourable position, it is impossible for me to
describe the astonishment of the mother and the
ladies' maid of the patients, when they witnessed
the power which the patients had so speedily ac-
quired of supportinp; themselves, during tne sleep, in
tnis improved position, — far superior even to the
position in which they were ordinarily supported by
the mechanical apparatoii. Their surprise was still
greater, however, when they found that after the
patients were aroused they atlU t^Xvi^o:^^ ^vv vow-


70

tion of the iiil:.d concentrated on any part of the
body, or on any special organ or function, would
change the physical action of the part so regarded ;
and the more so if the mind was fully persuaded of

creased degree of power, by which they were en-
abled to support themselves so well by voluntary
effort, which they had not had the power of doing for
a long period previously. The mother exclaimed,
that much as she expected from what she had heard,
both from Mr. Wilkinson and myself, still what she
now witnessed far exceeded her most sanguine ex-
pectations; and added, that she only wishra that aU
medical men, and all others who had relatives suffer-
ing from such aflSiction, could only witness what she
had then seen, as it was utterly impossible for any
one to resist the force of such ocular demonstration
as she had then had presented to her, regarding the
Talue and power of hypnotism in the treatment of .
such affections.

Twice each day these operations were repeatedi
and with such marked improvement, that without
the slightest incoir^enience, in less than a week, they
could walk about n'om half an hour to three-quarters
after the operations, without the apparatus or any
support from stays, with perfect ease, supporting
themselves by muscular effort Alone, and in a better
position than the instruments afforded; whereas
Defore my operations, they durst not remain a
single minute in the erect posture without their
mechanical apparatus. The gratification of the
patients and their mother is unbounded, from my
success with tbem^ having so far exceeded their most
san^ine expectations in both cases. In short, hyp-
notism is by far the most reUional as well as most rae-
ce80U mode of treating such complaints, because it
infuses increased vigour into the weak muscles,
which, Increased by each repetition of the process, to
a considerable extent persists iifter the patient is
awake. Moreover, by cataleptiformly fixing certain
muscles, and preventing the expansion of cor-
responding regions of the chest, the formerly col-
lapsed or depressed portions of the chest and lungs
are brought into l>lay, and thereby expanded;
whereas the mechanics^ supports now applied, un-
less when there is positive disease of the bones of
the spine, are worse than useless, for this reason, be-
csuse they tcasie ly compression^ or weaken by inactkm,


71

tbe certainty of such result being realised. In a
certain stage of the hypnotic sleep there is a greater
degree of mental concentration, and a grea er vivid-
ness of the imagination in those who pass into the

muscles which naturally ought to give dae support
and form to the human figure ; so that, as well ex-
pressed by the mother of these patients, as quoted
above, when the instruments are ''removed, there Is
evidently less and less strength in the weaker muscles to
do the dutff for Ihemsdoes" In all cases of spinal dis-
tortion which are capable of cure or amelioration,—
and almost all cases are so at an early stage, — there
is no reason to doubt that hypnotism, when properly
directed, is quite capable of arresting, or of entirely
curing, cases of spinal curvature; and it is, more-
over, a far more agreeable, safe, and less expensive
method than that which requires the aid of so much
mechanical apparatus, and so much confinement of
the patients to the recumbent posture.

After I had attended these patients for a week, the
mother called my attention to the contracted state of
her elder daughter's arms, both of which she had
been unable to extend fully for upwards of four
years. The right fore-arm I ascertained could not
be extended beyond an angle of about 55P with the
humerus ; the left was considerably less contracted
The malposition had been induced by the position
in which her arms had been held so long dunng her
first sixteen months recumbent posture. I immedi-
ately acted on the right arm so as to ensure the cata-
leptiform state of the extensor muscles, and on
arousing the patient a few minutes thereafter, it was
ascertained that she could then extend the arm com-
pletely by her own voluntary effort; and by then ope-
rating on the left arm, an equally satisfactory result
ensued. All this may appear very marvellous to
those who are unacquainted with the extraordinary
power acquired bjr us over the muscular system
during the hypnotic state. Let them judge of this
power by the following fact, detailed by Dr. Car-
penter in his article on sleep in the *' Cyclopaedia of
Anatomy and Physiology." He there says: " We
have seen one of Mr. Braid's hypnotized subjects, a
man remarkable for the poverty of his muscular de-
velopment, lift a twenty-eight pound weight upon
his little finger alone, and even swing it round his
head." I may add to the aboNe \m^wVKoX^»sX'»'^*^


72

second — conscious state of the sleep, and a greater
general mobility of the system accordingly, and thus
we obtain the effects in a proportionally more speedy,
intense, and certain degree than in the waking con-
dition; and thus, by inducing a new and altered
action, we get rid of the previously existing morbid
action.

Remarkable and important, therefore, as the phe-
nomena which I contend for as producible by hyp-
notism are, it must at once be obvious to every
candid and intelligent member of the profession,
that they violate no established law and recognised
principle in physiological and psychological science.

Arlington House,

Oxfordstreetf Manchester,

July, 1850.

the said individual had not, for six years, been able
to lift with impunity more than fourfeen pounds when
in the waking condition ; and yet, on another occasion,
1 saw him in the sleep lift as high as his knee, on the
last Joint of his fore-finger, a fifty-six pound weight.
Such increased muscular power, then, oeing inftised
into morbidly weak muscles, an increased power
persists in them after they come out of the sleep ; and
this accumulating by each repetition of the procen,
readily accounts for the satisfactory results realised,
upon the principle of an improvea system of train-
ing. Nor should I omit to add, that morbidly-con-
tracted muscles can be as speedily reduced to a
natural condition by appropriate management during
the hypnotic state. Vide pages 59, 65 and 71.


London ; Printed by WUliam T^tet, BoU-c«urt.
