NEURHYPNOLOGY; or, The Rationale of Nervous Sleep, Considered in Relation with Animal Magnetism.
By James Braid. London: John Churchill; Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black, 1843.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/neurypnologyorra00braiiala).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

NEURYPNOLOGY;


OR,  THE


RATIONALE OF  NERVOUS SLEEP,


CONSIDERED  IN'  RELATION  WITH


ANIMAL  MAGNETISM.


ILLUSTRATED  BY


NUMEROUS  CASES  OF  ITS  SUCCESSFUL  APPLICATION
IN  THE  RELIEF  AND  CURE  OF  DISEASE.


BY

JAMES  BRAID,  M.R.C.S.E.,  C.M.W.S.  &c.


DtteaU  Stewart.


LONDON:

JOHN  CHURCHILL,  PRINCE'S  STREET,  SOHO.
ADAM  &  CHARLES  BLACK,  EDINBURGH.

1843.


EDINBURGH:

PRINTED  BY  ANDREW  SHORTRKDK,
OKOROB  IV.  BR1DOK.


CHARLES  ANDERSON,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.  ED.  &c.

MY  DEAR  SIB,

INCLINATION  as  well  as  duty  induces  me  to
dedicate  this  work  to  you :  that  I  may  publicly
express  the  lively  sense  of  gratitude  I  entertain  for
the  many  opportunities  enjoyed  during  my  appren-
ticeship with  yourself  and  your  late  father,  of  acquir-
ing a  practical  as  well  as  theoretical  knowledge  of
my  profession;  of  becoming  familiar  with  your
comprehensive  views  of  disease,  and  their  happy
application  in  practice ;  for  the  personal  kindness
shewn  me  during  my  pupilage ;  and  for  the  unin-
terrupted friendship  which  has  ever  since  existed
betwixt  us.

I  am  aware  that  you  are  not  practically  acquainted
with  the  subject  of  this  treatise,  but  your  intimate
knowledge  of  general  science  renders  you  eminently
qualified  for  prosecuting  the  subject  with  success;

1104488


IV  DEDICATION.

and  permit  me  to  assure  you,  that  its  value  as  a
curative  power,  for  an  intractable  class  of  diseases,
renders  it  well  worthy  of  your  best  attention.

Believe  me,

My  dear  Sir,

Most  faithfully  yours,

JAMES  BRAID.


3,  ST  PETER'S  SQUARE,
MANCHESTER,  June  2,  1843.


CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION.

General  remarks— Why  Hypnotism  has  been  separated  from  Animal
Magnetism  —  How  far  considered  useful  in  the  cure  of  disease  —  Its
powers  on  the  animal  functions  —  Certain  erroneous  charges  refuted  —
Opinions  and  practice  of  Bertrand  and  Abbe'  Faria,  Mr  Brooks,  Dr
Prichard  —  Its  moral  influence  —  Should  be  used  by  professional  men
only  —  Definition  of  terms,  ....  Page  1


PART I.
CHAPTER  I.

Introductory  remarks  —  Circumstances  which  directed  to  the  investigation
—  A  real  phenomenon  observed  —  Experiments  instituted  to  prove  the
cause  of  it  —  Opinions  and  conclusions  drawn  from  them  —  Reasons  for
separating  Hypnotism  from  Mesmerism — Hypnotism  more  generally
successful  than  Animal  Magnetism  —  Mr  Herbert  Mayo's  testimony  on
this  point  — Proofs  of  this  referred  to— Different  modes  by  which  it  can
be  induced  —  Can  only  be  expected  to  succeed  by  complying  with  the
whole  conditions  required,  ....  Page  15


Till  CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  II.

Mode  of  Hypnotizing  —  Circumstances  necessary  to  be  complied  with  —
Peculiar  phenomena  which  follow;  excitement  first,  and  afterwards
depression  of  function — Importance  of  attending  to  this  —  How  these
may  be  made  to  alternate  with  each  other  —  Extraordinary  influence  of
a  current  of  air  during  Hypnotism— Reasons  for  certain  modifications  of
original  modes  of  operating  —  Hypnotism  proceeds  from  a  law  of  the
animal  economy— Arises  from  the  physical  and  psychical  condition  of
the  patient,  and  not  from  any  emanation  or  principle  proceeding  from
others — Example  for  proof — Exhibits  no  appreciable  electric  or  mag-
netic change.  —  Two  patients  may  hypnotize  each  other  by  contact.  —
Phenomena  arise  spontaneously  in  course  of  disease.  —  Mr  Wakley's
admission  on  this  point.  —  Hr  H.  Mayo's  testimony  as  to  the  effects  of
Hypnotism.  —  Effects  of  different  positions  of  the  eyes.  —  Remarks  on
articles  in  Medical  Gazette.  —  Consensual  adjustment  of  eyes.  —  Effects
on  size  of  pupil.  — Power  of  habit  and  imagination.  — Docility  of  pa-
tients, and  exalted  sensibility,  and  their  effects.  —  Patient  hypnotized
whilst  operating  on  another.  —  Mode  of  resisting  influence,  Page  27


CHAPTER  III.

Phenomena  of  natural  sleep,  dreaming,  and  somnambulism  contrasted  —
Causes  of  common  sleep  —  Of  dreaming  —  Effects  of  variety  and  mono-
tony compared  —  Changes  alleged  to  take  place  in  the  structure  of  the
brain  by  exertion  —  Cause  of  Hypnotism,  M'Nish's  article  on  ' '  Reverie"
compared  with  Mr  Braid's  theory  of  Hypnotism  —  Mode  of  arousing
patients  from  the  state  of  Hypnotism,  .  .  Page  43


CHAPTER  IV.

Phenomena  of  common  sleep — Of  Hypnotism  —  Power  of  locomotion  and
accurate  balancing  of  themselves  — Tendency  to  dance  on  hearing
appropriate  music— Grace  displayed  under  its  influence  — Tendency  to


CONTENTS.  IX

become  cataleptiformly  fixed  in  any  position  if  left  quiet  —  Probability
of  Hypnotism  having  been  practised  amongst  the  ancients,  and  the  cause
of  their  superior  excellence  in  sculpture,  painting,  and  dancing  —  Effects
analogous  to  Nitrous  Oxide  in  some  — in  what  it  differs  from  this  and
intoxication  from  wine  and  spirits  — Analogous  to  conium  —  Effects  of
monotonous  impressions  on  any  of  the  senses  — Opinions  of  Cullen,
M'Nish,  Willich  —  (Counting  and  repeating  generally  known)  —  A
writer  in  Medical  Gazette  —  Power  of  habit  and  expectation  —  All  the
phenomena  consecutive — Note  illustrating  this  —  Power  of  Hypnotism
to  cure  intractable  diseases  and  disorders  —  Miss  Collins  case  and
Miss  E.  Atkinson's— Extent  to  which  it  may  be  expected  to  be
useful,  ......  Page  54


CHAPTER  V.

Reasons  for  delivering  Public  Lectures  on  Hypnotism  —  Mode  of  procuring
refreshing  sleep,  with  low  pulse  and  general  flaccidity  of  muscle  —  Effi-
cacy of  this  plan,  .  .  .  .  Page  75


CHAPTER  VI.

Introductory  remarks  —  Relation  between  mind  and  matter  illustrated  to
disprove  materialism  —  Armstrong,  Colton,  Brown,  Abercrombie,
Stewart,  Plato  —  General  conclusion,  that  mind  or  life  is  the  cause  of
organism  —  Power  of  conscience  —  The  passions,  how  excited  —  Dr
Elliotson's  opinion  as  to  the  efficacy  or  non-efficacy  of  volition  and  sym-
pathy with  operator's  brain  —  Modes  of  dividing  the  brain  —  Causes  of
Phrenology  being  imperfect  —  Objections  to  Phreno-Hypnotism  —  Mode
of  connection  between  the  brain  and  body  — First  attempts  at  Phreno-
logizing  during  Hypnotism  were  failures  —  Succeeded  by  operating  dif-
ferently—  Cases  illustrative  —  A  child  operates  successfully  —  Details  of
the  case  —  Other  successful  cases —  Proper  time  for  operating —  Case  of
an  officer  in  1758  —  Inferences  as  to  its  curative  powers  —  Opinions  of
La  Roy  Sunderland,  and  Mr  Hall  —  Presumed  cause  of  phenomena
called  Cross  Magnetism  —  Return  stolen  property  to  proper  owners  and
proper  place  by  smell  and  touch  —  Power  of  hearing  faint  sounds  —


X  CONTENTS.

Additional  cases— Opposite  faculties  can  be  excited  at  same  time  by
acting  on  the  opposite  hemispheres — Mode  of  operating  —  Concludin
remarks  on  the  value  of  testimony, .  .  .  Page  79

CHAPTER  VII.

General  resumi  —  Many  phenomena  admit  of  physical  and  chemical  proof
—  Difficulties  of  comprehending  many  phenomena  —  Effects  of  prejudice
in  preventing  the  reception  of  truth  —  Critique  on  debate  at  Medico-
Chirurgical  Society  on  Mr  Ward's  operation  —  State  of  the  circulation—
Conjectures  as  to  the  cause  of  the  cataleptiform  condition,  Page  150


PART  II.


Modes  of  operating  —  Objects  of  operations  —  Cases  of  sight  improved  —
Hearing — Deaf  and  dumb — Mr  Curtis's  remarks — James  Shelmerdine's
case — Mr  Bingham's  testimony — S.  Taylor — Sense  of  smell — Touch  and
resistance  —  Tic,  paralysis  of  sense  and  motion,  cured  —  Miss  E.  Atkin-
son's case,  voice  recovered— Rheumatism,  ten  cases— Irregular  muscular
action  —  Headache  —  Spinal  Irritation  —  Epilepsy — Spinal  curvature  —
Neuralgia,  and  palpitation  of  the  heart  —  Surgical  operations  without
pain  —  Diseases  of  the  skin  —  Locked  jaw  —  Tonic  spasm  —  Miss  Collins
—  Concluding  remarks,  ....  Page  161


PREFACE.


THE  circumstances  which  led  me  to  engage  in  the
investigation  of  hypnotism,  are  detailed  in  the  intro-
duction to  this  little  work;  in  the  first  part  of  the
treatise  I  have  endeavoured  to  give  the  results  at
which  I  arrived,  in  most  instances  sketching  the
route  by  which  I  travelled,  and  stating  the  inferences
drawn  from  the  various  incidents  which  occurred  in
the  course  of  my  progress.  Having  furnished  the
data  from  which  I  drew  my  conclusions,  the  reader
is  thus  prepared  to  determine,  whether,  on  any
occasion,  I  have  come  to  these  conclusions  without
what  he  would  consider  sufficient  evidence,  and  in
such  case  can  institute  additional  experiments  to
any  extent  he  may  judge  requisite.  One  circum-
stance, however,  I  may  remark.  From  a  fear  of
being  misled,  I  have  requested  the  most  sceptical
individuals  I  knew,  both  professional  and  merely
scientific  men,  to  scrutinize  all  my  experiments  in
the  most  critical  manner ;  and  have  also  induced
some  of  my  most  intelligent  and  respected  friends
to  submit  to  the  operations,  in  the  hope  that  I


Xll  PREFACE.

might  thus  more  certainly  guard  against  being
deceived.  The  results  I  now  submit  to  the  public,
and  to  the  kind  and  candid  consideration  of  my  pro-
fessional brethren,  whom  I  should  wish  to  investigate
the  subject  coolly,  and  with  an  honest  desire  to  arrive
at  truth.  Having  myself  been  sceptical,  I  can  make
every  reasonable  allowance  for  others.  On  this
point  I  fully  subscribe  to  the  propriety  of  the
remark  of  Treviranus,  the  celebrated  botanist,  when
speaking  of  mesmerism.  He  says,  (I  quote  from
memory,)  "I  have  seen  much  which  I  would  not
have  believed  on  your  telling;  and  in  all  reason,
therefore,  I  can  neither  hope  nor  wish  that  you
should  believe  on  mine."

It  is  quite  natural  for  any  man  to  prefer  the
evidence  of  his  own  senses  to  that  of  all  others,  and  I
think  no  one  who  has  the  opportunity  of  examining
the  phenomena  for  himself  should  neglect  to  do  so.
However,  there  are  some  circumstances  which  ought
to  be  particularly  borne  in  mind,  or  very  erroneous
opinions  may  be  formed  by  the  uninitiated,  from
what  is  actually  witnessed.  First,  there  is  a  remark-
able difference  in  the  degree  of  susceptibility  of  diffe-
rent individuals  to  the  hypnotic  influence,  some
becoming  rapidly  and  intensely  affected,  others  slowly
and  feebly  so.  This  is  only  analogous  to  what  we
experience  in  regard  to  the  effects  of  medicines  on
different  individuals,  and  especially  as  regards  wine,
spirits,  and  opium,  and  nitrous  oxide.  Whilst  this  is
a  recognized  fact,  as  regards  the  latter,  it  appears  to
me  somewhat  surprising  to  find  many,  and  even  pro-
fessional men  too,  who  seem  to  expect  as  much
uniformity  ought  to  obtain,  in  regard  to  the  pheno-


PREFACE.  Xlll

mena  during  hypnotism,  as  if  we  were  operating  on
inanimate  matter.  On  the  contrary,  they  ought  to
be  ready  to  admit  that  a  variety  might  be  expected
to  arise,  even  in  the  same  individual,  according  to  the
physical  and  mental  condition  of  the  patient  at  the
moment  the  operation  is  performed.

The  next  most  important  point  for  consideration  is,
the  fact  of  all  the  phenomena  being  consecutive.  We
have  thus  the  extremes  of  insensibility,  and  exalted
sensibility,  of  rigidity  and  mobility,  at  different
stages,  and  these  merging  into  each  other  by  the  most
imperceptible  gradations,  or  in  the  most  abrupt
manner,  according  to  the  mode  of  treating  the
patient.  It  is  no  unusual  thing  for  different  parties
to  be  testing,  or  calling  for  tests,  for  the  opposite  con-
ditions,'  at  the  same  instant  of  time.  These,  of  course,
are  incompatible,  but,  at  a  certain  stage,  the  transi-
tions from  torpor  of  all  the  senses,  and  catalep-
tiform  rigidity,  to  the  most  exalted  sensibility,  and
flaccidity  of  muscle,  may  be  effected  almost  with
the  celerity  of  thought,  even  by  so  slight  a  cause  as  a
breath  of  air  directed  against  the  part.  If  left  at  rest
it  will  speedily  merge  back  again,  and  thus  those  un-
acquainted with  such  peculiarities,  will  be  continually
liable  to  think  they  discover  discrepancies,  which,
however,  only  originate  from  their  imperfect  know-
ledge of  the  subject ;  just  as  an  unskilful  manipulator
will  be  ready  to  suppose,  from  his  different  results,
that  the  observations  of  other  chemists  have  been
erroneous.

The  third  point  meriting  especial  attention  is,  the
condition  of  the  mind  at  different  stages.  As  results
from  opium,  so  also  from  hypnotism.  At  one  stage


XIV  PREFACE.

it  gives  an  extraordinary  power  of  concentration  of
thought,  or  disposition  to  rapt  contemplation,  where-
as, at  another  stage,  the  discursive,  or  imaginative
faculties  are  excited  into  full play, and thus  the
most  expanded,  bright,  and  glowing  scenes  and  images
are  presented  to  the  fervid  imagination. Such  effects
are  quite  analogous  to  those  described  as  resulting
from  the  use  of  opium,  and  detailed  by  the  late  Sir
Humphrey  Davy,  as  experienced  in  his  own per-
son, from  the  inhalation  of  the  nitrous  oxide. "  I
thus  felt  a  sense  of  tangible  extension,  highly  plea-
surable in  every  limb,  my  visible  impressions  were
dazzling  and  apparently  magnified. I  heard  distinctly
every  sound  in  the  room,  and  was  perfectly  aware  of
my  situation. By  degrees,  as  the  pleasurable  sensa-
tion  increased,  I  lost  all  connection  with  external
things  ;  trains  of  vivid  visible  images  rapidly  passed
through  my  mind. I  existed  in  a  world  of  newly
connected  and  newly  modified  ideas." It  must  also
be  borne  in  mind,  that  these  opposite  mental  condi-
tions may  glide  into  each  other  by  the  most  imper-
ceptible degrees,  or  by  the  most  abrupt  transitions,
according  to  the  modes  of  management,  and  thus  con-
sciousness or  unconsciousness,  sound  sleep,  dreaming,
or  somnambulism,  will  result,  according  as  sensations
or  ideas  predominate,  or  are  equally  vivid. See  Hib-
bert's  Philosophy  of  Apparitions. At  a  certain  stage
the  same  abruptness  of  transition  may  be  realized  in
the  mental  phenomena,  as  were  referred  to  in  the  last
paragraph,  in  respect  to  the  physical,  and  from  equally
slight  causes. I  presume  it  is  from  this  cause  that  the
phrenological  manifestation  may  be  so  readily  and
characteristically  exhibited  at  this  period.  At  page  143


PREFACE.  XV

I  have  stated  that,  were  it  not  that  I  should  con-
sider it  an  unnecessary  waste  of  time  to  prosecute  the
inquiry  farther,  after  the  amount  of  evidence  obtained
by  myself,  and  others,  I  had  no  doubt  but  I  might
soon  obtain  any  number  of  additional  cases  I  might
desire.  In  proof  of  this,  I  may  remark,  that  since
that  period,  I  was  induced  one  day  to  try  some  fresh
subjects,  when  I  succeeded  in  eliciting  the  manifes-
tations in  the  most  satisfactory  manner  in  the  case
of  a  man  of  forty  years  of  age,  and  in  three  other
male  subjects  upwards  of  twenty  years  of  age.  Of  the
latter,  under  the  excitation  of  constructiveness  and
ideality,  one  wrote,  and  the  other  drew  patterns,  and
neither  of  them  had  seen  such  experiments,  nor
expected  to  be  so  tested,  nor  remembered  what
happened.  The  same  day  I  also  manipulated  three
females,  one  45  years  of  age,  a  young  lady  of  19,
and  a  girl,  all  of  whom  exhibited  the  manifesta-
tions quite  distinctly.  Another  day,  to  satisfy  a
number  of  intellectual  friends,  I  hypnotized  three  of
their  personal  friends,  two  of  whom  were  entire
strangers  to  me,  and  were  quite  sceptical  as  to  the
possibility  of  my  being  able  to  affect  them  at  all.
They  all  exhibited  the  manifestations  most  dis-
tinctly, two  of  them  in  a  remarkable  degree,  and  to
the  extent  of  twenty  manifestations  at  first  trial.
Under  "  conscientiousness,"  one  restored  a  reticule
she  had  stolen,  and  burst  into  a  flood  of  tears  at  the
thought  of  her  delinquency.  The  friends  were  alarmed
at  the  intensity  of  her  emotion,  but  by  changing  the
point  of  contact,  I  had  her  changed  from  the  grave  to
the  gay  in  a  few  seconds.  A  few  days  after  I  had
other  two  cases,  and  I  feel  assured  that  in  most  of  the


XV  PREFACE.

twelve  cases  here  referred  to  the  parties  knew  nothing
of  phrenology,  and  that  not  one  of  them  could  with
certainty  point  to  two  of  their  own  organs.  I  may
also  add,  they  were  all  tested  before  competent  and
observant  witnesses,  who  can  testify  there  was  no
prompting  by  any  one.

It  appears  quite  evident,  that  whatever  images
or  mental  emotions  or  thoughts  have  been  excited
in  the  mind  during  nervous  sleep,  are  generally
liable  to  recur,  or  be  renovated  and  manifested
when  the  patient  is  again  placed  under  similar  cir-
cumstances. Notwithstanding  the  apparent  conclu-
siveness  of  the  cases  recorded,  that  there  exists  a
natural  connection  betwixt  certain  localities  touched
and  the  peculiar  manifestations  which  follow,  in
order  to  determine  this  question  in  the  most  decided
manner,  it  is  my  intention  to  institute  a  series  of
experiments  on  fresh  patients,  in  order  to  ascertain
to  what  extent  it  may  be  practicable,  by  arbitrary
association,  to  excite  the  opposite  tendencies  from  the
same  points  ;  also,  whether  they  can  be  exhibited  in
the  same  striking  and  natural  manner  by  both
methods,  or  by  which  points  they  can  be  elicited  with
the  greatest  facility  and  fidelity  to  natural  expression.
There  will  thus  be  both  positive  and  negative  proof
to  aid  us  in  determining,  whether  there  is  any  natu-
ral and  necessary  connection  existing  betwixt  the
points  manipulated,  and  the  manifestations  excited  ;
or  whether  it  may  depend  entirely  upon  associations
which  have  originated  from  some  partial  knowledge
of  phrenology,  from  arbitrary  arrangements,  or  acci-
dental circumstances  or  causes  which  have  been  en-
tirely overlooked  or  forgotten ;  and  which  afterwards


PREFACE.  XV11

produce  the  results  from  "  that  ultimate  law  of  the
mind,  which  ordains,  that  the  repetition  of  a  definite
sensation  shall  be  followed  by  a  renovation  of  the  past
feelings  with  which  it  was  before  associated."  (Hib-
bert,  page'31G.)  I  am  induced  to  adopt  this  course,
from  my  anxiety  to  remove  every  possible  source  of
error  as  to  the  cause  of  the  original  manifestation,  and
from  the  recollection  of  the  remarkable  circumstance
of  the  woman  who,  during  natural  somnambulism,
could  repeat  correctly  large  portions  of  the  Hebrew
Bible,  and  other  books,  in  languages  she  had  never
studied,  and  was  perfectly  ignorant  of  when  awake,
but  which  was  at  length  discovered  to  have  been
acquired  from  hearing  a  clergyman,  with  whom  she
resided  when  a  girl,  reading  them  aloud  to  himself ;
and  also  of  some  patients  whilst  labouring  under  dis-
ease remembering  languages  long  forgotten.  I  wish
to  ascertain  whether  any  such  accidental  circumstance
may  have  been  the  cause  of  the  remarkable  manifes-
tations arising  in  the  minds  of  patients  when  first
manipulated.  Whatever  are  the  results  of  my  farther
inquiry  shall  be  carefully  noted  and  published,  as  my
object  is  neither  to  prove  nor  disprove  the  truth  of
phrenology,  but  to  establish  the  value  of  hypnotism,
and  determine  how  best  to  apply  it,  as  a  means  of
meliorating  the  mental,  and  moral,  and  physical  con-
dition of  man.

That  during  the  nervous  sleep,  there  is  the  power
of  exciting  patients  to  manifest  the  passions  and
emotions,  and  certain  mental  functions,  in  a  more
striking  manner  than  the  same  individuals  are
capable  of  in  the  waking  condition,  no  one  can
doubt  who  has  seen  much  of  these  experiments.  And
b


XV111  PREFACE.

it  can  in  no  way  alter  the  importance  of  hypnotism,
as  a  curative  power,  and  extraordinary  means  of
controlling  and  directing  mental  functions,  in  a  parti-
cular manner,  by  a  simple  association  of  impressions,
whether  we  thus  act  on  the  brain  as  a  single  organ }
or  as  a  combination  of  separate  organs ;  or  whether
the  primary  associations  have  originated  from  a
special  organic  connection,  or  from  some  accidental
and  unknown  cause,  or  from  preconcerted  arrange-
ment and  arbitrary  association.

In  such  operations  as  particularly  require  the  use
of  the  eyes,  I  have  never  seen  patients  in  the  hypno-
tic state  perform  what  they  attempted  with  the  same
celerity  and  accuracy  as  they  were  capable  of  doing
when  awake,  and  with  the  aid  of  sight.  In  short,  I
have  never  witnessed  any  phenomena  which  were  not
reconcileable  with  the  notion  that  they  arose  from  the
abnormal  exaltation  or  depression  of  sensations  and
ideas,  or  to  their  being  thrown  into  unusual  and  varied
ratios  by  the  processes  resorted  to.

Having  heard  it  reported,  that  by  establishing  a
connection  betwixt  two  patients  by  a  chain  or  string,
that  manipulating  one  would  manifest  the  same
phenomena  in  both,  I  tried  the  experiment,  but  with
the  precaution  that  the  patients  should  be  in  separate
rooms,  so  that  the  one  could  not  hear,  nor  feel,  from
the  motion  of  the  air,  what  the  other  was  doing.  I
formed  the  connection  by  a  cord  in  some  cases,  and
in  others  by  a  copper  wire,  and  had  parties  stationed
where  they  could  observe  the  movements  of  both  at
same  time.  We  could  discover  no  such  sympathetic
influence  as  is  asserted  to  have  been  realized  by
others.


PREFACE.  XIX

The  experiments  recorded  at  page  142  of  my  having
caused  patients  to  hypnotize,  manipulate,  and  rouse
themselves,  (by  simply  desiring  them  to  rub  their  own
eyes,)  and  which  produced  results  precisely  the  same
as  when  done  by  any  one  else,  seem  to  me  the  most
decisive  proof  possible  that  the  whole  results  from
the  mind  and  body  of  the  patients  acting  and  re-act-
ing on  each  other,  and  that  it  has  no  dependence  on
any  special  influence  emanating  from  another.  My
first  experiments  on  this  point  were  instituted  in  the
presence  of  some  friends  on  the  1st  May,  1843,  and
following  days.  I  believe  they  were  the  first  experi-
ments of  the  kind  which  had  ever  been  tried,  and
they  have  succeeded  in  every  case  in  which  I  have  so
operated.

With  due  attention  to  the  points  above  referred  to,
and  with  that  practice  which  is  requisite  to  insure
adroitness  in  experimenting  in  any  department  of  art
or  science,  and  with  an  honest  desire  to  view  every
fact  having  no  bias  to  uphold  some  previous  prejudice
or  opinion,  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  facts  and  obser-
vations set  forth  in  this  treatise  will  soon  be  very
generally  confirmed.

A  perusal  of  the  cases  recorded  in  the  second  part
will,  I  trust,  render  the  importance  of  the  subject
sufficiently  apparent  to  stimulate  inquiry ;  and  I
hope  it  may  be  gratifying  to  others  to  read,  as  it
is  to  me  to  be  able  to  record,  that  the  predication  I
had  ventured  to  make  at  page  256,  as  to  the  pro-
bability of  hypnotism  proving  a  cure  for  tetanus  and
hydrophobia,  has  already  been  happily  realized  in
respect  to  the  former  intractable  and  generally  fatal
disease.  After  this  treatise  had  been  in  the  press


XX  PREFACE.

the  following  case  occurred,  and  its  importance
must  be  my  apology  for  giving  a  brief  detail  of  it
here :  —

Master  J.  B.,  13  years  of  age,  was  suddenly  attacked
with  chilliness  and  pain  all  over  his  body,  on  the
evening  of  30th  of  last  March.  I  was  called  to  attend
him  the  following  day,  when  I  considered  he  had  got
a  febrile  attack  from  cold,  and  prescribed  accordingly.
Next  day,  however,  it  had  assumed  a  very  different
aspect.  I  now  found  I  had  got  a  severe  case  of
opisthotonos  to  deal  with.  The  head  and  pelvis
were  rigidly  drawn  back,  the  body  forming  an  arch,
and  the  greatest  force  could  not  succeed  in  straighten-
ing it,  or  bringing  the  head  forward.  Whilst  the
spasm  never  relaxed  entirely,  it  frequently  became
much  aggravated,  when  the  head  was  so  much  drawn
back  as  to  seriously  impede  respiration.  The  legs
were  also  sometimes  flexed  spasmodically.  The  effect
of  the  spasm  in  obstructing  the  respiration,  and  hurry-
ing the  circulation,  was  very  great,  and  seemed  to
place  the  patient  in  great  jeopardy.  The  pulse  was
never  less  than  150,  but  during  the  paroxysm  was
considerably  increased.  It  was  evident  I  had  got  a
most  formidable  case  to  contend  with,  and  that  no
time  ought  to  be  lost.  I  therefore  determined  to  try
the  power  of  hypnotism,  well  knowing  how  generally
such  cases  end  fatally  under  ordinary  treatment.  He
was  quite  sensible,  and  the  only  difficulty  in  getting
him  to  comply  with  my  instructions,  arose  from  the
recurrence  of  the  severe  spasmodic  attacks.  In  a  very
few  minutes,  however,  I  succeeded  in  reducing  the
spasm  so  that  his  head  could  be  carried  forward  to
the  perpendicular,  his  breathing  was  relieved,  his  pulse


PREFACE.  XXI

considerably  diminished,  and  I  left  him  in  a  state  of
comparative  comfort.  In  about  two  and  a-half  hours
after  I  visited  him  again,  accompanied  by  my  friend
Dr  Cochrane.  The  spasms  had  recurred,  but  by
no  means  with  the  same  violence.  Dr  Cochrane
had  no  difficulty  in  recognizing  the  disease,  but  did
not  believe  any  means  could  save  such  a  case.
He  had  never  seen  a  patient  hypnotized  till  that
afternoon,  and  watched  my  experiment  with  much
interest  and  attention.  He  seemed  much  and  agree-
ably surprised  by  the  extraordinary  influence  which
an  agency  so  apparently  simple  exerted  over  such  a
case.  The  pupil  was  speedily  dilated,  as  if  under  the
influence  of  belladonna  ;  the  muscular  spasm  relaxed,
and  in  a  few  minutes  he  was  calmly  asleep.  Having
ordered  three  calomel  powders  to  be  given  at  intervals,
we  left  him  comfortably  asleep.  Next  day  there  was
still  spasm  of  the  muscles,  but  by  no  means  so  severe.
Whilst  I  determined  to  follow  up  the  hypnotic  treat-
ment, which  had  been  so  far  successful,  I  considered  it
would  be  highly  imprudent  to  trust  wholly  to  that  in
the  treatment  of  such  a  case.  As  I  consider  such  cases
are  generally  attended  with  inflammation  of  the
medulla  oblongata,  and  upper  part  of  the  spinal  cord,
I  bled  him,  and  ordered  the  calomel  to  be  continued.
The  same  plan  was  persevered  in,  hypnotizing  him
occasionally  for  some  days,  administering  calomel  till
the  gums  were  slightly  affected,  cold  lotion  to  the
head,  and  the  antiphlogistic  regimen  till  I  considered
all  risk  of  inflammatory  action  past,  when  he  was
treated  more  generously,  and  I  am  gratified  to  say  he
is  now  quite  well.
c  I  feel  confident  that  without  the  aid  of  hypnotism


XX11  PREFACE.

this  patient  would  have  died.  I  sincerely  wish  it
may  prove  equally  successful  in  other  cases  of  the
kind,  and  also  in  that  hitherto  fatal  disease,  hydro-
phobia. My  anxiety  to  see  it  fairly  tried  in  the
latter  disease  induces  me  to  offer  my  gratuitous  services
in  any  case  of  that  disease  occurring  within  a  few
hours'  journey  of  Manchester.

I  consider  it  necessary  to  explain  that  my  reason  for
having  inserted  some  cases  attested  by  the  patients
and  others  is,  that  most  unwarrantable  interferences
have  been  resorted  to  by  several  medical  men,  in
order  to  misrepresent  some  of  them.  In  one  instance,
in  order  to  obtain  an  attested  erroneous  document,  the
case  was  BEAD  to  the  patient  and  others  present,  THE

VERY REVERSK OF WHAT WAS WRITTEN. However

extraordinary  such  conduct  may  appear,  the  fact  of
its  occurrence  was  publicly  proved,  and  borne  testimony
to  by  the  patient  and  other  parties  present  on  the  occasion
when  the  document  was  obtained.


INTRODUCTION.


General  remarks— Why  Hypnotism  has  been  separated  from  Animal
Magnetism  —  How  far  considered  useful  in  the  cure  of  disease  — Its
powers  on  the  animal  functions  —  Certain  erroneous  charges  refuted  —
Opinions  and  practice  of  Bertrand  and  Abb6  Faria,  Mr  Brooks,  Dr
Prichard— Its  moral  influence  —  Should  be  used  by  professional  men
only  —  Definition  of  terms.

IT  was  my  intention  to  have  published  my  "  Prac-
tical Essay  on  the  Curative  Agency  of  Neuro-
Hypnotism,"  exactly  as  delivered  at  the  Conversazione
given. to  the  members  of  the  British  Association  in
Manchester,  on  the  29th  June,  1842.  By  so  doing,
and  by  appending  foot  notes,  comprising  the  data  on
which  my  views  were  grounded,  it  would  have  con-
veyed a  pretty  clear  knowledge  of  the  subject,  and  of
the  manner  in  which  it  had  been  treated.  It  has
since  been  suggested,  however,  that  it  might  readily
be  incorporated  with  the  short  Elementary  Treatise
on  Neuro-Hypnology,  which  I  originally  intended  to
publish,  and  which  I  am  earnestly  solicited  to  do,  by
letters  from  professional  gentlemen  from  all  quarters.
I  now,  therefore,  submit  my  views  to  the  public  in
A


2  GENERAL  REMARKS.

the  following  condensed  form.  I  shall  aim  at  brevity
and  perspicuity ;  and  my  great  object  will  be  to  teach
others  all  I  know  of  the  modes  of  inducing  the  pheno-
mena, and  their  application  in  the  cure  of  diseases,
and  to  invite  my  professional  brethren  to  labour  in
the  same  field  of  inquiry,  feeling  assured,  that  the
cause  of  science  and  humanity  must  thereby  be  pro-
moted.

It  was  with  this  conviction  I  offered  my  "  Practical
Essay  on  the  Curative  Agency  of  Neuro-IIypnotism,"
to  the  medical  section  of  the  British  Association.

In  November,  1841,  I  was  led  to  investigate  the
pretensions  of  animal  magnetism,  or  mesmerism,  as
a  complete  sceptic,  from  an  anxiety  to  discover  the
source  of  fallacy  in  certain  phenomena  I  had  heard
were  exhibited  at  M.  Lafontaine's  conversazioni.  The
result  was,  that  I  made  some  discoverieswhich  appeared
to  elucidate  certain  of  the  phenomena,  and  rendered
them  interesting,  both  in  a  speculative  and  practical
point  of  view.  I  considered  it  a  most  favourable
opportunity  for  having  additional  light  thrown  upon
this  subject,  to  offer  a  paper  to  the  medical  section  of
the  British  Association,  which  was  about  to  meet  in
Manchester.  Gentlemen  of  scientific  attainments
might  thus  have  had  an  opportunity  of  investigat-
ing it,  and  eliciting  the  truth,  unbiassed  by  local
or  personal  prejudice.  I  hoped  to  learn  some-
thing from  others,  on  certain  points  which  were
extremely  mysterious  to  me,  as  to  the  cause  of  some
remarkable  phenomena.  I  accordingly  intimated
my  intention  to  the  secretaries,  by  letter,  on  18th
May,  and  on  the  morning  of  Wednesday,  the  22d
June,  1842,  scut  the  paper  I  proposed  reading  for


GENERAL  REMARKS.  Jl

the  consideration  of  the  committee,  intimating'  also,  by
letter,  my  intention  to  produce  before  them  as  many
of  the  patients  as  possible,  whose  cases  were  referred
to  in  proof  of  the  curative  agency  of  Neuro-Hypno-
tism,  so  that  they  might  have  an  opportunity  of
ascertaining,  for  themselves,  the  real  facts  of  the
cases,  uninfluenced  by  any  bias  or  partiality  that  I
might  exhibit  as  the  discoverer  and  adapter  of  this
new  mode  of  treatment.  The  committee  of  the  medi-
cal section,  however,  were  pleased  to  decline  enter-
taining the  subject.

Many  of  the  most  eminent  and  influential  members
of  the  Association,  however,  had  already  witnessed
and  investigated  my  experiments  in  private,  and  ex-
pressed themselves  highly  gratified  and  interested
with  them.  In  compliance  with  the  repeated  desire
of  these  gentlemen,  and  many  other  eminent  members
of  the  Association  to  whom  I  could  not  possibly  afford
time  to  exhibit  my  experiments  in  private,  and  who
were  anxious  to  have  an  opportunity  afforded  them
of  seeing,  hearing,  and  judging  of  the  phenomena  for
themselves,  I  gave  a  gratuitous  conversazione,  when
I  read  the  "  Rejected  Essay,"  and  exhibited  the  ex-
periments in  a  public  room,  to  which  all  the  members
of  the  Association  had  been  respectfully  invited.  The
interest  with  which  the  subject  was  viewed  by  the
members  of  the  Association  generally,  was  sufficiently
testified  by  the  number  and  high  respectability  of
those  who  attended  on  that  occasion  ;  in  reference  to
which  the  chairman  requested  the  reporters  to  put  on
record,  "  that  he  had  been  in  the  habit  for  many
years  of  attending  public  meetings,  and  he  had  never
in  his  life  seen  a  more  unmixed,  a  more  entirely


4  HYPNOTISM  SEPARATED  FROM

respectable  assembly  in  Manchester."  It  was  also
manifested  by  their  passing  a  vote  of  thanks  at  the
conclusion  of  the  conversazione,  for  my  having  afforded
an  opportunity  to  the  members  of  the  British  Associa-
tion of  witnessing  my  experiments,  to  which  they  had
previously  borne  testimony  as  having  been  "  highly
successful."

On  that  occasion  I  stated,  there  were  certain  pheno-
mena, which  I  could  readily  induce  by  particular
manipulations,  whilst  I  candidly  confessed  myself
unable  to  explain  the  modus  operandi  by  which
they  were  induced.  I  referred  particularly  to  the
extraordinary  rapidity  with  which  dormant  func-
tions, and  a  state  of  cataleptiform  rigidity,  may  be
changed  to  the  extreme  opposite  condition,  by  a
simple  waft  of  wind,  either  from  the  lips,  a  pair  of
bellows,  or  by  any  other  mechanical  means.  I  soli-
cited information  on  these  points,  both  privately  and
publicly,  from  all  the  eminently  scientific  gentlemen
who  honoured  me  with  their  company  during  the
meetings  of  the  British  Association  in  this  town  ;  but
no  one  ventured  to  express  a  decided  opinion  as  to  the
causes  of  these  remarkable  phenomena.  I  now  beg
to  assure  every  reader  of  this  treatise,  that  I  shall
esteem  it  a  great  favour  to  be  enlightened  on  points
which  I  confess  are,  at  present,  still  above  my  com-
prehension.

It  will  be  observed,  for  reasons  adduced,  I  have
now  entirely  separated  Hypnotism  from  Animal  Mag-
netism. I  consider  it  to  be  merely  a  simple,  speedy,
and  certain  mode  of  throwing  the  nervous  system
into  a  new  condition,  which  may  be  rendered  emi-
nently available  in  the  cure  of  certain  disorders.  I


ANIMAL  MAGNETISM.  5

trust,  therefore,  it  may  be  investigated  quite  inde-
pendently of  any  bias,  either  for  or  against  the
subject,  as  connected  with  mesmerism  ;  and  only  by
the  facts  which  can  be  adduced.  I  feel  quite  con-
fident we  have  acquired  in  this  process  a  valuable
addition  to  our  curative  means ;  but  I  repudiate  the
idea  of  holding  it  up  as  a  universal  remedy  ;  nor- do
I  even  pretend  to  understand,  as  yet,  the  whole  range
of  diseases  in  which  it  may  be  useful.  Time  and  ex-
perience alone  can  determine  this  question,  as  is  the
case  with  all  other  new  remedies.

When  we  consider  that  iu  this  process  we  have
acquired  the  power  of  raising  sensibility  to  the  most
extraordinary  degree,  and  also  of  depressing  it  far
below  the  torpor  of  natural  sleep  ;*  and  that  from  the
latter  condition,  any  or  all  of  the  senses  may  be
raised  to  the  exalted  state  of  sensibility  referred  to,
almost  with  the  rapidity  of  thought,  by  so  simple  au
agency  as  a  puff  of  air  directed  against  the  respective
parts ;  and  that  we  can  also  raise  and  depress  the
force  and  frequency  of  the  circulation,  locally  or
generally,  in  a  most  extraordinary  degree,  it  must  be
evident  we  have  thus  an  important  power  to  act
with.  Whether  these  extraordinary  physical  effects
are  produced  through  the  imagination  chiefly,  or  by
other  means,  it  appears  to  me  quite  certain,  that  the
imagination  has  never  been  so  nnich  under  our  con-
trol, or  capable  of  being  made  to  act  in  the  same
beneficial  and  uniform  manner,  by  any  other  mode  of
management  hitherto  known.

*  Vide  Experiments,  pp.  61  to  67.


6  VALUE  AS  A  CURATIVE  POWER.

That  we  really  have  acquired  in  this  process  a
valuable  addition  to  our  curative  means,  which  en-
ables us  speedily  to  put  an  end  to  many  diseases
which  resisted  ordinary  treatment,  I  think  will  be
satisfactorily  manifested  by  the  cases  which  I  have
recorded.  Many  of  these  cases  have  been  seen  by  other
medical  men,  and  are  so  remarkable,  so  self-evident
to  every  candid  and  intelligent  mind,  that  it  is  im-
possible, with  any  shew  of  propriety,  to  deny  them.
Most  unwarrantable  and  novel  attempts  have  been
made,  not  only  to  extinguish  the  farther  prosecu-
tion of  Hypnotism,  but  also  to  misrepresent  all  I
had  either  said  or  done  on  the  subject,  and  thus
damage  me,  as  well  as  Hypnotism,  in  public  estima-
tion. I  am  in  possession  of  a  mass  of  documen-
tary evidence  in  proof  of  this,  to  an  extent  which
could  scarcely  be  credited.  But  I  shall  not  trouble
my  readers  with  details  of  all  that  has  been  done  in
order  to  prejudice  my  patients  against  me.

As  regards  general  principles,  it  has  even  been
attempted,  by  garbled  statements,  to  set  forth  such
gross  misrepresentations  as  could  only  be  credited
by  parties  totally  ignorant  of  the  subject.  Thus  it
was  alleged,  that  my  mode  of  hypnotizing  was  no
novelty  ;  on  the  contrary,  that  it  was  an  unac-
knowledged plagiarism,  and  that  it  was  the  opinion
and  practice  of  Bertrand  and  the  Abbe  Faria.  Now,
so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  comprehend  the  mean-
ing of  Bertrand,  which  Colquhoun  observes,  "  it  is
rather  difficult  to  comprehend,"  he  adheres  "  to  the
theory  of  imagination,  and  imagination  alone,"
(Colquhoun's  Ititroduction,  p.  94.)  At  p.  34,  vol.  iv.  of


ERRONEOUS  CHARGES  REFUTED.  7

the  "Encyclopaedia  of  Practical  Medicine,"  DrPrichard
says  of  Bertrand,  that  he  "  comes  at  last  to  the  con-
clusion, that  all  the  results  of  these  operations  are
brought  about  through  the  influence  of  the  mind  ;"
that  is,  through  the  influence  of  the  imagination  of
the  patients  acting  on  themselves.  Bertrand  also
supports  this  opinion  by  the  manner  in  which  the
Abbe  Faria  performed  magnetization.  His  plan  was
this :  "  He  placed  the  patient  in  an  arm-chair,  and
after  telling  him  to  shut  his  eyes,  and  collect  himself,
suddenly  pronounced,  in  a  strong  voice  and  impera-
tive tone,  the  word  '  dormez,'  which  generally  pro-
duced on  the  individual  an  impression  sufficiently
strong  to  give  a  slight  shock,  and  occasion  warmth,
transpiration,  and  sometimes  somnambulism."  Had
his  success  by  this  method  been  as  general  as  mine,
would  he  have  used  the  word  "  sometimes"  on  this
occasion  ?*  It  is  farther  added,  "  if  the  first  attempt
failed,  he  tried  the  experiment  a  second,  third,  and
even  a  fourth  time,  after  which  he  declared  the  indi-
vidual incapable  of  entering  into  the  state  of  lucid
sleep."  Whilst  it  is  doubted  that  his  success  was
equal  to  what  he  represented  it,  still  Bertrand  states,
in  reference  to  the  Abbe  Faria,  that  it  was  incon-
testable, "  that  he  very  often  succeeded."  Now,  is
this  not  sufficient  proof,  that  his  success  was  by  no
means  so  general  as  mine  ?  And  who  does  not  see,
on  perusing  my  directions  for  hypnotizing,  t  that
our  methods  are  very  different  ?

It  is  farther  added,  "  The  complete  identity  of  the
phenomena  thus  produced  by  a  method  which  operated

*  Vide  p.  24. f  For  proof  of  this,  see  pp.  27  and  28.


8  OPINIONS  OF  MR  BROOKES,

confessedly  through  the  imagination,  with  those
which  display  themselves  under  the  ordinary  treat-
ment of  the  magnetizers,  affords  a  strong  reason  for
concluding  that  the  results  in  other  instances  depend
upon  a  similar  principle."  It  is  still  farther  added,
that  M.  Bertrand  denies  the  necessity  of  strong  intense
volitions  of  the  operator  being  necessary  to  produce
the  result.  He  declared,  "  that  in  trials  made  by  him-
self, precisely  the  same  results  followed,  whether  he
WILLED  to  produce  them  or  not,  provided  that  the
patient  was  inwardly  persuaded  that  the  whole  ritual
was  duly  observed"  Can  any  farther  remarks  be  re-
quired to  prove  that  Bertrand  referred  the  result  en-
tirely to  the  effect  of  imagination  ?  And  can  any  one
who  has  attended  to  what  I  have  given  as  my  opinion,
>ay  that  this  either  IPOS,  or  is  my  opinion  ?  Certainly
quite  the  contrary.  The  parties  referred  to,  therefore,
have  only  proved  their  belief  of  how  easy  it  is,  by
garbled  statements,  to  misrepresent  the  truth,  when
submitting  such  remarks  to  those  ignorant  of  the  sub-
ject, or  who  are  blinded  by  prejudice.

The  following  remarks  by  Mr  H.  Brookes,  a  cele- .
brated  lecturer  on  animal  magnetism,  will  illustrate
this  point  rather  better  than  the  individuals  referred
to.  On  hearing  that  I  had  changed  my  original  opinion
about  identity,  he  writes  thus  :  "  I  am  very  glad  you
have  at  length  found  reason  to  change  your  original
opinion  as  to  the  identity  of  your  phenomena  with
those  of  mesmerism.  From  the  very  hrst  I  freely
.•i'linitted  the  value  and  importance  of  your  discovery,
but  I  could  not  admit  that  identity,  and  I  blamed  you
for  insisting  upon  it  so  hastily,  and  using  such  hard
words  against  the  animal  magnetists,  because  they


OF  BERTBAND,  AND  MAYO.  9

could  not  agree  with  you.  I  thought,  and  still  think,
you  did  wrong  iu  that,  and  that  you  certainly  did
yourself  injustice,  for  in  fact  you  are  the  original  dis-
coverer of  a  new  agency,  and  not  of  a  mere  modifica-
tion of  an  old  one."

But  when  so  much  had  been  said  of  Bertrand,  with
the  hope  of  making  it  appear  that  I  had  either  been
ignorant  of,  or  copied  his  views  without  due  acknow-
ledgment, which  is  evidently  erroneous,  why  not  have
quoted  him  also  to  prove  I  was  wrong  in  attributing
curative  effects  as  resulting  from  these  operations?
Let  us  hear  what  M.  Bertrand  says  on  this  point.
He  "  declares,  that  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  with  what
facility  the  practisers  of  the  art  succeed  in  relieving
the  most  severe  affections  of  the  nervous  system.
Attacks  of  epilepsy,  in  particular,  are  rendered  con-
siderably less  frequent  and  severe  by  their  method
skilfully  employed ;  which  displays  in  so  remarkable
a  manner  the  influence  of  moral  impressions  on  the
physical  state  of  the  constitution."  After  such  decla-
rations in  favour  of  the  curative  power  of  mesmerism,
had  M.  Bertrand's  method  of  inducing  the  condition
been  as  generally  and  speedily  successful  as  mine,  will
any  one  believe  that  it  would  not  have  been  brought
more  generally  into  practice  ere  now  ?  Mr  Mayo,  one
of  our  best  authorities,  in  a  letter  to  me  on  this  subject,
states  distinctly  that  the  great  reason  for  its  not  being
more  generally  introduced  into  practice,  was  the
tediousness  of  the  processes  for  inducing  the  condition,
and  the  uncertainty,  after  all  the  time  and  trouble
devoted  to  the  manipulation,  of  producing  any  result
whatever.  He  concludes  his  observations  on  this  sub-
ject, by  the  remark,  "It  took  up  too  much  time."  And


10  DK  PRICHARD'S  OPINION.

Dr  Prichard,  author  of  the  article  referred  to  in  the
Encyclopaedia  of  Practical  Medicine,  adds,"  "  On  the
whole,  when  we  consider  the  degree  of  suffering  occa-
sioned by  disorders  of  the  class  over  which  magnetism
exerts  an  influence,  through  the  medium  of  the  ima-
gination, and  the  little  efficacy  which  ordinary
remedies  possess,  of  alleviating  or  counteracting  them,
it  i>  much  to  be  wished  that  this  art,  notwithstanding
the  problematical  nature  of  the  theories  connected
with  it,  were  better  known  to  us  in  actual  practice."
I  am  aware  great  prejudice  has  been  raised  against
mesmerism,  from  the  idea  that  it  might  be  turned  to
immoral  purposes.  In  respect  to  the  Neuro-Hypnotic
state,  induced  by  the  method  explained  in  this  treatise,
I  am  quite  certain  that  it  deserves  no  such  censure.
I  have  proved  by  experiments,  both  in  public  and  in
private,  that  during  the  state  of  excitement,  the  judg-
ment is  sufficiently  active  to  make  the  patients,  if
possible,  even  more  fastidious  as  regards  propriety  of
conduct,  than  in  the  waking  condition ;  and  from  the
state  of  rigidity  and  insensibility,  they  can  be  roused
to  a  state  of  mobility,  and  exalted  sensibility,  either
by  being  rudely  handled,  or  even  by  a  breath  of  air.
Nor  is  it  requisite  this  should  be  done  by  the  person
who  put  them  into  the  Hypnotic  state.  It  will
follow  equally  from  the  manipulations  of  any  one
else,  or  a  current  of  air  impinging  against  the  body,
from  any  mechanical  contrivance  whatever.  And,
finally,  the  state  cannot  be  induced,  in  any  stage,
unless  with  the  knowledge  and  consent  of  the  party
operated  on.  This  is  more  than  can  be  said  respecting
s  great  number  of  our  most  valuable  medicines,  for
there  are  many  which  we  are  in  the  daily  habit  of


SHOULD  BE  USED  BY  THE  PROFESSION  ONLY.  11

using,  with  the  best  advantage  in  the  relief  and  cure
of  disease,  which  may  be,  and  have  been  rendered
most  potent  for  the  furtherance  of  the  ends  of  the
vicious  and  cruel ;  and  which  can  be  administered
without  the  knowledge  of  the  intended  victim.  It  ought
never  to  be  lost  sight  of,  that  there  is  the  use  and  abuse
of  every  thing  in  nature.  It  is  the  use,  and  only  the
judicious  use  of  Hypnotism,  which  I  advocate.

It  is  well  known  that  I  have  never  made  any  secret
of  my  modes  of  operating,  as  they  have  not  only  been
exhibited  and  explained  publicly,  but  also  privately,
to  any  professional  gentleman,  who  wished  for  farther
information  on  the  subject.  Encouraged  by  the  con-
fidence which  flows  from  a  consciousness  of  the
honesty  and  integrity  of  my  purpose,  and  a  thorough
conviction  of  the  reality  and  value  of  this  as  a  means
of  cure,  I  have  persevered,  in  defiance  of  much,  and,
as  I  think,  unwarrantable  and  capricious  opposition.

In  now  unfolding  to  the  medical  profession  gene-
rally— to  whose  notice,  and  kind  consideration,  this
treatise  is  more  particularly  presented — my  views  on
what  I  conceive  to  be  a  very  important,  powerful,  and
extraordinary  agent  in  the  healing  art ;  I  beg  at  once
distinctly  to  be  understood,  as  repudiating  the  idea
of  its  being,  or  ever  becoming,  a  universal  remedy.
On  the  contrary,  I  feel  quite  assured  it  will  require
all  the  acumen  and  experience  of  medical  men,  to
decide  in  what  cases  it  would  be  safe  and  proper  to
have  recourse  to  such  a  mean  ;  and  I  have  always
deprecated,  in  the  strongest  terms,  any  attempts  at
its  use  amongst  unprofessional  persons,  for  the  sake
of  curiosity,  or  even  for  a  nobler  and  more  benevolent
object — the  relief  of  the  infirm ;  because  I  am  satisfied


12  DEFINITION  OF  TERMS.

it  ought  to  be  left  in  the  hands  of  professional  men,
and  of  them  only.  I  have  myself  met  with  some
cases  in  which  I  considered  it  unsafe  to  apply  it  at
all ;  and  with  other  cases  in  which  it  would  have
been  most  hazardous  to  have  carried  the  operation  so
far  as  the  patients  urged  me  to  do.*

In  now  submitting  my  opinions  and  practice  to
the  profession  in  the  following  treatise,  I  consider
myself  as  having  discharged  an  imperative  duty  to
them,  and  to  the  cause  of  humanity.  In  future,  I
intend  to  go  on  quietly  and  patiently,  prosecuting  the
subject  in  the  course  of  my  practice,  and  shall  leave
others  to  adopt  or  reject  it,  as  they  shall  find  con-
sistent with  their  own  convictions.

As  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance,  in  discussing  any
subject,  to  have  a  correct  knowledge  of  the  meaning
attached  to  peculiar  terms  made  use  of,  I  shall  now
give  a  few  definitions,  and  explain  my  reasons  for
adopting  the  terms  selected.

Nrtirypnology  is  derived  from  the  Greek  words
»iiipo»,  nerve ;  I/TVO?,  sleep ;  Xoyo?,  a  discourse  ;  and
means  the  rationale,  or  doctrine  of  nervous  sleep,
which  I  define  to  be,  "  a  peculiar  condition  of  the
nervous  system,  into  which  it  can  be  thrown  by  arti-
ficial contrivance  :"  or  thus,  "  a  peculiar  condition  of
the  nervous  system,  induced  by  a  fixed  and  abstracted
attention  of  the  mental  and  visual  eye,  on  one  object,
not  of  an  exciting  nature."

The  circumstances  which  render  my  operations  danger-
ous, the  symptoms  which  indicate  danger,  and  the  mode  of
acting  wheu  they  occur,  to  remove  them,  are  pointed  out,  pp.
.VJ  and  53.


DEFINITION  OF  TERMS.


13


By  the  term  "  Neuro-Hypnotism,"  then,  is  to  be
understood  "  nervous  sleep ;"  and,  for  the  sake  of
brevity,  suppressing  the  prefix  "  Neuro,"  by  the
terras  —


HYPNOTIC,
HYPNOTIZE,

HYPNOTIZED,

HYPNOTISM,

DEHYPNOTIZE,


DEHYPNOTIZED,

and
HYPNOTIST, j


be  understo


The  state  or  condition  of  nervous  sleep.

To  induce  nervous  sleep.

One  who  has  been  put  into  the  state  of

nervous  sleep.
Nervous  sleep.
To  restore  from  the  state  or  condition

of  nervous  sleep.
Restored  from  the  state  or  condition  of

nervous  sleep.

One  who  practises  Neuro-Hypnotism.


Whenever,  therefore,  any  of  these  terms  are  used
in  the  following  pages,  I  beg  to  be  understood  as
alluding  to  the  discovery  I  have  made  of  certain  pecu-
liar phenomena  derived  and  elicited  by  my  mode  of
operating ;  and  of  which,  to  prevent  misconception,
and  intermingling  with  other  theories  and  practices
on  the  nervous  system,  I  have  thought  it  best  to  give
the  foregoing  designation.

I  regret,  as  many  of  my  readers  may  do,  the  incon-
venient length  of  the  name  ;  but,  as  most  of  our
professional  terms,  and  nearly  all  those  of  a  doctrinal
meaning,  have  a  Greek  origin,  I  considered  it  most
in  accordance  with  good  taste,  not  to  deviate  from  an
established  usage.  To  obviate  this  in  some  degree,  I
have  struck  out  two  letters  from  the  original  ortho-
graphy, which  was  Neuro-Hypnology.


NEUKYPNOLOGY.

PART  I.


CHAPTER  I.

Introductory  remarks  —  Circumstances  which  directed  to  the  investigation
—  Anal  phenomenon  observed  — Experiments  instituted  to  prove  the
cause  of  it  — Opinions  and  conclusions  drawn  from  them— Reasons  for
separating  Hypnotism  from  Mesmerism  —  Hypnotism  more  generally
successful  than  Animal  Magnetism  —  Mr  Herbert  Mayo's  testimony  on
tUU  point  —  Proofs  of  this  referred  to — Different  modes  by  which  it  can
be  Induced  —  Can  only  be  expected  to  succeed  by  complying  with  the
whole  conditions  required.

HAVING,  in  the  introduction,  presented  a  cursory
view  of  certain  points,  and  given  a  few  explanatory
remarks,  I  shall  now  proceed  to  a  more  particular
and  detailed  consideration  of  the  subject.  I  shall
explain  the  course  I  have  pursued  in  prosecuting  my
investigation  ;  the  phenomena  which  I  discovered  to
result  from  the  manipulations  had  recourse  to ;  the
inferences  I  was  consequently  led  to  deduce  from
them  ;  the  method  I  now  recommend  for  inducing
the  hypnotic  condition,  for  applying  it  in  the  cure


HYPNOTISM  HOW  DISCOVERED.  15

of  various  disorders,  and  the  result  of  my  experience,
as  to  the  efficacy  of  hypnotism  as  a  curative  agent.

By  the  impression  which  hypnotism  induces  on
the  nervous  system,  we  acquire  a  power  of  rapidly
curing  many  functional  disorders,  most  intractable,
or  altogether  incurable,  by  ordinary  remedies,  and
also  many  of  those  distressing  affections  which,  as  in
most  cases  they  evince  no  pathological  change  of
structure,  have  been  presumed  to  depend  on  some
peculiar  condition  of  the  nervous  system,  and  have
therefore,  by  universal  consent,  been  denominated
"  nervous  complaints ;"  and  as  I  felt  satisfied  it  was
not  dependent  on  any  special  agency  or  emanation,
passing  from  the  body  of  the  operator  to  that  of
the  patient,  as  the  animal  magnetizers  allege  is  the
case  by  their  process,  I  considered  it  desirable,  for  the
sake  of  preventing  misconception,  to  adopt  new  terms,
as  explained  in  the  introduction.

I  was  led  to  discover  the  mode  I  now  adopt  with
so  much  success  for  inducing'  this  artificial  condition
of  the  nervous  'system,  by  a  course  of  experiments
instituted  with  the  view  to  determine  the  cause  of
mesmeric  phenomena.  From  all  I  had  read  and
heard  of  mesmerism,  (such  as,  the  phenomena  being
capable  of  being  excited  in  so  few,  and  these  few
individuals  in  a  state  of  disease,  or  naturally  of  a
delicate  constitution,  or  peculiarly  susceptible  tem-
perament, and  from  the  phenomena,  when  induced,
being  said  to  be  so  exaggerated,  or  of  such  an  extra-
ordinary nature,)  I  was  fully  inclined  to  join  with
those  who  considered  the  whole  to  be  a  system  of
collusion  or  delusion,  or  of  excited  imagination,  sym-
pathy, or  imitation.


16  PHENOMENON  ARRESTING  ATTENTION.

The  first  exhibition  of  the  kind  I  ever  had  an  oppor-
tunity of  attending,  was  one  of  M.  Lafontaine's  con-
versazioni, on  the  13th  November,  1841.  That  night
I  saw  nothing  to  diminish,  but  rather  to  confirm,  my
previous  prejudices.  At  the  next  conversazione,  six
nights  afterwards,  one  fact,  the  inability  of  a  patient
to  open  his  eyelids,  arrested  my  attention.  I  con-
sidered that  to  be  a  real  phenomenon,  and  was  anxious
to  discover  the  physiological  cause  of  it.  Next  night,
I  watched  this  case  when  again  operated  on,  with
intense  interest,  and  before  the  termination  of  the
experiment,  felt  assured  I  had  discovered  its  cause,
but  considered  it  prudent  not  to  announce  my  opinion
publicly,  until  I  had  had  an  opportunity  of  testing  its
accuracy,  by  experiments  and  observation  in  private.

In  two  days  afterwards,  I  developed  my  views  to
my  friend  Captain  Brown,  as  I  had  also  previously
done  to  four  other  friends ;  and  in  his  presence,  and
that  of  my  family,  and  another  friend,  the  same
evening,  I  instituted  a  series  of  experiments  to  prove
the  correctness  of  my  theory,  namely,  that  the  con-
tinued fixed  stare,  by  paralyzing  nervous  centres  in
the  eyes  and  their  appendages,*  and  destroying  the
equilibrium  of  the  nervous  system,  thus  produced  the
phenomenon  referred  to.  The  experiments  were
varied  so  as  to  convince  all  present,  that  they  fully
bore  out  the  correctness  of  my  theoretical  views.

My  first  object  was  to  prove,  that  the  inability  of
the  patient  to  open  his  eyes  was  caused  by  paralyzing

*  By  this  expression  I  mean  the  state  of  exhaustion  which
follows  too  long  continued,  or  too  intense  action,  of  any  organ
or  function.


EXPERIMENTS  TO  PROVE  CAUSE  OF. 17

the  levator  muscles  of  the  eyelids,  through  their  con-
tinued action  during  the  protracted  fixed  stare,  and
thus  rendering  it  physically  impossible  for  him  to  open
them.*  With  the  view  of  proving  this,  I  requested  Mr
Walker,  a  young  gentleman  present,  to  sit  down,  and
maintain  a  fixed  stare  at  the  top  of  a  wine  bottle,  placed
so  much  above  him  as  to  produce  a  considerable  strain
on  the  eyes  and  eyelids,  to  enable  him  to  maintain  a
steady  view  of  the  object.  In  three  minutes  his  eyelids
closed,  a  gush  of  tears  ran  down  his  cheeks,  his  head
drooped,  his  face  was  slightly  convulsed,  he  gave  a
groan,  and  instantly  fell  into  profound  sleep,  the  re-
spiration becoming  slow,  deep  and  sibilant,  the  right
hand  and  arm  being  agitated  by  slight  convulsive
movements.  At  the  end  of  four  minutes  I  considered
it  necessary,  for  his  safety,  to  put  an  end  to  the  ex-
periment.

This  experiment  not  only  proved  what  I  expected,
but  also,  by  calling  my  attention  to  the  spasmodic
state  of  the  muscles^of  the  face  and  arm,  the  peculiar
state  of  the  respiration,  and  the  condition  of  the
mind,  as  evinced  on  rousing  the  patient,  tended  to

*  Attempts  have  been  made  to  prove,  that  I  got  this  idea
from  a  person  who  publicly  maintained  that  the  patient  re-
ferred to  could  have  opened  his  eyes  if  he  liked ;  to  this  the
patient  having  replied,  "  I  have  tried  all  I  could  and  cannot ;"
the  individual  referred  to,  in  support  of  his  opinion,  alleged,
that  the  inability  was  only  imaginary ;  that  he  "could  easily
believe  that  a  man  may  stand  with  his  back  to  a  wall,  and
may  really  believe  that  he  has  no  power  to  move  from  the
wall."  It  is  therefore  clear  this  individual  attributed  the
phenomena  to  a  mental,  whilst  I  attributed  it  to  a  j)hysical
cause.


18  EXPERIMENTS  AND

prove  to  my  mind  I  had  got  the  key  to  the  solution
of  mesmerism.  The  agitation  and  alarm  of  this  gentle-
man, on  being  roused,  very  much  astonished  Mrs
Braid.  She  expressed  herself  greatly  surprised  at  hia
being  so  much  alarmed  about  nothing,  as  she  had
watched  the  whole  time,  and  never  saw  me  near  him,
or  touching  him  in  any  way  whatever.  I  proposed  that
she  should  be  the  next  subject  operated  on,  to  which
she  readily  consented,  assuring  all  present  that  she
would  not  be  so  easily  alarmed  as  the  gentleman
referred  to.  I  requested  her  to  sit  down,  and  gaze  on
the  ornament  of  a  china  sugar  basin,  placed  at
the  same  angle  to  the  eyes  as  the  bottle  in  the  for-
mer experiment.  In  two  minutes  the  expression  of
the  face  was  very  much  changed  ;  at  the  end  of  two
minutes  and  a  half  the  eyelids  closed  convulsively  ;
the  mouth  was  distorted ;  she  gave  a  deep  sigh,  the
bosom  heaved,  she  fell  back,  and  was  evidently  pass-
ing into  an  hysteric  paroxysm,  to  prevent  which  I
instantly  roused  her.  On  counting  the  pulse  I  found
it  had  mounted  up  to  180  strokes  a  minute.

In  order  to  prove  my  position  still  more  clearly,  I
called  up  one  of  my  men-servants,  who  knew  nothing
of  mesmerism,  and  gave  him  such  directions  as  were
calculated  to  impress  his  mind  with  the  idea,  that
his  fixed  attention  was  merely  for  the  purpose  of
watching  a  chemical  experiment  in  the  preparation
of  some  medicine,  and  being  familiar  with  such  he
could  feel  no  alarm.  In  two  minutes  and  a  half  his
eyelids  closed  slowly  with  a  vibrating  motion,  his
chin  fell  on  his  breast,  he  gave  a  deep  sigh,  and  in-
stantly was  in  a  profound  sleep,  breathing  loudly.
All  the  persons  present  burst  into  a  fit  of  laughter,


INFERENCES  DRAWN  FROM  THEM.  19

but  still  he  was  not  interrupted  by  us.  In  about  one
minute  after  his  profound  sleep  I  roused  him,  and
pretended  to  chide  him  for  being  so  careless,  said  he
ought  to  be  ashamed  of  himself  for  not  being  able  to
attend  to  my  instructions  for  three  minutes  without
falling  asleep,  and  ordered  him  down  stairs.  In  a
short  time  I  recalled  this  young  man,  and  desired  him
to  sit  down  once  more,  but  to  be  careful  not  to  go  to
sleep  again,  as  on  the  former  occasion.  He  sat  down
with  this  intention,  but  at  the  expiration  of  two
minutes  and  a  half  his  eyelids  closed,  and  exactly  the
same  phenomena  as  in  the  former  experiment  ensued.
I  again  tried  the  experiment  by  causing  Mr  Walker
to  gaze  on  a  different  object  from  that  used  in  the  first
experiments,  but  still,  as  I  anticipated,  the  phenomena
were  the  same.  I  also  tried  him  a  la  Fontaine,  with
the  thumbs  and  eyes,  and  likewise  by  gazing  on  my
eyes  without  contact,  and  still  the  effects  were  the
same,  as  I  fully  expected.

I  now  stated  that  I  considered  the  experiments
fully  proved  my  theory  ;  and  expressed  my  entire
conviction  that  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism  were  to
be  accounted  for  on  the  principle  of  a  derangement  of
the  state  of  the  cerebro-spinal  centres,  and  of  the  cir-
culatory, and  respiratory,  and  muscular  systems,  in-
duced, as  I  have  explained,  by  a  fixed  stare,  absolute
repose  of  body,  fixed  attention,  and  suppressed  respi-
ration, concomitant  with  that  fixity  of  attention.  That
the  whole  depended  on  the  physical  and  psychical
condition  of  the  patient,  arising  from  the  causes  re-
ferred to,  and  not  at  all  on  the  volition,  or  passes  of
the  operator,  throwing  out  a  magnetic  fluid,  or  ex-
citing into  activity  some  mystical  universal  fluid  or


20  JIESMER'S  EXPERIMENTS.

medium.  I  farther  added,  that  having  thus  produced
the  primary  phenomena,  I  had  no  doubt  but  the
others  would  follow  as  a  matter  of  course,  time  being
allowed  for  their  gradual  and  successive  develop-
ment.*

*  It  has  been  asserted,  for  the  mere  purpose  of  proving
the  contrary,  that  I  had  claimed  being  the  first  to  discover
that  contact  was  not  necessary,  and  that  a  magnetic  fluid  was
not  required  to  produce  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism.  I
never  made  any  such  claim,  but  illustrated  these  facts  by
the  most  simple  and  conclusive  experiments  probably  which
were  ever  adduced  for  that  purpose.  In  one  of  my  lectures,
I  gave  a  history  of  mesmerism,  including  Mesmer's  attempt
to  mesmerize  trees  in  Dr  Franklin's  garden,  to  prove  to  the
Commission  of  1784,  that  the  patients  would  become  affected
when  they  went  under  the  mesmerized  trees,  from  the  mag-
netic fluid  passing  from  the  trees  to  the  patients.  This  was
proof  sufficient,  that  even  Mevmer  did  not  hold  that  contact
was  necessary.  I  farther  stated  the  fact,  that  the  experiment
was  a  failure,  as  the  patient  became  affected,  not  under  the
minnerized,  but  under  the  wremesmerized  trees,  which  led
the  Commission  to  infer,  that  the  phenomena  resulted  from
imagination,  and  not  from  the  influence  of  a  magnetic  fluid.
Here,  then,  we  had  two  theories,  neither  of  which  considered
contact  necessary.  Surely  no  one  could  suppose  that  I
wished  to  lay  claim  to  these  facts  as  discoveries  of  my  own,
seeing  I  gave  the  dates  when  the  occurrence  took  place,
which  was  many  years  before  I  was  born.

Moreover,  I  explained,  at  the  same  lecture,  the  different
modes  of  mesmerizing,  by  passes  at  a  distance,  and  by  pointing
the  fingers  at  the  eyes  and  forehead,  adopted  by  others,  long
before  I  made  any  experiments  on  the  subject ;  and  at  sub-
sequent lectures,  from  observing  the  graceful  attitudes  some
patients  assumed  during  the  hypnotic  state,  and  the  ease
with  which  they  could  maintain  any  given  position,  by  be-


HYPNOTISM  SEPARATED  FROM  MESMERISM.  21

For  a  considerable  time  I  was  of  opinion  that  the
phenomena  induced  by  my  mode  of  operating  and
that  of  the  mesmerizers,  were  identical ;  and,  so  far  as
I  have  yet  personally  seen,  I  still  consider  the  condi-
tion of  the  nervous  system  induced  by  both  modes  to
be  at  least  analogous.  It  appeared  to  me  that  the
fixation  of  the  mind  and  eyes  was  attained  occa-
sionally during  the  monotonous  movements  of  the
mesmerizers,  and  thus  they  succeeded  sometimes,  and
as  it  were,  by  chance  ;  whereas,  by  my  insisting  on  the
eyes  being  fixed  in  the  most  favourable  position,  and
the  mind  thus  rivetted  to  one  idea,  as  the  primary
and  imperative  conditions,  my  success  was  consequently
general  and  the  effects  intense,  while  theirs  was  feeble
and  uncertain.  However,  from  what  the  mesmerizers
state  as  to  effects  which  they  can  produce  in  certain
cases,  there  seem  to  be  differences  sufficient  to  war-
rant the  conclusion  that  they  ought  to  be  considered
as  distinct  agencies  ;  and  for  the  following  reasons.
The  mesmerizers  positively  assert  that  they  can  pro-
duce certain  effects,  which  I  have  never  been  able  to
produce  by  my  mode,  although  I  have  tried  to  do  so.*

coming  cataleptiformly  fixed  in  it,  I  hazarded  the  opinion,
that  it  may  have  been  to  hypnotism  the  Grecians  were  in-
debted for  their  fine  statuary  ;  and  the  Fakirs  for  their
power  of  performing  their  remarkable  feats.  I  also  ex-
pressed my  belief,  that  the  rapt  state  of  religious  enthusiasts,
such  as  that  of  the  monks  of  Mount  Athos,  arose  from  the
same  cause,  although  none  of  the  parties  might  have  under-
stood the  true  principle  by  which  they  were  pi'oduced.

*  The  effects  I  allude  to  are  such  as,  telling  the  time  on  a
watch  held  behind  the  head,  or  placed  on  the  pit  of  the  sto-
mach ;  reading  closed  letters,  or  a  shut  book  ;  perceiving


22  HYPNOTISM  MORE  READILY  INDUCED.

Now,  I  do  not  consider  it  fair  or  proper  to  impugn  the
statements  of  others  in  this  matter,  who  are  known  to
be  men  of  talent  and  observation,  and  of  undoubted
credit  in  other  matters,  merely  because  /  have  not
personally  witnessed  the  phenomena,  or  been  able  to
produce  them  myself,  either  by  my  own  mode  or
theirs.  With  my  present  means  of  knowledge  I  am
willing  to  admit  that  certain  phenomena  to  which  I
refer  have  been  induced  by  others,  but  still  I  think
most  of  them  may  be  explained  in  a  different  and
more  natural  way  than  that  of  the  mesmerizers.  When
I  shall  have  personally  had  evidence  of  the  special
influence  and  its  effects  to  which  they  lay  claim,  I
shall  not  be  backward  in  bearing  testimony  to  the
fact.

However,  the  greatest  and  most  important  diffe-
rence is  this,  that  they  can  succeed  so  seldom,  and  I
so  generally,  in  inducing  the  phenomena  which
we  both  profess  thus  to  effect.  Granting,  therefore,  to
the  mesmerizers  the  full  credit  of  being  able  to  pro-
duce certain  wonderful  phenomena  which  I  have  not
been  able  to  produce  by  my  plan,  still  it  follows,  that
mine  is  superior  to  theirs  in  as  far  as  general  appli-
cability and  practical  utility  are  concerned.  Mine  has
also  this  advantage,  that  I  am  quite  certain  no  one
can  be  affected  by  it,  in  any  stage  of  the  process,
unless  by  the  free  will  and  consent  of  the  patient,
which  is  at  once  sufficient  to  exonerate  the  practice
what  is  doing  miles  off ;  having  the  power  of  perceiving  the
nature  and  cure  of  the  diseases  of  others,  although  unedu-
cated in  medical  science  ;  mesmerising  patients  at  miles'  dis-
tance, without  the  knowledge  or  belief  in  the  patient  that  any
such  operation  is  intended.


MK  H.  MAYO'S  TESTIMONY.  23

from  the  imputations  of  being  capable  of  being  con-
verted to  immoral  purposes,  which  has  been  so  much
insisted  on  to  the  prejudice  of  animal  magnetism.
This  has  arisen  from  the  mesmerizers  asserting  that
they  have  the  power  of  overmastering  patients  irre-
sistibly, even  whilst  at  a  distance,  by  mere  volitions
and  secret  passes.

I  am  fully  borne  out  by  the  opinion  of  that  emi-
nent physiologist,  Mr  Herbert  Mayo,  in  my  view  of
the  subject,  that  my  plan  is  "  the  best,  the  shortest,
and  surest  for  getting  the  sleep,"  and  throwing  the
nervous  system,  by  artificial  contrivance,  into  a  new
condition,  which  may  be  rendered  available  in  the
healing  art.  At  a  private  conversazione,  which  I  gave
to  the  profession  in  London  on  the  1st  of  March,
1842,  he  examined  and  tested  my  patients  most  care-
fully, submitted  himself  to  be  operated  on  by  me
both  publicly  and  privately,  and  was  so  searching
and  inquisitive  in  his  investigations  as  to  call  forth
the  animadversions  of  a  medical  gentleman  present,
who  thought  he  was  not  giving  me  fair  play  ;  but
which  he  has  assured  me  proceeded  from  an  anxious
desire  to  know  the  truth,  not  being  biassed  by  having
any  peculiar  views  of  his  own  to  bring  forward  ;  and
because  he  considered  the  subject  most  important,
both  in  a  speculative  and  practical  point  of  view.

Whatever  I  advance,  therefore,  in  the  following
remarks,  I  wish  to  be  distinctly  understood  as  strictly
in  reference  to  my  own  mode  of  operating,  and  dis-
tinct from  that  of  all  others.  The  latter  I  shall
merely  refer  to  in  as  far  as  is  necessary  to  point  out
certain  sources  of  fallacy  by  which  the  phenomena  of
the  one  may  be  confounded  with  those  of  the  other.


24 HYPNOTISM  GENERALLY  INDUCED.

In  proof  of  the  general  success  of  my  mode  of
operating,  I  need  only  name,  that  at  one  of  my  public
lectures in Manchester, fourteen  male  adults,  in
good  health,  all  strangers  to  me,  stood  up  at  once,  and
ten  of  them  became  decidedly  hypnotized. At  Roch-
dale I  conducted  the  experiments  for  a  friend,  and
hypnotized  twenty  strangers  in  one  night. At  a
private  conversazione  to  the  profession  in  London,  on
the  1st  of  March,  1842,  eighteen  adults,  most  of  them
entire  strangers  to  me,  sat  down  at  once,  and  in  ten
minutes  sixteen  of  them  were  decidedly  hypnotized.
Mr  Herbert  Mayo  tested  some  of  these  patients,  and
satisfied  himself  of  the  reality  of  the  phenomena. On
another  occasion  I  took  thirty-two  children  into  a
room,  none  of  whom  had  either  seen  or  heard  of
hypnotism  or  mesmerism  :  I  made  them  stand  up  at
three  times,  and  in  ten  or  twelve  minutes  had  the
whole  thirty-two  hypnotized,  maintaining  their  arms
extended  while  in  the  hypnotic  condition,  and  this
at  mid-day. In  making  this  statement,  I  do  not
mean  to  say  they  were  in  the  ulterior  stage,  or  state
of  torpor ;  but  that  they  were  in  the  primary  stage,  or
that  of  excitement,  from  which  experience  has  taught  me
confidently  to  rely  that  the  torpid  and  rigid  state  will
certainly  follow,  by  merely  affording  time  for  the
phenomena  to  develop  themselves. In  the  Stockport
Chronicle  of  4th  February,  1842,  there  is  a  report  of
a  lecture  delivered  in  that  town  a  few  days  before. A
dozen  male  patients  were  made  to  stand  up  at  once,
and treated  according  to  my  method,  six  of  them
became  hypnotized,  and  two  of  them  so  deeply,  as  to
cause  the  lecturer  very  considerable  trouble  to  rouse
them. With  one  named  "Charlie,"  all  the  usual


CAUSES  OF  FAILURE.  25

means,  including  bufferings  and  frictions  before  a  fire,
did  not  succeed  in  restoring  speech  until  he  had  been
made  to  swallow  nearly  half  a  tumbler  glass  of  neat
gin.  I  consider  this  important  as  being  the  testimony
of  an  enemy.  It  can  take  place  also  in  the  dark,  as  well
as  by  day  or  by  gas  light ;  when  the  eyes  are  bandaged,
as  when  they  are  uncovered,  by  merely  keeping  the
eyes  fixed,  the  body  in  a  state  of  absolute  rest,  and
the  mind  abstracted  from  all  other  considerations.
In  cases  of  children,  and  those  of  weak  intellect,  or
of  restless  and  excitable  minds,  whom  I  could  not
manage  so  as  to  make  them  comply  with  these  simple
rules,  I  have  always  been  foiled,  although  most
anxious  to  succeed.  This  I  consider  a  strong  proof
of  the  correctness  of  my  views.  By  arresting  the
attention,  and  fixing  the  eyes,  it  is  also  successful
with  brute  animals.

This  general  success  of  my  plan,  both  with  man
and  brute  animals,  I  consider  sufficient  to  prove  it
proceeds  from  a  law  in  the  animal  economy.  The
exceptions  to  success  are  so  few  as  to  lead  to  the  con-
clusion that  they  arise  from  a  non-compliance  with
the  conditions.  It  is,  however,  unquestionable,  that
there  exists  great  difference  in  the  susceptibility  of
different  individuals,  some  becoming  rapidly  and
intensely  affected,  others  slowly  and  feebly  so.

I  am  aware  that  some  say  they  have  tried  my
mode,  and  failed  to  produce  the  phenomena.  The
reason,  I  presume,  is  simply  this.  They  will  not
believe  the  necessity  of  complying  with  the  WHOLE  of
the  conditions  I  have  distinctly  insisted  on.  But,  in
all  fairness,  if  they  do  not  comply  with  the  WHOLE
conditions,  they  have  no  right  to  expect  the  promised


26  CAUSES  OF  FAILURE.

results,  nor  to  be  disappointed  because  they  fail.  If
the  patient  and  operator  comply  in  all  respects  as  I
direct,  success  is  almost  certain  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,
he  is  almost  equally  certain  to  fail  if  all  the  conditions
are  not  strictly  complied  with.

When  we  consider  the  great  difficulty  to  some  per-
sons of  abstracting  their  minds,  and  the  greater  diffi-
culty of  ensuring  that  patients  operated  on  in  a  public
room  shall  be  able  to  abstract  their  minds  entirely
from  the  circumstances  with  which  they  are  sur-
rounded, and  from  other  considerations  concentrate
their  ideas  entirely  on  the  subject  in  hand,  and  the
equally  great  difficulty  of  securing  absolute  quiet  where
a  large  nnmber  of  people  are  assembled,  and  the  ex-
treme quickness  of  hearing  when  patients  are  passing
into  the  hypnotic  state,  which  makes  them  liable  to
be  roused  by  the  slightest  noise,  it  must  be  evident,
that  a  public  lecture-room  is  by  no  means  a  favour-
able place  for  operating  on  patients  for  the  first  time.

Prosecuting  the  investigation,  as  I  have  been  doing,
by  experiments  and  observations,  I  have,  as  might
be  expected,  had  occasion  to  modify  and  alter  some
of  my  views  and  manipulations  ;  but  still  the  prin-
ciple remains  the  same.


CHAPTER  II.

Mode  of  Hypnotizing  —  Circumstances  necessary  to  be  complied  with  —
Peculiar  phenomena  which  follow;  excitement  first,  and  afterwards
depression  of  function  —  Importance  of  attending  to  this  —  How  these
may  be  made  to  alternate  with  each  other  —  Extraordinary  influence  of
a  current  of  air  during  Hypnotism — Reasons  for  certain  modifications  of
original  modes  of  operating  —  Hypnotism  proceeds  from  a  law  of  the
animal  economy  —  Arises  from  the  physical  and  psychical  condition  of
the  patient,  and  not  from  any  emanation  or  principle  proceeding  from
others— Example  for  proof— Exhibits  no  appreciable  electric  or  mag-
netic change.  —  Two  patients  may  hypnotize  each  other  by  contact.  —
Phenomena  arise  spontaneously  in  course  of  disease. —  Mr  Wakley's
admission  on  this  point.  —  Mr  H.  Mayo's  testimony  as  to  the  effects  of
Hypnotism.  —  Effects  of  different  positions  of  the  eyes.  —  Remarks  on
articles  in  Medical  Gazette.  —  Consensual  adjustment  of  eyes.  —  Effects
on  size  of  pupil.  —  Power  of  habit  and  imagination.  —  Docility  of  pa-
tients, and  exalted  sensibility,  and  their  effects.  —  Patient  hypnotized
whilst  operating  on  another.  —  Mode  of  resisting  influence.

I  NOW  proceed  to  detail  the  mode  which  I  practise
for  inducing  the  phenomena.  Take  any  bright  object
(I  generally  use  my  lancet  case)  between  the  thumb
and  fore  and  middle  fingers  of  the  left  hand  ;  hold  it
from  about  eight  to  fifteen  inches  from  the  eyes,  at
such  position  above  the  forehead  as  may  be  necessary
to  produce  the  greatest  possible  strain  upon  the  eyes
and  eyelids,  and  enable  the  patient  to  maintain  a  steady
fixed  stare  at  the  object.*  The  patient  must  be  made

*  At  an  early  period  of  my  investigations,  I  caused  the
patients  to  look  at  a  cork  bound  on  the  forehead.  This  was


28  DIRECTIONS  FOE  HYPNOTIZING.

,  understand  that  he  is  to  keep  the  eyes  steadily _fixed
on*e  object,  and  the  mind  riveted  on  the  idea  of  that
one  object. It  will  be  observed,  that  owing  to  the
conseimal  adjustment  of  the  eyes,  the  pupils  wi be
^"contracted:  they -ill  shortly  begin  to ^ dilate
mid  ifter  they  have  done  so  to  a  considerable  extent
and  have  aimed  a  wavy  motion,  if  the  fore  and
middle  fingers  of  the  right  hand,  extended  and  a  httle
grated,  are  carried  from  the  object  towards  the
STmort  probably  the  eyelids  will  close  involun-
tarTl'y,  with  a  vibratory  motion. If  this  is  not  the
case  or  the  patient  allows  the  eyeballs  to  mow ,  desire
him  to  begin  anew,  giving  him  to  understand  that  he
is  to  allow  the  eyelids  to  close  when  the  fingers  are
again  carried  towards  the  eyes,  but  that  the  eyeballs
must  be  kept  fixed  in  the  same  position,  and  the  mmd
riveted  to  the  one  idea  of  the  object  held  above  the  eyes
It  will  generally  be  found,  that  the  eyelids  close  with
a  vibratory  motion,  or  become  spasmodically  clo
After  ten  or  fifteen  seconds  have  elapsed,  by  gently
elevating  the  arms  and  legs,  it  will  be  found  that  the
patient  has  a  disposition  to  retain  them  in  the  situation
in  which  they  have  been  placed,  if  he  is  intensely  a/ected.

a  very  efficient  plan  with  those  who  had  the  power  of  con-
verging the  eyes  so  as  to  keep  them  both  steadily  directed  on
the  object  I  very  soon  found,  however,  that  there  were
many  who  could  not  keep  both,  eyes  steadily  fixed  on  so  near
an  object,  and  that  the  result  was,  that  such  patients  did  not
become  hypnotized.  To  obviate  this,  I  caused  them  to  look
at  a  more  distant  point,  which,  although  scarcely  so  rapid  and
intense  in  its  effects,  succeeds  more  generally  than  the  other,
and  is  therefore  what  I  now  adopt  and  recommend.


EFFECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  29

If  this  is  not  the  case,  in  a  soft  tone  of  voice  desire
him  to  retain  the  limbs  in  the  extended  position,  and
thus  the  pulse  will  speedily  become  greatly  accele-
rated, and  the  limbs,  in  process  of  time,  will  become
quite  rigid  and  involuntarily  fixed.  It  will  also  be
found,  that  all  the  organs  of  special  sense,  excepting
sight,  including  heat  and  cold,  and  muscular  motion,
or  resistance,  and  certain  mental  faculties,  are  at  first
prodigiously  exalted,  such  as  happens  with  regard  to
the  primary  effects  of  opium,  wine,  and  spirits.  After
a  certain  point,  however,  this  exaltation  of  function  is
followed  by  a  state  of  depression,  far  greater  than  the
torpor  of  natural  sleep.*  From  the  state  of  the  most
profound  torpor  of  the  organs  of  special  sense,  and
tonic  rigidity  of  the  muscles,  they  may,  at  this  stage,
instantly  be  restored  to  the  opposite  condition  of  ex-
treme mobility  and  exalted  sensibility,  by  directing

*  I  wish  to  direct  especial  attention  to  this  circumstance,
as  from  overlooking  the  fact  of  the  first  stage  of  this  artificial
hypnotism  being  one  of  excitement,  with  the  possession  of
consciousness  and  docility,  many  imagine  they  are  not  affected,
whilst  the  acceleration  of  pulse,  peculiar  expression  of  coun-
tenance, and  other  characteristic  symptoms,  prove  the  exis-
tence of  the  condition  beyond  the  possibility  of  a  doubt,
to  all  who  understand  the  subject,  I  consider  it  very  impru-
dent to  carry  it  to  the  ulterior  stage,  or  that  of  torpor,  at  a
first  trial.  Moreover,  there  is  great  difference  in  the  suscep-
tibility to  the  neuro-hypnotic  impression,  some  arriving  at
the  state  of  rigidity  and  insensibility  in  a  few  minutes,  whilst
others  may  readily  pass  into  the  primary  stage,  but  can
scarcely  be  brought  into  the  ulterior,  or  rigid  and  torpid
state.  It  is  also  most  important  to  note,  that  many  instances
of  remarkable  and  permanent  cures  have  occurred,  where  it
has  never  been  carried  beyond  the  state  of  consciousness.


30  MODES  OF  OPERATING.

a  current  of  air  against  the  organ  or  organs  we  wish
to  excite  to  action,  or  the  muscles  we  wish  to  render
limber,  and  which  had  been  in  the  cataleptiform  state.
By  mere  repose  the  senses  will  speedily  merge  into
the  original  condition  again.  The  modus  operandi
of  the  current  of  air  producing  such  extraordinary
effects,  I  acknowledge  myself  quite  unable  to  explain,
but  I  have  no  difficulty  in  producing  and  repro-
ducing the  effects  by  the  same  means,  whether  per-
formed by  myself  or  others,  and  whether  the  current
of  air  is  from  the  lips,  from  a  pair  of  bellows,  or  by
the  motion  of  the  hand,  or  any  inanimate  object.
The  extent  and  abruptness  of  these  transitions  (see
page  63)  are  so  extraordinary,  that  they  must  be
seen  before  the  possibility  is  believed.

An  abrupt  blow,  or  pressure  over  the  rigid  muscle,
will  de-hypnotize  a  rigid  part ;  but,  I  have  found
pressing  the  nose  will  not  restore  smell,  unless  very
gentle  and  continued,  nor  will  pressing  a  handker-
chief against  the  ear  restore  hearing  when  the  ear  has
become  torpid,  nor  will  gentle  friction  over  the  skin
restore  sensibility  to  the  dormant  skin,  or  mobility  to
the  rigid  muscles  underneath,  (unless  so  gentle  as  to
be  titillation,  properly  so  called,)  and  yet  a  slight  puff
of  wind  will  instantly  rouse  the  whole  to  abnormal
sensibility  and  mobility :  a  fact  which  has  perplexed
and  puzzled  me  exceedingly.

At  first  I  required  the  patients  to  look  at  an  object
until  the  eyelids  closed  of  themselves,  involuntarily.
I  found,  however,  that  in  many  cases  this  was  fol-
lowed by  pain  in  the  globes  of  the  eyes,  and
slight  inflammation  of  the  conjunctival  membrane.
In  order  to  avoid  this,  I  now  close  the  eyelids,
when  the  impression  on  the  pupil  already  referred


GENERAL  INFERENCE.  31

to  has  taken  place,  because  I  find  that  the  beneficial
phenomena  follow  this  method,  provided  the  eye-
balls are  kept  fixed,  and  thus,  too,'  the  unpleasant
feelings  in  the  globes  of  the  eyes  will  be  prevented.
Were  the  object  to  produce  astonishment  in  the
person  operated  on,  by  finding  himself  unable  to
open  his  eyes,  the  former  method  is  the  better ;  as
the  eyes  once  closed  it  is  generally  impossible  for  him
to  open  them  ;  whereas  they  may  be  opened  for  a
considerable  time  after  being  closed  in  the  other  mode
I  now  recommend.  However,  for  curative  purposes,
I  prefer  the  plan  which  leaves  no  pain  in  the  globes
of  the  eyes.

In  fine,  from  a  careful  analysis  of  the  whole  of  my
experiments,  which  have  been  very  numerous,  I  have
been  led  to  the  following  conclusion  :  —  That  it  is  a
law  in  the  animal  economy,  that  by  a  continued
fixation  of  the  mental  and  visual  eye,  on  any  object
which  is  not  of  itself  of  an  exciting  nature,  with  abso-
lute repose  of  body,  and  general  quietude,  they  become
wearied ;  and,  provided  the  patients  rather  favour  than
resist  the  feeling  of  stupor  of  which  they  will  soon
experience  the  tendency  to  creep  upon  them,  during
such  experiments,  a  state  of  somnolency  is  induced,
accompanied  with  that  condition  of  the  brain  and
nervous  system  generally,  which  renders  the  patient
liable  to  be  affected,  according  to  the  mode  of  mani-
pulating, so  as  to  exhibit  the  hypnotic  phenomena.
As  the  experiment  succeeds  with  the  blind,  I  con-
sider it  not  so  much  the  optic,  as  the  sentient,  motor,
and  sympathetic  nerves,  and  the  mind  through
which  the  impression  is  made.  I  feel  so  thoroughly
convinced  that  it  is  a  law  of  the  animal  economy
that  such  effects  should  follow  such  condition  of


32


ALLEGED  CAUSE  OF  PHENOMENA.


my  deliberate  o^on,^tt«  ^

not  be  controverted. to  t  f  go

may  never  be  able  to  account  for  that  m  ^  ^

as  Jo  satisfy  all  ^^T^^^t as  experience

why  the  law  of  gnmtoto  on  sh  ould  ^  ^

has  taught  us  it  does  act St  ^,as  ow  g  ^

--;"


lnotawarehehadcalledher,orofwhathad  passed
I  have  also  had  the  state  of  the  patient  tested


NO  MAGNETIC  CHANGE.  33

before,  during,  and  after  being  hypnotized,  to  ascer-
tain if  there  was  any  alteration  in  the  magnetic  or
electric  condition,  but  although  tested  by  excellent
instruments,  and  with  great  care,  no  appreciable
difference  could  be  detected.  Patients  have  been
hypnotized  whilst  positively,  and  also  whilst  nega-
tively, electrified,  without  any  appreciable  difference
in  the  phenomena ;  so  that  they  appear  to  be  excited
independently  of  electric  or  magnetic  change.  I
have  also  repeatedly  made  two  patients  hypnotize
each  other,  at  the  same  time,  by  personal  contact.
How  could  this  be  reconciled  with  the  theory  of  a
special  influence  transmitted  being  the  cause  of  the
phenomena,  plus  and  minus  being  equally  efficient  ?

It  is  also  well  known,  that  occasionally  the  pheno-
mena arise  spontaneously  in  the  course  of  disease.

It  is  now  admitted  even  by  the  editor  of  the  Lancet,
one  of  the  greatest  opponents  of  mesmerism,  in  the
leading  article  of  4th  February,  1843,  that  the  phe-
nomena "  are  wonderful  only  to  those  who  are
unacquainted  with  the  aspects  of  disease  ;"  and  "  that
we  continually  see  patients  labouring  under  hysteria,
and  analogous  forms  of  nervous  disease,  falling  sud-
denly into  various  states  of  stupor,  trance,  and  con-
vulsion, without  any  assignable  cause."  When  it  is
acknowledged  that  such  effects  as  those  named,  may
spring  from  such  slight  influences  as  to  be  said  to  arise
"  without  any  assignable  cause"  can  it  be  wondered  at
that  important  changes  may  be  induced  by  acting  on
the  nervous  system  in  the  way  I  have  adopted,  of
which  Mr  Herbert  Mayo,  (whose  competence  to  give
an  opinion  on  any  physiological  subject  no  one  will
question,  and  who  himself  publicly  submitted  to  be
c


,34  MB  MAYO'S  OBSERVATIONS.

operated  on  by  me,)  observed,  in  the  course  of  ottr
correspondence,  that  it  induces  "  a  feeling  of  stupor,
which  any  one  may  observe  has  a  disposition  to  creep
upon  him,  when  he  tries  your  experiment  of  looking
fixedly  at  an  object  as  you  direct."

I  thought  it  desirable,  therefore,  to  adopt  the  name
I  did,  for  the  reasons  explained  in  the  introduction.

A  patient  may  be  hypnotized  by  keeping  the  eyes
fixed  in  any  direction.  It  occurs  most  slowly  and
feebly  when  the  eyes  are  directed  straight  forward,  and
most  rapidly  and  intensely  when  they  can  be  main-
tained in  the  position  of  a  double  internal  and
upward  squint.*

*  It  is  not  a  little  amusing  to  find  any  one  try  to  distort  so
greatly,  by  garbled  statements,  the  plain  meaning  of  an  author,
as  to  make  it  appear  that  a  writer  of  some  articles  on  Animal
Magnetism,  in  the  Medical  Gazette  in  1833,  was  well  ac-
quainted with  my  mode  of  operating.  He  observes  at  page
856,  "  On  the  majority  of  persons  no  influence  whatever  is
exhibited."  How  does  this  coincide  with  the  general  success
of  my  mode  as  stated  at  page  24  ?  "  On  those  least  affected
a  number  of  anomalous  slight  symptoms  are  produced."  He
then  describes  those  "  feelings  of  heat  and  cold,  and  those  of
creeping  and  trembling,"  which,  he  adds,  "  are  only  the  usual
imaginary  feelings  which  most  persons  have  if  their  attention
be  strongly  directed  to  any  particular  part  of  the  body,  more
especially  if  (as  i.-j  generally  the  case  with  magnetic  patients,)
something  is  expected  to  occur."  Such  are  the  symptoms
attributed  by  this  writer  to  "  attention,"  but  are  these  the
symptoms  or  phenomena  induced  by  Hypnotism,  as  stated
in  Chapter  IV.  I  Or  is  there  the  slightest  similarity  in  the
cause  !  In  this  author's  view  it  is  the  result  of  "  attention
strongly  directed  to  different  parts  of  tlie  body,"  whereas  mine
is  by  attention  rivetted  to  something  without  the  body.  The


CONSENSUAL  ADJUSTMENT  OF  PUPILS.  35

It  is  now  pretty  generally  known,  that  during  the
effort  to  look  at  a  very  near  object,  there  is  produced,
according  to  the  direction  of  the  object,  a  double
internal  squint,  or  double  internal  and  downward  or
upward  squint,  and  the  pupils  are  thereby  powerfully
contracted.  I  am  not  aware,  however,  that  it  has
been  recorded,  that  by  directing  the  eyes  loosely,

best  mode  of  gathering  the  opinion  of  an  author  appears  to
me  to  be  that  of  his  summing  up  at  the  conclusion  of  his  sub-
ject. Now,  at  page  1037,  the  subject  is  concluded  by  the
following  observations  :  —  "  This,  then,  is  our  case.  Every
credible  effect  of  magnetism  has  occurred,  and  every  incredible
is  said  to  have  occurred  in  cases  where  no  magnetic  influence
has  been  exerted,  but  in  all  which  excited  imagination,  irri-
tation, or  some  powerful  mental  impression,  has  operated  :
where  the  mind  has  been  alone  acted  on,  magnetic  effects
have  been  produced  without  magnetic  manipulations  :  where
magnetic  manipulations  have  been  employed,  unknown,  and
therefore  without  the  assistance  of  the  mind,  no  result  has
ever  been  produced."  Now,  can  any  thing  more  be  required
than  this,  to  prove  that  this  writer,  as  well  as  Bertrand,
adheres  to  the  theory  of  imagination  ?  Such  was  the  impres-
sion left  on  my  mind  by  reading  these  papers  when  they  were
published  ;  and,  together  with  Wakley's  experiments,  deter-
mined me  to  consider  the  whole  as  a  system  of  collusion  or
illusion,  or  of  excited  imagination,  sympathy,  or  imitation.  I
therefore  abandoned  the  subject  as  unworthy  of  farther  investi-
gation, until  I  attended  the  conversazioni  of  Lafontaine,  where
I  saw  one  fact,  the  inability  of  a  patient  to  open  his  eyelids,
which  arrested  my  attention  ;  I  felt  convinced  it  was  not  to
be  attributed  to  any  of  the  causes  referred  to,  and  I  therefore
instituted  experiments  to  determine  the  question  ;  .and  exhi-
bited the  results  to  the  public  in  a  few  days  after.


36  EFFECTS  OF  IMAGINATION

upwards  or  downwards,  to  the  right  or  to  the  left,  as
if  looking  at  a  very  distant  object,  the  pupils  become
very  much  dilated,  irrespective  of  the  quantity  of
light  passing  to  the  retina  ;  so  that  in  this  manner  we
can  contract  or  dilate  the  pupil  at  will.  To  those  who
consider  the  movement  of  the  iris  as  the  mere  effect  of
irritability,  I  may  observe,  in  that  view,  the  former
position  increases,  the  latter  diminishes,  the  irrita-
bility. I  may  farther  remark,  if  the  eyes  are  much
strained  in  ANY  direction,  I  think  the  pupils  will  be
found  to  contract  as  a  consequence.

It  is  important  to  remark,  that  the  oftener  patients
are  hypnotized,  from  association  of  ideas  and  habit,  the
more  susceptible  they  become ;  and  in  this  way  they
are  liable  to  be  affected  entirely  through  the  imagination.
Thus,  if  they  consider  or  imagine  there  is  something
doing,  although  they  do  not  see  it,  from  which  they
are  to  be  affected,  they  will  become  affected;  but,  on  the
contrary,  the  most  expert  hypnotist  in  the  world  may
exert  all  his  endeavours  in  vain,  if  the  party  does  not
expect  it,  and  mentally  and  bodily  comply,  and  thus
yield  to  it.

It  is  this  very  circumstance,  coupled  with  the
extreme  docility  and  mobility  of  the  patients,  and
extended  range  and  extreme  quickness  of  action,  at  a
certain  stage,  of  the  ordinary  functions  of  the  organs
of  sense,  including  heat  and  cold,  and  muscular
motion,  the  tendency  of  the  patients  in  this  state  to
approach  to,  or  recede  from,  impressions,  according  as
their  intensity  or  quality  is  agreeable  or  the  contrary,
which  I  consider  has  misled  so  many,  and  induced  the
animal  magnetizers  to  imagine  they  could  produce


AXD  HABIT.  37

their  effects  on  patients  at  a  distance,  through  mere
volition  and  secret  passes.*

,*  In  the  Medical  Times  of  26th  March,  1842, 1  published
a  letter  on  this  subject,  from  which  I  make  the  following
extracts  :  —

"  The  supposed  power  of  seeing  with  other  parts  of  the  body
than  the  eyes,  I  consider  is  a  misnomer,  so  far  as  I  have  yet
personally  witnessed.  It  is  quite  certain,  however,  that  some
patients  can  tell  the  shape  of  what  is  held  at  an  inch  and  a
half  from  the  skin,  on  the  back  of  the  neck,  crown  of  the
head,  arm,  or  hand,  or  other  parts  of  the  body,  but  it  is  from
feeling  they  do  so  ;  the  extremely  exalted  sensibility  of  the
skin  enabling  them  to  discern  the  shape  of  the  object  so
presented,  from  its  tendency  to  emit  or  absorb  caloric.  This,
however,  is  not  sight,  but  feeling.

"  In  like  manner  I  have  satisfied  myself  and  others,  that
patients  are  drawn,  or  induced  to  obey  the  motions  of  the
operator,  not  from  any  peculiar  inherent  magnetic  power  in
him,  but  from  their  exalted  state  of  feeling  enabling  them  to
discern  the  currents  of  air,  which  they  advance  to,  or  retire
from,  according  to  their  direction.  This  I  clearly  proved  to
be  the  case  to-day,  and  that  a  patient  could  feel  and  obey  the
motion  of  a  glass  funnel  passed  through  the  air  at  a  distance
of  fj "teen  feet.

To  remove  all  sources  of  fallacy  as  to  the  extent  of  influ-
ence exercised  by  the  patient  herself,  independently  of  any
personal  or  mental  influence  on  my  part,  whilst  I  was  other-
wise engaged,  my  daughter  requested  the  patient  to  go  into  a
room  by  herself,  and,  when  alone,  try  whether  she  could
hypnotize  herself.  In  a  short  time  I  was  told  the  patient  was
found  fast  asleep  in  my  drawing-room.  I  went  to  her,  ban-
daged her  eyes,  and  then,  with  the  glass  funnel,  (which  I
used  to  avoid  the  chance  of  electric  or  magnetic  influence
being  passed  from  my  person  to  that  of  the  patient,)  elevated}
or  drew  up  her  arms,  and  then  her  whole  body.  I  now


38  STATE  OF  THE  SENSES,

It  would  be  difficult  to  adduce  a  more  striking
example  than  the  following  of  the  fact,  that  the  phe-
nomena are  produced  by  the  fixation  of  the  mind  and
eyes,  and  general  repose  of  the  patient,  and  not  from

retired  fifteen  feet  from  her,  and  found  every  time  I  drew  the
funnel  towards  me,  ehe  approached  nearer,  but  when  it  was
forced  sharply  from  me,  she  invariably  retired  ;  and  if  it  was
moved  laterally,  she  moved  to  the  right  or  left  accordingly.
I  now  continued  drawing  the  funnel  so  as  to  keep  up  the  cur-
rents towards  the  door,  and  in  this  way,  her  arms  being
extended,  and  eyes  bandaged,  she  followed  me  down  stairs
and  up  again,  a  flight  of  twenty-two  steps,  with  the  peculiar
characteristic  caution  of  the  somnambulist.  After  arriving
at  the  top  of  the  stair,  I  allowed  her  to  stand  a  little,  and
again  began  the  drawing  motion.  She  evidently  felt  the
motion,  and  attempted  to  come,  but  could  not.  I  now
endeavoured  to  lead  her  by  the  band,  but  found  that  the  legt
had  become  eataleptiform,  so  that  the  could  not  more.  I  now
carried  her  into  the  drawing-room,  and,  after  she  was  seated  on
a  chair,  awoke  her.  She  was  quite  unconscious  of  what  had
happened,  and  could  not  be  made  to  believe  she  had  been
down  stairs  —  said  she  was  quite  sure  she  could  have  done  no
such  thing  without  falling — and  to  this  moment  believes  we
were  only  hoaxing  her  by  saying  she  had  had  such  a  ramble.
**  I  had  repeatedly  performed  this  experiment  with  this
patient  and  others  before,  with  the  same  result  in  all  respects
but  walking  up  and  down  stairs  ;  and  proved  their  readiness
to  be  drawn  by  others  equally  as  myself  when  in  that  state  ;
BO  that  I  consider  it  quite  evident  to  any  unprejudiced  person,
that  a  patient  can  hypnotize  himself  independently  of  any
personal  influence  of  another  ;  and  that  it  is  by  extreme  sen-
Ml.ility  of  the  skin,  and  docility  of  the  patients,  that  they  are
drawn  after  an  operator,  rather  than  by  magnetic  attraction  ;
and  that  the  power  of  discriminating  objects  held  near  the


AND  DOCILITY  OF  PATIENTS.  20

imagination,  or  the  look  or  will  of  another.  After
my  lecture  at  the  Hanover  Square  Rooms,  London,  on
the  1st  of  March,  1842,  a  gentleman  told  Mr  Walker,
who  was  along  with  me,  that  he  was  most  anxious  to

skin  in  different  parts  of  the  body,  is  the  result  of  feeling,  and
not  of  sight.

"  The  moment  I  witnessed  the  attempts  of  a  celebrated  pro-
fessor to  draw  a  patient,  I  formed  my  opinion  of  the  cause ;  —
that  it  arose  from  currents  of  air  produced  by  his  hand,  to-
gether with  the  extreme  sensibility  of  the  skin,  and  docility  of
the  patients  when  in  that  state  ;  and  my  experiments  have
clearly  proved  this,  some  patients  acknowledging  the  fact.

"It  may  be  interesting  to  remark,  that  whilst  passing  up
and  down  stairs  the  door  bell  rang,  which  produced  such  a
tremor  through  the  whole  frame  as  nearly  caused  the  patient's
fall  —  a  fact  quite  in  accordance  with  the  effect  of  any  abrupt
noise  on  NATURAL  somnambulists."

It  is  owing  to  this  extreme  sensibility  of  the  skin  during
hypnotism,  that  patients  may  walk  through  a  room  blindfolded,
without  running  against  the  furniture  —  the  difference  of
temperature,  or  rather  degree  of  conducting  power  of  objects,
and  the  resistance  of  the  air  directing  them.

I  have  frequently  illustrated  this  with  very  sensitive
patients  in  the  most  beautiful  and  satisfactory  manner,  thus  :
By  throwing  any  fragrant  and  agreeable  scent  on  a  bare  table
the  patients  will  approach,  anxious  to  smell  it,  but  are  re-
pelled before  they  come  quite  close  to  the  cold  table.  Place  a
handkerchief  on  the  table,  on  which  place  the  scent,  and  now
the  patient  will  approach  close  to  it,  and  revel  in  its  fragrance.
Remove  the  handkerchief,  and  the  attractive  and  repulsive
movements  will  again  ensue.

This  was  beautifully  illustrated  at  a  private  conversazione
at  my  house  lately,  in  the  presence  of  several  medical  and
other  eminently  scientific  gentlemen.  Two  patients  were


40  OPERATOR  HYPNOTIZED.

see  me,  that  I  might  try  whether  I  could  hypnotize
him.  He  said  both  himself  and  friends  were  anxious
he  should  be  affected,  but  that  neither  Lafontaine  nor
others  who  had  tried  him,  could  succeed.  Mr  Walker
said,  if  that  is  what  you  want,  as  Mr  Braid  is  engaged
otherwise,  sit  down,  and  I  will  hypnotize  you  myself
in  a  minute.  When  I  went  into  the  room  I  observed
what  was  going  on,  the  gentleman  sitting  staring  at
Mr  Walker's  finger,  who  was  standing  a  little  to  the
right  of  the  patient,  with  his  eyes  fixed  steadily  on
those  of  the  latter.  I  passed  on,  and  attended  to  some-
thing else,  and  when  I  returned  a  little  after,  found

hypnotized,  when  one  became  so  enamoured  of  the  scent  of  a
gentleman's  snuff-box  as  to  follow  him  round  the  room.  He
then  laid  the  box  about  eighteen  inches  from  the  edge  of  an
uncovered  table,  when  she  advanced,  her  arms  being
extended,  anxious  to  reach  the  box,  but  when  about  ten  or
twelve  inches  from  it,  she  started  back,  from  perceiving  the
impression  of  the  cold  table  at  that  distance.  She  now  made
another  attempt  to  approach  the  box,  being  attracted  by  the
fragrance  of  its  contents,  but  was  as  speedily  repelled  by  the
cold  table  before  she  approached  it,  and  now  kept  bobbing
over  the  box,  much  in  the  same  manner  as  I  have  witnessed
in  the  attempts  of  a  hungry  dog  to  partake  of  very  hot  food.
The  other  patient,  in  passing  round  the  table,  also  caught  the
smell  of  the  box,  and  advanced  from  another  point,  and  thus
both  kept  bobbing  over  it,  much  to  the  amusement  of  all  pre-
sent. I  now  covered  the  table  with  a  handkerchief,  and
placed  the  box  on  it,  when  they  instantly  approached  close  to
it,  and  seemed  to  feast  on  its  fragrance ;  on  removing  the
handkerchief  they  withdrew,  and  commenced  bobbing  over  it
•«  at  first  The  former  patient  had  never  seen  such  experi-
ments, or  been  tested  in  this  way  before.


MODE  OF  PREVENTING  HYPNOTISM.  41

Mr  Walker  standing  in  the  same  position  fast  asleep,
his  arm  and  finger  in  a  state  of  catalcptiform  rigidity,
and  the  patient  wide  awake,  and  staring  at  the  finger
all  the  while.  After  I  had  roused  Mr  Walker,  the
gentleman  observed,  "  this  is  really  very  strange,  that
no  one  can  mesmerise  me  ;  I  must  have  extraordinary
powers  of  resistance."  I  requested  him  to  stay  a
little,  and  I  would  try  what  I  could  do  for  him  when
all  was  quiet.  In  three  minutes  I  had  him  asleep,
and  in  a  little  more  quite  rigid.  The  following  rea-
sons may  be  assigned  for  my  success  after  Mr  Walker
had  so  signally  failed.  He  tried  it  whilst  there  were
several  people  in  the  room,  who  were  moving  about
and  talking  ;  I  took  care  not  to  commence  till  all  was
quiet — Mr  Walker  had  not  taken  the  precaution  to
make  the  patient  direct  his  eyes  in  the  best  possible
manner,  but  I  was  careful  that  he  should  do  so.  More-
over, although  Mr  Walker  had  not  succeeded  in  putting
him  into  the  somnolent  condition,  he  had,  no  doubt,
partially  affected  him,  and  the  influence  had  not  en-
tirely passed  off  when  I  began  my  operation.  Two
days  after,  Mr  Walker  accompanied  me  when  I  called
on  one  of  the  most  celebrated  mesmerizers  in  Europe,
who,  during  our  conversation,  stated,  that  a  glance  of
the  eye  was  quite  enough,  in  many  cases,  to  produce
the  effects.  During  our  conversation,  I  presume,  he
had  determined  to  surprise  both  Mr  Walker  and  my-
self, by  keeping  his  large  intellectual  eyes  fixed  on  Mr
Walker.  The  latter,  however,  suspecting  what  was
intended,  and  knowing  my  opinion  as  to  the.  mode
of  resisting  the  influence  of  such  fascination,  kept  his
eyes  moving,  and  his  mind  roaming,  and  thus  frus-
trated the  volition  of  one  of  the  most  energetic  minds,


42  PATIENT  HYPNOTISES  HIMSELF.

and  the  glances  and  fascination  of  one  of  the  finest
pair  of  eyes  imaginable  for  such  a  purpose.  I  must
remark,  that  Mr  Walker  was  once  magnetized  by  M.
Lafontaine,  after  having  been  several  times  operated
on  by  me,  a  circumstance  which  of  course  would  ren-
der him  more  susceptible  to  the  influence  of  the  ani-
mal magnetizers'  modes  of  operating,  according  to  their
own  theory.  Had  Mr  Walker  believed  in  the  power,
I  know  he  would  have  become  affected,  even  suppos-
ing the  gentleman  referred  to  had  no  such  inten-
tion, —  and  I  am  not  prepared  to  say  he  had.  Mr
Walker,  however,  firmly  believed  he  was  trying  to
mesmerize  him  by  the  fascination  referred  to  ;  but,
relying  on  my  opinion,  and  acting  accordingly,  he
escaped.  In  order  to  shew  the  efficacy  of  my  simple
plan,  in  a  short  time  after,  in  the  presence  of  the
same  gentleman,  I  requested  Mr  Walker  to  hypnotize
himself.  By  simply  fixing  his  eyes  and  mind  this
was  accomplished  in  about  a  minute.


43


CHAPTER  III.

Phenomena  of  natural  sleep,  dreaming,  and  somnambnlism  contrasted  —
Causes  of  common  sleep  —  Of  dreaming  —  Effects  of  variety  and  mono-
tony compared —  Changes  alleged  to  take  place  in  the  structure  of  the
brain  by  exertion  —  Cause  of  Hypnotism,  M'Nish'g  article  on  ' '  Reverie"
compared  with  Mr  Braid's  theory  of  Hypnotism  —  Mode  of  arousing
patients  from  the  state  of  Hypnotism.

I  CONSIDER  it  unnecessary,  in  this  treatise,  to  enter
into  a  detailed  account  of  the  ordinary  phenomena  of
sleep,  dreaming,  and  sonnambulism,  as  contrasted  with
the  waking  state.  Suffice  it  to  say,  the  waking  con-
dition is  that  of  mental  and  bodily  activity,  during
which  we  are  enabled  to  hold  communion  with  the
external  world,  by  perceiving  the  ordinary  impres-
sions of  appropriate  stimuli  through  the  organs  of
special  sense,  and  of  exercising  the  power  of  voluntary
motion,  and  the  mental  functions  generally.  The
state  ofprofound  sleep  is  exactly  the  reverse  of  this  —
a  state  of  absolute  wnconsciousness  of  all  that  is  going
on  around,  and  suspension  of  voluntary  motion,  and
intellectual  activity.  In  as  far  as  regards  the  organs
of  special  sense,  and  voluntary  motion,  and  a  tempo-
rary suspension  of  the  mental  energies,  it  is  the  em-
blem of  death.

Between  these  extreme  points  there  are  gradual


44  SLEEP,  DREAMING,

transitions,  so  that  there  are  all  possible  varieties  of
condition  imaginable,  from  the  highest  state  of  mental
and  bodily  activity,  to  absolute  torpor  of  both.  There
are  two  conditions,  however,  to  which  I  may  briefly
advert, — that  of  dreaming  and  of  somnambulism.  In
the  former  there  are  some  of  the  mental  and  bodily
functions  in  a  state  of  partial  activity,  but,  from  the
sensations  arising  from  external  stimuli  being  per-
ceived very  imperfectly,  erroneous  impressions  are
conveyed  to  the  mind  ;  and,  as  happens  in  some  cases
of  insanity,  the  power  of  controlling  the  current  of
thought  being  absent,  one  idea  excites  another,  until
the  most  incongruous  combinations  are  produced  in
many  instances.  Somnambulism,  properly  so  called,
is  a  state  still  more  nearly  allied  to  the  waking  con-
dition than  dreaming.  The  mental  functions  are
more  awake,  a  more  just  estimate  of  external  im-
pressions can  be  formed,  and  there  is  the  power
of  voluntary  motion  present  in  a  remarkable  degree.
Persons  in  this  state  are  thus  capable  of  being
directed  by  those  around,  into  certain  trains  of
thought  and  action.  The  principal  difference  be-
tween the  natural  somnambulists,  and  those  who
become  so  through  hypnotizing  in  the  manner  pointed
out  in  this  treatise,  is  the  greater  tendency  of  the  latter
t"  lujise  into  a  state  of  profound  sleep,  unless  prevented
by  being  roused  and  directed  by  those  present.  Natu-
ral somnambulists  seem  to  be  impelled  to  certain  trains
of  action  by  internal  impulses  ;  but,  so  far  as  I  have
seen,  the  artificial  somnambulists  have  an  inclination
to  remain  at  absolute  rest,  unless  excited  to  action  by
some  impression  from  without.  In  compliance  with
such  excitement,  however,  they  evince  great  acuteness


AND  SOMNAMBULISM.  45

and  docility.  There  is  also  another  remarkable  differ-
ence. It  is  stated,  that  although  natural  somnam-
bulists cannot  remember,  when  awake,  what  they
were  engaged  in  when  asleep,  they  have  a  vivid  re-
collection of  it  when  in  that  state  again  ;  but  I  have
found  no  parallel  to  this  in  the  somnambulism  induced
by  hypnotism.

By  this  I  mean  that  they  cannot  explain  what
happened  during  the  former  somnambulic  state,  but
they  may  approximate  to  the  words  and  actions
which  had  formerly  manifested  themselves,  provided
they  are  placed  under  exactly  similar  circumstances.
For  the  extent  to  which  peculiar  manifestations  may
be  brought  out  by  manipulating  the  head  and  face,  at
a  certain  stage  of  hypnotism,  see  Chapter  VI.  where
examples  are  given  of  memory  as  regarded  events
which  happened  during  the  waking  condition,  whilst
they  seemed  to  have  no  recollection  of  what  happened
during  a  former  state  of  hypnotism.

As  to  the  causes  of  common  sleep,  I  may  remark,
that,  by  the  exercise  of  the  mental  operations,  and
the  impressions  conveyed  through  the  organs  of  special
sense,  muscular  effort,  and  the  discharge  of  other  ani-
mal functions,  the  brain  becomes  exhausted,  and
ceases  to  be  affected  by  ordinary  stimuli,  and  lapses
into  that  dormant  state  we  call  sleep.  During  this
condition  it  becomes  recruited,  and  fitted  for  again
receiving  its  wonted  impressions  through  the  organs
of  sense,  and  of  holding  intercourse  with  external
nature,  and  exercising  those  powers  of  voluntary
motion  and  mental  function  peculiar  to  the  waking
condition.


46  CAUSES  OF  SLEEP.

It  will  be  generally  admitted,  that  the  most  refresh-
ing, and  therefore  the  most  natural  sleep,  accompanies
that  condition  or  languor  which  follows  the  moderate
exercise  or  fatigue  of  all  the  bodily  and  mental  func-
tions, rather  than  an  undue  exercise  of  one  or  more  to
the  neglect  of  the  others.  It  is  long  since  it  was  ob-
served that  inordinate  attention  to  one  subject  caused
dreaming,  instead  of  sound  sleep.  It  will  also  be  found
that  the  absolute  length  of  time  during  which  any
function  may  be  exercised,  depends  very  much  on  the
continuity  of  its  exertion,  or  its  alternation  with  that
of  other  functions  ;  thus  the  mind  may  become  con-
fused and  bewildered  by  continuing  one  particular
study  for  a  length  of  time,  but  may  be  able  to  return
to  it  with  energy  and  advantage,  and  prosecute  the
subject  longer  on  the  whole,  by  varying  it  with  study
of  a  different  nature ;  moreover,  bodily  disease,  and
even  insanity,  frequently  arises  from  allowing  the
mind  to  be  occupied  inordinately  by  one  particular
object  or  pursuit,  whether  that  may  be  religion
politics,  avarice,  schemes  of  ambition,  or  any  other
passion,  emotion,  or  object  of  unvaried  contempla-
tion.

In  like  manner,  continued  and  over-intense  mus-
cular effort  very  soon  exhausts  the  power  of  the
muscles  so  exercised  or  over-exerted  ;  and  by  keeping
the  eyes  steadily  and  constantly  exercised  by  gazing
on  a  coloured  spot,  they  soon  cease  to  be  able  to  dis-
cern the  boundaries  of  the  respective  colours,*  and
ultimately  seem  scarcely  to  be  capable  of  distinguish-

*  Muller.


CAUSES  OF  SLEEP.  47

ing  the  spot  at  all.  The  same  might  be  proved  of  the
other  senses.  In  fine,  alternate  action  and  repose  is  the
law  of  animated  nature.*

*  This  subject  is  beautifully  illustrated  by  Miiller,  at  page
1410,  Vol.  II.  (Baly's  translation,)  which  I  now  quote.  "  The
excitement  of  the  organic  processes  in  the  brain  which  attends
an  active  state  of  the  mind,  gradually  renders  that  organ  in-
capable of  maintaining  the  mental  action,  and  thus  induces
sleep,  which  is  to  the  brain  what  bodily  fatigue  is  to  other
parts  of  the  nervous  system.  The  cessation  or  remission  of
mental  activity  during  sleep,  in  its  turn,  however,  affords  an
opportunity  for  the  restoration  of  integrity  to  the  organic
conditions  of  the  cerebrum,  by  which  they  regain  their  excit-
ability. The  brain,  whose  action  is  essential  to  the  manifes-
tation of  mind,  obeys,  in  fact,  the  general  law  which  prevails
over  all  organic  phenomena,  —  that  the  phenomena  of  life
being  particular  states  induced  in  the  organic  structures,  are
attended  with  changes  in  the  constituent  matter  of  these
structures.  Hence,  the  longer  the  action  of  the  mind  is  con-
tinued, the  more  incapable  does  the  brain  become  of  support-
ing that  action,  and  the  more  imperfectly  are  the  mental
processes  performed,  until  at  length  sensations  cease  to  be
perceived,  notwithstanding  the  impressions  of  external  stimuli
continue.  This  is  entirely  analogous  to  what  frequently
occurs  during  the  waking  state,  in  tiie  case  of  individual  sen-
sations."

I  must  beg  leave  to  take  one  exception  to  the  correctness
of  these  remarks,  and  that  is,  moderate  exercise,  I  consider,
instead  of  exhausting,  seems  rather  to  act  as  a  salutary
stimulus,  and  thus  strengthens  both  organ  and  function.  He
then  goes  on  to  state,  most  lucidly  and  fairly,  "  Nor  merely
the  action  of  the  mind,  but  the  long  continued  exertion  of
other  functions  of  animal  life,  such  as  the  senses  or  muscular
actions,  induces  the  same  exhaustion  of  the  organic  states  of


48  CAUSE  OF  HYPNOTISM.

It  is  on  this  very  principle,  of  over-exerting  the
attention,  by  keeping  it  riveted  to  one  subject  or  idea

the  brain,  and  thereby  want  of  sleep  and  sleep  itself  ;  for
these  different  systems  of  the  body  participate  in  the  change
which  the  organic  condition  of  any  one  of  them  may  undergo.
Lastly,  impairment  of  the  normal  organic  state  of  the  brain,
by  the  circulation  through  it  of  blood  charged  with  imperfectly
assimilated  nutriment,  as  after  full  meals  in  which  spirituous
drinks  have  been  taken,  also  induces  sleep.  The  narcotic
medicaments  act  still  more  strongly  by  the  change  they  pro-
duce in  the  organic  composition  of  the  sensorium.  Even  the
increased  pressure  of  the  blood  upon  the  brain,  produced  by
the  horizontal  posture,  may  become  the  cause  of  sleep."

Here  then  is  the  opinion  of  this  author  in  a  few  words.
The  exercise  of  function  is  attended  with  a  change,  deteriora-
tion, or  wasting  of  the  organic  structure  at  a  more  rapid  rate
than  can  be  repaired  by  the  slow,  but  regular  and  persistent
organic  renovation  continually  going  on  in  the  whole  sys-
tem. A  cessation  of  sentient,  and  mental,  and  muscular  func-
tions, therefore,  as  happens  in  sleep,  becomes  necessary  to
afford  time  for  the  renovation  of  the  deteriorated  organic
structures  of  the  respective  organs,  and  of  the  brain  in  par-
ticular, which,  in  so  eminent  a  degree,  sympathizes  and  par-
ticipates in  the  organic  changes  which  have  been  induced  in
other  organs.

Liebig's  views  seem  confirmatory  of  this,  where  he  points
out  the  fact,  that  the  chemical  principles  of  those  substances
which  act  most  energetically  on  the  brain  and  nerves  have
a  composition  analagous  to  that  of  the  substance  of  the  brain
and  nerves,  as  in  the  case  of  the  vegetable  alkaloids.  He
believes  that  all  the  active  principles  which  produce  power-
fully poisonous  or  medicinal  effects,  in  minute  doses,  are  com-
pounds of  nitrogen  ;  and  that  those  compounds,  being  resolved
into  their  elements,  take  a  share  in  the  formation,  or  transfor-
mation, of  brain  and  nervous  matter.


HYPNOTISM  AND  REVERIE.  49

which  is  not  of  itself  of  an  exciting  nature,  and,  over-
exercising  one  set  of  muscles,  and  the  state  of  the
strained  eyes,  with  the  suppressed  respiration,  and
general  repose,  which  attend  such  experiments,  which
excites  in  the  brain  and  whole  nervous  system  that
peculiar  state  which  I  call  Hypnotism,  or  nervous
sleep.  The  most  striking  proofs  that  it  is  different
from  common  sleep,  are  the  extraordinary  effects
produced  by  it.  In  deep  abstraction  of  mind,  it  is
well  known,  the  individual  becomes  unconscious  of
surrounding  objects?,  and  in  some  cases,  even  of  severe
bodily  inflictions.  During  hypnotism,  or  nervous
sleep,  the  functions  in  action  seem  to  be  so  intensely
active,  as  must  in  a  great  measure  rob  the  others
of  that  degree  of  nervous  energy  necessary  for  excit-
ing their  sensibility.  This  alone  may  account  for
much  of  the  dulness  of  common  feeling  during  the
abnormal  quickness  and  extended  range  of  action  of
certain  other  functions.*

*  It  was  certainly  presuming  very  much  on  the  ignorance
of  others  for  any  one  to  attempt  so  to  pervert  the  meaning
of  an  author,  as  to  twist  what  M'Nish  has  written  on  the
article  "  Reverie,"  and  represent  it  as  the  basis  of  my  theory.
How  does  M'Nish  define  it  1  "  Reverie,"  he  says, "  proceeds
from  an  unusual  quiescence  of  the  brain,  and  inability  of  the
mind  to  direct  itself  strongly  to  any  one  point  ;  it  is  often  the
prelude  of  sleep.  There  is  a  defect  in  the  attention,  which,
instead  of  being  fixed  on  one  subject,  wanders  over  a  thousand,
and  even  on  these  is  feebly  and  ineffectively  directed."  Now
this,  as  every  one  must  own,  is  the  very  reverse  of  what  is  in-
duced by  my  plan,  because  I  rivet  the  attention  to  one  idea,
and  the  eyes  to  one  point,  as  the  primary  and  imperative  con-
ditions. Then,  as  to  another  passage,  "  That  kind  of  reverie
in  which  the  mind  is  nearly  divested  of  all  ideas,]and  approxi-
D


50  MODE  OF  AROUSING  PATIENTS,

The  untoward  result  referred  to  in  the  note
below,  I  have  no  doubt,  was  the  effect  of  permit-
ting the  experiment  to  be  carried  too  far.  No  such
consequence  has  ever  followed  in  any  of  my  opera-
tions, and  for  this  reason,  that  I  have  always
•watched  each  case  with  close  attention,  and  aroused

mates  nearly  to  the  state  of  sleep,  I  have  sometimes  expe-
rienced while  gazing  long  and  intently  upon  a  river.  The
thoughts  seem  to  glide  away,  one  by  one,  upon  the  surface  of
the  stream,  till  the  mind  is  emptied  of  them  altogether.  In
this  state  we  see  the  glassy  volume  of  the  water  moving  past
us,  and  hear  its  murmur,  but  lose  all  power  of  fixing  our
attention  definitively  upon  any  subject ;  and  either  fall  asleep,
or  are  aroused  by  some  spontaneous  reaction  of  the  mind,  or
by  some  appeal  to  the  senses  sufficiently  strong  to  startle  us
from  our  reverie."  Now,  I  should  have  read  this  passage  a
thousand  times  without  discovering  any  analogy  between  it
and  my  theoretical  views.  They  appear  to  me  to  be  "  wide
as  the  poles  asunder."  Instead  of  ridding  the  mind  of  ideas
"  one  by  one,  till  the  mind  is  emptied  of  them  altogether"  I
endeavour  to  rid  the  mind  at  once  of  all  ideas  but  one,  and  to
fix  that  one  in  the  mind  eten  after  pasting  into  the  hypnotic
itate.  This  is  very  different  from  what  happens  in  the  reverie
referred  to,  in  which  M'Nish  confesses  the  difficulty  "  of  fix-
ing our  attention  definitively  upon  any  subject."  Again,  so
far  from  a  reaction  of  the  mind  being  sufficient  to  rouse
patients  from  the  hypnotic  state,  as  in  the  reverie  referred  to,
I  can  only  state,  that  T  have  never  seen  patients  deeply  affec-
ted come  out  of  it  without  assistance  ;  and  I  heard  Lafontaine
Bay,  he  had  been  unable  to  restore  the  Frenchman  who  was
with  him  for  twelve  hours  on  one  occasion,  when  a  sur-
geon operated  on  him  ;  and  I  have  read  the  report  of  an-
other, who  operated  on  a  patient  at  Stockport,  "  Charlie,"
aen.nling  to  my  method,  and,  from  having  allowed  him  to  go
too  far,  experienced  110  small  difficulty  in  rousing  him,  nor


AND  PREVENTING  DANGER.  51

the  patient  the  moment  I  saw  the  slightest  symptom
of  danger.  I  shall,  therefore,  now  point  out  the
symptoms  of  danger,  with  the  mode  of  arousing
patients,  and  thus  preventing  mischief  which  might
ensue  from  want  of  due  caution  in  the  operator.

could  he  be  restored  to  speech  after  much  manipulation,  and
buffetting,  and  friction,  till  lie  had  swallowed  nearly  half  a
tumbler  glass  of  neat  gin.  To  prevent  misrepresentation,  1
shall  quote  the  case  as  reported  in  the  Stockport  Chronicle  of
4th  February,  1842.  —  "To  the  final  instance  the  lecturer
now  drew  particular  attention.  It  was  that  of  a  young  man,
recognized  by  many  in  the  room  by  the  familiar  name  of
'  Charlie.'  He  was  just  entering  upon  the  state  of  somno-
lence, and  the  attention  of  the  audience  was  directed  to  the
fact,  that  it  was  so  indicated,  by  the  different  members  be-
coming rigid.  Presently  his  eyelids  closed,  and  he  became
as  though  apparently  under  the  influence  of  catalepsy.  It
was  tried  to  make  him  sit  down,  but  his  whole  frame  was
perfectly  rigid,  and  that  object  could  not  therefore  be  accom-
plished. He  was  then  laid  on  the  floor,  and  the  usual  means,
with  cold  water  added,  were  employed  in  order  to  bring  him
to  a  state  of  consciousness.  After  a  time  these  partially  suc-
ceeded, his  limbs  became  once  more  supple,  and  he  was  set
in  a  chair,  apparently  conscious,  though  his  eyelids  were  not
yet  open.  He  was  several  times  requested  to  open  them,
and  as  often  made  the  most  vigorous  efforts  to  do  so,  but  was
unable  ;  at  last  they  were  opened,  and  it  was  discovered  that
the  operation  had  so  far  influenced  the  entire  functions  of  his
body,  that  he  had  for  a  time  lost  the  power  of  utterance,  the
muscles  of  the  throat  and  tongue  still  remaining  in  a  state  of
the  most  perfect  rigidity.  In  this  state,  and  being  affected  by
a  tremor  which  seized  every  part  of  his  person,  the  patient
was  conducted  into  an  ante-room,  and  placed  before  a  fire,
while  the  operator  continued  to  rub  the  parts,  in  order  to
excite  them  to  renewed  action,  and  to  restore  animation.  All


52 MODE  OF  AROUSING  PATIENTS.

Whenever  I  observe  the  breathing  very  much
oppressed,  the  face  greatly  flushed,  the  rigidity  exces-
sive, or  the  action  of  the  heart  very  quick  and  tumul-
tuous, I  instantly  arouse  the  patient,  which  I  have
always  readily  and  speedily  succeeded  in  doing  by  a
clap  of  the  hands,  an  abrupt  shock  on  the  arm  or  leg
by  striking  them  sharply  with  the  flat  hand,  pressure
and  friction  over  the  eye-lids,  and  by  a  current  of  air
wafted  against  the  face.  I  have  never  failed  by  these
means  to  restore  my  patients  very  speedily.

I  feel  convinced  hypnotism  is  not  only  a  valuable,
but  also  a  perfectly  safe  remedy  for  many  complaints,
if  judiciously  used ;  still  it  ought  not  to  be  trifled
with  by  ignorant  persons  for  the  mere  sake  of  grati-
fying idle  curiosity.  In  all  cases  of  apoplectic  ten-

this,  however,  had  not  the  desired  effect  for  some  time,  during
which  the  patient  evinced  feelings  of  considerable  surprise  at
his  condition ;  but  nevertheless  was  exceedingly  lively,  and
made  several  efforts  to  speak,  but  could  not.  At  last  half  a
tumbler  glass  of  neat  gin  was  brought,  the  greater  portion  of
which  he  drank  off,  and  this  partially  restored  the  power  of
utterance,  for  he  was  afterwards  able  to  articulate  a  little,
and  asked,  though  only  in  a  whisper,  for  his  hat ;  and  also
requested  that  some  water  might  be  mixed  with  the  remain-
ing portion  of  the  gin.  He  complained  also  of  a  sense  of
excessive  fulness  of  the  stomach  ;  and  said,  in  answer  to  in-
quiries, that  although  not  feeling  cold,  he  was  yet  unable  to
resist  the  tremor  which  had  seized  him."

Was  not  this  a  beautiful  illustration  of  the  facility  with
which  patients  might  be  roused  from  this  condition  "  by  a  re-
action of  the  mind  ?"  Nor  was  this  the  only  case  that  even-
ing, in  which  great  difficulty  had  been  experienced  in  rousing
patients  from  the  hypnotic  state.


CAUTION  IN  SOME  CASES  REQUISITE.  53

dency,  or  where  there  is  aneurism,  or  serious  organic
disease  of  the  heart,  it  ought  not  to  be  resorted  to,
excepting  with  the  precaution,  that  it  may  be  in  the
mode  calculated  to  depress  the  force  and  frequency  of
the  heart's  action.


CHAPTER  IV.

Phenomena  of  common  sleep  —  Of  Hypnotism  —  Power  of  locomotion  and
accurate  balancing  of  themselves  —  Tendency  to  dance  on  hearing
appropriate  music — Grace  displayed  under  its  influence  —  Tendency  to
become  cataleptiformly  fixed  in  any  position  if  left  quiet  —  Probability
of  Hypnotism  having  been  practised  amongst  the  ancients,  and  the  cause
of  their  superior  excellence  in  sculpture,  painting,  and  dancing  —  Effects
analogous  to  Nitrous  Oxide  in  some  —  in  what  it  differs  from  this  and
intoxication  from  wine  and  spirits  — Analogous  to  conium  —  Effects  of
monotonous  impressions  on  any  of  the  senses  —  Opinions  of  Cullen,
M'Nish,  Willich  —  (Counting  and  repeating  generally  known)  —  A
writer  in  Medical  Gazette  —  Power  of  habit  and  expectation  —  All  the
phenomena  consecutive  —  Note  illustrating  this  —  Power  of  Hypnotism
to  cure  intractable  diseases  and  disorders  — Miss  Collins  case  and  Miss
E.  Atkinson's—  Extent  to  which  it  may  be  expected  to  be  useful.

IN  passing  into  common  sleep  objects  are  perceived
more  and  more  faintly,  the  eyelids  close,  and  remain
quiescent,  and  all  the  other  organs  of  special  sense
become  gradually  blunted,  and  cease  to  convey  their
usual  impressions  to  the  brain,  the  limbs  become
flaccid  from  cessation  of  muscular  tone  mid  action,
the  pulse  and  respiration  become  slower,  the  pupils
are  turned  upwards  and  inwards,  and  are  contracted.
(Miillcr.)

In  the  hypnotic  state,  induced  with  the  view  of
exhibiting  what  I  call  the  hypnotic  phenomena,
vision  becomes  more  and  more  imperfect,  the  eyelids


EFFECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  55

are  closed,  but  have,  for  a  considerable  time  a  vibratory
motion,  (in  some  few  they  are  forcibly  closed,  as  by
spasm  of  the  orbiculares  ;)  the  organs  of  special  sense,
particularly  of  smell,  touch,  and  hearing,  heat  and
cold,  and  resistance,  are  greatly  exalted,  and  afterwards
become  blunted,  in  a  degree  far  beyond  the  torpor  of
natural  sleep  ;  the  pupils  are  turned  upwards  and
inwards,  but,  contrary  to  what  happens  in  natural
sleep,  they  are  greatly  dilated,  and  highly  insensible
to  light ;  after  a  length  of  time  the  pupils  become
contracted,  whilst  the  eyes  are  still  insensible  to  light.
The  pulse  and  respiration  are,  at  first,  slower  than
is  natural,  but  immediately  on  calling  muscles  into
action,  a  tendency  to  cataleptiform  rigidity  is  assumed,
with  rapid  pulse,  and  oppressed  and  quick  breathing.
The  limbs  are  thus  maintained  in  a  state  of  tonic
rigidity  for  any  length  of  time  I  have  yet  thought  it
prudent  to  try,  instead  of  that  state  of  flaccidity  in-
duced by  common  sleep ;  and  the  most  remarkable
circumstance  is  this,  that  there  seems  to  be  no  cor-
responding state  of  muscular  exhaustion  from  such
action.*

*  The  average  of  a  great  number  of  experiments  gives  me
the  following  results  :  The  rise  in  the  pulse  from  mere  mus-
cular effort,  to  enable  patients  to  keep  their  legs  and  anus
extended  for  five  minutes,  is  about  20  per  cent.  When  in
the  state  of  hypnotism  it  is  upwards  of  100  per  cent.  By
arousing  all  the  senses,  and  the  head  and  neck,  it  will  speedily
fall  to  40  per  cent,  (that  is,  twice  what  it  was  when  so  tested
in  the  natural  condition,)  and  by  rendering  the  whole  muscles
limber,  whilst  the  patient  is  in  the  state  of  hypnotism  the
pulse  very  speedily  falls  to,  or  even  below,  the  condition  it  was
before  the  experiment.


56  EFFECTS  OF  HTPNOTKM.

In  passing  into  natural  sleep,  any  thing  held  in
the  hand  is  soon  allowed  to  drop  from  our  grasp,  but,
in  the  artificial  sleep  now  referred  to,  it  will  be
held  more  firmly  than  before  falling  asleep.  This  is
a  rery  remarkable  difference.

The  power  of  balancing  themselves  is  so  great  that
I  have  never  seen  one  of  these  hypnotic  somnambu-
lists fall.  The  same  is  noted  of  natural  somnambu-
lists. This  is  a  remarkable  fact,  and  would  appear  to
occur  in  this  way,  that  they  acquire  the  centre  of
gravity,  as  if  by  instinct,  in  the  most  natural,  and
therefore,  in  the  most  graceful  manner,  and  if  allowed
to  remain  in  this  position,  they  speedily  become
cataleptiformly  and  immoveably  fixed.  From  ob-
serving these  two  facts,  and  the  general  tendency  and
taste  for  dancing  displayed  by  most  patients  on  hear-
ing lively  music  during  hypnotism,  the  peculiarly
graceful  and  appropriate  movement  of  many  when
thus  excited,  and  the  varied  and  elegant  postures  they
may  be  made  to  assume  by  slight  currents  of  air,  and
the  faculty  of  retaining  any  position  with  so  much  ease,
I  have  hazarded  the  opinion,  that  the  Greeks  may
have  been  indebted  to  hypnotism  for  the  perfection
of  their  sculpture,  and  the  Fakirs  for  their  wonder-
ful feats  of  suspending  their  bodies  by  a  leg  or  an
arm.*

*  It  has  been  suggested  to  me,  that  it  can  scarcely  be
doubted  that  the  Bacchanalians,  who  had  no  feeling  of  wounds,
("  non  sentit  vulnera  Mcenas," — Otid,)  and  whose  condition
was  a  stupor  different  from  common  sleep,  ("  Exsomnis  stupet
(Evia*,"—  Horace,)  were  in  the  hypnotic  condition  or  nervous
sleep,  and  therein  excited  to  dance  by  music  ;  and  that,  as
uneducated  maid-servants,  when  under  the  fuW  influence  of  tha


DIFFERENT  FROM  NATURAL  SLEEP.  67

It  thus  clearly  appears  that  it  differs  from  common
sleep  in  many  respects,  that  there  is  first  a  state  of
excitement  as  with  opium,  and  wine,  and  spirits,  and
afterwards  a  state  of  corresponding  deep  depression
or  torpor.

In  the  case  of  two  patients, symptoms  very  much  the
same  as  those  produced  in  them  by  the  laughing  gas,  were
produced  twice  on  each  patient,  and  the  only  time  I
know  of  their  having  been  hypnotized.  One  lost  the
power  of  speech  for  two  hours,  as  happened  also  after
the  gas.  Both  these  patients  had  hypnotized  them-
selves. There  is  a  remarkable  difference  between  the
hypnotic  condition,  and  that  induced  by  the  nitrous
oxide.  In  the  latter  there  is  great,  almost  irresistible  in-
clination to  general  muscular  effort,  as  well  as  laughter  ;
in  the  former  there  seems  to  be  no  inclination  to  any
bodily  effort,  unless  excited  by  impressions  from  with-
out. When  the  latter  are  used,  there  is  a  remarkable
difference  again  in  the  power  of  locomotion  and  accu-

state  of  nerve,  move  with  the  grace  and  peculiar  action  of
the  most  accomplished  dancers  of  pantomimic  ballet,  there  is
reason  to  believe,  not  merely  that  the  perfect  grace  exhibited
in  the  attitudes  represented  in  ancient  sculpture  and  painting,
was  derived  from  studying  the  Bacchanalian  and  other  mystic
dancers,  but  that  the  movements  used  by  stage-dancers,  in
our  days,  have  been  transmitted  to  us  by  continued  imitation,
through  Italy,  from  the  dancers  in  the  Greek  mysteries.  No
person  can  see  girls  of  humble  education,  under  the  influence
of  music  while  in  the  nervous  sleep,  without  perceiving,  that
those  individuals,  if  awake,  could  not  move  with  the  elegance
they  exhibit  under  that  influence.  The  reason  of  such  grace
probably  is,  that  it  arises  from  the  simple  and  pure  effects  of
nature  to  balance  the  body  perfectly  in  all  its  complicated
movements  wliile  the  power  of  sight  is  suspended.


58  MODES  OF  MESMERIZING,

rate  balancing  of  themselves,  when  contrasted  with
the  condition  of  intoxication  from  wine  or  spirits,
where  the  limbs  become  partially  paralyzed,  whilst
the  judgment  remains  pretty  clear  and  acute.  The
state  of  muscular  quiescence,  with  acute  hearing,  and
dreamy,  glowing  imagination,  approximates  it  some-
what to  the  condition  induced  by  conium.

During  the  course  of  last  spring  some  lectures  were
delivered  in  this  town  to  prove  that  the  mesmeric
phenomena  might  be  induced  by  an  "  undue  continu-
ance or  repetition  of  the  same  sensible  impression"
on  any  of  the  senses.  Immediately  after  the  first
lecture  I  instituted  experiments  according  to  this
plan,  but  very  soon  ascertained,  that  the  sleep  induced
by  this  mode  of  operating,  unless  through  the  eye,  was
nothing  more  than  NATURAL  or  common  sleep,  except-
ing in  patients  wlo  had  had  the  impressibility  stamped
on  them,  by  having  been,  previously  mesmerized  or  hypno-
tised. The  lecturer  concluded  his  course  by  stating
his  opinion,  that  he  knew  no  sleep  but  natural  or
common  sleep  ;  and  by  representing  that  he  considered
the  effects  produced  by  the  different  modes  to  be  the
same.*  I  believe  most,  if  not  all  the  patients  this

*  This  being  his  belief,  there  could  be  no  novelty  in  his
views.  The  following  was  the  language  of  Cullen,  long  before
he  was  born,  «  If  the  mind  is  attached  to  a  single  sensation,  it
is  brought  very  nearly  to  the  state  of  the  total  absence  of
impressions ;  or,  in  other  words,  to  the  state  most  closely
bordering  upon  sleep  ;  remove  those  stimuli  which  keep  it
employed,  and  sleep  ensues  at  any  time."

M'Nish  also  writes,  «  Attention  to  a  single  sensation  has
the  same  effect,  (of  inducing  slumber.)  This  has  been
exemplified  in  the  case  of  all  kinds  of  monotony,  where  there


AND  INDUCING  NATURAL  SLEEP.  59

gentleman  exhibited  at  his  lectures  had  been  previously
mesmerized  or  hypnotized,  which,  if  I  am  correct  in
this  supposition,  from  the  circumstances  already

is  a  want  of  variety  to  stimulate  the  ideas,  and  keep  them  on
the  alert."

And  again  M'Nish  writes,  "  I  have  often  coaxed  myself  to
sleep  by  internally  repeating  half  a  dozen  times  any  well-
known  rhyme.  Whilst  doing  so  the  ideas  must  be  strictly
directed  to  this  particular  theme,  and  prevented  from  wan-
dering." He  then  adds,  that  the  great  secret  is  to  compel  the
mind  to  depart  from  its  favourite  train  of  thought,  into  which
it  has  a  tendency  to  run,  "  and  address  itself  solely  to  the
terbal  repetition  of  what  is  substituted  in  its  place  ;"  and
farther  adds,  "  the  more  the  mind  is  brought  to  turn  upon  a
single  impression,  the  more  closely  it  is  made  to  approach  to
the  state  of  sleep,  which  is  the  total  absence  of  all  impres-
sions." Willich  also,  some  forty  years  ago,  wrote  thus,
"  Sleep  is  promoted  by  tranquillity  of  mind,  *  *  *  by  gently
and  uniformly  affecting  one  of  the  senses;  for  instance,  by
music  or  reading ;  and  lastly,  a  gentle  external  motion  of  the
whole  body,  as  by  rocking  or  sailing."  Counting  and  repeat-
ing a  few  words  have  been  also  long  and  generally  known  and
resorted  to  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  sleep.

Let  any  one  read  attentively  the  following  extract  from  the
Medical  Gazette  of  February  24,  1838,  on  the  power  of  weak
monotonous  impressions  on  the  senses  having  the  power  of
inducing  sleep,  and  many  phenomena  usually  attributed  to
mesmerism,  and  say  what  merit  could  be  due  to  a  person
acquainted  with  the  article  referred  to,  for  recording  a  note  to
the  same  effects  some  six  or  eight  months  thereafter,  and  that
without  having  instituted  a  single  experiment  to  prove  the
correctness  of  the  hypothesis  ?  "  For  the  other  slight  symp-
toms" (others  enumerated  having  been  attributed  to  imagina-
tion or  emotion  of  mind)  "  of  vapours,  drowsiness,  and  at  last


60  MODES  OF  INDUCING  ARTIFICIAL  SLEEP.

referred  to,  (see  page  36,  and  note,  page  61,)  would
completely  nullify  the  importance  of  his  apparent  re-
sults. However,  I  have  never  heard  of  his  having
operated  successfully,  and  exhibited  the  phenomena  on
numbers  of  patients  taken  indiscriminately  from  a  mixed
audience,  who  had  never  been  operated  on  before;  or
produced  curative  results  such  as  I  have  so  repeatedly
done.  I  therefore  consider  it  a  fair  inference,  that
until  the  same  phenomena  are  produced  by  his  method
in  cases  of  persons  which  have  never  been  hypnotized
or  mesmerized,  nothing  is  proved  beyond  the  fact
which  I  have  so  often  urged,  namely,  the  power  of

natural  sleep,  no  other  cause  need  be  sought  than  the  tedious-
ness  and  ennui  of  passing  the  hands  for  more  or  less  than  an
hour  over  the  most  sensitive  parts  of  the  body.  This  is  only
an  instance  of  the  well  known  effect  of  weak,  monotonous
impressions  on  the  senses  inducing  sleep  ;  analogous  examples
are  found  in  the  soothing  influence  of  a  body  seen  slowly
vibrating,  or  of  a  distant  calm  scene,  or  the  motions  of  the
waves,  or  of  quivering  leaves  ;  or  in  impressions  on  the  sense
of  hearing  by  the  sound  of  a  waterfall,  the  rippling  of  billows,
the  humming  of  insects,  the  low  howling  of  the  winds,  the
voice  of  a  dull  reader  ;  or  on  the  nerves  of  common  sensation
by  gentle  friction  of  the  temple  or  eye-brow,  or  any  tentitive
part  of  the  body ;  the  rocking  of  a  cradle  ;  any  slow  and  regu-
lar motion  of  the  limbs  or  trunk  ;  all  these  instances  shew
that  the  effect  of  monotonous  impressions  on  the  senses  is  to
produce,  in  most  persons,  tranquillity,  or  drowsiness,  and
ultimately  sleep."

Where,  then,  is  the  great  merit  of  any  one  having  recorded
a  note  six  or  eight  months  after  this  was  published,  that  these
phenomena  were  induced  by  "  the  undue  continuance  and
repetition  of  the  same  sensible  impression !"


CAUSE  OF  CERTAIN  MISTAKES.  61

imagination,  sympathy,  and  habit,  in  producing  the
expected  effects  ON  THOSE  PREVIOUSLY  IMPRESSED.*

From  overlooking  another  important  fact  which  I
have  repeatedly  explained,  that  all  the  phenomena
are  consecutive,  that  is,  first  increased  sensibility,
mobility,  and  docility,  and  afterwards  a  subsidence
into  insensibility  and  cataleptiform  rigidity,  this
gentleman,  by  mistaking  and  exhibiting  the  primary
phenomena  for  the  secondary,  seems  to  have  managed
to  deceive  both  himself  and  some  others  who  are  satis-
fied to  look  at  such  matters  loosely.  This,  hoivever,  is
confounding  things  which  are  in  themselves  essentially
different.  I  beg  especial  attention  to  the  note  below. f

*  A  very  decided  proof  of  this  was  exhibited  at  one  of  my
lectures,  where,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  report  of  it,  twenty-
two  who  had  been  operated  on  before,  laid  hold  of  different
parts  of  each  other's  persons  or  dresses,  and  by  concentrating
their  attention  to  that  act,  and  anticipating  the  effect,  they  all
became  hypnotized  in  about  a  minute.  After  another  lecture,
in  the  ante-room,  sixteen  who  had  been  hypnotized  formerly,
stood  up  in  the  same  manner,  and  also  one  who  had  nexer  been
hypnotized.  In  about  a  minute  all  were  affected  excepting  the
latter.  I  then  operated  on  him  alone  in  my  usual  way,  and
in  two  or  three  minutes  he  was  very  decidedly  affected.
Suffice  it  to  say,  I  have  varied  my  experiments  in  every  pos-
sible form,  and  clearly  proved  the  power  of  imagination  orer
those  previously  impressed,  as  the  patients  have  become  hyp-
notized or  not  by  the  same  appliance,  accordingly  to  the
result  which  they  previously  expected.  This  readily  accounts
for  the  result  of  Mr  Wakley's  experiments  with  the  Okeys.

•f-  In  illustration  of  this,  I  may  here  state  the  following
remarkable  facts,  which  have  been  frequently  repeated  before
many  most  competent  witnesses,  and  of  which,  therefore,  I
consider  there  can  be  no  doubt.


(52  EFFECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.

Of  all  the  circumstances  connected  with  the  arti-
ficial sleep  which  I  induce,  nothing  so  strongly  marks

The  first  symptoms  after  the  induction  of  the  hypnotic  state,
and  extending  the  limbs,  are  those  of  extreme  excitement  of
all  the  organs  of  sense,  sight  excepted.  I  have  ascertained
by  accurate  measurement,  that  the  hearing  is  about  twelve
times  more  acute  than  in  the  natural  condition.  Thus  a
patient  who  could  not  hear  the  tick  of  a  watch  beyond  3
feet  when  awake,  could  do  so  when  hypnotized  at  the  distance
of  35  feet,  and  walk  to  it  in  a  direct  line,  without  difficulty
or  hesitation.  Smell  is  in  like  manner  wonderfully  exalted  ;
one  patient  has  been  able  to  trace  a  rose  through  the  air
when  held  46  feet  from  her.  May  this  not  account  for  the
fact  of  Dr  Elliotson's  patient  Okey,  discovering  the  peculiar
odour  of  patients  in  articulo  mortis  1  when  she  said  on  passing
them,  "  there  is  Jack."  The  tactual  sensibility  is  so  great,
that  the  slightest  touch  is  felt,  and  will  call  into  action  cor-
responding muscles,  which  will  also  be  found  to  exert  a  most
inordinate  power.  The  sense  of  heat,  cold,  and  resistance,
are  also  exalted  to  that  degree,  as  to  enable  the  patient  to
feel  any  thing  without  actual  contact,  in  some  cases  at  a  con-
siderable distance,  (18  or  20  inches,)  if  the  temperature  is
very  different  from  that  of  the  body  ;  and  some  will  feel  a
breath  of  air  from  the  lips,  or  the  blast  of  a  pair  of  bellows,
at  the  distance  of  50,  or  even  90  feet,  and  bend  from  it,  and,
by  making  a  back  current,  as  by  waving  the  hand  or  a  fan,
will  move  in  the  opposite  direction.  The  patient  has  a  ten-
dency to  approach  to,  or  recede  from  impressions,  according  as
they  are  agreeable  or  disagreeable,  either  in  quality  or  intensity.
Thus,  they  will  approach  to  soft  sounds,  but  they  will  recede
from  loud  sounds,  however  harmonious.  A  discord,  such  as
two  semi-tones  sounded  at  same  time,  hoicerer  toft,  will  cause  a
sensitive  patient  to  shudder  and  recede  when  hypnotized,  al-
though ignorant  of  music,  and  not  at  all  disagreeably  affected
by  such  discord  when  awake.  By  allowing  a  little  time  to


EFFECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  63

the  difference  between  it  and  natural  sleep  as  the
wonderful  power  the  former  evinces  in  curing  many

elapse,  and  the  patient  to  be  in  a  state  of  quietude,  he  will
lapse  into  the  opposite  extreme,  of  rigidity  and  torpor  of  all
the  senses,  so  that  he  will  not  hear  the  loudest  noise,  nor
smell  the  most  fragrant  or  pungent  odour  ;  nor  feel  what  is
either  hot  or  cold,  although  not  only  approximated  to,  but
brought  into  actual  contact  with,  the  skin.  He  may  now  be
pricked,  or  pinched,  or  maimed,  without  evincing  the  slightest
symptom  of  pain  or  sensibility,  and  the  limbs  will  remain
rigidly  fixed.  At  this  stage  a  puff  of  wind  directed  against
any  organ  instantaneously  rouses  it  to  inordinate  sensibility,
and  the  rigid  muscles  to  a  state  of  mobility.  Thus,  the
patient  may  be  unconscious  of  the  loudest  noise,  but  by  simply
causing  a  current  of  air  to  come  against  the  ear,  a  very  mode-
rate noise  will  instantly  be  heard  so  intensely  as  to  make  the
patient  start  and  shiver  violently,  although  the  whole  body
had  immediately  before  been  rigidly  cataleptiform.  A  rose,
valerian,  or  a.^afoetida,  or  strongest  liquor  ammonice,  may  have
been  held  close  under  the  nostrils  without  being' perceived,
but  a  puff  of  wind  directed  against  the  nostrils  will  instantly
rouse  the  sense  so  much,  that  supposing  the  rose  had  been
carried  46  feet  distant,  the  patient  has  instantly  set  off  in
pursuit  of  it  ;  and  even  whilst  the  eyes  were  bandaged,
reached  it  as  certainly  as  a  dog  traces  out  game  ;  but,  as
respects  valerian  or  asafoetida,  will  rush  from  the  unpleasant
smell,  with  the  greatest  haste.  The  same  with  the  sense  of
touch.

The  remarkable  fact  that  the  whole  senses  may  have  been
in  the  state  of  profound  torpor,  and  the  body  in  a  state  of
rigidity,  and  yet  by  very  gentle  pressure  over  the  eye-balls,
the  patient  shall  be  instantly  roused  to  the  waking  condition,
as  regards  all  the  senses,  and  mobility  of  the  head  and  neck,
in  short  to  all  parts  supplied  by  nerves  originating  above  the
origin  of  the  fifth  pair,  and  those  inosculating  with  them,  and


04  EFFECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.

diseases  of  long  standing,  and  which  had  resisted  natu-
ral sleep,  and  every  known  agency,  for  years,  —  e.  g.

will  not  be  affected  by  simple  mechanical  appliance  to  other
organs  of  sense,  is  a  striking  proof  that  there  exists  some
remarkable  connection  between  the  state  of  the  eyes,  and
condition  of  the  brain  and  spinal  cord  during  the  hypnotic
state.

This  is  also  a  remarkably  good  illustration  of  the  propriety
of  Mr  Mayo's  designation  of  the  origin  of  the  fifth  pair  of
nerves,  which  he  styles  "  the  dynamic  centre  of  the  nervous
system."*

Another  remarkable  proof  to  the  same  effect  is  this  ;  sup-
posing the  same  state  of  torpor  of  all  the  senses,  and  rigidity
of  the  body  and  limbs  to  exist,  a  puff  of  air,  or  gentle  pressure
against  ONE  eye  will  restore  sight  to  that  eye,  and  sense  and
mobility  to  one  half  of  the  body  —  the  same  side  as  the  eye
operated  on  —  but  will  leave  the  other  eye  insensible,  and  the
other  half  of  the  body  rigid  and  torpid  as  before.  Neither
hearing  nor  smell,  however,  are  restored  in  this  case  to  either
side.  Thus,  by  one  mode  of  acting  through  the  eye,  we
reduce  the  patient  to  a  state  of  hemiplegia,  by  the  other  to
that  of  paraplegia,. as  regards  both  sense  and  motion.  In
many  cases,  when  the  patient  has  been  hypnotized  by  looking
sideways,  this  gives  a  tendency  to  the  body  to  turn  round  in
that  direction  when  asleep.

It  seemed  puzzling,  that  by  acting  on  one  eye,  both  sense
and  motion  could  be  communicated  to  the  same  side  of  the
body,  seeing  the  motor  influence  is  communicated  from  the
appetite  hemitphere  of  the  brain.  It  has  occurred  to  me  that
the  partial  decussatiou  of  the  optic  nerves  may  account  for
this,  and  that  this  partial  decussation  may  be  for  the  express
purpose  of  perfecting  the  union  of  sensation  and  motion
through  the  eyes, -"on  which  we  lean  as  on  crutches  ;"  thus

*  "  The  Nervous  System,  and  its  Functions,"  p.  27.


PHENOMENA  OF  HYPNOTISM.  65

patients  who  have  been  born  deaf  and  dumb,  of  vari-
ous ages,  up  to  32  years,  had  continued  without

enabling  us  to  balance  ourselves  so  much  more  perfectly  than
we  could  otherwise  have  done.

There  is  another  most  remarkable  circumstance,  that  whilst
the  patient  is  in  the  state  of  torpor  and  rigidity,  we  may  pass
powerful  shocks  of  the  galvanic  battery  through  the  arms,  so
as  to  cause  violent  contortions  of  them,  without  his  evincing  the
slightest  symptom  of  pe'rceiving  the  shocks,  either  by  move-
ment of  the  head  or  neck,  or  expression  of  the  countenance.
On  partially  arousing  the  head  and  neck,  as  by  gentle  pres-
sure on  the  eyes,  or  passing  a  current  of  air  against  the
face,  the  same  shocks  will  be  felt,  as  evinced  by  the  move-
ments of  the  head  and  neck,  the  contortions  of  the  face,  and
the  whine,  moan,  or  scream  of  the  patient.  All  this  may
happen,  as  I  have  witnessed  innumerable  times,  and  the
patient  be  altogether  unconscious  of  it  when  roused  from  the
hypnotic  condition.

Moreover,  whilst  the  patient  is  in  the  -condition  to  be  un-
conscious of  the  shock  passed  through  the  arms  whilst  a  rod  is
placed  in  each  hand,  if  one  of  the  rods  is  applied  to  any  part
of  the  head,  or  neck,  or  face,  in  short,  to  any  part  which  is
set  at  liberty  by  acting  on  both  eyes,  as  formerly  referred  to,
he  will  instantly  manifest  symptoms  of  feeling  a  shock,  though
it  be  much  less  powerful  than  that  which  had  failed  to  produce
any  sensation  or  consciousness  when  passed  through  both  arms.
This  might  readily  be  accounted  for  on  the  principle  of  the
circuit  being  shortened,  and  also  by  one  of  the  rods  being
nearer  the  centre  of  the  sensorium  ;  but  that  it  depends  on
something  else  is  apparent  from  the  following  -fact  :  Without
moving  the  rod  placed  on  the  neck,  head,  or  face,  carry  the
other  rod  from  the  hand,  to  any  other  part  of  the  head,  neck,
or  face,  and  all  evidence  of  feeling  will  disappear,  unless  the
power  of  the  galvanic  current  is  increased.

Analogous  to  this  is  another  most  puzzling  phenomenon :
E


66  PHENOMENA  OF  HYPNOTISM.

the  power  of  hearing  sound  until  the  time  they  were
operated  on  by  me,  and  yet  they  were  enabled  to  do  so

The  brain  being  in  a  state  of  torpor,  the  limbs  rigid,  and
the  skin  insensible  to  pricking,  pinching,  heat  or  cold,  by
gently  pressing  the  point  of  one  or  two  fingers  against  the
back  of  the  hand,  or  any  other  part  of  the  extremity,  the
rigidity  will  very  speedily  give  place  to  mobility,  and  quiver-
ing of  the  arm,  hand,  and  fingers,  and  which  is  greatly  in-
creased by  pressing  another  finger  against  the  neck,  head,  or
face.  Indeed,  in  the  latter  case,  the  commotion  of  the  whole
body  is  as  violent  in  some  patients  as  from  shocks  of  the
galvanic  battery.  By  placing  BOTH  fingers  on  any  part  of  the
head,  face,  or  neck,  the  commotion  almost,  or  entirely  ceases.
By  pinching  the  skin  of  the  hand  or  arm  with  one  finger  and
thumb,  and  the  skin  of  the  neck  or  face  with  the  other,  no
effect  is  produced.  Pressure,  made  with  insulating  rods,  glass,
or  sealing  wax,  is  followed  by  the  same  phenomena  as  when
done  by  the  points  of  the  fingers.  The  flat  hand  applied  has
very  little  effect.  The  pressure  being  made  against  both
hands,  the  arms  are  contorted,  and  if  the  head  is  partially
dehypnotized  the  patient  will  complain  of  pins  running  into  the
fingers,  especially  if  one  point  of  contact  is  the  hand,  and  the
other  the  face  or  head.  These  phenomena  do  not  occur
whilst  the  skin  remains  sensible  to  pricking  or  pinching.

Moreover,  during  the  state  of  cataleptiform  rigidity,  the
circulation  becomes  greatly  accelerated,  in  many  cases  it
has  more  than  double  the  natural  velocity  ;  and  may  be
brought  down  to  the  natural  standard,  in  most  cases  in
less  than  a  minute,  by  reducing  the  cataleptiform  condi-
tion. It  is  also  found,  that  it  may  be  kept  at  any  inter-
mediate condition  between  these  two  extremes,  according
to  the  manipulations  used  ;  and  that  the  blood  is  circulated
with  leas  force  (the  pulse  being  always  contracted)  in  the
rigid  limbs,  and  sent  in  correspondingly  greater  quantity  and
force  into  those  parts  which  are  not  directly  subjected  to


ITS  CURATIVE  POWERS.  67

by  being  kept  in  the  hypnotic  state  for  eight,  ten,  or
twelve  minutes,  and  have  had  their  hearing  still  far-
ther improved  by  a  repetition  of  similar  operations.
Now,  supposing  these  patients  to  have  spent  six  hours
out  of  twenty-four  in  sleep,  many  of  them  had  had
four,  five,  six,  or  eight  years  of  continuom  sleep,  but  still
awoke  as  they  lay  down,  incapable  of  hearing  sound,
and  yet  they  had  some  degree  of  it  communicated

the  pressure  of  rigid  muscles.  It  is  also  important  to  note,
that  by  acting  on  both  eyes  in  the  manner  required  to  induce
the  state  of  paraplegia,  as  already  explained,  the  force  and
frequency  of  the  heart's  action  may  be  as  speedily  and  per-
ceptibly diminished,  as  the  action  of  a  steam  engine  by  turning
off  the  steam.  By  again  fixing  the  eyes,  its  former  force  and
velocity  will  be  almost  as  speedily  restored,  as  can  be  satisfac-
torily proved  to  any  one  who  keeps  his  ear  applied  to  the
chest  during  these  experiments.  The  amount  of  change  in
the  pulse,  by  acting  on  the  two  eyes,  and  thus  liberating  the
organs  of  special  sense,  and  the  head  and  neck,  is  about  60
per  cent  of  the  actual  rise  of  the  pulse  when  at  the  maximum
above  the  ordinary  velocity  of  the  circulation.  We  might
therefore,  I  think,  a  priori,  infer,  that  in  this  new  condition
of  the  nervous  system  we  have  acquired  an  important  power
to  act  with.

N.B.  —  It  is  to  be  observed,  that  owing  to  the  extreme
acuteness  of  hearing  during  the  first  stage  of  hypnotism,  it  is
extremely  apt  to  mislead  the  operator,  or  those  who  do  not
understand  this  fact,  during  operations  on  the  acuteness  of  the
other  senses,  such  as  smell,  currents  of  air,  and  heat  and  cold.
To  avoid  such  mistakes,  therefore,  it  is  best  to  allow  the  hear-
ing to  disappear,  by  which  time  all  the  other  senses  will  have
gone  to  rest,  with  the  exception  of  the  susceptibility  to  be
affected  by  a  current  of  air.  I  allow  all  the  senses  to  become
dormant,  and  then  rouse  only  the  one  I  wish  to  exhibit  in  the
state  of  exalted  function,  when  operating  carefully.


fi8  CURATIVE  POWERS

to  them  by  a  few  minutes  of  Hypnotism.  Can  any
stronger  proof  be  wanted,  or  adduced,  than  this,  that
it  is  very  different  from  common  sleep  ?  A  lady,  54
years  of  age,  had  been  suffering  for  16  years  from
incipient  amaurosis.  According  to  the  same  ratio,
she  must  have  had  four  years  of  sleep,  but  in-
stead of  improving  she  was  every  month  getting
worse,  and  when  she  called  on  me,  could  with  diffi-
culty read  two  words  of  the  largest  heading  of  a
newspaper.  After  eight  minutes  hypnotic  sleep,  how-
ever, she  could  read  the  other  words,  and  in  three
minutes  more,  the  whole  of  the  smaller  heading,  soon
after  a  smaller  sized  type,  and  the  same  afternoon,
witli  the  aid  of  her  glasses,  read  the  118th  Psalm,  29
rcneg,  in  the  small  diamond  Polyglot  Bible,  which
for  years  had  been  a  sealed  book  to  her.  There  has
also  been  a  most  remarkable  improvement  in  this  lady's
general  health  since  she  was  hypnotized.  Is  there
any  individual  who  can  fail  to  see,  in  this  case,  some-
thing different  from  common  sleep?  Another  lady,
44  years  of  age,  had  required  glasses  22  years,  to  en-
able her  to  see  to  sew,  read,  or  write.  She  had  thus
five  years  and  a-half  of  sleep,  but  the  sight  was  still
getting  worse,  so  that,  before  being  hypnotized,  she
could  not  distinguish  the  capitals  in  the  advertising
columns  of  a  newspaper.  After  being  hypnotized,
however,  she  could,  in  a  few  minutes,  see  to  read  the
large  and  second  heading  of  the  newspaper,  and  next
day,  to  make  herself  a  blond  cap,  threading  her  needle
WITIIOI-T  the  aid  of  glasses.  This  lady's  daughter,
who  had  been  compelled  to  use  glasses  for  two  years,
was  enabled  to  dispense  with  them,  after  being  once
hypnotized.  It  is  also  important  to  note,  that  all


OF  HYPNOTISM.  69

these  three,  as  well  as  many  others,  were  agreeably
surprised  by  improvement  of  memory  after  being  hyp-
notized. The  memory  of  one  was  so  bad  that  she
was  often  forced  to  go  up  stairs  several  times  before
she  could  remember  what  she  went  for,  and  could
scarcely  carry  on  a  conversation  ;  but  all  this  remnant
of  a  slight  paralytic  affection  is  gone,  by  the  same
operations  which  roused  the  optic  nerves,  and  re-
stored the  sight.  Now,  with  such  cases  as  these,
who  can  doubt  that  there  is  a  real  difference  in  the
state  of  the  brain  and  nervous  system  generally,  dur-
ing the  hypnotic  sleep,  from  that  which  occurs  in
common  sleep  ?  The  same  might  be  urged  from  vari-
ous other  diseases  cured  or  relieved  by  this  process,
but  I  shall  only  briefly  refer  to  a  few.

In  the  second  part  of  this  treatise,  where  the  cases
are  recorded,  will  be  found  many  examples  of  the
curative  power  of  hypnotism,  equally  remarkable
with  those  to  which  I  have  just  referred  :  such  as  Tic
Doloureux ;  Nervous  headach  ;  Spinal  irritation ;
Neuralgia  of  the  heart ;  Palpitation  and  intermittent
action  of  the  heart ;  Epilepsy  ;  Rheumatism  ;  Para-
lysis ;  Distortions  and  tonic  spasm,  &c.

I  shall  here  give  a  few  particulars  of  a  case  which
shews  in  a  most  remarkable  degree  the  difference  of
this  and  common  sleep,  or  that  induced  by  opium  and
the  whole  range  of  medicines  of  that  class.  Miss
Collins,  of  Newark,  Nottinghamshire,  had  a  spasmodic
seizure  during  the  night,  by  which  her  head  was
bound  firmly  to  her  left  shoulder.  The  most  ener-
getic and  well  directed  means,  iinder  a  most  talented
physician,  and  aided  by  the  opinion  of  Sir  Benjamin


70  CURATIVE  POWERS

Brodie,  had  been  tried,  as  far  as  known  remedies
could  be  carried,  (amongst  other  means,  narcotics,
in  as  large  doses  as  were  compatible  with  the  safety
of  the  patient ;)  and  although  she  was  carefully
watched  by  night  and  by  day,  there  had  never
been  the  slightest  relaxation  of  the  spasm,  which
had  continued  nearly  six  months.  When  I  first
examined  her,  no  force  I  was  capable  of  exerting
could  succeed  in  separating  the  head  and  shoulder  in
the  slightest  degree.  Experience  led  me  to  hope,  how-
ever, that  I  might  be  able  to  do  so  after  she  was  hyp-
notized. Having  requested  all  present,  excepting  the
patient,  her  father,  and  her  physician,  to  retire,  I
hypnotized  her,  and  in  three  minutes  from  commencing
the  operation,  with  the  most  perfect  ease  to  myself,  and
without  the  slightest  pain  to  the  patient,  her  head  was
inclined  in  the  opposite  direction,  and  in  two  minutes
more  she  was  roused,  and  was  quite  straight.  I  visited
this  patient  only  three  times,  after  which  she  returned
home.  Shortly  afterwards,  she  had  a  nervous  twitch-
ing of  the  head,  and  on  one  occasion  it  was  again
drawn  down  to  her  shoulder.  Dr  Chawner,  however,
hypnotized  her  as  he  had  seen  me  do,  and  put  it
right  immediately ;  and  she  is  now  (about  twelve
months  after  she  was  hypnotized)  in  perfect  health,
"  her  head  quite  straight,  and  she  has  perfect  control
over  the  muscles  of  the  neck."  (See  cases.)

Miss  E.  Atkinson  had  been  unable  to  speak  above
a  whisper  for  four  years  and  a  half,  notwithstanding
every  known  remedy  had  been  perseveringly  adopted,
under  able  practitioners.  After  the  ninth  hypnotic
operation  she  could  speak  aloud  without  effort,  and


OF  HYPNOTISM.

has  continued  quite  well  ever  since  —  now  about  nine
months.  (See  case  at  length,  Part  II.)

The  extraordinary  effects  of  a  few  minutes  hypno-
tism, manifested  in  such  cases  (so  very  different  from
what  we  realize  by  the  application  of  ordinary  means)
may  appear  startling  to  those  unacquainted  with
the  remarkable  powers  of  this  process.  I  have  been
recommended,  on  this  account,  to  conceal  the  fact  of
the  rapidity  and  extent  of  the  changes  induced,  as
many  may  consider  the  thing  impossible,  and  thus  be
led  to  reject  the  less  startling,  although  not  more
true,  reports  of  its  beneficial  action  in  other  cases.  In
recording  the  cases,  however,  I  have  considered  it  my
duty  to  record  facts  as  I  found  them,  and  to  make  no
compromise  for  the  sake  of  accommodating  them  to
the  preconceived  notions  or  prejudices  of  others.

It  ma}-  be  proper  to  add,  however,  that  I  have
afforded  opportunities  to  many  eminent  professional
and  scientific  gentlemen  to  see  the  patients,  and  in-
vestigate for  themselves  the  real  state  of  these  respec-
tive cases ;  and  to  them  I  can  confidently  appeal  as
to  the  accuracy  and  fidelity  of  the  reports  of  most  of
the  cases  recorded  in  this  treatise.

After  such  evidence  as  this,  no  one  can  reasonably
doubt  that  there  is  a  remarkable  difference  between
hypnotism  and  natural  sleep,  and  that  it  is  a  valuable
addition  to  our  therapeutic  means.

How  these  extraordinary  effects  are  produced,  it
may  be  impossible  absolutely  to  decide.  One  thing,
however,  I  am  certain  of,  that,  in  this  condition,
besides  the  peculiar  impression  directly  made  on
the  nervous  centres,  by  which  the  mind  is  for  the
time  "  thrown  out  of  gear,"  and  which  enables  us,


72  PECULIAR  PHENOMENA

in  a  remarkable  manner,  to  localize  or  concentrate
the  nervous  energy,  or  sensorial  power,  to  any  par-
ticular point  or  function,  instead  of  the  more  equal
distribution  which  exists  in  the  ordinary  condition,
we  have  also  an  extraordinary  power  of  acting  on  the
capillaries,  and  of  increasing  and  diminishing  the
force  and  frequency  of  the  circulation,  locally  and
generally.*  This  can  be  done  in  a  most  remarkable
degree,  both  as  regards  the  extent  and  rapidity  of
these  changes,  f  And,  moreover,  changes  from  abso-

*  By  this  I  mean  that  any  one  examining  the  pulse  by  the
radial  artery,  whilst  the  patient  has  his  arms  in  the  catalep-
tiform  condition,  and  held  at  right  angles  with  his  body,  (and
when,  of  course,  the  circulation  can  only  be  influenced  by  the
state  of  rigidity  or  flaccidity  of  the  muscles,)  it  will  be  found
fwble  or  contracted,  but  the  moment  the  rigidity  of  the
muscles  is  reduced,  by  blowing  on  or  fanning  them,  the  pulse
will  become  much  more  developed.  This,  of  course,  which
may  be  done  without  the  patient  being  conscious  of  the  ex-
l>oriment,  is  totally  different  from  what  may  be  displayed  as
a  trick,  by  a  person  voluntarily  compressing  the  axillary  and
lirachial  arteries,  by  drawing  his  arm  firmly  against  his  side.
The  former  is  independent  of  volition,  the  latter  is  entirely
voluntary,  and  a  mere  trick.

+  The  first  time  I  ever  had  an  opportunity  of  examining  a
patient  minutely,  or  of  feeling  the  pulse  of  one,  under  the
mesmeric  influence,  was  on  the  19th  November,  1841.  I  was
much  struck  with  the  state  of  the  pulse  at  the  wrist  —  so
Miiall  and  rapid  as,  combined  with  the  state  of  tremor,  or
slight  subsultus  in  the  arm,  rendered  it  impossible  to  count
it  accurately  at  the  wrist  This  circumstance  induced  me  to
reckon  the  velocity  of  the  pulse  by  the  carotid  artery,  as  will
!><•  found  recorded  in  the  "  Manchester  Guardian"  of  the  24th
<>f  that  month.  I  adduced  this  as  the  cause  of  the  discrepancy


DURING  HYPNOTISM.  73

lute  insensibility  to  the  most  exalted  sensibility,  may
be  effected  at  a  certain  stage,  almost  with  the  rapidity
of  thought,  as  exemplified  at  page  63.  On  the  whole,
I  consider  it  is  of  great  importance  to  have  acquired  a
knowledge  of  how  these  effects  can  be  produced  and
generally  applied,  and  turned  to  advantage  in  the  cure
of  disease,  although  we  should  never  ascertain  the
real  proximate  cause,  or  principle  through  which  we
produce  our  effects.  Who  can  tell  how,  or  why,  qui-
nine and  arsenic  cure  intermittent  fever?  They  are,
nevertheless,  well  known  to  do  so,  and  are  prescribed
accordingly.

Whilst  I  feel  assured  from  personal  experience,  and
the  testimony  of  professional  friends,  on  whose  judg-
ment and  candour  I  can  implicitly  rely,  that  in  this
•we  have  acquired  an  important  curative  agency  for  a
certain  class  of  diseases,  I  desire  it  to  be  distinctly  un-
derstood, as  already  stated,  that  I  by  no  means  wish

between  the  numeration  of  the  pulse  by  others  and  myself,
that  I  had  counted  it  by  the  carotid  artery,  and  considered  it
impossible  for  any  one  to  reckon  it  correctly  by  the  radial
artery  in  such  a  case.  The  injected  state  of  the  conjunctival
membrane  of  the  eye,  and  the  whole  capillary  system  in  the
neck,  head,  and  face,  was  so  apparent,  as  Dr  Radford  very
correctly  stated,  that  no  one  near  the  patient  could  fail  to
observe  it :  this,  together  with  the  cold  hands  and  contracted
pulse  at  the  wrist,  led  me  to  infer,  that  the  rigid  state  of  the
cataleptiform  muscles,  opposed  the  free  transmission  of  the
blood  through  the  extremities,  and  would  thus  cause  increased
action  in  the  heart  and  determination  to  the  brain  and  spinal
cord,  as  resulted  from  the  ingenious  experiments  of  my  late
friend  Dr  Kellie,  for  speedily  terminating  the  cold  stage  of
ague,  by  putting  a  tourniquet  round  one  of  the  extremities.


74  NOT  A  UNIVERSAL  REMEDY.

to  hold  it  up  as  a  universal  remedy.  I  believe  it  is
capable  of  doing  great  good,  if  judiciously  applied.
Diseases  evince  totally  different  pathological  condi-
tions, and  the  treatment  ought  to  be  varied  accor-
dingly. We  have,  therefore,  no  right  to  expect  to
find  a  universal  remedy  either  in  this,  or  any  other >
method  of  treatment.


75


CHAPTER  V.

Reasons  for  delivering  Public  Lectures  on  Hypnotism— Mode  of  procuring
refreshing  sleep,  with  low  pulse  and  general  flaccidity  of  muscle  —  Effi-
cacy of  this  plan.

WHEN  I  had  ascertained  that  Hypnotism  was  im-
portant as  a  curative  power,  and  that  the  prejudices
existing  against  it  in  the  public  mind,  as  to  its
having  an  immoral  tendency,  were  erroneous  ;  and
the  idea,  that  it  was  calculated  to  sap  the  foundation
of  the  Christian  creed,  by  suggesting  that  the  Gospel
miracles  might  have  been  wrought  by  this  agency,
was  quite  unfounded  and  absurd,  I  felt  it  to  be  a
duty  I  owed  to  the  cause  of  humanity,  and  my  pro-
fession, to  use  my  best  endeavours  to  remove  those
fallacies,  so  that  the  profession  generally  might  be  at
liberty  to  prosecute  the  inquiry,  and  apply  it  practi-
cally, without  hazarding  their  personal  and  profes-
sional interest,  by  prosecuting  it  in  opposition  to
popular  prejudice.  It  appeared  to  me  there  was  no
mode  so  likely  to  insure  this  happy  consummation  as
delivering  lectures  on  the  subject  to  mixed  audiences.
The  public  could  thus  have  demonstrative  proof  of  its
practical  utility ;  and,  when  it  was  proved  to  proceed
from  a  law  of  the  animal  economy,  and  that  the


70  MODE  OF  PRODUCING

patient  could  only  be  affected  in  accordance  with  his
own  free  mil  and  consent,  and  not,  as  the  animal  mag-
netizers  contend,  through  the  irresistible  power  of
volitions  and  passes  of  the  mesmerizers,  which  might
be  done  in  secret  and  at  a  distance,  the  ground  of
charge  as  to  my  agency  having  an  immoral  tendency,
must  at  once  fall  to  the  ground.  I  have  reason  to
believe  my  labours  have  not  been  altogether  unsuccess-
ful, in  removing  the  popular  prejudices  ;  and  I  hope
that  the  more  liberal  of  my  professional  brethren,
now  that  they  know  my  true  motives  of  action,  in
giving  lectures  to  mixed  audiences,  instead  of  confin-
ing them  to  the  profession  only,  and  especially  as  I
made  no  secret  of  my  modes  of  operating,  will  be  inclined
to  approve  rather  than  blame  me,  for  the  course  I
have  taken  in  this  respect.

From  some  peculiar  views,  I  was  led  to  make  ex-
periments, by  which  I  hoped  to  obtain  natural  or
refreshing  sleep,  and  the  results  were  quite  satisfac-
tory. I  have  thus  succeeded  in  making  a  patient,
who,  when  operated  upon  in  the  usual  way,  was  highly
susceptible,  and  disposed  to  become  strongly  cataleptic,
with  rapid  pulse  and  oppressed  breathing,  remain  in
a  sound  sleep  for  upwards  of  three  hours,  with  all  the
muscles  flaccid,  and  the  pulse  and  respiration  slower
than  natural,  when  operated  on  in  this  manner.  All
this  difference  arises  from  the  simple  circumstance  of
the  position  in  which  the  eyes  are  placed  during  the
operation,  namely,  closing  the  eyelids,  and  bringing
the  eyes  loosely  upwards,  as  if  looking  at  an  object  at
a  great  distance,  the  eye-balls  being  turned  up  only
gently,  so  as  to  cause  dilatation  of  the  pupil,  as  already
explained ;  and  the  limbs  placed  so  as  to  relax  the


SLEEP  AT  WILL.  77

muscles  as  much  as  possible,  and  thus  prevent  accelera-
tion of  the  pulse.

I  was  led  to  the  adoption  of  this  method  from  the
following  train  of  reasoning.  If,  as  I  inferred  was
the  case,  the  spasmodic  tendency  was  reflected  to  the
muscular  system  generally,  from  the  semiparalyzed
state  of  the  branches  of  the  third  pair  of  nerves  (which
supply  the  levatores  palpebrarum  and  irides,)  during
the  continued  fixed  stare  and  straining  of  the  eyes,  I
thought,  were  I  to  insure  all  the  other  concomitant
requirements  for  procuring  hypnotism,  minus  the
strain  on  the  leoators  and  irides,  I  ought  to  procure
refreshing  sleep,  without  rigidity  of  muscle  or  quick-
ened circulation.  By  closing  the  eyelids,  the  first
could  be  obtained,  and  by  turning  the  eyes  up
loosely,  which  dilates  the  pupils,  the  other  would
also  be  attained  ;  I  therefore  tried  the  experiment,
which,  as  already  noted,  proved  most  successful.

I  think  the  plan  I  have  just  pointed  out  is  quite  as
simple,  and  I  feel  assured  it  will  prove  as  efficacious
in  procuring  "  sleep  at  will"  as  that  of  Gardener,
lately  published  by  Dr  Binns.  I  may  add,  that  I
publicly  stated  my  plan  at  my  lectures  in  London,
on  the  1st  and  2d  March,  1842,  which  was  at  least
five  or  six  months  prior  to  the  publication  of  Dr
Binns's  work.  I  had  also  done  the  same  at  m y  lectures
in  Liverpool,  about  six  weeks  before  tliat  last  period.

Mr  Barrallier,  an  intelligent  surgeon,  of  Milford,
who  investigated  the  subject  of  Hypnotism  with  much
/eal  and  success,  and  published  some  interesting  ex-
periments on  the  subject  in  the  Medical  Times,  also
referred  to  the  case  of  a  gentleman  in  that  town,  whom
he  had  heard  of  as  having  been  in  the  habit  of  pro-


78  CAUSES  OF  PECULIAR  PHENOMENA.

curing  sleep  immediately  by  keeping  his  eyes  fixed
for  a  few  minutes  in  one  direction.  Until  he  adopted
this  method  he  scarcely  slept  at  all.  For  various
modes  of  procuring  sleep  see  pages  58-60  of  this
treatise.

In  reference  to  my  original  theory,  Dr  Binns,  at
page  372,  calls  in  question  the  justice  of  my  allega-
tion, that  during  Hypnotism,  natural  or  artificial,
there  should  be  any  imperfect  arterialization  of  the
blood,  notwithstanding  the  suppressed  or  modified
respiration  and  circulation.  He  has  adduced  no  argu-
ments, however,  to  convince  me  to  the  contrary  ;  and
I  again  repeat  my  conviction,  that  such  condition  of
the  blood  does  exist,  and  is  a  cause  of  ordinary  sleep  ;
and  that  the  still  more  intense  state  of  torpor,  in  a
certain  state  of  Neuro-Hypnotism,  results  from  a  still
less  perfectly  purified  blood  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,
that  the  dreamy  and  exalted  states  arise  from  diffe-
rent degrees  of  stimulating  properties  of  the  blood,
from  being  more  highly  arterialized  at  various  stages,
together  with  the  velocity  of  circulation,  and  pressure
or  tension  on  the  brain  during  the  cataleptiform  state.


79


CHAPTER  VI.

Introductory  remarks  —  Relation  between  mind  and  matter  illustrated  to
disprove  materialism  —  Armstrong,  Colton,  Brown,  Abercromby,
Stewart,  Plato — General  conclusion,  that  mind  or  life  is  the  cause  of
organism  —  Power  of  conscience  —  The  passions,  how  excited  —  Dr
Elliotson's  opinion  as  to  the  efficacy  or  non-efficacy  of  volition  and  sym-
pathy with  operator's  brain  —  Modes  of  dividing  the  brain  —  Causes  of
Phrenology  being  imperfect  —  Objections  to  Phreno-Hypnotism  —  Mode
of  connection  between  the  brain  and  body  —  First  attempts  at  Phreno-
logizing  during  Hypnotism  were  failures  —  Succeeded  by  operating  dif-
ferently —  Cases  illustrative  —  A  child  operates  successfully  —  Details  of
the  case  —  Other  successful  cases — Proper  time  for  operating  —  Case  of
an  officer  in  1758  —  Inferences  as  to  its  curative  powers  —  Opinions  of
Le  Roy  Sunderland,  and  Mr  Hall  —  Presumed  cause  of  phenomena
called  Cross  Magnetism  —  Return  stolen  property  to  proper  owners  and
proper  place  by  smell  and  touch  —  Power  of  hearing  faint  sounds  —
Additional  cases — Opposite  faculties  can  be  excited  at  same  time  by
acting  on  the  opposite  hemispheres  —  Mode  of  operating  —  Concluding
remarks  on  the  value  of  testimony.

I  HAVE  no  doubt  that  some  of  the  views  already
advanced,  and  the  facts  on  which  they  are  grounded,
have  appeared  startling  to  many  of  my  readers,  and
I  feel  assured  the  subject  to  be  discussed  in  the  fol-
lowing chapter  must  be  still  more  so  ;  namely,  that
during  hypnotism,  we  acquire  the  power,  through
the  nerves  of  common  sensation,  of  rousing  any  sen-
timent, feeling,  passion,  or  emotion,  and  any  mental


80  PHRENOLOGY  DOES  NOT  INVOLVE

manifestation,  according  to  our  mode  of  manipulat-
ing the  patient.  This  is  what  has  been  designated
phreno-magnetism  by  the  discoverers  of  these  curious
phenomena,  but  which,  in  accordance  with  my  no-
menclature, I  shall  designate  phrcno-hypnotism.  It
appears  with  this,  as  with  many  other  discoveries,
that  similar  investigations  were  going  forward  at
the  same  time  in  England  and  America,  while  the
discoverers  were  without  the  knowledge  of  each  other's
views  or  proceedings,  and  that  the  results  of  their
experiments  led  all  parties  to  form  analogous  con-
clusions.

It  must  be  evident  to  every  one  who  reflects  deeply
and  dispassionately  on  the  subject,  that  if  we  really
can  thus  acquire  such  power  as  to  rouse  into  great
activity  any  faculty  or  propensity,  whilst  we  diminish
the  activity  of  antagonist  faculties,  we  must  thereby
acquire  an  important  power  for  meliorating  the  moral,
intellectual,  and  physical  condition  of  man.  I  shall
have  no  difficulty  in  adducing  sufficient  proof,  that
the  human  mind  can  be  so  developed  and  acted  on
through  the  bodily  organs  ;  but,  before  entering  into
a  detail  of  the  modes  of  doing  so,  I  shall  endeavour
to  remove  a  prejudice  against  the  discussion  of  this
subject,  which  has  arisen  from  the  unhappy  circum-
stance that  some  of  those  who  promulgated  this  doc-
trine have  professed  a  belief  in  materialism.  Such  an
avowal  was  indeed  calculated  to  excite,  not  the  pre-
judices, but  the  sound  principles,  of  Christian  society
in  general  against  the  reception  or  dispassionate  con-
sideration of  the  facts  on  which  it  rested.  For  my
own  part,  I  can  see  nothing  in  the  subject  to  warrant
.such  conclusions  as  the  materialists  have  avowed  ;  and


BELIEF  IN  MATERIALISM.  81

truth  is  not  to  be  rejected,  because  misguided  men
attempt  to  build  upon  it  a  hollow  and  unseemly
superstructure.

The  following  are  my  views  of  the  relation  which
subsists  betwixt  mind  and  matter  : — I  look  upon  the
brain  simply  as  the  organ  of  the  mind,  and  the  bodily
organs  as  the  instruments  for  upholding  the  integrity
of  the  bodily  frame,  and  for  acquiring  and  extending
its  communion  with  external  nature  in  our  present
state  of  existence.  That  the  mind  acts  on  matter,
and  is  acted  on  by  matter,  according  to  the  quality
and  quantity,  and  relative  disposition  of  cerebral
development.  This,  however,  does  not  imply,  that
mind  is  a  mere  attribute  of  matter.*  My  thinking,


*  "  A  few  sounds  acting  on  the  tympanum  of  the  ear,  or  a
few  black  and  small  figures  scribbled  on  a  piece  of  white
paper  (see  Mr  Rennell's  pamphlet)  have  been  known  to  knock
a  man  down  as  effectually  as  a  sledge  hammer,  and  to  deprive
him  not  only  of  vision,  but  even  of  life.  Here,  then,  we  have
instances  of  mind  acting  upon  matter,  and  I  by  no  means
affirm  that  matter  does  not  also  act  upon  mind ;  for  to
those  who  advocate  the  intimate  connection  between  body
and  mind,  these  reciprocities  of  action  are  easily  reconcile-
able  ;  but  this  will  be  an  insuperable  difficulty  to  those  who
affirm  the  identity  of  mind  and  body."  Again,  "  This  inti-
mate union  between  body  and  mind  is,  in  fact,  analogous
to  all  that  we  see,  and  feel,  and  comprehend.  Thus,  we  ob-
serve that  the  material  stimuli  of  alcohol,  or  of  opium,  act
upon  the  mind  through  the  body,  and  that  the  moral  stimuli
of  love,  or  of  anger,  act  upon  the  body  through  the  mind  :
these  are  reciprocities  of  action  that  establish  the  principle  of
connection  between  the  two,  but  are  fatal  to  that  of  an  iden-
tity."— "  Does  not  every  passion  of  the  mind  act  directly,
F


82  REFUTATION  OF  MATERIALISM.

and  willing,  and  acting,  so  as  to  influence  the  mental
and  bodily  condition  of  another,  surely  does  not
destroy  our  separate  individuality?  As  well  might
we  say,  that  the  refined  compositions  of  a  Mozart  or
Beethoven,  which  were  conveyed  to  the  ears  of  their
delighted  auditors  through  different  instruments,
were  created  by  the  thought  and  will  of  the  instru-
ments.

It  appears  to  me  quite  clear,  that  the  musician
might  conceive,  and  compose,  and  record  every  idea,
whilst  others  could  have  no  conception  of  their  nature
or  merits,  unless  communicated  through  an  appropriate
instrument  or  instruments.  The  musician  and  instru-
ment, therefore,  are  distinct  in  their  nature,  as  the
soul  and  the  bodily  organs  are  essentially  distinct
from  each  other.

I  shall  endeavour  to  illustrate  my  views  by  the

primarily,  and,  as  it  were,  per  se  upon  the  body,  with  greater
or  with  lesser  influence  in  proportion  to  their  force  ?  Does
not  the  activity  belong  on  this  occasion  to  the  mind,  and  the
mere  passiveness  to  the  body  ?  Does  not  the  quickened  cir-
culation follow  the  anger,  the  start  the  surprise,  and  the  swoon
the  sorrow !  Do  not  these  instances,  and  a  thousand  others,
clearly  convince  us  that  priority  of  action  here  belongs  to  the
mind,  and  not  to  the  body?  and  those  who  deny  this,  are
reduced  to  the  ridiculous  absurdity  of  attempting  to  prove
that  a  man  is  frightened  because  he  runs  away,  not  that  he
runs  away  because  he  is  frightened,  and  that  the  motion  pro-
duces the  terror,  not  the  terror  the  motion." — Colton's  Lucon.
The  same  author  also  urges  the  argument  effectively  by  an
appeal  to  the  fact  of  mania  being  so  frequently  produced  by
moral  causes,  and  the  success  which  lias  attended  the  treat-
ment of  the  insane  by  strict  attention  to  moral  management.


REFUTATION  OF  MATERIALISM.  83

following  simile.  Suppose  the  instrument  is  good,
and  well  fitted  for  expressing  musical  composition,  it
is  evident,  that  it  will  better  convey  the  beauties  of
the  composition,  than  if  represented  by  a  bad  or  in-
different instrument ;  and  will  also  afford  more  delight,
and  satisfaction,  and  encouragement  to  the  farther
exertions  of  the  composer,  than  if  performed  on  a
bad  instrument.  Just  so  the  mind  furnished  with  a
well  developed  brain.  Supposing  the  musical  instru-
ment is  very  perfect  in  some  parts,  but  very  imperfect
in  others,  it  is  evident,  that  the  musician  can  afford
more  pleasure  to  others,  as  well  as  more  satisfaction  to
himself,  by  playing  on  the  more  perfect  parts.  Then>
supposing  the  parts  played  on  capable  of  becoming
improved,  by  being  so  exercised,  (which  is  the  case
with  several  instruments,  as  the  violin,)  it  is  clear,
that  there  will  be  greater  and  greater  inducement  for
the  musician  to  confine  himself  to  the  better  parts  of
the  instrument,  and  thus,  by  concentrating  his  whole
energies  to  these  points,  he  will  more  and  more
enamour  himself,  as  well  as  his  auditors,  by  the  per-
fection of  his  performances.

This  is  exactly  what  I  conceive  takes  place  in  refe-
rence to  the  brain,  supposing  different  parts  to  be
appropriated  as  the  instruments  for  the  manifestation
of  different  mental  functions.  Every  part  of  the
human  frame  is  continually  undergoing  the  process
of  waste  and  repair  —  that  is  to  say,  the  molecular
particles  of  the  various  organs  are  continually  chang-
ing, and  moderate  exercise  tends  to  increased  develop-
ment and  power,  whilst  inaction  has  the  opposite
tendency.  This  no  one  will  deny.  The  analogy,
therefore,  is  complete.  The  soul  or  mind,  by  being


84  REFUTATION  OF  MATERIALISM.

exercised  judiciously  in  a  particular  direction,  streng-
thens some  peculiar  organ,  and  acquires  precision  from
habit,  which  gives  a  tendency  to  perseverance  in  the
same  course  of  action  ;  and,  by  refraining  from  certain
practices,  the  corresponding  organs  become  feeble,  and
thus  exercise  a  less  powerful  influence  on  the  mind.
Thus  we  can  account  for  the  power  of  habit,  both
physical  and  mental,  each  tending  to  strengthen  the
other  by  correct  training ;  and  it  is  on  this  prin-
ciple that  we  can  hope  to  meliorate  the  condition  of
the  vicious  members  of  society,  by  separating  them
from  bad  companions  and  practices,  and  encouraging
them  in  the  exercise  of  virtuous  habits.

Moreover,  the  mind  of  the  musician  may  conceive
and  excite  into  activity  the  corresponding  organs  of
the  brain  ;  these  may  react  on  his  corporeal  organs,
and  excite  into  activity  the  silent  lyre ;  all  these  links
of  intercommunication  may  be  perfected,  without
conveying  any  corresponding  feeling  or  emotion  to
the  minds  of  others,  unless  they  are  provided  with
appropriate  recipient  organs  (musical  ears)  for  con-
veying to  their  brains  certain  vibrations,  and  thus
inducing  in  corresponding  parts  of  their  brains  such
a  condition  as  may  awaken  in  their  minds  certain
associations  of  ideas,  and  manifest  the  peculiar  emo-
tions which  arise  from  them.  It  is  not  enough  that
we  have  part  of  this  concatenation  complete;  the
whole  must  be  complete,  or  the  results  cannot  be
perfect.*

*  Some  time  after  I  had  written  the  above,  I  had  the  satis-
faction to  meet  with  a  somewhat  analogous  illustration  from
the  pen  of  the  late  celebrated  Dr  John*  Armstrong,  which  I
uow  quote  from  his  work  on  Fever,  p.  478  ; —


DH  ARMSTRONG'S  OPINION.  85

The  same  arguments  might  be  enforced  in  respect
to  the  painter,  and  sculptor,  and  orator,  but  it  appears

"  It  will  have  been  perceived,  that  I  consider  insanity  as
the  effect  of  some  disorder  in  the  circulation,  whether  pro-
duced by  agencies  of  a  corporeal  or  mental  nature.  It  might
be  shewn  by  familiar  facts,  that  the  brain  is  the  principal
organ  through  which  the  operations  of  the  mind  are  per-
formed ;  and  it  does  not,  as  many  have  supposed,  necessarily
involve  the  doctrine  of  materialism  to  affirm,  that  certain
disorders  of  that  organ  are  capable  of  disturbing  those  opera-
tions. If  the  most  skilful  musician  in  the  world  were  placed
before  an  unstrung  or  broken  instrument,  he  could  not  pro-
duce the  harmony  which  he  was  accustomed  to  do  when  that
instrument  was  perfect,  nay,  on  the  contrary,  the  sounds
would  be  discordant ;  and  yet  it  would  be  manifestly  most
illogical  to  conclude,  from  such  an  effect,  that  the  powers  of
the  musician  were  impaired,  since  they  merely  appeared  to
be  so  from  the  imperfection  of  the  instrument.  Now,  what
the  instrument  is  to  the  musician,  the  brain  may  be  to  the
mind,  for  ought  we  know  to  the  contrary  ;  and  to  pursue  the
figure,  as  the  musician  has  an  existence  distinct  from  that  of
the  instrument,  so  the  mind  may  have  an  existence  distinct
from  that  of  the  brain  ;  for  in  truth  we  have  no  proof  what-
ever of  mind  being  a  property  dependent  upon  any  arrange-
ment of  matter.  We  perceive,  indeed,  the  properties  of
matter  wonderfully  modified  in  the  various  things  of  the
universe,  which  strike  our  senses  with  the  force  of  their
sublimity  or  beauty  ;  but  in  all  these  we  recognize  certain
radical  and  common  properties,  that  bear  no  conceivable
relation  to  those  mysterious  capacities  of  thought  and  of
feeling,  referable  to  that  something  which,  to  designate  and
distinguish  from  matter,  we  term  mind.  In  this  way,  I  con-
ceive, the  common  sense  of  mankind  has  made  the  distinction
which  every  where  obtains  between  mind  and  matter,  for  it
is  natural  to  conclude,  that  the  essence  of  mind  may  be  dis-


86  MR  H.  MAYO  S  OPINION.

to  my  mind  so  evident  by  what  has  already  been
advanced,  that  I  forbear  extending  my  illustrations,

tinct  from  the  essence  of  matter,  as  the  operations  of  the  one
are  so  distinct  from  the  properties  of  the  other.  But  when
we  say  that  mind  is  immaterial,  we  only  mean,  that  it  has
not  the  properties  of  matter ;  for  the  consciousness  which
informs  us  of  the  operations,  does  not  reveal  the  abstract
nature  of  mind,  neither  do  the  properties  reveal  the  essence
of  matter.  When  any  one,  therefore,  asserts  the  materiality
of  mind,  he  presupposes,  that  the  phenomena  of  matter
clearly  shew  the  real  cause  of  mind,  which,  as  they  do  not,
he  unphilosophically  places  his  argument  on  an  assumption.
And  his  ground  of  reasoning  is  equally  gratuitous,  when  he
contends  that  mind  is  an  attribute  of  matter,  because  it  is
never  known  to  operate  but  in  conjunction  with  matter,  for
though  this  connection  is  continually  displayed,  yet  we  have
no  direct  proof  of  its  being  necessary."

In  like  manner,  Mr  Herbert  Mayo,  in  the  introduction  to
his  late  work  on  the  Nervous  System  and  its  Functions,  writes
thus :  — "  Life  is  a  force  so  contrived  and  used,  as  to  qualify
the  materials  of  the  inert  world  for  a  temporary  union  with
consciousness,  —  a  means  how  mind  may  enter  into  such
relations  with  matter,  that  it  may  have  its  being  and  part  in
physical  nature,  and  its  faculties  developed,  and  its  capabili-
ties and  tendencies  drawn  out  and  proved  (for  whatever  ulte-
rior purpose)  in  subjection  to,  and  in  harmony  with,  her
laws.

"  As  we  imagine  the  Supreme  Mind  to  be  ubiquitous,
infinite,  controlling,  but  uncontrolled  by  matter,  so  in  con-
trast with  these  attributes  we  conceive  the  finite  mind  to  be
bound  down  to  place,  and  to  be  dependent  on  a  certain
arrangement  of  matter  for  its  manifestation,  each  power  dis-
played as  the  property  of  a  tissue,  each  agency  as  the  function
of  an  organ.

"  These  views  do  not  lead  to  materialism. For  one  cannot


ARGUMENT  DRAWN  FROM  MEMORY. 87

conceiving  them  to  be  unnecessary.  I  therefore  con-
clude that  the  soul  and  the  brain  are  essentially  quite
distinct,  and  stand  much  in  the  same  relation  to  each
other  as  the  musician  and  musical  instrument.

Another  powerful  argument  of  the  mind  being  an
independent  essence,  is  the  fact,  that  amidst  the  con-
tinued changes  which  we  know  are  going  on  in  the
physical  frame,  we  still  recognize  personal  identity ;
and  the  remembrance  of  occurrences,  even  of  early
life,  after  every  particle  of  the  body  has  been  changed
several  times,  is  reconcileable  with  the  idea  of  the
original  mind  merely  having  exchanged  and  reno-
vated the  substance  of  its  dwelling-place ;  but  how
can  we  suppose  that  each  particle  had,  in  retiring,
transferred  its  quantum  of  knowledge  to  the  particle
of  matter  which  was  to  supply  its  place  ?

Colton's  remark  seems  very  just  when  he  says,  —
"  Many  causes  are  now  conspiring  to  increase  the
trunk  of  infidelity,  but  materialism  is  the  main  root
of  them  all."  I  have  therefore  endeavoured,  and  I
hope,  by  what  has  already  been  said,  with  some  suc-
cess, to  prove,  that  the  belief  in  the  brain  being  the
organ  of  the  mind,  leads  only  to  the  admission  of  the

disjoin  the  physiology  of  the  nervous  system  from  mental
philosophy,  nor  investigate  the  play  of  its  organs  without
attending  to  the  mind  itself.  And  if  equal  consideration  is
given  to  the  two  classes  of  phenomena,  it  is  impossible  (so  at
least  it  appears  to  myself)  to  avoid  the  conviction,  that  they
are  essentially  independent  the  one  of  the  other,  and  belong
to  distinct  essences  ;  and  that  ipseity,  the  consciousness  of
personal  being,  is  not  a  mode  of  material  existence,  nor
physical  impenetrability  an  attribute  of  that  which  feels  and
thinks."


88  PHRENOLOGY  CONFIRMS

necessity  of  certain  conditions  of  matter,  in  order  to
make  the  varied  conditions  of  mind  manifest  to
ourselves  and  other  beings  with  which  we  are  sur-
rounded during  the  present  state  of  our  existence.
The  charge  against  the  doctrine  of  phrenology,  there-
fore, as  leading  to  a  belief  in  materialism,  is  altogether
unfounded  ;  for  phrenology  merely  professes  to  appro-
priate to  separate  portions  of  the  brain  the  execution
of  special  functions  or  manifestations,  which  are  gene-
rally admitted,  without  hesitation,  to  result  from  its
functions  as  a  single  organ.  I  might  therefore  at
once  dismiss  the  subject,  leaving  the  doctrines  of  the
existence  of  a  God,  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul,
to  the  defence  of  many  able  writers  on  that  depart-
ment of  mental  philosophy.  However,  as  it  appears
to  me  that  an  argument  of  considerable  strength,  in
support  of  both  these  doctrines,  may  be  drawn  from
the  doctrines  of  phrenology,  or  the  allocation  of  special
functions  to  particular  portions  of  the  brain,  I  think
it  may  not  be  out  of  place  for  me  very  briefly  to
advert  to  these  topics.

The  concurrent  notions  and  practices  of  all  nations,
savage  as  well  as  civilized,  clearly  indicate  their  in-
ward belief  in  a  superintendent  power  who  rules  th'e
destinies  of  man  and  of  nations,  as  verified  by  their
varied  forms  of  worship.  Phrenology,  as  illustrated
by  Hypnotism,  does  more  — it  proves  that  there  is  a
particular  portion  of  the  brain  which  the  mind  may
use  as  an  organ  destined  for  the  especial  purpose  of
adoration  ;  and,  as  nothing  has  been  made  in  vain,
<>r  without  a  final  cause,  we  may  safely  infer  that  such
an  organ  would  never  have  been  made  had  it  not  been
intended  to  be  exercised ;  and  how  could  it  have  been


THE  CHRISTIAN  CREED.  89

exercised  worthily  had  there  been  no  suitable  object  of
adoration  ?  The  very  fact,  therefore,  of  the  existence  of
such  a  special  organ  having  been  ascertained,  stamps
the  folly  of  the  Atheist ;  and,  as  we  have  proved  that
mind  is  not  necessarily  a  mere  attribute  of  organized
matter,  but  a  distinct  essence,  we  cannot  suppose  it
to  be  more  perishable  than  matter  ;  and  as  it  is  an
acknowledged  fact,  that  matter,  so  far  as  we  can
apprehend,  is  essentially  indestructible,  analogy  would
lead  us  to  infer,  that  the  mind,  the  more  important
part  of  man,  will  not  be  less  imperishable  ;  and,  con-
sequently, the  most  rational  conclusion  to  which  we
can  arrive  is,  that  the  soul  is  immortal.

"  There  is  mind,  then,  as  well  as  matter,  or  rather,
if  there  be  a  difference  of  the  degrees  of  evidence,
there  is  mind,  more  surely  than  there  is  matter  ;  and
if  at  death  not  a  single  atom  of  the  body  perishes,  but
that  which  we  term  dissolution,  decay,  putrefaction,
is  only  a  change  of  the  relative  positions  of  those
atoms,  which  in  themselves  continue  to  exist  with  all
the  qualities  which  they  before  possessed,  there, is
surely  no  reason,  from  this  mere  change  of  place  of
the  atoms  that  formed  the  body,  to  infer,  with  respect
to'the  independent  mind,  any  other  change  than  that
of  its  mere  relation  to  those  separate  atoms.  The
continued  subsistence  of  every  thing  corporeal  cannot,
at  least,  be  regarded  as  indicative  of  the  annihilation
of  the  other  substance,  but  must,  on  the  contrary,  as
far  as  the  mere  analogy  of  the  body  is  of  any  weight,
be  regarded  as  a  presumption  in  favour  of  the  con-
tinued subsistence  of  the  mind,  when  there  is  nothing
around  it  which  has  perished,  and  nothing  even
which  has  perished,  in  the  whole  material  universe,


90  OPINIONS  OF  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

since  the  universe  itself  was  called  into  being."  Dr
Thomas  Brown.

"  The  mind  remembers,  conceives,  combines,  and
reasons;  it  loves,  it  fears,  and  hopes  in  the  total
absence  of  any  impression  from  without,  that  can
influence,  in  the  smallest  degree,  these  emotions  ;  and
we  have  Ihe  fullest  conviction  that  it  would  continue
to  exercise  the  same  functions  in  undiminished
activity,  though  all  material  things  were  at  ouce
annihilated." — Abercrombie.

Mr  Stewart  also  says,  "  Of  all  the  truths  we  know,
the  existence  of  mind  is  the  most  certain.  Even  the
system  of  Berkeley  concerning  the  non-existence  of
matter,  is  far  more  conceivable,  than  that  nothing  but
matter  exists  in  the  universe."

Plato  also  wrote  thus  : — "The  body  being  com-
pounded, is  dissolved  by  death  ;  the  soul,  being  simple,
passetli  into  another  life,  incapable  of  corruption."

That  accomplished  physician  and  metaphysician,
Dr  Abercrombie,  after  relating  the  effects  on  memory
of  diseases  and  disorders  of  the  brain,  with,  in  many
instances,  serious  organic  lesion,  concludes  thus  :  "One
thing,  however,  is  certain,  that  they  give  no  counte-
nance to  the  doctrine  of  materialism,  which  some
have  presumptuously  deduced  from  a  very  partial  view
of  the  influence  of  cerebral  disease  upon  the  manifes-
tations of  mind.  They  shew  us,  indeed,  in  a  very
striking  manner,  the  mind  holding  intercourse  with
the  external  world  through  the  medium  of  the  brain
and  nervous  system  ;  and,  by  certain  diseases  of  these
organs,  they  shew  this  intercourse  impaired  or  sus-
pended ;  but  they  shew  nothing  more.  In  particular,
they  warrant  nothing  in  any  degree  analogous  to  those


MIXD  THE  CAUSE  OF  ORGANISM.  91'

partial  deductions  which  form  the  basis  of  materialism.
Ou  the  contrary,  they  shew  us  the  brain  injured  and
diseased  to  an  extraordinary  extent,  without  the  men-
tal functions  being  affected  in  any  sensible  degree."
(This  power  no  doubt  arises  from  each  hemisphere
having  corresponding  organs,  and  consequently  when
only  one  is  diseased,  the  other  may  be  adequate  to  the
manifestation  of  the  mental  phenomena.)  "  They
shew  us  farther,  the  manifestations  of  mind  obscured
for  a  time,  and  yet  reviving  in  all  their  original  vigour
almost  in  the  very  moment  of  dissolution.  Finally,
they  exhibit  to  us  the  mind,  cut  off  from  all  inter-
course with  the  external  world,  recalling  its  old  im-
pressions, even  of  things  long  forgotten,  and  exercis-
ing its  powers  on  those  which  had  long  ceased  to
exist,  in  a  manner  totally  irreconcilable  with  any
idea  we  can  form  of  a  material  function."  On  the
Intellectual  Powers,  pp.  154,  155.

In  addition  to  what  I  have  already  advanced  in  re-
futation of  the  doctrine  of  materialism,  I  beg  to  b\ib-
mit  what  appears  to  me  much  more  probable  than
that  mental  manifestations  are  the  result  of  mere
organism,  —  namely,  that  organism  is  the  result  of
mind,  or  the  principle  of  life  influencing  or  directing
organism  in  accordance  with  what  may  be  its  especial
wants  and  desires.  We  know  that  every  seed  of  a
plant  has  a  principle  of  life  imparted  to  it  by  the  great
first  cause  of  all,  by  which,  when  sown  in  congenial
soil,  it  will  exert  its  powers,  and  appropriate  to  itself
materials  from  the  soil,  to  form  an  organism  in  accor-
dance with  its  peculiar  wants  and  nature ;  and  that,
having  passed  through  certain  conditions,  and  formed
other  kindred  seed  or  germs  to  propagate  its  kind


92  MIND  AND  LIFE

under  a  return  of  favouring  circumstances,  the  plant
dies,  and  is  resolved  into  its  original  elements.  Man
and  animals  also  possess  similar  faculties  for  propa-
gating and  multiplying  their  species ;  and  to  me  it
appears  far  more  probable,  that  the  peculiar  organism
of  each  variety  results  from  the  vivifying  or  intelligent
principle  we  call  life  or  mind  (and  no  one  denies  the
existence  of  the  former,  although  we  know  nothing
of  its  essence  or  mode  of  operation,)  directing  and  de-
termining appropriate  formation,  than  that  the  mere
accidental  union  of  particles  of  matter,  in  definite
quantity  and  form,  should  be  the  cause  of  mental  phe-
nomena.* Itis  truewecan  here  only  speak  of  analogies,
but  the  analogy  in  favour  of  this  proposition  seems  far
more  natural  and  probable  than  the  other.  Is  it  not,
for  example,  a  priori,  as  probable,  on  viewing  a  well
planned  factory,  fitted  up  with  what  is  called  self-acting
machinery,  for  us  to  suppose  that  the  whole  should
have  been  planned,  and  the  machinery  constructed,
in  accordance  with  the  intelligent  designs  of  a  skilful
artist,  as  that  the  brute  matter,  of  which  the  whole  is
constructed,  came  into  its  particular  forms  and  arrange-
ments of  its  own  accord,  or  by  accident,  and  thus  pro-
duced the  intelligence  of  the  superintending  possessor?
The  higher  and  more  perfect  the  original  force,  or  life,

*  The  original  identity  of  structure  of  the  germ  of  the  most
various  organic  beings,  constituted,  as  it  always  is,  of  a  cell,
with  a  nucleus,  seems  to  prove,  that  the  cause  of  the  variety
of  classes,  families,  genera,  and  species  of  animals  and  plants
developed  from  the  germ,  resides  not  in  the  structure  or
chemical  property  of  the  germ,  but  in  the  idea  or  spirit
implanted  in  it  at  its  creation."  (Miiller,  p.  1339.)


THE  CAUSE  OF  ORGANISM.  93

or  spirit,  originally  imparted  into  each  species,  the
more  complex  and  extensive  should  we  expect  to  find
the  corresponding  organism,  to  adapt  it  for  the  suitable
performance  of  its  more  varied  functions  ;  and  it  there-
fore was  necessary  for  man  to  have  that  superiority,
even  in  the  form  and  functions  of  his  hands,  in  which
he  so  much  surpasses  that  of  all  other  animals,  to  fit
him  for  the  execution  of  the  more  extended  range  of
operations,  which  his  superior  endowments  and  cere-
bral organism  fitted  him  to  devise.

In  this  view  of  the  subject,  (and  it  appears  to  me,
after  consulting  the  various  opinions  of  our  ablest
authorities  on  life  and  organization,  to  be  the  most
satisfactory  conclusion  I  could  arrive  at,)  every  plant
or  animal,  however  minute,  may  have  a  particular
vital  or  directing  principle  originally  imparted  to  it,
and  still  sustained  in  its  power  by  the  great  Creator,
without  the  necessity  of  according  to  each  an  immor-
tal existence  and  responsibility.  Nor  is  there  any
thing  irreconcilable  in  the  supposition  that  man,  with
higher  original  powers,  and  more  perfect  organism,
fitting  him  to  use  these  appropriately,  and  who  is  the
highest  link  in  the  chain,  in  this  world,  between
inorganic  matter  and  the  Supreme  Being,  should  be
constituted  a  responsible  agent,  and  exist  hereafter,
whilst  those  creatures  with  less  expansive  faculties,
both  of  life  and  organization,  may  be  exempted  from
such  ultimate  responsibility,  and  may  not  be  immortal.

This  is  only  analogous  to  what  we  see  in  respect  to
a  commanding  officer  and  his  men,  the  former  only
being  responsible  for  imprudent  enterprises,  the
latter  being  considered  merely  as  instruments  in  his
hands.


94  POWER  OF  CONSCIENCE.

I  shall  close  these  remarks  on  the  immortality  of
the  soul  by  a  quotation  from  that  excellent  work,
"  Abercrombie  on  the  Intellectual  Powers."  "  This
momentous  truth  rests  on  a  species  of  evidence  alto-
gether different,  which  addresses  itself  to  the  moral
constitution  of  man.  It  is  found  in  those  principles
of  his  nature  by  which  he  feels  upon  his  spirit  the
awe  of  a  God,  and  looks  forward  to  the  future  with
anxiety  or  with  hope,  —  by  which  he  knows  to  dis-
tinguish truth  from  falsehood,  and  evil  from  good,  and
has  forced  upon  him  the  conviction  that  he  is  a  moral
and  responsible  being.  This  is  the  power  of  con-
science, that  monitor  within,  which  raises  its  voice  in
the  breast  of  every  man,  a  witness  for  his  Creator.
He  who  resigns  himself  to  its  guidance,  and  he  who
repels  its  warnings,  are  both  compelled  to  acknow-
ledge its  power  ;  and  whether  the  good  man  rejoices
in  the  prospect  of  immortality,  or  the  victim  of  re-
morse withers  beneath  an  influence  unseen  by  human
eye,  and  shrinks  from  the  anticipation  of  a  reckoning
to  come,  each  has  forced  upon  him  a  conviction,  such
as  argument  never  gave,  that  the  being  which  is
essentially  himself  is  distinct  from  any  function  of  the
bo.Iy,  and  will  survive  in  undiminished  vigour  when
the  body  shall  have  fallen  into  decay.

"  There  is  thus,  in  the  consciousness  of  every  man,
a  deep  impression  of  continued  existence.  The  casuist
may  reason  against  it  till  he  bewilder  himself  in  his
own  sophistries ;  but  a  voice  within  gives  the  lie  to
his  vain  speculations,  and  pleads  with  authority  for  a
life  which  is  to  come.  The  sincere  and  humble
inquirer  cherishes  the  impression,  while  he  seeks  for
farther  light  on  a  subject  so  momentous,  and  ho


PASSIONS  EXCITED  BY  MUSIC.  95

thus  receives,  with  absolute  conviction,  the  truth
which  beams  upon  him  from  the  revelation  of  God,  that
the  mysterious  part  of  his  being,  which  thinks,  and
wills,  and  reasons,  shall  indeed  survive  the  wreck  of
its  mortal  tenement,  and  is  destined  for  immor-
tality."*

It  must  be  obvious  to  all,  that  every  variety  of
passion  and  emotion  can  be  excited  in  the  mind  by
music ;  but  how  does  this  arise  ?  Simply  by  the
different  effects  produced  by  the  varied  degrees  of
velocity,  force,  quality,  and  combinations  of  the
oscillations  of  the  air  acting  on  the  auditory  nerves,
these  again  communicated  to  the  brain,  and  this  acting
on  the  mind  and  body,  creating  corresponding  mental
and  bodily  manifestations.  Every  one  must  have
observed  the  remarkable  effects  evinced  by  these
means  on  the  physiognomy,  and  the  more  critically
observant  must  have  noticed,  that  in  susceptible
individuals  there  is  also  a  very  marked  change  in  the
state  of  the  respiration  and  general  posture  of  the
body.  They  must  also  have  experienced,  in  them-
selves and  others,  how  prone  we  are  to  assume  a

*  To  those  who  wish  to  pursue  the  subject  farther,  I  beg
to  refer  to  Dr  Samuel  Clarke  on  the  Being  and  Attributes  of
God,  pp.  70 — 75  ;  Jackson  on  Matter  and  Mind,  pp.  41 — 47,
51  ;  Warburton's  Divine  Legation,  vol.  T.  book  3d  ;  Drew's
Essay  on  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul ;  and  Ramsay's  Prin-
ciples, pp.  233  —  5  ;  also  Brougham  and  Bakewell,  where
they  will  find  it  ably  argued  as  far  as  Natural  Theology  can
avail  ;  but  the  sacred  volume  contains  a  lucidity  and  sanc-
tion beyond  all  we  can  adduce  from  mere  human  ingenuity,
and  I  therefore  conclude  by  referring  to  it,  as  "  life  and  im-
mortality are  clearly  brought  to  light  through  the  Gospel."


96  CAUSES  OF  THE  PHENOMENA.

sympathetic  condition,  both  of  mind  and  body,  from
those  with  whom  we  associate,  or  during  a  temporary
interview. These  physical  changes seem to result
from  a  mental  influence  imparted  through  the  eyes
and  ears,  and  then  reflected  from  within,  through  the
respiratory,  facial,  and  spinal  nerves,  on  the  external
form  and  features. Now,  such  being  the  case,  is  there
any  great  improbability,  that  by  calling  the  muscles
of  expression  into  action  during  the  hypnotic  state,
by  titillating  certain  nerves,  that  the  impression  of
the  feeling  with  which  such  external  manifestation  is
generally  associated  should  be  reflected  on  the  brain,
and  excite  in  the  mind  the particular  passion  or
emotion  ? I  think  it  is  highly  probable  this  is  the
true  cause  of  the  phrenological  manifestations  during
the  hypnotic condition ; and  as  it  is  the  peculiar
feature  of  this  condition,  that  the  whole  energies  of
the  soul should  be concentrated  on  the emotion
excited,  the  manifestation,  of  course,  becomes  very
decided. I  presume  the  different  points  pressed  on,
through  the  stimulus  given  to  various fasciculi of
nerves,  call into action certain combinations of
muscles  of  expression  in  the  face  and  general  frame,
and  also  influence  the  organs  of  respiration,  and  thus
the  mind  is  influenced,  indirectly,  through  the  organs
of  common  sensation  and  the  sympathetic,  as  sneezing
is  excited  in  some  by  too  strong  a  light  irritating  the
optic  nerves. Two  patients  who  are  highly  intelli-
gent, and remain partially conscious, and who
acknowledge  they  did  all  in  their  power  to  resist  the
influence  excited  by  manipulating  the  head,  state,  that
the  first  feeling  was  a  drawing  of  the  muscles  of  the
face,  and  affection  of  the  breathing,  which  was  fol-


SITUATION  OF  SYMPATHETIC  POINTS.  97

lowed  by  an  irresistible  impulse  to  act  as  they  did,
but  why  they  could  not  tell.

In  this  view  of  the  subject  it  would  resolve  itself
into  the  laws  of  sympathy,  and  the  question  then  is,
where  are  the  external  or  superficial  points  of  the
sympathies  located?  Experience  must  decide  this,
and  in  the  peculiar  condition  induced  by  hypnotism,
according  to  my  own  experience,  this  can  be  more
readily  and  certainly  determined  than  in  the  normal
state.  These  points  having  been  ascertained,  we  can
then  determine  how  and  where  to  act  according  to
our  particular  object ;  and  it  can  be  of  no  real  impor-
tance where  the  cerebral  points  or  special  organs  may
be  posited.

As  to  the  real  locations  of  the  sympathetic  points,
by  stimulating  which  we  produce  peculiar  manifesta-
tions, they  appear  to  me  not  to  be  quite  accurately
the  same  in  all  heads,  but,  on  the  whole,  pretty  near
the  centres  of  the  organs  as  mapped  out  on  heads
generally  approved  by  phrenologists,  and  I  have  had
decided  proof  that  there  is  some  relation  subsists
betwixt  the  size  and  function,  as  in  general  there  is
more  energy  displayed  when  there  is  large  develop-
ment, and  the  negative  when  it  is  defective.  Thus,
a  patient  with  large  combativeness  or  destructiveness,
when  excited  during  hypnotism,  will  display  great
violence  and  disposition  to  attack  others,  whereas,
where  they  are  defective,  they  will  shrink  and  express
a  fear  that  some  one  is  quarrelling,  or  angry  with
them.

If  the  solution  of  the  cause  of  these  remarkable
phenomena  now  given  should  not  be  deemed  correct,
the  only  other  which  occurs  to  my  mind  as  at  all
G


98  DR  EILIOTSON'S  OPINIONS

satisfactory,  is  this,  that  the  different  fasciculi  of  sen-
tient nerves  excite  directly  the  corresponding  points
of  the  brain,  and  these  again  the  physical  manifesta-
tions. We  know  by  what  musical  combinations  and
movements  we  can  excite  the  different  passions  ;  we
know  also  that  this  arises  from  some  peculiar  im-
pression communicated  to  the  brain  through  the
portio  mollis  of  the  seventh  pair  of  nerves;  and
whether  this  is  conveyed  to  it  as  a  single  organ  only,
or  as  a  combination  of  organs,  it  is  clear  that,  as  the
origin  of  the  seventh  is  more  remote  from  the  brain
than  the  origin  of  theyz/M,  there  must,  consequently,
be  at  least  as  great  difficulty  in  accounting  for  such
results  being  excited  through  the  different  branches
of  the  seventh  as  through  those  of  the  fifth  pair.

The  animal  magnetizers  do  not  now  contend
for  their  volitions  being  necessary.  Dr  Elliotson
distinctly  states,  in  a  published  letter,  dated  llth
September,  1842,  that  he  had  "  never  produced  any
effect  by  mere  willing  ;"  and  adds,  "  I  have  never  seen
reason  to  believe,  (and  I  have  made  innumerable
comparative  experiments  upon  the  point,)  that  I  have
heightened  the  effect  of  my  processes  by  exerting  the
strongest  will,  or  lessened  them  by  thinking  inten-
tionally of  other  things,  and  endeavouring  to  bestow
no  more  attention  upon  what  I  was  about  than  was
just  necessary  to  carry  on  the  process.  So  far  from
willing,  I  have  at  first  had  no  idea  of  what  would  be
the  effect  of  my  processes  ;  in  exciting  the  cerebral
organs,  the  effect  ensues  as  well  in  my  female  paiii-nt
though  the  manipulator  be  a  sceptic,  and  may  there-
fore be  presumed  not  to  wish  the  proper  result  to
ensue,  and  though  I  stand  aside,  and  do  not  know


AS  TO  VOLITION  AND  SYMPATHY.  99

what  organ  he  has  in  view.  I  have  never  excited
them  by  the  mere  will  ;  I  have  excited  them  with  my
fingers  just  as  well  when  thinking  of  other  matters
with  my  friends,  and  momentarily  forgetting  what  I
was  about,"  &c.  The  Doctor  also  denies  his  belief  in
the  phrenological  results  arising  from  sympathy  with
the  state  of  the  operator's  brain.  I  feel  convinced  that
he  is  right  in  these  sentiments,  and  believe  that  the
same  degree  of  mechanical  pressure  or  stimulus  to  the
integuments  of  the  cranium,  from  an  inanimate  sub-
stance, when  the  patient  is  in  the  proper  stage  of  the
mesmeric  condition,  will  produce  the  same  manifesta-
tion as  the  personal  touch  of  either  sceptic  or  believer
in  animal  magnetism.  Thus,  touching  them  with  a
knobbed  gla.ss  rod,  three  feet  long,  has  produced  the
phenomena  with  my  patients  as  certainly  as  personal
contact,  so  th<it  if  there  is  any  thing  of  vital  magnetism
in  it,  it  is  subject  to  different  laws  from  that  of  ordi-
nary magnetism  or  electricity.

Mere  pointing  I  have  myself  found  sufficient  to
excite  the  manifestations  in  several  patients,  after
previous  excitement  of  the  organs,  but  this  arises
from  feeling,  as  I  know  the  sensibility  of  the  skin
in  those  cases  enables  them  to  feel  without  actual
contact.

The  following  experiment  seems  to  me  to  prove
clearly  that  the  manifestations  were  entirely  attri-
butable to  the  mechanical  pressure  operating  on  an
excited  state  of  the  nervous  system.  I  placed  a  cork
endways  over  the  organ  of  veneration,  and  bound  it
in  that  position  by  a  bandage  passing  under  the  chin.
I  now  hypnotized  the  patient,  and  observed  the
effect,  which  was  precisely  the  same,  for  some  time,


100  EFFECTS  OF  SIMPLE  PRESSURE.

as  when  no  such  appliance  was  used  ;  after  a  minute
and  a  half  had  elapsed,  an  altered  expression  of
countenance  took  place,  and  a  movement  of  the  arms
and  hands,  which  latter  became  clasped  as  in  adora-
tion, and  the  patient  now  arose  from  the  seat  and
knelt  down  as  if  engaged  in  prayer.  On  moving  the
cork  forwards,  active  benevolence  was  manifested,
and  on  being  pushed  back,  veneration  again  mani-
fested itself.  I  have  repeatedly  tried  similar  experi-
ments with  this,  and  other  «patients,  with  the  like
results,  including  other  organs.  It  is  clear  there  was
no  mechanical  pressure  to  direct  the  movement  down-
wards^ because  there  was  pressure  upwards  also  ;  and
had  there  been  any  preconceived  notion  in  the  patient's
mind,  to  excite  to  such  action,  it  ought  to  have  been
manifested  immediately  on  passing  into  the  sleep.  None
of  the  patients  had  the  slightest  notion  of  what  was
my  object  in  making  such  experiments,  and  none  of
them  saw  the  others  operated  on.  At  page  141,  it
will  be  observed,  pressure  by  their  own  fingers  pro-
duced similar  manifestations,  even  whilst  their  minds
were  expecting  some  other  restilts.

Whilst  it  is  generally  agreed  that  the  brain
admits  of  being  divided  into  regions  for  the  animal
propensities,  moral  sentiments,  and  intellectual  facul-
ties, it  has  not  been  at  all  possible  to  prove  satisfac-
torily the  exact  position  and  size  of  each  organ,  as
noted  by  the  phrenologists.  Granting  that  there  is  a
distinct  organ  or  point  in  the  brain  for  each  faculty,
which  I  think  is  highly  probable,  still  there  must
ever  be  insuperable  difficulty  in  thus  accurately  deter-
mining character,  even  supposing  we  knew  the  exact
position  and  size  of  each  organ,  because  much  must


PHRENOLOGY  WHY  IMPERFECT. 101

depend  upon  the  state  of  perfection  of  structure,  and
activity  of  the  point  or  organ,  as  well  as  its  absolute
size.  Thus,  a  person  with  a  large  eye  may  have  defec-
tive sight,  whilst  a  person  with  a  small  eye  may  see
clearly  and  distinctly,  the  greater  perfection  of  struc-
ture, and  activity  of  the  optic  nerves,  more  than
compensating  for  mere  deficiency  of  size.  So  it  is
with  the  brain,  a  part  may  be  abnormally  large,  and
the  faculty  dull,  from  want  of  power  or  activity,  or
perfection  of  organic  structure  ;  and  the  reverse  may
obtain,  a  small  development,  with  high  activity,  may
render  its  function  predominant.  It  is  from  a  want
of  such  knowledge  as  this  that  phrenology  must  ever
prove  imperfect,  even  granting  the  localities  to  be
correctly  ascertained  and  established.  However,
when  we  have  ascertained  the  points  where,  by  acting
in  any  peculiar  manner,  we  can  excite  into  activity
particular  sympathetic  physical  and  mental  associations,
whilst  the  other  faculties  are  put  into  a  state  of
quiescence,  it  appears  to  me  to  be  a  matter  of  far
greater  importance,  and  a  subject  still  more  curious,
than  any  thing  ever  brought  forward  by  phrenolo-
gists. It  is  far  more  available  for  practical  purposes  too.
Phrenologists  could  at  best  only  pretend  to  tell  the
natural  tendencies  of  an  individual,  and  direct  that  he
should  be  educated  in  accordance  with  a  specific  plan,
as  has  hitherto  been  done  independently  of  phrenology,
from  watching  the  natural  dispositions  and  habits  of
different  individuals,  by  encouraging  and  directing
their  studies  in  such  and  such  a  direction  ;  but  here,
in  addition  to  this,  we  have  the  power  of  giving  a
decided  impulse  in  any  particular  direction.  It  ought
not  to  be  overlooked,  that  this  does  not  deprive  us  of


102  IMPORTANCE  OF  INQUIRY.

any  of  our  former  available  modes  of  instruction  in
science  and  morality,  but  it  promises  to  prove  a
powerful  auxiliary  for  expediting  and  ensuring  the
success  of  those  means.  It  therefore  follows,  that  it
becomes  the  duty  of  every  well-wisher  to  his  species
to  investigate  this  matter,  and  determine  how  far  it  is
generally  applicable.  It  is  still  more  the  duty  of  the
medical  faculty  to  do  so,  because,  should  farther
experience  determine  this  question  in  the  affirmative,
it  is  reasonable  to  expect  it  may  be  turned  to  the  best
account  in  the  cure  of  disease,  by  applying  our
remedies  locally,  to  the  cutaneous  points  which  have
been  ascertained  to  be  the  centres  of  the  morbid  con-
catenation. Thus,  leeching  and  sedatives,  &c.  might
be  applied  to  such  points  when  there  was  excitement
of  the  corresponding  functions,  and  vice  versa,  with
the  reasonable  hope  of  success  ;  and  if  this  method
cannot  be  effective,  we  can  be  pretty  certuin  of  success
through  hypnotism,  by  exciting  the  morbidly  low
faculty  where  there  is  depression,  and  the  antagonist
organ  where  there*  has  been  excitement.  In  this
manner  I  have  no  doubt  but  hypnotism  may  prove  of
incalculable  advantage  in  the  treatment  of  many  cases
of  insanity,  and  nervous  affections  tending  to  induce
that  disease.

I  am  quite  aware  some  will  be  ready  to  start  an
objection  to  my  views,  by  stating  that  the  scalp,
where  many  or  most  of  these  demonstrations  have
been  manifested,  is  not  highly  sensitive,  that  it  is  not
extensively  supplied  with  sensient  nerves,  and  that
they  all  arise  from  the  fifth  pair,  and  do  not  pass
directly  through  the  skull  to  the  subjacent  points  of
the  brain.  This,  however,  does  not  prove  that  the


HOW  DIFFERENT  PARTS  ARE  CONNECTED.  103

terminal  branches  may  not  ultimately  have  a  special
influence  on  such  points,  notwithstanding  their  cir-
cuitous course  to  arrive  there.  I  beg  to  remind
such  individuals  that  we  are  by  no  means  sufficiently
acquainted  with  the  laws  and  distribution  of  the
nervous  system,  to  be  able  to  prescribe  rules  as  to
how  it  ought  and  must  act.  Who  does  not  know,  that
until  the  discoveries  of  our  illustrious  countryman,
Sir  Charles  Bell,  the  same  nerve  was  considered  to
give  both  sense  and  motion  ?  And  when  he  pro-
pounded that  the  true  cause  of  its  double  functions
was  because  of  its  having  double  roots,  was  not  this
announcement  scouted  for  some  time,  and  then,  when
proved  to  be  true,  were  not  attempts  made  to  rob  Sir
Charles  Bell  of  the  honour  of  the  discovery?

There  seems  to  be  great  reason  to  conclude  that  the
distribution  of  the  nerves  of  the  scalp  will  ultimately
be  found  far  more  intricate  and  beautifully  arranged
than  at  present  we  have  any  conception  of.

I  shall  now  proceed  to  state  my  views  as  to  the
mode  in  which  different  parts  of  the  brain  are  asso-
ciated with  different  parts  of  the  body.  I  have  long
quite  agreed  with  those  physiologists  who  consider
that  the  vis  nervosa  is  something  circulated  in  tubes,
that  the  primitive  nerve-tubes  do  not  anastomose,
but  only  run  parallel  with  others,  remaining  dis-
tinct and  isolated  throughout  their  course,  and  that
consequently  the  "  cerebral  extremity  of  each  fibre  is
connected  with  the  peripheral  extremity  of  a  single
nervous  fibre  only,  and  that  this  peripheral  extremity
is  in  relation  with  only  one  point  of  the  brain  or
spinal  cord  :  so  that,  corresponding  to  the  many
millions  of  primitive  fibres  which  are  given  off  to


104  HOW  PASSIONS  ARE  EXCITED.

peripheral  parts  of  the  body,  there  are  the  same  num-
ber of  peripheral  points  of  the  body  represented  in  the
brain.  The  sensation  of  a  single  point  evidently
depends  on  the  impression  being  conveyed  by  means
of  a  single  fibre  to  a  single  point  of  the  sensorium."
(Miiller.)  It  is  from  the  same  cause  that  we  can
regulate  simple  or  associated  movements  of  distinct
members.

From  all  these  considerations  it  appears  quite  rea-
sonable to  suppose,  and  analogy,  as  respects  distinct
organs  being  appropriated  for  other  special  functions,
warrants  the  inference,  that  different  parts  of  the
brain  may  have  special  functions  to  perform,  both  as
regards  mind  and  matter ;  and  that,  when  such
points  are  excited  into  inordinate  activity,  the  mani-
festations will  become  correspondently  more  con-
spicuous, and  vice  versa.

We  know  from  experience  that  the  various  passions
and  emotions  can  be  excited  through  the  organ  of
hearing  either  by  music  or  oratory,  th rough  the  eyes
by  painting  and  sculpture,  and  likewise,  though  less
extensively  and  efficiently,  through  common  sensa-
tion, and  there  seems  to  me  to  be  nothing,  a  priori,  to
militate  against  the  probability,  that  this  may  be
effected  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  has  yet  been
done,  provided  we  can  only  discover  the  peculiar
mode  of  exciting  certain  portions  of  the  brain.  If
the  views  already  advanced,  that  every  point  of  the
body  supplied  by  primitive  nervous  fibres  has  a  distinct
corresponding  point  in  the  brain,  it  is  clear,  that  by
titillating  each  peripheral  point,  we  shall  excite  its
corresponding  central  point ;  and  from  what  shall  be
found  detailed  in  the  experiments  recorded,  it  appears


SMELLIE'S  PREDICATION.  105

highly  probable  that  the  respective  parts  of  the  brain
corresponding  to  every  part  of  the  body,  may  be
excited  into  activity  through  certain  sympathetic
points  in  the  integuments  of  the  head  and  neck,  and
if  so,  we  may  also  excite  into  activity*  the  whole  of
those  actions,  mental  and  muscular,  which  are  asso-
ciated with  each  portion  of  the  cerebrum.  In  this
case  Smellie's  supposition  would  be  completely  realized
in  man.  He  expresses  himself  thus  :  —  "I  can  con-
ceive a  superior  being  so  thoroughly  acquainted  with
the  human  frame,  so  perfectly  skilled  in  the  connec-
tion and  mutual  dependence  which  subsist  between
our  intellect  and  our  sensitive  organs,  as  to  be  able,
by  titillating  in  various  modes  and  directions,  particular
combinations  of  nerves,  or  particular  branches  of  any
single  nerve,  to  excite  in  the  mind  what  ideas  he  may
think  proper.  I  can  likewise  conceive  the  possibility
of  suggesting  any  particular  idea,  or  species  of  ideas,
by  affecting  the  nerves  in  the  same  manner  as  these
ideas  affect  them  when  excited  by  any  other  cause."
This  confident  aspiration  seems  to  be  now  in  a  great
measure  realized,  by  certain  modes  of  manipulating
patients  during  the  hypnotic  condition,  of  which  I
shall  now  adduce  a  few  illustrations.

My  first  attempt  to  excite  the  phreno-hypnotic
phenomena  was  in  the  month  of  April,  1842,  in  the
lecture-room  at  Liverpool,  but  it  did  not  succeed.  I
then  tried  the  experiment  repeatedly  in  private,
putting  the  patients  to  sleep  by  contact  as  well  as  in
my  usual  way,  but  still  could  not  succeed.  I  was
anxious  to  try  it  fairly,  and  therefore  applied  to  Mr
Brookes,  through  the  kindness  of  Dr  Birt  Davies  of
Birmingham,  for  information  as  to  the  mode  Mr


IOC  PHRENO- HYPNOTIC  EXPERIMENTS

Brookes  had  practised  so  successfully,  and  which  was
most  politely  communicated  to  me  by  both  these
gentlemen.  I  tried  this  mode  with  several  patients,
both  in  my  usual  plan  and  that  of  the  animal
magnetisers,  but  was  still  unsuccessful.  I  now
abandoned  it  as  a  hopeless  task,  presuming  the
cases  which  had  proved  successful  with  others  must
have  been  hisus  naturae,  or  that  the  operators  had
deceived  themselves,  the  patients  having  been  led  to
answer,  and  give  the  manifestations  they  did,  from
the  nature  of  the  leading  questions  proposed,  and
might  afterwards  remember  what  passed  at  previous
operations,  and  answer  accordingly ;  whilst,  like
natur.il  somnambulists,  they  might  not  remember,
when  awake,  what  had  passed  during  their  sleep.

Last  December  I  was  induced  to  make  another
attempt,  from  reading  a  report  of  Mr  Spencer  T.  Hall's
two  first  lectures  on  the  subject,  at  Sheffield  :  and  it
was  remarkable,  that  the  very  first  patient  I  tried  in
that  way  exhibited  several  of  the  manifestations.
However,  I  was  led  to  refer  the  result  to  a  totally
different  cause  from  what  he  and  the  other  animal
magnetisers  did.  I  concluded  it  arose  from  the
different  degrees  of  sensibility  of  different  parts  of  the
integuments,  conveying  correspondingly  varied  im-
pressions when  similarly  impressed,  and  exciting  diffe-
rent ideas  in  the  mind,  and  thus  calling  up  old  associ-
ations ;  and  that  when  similarly  impressed  the  same
ideas  might  again  present  themselves  to  the  mind.  I
considered  this  far  more  probable  than  that  the  brain
was  affected  by  any  transmission  from  the  operator  to
the  brain  directly  through  the  skull ;  and  to  prove  this,
tried  the  effect  of  pressure  over  parts  which  had  no


HOW  EXCITED.  107

cerebral  substance  directly  subjacent,  and  the  results
confirmed  my  expectations.  Thus,  pressure  on  the  apex
of  the  mastoid  process,  and  the  ossa  nasi,  and  the  chin,
were  as  certainly  followed  by  particular  manifestations,
as  pressure  on  different  parts  of  the  cranium  were
followed  by  others.  I  also  very  soon  ascertained  that
the  same  points  of  the  cranium,  when  thus  excited,
did  not  excite  the  same  ideas  or  emotions  to  the  minds
of  different  patients,  which  I  considered  ought  to  have
been  the  case,  according  to  the  views  of  the  stanch
phrenologists.  I  have  since  discovered  the  cause  of
this,  namely,  not  having  operated  at  the  proper  stage
of  the  hypnotic  condition.

I  shall  now  adduce  a  fewr  examples.  On  one  sub-
ject, after  being  in  the  hypnotic  condition  for  a  few
minutes,  by  applying  gentle  pressure  over  the  ossa
nasi,  immoderate  laughter  was  immediately  excited,
and  ceased  as  abruptly  on  removing  the  contact.  The
abruptness  of  these  transitions,  especially  from  immo-
derate laughter  to  the  extreme  gravity  and  vacancy  of
expression  peculiar  to  the  hypnotic  state,  was  quite
ludicrous,  and  almost  beyond  belief.  Supposing  she
were  singing  the  most  grave  tune  and  solemn  words,  the
moment  the  nose  was  touched  in  this  manner,  by  any
one,  she  was  irresistibly  thrown  into  this  merry  mood,
but  would  join  in  the  tune  again  with  the  utmost
gravity  the  moment  the  contact  ceased.  Rubbing  the
same  part,  or  pinching  up  the  skin  over  it,  seemed  to
produce  no  effect  whatever.  On  applying  pressure
to  this  patient's  chin  there  was  an  immediate  catch  in
the  breathing,  with  sighing  and  sobbing,  which  would
subside  on  removing  the  point  of  contact.  By  touch-
ing both  nose  and  chin  at  same  time  there  was  the


108  PHRENO-HYPNOTIC  EXPERIMENTS.

most  ludicrous  combination  of  laughing  and  crying,
each  struggling  for  the  mastery,  as  we  sometimes  see
in  hysteric  attacks.  Both  would  cease  immediately
on  removing  the  contact.  Friction  or  pinching  the
skin  on  the  chin  had  no  effect  of  producing  such
phenomena.  In  short,  no  part  of  this  patient  which
I  tested  seemed  capable  of  being  excited  by  friction
or  pinching  the  integuments,  excepting  around  the
.orbits,  which  produced  spectra,  although  less  perfectly
so  than  by  simple  pressure  against  the  bone.  This
patient,  being  pressed  over  the  phrenologists'  organ  of
time,  always  expressed  a  desire  "  to  write"  —  a  letter
—  to  her  mother  or  her  brother  ;  over  their  organ  of
tune,  "to  sing  ;"  between  this  and  wit,  "  to  be  judici-
ous ;"  the  boundary  between  wit  and  causality,  "  to
be  clever  ;"  causality,  "  to  have  knowledge  ;"  in  the
centre  of  the  forehead,  to  have  "  a  certain  perception
of  learning;"  below  this  the  phrenologists'  eventu-
ality, "  to  be  skilful ;"  the  points  of  the  head  occupied
by  veneration  and  benevolence  were  sometimes  in-
dicated by  the  desire  "  to  be  virtuous,"  or  "  to  be
honourable ;"  most  frequently,  when  the  point  touched
was  over  benevolence,  the  answer  was,  "  to  be  honour-
able," and  when  over  the  other  point,  "  to  be  virtu-
ous," when  both  points  were  touched  at  same  time,  it
was,  "  to  be  honourable  and  virtuous,"  and  the  same
answer  was  always  given  when  these  points  were
touched  combined  with  No.  1,  or  amativeness.  When
the  latter  was  touched  alone,  the  answer  always  was
"  to  be  commended  ;"  when  approximating  the
mastoid  process,  or  over  that  process,  a  remarkable
placidity,  or  expression  of  delight,  came  over  the
countenance,  and  the  desire  was  for  "  complacency,"


PHRENO-HYPNOTIC  EXPERIMENTS.  109

which,  when  hypnotized,  she  defined,  "to  be  civil,"
but  when  awake  she  seemed  at  a  loss  to  know  what
the  word  meant.  On  touching  "  combativeness"  the
placidity  of  countenance  was  speedily  exchanged  for
the  opposite  expression  ;  but  on  pressure  being  made
immediately  above  the  ears,  the  most  ferocious  aspect
of  countenance  was  assumed,  the  breath  being  sup-
pressed almost  to  suffocation,  the  face  becoming  flushed,
with  grinding  of  the  teeth  ;  and  when  the  arms
were  not  rigid,  the  most  vigorous  efforts  at  inflicting
violence  on  all  who  were  within  her  reach,  as  several
gentlemen  can  attest  to  their  personal  knowledge  and
sorrow.  On  pressure  being  applied  to  the  root  of  the
nose,  the  idea  of  seeing  different  forms,  and  figures,
and  colours,  seemed  to  be  excited  in  the  mind,  more
vividly  when  certain  points  were  thus  excited,  but  it
could  be  excited  by  pressing  the  integuments  against
the  under,  as  well  as  upper  edge  of  the  orbit,  with
this  difference,  that  the  objects  seen,  or  rather  spectra
excited,  were  then  generally  of  a  painful  and  dis-
tressing character,  whereas  they  were  generally  of
a  bright,  and  glowing,  or  cheerful  description  when
excited  by  acting  on  the  upper  margin  of  the  orbit.
I  should  observe,  that  care  was  taken,  in  all  these
experiments,  not  to  press  against  the  globe  of  the  eye.
Thus  far  the  phenomena  were  pretty  uniform  in  this
patient,  the  answers  having  been  generally  very
much  the  same  when  impressed  exactly  in  the  same
toay,  on  the  same  points,  and  under  similar  circumstances
in  all  other  respects.  Thus,  the  last  day  I  had  an
opportunity  of  testing  this  patient,  I  went  over  the
different  points  four  times  with  scarcely  the  slightest
variation  in  the  answers,  as  can  be  testified  by  several


110  PH  RENO-HYPNOTIC  EXPERIMENTS.

gentlemen  who  were  present ;  and  they  were  again
repeated  two  or  three  times  the  same  evening  with
like  results.  This  patient  was  operated  on  the  previous
day  in  presence  of  several  professional  and  scientific
gentlemen,  when  several  answers  were  given  diffe-
rent. More  than  one  being  operating  on  that  occasion,
and  the  manner  and  degree  of  touching  the  parts
being  different,  might  be  the  cause  of  the  varied
results.  I  am  satisfied  this  patient  knew  nothing  of
phrenology ;  and  that  she  remembered  nothing  of
what  she  said,  or  was  done  to  her  during  these
operations.

Case  II.  In  this  yatient  friction  would  excite,  whilst
pressure  had  no  effect  in  calling  forth  manifestations.
In  this  case,  friction  over  the  ossa  nasi  excited  the
desire  for  "  something  to  smell,"  generally  aromatic
vinegar  or  Eau  de  Cologne  ;  over  the  chin,  for  some-
thing to  eat ;  over  the  tendon  of  the  orbicularis,  a
slight  tendency  to  laugh  ;  close  upon  the  root  of  the
nose,  friction  excited  spectra,  and  round  the  orbit,  in
like  manner,  the  same  or  similar  spectra,  differing  in
form,  and  hue,  and  combination,  according  to  the
degree  of  pressure  and  friction  applied  ;  over  the  organ
of  tune,  "  to  sing  ;"  over  the  back  part  of  the  base  of
the  head,  expressed  herself  "  very  happy  and  com-
fortable ;"  over  combativeness  and  destructiveness,  a
quarrelsome  disposition,  as  manifested  in  word,  look,
and  action.  The  other  parts  tried  were  less  certain  or
decided  in  this  patient.

Case  III.  In  this  patient,  friction  excited  the  desire
"  to  waltz,"  when  applied  over  the  organ  of  tune,
and  the  desire  "  to  walk,"  when  applied  to  the  organ
of  wit,  as  mapped  by  the  phrenologists,  and  in  like


SUPPOSED  CAUSE  OF  PHENOMENA.  Ill

manner,  "  to  sing,"  when  veneration  was  the  point
affected.  Spectra,  also,  when  the  integuments  were
rubbed  against  the  margin  of  the  orbits.  Although
not  corresponding  with  the  phrenological  charts,  nor
with  what  occurred  in  the  others,  similar  answers
were  given  when  the  same  points  were  similarly
excited.

Case  IV.  When  asked  what  she  would  like,  when
manipulated  as  the  others  referred  to,  always  an-
swered, "  nothing  at  all,"  excepting  over  the  most
sensitive  parts  of  the  cranium,  when  her  answer  was,
"  leeches  to  my  head."

Case  V.  Very  much  the  same  as  the  last.

I  think  the  cases  referred  to  support  my  position,
that  the  different  results  arise  from  the  circumstance
of  different  parts  of  the  integuments  having  different
degrees  of  sensibility,  and  thus  exciting  different
ideas  in  the  mind  when  the  same  quality  and  inten-
sity of  stimulus  is  applied  to  each  part  in  succession.
There  can  be  no  doubt  but  the  point  under  which
the  phrenologists  have  posited  "  combativeness  and
destructiveness,"  is  the  most  highly  sensitive  of  any
part  of  the  cranium,  and  is  always  accompanied  with
symptoms  of  the  patients  feeling  pain,  and,  as  a
matter  of  course,  they  will  offer  resistance,  and  at-
tempt to  free  themselves  from  the  offending  cause ;
and  so  of  the  rest,  according  to  their  respective  im-
pressibilities.

After  the  above  remarks  had  been  written,  and  my
work  sent  to  press,  I  met  with  the  following  most
interesting  case  :  —  I  was  informed  that  a  child,  five
years  and  a  half  old,  who  had  been  present  when  I
exhibited  the  experiments  on  No.  I.  the  same  even-


112  CHILD  HYPNOTIZES  HER  NURSE.

ing  had  proposed  to  operate  on  her  nurse.  The  nurse
had  no  objection  to  indulge  the  girl,  never  supposing
any  effect  could  take  place.  However,  it  appeared
she  speedily  closed  her  eyes,  when  the  child,  imitat-
ing what  she  saw  me  do,  placed  a  finger  on  her  fore-
head, and  asked  what  she  would  like,  when  the
patient  answered,  "  to  dance ;"  on  trying  another
point,  the  answer  was,  "  to  sing,"  and  the  two  then
had  a  song  together,  after  which  the  juvenile  experi-
menter roused  the  patient  in  the  same  manner  she
had  seen  me  do.

The  above  circumstance  being  related  to  me  the
following  day,  I  felt  curious  to  ascertain  whether
there  might  not  be  some  mistake,  as  there  had  been
no  third  party  present,  and  it  depended  entirely  on
the  statement  of  the  child,  which  induced  me,  when
visiting  the  family  the  day  after,  to  request  permis-
sion to  test  the  patient.  This  was  readily  granted  }
and,  to  my  astonishment,  she  manifested  the  pheno-
mena in  a  degree  far  beyond  any  case  I  had  tried  ;
indeed,  she  did  so,  with  a  degree  of  perfection  which
baffles  description.

However  frequently  she  was  tried,  the  same  ex-
pression of  countenance,  the  same  condition  of  the
respiration,  and  similar  postures  of  the  body  have
been  evinced,  when  the  same  points  were  pressed.
Indeed,  so  highly  susceptible  was  she,  that,  after  a  few
trials,  when  I  pointed  a  finger  or  glass  rod  over  the
part,  without  contact,  similar  manifestations  resulted,
only  in  a  less  rapid  and  more  modified  degree.  I
also  found  by  trying  No.  II.  at  an  earlier  stage,  that
her  susceptibility  was  almost  equal  to  the  present
case.  The  following  are  a  few  of  the  more  striking


REMARKABLE  EXPERIMENTS.  113

manifestations  :  pressure  on  the  chin  was  followed
by  movement  of  the  jaws,  lips,  and  tongue,  with  the
desire  to  eat ;  on  the  lower  part  of  the  nose,  "  to
smell ;"  insertion  of  tendon  of  the  orbicularis,  immode-
rate laughter,  which,  on  being  asked  why  she  laughed,
the  answer  indicated,  it  was  from  a  sense  of  the  ludi-
crous being  excited ;  over  time,  "  to  dance ;"  tune,
"  to  sing,"  with  pressure  on  the  eye  at  same  time,
she  did  sing  part  of  a  song ;  over  the  back  of  the
head,  No.  I.  she  shuddered  and  retreated,  under  the
impression  that  some  one  was  about  to  take  liberties
with  her,  the  same  feeling  of  delicacy  was  also  mani-
fested when  any  other  part  of  the  body  was  touched
excepting  the  head  and  face ;  over  apex  of  mastoid
process,  the  desire  to  shake  hands  and  be  friendly ;  the
former,  with  No.  4,  or  adhesiveness,  she  would  lean  to,
or  clasp  any  one  near  her  ;  combativeness,  the  reverse  ;
destructiveness,  (it  is  very  small,)  she  was  distressed
from  the  notion  that  some  one  was  quarrelling  with
her;  philoprogenitiveness,  she  always  said,  "  hark,  the
poor  child  is  crying  !"  secretiveness  and  caution,  she
would  tell  nothing  ;  benevolence,  "  to  travel ;"  vene-
ration, she  knelt  down  in  the  most  solemn  manner
and  prayed ;  combined  with  hope  an  expression  of
ecstasy  united  with  devotion  ;  over  the  eyebrows,
spectra  of  all  forms  and  colours,  gay  and  glowing,
and  when  below  the  eye,  the  notion  of  the  sea,  a
ship,  and  people  about  to  be  drowned  ;  at  a  farther
trial,  other  manifestations  came  out  equally,  or  even
more  strikingly,  according  to  the  accuracy  with  which
the  corresponding  points  were  touched.  In  parti-
cular, I  must  note  what  happened  the  first  time  I
touched  imitation,  which  was  entirely  accidental,

H


114  EXPERIMENTS.

and  whilst,  besides  a  relation  of  my  own,  there
was  present  a  gentleman  whose  literary  and  scien-
tific attainments,  and  philosophic  turn  of  mind,
as  well  as  high  standing  in  society,  render  him  an
ornament  to  our  country.  Besides  imitating  every
thing  done  or  said  in  English,  she  imitated  correctly
French,  Italian,  Spanish,  German,  Latin,  and  Greek  ;
every  word  was  spoken  with  the  utmost  precision,
and  has  been  done  several  times  since  before  many
professional  and  scientific  gentlemen,  and  ladies,  who
can  bear  testimony  to  the  extraordinary  fidelity  of
pronunciation  and  emphasis.  I  need  scarcely  add,  she
could  not  do  so  when  tested  after  being  awakened.
Many  other  patients  I  have  since  made  do  the  same,
one  a  girl  of  only  twelve  years  of  age.

On  Mr  Hall's  arrival  in  Manchester,  previous  to
his  first  lecture,  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  him  at
my  house,  when  I  exhibited  my  experiments  on  this
and  another  patient,  with  which  he  seemed  much
gratified.  I  also  afforded  him  an  opportunity  of
seeing  them  again  next  day.  After  I  had  them  in
the  hypnotic  condition,  I  requested  him  to  mani-
pulate their  heads,  which  he  did  more  minutely  than
I  had  done,  and  consequently  brought  out  additional
manifestations.  I  was  on  the  alert  to  all  he  did  and
said,  for  I  was  determined  he  should  not  have  an
opportunity  of  prompting  in  any  way,  and  most
assuredly,  by  exciting  acquisitiveness,  he  very  soon
led  the  patient  to  steal  a  silver  snuff-box  from  a  gen-
tleman present,  and  it  was  most  striking  the  anxiety
with  which  she  returned  it,  on  Mr  Hall  removing  the
point  of  contact  to  conscientiousness, — the  movement
of  the  arm  was  changed  instantly,  as  if  automatically.


OBSERVATIONS  OF  TWO  PATIENTS.  115

I  had  never  tried  to  excite  either  of  these  two  points.
The  other  manifestations,  which  I  had  previously
seen  developed,  were  precisely  the  same  under  his
manipulations  as  my  own.  I  made  several  attempts
to  excite  the  organ  of  benevolence,  but  without  effect,
until  one  day  I  accidentally  placed  my  finger  so  low
as  1  should  have  considered  to  be  the  middle  of  com-
parison, as  marked  on  the  busts,  when  she  instantly
evinced  the  emotion  in  the  most  active  manner,
saying,  "  poor  creature,  poor  creature,"  and  not  con-
tent, as  many  are,  with  mere  words  of  compassion,
she  anxiously  presented  us  with  all  the  money  in
her  pocket.  I  should  not  omit  to  add,  that  this
patient  is  quite  wwconscious  of  all  she  or  others  do
or  say  whilst  in  this  state,  and  did  not  know  the
location  of  a  single  organ.

It  would  only  be  an  unnecessary  waste  of  time  to
detail  at  length  all  the  cases  I  have  had  since  of
similar  manifestations,  varying  in  degree  according
to  the  original  constitution  and  habit  of  mind  of
each  patient.  This  variety  is  the  most  striking  proof
of  the  reality  of  the  phenomena.  There  are  some
patients  who  have  a  sort  of  indistinct  recollection  of
what  had  passed,  as  if  it  had  been  a  dream  ;  two  in
particular,  who  observed  they  had  an  indistinct  notion
of  what  they  were  doing,  but  felt  irresistibly  im-
pelled, as  it  were,  to  do  certain  things,  even  whilst
they  thought  complying  with  the  predominant  in-
clination would  make  them  very  ridiculous.  This,  I
presume,  referred  to  imitation  and  comicality,  and
such  like  humorous  faculties,  which  they  displayed  in
a  very  remarkable  degree.  These  patients  are  highly
respectable  and  intelligent,  and  manifested  the  phe-


116  EXPERIMENTS.

nomena  quite  as  prominently"  as  the  patient  last
named,  that  of  veneration  and  hope,  also  filial  affec-
tion, in  a  manner  baffling  description.  Each  knew
only  one  phrenological  organ.

That  I  might  be  the  better  certified  that  all  was
reality,  I  also  got  a  relation  of  my  own  to  submit  to
the  operation,  and  it  was  quite  conclusive.  She  has
a  slight  recollection  of  some  things  which  were  said
and  done,  but  of  others  seems  quite  oblivious.

I  had  also  the  opportunity  of  verifying  the  truth-
fulness of  these  various  and  interesting  phenomena
through  the  kindness  of  Mrs  Col. ,  who  sub-
mitted to  be  operated  on  by  me  in  presence  of  her
husband,  as  also  the  Major  ;  the  Captain  and  Surgeon
of  the  regiment ;  a  high  dignitary  of  the  church,  and
who  is  also  an  eminently  scientific  gentleman ;  Mr
Gardom,  surgeon,  and  other  professional  gentlemen  ;
Mr  Aspinal  Turner,  and  a  number  of  others,  both
ladies  and  gentlemen.  In  about  three  minutes  after
she  was  asleep,  I  placed  two  fingers  over  the  point
named  veneration,  instantly  the  aspect  of  her  coun-
tenance changed  ;  in  a  little  she  slowly,  and  solemnly,
and  majestically  arose  from  her  chair,  advanced  to-
wards the  table  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  and  softly
sank  on  her  knees,  and  exhibited  such  a  picture  of
devout  adoration  as  can  never  be  forgotten  by  any
who  had  the  gratification  to  witness  it.  She  was
tested  with  a  number  of  other  faculties,  when  the
corresponding  manifestations  were  equally  striking
and  characteristic.  When  awakened,  this  lady  was
quite  unconscious  of  all  which  had  happened.

Here,  then,  we  have  the  testimony  of  a  lady  of  the
highest  respectability  and  intelligence,  and  energy  of


EXPERIMENTS.  117

mind,  corroborating,  both  in  word  and  action,  and
look,  the  reality  of  the  phenomena  as  exhibited  by
others,  and  that  in  the  presence  of  most  respectable
and  intelligent  witnesses,  who  can  bear  testimony
that  there  was  nothing  said  or  done  to  direct  her  in
the  important  manifestations.  This  lady  had  been
hypnotized  by  me  once  before,  for  a  few  minutes,  at
a  private  conversazione  the  week  before,  when  she
sat  down  fully  convinced  she  could  NOT  be  affected,
but  was  soon  made  to  acknowledge  the  power  of
hypnotism,  and  now  she  was  a  valuable  evidence  to
the  more  novel  investigation  as  to  how  far  phreno-
logical manifestations  could  be  developed  during  hyp-
notism.* I  have  now  realized  these  phenomena  very
prominently  in  forty-five  patients,  most  of  whom,
I  am  quite  certain,  knew  nothing  of  phrenology,
some  of  them  not  even  what  the  word  meant ;  and
the  smallness  of  the  points  to  which  the  contact
must  be  made  to  elicit  the  manifestations  correctly,
especially  the  subdivisions  by  Mr  Hall,  is  such  as  to

*  A  report  having  been  circulated,  no  doubt  with  the  view
of  neutralizing  the  interest  attaching  to  the  case,  that  this
lady  was  a  phrenologist,  I  called  to  inquire  whether  there
was  any  ground  for  such  a  report.  Mrs  S.  herself  assured
me  it  was  quite  erroneous,  for  it  was  a  subject  she  had  never
paid  any  attention  to,  and  one  she  was  quite  ignorant  of.
Wishing  to  be  very  circumstantially  correct  in  the  statement,
she  added,  "  I  have  understood  the  organ  of  music  is  some-
where about  the  forehead ;"  when  requested  to  place  her
finger  on  the  organ,  she  was  quite  wrong,  so  that  she  did  not
know  a  single  organ.  I  mentioned  this  circumstance,  in  her
presence,  at  another  conversazione,  when  she  most  distinctly
declared  the  facts  here  recorded,  to  be  strictly  correct.


118  MR  HALL'S  LECTURES.

render  collusion  most  improbable^  I  was  also  care-
ful to  avoid  prompting,  by  putting  leading  questions.
I  have  also  succeeded  partially  with  others ;  and
several  of  my  friends  have  also  been  successful  with
a  few  other  cases.

I  attended  Mr  Hall's  public  lectures,  and  the
very  first  experiment  he  tried,  February  24,  1843,
convinced  me,  that  the  reason  why  I  had  not
sooner  obtained  the  manifestations  more  generally
was,  because  I  had  allowed  my  patients  to  pass  into
the  supersentient  state  before  testing  them.  I  was
aware  of  the  difference  in  the  state  of  the  circulation
through  the  brain  in  the  state  in  which  my  patients
were,  and  what  it  must  be  in  the  state  in  which  his
were  during  his  operations,  and  conjectured,  that  by
trying  my  patients  in  that  condition,  I  might  get  mani-
festations which  I  had  failed  to  do  at  former  trials  ;
and  the  very  first  cases  I  tried  proved  this  conjecture
to  be  correct.  For  example,  No.  II.  already  referred
to,  exhibited  a  number  of  additional  phenomena
beautifully ;  and  Cases  IV.  and  V.  in  like  manner,
came  out  beautifulhr.  From  this  single  observation
on  Mr  Hall's  mode,  or  rather  time,  of  operating,  I
have  been  enabled  to  arrive  at  a  mode  of  operating
which,  I  believe,  by  putting  patients  into  the  hypno-
tic condition  my  own  way,  there  will  be  no  great
difficulty  in  manifesting  some  of  the  phenomena  in
most  cases.  There  are  some  patients,  however,  who
will  evince  them  much  more  prominently  than
others,  and  the  power  of  habit  seems  evident  in
most,  being  more  readily  operated  on  after  a  few
trials.  Some,  however,  seem  as  perfect  as  possible  at
the  first  trial.


ILLUSTRATIVE  CASE  FROM  ABERCROMBIE.  119

I  have  tried  several  private  friends,  on  whose  in-
telligence, honour,  and  integrity,  I  could  rely,  and
also  children,  and  have  found  the  evidence  so  satis-
factory, that  I  am  quite  certain  as  to  the  reality  of
the  phenomena ;  but  as  to  my  theoretical  views,  I
wish  them  to  be  considered  as  mere  conjectures,
thrown  out  for  the  purpose  of  exciting  others  to
think,  and  investigate  this  curious  and  most  inte-
resting and  important  subject.

I  shall  conclude  this  article  by  calling  the  attention
of  my  readers  to  the  coincidence  which  appears  to
subsist  betwixt  the  phenomena  now  referred  to,  and
the  mode  of  exciting  dreaming,  in  some  patients,  by
whispering  in  their  ears.  I  shall  illustrate  that  by
reference  to  a  case  recorded  in  one  of  Dr  Aber-
crombie's  valuable  works,  on  the  authority  of  the
late  Dr  Gregory.  It  is  that  of  the  case  of  an
officer  in  the  expedition  to  Louisburgh  in  1758.  His
brother  officers  were  in  the  habit  of  amusing  them-
selves at  his  expense.  They  could  produce  any  kind
of  dream  they  chose,  especially  if  done  by  one  with
whose  voice  he  was  familiar.  Thus,  at  one  time,
they  conducted  him  through  the  whole  process  of  a
quarrel,  ending  in  a  duel ;  and  when  it  was  supposed
the  parties  met,  a  pistol  was  put  in  his  hand,  which
he  fired,  and  was  awakened  by  its  report.  On  another
occasion,  being  asleep  on  the  locker  of  the  cabin,  he
was  made  to  believe  that  he  had  fallen  overboard,
and  was  told  to  save  himself  by  swimming.  He
imitated  the  art  of  swimming,  when  they  told  him
to  dive  for  his  life,  as  a  shark  was  pursuing  him,
which  he  attempted  so  energetically,  that  he  threw
himself  from  the  locker,  by  which  he  bruised  himself


120  BENEFIT  OF  LOCAL  TREATMENT

severely.  Again,  after  the  landing  of  the  army,  he
was  found  one  day  asleep  in  his  tent,  and  apparently
much  annoyed  with  the  noise  of  the  cannonading
then  going  on  briskly.  He  was  made  to  believe  he
was  engaged  with  the  enemy,  when  he  expressed
much  fear,  and  betrayed  a  wish  to  run  away.  They
remonstrated  against  this  act  of  cowardice,  whilst
they  increased  his  alarm  by  imitating  the  groans  of
the  wounded  ;  and  when  he  inquired  who  was  killed,
which  he  often  did,  they  named  his  particular  friends.
At  last  he  was  told  that  the  man  next  him  in  the
line  had  fallen,  when  he  instantly  sprang  from  his
bed,  rushed  out  of  the  tent,  and  was  aroused  from  his
sleep,  and  relieved  from  his  fears,  by  falling  over  the
teut  ropes.  It  is  added,  that  after  these  experiments,
he  had  no  distinct  recollection  of  his  dreams,  but
only  a  confused  feeling  of  oppression  or  fatigue  ;  and
used  to  say  to  his  friends,  that  he  was  sure  they  had
been  playing  him  some  tricks.

I  shall  add  one  illustration  as  to  the  probability  of
benefit  accruing  to  society  from  this  subject  being
prosecuted  with  zeal  and  due  consideration.  A  highly
scientific  friend,  who  had  honoured  me  with  his  pre-
sence at  a  private  conversazione,  called  two  days
thereafter,  and  stated,  that  from  reflecting  on  what  1
had  said  and  exhibited  the  day  before  as  to  the  mode
of  exciting  certain  points  or  functions  of  the  brain
through  acting  on  certain  points  of  the  scalp  and
face,  it  appeared  to  him  most  reasonable  to  expect,
that  by  applying  treatment  to  such  points,  we  might
most  readily  afford  relief  to  disorder  of  the  correspond-
ing internal  organs.  I  told  him  I  was  so  thoroughly
convinced  of  that,  as  to  have  been  induced  to  act


IN  A  CASE  OF  INSANITY.  121

accordingly ;  and  that  the  daybefore  I  had  been  visiting
an  insane  patient,  who  entertained  the  horrible  idea,
that  she  imist  murder  every  body  she  knew,  and  then
murder  herself  also ;  that  on  placing  my  hand  upon
the  organs  of  combati  veil  ess  and  destructiveness,  in  a
few  seconds,  she  gave  a  violent  shudder,  and  seemed
greatly  excited,  and  becoming  perfectly  furious.  On
examining  these  parts,  I  found  the  integuments  quite
red.  I  ordered  leeches,  and  cold  lotion  afterwards,
but  next  day  she  remained  equally  violent,  and  the
pulse  between  140  and  150,  which  it  had  been  for
some  time,  notwithstanding  medicines  had  been
given  to  depress  it.  I  now  made  an  incision  an  inch
and  a  half  long  through  the  integuments,  and  down
to  the  bone,  and  in  twelve  hours  after  found  her
much  calmer,  and  the  pulse  down  to  100,  and  it
remained  there  for  several  days.  There  was  no  such
loss  of  blood  as  could  have  acted  constitutionally  on
the  heart  directly  by  the  quantity  effused.  On  again
rising,  Belladonna  plasters  were  applied  —  these  not
having  the  desired  effect,  recourse  was  again  had  to
scarification  behind  both  ears,  and  with  great  success,
as  in  a  few  days  she  was  so  calm  as  not  to  require  the
strait  jacket,  and  for  two  months  has  been  sullen  but
harmless.

At  another  conversazione,  the  same  gentleman
requested  me  to  excite  philoprogenitiveness,  which
I  did,  and  he  then  asked  me  to  combine  destruc-
tiveness along  with  it.  I  told  him  the  faculty
would  not  be  developed,  because  the  organ  was
so  small  in  this  patient  as  to  make  her  always
imagine  some  one  was  quarrelling  with  her.  Still  he
wished  me  to  try,  which  1  did,  and  the  result  was


122  OPINIONS  OF  SUNDERLAND  AND  HALL.

that  she  immediately  seemed  distressed  about  some
one  being  angry  with  the  children.  Two  days  after  I
was  informed  that  the  object  of  the  request  was  to
prove  that  such  would  be  the  case,  as  he  had  whispered
to  a  professional  gentleman  present,  before  the  answer
was  elicited,  and  no  one  else  in  the  room  knew  this
remark.  Two  days  after,  on  a  slip  of  paper  handed
to  me  by  the  same  gentleman,  he  had  noted,  that  if
I  would  excite  the  same  organs  in  another  patient,
whose  destrncti ven ess  was  more  prominent,  I  would
find  she  would  be  angry  with  the  children,  and  wish
to  punish  or  send  them  away,  and  assuredly  it  proved
so.  He  also  added,  that  this  is  the  combination  of
morbid  excitement  which  he  conjectured,  and  I  think
with  great  justice,  is  the  cause  of  parents  murdering
their  own  children  during  a  fit  of  insanity.  An
example  of  more  acute,  beautiful,  and  successful
induction  than  this  could  scarcely  be  conceived  pos-
sible ;  and  it  is  highly  gratifying  to  know  that  the
opinions  of  a  gentleman  of  such  talents  and  attain-
ments coincides  so  much  with  my  general  views  on
this  subject.

The  doctrine  propounded  by  the  Rev.  La  Roy  Sun-
derland,  and  Mr  Spencer  T.  Hall,  and  others,  seems
to  be  this,  that  there  is  a  separate  organ  in  the  brain
for  every  mental  faculty,  emotion,  propensity,  desire,
and  action,  mental  or  corporeal ;  that  every  positive
organ  has  also  its  negative  organ  proximate  ;  and  that
by  certain  manipulations  during  the  mesmeric  state,
these  organs  may  be  stimulated  into  activity  singly  or
combined,  and  thus  caused  to  manifest  the  correspon-
ding faculty  by  thought,  word,  and  action.  They  do  not
deny  the  correctness  of  the  outlines  as  given  by  former


DIFFERENT  ARRANGEMENT  ADVOCATED.  123

phrenologists  ;  on  the  contrary,  they  bear  positive  tes-
timony to  their  general  correctness.  However,  they
subdivide  each  of  the  former  faculties,  which  we  may
designate  the  pure  faculties,  into  groups  of  distinct
organs,  for  the  specific  manifestation  of  special  faculties,
the  tendencies  to  which  were  naturally  included  in
the  simple  or  primitive  general  organ  ;  and  they
allege  they  can  thus  give  such  a  special  or  character-
istic direction  to  the  feeling  as  to  entitle  it  to  be  con-
sidered as  the  manifestation  of  a  distinct  organ  or
faculty.

It  occurs  to  me,  that  this  might  be  much  simplified,
by  considering,  that  on  the  central  point  of  the  general
organ,  we  stimulate  fasciculi  of  nerves  connected  with
a  general  manifestation,  for  example,  benevolence ;
but  that,  as  we  approach  the  surrounding  organs,  we
partially  excite  proximate  faculties,  from  some  of  their
corresponding  peripheral  sentient  nerves  co-mingling
with  those  of  the  other  faculty,  and  thus  engender
a  mixed  manifestation  ;  just  as  we  find  the  intercourse
between  neighbouring  countries  modifies  the  national
character  which  peculiarly  belongs  to  each  nation.
Thus,  in  one  direction,  benevolence  (by  which  I  illus-
trate my  position)  will  be  blended  with  comparison,
or  excited  through  the  influence  of  association  respect-
ing some  one  we  have  known,  or  from  supposing
what  might  be  our  feelings  were  we  placed  in  such
and  such  circumstances  ;  in  another  direction,  it  will
be  influenced  more  or  less  by  the  tendency  to  imitate
the  benevolent  acts  of  others,  and,  as  we  approach
veneration,  it  will  partake  more  of  a  religious  and
moral  obligation  in  reference  to  the  Deity.  If  I  am
right  in  this  conjecture,  of  course  there  will  be  every


124 SUPPOSED  CAUSE  OF "  CROSS-MAGNETIZING."

possible  shade  of  manifestation  as  we  approach  nearer
to  the  adjoining  organ.  I  am  not  acquainted  with
the  mapping  of  the  head  either  by  La  Roy  Sunderland
or  Mr  Hall  ;  but,  if  the  original  compartments  are  to
be  so  divided  and  subdivided,  according  to  the  mere
varieties  of  manifestation  during  the  hypnotic  state,
I  feel  assured,  that  each  of  their  subdivisions  may
be  again  divided,  as  a  shade  of  difference  will  be
manifested  by  every  possible  change  in  the  point  of
contact.

I  had  much  pleasure  in  witnessing  Mr  Hall's  ex-
periments, and  bore  public  testimony  to  the  reality  of
the  general  phenomena.  This  I  could  have  done
from  the  mere  circumstance  of  carefully  watching  the
peculiar  expression  of  countenance,  and  state  of  the
respiration,  induced  by  every  move' of  the  point  of
contact.  The  shades  of  difference  were  so  minute  that
collusion  was  all  but  impossible.  Moreover,  I  had  per-
sonal experience  of  the  reality  of  the  leading  pheno-
mena in  a  number  of  my  own  patients,  with  parties
who  knew  nothing  of  phrenology,  and  whose  respec-
tability and  known  character  placed  them  above  the
possibility  of  being  suspected  as  acting  a  part,  either
for  the  purpose  of  gratifying  or  deceiving  others.
Whilst  I  readily  bear  testimony  to  the  reality  of  the
phenomena,  and  that  I  saw  nothing  in  Mr  Hall  to
lead  me  to  suppose  he  wished  to  deceive  any  one,  it  is
due  to  the  cause  of  truth  for  me  to  state,  that  the
varieties  which  I  observed  in  his  phenomena  and
those  occurring  in  my  own  patients,  I  consider  were
the  mere  results  of  the  different  manipulations  used,
and  not  of  any  such  special  influence  as  he  and  other
.•uiiinal  magnetizers allege.


PATIENTS  RESTORED  BY  SMELL  AND  TOUCH.  125

In  reference  to  the  phenomena  which  were  desig-
nated "  cross-magneti/ing,"  and  which  appeared  most
distressing  to  the  patients,  as  well  as  to  the  operator,
(fortunately  no  such  effects  have  ever  occurred  in  my
patients,)  I  think  they  may  be  explained  thus :  it
seems  probable,  part  may  be  the  result  of  imagina-
tion, or  an  accidental  circumstance  exciting  the
opposing  classes  of  muscles  into  action  at  the  same
time.  This  may  also  be  caused  by  exciting  two
antagonist  emotions,  such  as  one  requiring  the  ener-
getic action  of  the  muscles  of  inspiration,  and  the
other  the  muscles  of  expiration,  the  consequence  of
which  is,  very  speedily  to  throw  the  patient  into  a
state  of  partial  asphyxia  ;  and  the  result  must  be,  a
great  difficulty  in  restoring  the  patient  from  the
deleterious  influence  of  insufficiently  decarbonised
blood  circulating  through  the  brain.  Such  I  consider
was  the  case  with  the  patient  I  saw  create  so  much
trouble  to  Mr  Hall  on  the  evening  of  the  24th
February,  1843,  in  the  lecture-room  of  the  Athenaeum,
Manchester.

Having  heard  Mr  Hall  state,  that  patients  who  had
stolen  any  thing  would  always  seek  out  the  persons
from  whom  it  had  been  taken,  and  restore  it  to  them
after  conscientiousness  was  excited,  and  that  they
would  find  out  the  rightful  owner  whatever  part  of
the  room  he  had  removed  to,  I  was  curious  to  prove
this.  My  first  object  was  to  ascertain  whether  it
was  a  fact,  which  I  very  soon  did  with  my  own
patients,  and  my  next  object  was  to  ascertain  by  what
means  they  accomplished  this,  and  I  readily  determined
it  was  by  smell  and  touch.  The  first  thing  they  did,  on
rousing  conscientiousness,  was  to  look  thoughtful,


126  POWER  OF  HEARING  FAINT  SOUNDS.

then  they  began  sniffing,  ami  traced  out  the  parties
robbed,  and  restored  it  to  them.  When  asked,  what
are  you  doing?  the  answer  was,  "  I  am  giving  back
something  which  I  hail  stolen."  On  being  asked,  how
do  you  know  the  person  ?  (having  gone  to  the  opposite
side  of  the  room,)  the  answer  was,  "  I  smell  them,
or  him."  Every  time  the  experiment  was  tried,  the
result  was  the  same,  and  the  answer  the  same,  as
was  obvious  to  every  one  in  the  room.  Another
patient  did  the  same  when  the  sense  of  smell  was  acute,
but  when  I  tried  the  experiment  with  the  sense  of
smell  dulled,  the  stolen  article  was  merely  laid  down,
without  giving  it  to  the  proper  person.  There  was
thus  both  positive  and  negative  proof  of  exalted
smell  being  the  cause  of  them  restoring  to  the  proper
part}' ;  and  feeling  directs  as  to  place.  I  have  found
this  done  with  the  same  promptitude  and  certainty
when  six,  eight,  or  twelve  faculties  had  been  roused
and  manifested  before  conscientiousness  was  excited.
I  have  found  this  the  same  in  all  I  have  tried,  only
some  will  throw  the  articles  down  as  if  horror-
struck.

The  movement  of  the  jaws  also,  and  various  other
movements  in  imitation  of  the  operator,  I  have
ascertained  arise  from  their  remarkable  power  of
hearing  extremely  faint  sounds,  and  the  most  curious
point  is  this,  that  they  seem  to  have  the  power  of
discerning  such  faint  sounds,  when  they  seem  not  to
be  affected  by  very  loud  sounds.  It  is  also  the  same
with  feeling.  They  will  in  some  states  be  insensible
to  pricking,  pinching,  or  maiming,  but  so  highly
sensible  to  a  breath  of  air,  or  the  tickling  of  a  feather,
that  they  may  be  instantly  roused  by  the  latter


PRECAUTIONS  ADOPTED.  127

means,  when  the  former  would  have  no  such  influ-
ence. Probably  this  is  the  cause  of  the  remarkable
effects  of  a  current  of  air,  its  rousing  cutaneous  sensi-
bility, directing  the  nervous  influence  to  the  skin,
and  withdrawing  it  from  rigid  muscles,  thus  reducing
the  cataleptiform  state,  and  permitting  the  blood
and  vis  nervosa  to  flow  in  their  usual  manner.  The
latter  change  being  induced  gradually,  may  probably
be  the  cause  of  the  feeling  which  is  described  as  that
of  needles  and  pins  running  into  the  extremities,  and
producing  twitching,  when  gently  pressing  on  the
extremity  with  the  finger,  &c.  as  already  noticed.

In  concluding  this  chapter,  I  am  well  aware  the
statements  it  contains  must  appear  startling,  and
almost  beyond  belief,  to  many  of  my  readers.  Some
may  be  disposed  to  think  I  have  been  deceived  ;  and
because  many  of  the  manifestations  might  be  simu-
lated, I  know  it  has  been  alleged,  that  the  patients  of
those  who  have  been  exhibited  publicly,  were  either
deceiving  the  operator,  or  that  both  patients  and
operators  were  engaged  in  a  shameful  system  of
collusion.  In  respect  to  my  own  patients,  I  have
endeavoured  to  take  every  possible  precaution  that
they  should  not  deceive  me,  and  with  this  view  have
invited  the  most  sceptical  persons  I  know,  both  in
the  profession  and  out  of  it,  to  have  it  rigorously
tested,  and  the  result  has  been  my  entire  conviction
as  to  the  reality  of  the  phenomena  in  my  own
patients,  and  I  am  ready  to  believe  others  to  be  as
candid  as  myself.  Because  much  might  be  simulated,
and  parties  have  been  avowedly  trained  and  exhibited
to  prove  the  dexterity  of  teachers  and  pupils  in  a
system  of  avowed  collusion,  that  it  might  thereby  be


128  LEGITIMATE  INFERENCES  AND  INQtyRY.

inferred  the  patients  exhibited  by  other  lecturers
were  impostors,  is  a  most  illogical  mode  of  deciding
such  a  question.  There  ought  to  be  positive  proof  of
the  justice  of  such  imputation,  before  so  assailing
any  one,  when  there  is  so  much  proof  to  the  con-
trary, as  has  been  furnished  by  the  concurrent
testimony  of  so  many  experimenters  who  have  met
with  such  susceptible  subjects.  Surely  it  would  not
be  fair  to  infer,  that  because  some  are  trained  as
dexterous  thieves,  there  can,  therefore,  be  no  such
thing  as  an  honest  man  in  the  world  ?

The  question  to  be  decided  here  is  not  what
patients  can  be  trained  to  do  in  violation  to  nature's
laws  ;  that  is,  by  giving  them  some  stronger  motive
of  action,  by  artificial  means,  than  the  impulse  arising
from  natural  feeling.  What  might  be  achieved  in  this
way  I  know  not,  as  I  have  not  tried  such  experiments
connected  with  this  branch  of  the  subject.  It  is  well
known,  however,  that  so  long  ago  as  December,  1841,
I  particularly  pointed  out  the  remarkable  docility  of
patients  during  Hypnotism,  which  made  them  most
anxious  to  comply  with  every  proper  request  or  sup-
posed wish  of  others.  I  have,  therefore,  no  more
doubt  that  they  might  be  trained  to  manifest,  during
Hypnotism,  opposite  tendencies,  in  accordance  with
conventional  arrangements,  than  that  during  their
waking  moments  they  could  be  taught  to  do  so,  and
thus  call  black  white  and  white  black,  night  day  and
day  night,  and  such  like,  in  respect  to  every  custom,
word,  or  action.  The  proper  question  to  be  deter-
mined seems  to  me  to  be  this,  — Can  the  passions,
and  emotions,  and  intellectual  faculties,  be  excited
during  Hypnotism  simply  by  contact  or  friction  over


EXPERIMENTS.  129

certain  sympathetic  points  of  the  head  and  face,  with-
out previous  knowledge  of  phrenology,  training,  or
whispering,  or  such  leading  questions  as  must  natu-
rally excite  in  the  mind  such  passions,  emotions,  or
mental  and  bodily  manifestations?  My  own  expe-
rience warrants  me  to  answer  in  the  affirmative,  and
I  shall  give  a  few  additional  cases  in  illustration  of
the  data  from  which  I  have  come  to  this  conclusion.

Two  patients,  healthy,  strong  servant  girls,  en-
tirely ignorant  of  phrenology,  neither  of  whom  had
ever  seen  an  experiment,  and  one  was  so  sceptical,
as  to  wish  to  try  and  convince  me  she  could  not  be
hypnotized  at  all,  were  operated  on  separately.  At
first  trial,  I  succeeded  in  hypnotizing  both,  and  in  de-
veloping a  great  number  of  the  leading  organs,  such
as  the  desire  to  eat,  benevolence,  friendship,  pity,  at-
tachment, self-esteem,  love  of  approbation,  imitation,
(when  they  readily  spoke  five  languages  correctly,)
stealing  under  acquisitiveness,  and  under  conscien-
tiousness restored  to  the  proper  person  and  place  what
was  stolen ;  eventuality  most  remarkable ;  this  was
tried  twice  or  thrice  in  each,  when  they  could  tell
correctly  the  events  of  the  previous  day  while  the
organ  was  excited,  whereas  they  could  not  tell  a  single
circumstance  before  it  was  stimulated  ;  and  a  number
of  others,  such  as  forms,  figures,  and  colours,  by  excit-
ing the  corresponding  points.  These  experiments
were  tried  before  several  friends,  who  were  astonished
with  the  result,  several  of  the  most  remarkable  mani-
festations being  evinced  without  a  single  word  being
spoken  by  any  one.  They  were  not  tried  at  the  same
time,  and  neither  saw  nor  knew  of  the  other.
i


]  30  EXPERIMENTS.

Mr  T.,  a  gentleman  of  45  years  of  age,  who  was
ignorant  of  phrenology,  and  had  never  seen  a  phreno-
hypnotic  experiment,  was  hypnotized  without  expec-
ting any  experiment  of  the  kind  to  be  tried.  On
touching  "  benevolence"  the  manifestation  was  so
powerful  as  to  compel  me  quickly  to  desist ;  "  self-
esteem,"  very  decided  ;  "  ideality,"  very  decided,  com-
1'ined  with  "tune  and  language,"  he  sang  when  the
hitter  were  pressed  on,  but  instantly  stopped  when
the  pressure  was  removed,  and  resumed  as  readily  on
renewing  the  contact,  exactly  at  the  same  note  and
v:ord  where  he  left  off.  Also  the  usual  spectra  when
t  he  region  of  the  orbit  was  pressed  on.  When  aroused,
he  was  quite  unconscious  of  all  which  had  happened.
He  has  been  tried  three  times,  with  the  same  results,
only  that  additional  manifestations  came  out.  His
friends,  who  were  present,  can  testify  he  had  no  signal
given  to  lead  him  to  do  so.  His  wife,  also,  who  had
never  seen  any  thing  of  the  kind  before,  was  operated
on,  when  a  great  many  manifestations  came  out  most
decidedly.  Their  daughter,  who  had  seen  nothing  of
tliis,  was  now  called  into  the  room,  and  operated  on,
and  exhibited  a  great  many  manifestations,  and  all
this  by  the  mere  effect  of  pressure  and  gentle  friction
on  the  integuments.  None  of  the  three  remembered
any  thing  of  what  had  happened.

W.  T.  a  boy,  had  been  magnetized,  and  exhibited  a
t  \v  manifestations.  He  was  again  tried  in  public,
bat  without  success.  I  was  requested  to  try  him,
wluMi  a  number  of  manifestations  came  out  at  once
l-eautifully  —  under  benevolence,  he  took  off  his  coat
to  give  to  some  distressed  person,  and  after  a  number
of  other  manifestations  had  been  educed,  on  being


EXPERIMENTS.  131

awakened  he  seemed  very  much  surprised  to  find  his
coat  off.

John  W.,  22  years  of  age,  had  been  magnetized
publicly,  with  the  hope  of  eliciting  the  phreno-
logical manifestations,  but  he  became  so  stolid  that
it  was  quite  a  failure.  I  was  afterwards  requested
to  try  him,  in  my  way,  in  the  presence  of  a  number
of  gentlemen,  when  I  at  once  succeeded  in  exciting
several ;  pity  was  so  characteristic,  that  there  could
be  no  difficulty  or  doubt  on  the  subject,  as  it  was  not
only  exhibited  by  his  features  and  sobbing,  but  by
the  tears  which  ran  over  his  face  in  torrents.  On
trying  to  excite  imitation,  on  the  right  side,  no  effect
was  produced,  which  I  suspected  to  be  the  result  of
an  injury  he  had  sustained,  which  had  destroyed  the
integuments,  and  also  caused  exfoliation  of  the  outer
table  of  the  skull.  I  therefore  tried  in  the  opposite
side  of  the  cranium,  when  the  faculty  was  manifested
beautifully.  This  seems  a  good  corroboration  of  my
theory,  that  it  arises  from  the  peculiar  condition  of
the  nerves  of  the  scalp.  On  farther  trials  many  more
came  out  without  any  cause  beyond  the  simple
excitation  of  the  integuments  by  pressure  and  friction.
Not  only  may  such  general  manifestations  be  thus
excited,  but,  what  is  far  more  curious,  by  exciting
antagonist  points  in  the  opposite  hemispheres  of  the
brain,  the  patients  may  be  made  to  exhibit  corres-
pondingly opposite  feelings  in  the  different  sides  of
the  body.  If  the  antagonist  faculties  are  excited  on
the  same  side,  there  will  be  exhibited  only  the  stronger
of  the  two.  These  "  opposite  influences  on  the  two
sides,"  as  Dr  Elliotson  has  well  remarked,  "  are  the
most  astonishing  and  beautiful  experiments  that  all


132  EXPERIMENTS.

physiology  affords  ;"  and  are  also  the  most  beautiful
examples  of  the  correctness  of  Mr  Mayo's  fifteenth
aphorism,  at  page  28  of  his  Nervous  System  and  its
Functions,  where  he  says,  "  Each  lateral  half  of  a
vertebral  animal  is  separately  vitalized.  Or  the  pre-
servation of  consciousness  in  one  half  is  independent
of  its  preservation  in  the  other."  It  is  true  that
vivisections  have  proved  this,  but  neither  so  beauti-
fully nor  humanely  as  in  the  experiments  I  now
refer  to,  and  those  already  recorded  at  page  63  of  this
treatise.  Miss  S.,  a  lady  who  had  never  seen  a
phreno-hypnotic  experiment,  and  knew  nothing  of
phrenology,  exhibited  at  first  trial  a  great  number  of
the  leading  manifestations,  and  at  a  second  and  third,
'these  opposite  ones  in  a  remarkable  manner.  Under
friendship  and  adhesiveness,  she  embraced  a  female
friend  in  the  most  affectionate  manner,  and  on
destructiveness  being  excited  on  the  opposite  side  of  the
head,  she  rushed  forward  with  great  impetuosity  to
repel  some  imaginary  adversary,  whilst,  with  her
other  arm  and  hand,  she  contrived  to  shield  her
friend.  Had  I  not  laid  hold  of  her,  she  would  most
certainly  have  rushed  through  the  window.  On
being  roused  she  was  quite  oblivious  of  all  she  had
done.  Mrs  C.  another  equally  ignorant  of  the  sub-
ject, displayed  the  same  phenomena.  The  effect  of
music  in  exciting  to  ecstasy,  elegance  of  movement,
and  graceful  dancing,  was  most  remarkable.  Reniem-

licred  nothing. Miss  ,  entirely  ignorant  of  the

subject,  and  had  never  seen  an  experiment  of  the
kind,  and  expected  only  to  be  attempted  to  be  hypno-
tized, but  whilst  she  wished  to  be  tried,  she  had
expressed  to  the  friend  who  introduced  her,  that  she


EXPERIMENTS.  133

could  not  be  made  to  sleep.  She  exhibited  veneration
solemnly,  with  hope,  glowing  devotion,  and  with
ideality  and  language,  overwhelming  ecstasy,  expres-
sing her  happiness  and  prospect  of  entering  into
heaven  ;  "  self-esteem,"  the  most  conceited  prude ;
"  firmness"  most  decided  ;  "  adhesiveness  and  friend-
ship," and  this  in  one  side,  and  "  combativeness  and
destructiveness"  on  the  other  at  pleasure  ;  "  imitation"
in  perfection,  speaking  correctly  every  language  tried,
"  benevolence"  extremely  marked,  to  the  effusion  of
tears;  "acquisitiveness, conscientiousness, eventuality,
the  desire  to  eat,  to  smell,  spectra,"  &c.  &c.  She  was
quite  unconscious  of  all  that  had  happened,  and  the
friend  who  brought  her  to  me  knows  she  had  no
prompting.  She  has  been  tried  once  since  with  the
same  results.

Some  parties,  who  were  excellent  critics,  after
seeing  the  latter  and  two  others  operated  on,  and
expressing  their  utter  astonishment  with  the  accurate
and  natural  manner  in  which  every  passion  and
emotion  was  manifested,  expressed  a  strong  desire  to
see  some  one  operated  on  for  the  first  time.  I  offered
to  operate  on  any  of  three  young  ladies  whom  they
had  introduced  to  me  that  afternoon,  and  whom  I  had
not  known  previously  ;  indeed,  one  was  a  stranger  in
town,  from  the  south  of  England,  who  knew  nothing
of  hypnotism  or  phrenology,  and  had  no  faith  in
either,  notwithstanding  what  she  had  just  seen.  She,
Miss  S.,  sat  down  an  entire  sceptic,  but  in  a  few
minutes  she  was  not  only  most  decidedly  hypnotized,
but  also  one  of  the  most  beautiful  and  decided
examples  which  could  possibly  have  been  met  with  of
the  phrenological  sway  during  hypnotism,  simply  by


134  EXPERIMENTS.

stimulating  the  nerves  of  the  scalp  and  face.  The
moment  "  veneration"  was  touched,  her  features
assumed  the  peculiar  expression  of  that  feeling,  the
hands  were  clasped,  she  sank  on  her  knees  in  the
attitude  of  the  most  devout  adoration  ;  combined  with
"  hope,"  the  features  were  illuminated,  and  beamed
with  a  feeling  of  ecstasy,  the  hands  being  unclasped
and  moved  about  in  the  utmost  delight ;  and  when
"  ideality"  was  added,  the  ecstasy  was  so  extreme  as
scarcely  to  be  supportable.  On  changing  the  point  of
contact  to  "  firmness,"  she  instantly  arose,  and  stood
with  an  attitude  of  defiance  ;  "self-esteem,"  flounced
about  with  the  utmost  self-importance  ;  the  "  love  of
approbation"  was  painted  to  the  greatest  perfection  ;
"  imitation"  imitated  accurately  every  thing  done  or
spoken  in  any  language  ;  "  friendship  and  adhesive-
ness," clasped  hold  of  me  ;  and  by  stimulating  "  com-
bativeness"  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  head,  along
with  the  other,  she  struck  out  with  the  arm  of  the
side  on  which  combativeness  had  been  touched,  but
held  me  fast,  as  if  to  protect  me,  with  the  other.
1'nder  "benevolence,"  she  seemed  much  affected,  and
<li>tributed  her  property  to  the  imaginary  distressed
objects  her  fancy  had  painted  ;  under  "  acquisitive-
nos"  she  stole,  and  under  "conscientiousness"  she
restored  ;  "  tune,"  the  desire  for  music,  and  sang
beautifully,  a  waltz  being  played,  she  danced  with  a
grace  and  elegance  surpassing  all  which  any  of  us  ever
witnessed.  Eventuality  was  also  most  remarkable;
the  desire  to  eat,  to  smell,  was  also  excited  ;  also
form,  figures,  colours,  &c. ;  philoprogenitiveness  admi-
rable. All  this  was  done  at  first  trial,  with  an  entire
>t  ranger,  and  the  lady's  immediate  friends,  as  well  as


EXPERIMENTS.  13.5

others  present,  can  bear  testimony  that  there  was  not
the  slightest  prompting  either  by  one  or  other,  and
when  awakened  she  was  quite  unconscious  of  all
which  had  happened.  This  lady  has  been  twice
operated  on  since,  when  all  these  manifestations,  and
many  others,  were  exhibited  in  the  most  perfect
manner,  as  can  be  certified  by  Sir  Thomas  Arbuthnot,
Major  Wilbraham,  Colonel  Weniyss,  the  Rev.  Mr
P.,  and  another  high  dignitary  of  the  church,  and
the  patient's  family  and  friends ;  and  that  when
under  "  number"  she  wrote  down  a  sum,  and  under
"  constructiveness  and  ideality,"  she  drew  a  very
good  sketch  of  a  cottage,  putting  in  doors  and  win-
dows correctly.  The  uncle  of  the  latter  subject
was  so  much  astonished  and  gratified  with  what  he
had  seen,  that  he  begged  I  would  try  one  of  his
daughters.  I  hypnotized  the  eldest,  and  all  the
manifestations  came  out  quite  as  decidedly  as  in  her
cousin.  Under  "adhesiveness  and  friendship,"  she
clasped  me,  and  on  stimulating  the  organ  of  "  com-
bativeness"  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  head,  with  the
arm  of  that  side  she  struck  two  gentlemen  (whom  she
imagined  were  about  to  attack  me,)  in  such  a  manner
as  nearly  laid  one  on  the  floor,  whilst  with  the  other
arm  she  held  me  in  the  most  friendly  manner.
Under  "  benevolence,"  she  seemed  quite  overwhelmed
with  compassion  ;  "  acquisitiveness,"  stole  greedily  all
she  could  lay  her  hands  on,  which  was  retained  whilst
I  excited  many  other  manifestations,  but  the  moment
my  fingers  touched  "  conscientiousness,"  she  threw  all
she  hud  stolen  on  the  floor,  as  if  horror-stricken,  and
burst  into  a  flood  of  tears  ;  on  being  asked,  Why  do
you  cry,  she  said,  with  the  utmost  agony,  "  I  have


136  EXPERIMENTS.

done  what  was  wrong,  I  have  done  what  was  wrong."
I  now  excited  "  imitation  and  ideality,"  and  had  her
laughing  and  dancing  in  an  instant.  On  exciting
form  and  ideality,  she  seemed  alarmed,  and  when
asked  what  she  saw,  she  answered,  "The  D— 1."
What  colour  is  he  ?  "  Black."  On  pressing  the  eye-
brow, and  repeating  the  question,  the  answer  was,
*'  red,"  and  the  whole  body  instantly  became  rigid,
and  the  face  the  most  complete  picture  of  horror
which  could  be  imagined.  "  Destructiveness,"  which
is  largely  developed,  being  touched,  she  struck  her
father  such  a  blow  on  the  chest  as  nearly  laid  him  on
the  floor.  Had  I  not  endeavoured  to  restrain  her,  he
must  have  sustained  serious  injury.  Having  now
excited  veneration,  hope,  ideality,  and  language,  we
had  the  most  striking  example  inic'igiuable  of  extreme
ecstasy,  and  on  being  aroused,  she  was  quite  uncon-
scious of  all  that  had  happened,  excepting  that  she
had  heard  music,  and  had  been  dancing.  Her  philo-
progenitiveness  was  admirable.*

*  There  were  a  dozen  present  on  this  occasion,  of  whom
.Mr  Vandenhoff  was  one.  Being  well  known  as  an  accom-
plished artist,  I  requested  him  to  watch  all  he  saw  with  the
most  critical  attention,  and  to  tell  me  whether  the  passions
were  painted  naturally  or  the  contrary.  After  witnessing  the
first  case  with  evident  delight  and  surprise,  he  made  the  fol-
lowing observation,—"  If  this  is  acting,  it  is  the  most  perfect
actimj  I  hare  erer  teen.  In  acting,  we  aim  at  being  natural,
but  there  is  generally  some  point  in  which  we  fail ;  but  here  I
»ce  nature's  language  in  every  point."  Similar  expressions
followed,  in  what  was  seen  in  the  next  two  cases,  and  when
In-  witnessed  the  effects  on  the  two  ladies,  whose  cases  have
just  been  recorded,  he  confessed  himself  so  overpowered,  as  to


EXPERIMENTS.  137

At  a  conversazione  a  few  days  after,  in  the  pre-
sence of  Lady  S.,  Sir  Thomas  Arbutlmot,  Colonel
Arbuthnot,  Major  Wilbraham,  John  Frederick  Foster,
Esq.  Chairman  of  the  Quarter  Sessions,  D.  Maude,
Esq.  stipendiary  magistrate,  and  many  others,  both
gentlemen  and  ladies,  after  exhibiting  the  phenomena
on  those  who  had  been  previously  tested,  there  was  a
wish  expressed  to  see  some  one  operated  on  for  the
first  time.  I  offered  to  try  any  one  present,  and  a  lady
at  length  consented,  whom  I  never  saw  before  that
day,  nor  since.  She  exhibited  all  the  usual  pheno-
mena very  decidedly.  Under  "  acquisitiveness,"  she
stole  two  handkerchiefs  from  ladies,  and  a  ring  from
Mr  Foster's  finger.  After  several  manifestations  had

be  scarcely  capable  of  expressing  his  feelings  of  delight  and
astonishment,  but  said  he  should  write  me  on  the  subject.
The  following  is  part  of  a  letter  I  received  from  him  two  days
after, — "  I  thank  you  for  your  kind  invitation  to  witness  a
repetition  of  those  experiments  which  so  much  delighted  me
on  Saturday  last,  and  with  the  result  of  which  I  was  no  less
gratified  than  astonished.  Never  have  I  seen  nature  mani-
festing herself  more  distinctly  —  never  so  beautifully,  as  in
the  course  of  the  exhibition  on  that  evening.  I  believe  you
know  I  was  a  decided  sceptic  in  the  mesmeric  influence — and
I  was  something  more  in  relation  to  its  phrenological  sway  —
of  which  the  manifestations  while  under  its  mysterious  influ-
ence, by  the  two  young  ladies  of  my  own  immediate  acquain-
tance, who  had  not,  who  could  not  have  had,  any  knowledge  of
the  subject  prior  to  their  experience  on  that  evening,  have
perfectly  convinced  me  by  their  truthfulness.  I  may  take  a
farther  opportunity  to  dilate  more  fully  upon  this  interesting
and  wonderful  discovery,  the  beneficial  results  of  which  can-
not yet  be  appreciated,  because  we  know  not  to  what  extent
they  may  be  carried  out."


138  EXPERIMENTS.

been  exhibited,  the  moment  I  touched  "conscien-
tiousness," she  seemed  distressed,  and  set  off  and
searched  out  the  proper  parties  to  whom  to  restore  the
respective  articles.  They  had  changed  places,  but  she
found  them  out,  and  gave  back  the  handkerchiefs  to
their  owners,  and  also  put  the  ring  on  the  very  finger
of  Mr  Foster  from  which  she  had  taken  it.  She  was
a  strict  methodist,  who  had  never  danced  in  her  life,
and  who,  if  awake,  would  have  considered  it  a  sin  to
dance.  However,  under  the  excitement  of  suitable
music,  she  cut  a  very  good  figure  at  waltzing.  When
awakened,  she  remembered  nothing  of  all  which  had
happened.

Miss  L.,  a  lady  of  twenty-one  years  of  age,  very  ac-
complished, and  with  great  energy  of  mind,  braved  me
to  try  to  hypnotize  her.  She  felt  assured  I  could  not
do  so.  However,  she  was  very  soon  under  the  influ-
ence, and  gave  twenty  manifestations  in  the  most
decided  manner.  Under  friendship  and  adhesiveness,
and  destructiveness  on  the  opposite  side,  she  protected
me,  and  struck  her  own  mother.  She  knew  only  one
organ,  and  was  inclined  to  scoff  at  Hypnotism,  and
still  more  so  at  phreno-hypnotism.  Under  form  and
ideality  she  wrote  very  nicely,  without  the  use  of
her  eyes,  but  by  no  means  equal  to  what  she  does
when  awake.  When  awakened  she  seemed  surprised
when  told  what  had  happened.  She  remembered  me
touching  her  head,  wondered  what  I  was  doing  it
for,  said  she  felt  different  impulses  arise  when  I  was
manipulating  different  parts,  but  did  not  know  why,
nor  could  she  remember  what  she  had  done.

A  married  lady,  Mrs  E.,  and  the  mother  of  a
family,  would  not  believe  any  one  could  be  so  af-


EXPERIMENTS.  139

fected.  After  seeing  one  patient  done,  she  still  felt
assured  she,  at  least,  could  not  be  so  operated  on.  I
desired  her  to  try,  and  she  at  once  exhibited  upwards
of  twenty  manifestations  in  the  most  distinct  manner,
some  of  them  very  strikingly.  Under  benevolence
she  shed  tears,  drew  out  her  purse,  and  gave  half-a-
crown  "  to  the  poor  creatures."  She  also  exhibited
the  opposite  tendencies  at  the  same  time,  as  already
described.

Miss  R.,  a  young  lady  of  22  years  of  age,  very
well  educated,  and  intelligent,  wished  to  be  tried,
because  she  was  decidedly  sceptical.  It  so  happened
that  every  manifestation  tried  came  out  beautifully  and
prominently,  although,  when  aroused,  she  admitted  she
remembered  every  thing  she  had  done,  and  added,  that
she  had  resisted  to  the  utmost  of  her  power  doing  any
thing,  but  felt  irresistible  impulses  come  over  her  to  act
in  the  way  she  did,  as  I  touched  certain  points,  but
why  it  was  she  could  not  tell.  Declared  it  was  not
from  any  association  with  what  ought  to  be  the  case,
as  she  was  ignorant  of  the  organs,  but  added,  that
she  first  felt  a  drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  face,  and
then  the  breathing  became  affected,  and  with  this  the
peculiar  impulse  followed.  On  another  occasion,  with
the  eyes  bandaged,  she  had  a  pencil  put  in  her  right
hand,  when  a  number  of  organs  were  excited,  but  she
showed  no  evidence  of  any  desire  to  use  the  pencil
till  "  constructive!] ess  and  ideality"  were  excited.
The  moment  this  was  done,  however,  she  scrambled
till  she  got  some  paper,  and  began  drawing,  and  made
a  very  tolerable  profile.  When  "  acquisitiveness"  was
excited,  she  stole  a  ring  off  Mr  Foster's  finger,  who,
while  I  was  exciting  various  manifestations,  left  the


]40  EXPERIMENTS.

room.  The  moment  I  touched  "  conscientiousness,"
she  set  off  in  search  of  Mr  Foster,  walked  round  the
room  the  very  way  he  went,  then  left  that  room,
crossed  the  lobby  into  the  front  parlour,  and  hav-
ing made  a  gyration  in  this  room,  she  came  out
and  went  into  a  back  parlour,  where  she  found  Mi-
Foster,  and  put  the  ring  on  the  very  finger  from
whence  she  took  it.  She  evidently  traced  him  through
the  air  by  smell,  as  she  followed  the  exact  track  he
had  taken,  for  he  had  first  gone  into  the  front  parlour.
Had  it  been  by  clairvoyance,  she  of  course  ought  to
have  gone  to  him  direct,  and  by  the  shortest  way.
Such  facts  are  almost  past  belief,  but  here  they  are  as
they  happened,  and  there  could  not  have  been  more
competent  individuals,  than  those  present,  to  detect
any  mistake  or  deception,  namely,  Mr  Foster,  Mr
Brandt,  and  Mr  Lloyd,  barristers ;  Mr  Langton,  Mr
Bagshaw,  Mr  Schwabe,  and  many  others,  both  gen-
tlemen and  ladies.

Miss  W.,  a  very  intelligent  lady,  who  knew  nothing
of  phrenology,  and  had  never  seen  a  phreno-hypnotic
experiment,  was  operated  on.  On  "  benevolence"  being
excited,  she  seemed  very  distressed,  and  when  asked
what  she  was  thinking  of,  said  it  was  of  a  poor  man
who  had  lost  his  saw  and  hammer,  that  he  had  no
money  to  purchase  others  with,  and  his  children  were
starving.  Under  "  veneration  and  ideality,"  wished
to  die,  to  go  to  heaven  ;  under  combativeness,  first
looked  very  angry,  then  jumped  up  and  gave  a  blow,
which  upset  the  candlestick.  On  "  destructiveness"
being  excited,  (after  she  had  exhibited  several  other
organs,)  she  shook  her  fist,  then  started  on  her  feet,
looked  furious,  and  sprang  across  the  room,  her  arm


MOST  INTERESTING  EXPERIMENT.  141

at  full  length,  similar  to  a  person  fencing,  and  seized
hold  of  a  young  lady's  hand,  and  nearly  transfixed  it
with  her  nails.

Mr  Walker,  twenty-two  years  of  age,  after  passing
into  the  hypnotic  state,  shewed  no  symptoms  of  suscep-
tibility for  some  time,  but  at  length  he  did  so  in  the
most  perfect  manner  ;  namely,  benevolence,  venera-
tion, firmness,  self-esteem,  combativeness,  destruc-
tiveness,  acquisitiveness,  caution,  conscientiousness,
imitation  in  perfection,  pity,  benevolence  with  the
one  side,  and  destructiveness  on  the  other,  eventuality,
smell,  form,  colours,  number,  ideality,  &c.  This
gentleman  has  seen  busts  and  phreno-hypnotic
experiments  also,  but,  excepting  two  or  three,  would
be  puzzled  to  point  out  any  of  the  organs  correctly
when  awake.  He  remembered  nothing  of  what  had
passed.

Being  desirous  of  ascertaining  whether  he  might
not,  during  hypnotism,  remember  the  organs  better
than  whilst  awake,  and  thus  be  led  to  give  the  mani-
festations in  the  manner  he  did,  I  tried  the  follow-
ing experiment.  I  explained  my  intentions  to  the
friends  who  were  to  be  present,  but  he  was  entirely
ignorant  of  them.  He  had  never  seen  or  heard  of
such  experiment  having  been  tried.  When  I  con-
sidered him  in  the  proper  condition,  I  requested  him
to  place  the  point  of  a  finger  on  different  organs,  but
it  was  remarkable  that  he  was  wrong  in  every  instance,
even  with  respect  to  the  few  he  knew  when  awake.
Another  most  interesting  fact  was  discovered,  that
whilst  his  mind  was  directed  to  the  organ  I  had
named,  the  true  manifestation  of  the  point  touched,
came  out  in  every  instance.  Thus,  when  requested


142  INTERESTING  EXPERIMENTS.

to  point  out  ideality,  he  placed  the  finger  over
"  veneration,"  and  immediately  indicated  that  feel-
ing. When  asked  what  he  was  thinking  about?
"I  did  not  go  to  church  yesterday."  What  of
that  ?  "  It  was  wrong."  When  he  accidentally
pressed  on  benevolence,  the  feeling  was  manifested  ;
hrmness  in  like  manner  ;  self-esteem  in  a  powerful
degree.  On  evincing  symptoms  of  uneasiness,  I
asked  what  he  was  thinking  of?  he  replied,  "  some-
thing hurts  my  head."  The  fact  was,  his  arm  had
become  cataleptiform,  and  the  points  of  the  fingers
were  pressed  so  strongly  against  the  scalp  as  to  be  the
cause  of  complaint,  but  he  had  no  idea  of  that.
His  hand  having  rested  on  philoprogenitiveness,  he
began  to  hush  and  rock  on  his  chair  as  if  nursing
a  baby,  his  motion  became  more  and  more  violent
till  I  judged  it  necessary  to  put  a  stop  to  it,  by
removing  his  hand.  However,  I  found  his  arm  and
neck  had  both  become  so  rigid,  that  they  were  too
firmly  fixed  to  permit  of  being  separated  by  mechani-
cal force,  but  so  soon  as  this  was  reduced,  by  blowing
on  them,  the  peculiar  manifestation  ceased.  Everv
point  pressed  on  by  him  shewed  the  same  tendency
to  excite  its  peculiar  manifestation.  I  am  quite  cer-
tain this  gentleman  acted  a  candid  part,  and  could
not  be  induced  to  do  otherwise  by  any  one.

Another  most  interesting  fact  connected  with  the
latter  case,  was  the  circumstance  of  his  having  hyp-
notized himself,  excited  the  different  manifestations
as  stated  ;  and  on  being  requested  to  rub  his  eyes,  he
•  lid  so,  and  thus  roused  himself  from  the  hypnotic
condition.  I  have  tried  similar  experiments  with
many  other  patients,  and,  with  the  exception  of


INTERESTING  EXPERIMENTS.  143

two,  each  of  whom  hit  upon  one  organ,  have  found
none  of  them  could  point  accurately  to  the  organ
named,  but  in  every  instance  the  usual  indication  of
the  peculiar  organ  touched  came  out.  None  of  these
subjects  remembered  any  thing  of  what  had  happened.
Here,  then,  we  have  decided  proof,  that  all  the  phe-
nomena of  hypnotizing,  exciting  the  phrenological
manifestations,  and  rousing  to  the  waking  condition,
may  be  accomplished  by  the  personal  acts  of  the
patient  on  himself,  as  the  only  influence  required  to
excite  him  to  the  necessary  movement  might  be  con-
veyed by  an  automaton.

A  few  days  ago,  one  of  these  patients,  who  knows
no  foreign  language,  when  imitation  and  tune  were
excited,  followed  correctly  both  the  music  and  words
of  Italian,  French,  and  German  songs,  which  she
never  heard  till  they  were  played  and  sung  by  the
wife  of  a  learned  barrister,  who  was  also  present
himself,  and  who,  with  the  Rev.  Mr  F.  and  his  lady,
can  bear  testimony  to  the  great  accuracy  of  her  per-
formance. Such  is  the  power  of  Hypnotism.

Besides  the  twenty-five  cases  here  briefly  recorded,
I  have  had  many  more  exhibiting  the  phenomena
in  the  same  decided  manner,  simply  by  exciting  the
sympathetic  points  by  contact.  '  If  I  am  to  believe  the
evidence  of  my  senses,  therefore,  in  any  thing,  I  cannot
see  how  I  can  doubt  the  relation  which  subsists  be-
tween certain  points  of  the  cranium,  and  the  mental
manifestations,  which  are  excited  by  acting  on  them
during  Hypnotism.  I  believe  there  are  very  few
physiological  phenomena  which  can  be  more  clearly
demonstrated,  especially  at  such  an  early  stage  of
their  investigation.  Were  it  not  that  I  consider  it


144  MR  EBBAGE'S  SUCCESS.

would  only  be  an  unnecessary  waste  of  time  to  pro-
secute the  investigation  farther,  after  the  number  of
most  unequivocal  cases  which  have  been  met.  with  by
myself,  as  well  as  by  other  experimentalists  here  and
elsewhere,  I  feel  convinced  I  might  soon  increase  the
number  of  my  own  cases  to  any  extent  I  chose.

With  all  intelligent  and  honest  experimentalists  I
anticipate  similar  results  to  what  happened  with  Mr
Ebbage,  an  intelligent  surgeon  at  Leamington.  He
had  been  a  determined  sceptic,  and  had  much  annoyed
several  of  our  mutual  friends  by  his  strong  expres-
sions to  that  effect.  However,  whilst  on  a  visit  at
Manchester  lately,  at  our  first  interview,  I  made  a
convert  of  him  by  offering  to  exhibit  the  phenomena
in  his  own  wife,  who  had  never  been  so  operated  on,
or  even  tried  the  experiment.  She  soon  became
decidedly  hypnotized,  and  also  exhibited  several  phre-
nological manifestations  most  distinctly.  A  servant
of  the  family  was  now  called  into  the  room,  who  had
seen  no  operation  of  the  kind,  and  did  not  know  what
was  to  be  done.  She  also  became  decidedly  hypno-
tized, and  exhibited  several  phrenological  manifesta-
tions most  distinctly.  Mr  E.  now  admitted  that
rational  scepticism  could  not  resist  such  conclusive
evidence  ;  and  having  seen  another  case  or  two  at  my
house,  of  remarkably  susceptible  subjects,  with  in-
structions from  me  how  to  operate,  he  promised  to
prosecute  the  inquiry  on  his  return  home.

In  a  letter  to  me,  dated  1st  May,  1843,  he  writes
that  he  had  tried  the  experiments  with  several ;  that
in  some  ho  was  unsuccessful,  while  "  in  others  a  per-
fect state  of  sleep  and  unconsciousness  was  produced
at  different  periods,  varying  from  two  to  ten  minutes.


MODE  OF  OPERATING.  145

In  the  case  of  one  lady,  who  had  never  seen  any  thing
of  the  kind  before,  and,  I  may  add,  had  not  even
heard  it  spoken  of  as  connected  with  any  phrenolo-
gical developments,  the  most  marked  effects  were  soon
produced,  resembling  very  strongly  the  case  you
shewed  me  when  I  was  at  your  house."  He  farther
adds  the  following  judicious  remarks:  —  "I  must
say  the  peculiar  development  shewn  by  the  influence
of  this  sleep,  if  closely  and  scrutinizingly  watched,
must  open  to  the  mind  of  any  thinking  man  a  wide
expanse  for  speculation  as  to  the  truly  mysterious
means  by  which  the  effects  of  sensation  and  emotion
can  be  produced."

The  above  is  a  good  illustration  of  what  may  be
done,  even  by  a  determined  but  honest  sceptic.  Mr
E.  had  only  two  interviews  with  me  ;  and  if  any  oce
should  be  less  successful  in  his  attempts,  it  behoves
him  to  inquire  whether  his  failures  are  not  to  be
attributed  to  his  unskilful  or  uncandid  performance
of  the  experiments,  rather  than  to  inefficiency  of  the
method  recommended.

As  to  those  who  will  not  believe  the  testimony  of
others  without  seeing  the  experiments  tried  before
themselves,  on  fresh  patients,  I  beg  to  remark,  thut
the  best  plan  is  for  them  to  try  patients  fairly  them-
selves, and  they  must  soon  be  convinced  ;  only  they
must  be  careful  to  take  them  at  the  proper  time,  other-
wise they  may  fail  as  I  did  myself  at  first.

The  following  is  the  mode  of  operating  :  — Put  the-
patient  into  the  hypnotic  condition  in  the  usual  way,
extend  his  arms  for  a  minute  or  two,  then  replace-
them  gently  on  his  lap,  and  allow  him  to  remain  per-
fectly quiet  for  a  few  minutes.  Let  the  points  of  one


146  MODE  OF  OPERATING.

or  two  fingers  be  now  placed  on  the  central  point  of
any  of  his  best  developed  organs,  and  press  it  very
gently  ;  if  no  change  of  countenance  or  bodily  move-
ment is 'evinced,  use  gentle  friction,  and  then  in  a  soft
voice  ask  what  he  is  thinking  of,  what  he  would  like,
or  wish  to  do,  or  what  he  sees,  as  the  function  of  the
organ  may  indicate  ;  and  repeat  the  questions  and  the
pressure,  or  contact,  or  friction,  over  the  organ  till  an
answer  is  elicited.  If  very  stolid,  gentle  pressure  on
the  eyeballs  may  be  necessary  to  induce  him  to  speak.
If  the  skin  is  too  sensitive,  he  may  awake,  in  which
case  try  again,  waiting  a  little  longer  ;  if  too  stolid,  try
again,  beginning  the  manipulations  sooner.

The  operations  should  be  tried  again  and  again
with  the  same  patient,  varying  the  time  of  beginning
the  manipulations,  as  it  is  impossible  to  tell,  d  priori,
the  exact  moment  they  should  be  commenced  ;  and
many  of  the  best  cases  have  only  succeeded  partially,
or  not  at  all,  at  a  first  or  second  trial.  When  this
point  has  been  hit  upon,  however,  there  will  be  little
difficulty  in  getting  out  additional  manifestations,
and  this  will  be  still  more  evident  at  each  succeed-
ing trial.

Whispering  or  talking  should  be  carefully  avoided
by  all  present,  so  as  to  leave  nature  to  manifest  her-
self in  her  own  way,  influenced  only  by  the  stimulus
conveyed  through  the  nerves  of  touch  exciting  to
automatic  muscular  action.  We  all  know  that  during
common  sleep  a  person  unconsciously  changes  from
an  uncomfortable  position  to  one  which  is  agreeable.
This  is  a  sort  of  instinctive  action,  and,  as  already
explained,  I  think  it  highly  probable,  that  by  thus
calling  into  action  muscles  which  are  naturally  so


PRESUMED  CAUSE  OF  PHENOMENA.  ]47

exerted  in  manifesting  any  given  emotion  or  propen-
sity, they  may,  by  reflection,  thereby  rouse  that
portion  of  the  brain,  the  activity  of  which  usually
excites  the  motion.  In  this  case  there  would  be  a
sort  of  inversion  of  the  ordinary  sequence,  what  is
naturally  the  consequence  becoming  the  cause  of
cerebral  and  mental  excitation.  The  following  hypo-
thesis will  illustrate  my  meaning.  It  is  easy  to  ima-
gine, that  putting  a  pen  or  pencil  into  the  hand  might
excite  in  the  mind  the  idea  of  writing  or  drawing  ;
or  that  stimulating  the  gastrochnemius,  which  raises
us  on  our  toes,  might  naturally  enough  suggest  to  the
mind  the  idea  of  dancing,  without  any  other  sug-
gestion to  that  effect  than  what  arises  from  the
attitude  and  activity  of  the  muscles  naturally  and
necessarily  brought  into  play  whilst  exercising  such
functions.  However,  I  would  very  much  doubt  the
probability  of  stimulating  the  muscles  of  the  leg
exciting  the  idea  of  writing,  or  that  placing  a  pen  or
pencil  in  the  hand  would  excite  the  idea  of  dancing,
without  previous  concert  and  arrangement  to  that
effect.  It  is  upon  the  same  principle,  as  I  imagine,
that,  during  the  dreamy  state  of  hypnotism,  by  sti-
mulating the  sterno-mastoid  muscle,  which  causes
an  inclination  of  the  head,  the  idea  of  friendship
and  shaking  of  hands  is  excited  in  the  mind,  and
when  the  trapizus  is  excited  at  same  time,  the
greater  lateral  inclination  of  the  head  manifests  still
greater  attachment,  or  "  adhesiveness."  Philoproge-
nitiveness,  by  calling  into  action  the  recti  and  occipito
frontalis  muscles,  gives  the  rocking  motion,  and  hence
the  idea  of  nursing,  &c.  ;  pressure  on  the  vertex,  by
calling  into  action  all  the  muscles  requisite  to  sustain


148  WEBER'S  EXPERIMENTS.

the  body  in  the  erect  position,  excites  the  idea  of
unyielding  firmness ;  veneration  and  benevolence,
from  giving  the  tendency  to  stoop  and  suppress  the
breathing,  thus  create  the  corresponding  feelings.  By
exciting  the  muscles  of  mastication  into  action,  the
idea  of  eating  and  drinking  is  roused,  and  the  s;mii>
may  arise  from  pressing  between  the  chin  and  under
lip,  which  first  excites  a  flow  of  saliva,  and  this  again
the  motion  of  the  tongue  and  jaws,  with  an  inclina-
tion to  swallow.  In  like  manner,  gently  pressing  the
tip  of  the  nose,  by  exciting  inspiration,  creates  the
desire  for  something  to  smell  at ;  if  the  point  of  con-
tact is  the  cheek,  under  the  orbits,  over  the  exit  of
the  tn/;-a-orbital  branch  of  the  fifth  pair,  the  breathing
l>ecomes  suppressed,  and  depressing  emotions  are
excited  ;  whereas,  above  the  orbit,  so  as  to  stimulate
the  sw/>ra-orbital  branch  of  the  fifth  pair,  generally
the  reverse  manifestations  are  evinced.

Those  familiar  with  Professor  Weber's  experiments,
know  that  each  of  those  points  differs  from  the  other
in  its  degree  of  sensibility.  It  is  remarkable  that
the  point  marked  "  eventuality,"  (and  which  I  have
strong  grounds  for  believing  is  the  chief  seat  of
memory,)  is  in  the  centre  of  the  forehead,  which  i>
one  of  the  most  sensitive  parts  of  the  scalp,  and  where
pressure  applied  necessarily  excites  the  corresponding
points  in  both  hemispheres  of  the  brain  at  same  time.

There  seems,  in  fact,  to  be  less  matter  of  wonder  in
this  discovery  than  some  lately  brought  forward  in
other  departments  of  physical  science  ;  for  example,
who  would  have  believed,  till  it  was  proved,  that  by
looking  into  a  camera-obscura  for  a  few  minute?,  or
<; veil  seconds,  he  might  have  his  likeness  accurately


VALUE  OF  TESTIMONY.  149

and  indelibly  transferred  to  a  plate  of  metal  ?  or  the
still  more  recent  discovery  of  Professor  Moser,  that
such  impressions  as  he  referred  to  could  be  effected  in
the  dark  ?

I  shall  conclude  this  article  by  a  quotation,  from
Dr  Abercrombie,  on  the  value  of  testimony.  He
observes,  —  "A  very  small  portion  of  our  knowledge
of  external  things  is  obtained  through  our  own  senses  ;
by  far  the  greater  part  is  procured  through  other
men,  and  this  is  received  by  us  on  the  evidence  of
testimony.  While  an  unbounded  credulity  is  the
part  of  a  weak  mind,  which  never  thinks  nor  reasons
at  all,  an  unlimited  scepticism  is  the  part  of  a  con-
tracted mind,  which  reasons  upon  imperfect  data,  or
makes  its  own  knowledge  and  extent  of  observation
the  standard  and  test  of  probability."  On  the  Intel-
lectual Powers,  pp.  71,  72.


150


CHAPTER  VII.

General  resume  —  Many  phenomena  admit  of  physical  and  chemical  proof
—  Difficulties  of  comprehending  many  phenomena  —  Effects  of  prejudice
in  preventing  the  reception  of  truth  —  Critique  on  debate  at  Medico-
Chirurgical  Society  on  Mr  Ward's  operation  —  State  of  the  circulation  —
Conjectures  as  to  the  cause  of  the  cataleptiform  condition.

BEFORE  concluding  the  first  part  of  this  treatise,  I
shall  make  a  short  resume  of  what  I  consider  the  points
made  out  by  what  has  been  advanced.  1st,  That  the
effect  of  a  continued  fixation  of  the  mental  and  visual
eye  in  the  manner,  and  with  the  concomitant  circum-
stances pointed  out,  is  to  throw  the  nervous  system
into  a  new  condition,  accompanied  with  a  state  of
somnolence,  and  a  tendency,  according  to  the  mode  of
management,  of  exciting  a  variety  of  phenomena,
very  different  from  those  we  obtain  either  in  ordinary
sleep,  or  during  the  waking  condition.  2d,  That  there
is  at  first  a  state  of  high  excitement  of  all  the  organs
of  special  sense,  sight  excepted,  and  a  great  increase  of
muscular  power ;  and  that  the  senses  afterwards  be-
come torpid  in  a  much  greater  degree  than  what
occurs  in  natural  sleep.  3d,  That  in  this  condition
we  have  the  power  of  directing  or  concentrating


GENERAL  RESUME.  151

nervous  energy,  raising  or  depressing  it  in  a  remark-
able degree,  at  will,  locally  or  generally.  4th,  That
in  this  state,  we  have  the  power  of  exciting  or  depress-
ing the  force  and  frequency  of  the  heart's  action,  and
the  state  of  the  circulation,  locally  or  generally,  in  a
surprising  degree.  5th,  That  whilst  in  this  peculiar
condition,  we  have  the  power  of  regulating  and  con-
trolling muscular  tone  and  energy  in  a  remarkable
manner  and  degree.  6th,  That  we  also  thus  acquire
a  power  of  producing  rapid  and  important  changes  in
the  state  of  the  capillary  circulation,  and  of  the  whole
of  the  secretions  and  excretions  of  the  body,  as  proved
by  the  application  of  chemical  tests.  7th,  That  this
power  can  be  beneficially  directed  to  the  cure  of  a
variety  of  diseases  which  were  most  intractable,  or
altogether  incurable,  by  ordinary  treatment.  8th,  That
this  agency  may  be  rendered  available  in  moderating
or  entirely  preventing,  the  pain  incident  to  patients
whilst  undergoing  surgical  operations.  9th,  That
during  hypnotism,  by  manipulating  the  cranium  and
face,  we  can  excite  certain  mental  and  bodily  mani-
festations, according  to  the  parts  touched.

I  have  obtained  analogous  results  with  so  many
patients,  as  to  make  me  quite  certain  of  the  reality  of
the  phenomena  referred  to,  and  to  warrant  me,  as  I
think,  to  draw  these  inferences.  Many  of  the  pheno-
mena are  of  such  a  nature  as  to  admit  of  physical  and
chemical  proof,  in  respect  to  which,  the  patients  can-
not possibly  deceive  us  ;  and  as  regards  those  pheno-
mena where  they  might  do  so,  I  have  had  the  assurance
of  so  many  patients,  on  whose  veracity  I  can  implicitly
rely,  proving  the  same  facts,  that  there  remains  not


l.»2  DIFFICULTIES  ATTENDING

the  slightest  room  for  me  to  doubt  the  correctness  of
these  statements.  I  have  been  equally  anxious  to
avoid  being  myself  misled,  as  I  should  be  not  to  mis-
load  others  ;  and  I  would  recommend  those  who  have
not  had  an  opportunity  of  watching  such  phenomena,
in  the  most  critical  manner,  or  who  have  not  entered  on
the  investigation  with  candid  minds,  to  suspend  their
opinions  until  they  have  had  such  opportunity.  I
liave  no  hesitation  in  saying  it  is  most  improbable
that  any  man  should  form  a  just  estimate  in  this  mat-
ter from  mere  reading  or  hearsay  evidence,  and  equally
-o  if  he  does  not  approach  it  with  a  mind  open  to
honest  and  fair  investigation.  The  subject  itself  is  so
very  subtle  in  its  manifestations,  so  very  different
from  all  we  are  accustomed  to  meet  with  in  the  ordi-
nary condition,  that,  with  the  utmost  candour  and
openness  for  receiving  the  truth,  and  the  whole  truth,
it  will  be  found  extremely  perplexing  to  follow  it  out
in  many  of  its  bearings.  How  then  can  it  be  expected
anyone  should  prosecute  the  inquiry  successfully  who
enters  on  it  with  his  mind  blinded  by  indomitable
prejudice  ?  *

*  It  would  perhaps  be  difficult  to  adduce  a  stronger  proof
of  the  extent  to  which  prejudice  may  overcloud  the  brightest
intellects,  and  render  them  incompetent  to  do  justice  to  the
Hiibject  they  would  investigate,  than  that  which  was  presented
at  a  late  meeting  of  the  Medico-Chirurgical  Society  of  London,  .
when  a  debate  took  place  after  the  reading  of  Mr  Ward's
case  of  amputation  of  the  leg  during  mesmeric  sleep.  As  I
am  not  an  animal  magnetiser,  nor  personally  acquainted  with
any  of  the  parties  referred  to,  any  remarks  I  am  about  to
make  are  of  course  uninfluenced  either  by  pique  or  prejudice.


THE  INQUIRY.  153

As  to  the  proximate  cause  of  the  phenomena,  I
believe  the  best  plan  in  the  present  state  of  our  knoAv-
ledge,  is  to  go  on  accumulating  facts,  and  their  appli-

The  operation  referred  to  was  said  to  have  taken  place  in  a
public  hospital ;  in  the  presence  of  medical,  and  also  non-
medical  witnesses.  The  patient  is  alleged  to  have  exhibited
no  manifestation  of  feeling  pain,  as  far  as  his  countenance
could  be  taken  as  a  correct  index,  and  there  was  no  move-
ment of  the  limbs  or  body  ;  and  after  the  operation  he  is  said  to
have  declared  that  he  did  not  feel  any  pain,  but  had  heard  "  a
grunching,"  which  it  has  been  inferred  was  the  noise  of  the
sawing  of  the  bone  ;  and  it  was  also  admitted  he  had  groaned
during  the  time  he  was  under  the  operation.

How  was  this  announcement  met  ?  First,  it  was  questioned
whether  the  man  was  not  a  person  of  little  or  no  feeling  at  any
time,  because  other  patients  had  been  known,  whilst  wide
awake,  who  were  very  insensible  to  pain.  But  had  not  the
patient,  in  this  case,  been  declared  to  have  been  suffering  so
much  pain  from  his  knee,  that  he  had  been  unable  to  sleep,
and  that  his  health  was  so  much  impaired  by  his  suffering  as
to  render  amputation  of  the  leg  indispensable  ?  Nay,  had
it  not  been  set  forth,  that  the  pain  of  his  leg  had  been  greatly
diminished,  and  his  sleep  restored,  and  his  health  greatly
improved,  after  he  was  mesmerized,  preparatory  to  the  opera-
tion, which  he  had  consented  to  undergo  whilst  in  that  state  ;
and  yet,  that  after  he  had  been  asleep,  and  considered  in  a  fit
state  for  being  operated  on,  the  mere  movement  of  the  joint,
whilst  drawing  him  to  the  edge  of  the  bed,  was  followed  by  so
much  pain  as  to  awake  him.  Was  this  any  proof  of  his  being
a  person  devoid  of  feeling  ?

Then  it  is  held,  that  as  he  heard,  as  it  is  presumed  he  did,
the  sawing  of  the  bone,  he  must  have  felt  the  cutting  of  the  ski»
and  soft  parts.  It  is  thus  assumed  that  it  is  impossible  for  a
person  to  hear,  and  be  in  the  state  not  to  feel  inflictions  on  the


154  CRITIQUE  OX

cation  in  the  cure  of  disease,  and  to  theorize  at  some
future  period,  when  we  have  more  ample  stores  of  facts
to  draw  inferences  from.  From  the  first  I  was  of

limb  at  tame  time.  It  is  well  known,  however,  that  disease
of  the  trunks  of  the  sentient  nerves,  or  of  the  spinal  cord,  may
induce  such  a  state,  independently  of  any  lesion  of  the  brain.
But  then,  say  others,  had  he  not  felt  when  the  }>rincif«i!  n<  rr<-
vas  irritated,  the  other  leg  must  have  been  convulsed.  This
is  assuming,  that  the  speakers  fully  knew  etery  law  which  has
been  known,  or  ever  shall  be  known  of  the  nervous  system,  in
erery  pottible  condition,  which  is  rather  a  bold  position  to
assume,  and  what  few  who  have  studied  the  subject  will  be
disposed  to  accord  even  to  the  gifted  individuals  referred  to.
Others  assume  the  non-expression  of  feeling  was  a  mere
matter  of  stoicism,  and  the  general  inference  to  be  deduced
from  the  whole  harangues  of  these  parties  is,  that  the  whole
was  a  piece  of  collusion  and  deception.  Had  the  parties
intended  collusion  and  deception,  would  they  have  admitted
that  the  patient  heard  the  sawing  of  the  bone,  or  groaned  or
moaned  during  the  operation  ?  One  gentleman,  the  learned
editor  of  a  medical  journal,  I  think,  admitted  he  was  bound
to  believe  the  testimony  of  those  who  had  brought  the  case
forward,  but  frankly  avowed,  that  for  his  own  .part,  "  he
would  not  have  belieted  it,  although  he  had  seen  it  himself."
When  a  man  has  attained  to  this  state  of  prejudice  and  incre-
dulity, of  course  it  would  be  idle  to  adduce  to  him  either
experiment  or  argument.

I  would  beg  respectfully  to  ask,  Had  the  mind  of  any
of  these  gentlemen  never  entertained  the  possibility  of  a
patient,  long  accustomed  to  severe  pain,  moaning  from
habit,  whilst  free  from  pain  at  the  moment ;  or  even
feeling  pain,  and  manifesting  the  same  by  sensible  signs
during  sleep,  and  yet  being  quite  unconscious  of  it  when
he  awoke  !  Do  we  never  meet  with  similar  results  in  conse-


A  DEBATE.  155

opinion,  that  much  of  the  excitement  and  many  of  the
phenomena  developed,  were  attributable  to  the  altered
state  of  the  circulation  in  the  brain  and  spinal  cord,

quence  of  accidents,  in  the  course  of  disease,  or  as  the  effects
of  over  doses  of  narcotics  ?  That  such  is  the  case  during  the
artificial  sleep  induced  by  the  methods  I  have  pointed  out  in
this  treatise,  I  am  quite  certain.  I  am  equally  certain  that
the  sensibility  to  pricking,  and  pinching,  and  maiming  the
rigid  limbs,  is  gone,  some  time  before  hearing  disappears-
Even  a  piece  of  paper  may  be  inserted,  and  retained  under
the  eyelids,  without  the  slightest  inconvenience,  not  even
inducing  nictitation.  In  short,  I  am  quite  certain  that  a
patient  may  be  sufficiently  sensible  to  hearing  to  enable  him
to  answer  questions,  whilst  unconscious  of  pricking,  pinching,
or  strong  shocks  of  galvanism  passed  through  the  arms,  and
that  even  when  roused  sufficiently  to  give  expression  to
feeling  such  inflictions,  if  allowed  to  remain  quiet  a  little
afterwards,  so  as  to  fall  into  the  profound  state  again,  that  he
may  have  lost  all  recollection  of  such  inflictions  when  roused
and  fully  awake.

From  the  circumstance  of  the  patient  having  heard,  as  it
is  alleged  he  did,  the  sawing  of  the  bone,  1  am  of  opinion  the
operation  was  commenced  sooner  than  it  should  have  been  ;
and  I  think  it  very  probable  that  the  moaning  referred  to
might  have  arisen  from  a  slight  feeling  of  pain,  but  not  suffi-
cient to  arouse  the  patient,  or  to  impress  him  sufficiently  to
enable  him  to  remember  it  when  awake.

In  conclusion,  from  the  numerous  opportunities  I  have
enjoyed  of  witnessing  analogous  results,  in  the  course  of  my
operations  in  Neuro-hypnotism,  if  I  may  venture  to  give  an
opinion  in  this  matter,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  expressing  my
thorough  conviction  that  Mr  Topham,  Mr  Ward,  and  the
patient,  have  all  spoken  and  represented  the  case  with  the
utmost  good  faith  and  candour.


156  CONJECTURES  AS  TO  THE  CAUSE

and  especially  to  the  greater  determination  of  blood
to  them,  and  all  other  parts  not  compressed  by  rigid
muscles,  arising  from  the  difficulty,  during  the  catalep-
tifonn  state,  of  the  blood  being  propelled  in  due  pro-


To  those  who  wish  to  stifle  investigation,  and  hold  we  ought
to  rest  satisfied  with  the  decision  of  the  French  Commission,
I  beg  to  remark,  that  a  commission  of  the  same  learned  body
was  appointed  to  investigate  and  to  report  on  Harvey's  dis-
covery of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  and  that  this  most
important  discovery  was  rejected  by  them  as  a  fallacy.  Did
their  decision  alter  the  laws  of  nature,  or  prevent  the  ultimate
triumph  of  our  immortal  countryman  ?  And  when  so  much
in  error  while  investigating  the  more  apparent  and  demon-
strable one  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  is  it  not  quite  as
likely  that  they  may  have  been  mistaken  in  their  decision  ou
the  still  more  abstruse  and  subtle  subject  of  the  laws  and
distribution  of  the  nervous  influence  ?

It  is  matter  of  history,  in  respect  to  the  profession  in  our
own  country,  that  there  was  not  a  medical  man  in  England,
who  had  attained  forty  years  of  age,  who  would  believe  in  the
truth  of  Harvey's  discovery.  Is  it  to  be  wondered  at,  then,
that  Hypnotism  should  meet  with  opposition  at  the  present
time?

To  conclude  these  remarks  in  respect  to  this  operation:
the  fact  that  patients  have  been  known,  in  some  few  in-
stances, from  natural  causes  which  were  not  understood,  to
have  undergone  severe  surgical  operations  without  any  sense
of  pain,  instead  of  militating  against  the  truth  of  the  insen-
sibility of  the  patient  whose  liinb  was  amputated  during  the
nervous  sleep,  tends  directly  to  confirm  it ;  for  if  such  a
remarkable  state  can  exist  from  some  accidental  circum-
stances not  understood,  there  is  no  reason  why  a  similar  con-
dition may  not  be  induced  by  artificial  means.


OF  CERTAIN  PHENOMENA.  157

portion  through  the  rigid  extremities.  I  have  not  yet
seen  occasion  to  alter  this  opinion  ;  but  rather  to  con-
clude, that  the  ganglionic,  or  organic  system  of  nerves,
is  also  inordinately  stimulated  from  the  same  cause,
and  thus  having  acquired  an  undue  preponderance
induces  many  of  the  remarkable  phenomena  which
have  been  referred  to.  Whoever  examines  carefully
the  injected  state  of  the  conjunctiva!  membrane,  and
of  the  capillary  circulation  in  the  head,  face,  and
neck,  the  distended  state  of  the  jugular  veins,  the
hard  bounding  throb  of  the  carotid  arteries,  and  the
greatly  increased  frequency  of  the  pulse,  during  the
rigid  condition  of  the  limbs,  cannot  fail  to  perceive
that  there  is  great  determination  to  the  head.  Again,
when  all  these  symptoms  are  so  speedily  changed  on
reducing  the  cataleptiform  condition  of  the  limbs,
how  can  it  be  doubted  that  the  rigidity  of  the  limbs,
and  consequent  obstruction  to  free  circulation  through
them,  is  the  chief  cause  of  the  determination  to  the
head  and  other  parts  not  directly  pressed  on  by  rigid
muscles  ?  *

*  In  reference  to  the  cataleptiform  condition,  I  beg  leave
to  offer  the  following  remarks  merely  by  icay  of  conjecture,  and
with  the  hope  that  they  may  excite  others  to  direct  their
attention  to  the  investigation.

Muscular  contraction  or  motion  is  voluntary  or  involuntary.
The  voluntary  arises  from  a  mandate  of  the  mind,  proceeding
from  the  brain,  and  effecting  contraction  or  shortening  of  the
muscular  fibres  ;  the  involuntary,  or  reflex,  from  irritation
conveyed  to  the  spinal  cord,  producing  a  like  result,  and  may
be  excited  by  tickling,  pricking,  or  pinching  the  skin  of  the
extremities  of  a  decapitated  or  pithed  animal.  It  appears  to


1  58  GENERAL  REMARKS.

In  conclusion,  I  beg  leave  to  remark,  that  the
varieties  which  are  met  with  as  regards  suscepti-
bility to  the  hypnotic  impression,  and  the  mode  and
degrees  of  its  action,  are  only  analogous  to  what  we
experience  in  respect  to  the  effects  of  wine,  spirits,
opium,  the  nitrous  oxide,  and  many  other  agents.


me,  however,  that  much  of  the  efficiency  and  tendency  to
muscular  contraction  is  dependent  on  another  cause,  namely,
the  state  of  (one  or  tension  of  the  muscles  when  considered  to
be  in  a  state  of  quiescence  ;  and  this  state  of  tone  I  consider
depends  on  the  ganglionic  or  organic  system  of  nerves.  Sup-
posing, from  deficiency  of  this,  the  muscular  system  is  relaxed,
a  morbid  tendency  to  reflex  action  will  be  induced,  as  a  musi-
cal string  will  be  more  easily  excited  to  vibrate  if  moderately
tight,  than  if  drawn  very  tense.  It  will  also  render  muscular
effort  less  efficient  and  certain,  because  part  of  the  muscular
contraction,  which  would  have  been  efficient  as  available  force
or  motion,  will  be  expended  in  bringing  up  the  muscular
structure  to  that  state  which  ought  to  have  been  its  normal
fundltion  of  tension  or  tone.

On  the  other  hand,  supposing  the  organic  system  has  been
extremely  active,  and  rendered  the  muscular  tone  abnormally
•/;-.<</,  it  will  produce  the  very  reverse  effect  of  that  just
referred  to.  It  will  not  only  offer  resistance  to  reflex  motion,
but  also  to  roluntary  motion  ;  and,  if  carried  to  a  certain  ex-
tent, may  render  the  parts  fixed  and  rigid,  from  the  ganglionic
system  overpowering  the  cerebro-spinal  system.

That  this  is  not  mere  hypothesis  seems  to  me  to  be  in  some
degree  proved,  by  the  result  of  operations  referred  to  in  my
paper  in  the  Edinburgh  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal  for
October,  1841,  where  muscles  which  had  been  rigidly  con-
tracted, and  had  lost  all  power  of  motion,  had  motion  restored


GENERAL  REMARKS.  159

They  are  all  well  known  to  act  differently  on  diffe-
rent individuals,  and  even  on  the  same  individuals  at
different  times,  according  to  the  condition  of  the

by  dividing  the  tendons,  and  allowing  a  new  portion  to  grow
between  the  divided  ends,  thus  elongating  the  muscles  ;  and,
in  other  cases,  where  there  was  paralysis  from  relaxation,
power.was  regained  by  cutting  out  a  portion  of  tendon,  bringing
the  divided  ends  together,  and  ensuring  their  adhesion,  and
thereby  shortening  the  muscles,  and  giving  them  artificially
that  tone  or  tension,  the  want  of  which  I  considered  was  the
great  cause  of  the  continuance  of  the  paralysis.  It  therefore
appears  to  me,  that  during  the  hypnotic  state  there  is  a  com-
plete inversion  of  the  ordinary  condition,  and  that  the  force
of  the  ganglionic  system  becomes  predominant,  instead  of
being,  as  in  the  ordinary  condition,  only  subordinate.

Another  argument  in  favour  of  this  view  is  the  well  known
fact,  that  all  voluntary  motion,  or  reflex  muscular  action,
speedily  exhausts  the  powers,  and  renders  the  subject  unable
to  continue  such  efforts,  and  fatigued  in  consequence  of  them.
Voluntary  effort  also  is  strongest  at  first,  and  gradually  be-
comes weaker.  The  functions  of  the  organic  system  of
nerves,  on  the  contrary,  are  more  equable  and  persistent  in
their  nature  ;  and,  although  they  may  be  influenced  in  some
degree  as  to  the  activity  of  their  functions,  by  directing  atten-
tion in  a  particular  manner,  —  as  the  secretion  of  saliva  by
thinking  of  food,  the  secretion  of  milk  by  the  nurse  thinking
of  her  child,  &c.  &c.,  still  they  cannot  be  said  to  be  under
voluntary  control  in  the  same  direct  manner  and  degree  as
muscular  motion.  The  cataleptifonn  state  induced  by  Hyp-
notism conies  on  gradually.  For  some  time  voluntary  power
predominates  ;  but  at  length  the  involuntary  rigidity,  or
organic  tonicity  gains  the  ascendency  ;  and,  although  per-
sisted in  for  a  great  length  of  time,  is  followed  by  no  exhaus-


160  GENERAL  REMARKS.

system  ;  but  who  calls  in  question  the  reality  of  their
effects  merely  because  of  that  want  of  uniformity  of
action  ?


tion  or  fatigue.  On  the  contrary,  so  far  as  I  have  carried
the  experiments,  the  whole  functions  seem  to  be  invigorated
by  the  continuance  of  this  condition.


161


PART  II.


CHAPTER  I.

Modes  of  operating  —  Objects  of  operations  —  Cases  of  sight  improved  —
Hearing  —  Deaf  and  dumb  —  Mr  Curtis's  remarks — James  Shelmerdine's
case — Mr  Bingham's  testimony — S.  Taylor —  Sense  of  smell — Touch  and
resistance  —  Tic,  paralysis  of  sense  and  motion,  cured  —  Miss  E.  Atkin-
son's case,  voice  recovered  —  Rheumatism,  ten  cases — Irregular  muscular
action  —  Headache  —  Spinal  Irritation  —  Epilepsy  —  Spinal  curvature  —
Neuralgia,  and  palpitation  of  the  heart  —  Surgical  operations  without
pain  —  Diseases  of  the  skin  —  Locked  jaw  —  Tonic  spasm  —  Miss  Collins
—  Concluding  remarks.

HAVING  in  the  former  part  so  far  explained  the
mode  of  inducing  the  phenomena,  I  now  proceed
to  detail  the  cases  in  which  I  have  successfully
applied  this  process  in  the  cure  of  disease.  I  shall
endeavour  to  explain  my  modes  of  operating  in
different  affections,  so  as  to  enable  others  to  apply
with  advantage  in  their  practice,  what  I  have  found
so  eminently  useful  in'my  own.
L


162  MODES  OF  OPERATING,

When  the  artificial  state  of  somnolence  has  been
induced  in  the  manner  already  pointed  out,  pp.  27 —
29,  the  manipulations  must  be  varied  according  to  the
peculiar  object  we  have  in  view.  If  the  force  of  the
circulation  in  a  limb  is  wished  to  be  diminished,  and
the  sensibility  also  to  be  reduced,  call  the  muscles  of
that  member  into  activity,  leaving  the  other  extre-
mities limber.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  force  of  the
circulation  and  sensibility  are  wished  to  be  increased
in  a  limb,  keep  it  limber,  and  call  the  others  into
activity,  by  elevating  and  extending  them,  and  the
desired  result  will  follow.  If  general  depression  is
wan  ted,  after  one  or  two  limbs  have  been  extended  for  a
short  time,  cautiously  reduce  them,  and  leave  the  whole
body  limber  and  quiet.  If  general  excitement  of  the
system  is  wanted,  extend  the  whole  limbs,  causing  the
patient  to  call  the  muscles  into  strong  action,  and  very
speedily  they  will  become  rigidly  fixed,  and  the  force
and  frequency  of  the  heart's  action,  and  determination
to  the  brain,  as  evinced  by  the  action  of  the  carotids,
distended  jugulars,  flushed  face,  and  injected  eyes,
will  speedily  become  apparent.  By  applying  the  ear
over  the  region  of  the  heart,  it  will  be  apparent  that
the  force  and  frequency  of  the  heart's  action  becomes
prodigiously  increased  in  a  very  short  time  after  ex-
tending the  limbs.  It  will  also  be  found,  they  may  be
very  speedily  altered  and  brought  down  by  reducing
the  rigidity  of  the  limbs.  The  difference  of  rise  in  the
pulse  when  extending  the  limbs  during  hypnotism,  from
what  happens  in  the  natural  state,  is  one  of  the
strongest  proofs  of  the  patient  being  in  the  hypnotic
condition.

It  has  appeared  to  me,  that  we  have  thus  the  power


WITH  OBJECTS  OF  OPERATIONS.  163

of  subjecting  the  brain  and  spinal  cord,  and  whole
ganglionic  system,  to  a  high  state  of  excitement,  as
the  pulse  may  speedily  be  raised  to  double  its  natural
velocity,  in  most  cases,  and  still'more  speedily  reduced
to  the  natural  standard  again.  Its  volume  and  ten-
sion may  also  be  equally  rapidly  increased  or
diminished.  It  is  therefore  naturally  to  be  expected,
that  the  functions  must  be  greatly  influenced  by  such
transitions.  Every  medical  man  knows  that  chronic
nervous  disorders  of  the  most  painful  nature  may
have  resisted  every  known  remedy  for  weeks,  or
months,  or  years,  but  have  speedily  vanished  on  the
accession  of  some  acute  attack.  Now,  my  views  were,
in  such  cases,  to  induce  an  intense  state  of  excitement
for  a  short  time,  to  be  terminated  abruptly,  with  the
hope  of  changing  the  former  action,  and  thus  termi-
nating the  disorder  ;  and  assuredly,  in  many  instances
the  most  obstinate  chronic  functional  disorder  is  gone,
or  greatly  meliorated,  by  a  few  such  operations.

Then,  again,  by  keeping  any  particular  organ
awake  or  active,  whilst  the  others  were  asleep,  I  con-
sidered there  would  be  a  great  increase  of  activity
induced,  by  the  whole  nervous  energy,  or  sensorial
power,  being  directed  to  that  point ;  or  by  keeping  all
the  other  organs  active,  whilst  one  which  had  been
too  active  was  allowed  to  remain  in  the  torpid  state,
that  inordinate  activity  would  be  reduced  in  intensity,
and  that  probably  permanently, — that  the  inordinate
stimulus,  in  one  case,  would  remove  the  susceptibility
to  lower  impressions,  which  Avere  frequently  exciting,
or  habitually  keeping  up  morbid  feeling  or  action ;
and  in  the  other  cases,  that  by  suspending  the  morbid
sensibility  of  a  part  for  a  time,  and  rousing  antagonist


164  SUCCESS  OF  OPERATIONS.

functions,  such condition might be permanently
improved.

Whether  I  have  been  right  or  wrong  in  my
theoretical  views,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  fact
that  in  many  instances  I  have  been  successful  in  the
application  of  Hypnotism  as  a  curative  agent ;  and
the  beneficial  results  of  the  operations  have  been  so
immediate  and  decided,  as  to  leave  no  doubt  that
they  stand  in  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect.
However,  that  much  of  the  success  depends  on  the
impression  arising  from  the  altered  condition  of
circulation,  seems  to  me  to  be  proved  by  the  fact,
that  in  cases  where  the  sleep  was  induced  without  the
rise  in  the  force  and  frequency  in  the  heart's  action,
by  insuring  this  condition,  the  beneficial  result  has
instantly  followed,  where  there  has  been  no  previous
improvement  -with  the  low  pulse.  The  following  is
a  remarkable  instance  of  this  :  —  Nodan,  deaf  mute,
twenty-four  years  of  age,  was  considered  never  to
have  heard  sound  excepting  the  report  of  a  gun  or
thunder,  when  there  was  succussion  of  the  air  suffi-
cient to  induce  feeling  rather  than  hearing,  properly
so  called.  The  mother  told  me  Mr  Vaughan,  head
master  of  the  Deaf  and  Dumb  Institution  when  Nodan
was  at  school,  considered  any  indication  of  hearing
referred  to  was  feeling,  and  not  hearing,  properly  so
called.  At  the  first  operation  there  was  very  little  rise
of  pulse,  and  afterwards  I  could  not  discern  he  had  any
sense  of  hearing  whatever.  At  next  trial  the  pulse
was  excited,  and  so  remarkable  was  the  effect,  that  in
going  home  he  was  so  much  annoyed  with  the  noise
of  the  carts  and  carriages,  that  he  would  not  allow
himself  to  be  operated  on  again  for  some  time.  He


CASES  OF  SIGHT.  165

has  only  been  operated  on  a  few  times,  and  the  result
is,  that  although  he  lives  in  a  back  street,  he  can  now
hear  a  band  of  music  coming  along  the  front  street,
and  will  run  out  to  meet  it.

I  shall  first  illustrate  the  efficacy  of  hypnotism  on
the  various  senses,  and  also  on  the  mental  condition.
And  first,  of  sight.  The  mode  of  operating  in  chronic
cases,  is  first  to  induce  the  sleep,  then  extend  the
extremities,  and  keep  the  eyes  from  getting  into  the
torpid  state,  by  fanning  them,  or  passing  a  current  of
air  over  them  occasionally.  The  length  of  time
required  to  keep  such  patient  in  this  condition  may
vary  from  six  to  twelve  minutes,  according  to  the
state  of  the  circulation.  The  following  cases  will
illustrate  the  affections  of  the  eyes  in  which  I  have
applied  this  mode  of  treatment  with  advantage.

Case  I.  Mrs  Roilcy  applied  to  me  on  the  6th  April,
1842.  She  stated  she  was  54  years  of  age ;  that
for  the  last  sixteen  years  she  had  been  a  great  suf-
ferer from  an  affection  of  the  head,  attended  with
pain  in  the  eyes  and  weakness  of  sight ;  that  it  was
now  become  so  bad,  that  she  could  not  continue  to
read  for  more  than  a  few  minutes  at  a  time,  even
with  the  aid  of  glasses.  She  had  undergone  the  most
active  treatment  under  first  rate  medical  men,  includ-
ing bleeding  general  and  local,  blistering  —  on  one
occasion,  she  was  twice  bled  with  leeches,  and  had
five  blisters  to  her  head  in  one  month  —  and  almost
every  variety  of  internal  medicine  which  could  be
suggested  for  such  a  case ;  but  still  without  improving
her  sight.  For  years  she  had  required  to  have  her  head
shaved  every  few  weeks,  and  cold  affusions  and
spirituous  lotions  frequently  applied  to  it,  to  reduce


166  CASES  OF  SIGHT.

the  excessive  heat  and  other  uncomfortable  feelings.
The  skin  of  the  palms  of  the  hands  was  so  hard,  dry,
and  irritable,  as  to  render  it  liable  to  chap  whenever
she  attempted  to  open  the  hands  fully.  The  pain
during  the  day,  and  general  irritability,  had  rendered
it  necessary  for  her  to  take  a  composing  pill  three
times  in  twenty-four  hours,  for  some  time  ;  still  her
rest  was  so  bad  as  to  force  her  to  rise  and  walk  about
the  room  several  times  during  the  night ;  and  her
memory  had  become  so  much  impaired,  that  she  often
required  to  go  up  stairs  and  then  down  again  several
times  before  she  could  remember  what  she  went  up
for.  About  three  years  before  consulting  me,  she  had
a  paralytic  attack,  which  deprived  her  of  power  of  the
muscles  of  the  right  side  of  the  face  for  a  few  days.
Such  had  been  the  general  state  of  her  health  before
consulting  me,  and  the  state  of  her  sight,  and  the
result  of  my  operation  will  be  understood  by  the  fol-
lowing document,  which  is  attested  by  herself  and
others,  who  were  present  when  I  first  operated  on
her  :  —

"Mrs  Roiley,  (aged  64,)  Chapel  Street,  Salford,
formerly  of  South  Windsor  Street,  Toxteth  Park,
Liverpool,  as  Miss  Robinson,  (four  years  ago,)  has
been  gradually  losing  sight  since  thirty-eight  years
of  age.  Called  on  me  for  the  first  time,  Gth  April,
1842.  Could  not  read  the  heading  of  the  newspaper,
excepting  the  words,  « Macclesfield  Courier ;'  after
being  hypnotized  for  eight  minutes,  she  could  dis-
tinctly read  'and  Herald,'  and  in  a  few  minutes
more  the  whole  of  the  smaller  line,  '  Congleton
(Ja/ette,  Stockport  Express,  and  Cheshire  Advertiser,'
also  the  day,  month,  and  date  of  the  paper.  That  the


MRS  ROILEY.  167

above  is  a  correct  report,  is  attested  by  the  patient
herself  and  other  three  patients,  who  were  present  the
whole  time.  (Signed)  ALICE  ROILEY.

M.  A.  STOWIE.

ANN  STOWIE.

HENRY  GAGGS."

When  Mrs  Roiley  called  on  me  two  days  after,  she
gave  me  the  following  report.  After  leaving  my
house  on  the  6th,  she  was  much  gratified  to  find  her
sight  so  much  improved,  which  induced  her  to  go  and
test  it  by  looking  at  articles  displayed  in  shop  win-
dows, and  in  particular  remarked  that  she  had  walked
up  to  Mr  Agnew's  shop  window,  and  was  able  to  see
distinctly  the  features  of  a  portrait  of  Sir  Robert
Peel,  and  to  read  under  it,  "  Sir  Robert  Peel,  Bart.,"
without  her  glasses,  neither  of  which  she  could  have
done  for  long  before.  She  also  stated,  that  after
being  at  home,  she  took  up  the  small  diamond  Poly-
glot Bible,  and  with  the  aid  of  her  glasses,  was
agreeably  surprised  to  find  she  was  enabled  to  read
the  118th  Psalm,  (29  verses,)  although  this  had  been,  as
she  expressed  it,  a  sealed  book  to  her  for  years.  The
following  is  the  report  which  was  recorded  and  attested
by  her  on  the  12th  April,  1842  :  —  "  Mrs  Roiley  was
able  to  read  a  Psalm  with  the  aid  of  her  glasses  in  the
smallest  sized  Polyglot  Bible  same  afternoon  she  was
first  hypnotized.  Two  days  after,  (8th  April,)  was
hypnotized  a  second  time.  Next  day,  made  a  net  hand-
kerchief with  the  aid  of  her  glasses.  April  12,  has
gone  on  improving,  and  in  my  own  presence  and
several  others,  with  the  aid  of  her  glasses,  read  the
Polyglot  Bible  with  ease  and  correctness,  which  she


168  CASES  OF  SIGHT  IMPROVED.

said,  had  been  a  sealed  book  to  her  for  years  before  I
operated  on  her.

(Signed) ALICE  ROILET.

M.  A.  STOWIE.

WM.  HALLIDAY."

It  is  gratifying  to  be  able  to  add,  that  the  improve-
ment of  the  sight  has  been  permanent ;  and  not  only
so,  but  that  the  whole  painful  catalogue  of  complaints
with  which  she  had  been  afflicted  speedily  disap-
peared, namely,  pain  of  the  chest,  head,  and  eyes,  loss
of  memory,  disturbed  sleep,  irregularity  of  the  secreting
and  digestive  functions,  and  instead  of  the  arid  skin,
regular  action  of  it,  so  that  the  palms  of  the  hands,
which  were  so  harsh  and  arid  that  she  could  not  extend
them  without  lacerating  the  skin,  causing  great  pain
and  annoyance,  were  very  soon  as  soft  as  a  piece  of
chamois  leather.  *  The  whole'  of  this  improvement
was  accomplished  entirely  by  this  agency,  as  she  had
no  medicine  whatever  during  her  attendance  on  me ;
nor  has  she  required  any  up  to  this  date,  20th  Feb-
ruary, 1843,  when  I  read  this  report  to  her,  and  when
>hu  remarked  it  was  much  under  drawn  ;  that  with
great  truth  I  might  have  represented  her  as  having
been  a  greater  sufferer.

Mrs  Roilcy  is  a  very  intelligent  person,  and  one
whose  Christian  profession  and  principles  place  her


*  Very  lately,  a  lady  about  25  years  of  age  was  hypno-
tized by  me.  On  being  roused,  she  expressed  her  surprise
to  find  her  hands  bathed  in  perspiration,  as  she  observed  the
wa$  never  known  to  have  the  slightest  moisture  on  her  hands  till
Utat  moment.


MRS  STOWE.  169

statements  above  all  suspicion.  She  lias  been  seen  by
many  eminent  professional  and  scientific  gentlemen,
who  can  bear  testimony  that  they  have  had  from  her
own  lips  the  same  statements  as  I  have  recorded
above.

It  appears  to  me  that  it  would  be  impossible  to
adduce  a  more  striking  proof  than  this  case  affords,  of
the  great  and  undoubted  benefit  resulting  from  the
application  of  any  remedial  measure.  The  improve-
ment was  so  remarkable,  as  to  admit  of  no  doubt  as
to  its  reality,  and  so  immediate  after  the  hypnotizing,
as  to  prove  they  stood  in  the  relation  of  cause  and
effect,  no  other  remedy  being  in  operation  ;  and  what-
ever may  be  supposed  capable  of  being  achieved
through  the  mere  power  of  imagination,  as  regards
certain  functions,  the  sense  of  sight  could  scarcely  be
supposed  capable  of  being  so  much  meliorated  directly
through  that  influence.

Case  II.  is  that  of  Mrs  M.  A.  Stowe.  This  lady  was
present  when  I  first  operated  on  Mrs  Roiley,  and  was
so  much  gratified  by  the  effects  she  witnessed  in  that
case,  as  to  induce  her  to  consult  me  as  to  the  state
of  her  own  eyes,  and  the  probability  of  benefiting
them  by  a  similar  operation.  Mrs  Stowe  was  44
years  of  age,  and  had  experienced  such  weakness  of
sight  as  to  require  the  aid  of  glasses  for  the  last
twenty-two  years,  to  enable  her  to  sew,  read,  or  write,
and,  for  some  years  past,  she  required  them  to  enable
her  to  transact  her  most  ordinary  household  duties.
The  following  is  the  statement  of  her  condition,  which
I  noted  at  the  time,  and  is  attested  by  her  own  signa-
ture, and  that  of  others  then  present : —

Mrs  Stowe,  aged  44,  1,  Bank  Place,  Red  Bank,


170  CASES  OF  SIGHT  IMPROVED.

Manchester,  has  been  troubled  with  weakness  of  sight
for  twenty-two  years,  so  as  to  require  glasses  to  enable
her  to  read  or  sew.  When  tested  to-day,  8th  April,
1842,  without  her  glasses,  could  not  distinguish  the
large  (capital)  letters  of  advertisements  in  a  news-
paper, nor  large  heading  of  the  paper.  After  being
liypnotized  for  eight  minutes,  she  could  distinctly  read
both  the  large  and  small  heading,  and  day,  month,  and
date  of  the  paper.

(Signed) M.  A.  STOWE.

She  has  also  been  able  to  sign  her  name  to  attest
the  accuracy  of  the  above  statement,  before  her
daughter,  and  another  patient.

(Signed) ANN  STOWE.

10th,  Called  on  me,  and  informed  me  she  had
been  able  to  make  herself  a  blonde  cap,  and  to  thread
her  needle  without  spectacles,*  which  she  could  not  do
before  for  twenty-two  years.  12th,  Continued  im-
proving ;  told  me  she  had  been  able  to  write  up  her
accounts  without  glasses.

(Signed) STOWE.

WM.  HALLIDAY.

ALICE  ROILEY.

ANN  STOWE.

This  patient  has  retained  the  improvement  of  her
sight.  She  has  also  informed  me,  that  she  was
agreeably  surprised,  after  she  left  my  house,  the  first

*  I  have  myself  seen  her  thread  a  No.  8  needle  on  several
oecuions.


MISS  STOWE,  &C.  171

day  she  was  operated  on,  to  find,  as  she  went  along  the
streets,  that  she  could  read  the  sign-boards,  which  she
could  not  do  for  years  before.  She  has  also  named  to
many  others,  as  well  as  myself,  a  very  convincing
proof  of  her  great  improvement  in  this  respect.  Be-
fore being  operated  on  by  me,  on  the  8th  April,  1842,
if  she  went  a-shopping,  without  her  glasses,  she  was
sure  to  make  some  mistake  as  to  the  quality  of  goods
purchased,  and  have  the  trouble  of  going  back  to  have
them  exchanged,  but  now  she  never  requires  to  take
her  glasses  with  her,  as  can  be  testified  by  the  shop-
men where  she  makes  her  purchases.  Her  memory
and  general  health  have  also  been  greatly  improved  by
the  same  operations.

Case  III.  Miss  Stowe,  daughter  of  the  former
patient,  22  years  of  age,  "  was  under  the  necessity
of  reading,  and  doing  any  particular  work,  with  the
aid  of  glasses,  for  the  last  two  years,  but  has  never
required  them  since  she  was  first  hypnotized,  and
can  now  read  the  small  Polyglot  Bible."  This  is
attested  by  her  mother,  herself,  and  Mr  William
Halliday,  and  Mrs  Roiley.

The  improvement  has  been  permanent,  and  she  has
threaded  a  No.  12  needle  in  my  presence,  eight  months
after  I  first  operated  on  her.

Case  IV.  Mr  J.  A.  Walker,  22  years  of  age,  had
always  had  very  weak  sight,  but  since  being  hypno-
tized has  been  greatly  improved  in  his  sight,  as  well
as  in  his  memory  and  general  health.

Case  V.  Mrs  C.,  aged  83,  had,  from  her  age,  required
the  use  of  glasses  for  many  years,  to  enable  her  to
sew  or  read.  Last  August  I  hypnotized  her  for  deaf-


172  IMPROVEMENT  OF  SIGHT.

ness,  with  very  decided  advantage,  and  I  told  her  I
also  expected  to  improve  her  sight  at  the  same  time.
She  was  very  incredulous,  but  was  agreeably  sur-
prised to  find,  that  after  a  second  operation  she  was
not  only  able  to  hear  much  better,  but  also  to  sew  some
flannel,  threading  her  needle  without  her  glasses.  She
had  been  thus  occupied  for  several  hours,  when  I
called  to  see  her,  after  the  second  operation.

There  have  been  cases  in  which  I  have  tried  this
method  without  success,  but  this  proves  only  that
we  must  never  expect  to  obtain  possession  of  a
universal  remedy.  Cases  of  confirmed  amaurosis,
which  had  resisted  every  other  known  remedy,  and
which  were  only  undertaken  by  me  at  the  desire  of
the  patients,  and  sometimes  of  medical  men  also,  as
a  forlorn  hope,  have,  as  in  most  cases  was  suspected
might  be  the  result,  proved  unsuccessful,  and,  through
these,  attempts  have  been  most  ungenerously  and
unwarrantably  made  to  throw  discredit  on  the  power
of  hypnotism  altogether.  It  has  proved  successful
in  too  many  instances,  however,  to  be  borne  down  by
such  paltry  and  pitiful  misrepresentation.  I  could
easily  adduce  many  more  successful  cases,  did  I  deem
it  necessary,  but  shall  only  give  two  more.

Case  V.  Mr  J has  always  had  imperfect

vision,  is  near-sighted,  has  strabismus  of  right  eye,
and  the  sight  so  dull,  that  it  was  with  great  difficulty
he  could,  without  glasses,  see  the  large  letters  (on
white  paper)  in  the  title  page  of  the  "  Medical
Gazette."  After  the  first  operation  he  could  see
better,  and!  after  it  had  been  repeated  a  few  times
he  could,  without  glasses,  read  a  few  words  of  the


MRS  S.'S  CASE.  173

leading  article  of  that  work,  and  after  a  few  more
operations,  could  read  the  type  in  which  the  lectures,
at  the  beginning  of  the  work,  are  printed.

Case  VI.  Mrs  S.,  one  of  my  own  near  relatives,  had
a  severe  rheumatic  fever  in  January,  1839.  During
the  course  of  this  disease  the  left  eye  became  impli-
cated, involving  both  the  internal  and  external  struc-
tures of  the  organ.  She  had  the  benefit  of  the  advice
of  one  of  the  first-rate  oculists  in  Edinburgh.  She
was  under  his  care  till  the  August  following,  when
he  considered  farther  attendance  unnecessary,  but
gave  such  instructions  as  he  deemed  expedient  for  her
future  management  of  it,  and  which  had  been  duly
attended  to  till  the  period  when  I  first  saw  her,  in
June,  1842.  At  that  time  she  came  on  a  visit  to  my
house.  The  eye  was  free  from  pain,  but  was  of  no
service  as  an  organ  of  vision.  There  was  an  opacity
over  more  than  one  half  of  the  cornea,  sufficient  to
prevent  distinct  perception  of  any  object  placed  oppo-
site the  temporal  half  of  the  eye,  all  being  seen  through
a  dense  haze  ;  and  objects  placed  towards  the  opposite
side  were  seen  very  imperfectly,  owing  to  the  injury
the  choroid  and  retina  had  sustained  in  the  points  on
which  the  images  of  such  objects  were  reflected.  The
opacity  of  the  cornea  was  not  only  an  obstacle  to
distinct  vision,  but  was  also  a  source  of  annoyance,
from  its  disfigurement,  being  obvious  even  to  those  at
a  considerable  distance.

Notwithstanding  the  great  advantage  I  had  seen
other  patients,  afflicted  with  affection  of  the  eyes,
derive  from  hypnotism,  it  never  occurred  to  me  that
such  a  case  as  that  of  Mrs  S.  was  likely  to  be  benefited
by  such  an  operation.  I  had,  however,  recommended


174  IMPROVEMENT  OF  SIGHT.

it  to  her  for  a  severe  rheumatic  affection  of  the  right
shoulder  and  arm.  She  had  been  in  my  house  about
three  months  before  she  could  make  up  her  mind  to  un-
dergo the  operation,  but  at  length,  the  violence  of  the
pain  impelled  her  to  try  it,  or  any  thing  else  I  should
recommend.  I  of  course  hypnotized  her,  which
immediately  relieved  her  pain  so  much,  that  after
the  first  operation,  she  could  move  the  arm  freely.
The  operation  was  repeated  the  following  day,  with
complete  relief  as  regarded  the  arm  ;  and  to  the  sur-
prise and  delight  of  the  patient,  myself,  and  others
present,  she  found  her  sight  so  much  improved  as
to  be  able  to  see  every  thing  in  the  room,  and  to
name  different  flowers,  and  distinguish  their  colours,
whilst  the  right  eye  was  shut,  which  she  had  not  been
able  to  do  for  more  than  three  years  and  a  half  pre-
viously. I  consequently  now  repeated  the  operation
daily,  and,  in  a  very  short  time,  had  the  satisfaction
of  seeing  the  cornea  so  transparent,  that  it  requires
close  inspection  to  observe  where  any  opacity  remains.
Neither  external  nor  internal  means  were  used  during
tin-  improvement,  nothing  but  the  hypnotizing  was
had  recourse  to  ;  and  during  the  three  months  I  had
an  opportunity  of  watching  it  prior  to  these  opera-
tions, there  was  no  visible  change  in  the  condition  of
the  organ.  I  should  observe,  that  after  the  first  ope-
ration, there  was  considerable  smarting  in  the  eye,
which  continued  all  night,  and,  in  a  less  degree,  after
future  operations,  which,  no  doubt,  roused  the  absor-
bents, and  effected  the  removal  of  the  opacity  of  the
cornea.  Stimulating  the  optic  nerve  to  greater  acti-
vity, however,  must  have  been  the  chief  cause  of  the
very  rapid  improvement,  which  enabled  her  to  see


MR  HOLDITCH.  175

objects  after  second  operation.  I  should  remark,  that
the  sight,  with  regard  to  objects  seen  from  the  tem-
poral side  of  the  eye,  is  much  more  distinct  than
from  the  nasal  side,  owing  to  the  retina  and  choroid
having  sustained  irreparable  damage  during  the  in-
flammatory stage  at  the  commencement  of  the  attack
in  1839.

Case  VII.  Mr  Holditch,  39  years  of  age,  had  been
partially  paralytic  for  ten  years,  which  came  on  some
time  after  a  fall.  Shortly  after  the  fall,  he  expe-
rienced an  attack  of  double  vision,  which  went  off
after  bleeding,  blistering,  and  the  usual  treatment,  but
was  followed  by  paralysis  of  the  lower  limbs,  which
induced  him  to  consult  me  on  the  18th  of  February,
1843.  See  Case  XXVII.  p.  217.  He  was  very  much
surprised,  when  I  told  him  he  had  defective  vision  of
the  right  eye,  said  he  was  not  aware  of  it,  and  would
not  believe  that  I  was  not  mistaken,  till  I  tested  him,
when  he  found  he  could  barely  see  the  capitals  of
the  words,  "  Medical  Gazette,"  as  heading  of  the
leading  article  of  that  work,  whilst  he  could  read  the
ordinary  size  print  of  the  page  with  the  other  eye.
After  being  hypnotized,  I  tested  him  in  the  same
position,  and  with  the  same  degree  of  light,  and  he
could  then  read  the  small  sized  print  with  it,  and
it  has  continued  so  ever  since.  He  could  also  walk
across  the  room  without  crutch  or  stick,  which  he
could  not  do  before,  at  which  he  was  very  much  sur-
prised, as  he  was  quite  conscious  the  whole  time,  and
therefore  could  not  believe  any  good  could  have  re-
sulted to  him  from  what  was  done,  till  he  had  the
positive  evidence  of  it  in  being  able  to  see  and  walk.

Here,  then,  we  have  seen  three  cases  of  improved


176  DEAFNESS  CURED.

vision  consequent  on  hypnotizing  for  other  affections,
and  where,  consequently,  the  improvement  could  not
at  all  be  attributable  to  imagination,  but  to  the
altered  condition  in  the  capillary  circulation  and  dis-
tribution of  the  vis  nerrosa.

In  cases  of  active  inflammation  of  the  eyes,  either
external  or  internal,  I  have  never  tried  hypnotism.
By  the  mode  calculated  to  excite  the  circulation,  of
course  it  would  be  quite  inadmissible ;  and  it  could
only  be  speculation  for  me  to  hazard  an  opinion  as  to
its  probable  result  by  the  other  mode.

The  extraordinary  excitement  of  the  auditory
organ,  which  I  had  observed  in  the  course  of  my  early
experiments,  and  the  fact  that  hearing  was  the  last
sense  to  disappear  during  this  artificial  sleep,  (unless
we  except  that  of  the  sensibility  to  a  current  of  air,)
led  me  to  anticipate  most  satisfactory  results  from
this  process  in  the  treatment  of  deafness,  arising  from
torpor  of  the  auditory  nerves.  I  consequently  tried
it  in  such  cases,  and  where  there  has  not  been  destruc-
tion, or  irreparable  organic  injury  to  the  auditory
apparatus,  I  can  confidently  say,  I  know  of  no
means  equal  to  hypnotism,  for  benefiting  such  cases.
Of  course,  it  cannot  suit  all  cases,  but  I  am  satisfied  it
will  succeed  in  a  numerous  class  of  cases,  and  in  some
which  bid  defiance  to  all  other  known  modes  of  treat-
ment.

I  am  enabled  to  state  this  confidently,  not  only
from  my  own  personal  success,  but  also  from  that  of
others  who  have  fairly  tried  it.  One  professional
friend,  Mr  Gardom,  introduced  to  me  two  patients
whom  he  had  improved  so  much  by  hypnotism  only,
that  they  were  enabled  to  hear  the  sermons  of  the'ir


DEAF  AND  DUMB.  177

respective  pastors,  which  they  could  |  not  do  before,
in  consequence  of  which  one  of  them  had  to  leave  her
favourite  minister,  and  go  to  another  church ;  but,
after  being  hypnotized,  has  been  able  to  hear  so
much  better,  that  she  has  been  thus  induced  to  re-
turn to  her  former  pastor.

The  great  success  which  I  had  experienced  from
hypnotism,  in  improving  those  who  were  deaf  through
disease,  led  me  to  hope  it  might  be  of  service  to  some
of  those  who  were  born  deaf  and  dumb,  and  I  there-
fore tried  it  in  such  cases  with  a  considerable  degree
of  success,  ultimately  with  a  success  beyond  my
most  sanguine  expectations.  In  consequence  of  what
had  been  done  and  exhibited  at  my  lectures,  the
medical  profession  of  Liverpool,  to  their  credit  be  it
recorded,  recommended  to  the  governors  of  the  Deaf  and
Dumb  Institution  there,  to  permit  an  experimental
trial  to  be  made  at  their  Institution.  The  governors
refused  their  assent  to  this  within  the  walls  of  the
Institution,  but  agreed  to  permit  a  trial  to  be  made
with  such  out-door  pupils  as  could  be  induced  to  sub-
mit to  it  elsewhere,  the  consent  of  the  parents  having
been  obtained.  In  consequence  of  this,  a  committee  of
the  governors  and  the  medical  faculty  was  appointed  to
superintend  the  said  investigation,  and  I  was  invited
to  go  over  and  conduct  the  experiments  in  their  presence,
and  it  was  proposed  a  report  of  the  results  should  be
published  in  the  Medical  Journals,  at  the  termination
of  our  labours.  The  difficulty  of  getting  the  pupils
and  their  parents  to  attend,  induced  us  to  abandon  the
proceedings  after  two  trials  had  been  made,  so  that  it
would  be  quite  inconsistent  with  the  conditions  stipu-
lated, at  the  commencement  of  said  investigation,  to  •

M


178  EXPECTATIONS  REGARDING

publish  any  report  of  the  result  of  this  partial  inves-
tigation. However,  I  think  I  cannot  better  illustrate
the  extent  of  my  expectations,  in  reference  to  such
cases,  than  by  transcribing  an  extract  from  my  ad-
dress to  the  said  committee,  prior  to  commencing  our
experimental  trial.

"  Hitherto,  these  patients  have  been  considered  be-
yond the  pale  of  human  aid,  so  decidedly  have  they
resisted  all  means  tried  for  their  relief ;  and  the  mor-
bid condition  of  the  organs,  as  ascertained  by  dissec-
tion, was  sufficient  to  warrant  the  inference  that  it
was  improbable  any  remedy  could  ever  be  discovered
for  such  cases.  Fully  aware  of  this  pathological  diffi-
culty, I  was  nevertheless  inclined  to  try  the  effect  of
neuro-hypnotism  with  congenital  deaf  mutes,  know-
ing it  could  be  done  with  perfect  safety,  and  without
pain  or  inconvenience  to  the  patients.  Moreover,
from  having  witnessed  its  extraordinary  power  of
rousing  the  excitability  of  the  auditory  nerves,  I
entertained  the  hope  that  it  might  thus  be  capable  of
exciting  some  degree  of  hearing,  from  the  increased
sensibility  of  the  nerves  compensating  for  the  imper-
fection of  the  organ.  I  was  not,  and  am  not  even
now,  so  visionary,  as  to  expect  perfection  of  function,
when  there  is  great  imperfection  of  the  organ.  Per-
fection of  organization  and  function  must  be  co-exis-
tont ;  at  least  the  function  cannot  be  perfectly  per-
formed when  the  organization  is  much  impaired.  The
rou It  of  my  first  trial  was  beyond  my  most  sanguine
expectations,  which  induced  me  to  persevere,  and  the
rou It  lias  been,  that  I  have  scarcely  met  with  a  case
of  congenital  deaf  mute,  where  I  have  not  suceeded  in
making  the  patient  hear  in  some  degree.  Many  may


DEAF  AND  DUMB.  179

never  hear  so  well  as  to  make  it  available  to  holding
conversation  by  its  aid  ;  but  still  it  is  most  interest-
ing in  a  physiological  point  of  view,  to  know  the
fact,  that  by  this  means  the  imperfect  organ  can  be
roused  to  any  degree  of  sensibility  to  sound,  as  even
this  must  tend  to  the  improvement  of  the  general
functions  of  the  brain,  rather  than  being  entirely  de-
prived of  one  source  of  its  appropriate  stimuli.  I
have  no  doubt,  moreover,  that  many  cases  will,  by
this  means,  be  restored  to  such  degree  of  hearing  as
will  be  available  for  colloquial  intercourse  in  society,
which  never  could  have  been  accomplished  by  any
other  means  hitherto  tried.  If  my  success  with  the
cases  assembled  here  is  at  all  equal  to  what  it  has
been  with  others  elsewhere,  I  think  it  cannot  be
otherwise  than  gratifying  to  you  to  find  that  our  art
has  acquired  a  new  and  important  power  in  this
agency.  I  must  not,  however,  omit  to  add,  that
many  cases  may  shew  no  improvement  at  a  first  or
second  trial,  and  yet  be  very  satisfactory  after  a  few
trials.  According  to  my  experience,  there  is  much
greater  chance  of  benefiting  congenital  deaf  mutes,
than  those  who  have  become  so  from  disease  or  acci-
dent, to  the  extent  of  total  loss  of  hearing.

"  In  testing  patients  as  to  their  power  of  hearing,  T
consider  it  quite  necessary  to  adopt  a  different  plan
for  those  who  are  congenital  deaf  mutes,  from  what  we
do  with  those  who  have  known  what  perfect  hearing
was  at  some  former  period  of  their  lives.  It  is  quite
true  that  the  latter  class  may  be  unable  to  hear  a
musical  box,  or  the  tick  of  a  watch,  when  held  at  a
little  distance  from  the  ears,  but  can  hear  it  when
pressed  against  the  ear,  or  the  mastoid  process,  or


180  MODES  OF  TESTING

against  the  teeth,  owing  to  the  greater  conducting
power  of  the  bony  structure.  There  are  patients  of
this  class,  however,  who  declare  they  have  no  sense  of
sound  when  so  tested,  because  their  previous  know-
ledge of  the  sense  enables  them  to  distinguish  betwixt
hearing,  properly  so  called,  and  common  feeling.  In
testing  congenital  deaf  mutes,  from  their  want  of  this
previous  knowledge,  they  will  all  signify  they  hear,
if  any  sonorous  or  vibrating  body  is  pressed  against
the  ear.  This,  however,  I  do  not  consider  we  have
any  proof  of  being  hearing,  but  feeling  ;  because  they
had  no  previous  knowledge  to  direct  them  as  to  the
peculiar  sensation  of  correct  hearing;  and  they  will
give  the  same  indication  if  the  sonorous  body  is
placed  on  any  other  solid  part  of  the  body,  according
to  its  respective  degree  of  sensibility.  In  applying
tests  to  congenital  deaf  mutes,  therefore,  I  consider
they  have  no  sense  of  hearing,  if  they  cannot  hear  the
sound  of  a  musical  box  held  close  to,  but  not  toiiching
the  ears,  or  any  other  sonorous  body  whose  vibra-
tions do  not  excite  such  oscillation  in  the  air  as  is
sufficient  to  be  recognized  by  common  feeling.  It
ought  also  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  common  feeling
of  the  deaf  and  blind  is  generally  much  more  acute
than  in  those  who  have  not  been  deprived  of  those
senses.  At  all  events  we  cannot  err  in  taking  this  as
our  standard,  because,  if  those  who  did  not  hear  on
the  application  of  such  a  test  before  the  operation,  do
not  hear  it  also  after  the  operation,  we  shall  consider
there  is  no  improvement ;  and  if  those  who  hear  it  at  a
certain  distance  before  the  operation,  cannot  after  the
operation  hear  it  at  a  greater  distance,  it  must  also  be
considered  no  improvement  has  been  made.  But  if


DEAF  AND  DUMB  PATIENTS.  181

the  former  can,  after  the  operation,  hear  without  the
box  touching  the  ear,  and  the  latter  can  hear  at  a  greater
distance,  then  of  course  we  are  entitled  to  say  an  im-
provement has  resulted  from  the  operation."

These  extracts  should  be  sufficient  to  explain  what
the  extent  of  my  expectations  were  as  to  meliorating
the  condition  of  congenital  deaf  and  dumb  patients,
the  principles  upon  which  these  expectations  were
based,  and  my  mode  of  testing  the  original  and  sub-
sequent condition  of  such  patients.  The  following
cases  will  prove  that  my  anticipations  have  been  so
far  realized  —  in  one  case  to  an  extent  I  never  calcu-
lated on.  The  mode  of  operating  5s,  hypnotize  the
patient,  extend  the  limbs,  and  gently  fan  the  ears.

Case  VIII.  The  case  of  Nodan  has  already  been
referred  to  at  page  164,  and  I  shall  therefore  merely
add  here,  that  he  was  24  years  old,  was  never
considered  to  have  had  the  power  of  hearing,  pro-
perly so  called,  according  to  the  opinion  of  the  head
master  of  the  Deaf  and  Dumb  Institution,  where  he
was  a  pupil ;  that  after  the  first  operation  I  satisfied
myself  he  had  no  sense  of  hearing,  but  after  the  second,
which  I  carried  still  farther,  he  could  hear,  and  was
so  annoyed  by  the  noise  of  the  carts  and  carriages
when  going  home,  after  that  operation,  that  he  could
not  be  induced  to  call  on  me  again  for  some  time.
He  has  been  operated  on  only  a  few  times,  and  has
been  so  much  improved,  that  although  he  lives  in  a
back  street,  he  can  now  hear  a  band  of  music  coming
along  the  front  street,  and  will  go  out  to  meet  it.  I
lately  tested  him,  and  found  he  could  hear  in  his
room  on  the  second  floor  a  gentle  knock  on  the
bottom  stair.  His  improvement,  therefore,  has  been
both  decided  and  permanent,  and  is  entirely  attri-


182  IMPROVEMENT  OF

butable  to  hypnotism,  as  no  other  means  were  adopted
in  his  case.

Case  IX.  "Mr  John  Wright,  Pendleton,  19
years  of  age.  Congenit.il  deaf  mute.  Was  four  years
at  the  asylum  under  Mr  Vaughan.  Never  heard
sound.  On  testing,  could  not  discern  the  tick  of  a
watch  pressed  against  the  ears,  nor  a  musical  box,
unless  when  pressed  against  the  ears,  which  was
evidently  feeling,  and  not  hearing,  as  he  evinced  the
same  expressions  when  it  was  applied  to  the  shoulder,
chest,  or  back  of  the  hand.  After  being  hypnoti/ed
for  eight  minutes,  he  could  hear  the  musical  box  held
more  than  an  inch  from  the  left  ear,  but  not  at  all  with
the  right,  if  not  pressed  against  it,  which  was  of
course  only  feeling.  Certified  as  correct  by  the  father
of  the  patient.  (Signed)  JOHN  WRIGHT."

"  MANCHESTER,  8th  April,  1842."

"  After  writing  the  above  statement,  he  was  again
tested,  and  could  hear  the  box  half  an  inch  from  the
right  ear.  (Signed)  JOHN  WRIGHT."

The  latter  fact,  of  hearing  better  after  being  roused
than  at  the  very  moment  they  are  roused,  occurs  in
cases  generally.  This  patient  attended  daily  for  a  short
time,  and  made  considerable  progress  in  the  power  of
hearing,  but  like  too  many  others  he  had  not  patience
to  persevere,  which  his  father,  who  is  a  very  respectable
and  intelligent  man,  wished  him  to  do.  Unfortunately
the  deaf  and  dumb  are  not  aware  of  the  extent  of  their
priration,  or  of  the  real  advantage  they  would  obtain
l.y  persevering,  and  their  expectation,  and  that  of  their
friends,  in  most  cases  seems  to  be,  that  the  moment
they  have  the  power  of  hearing  restored  in  some


DEAF  AND  DUMB  PATIENTS.  183

degree,  they  should,  as  by  a  miracle,  also  be  imme-
diately inspired  with  the  gift  of  tongues,  and  be  able
to  speak  and  understand  language  without  study,
toil,  or  trouble.  This  has  been  so  well  expressed  by
John  Harrison  Curtis,  Esq.  that  I  shall  quote  a  para-
graph from  his  pen  on  the  subject.

"  Kramer  condemns  the  cases  recorded  as  cures  by
Itard,  Deleau,  and  others,  because,  when  published,
the  patients  had  not  acquired  a  facility  of  speech
equal  to  that  evinced  by  other  people  of  the  same  age  ;
forgetting,  that  when  the  deafness  has  been  cured,  the
individual  is  placed  precisely  in  the  position  of  a  child
that  has  to  acquire  the  faculty  of  speech,  and  not
unfrequently  the  power  of  thought ;  while,  at  the
same  time,  if  he  have  approached  the  age  of  puberty,
he  has  to  contend  with  false  impressions  created  by
the  erroneous  perceptions  which  affected  him  while
unable,  from  his  infirmity,  to  impart  his  feelings  and
ideas  to  his  fellow-creatures  ;  in  fact,  he  is  placed  in
the  same  position  in  regard  to  hearing  as  Cheselden's
patient  was  with  respect  to  vision.  The  organ,  when
the  cophosis  is  removed,  requires  to  be  carefully
educated  to  perceive,  understand,  and  distinguish  the
variety  of  sounds  which  will  impinge  upon  the
auditory  nerve,  a  task  requiring  much  time  for  its
accomplishment.  The  cure  of  congenital  deafness,
consequently,  may  be  effected,  and  yet  rendered  effe'te,
for  want  of  this  necessary  subsequent  education."

After  remarking  that  many  cases  of  deaf  dumbness
arise  from  disease,  and  are  only  partially  deaf,  he
added,  "  Many  of  these  cases  admit  of  amelioration,
some  of  cure ;  and  I  hold,  that  wherever  there  is  a
chance  only  of  doing  good,  it  ought  not  to  be


184  MR  CTJRTIS'S  REMARKS.

neglected  ;  it  may  certainly  raise  hopes  which  may
be  nullified  hereafter,  but  not  in  the  patient,  who
cannot  comprehend  the  motives  of  the  proceeding ;
nor  would  the  friends  be  much  annoyed  thereat,  if
the  surgeon  has  performed  his  duty  properly,  by
shewing,  that  although  there  is  a  chance  of  success,  it
is  after  all  only  a  chance."  —  "It  does  not  occasion  a
loss  of  valuable  time,  worthy  to  be  put  in  competition
with  the  prospect  of  restoring  even  one  individual  to
the  enjoyment  of  the  society  and  converse  of  his  fel-
lows." —  "  Many  would  be  rendered  (by  proper  treat-
ment) useful  members  of  society,  who,  under  the
present  system,  remain  hopeless  objects  of  commisera-
tion as  long  as  they  live."  Mr  Curtis  farther  adds,
"  I  perfectly  agree  with  Dr  Williams,  who  says,  a
cure  ought  always  to  be  attempted,  and  that  at  the
earliest  moment  at  which  deafness  is  detected ;  and
children  so  affected  should  mix  with  others  not  deaf,
and  no  symbolical  education  should  take  place  until
all  chances  of  cure  are  gone."  Medical  Gazette,  23d
September,  1842.

These  remarks  are  so  judicious  and  important  as  to
require  no  comment  by  way  of  enforcing  them  on  any
intelligent  and  candid  reader.

The  following  case  having  been  the  cause  of  much
controversy,  I  shall  give  it  in  detail.  Before  operating
on  the  boy,  in  the  presence  of  the  gentleman  who
brought  him  to  me,  I  asked  the  lad,  in  writing,  if  he
ever  heard,  to  which  he  returned  answer,  (also  in
writing,)  "  No."  I  then  proceeded  to  operate  on  him,
and  the  following  is  a  report  of  his  case  from  my  note-
book.

Case  X.  "  James  Shelmerdino,  Mr  Barker's,  83  High


JAMES  SHELMERDINE.  185

Street,  Manchester,  aged  fourteen  years  and  a  half,  was
born  deaf  and  dumb,  and  educated  at  the  Manchester
Deaf  and  Dumb  Asylum,  and  came  out  last  June,
in  consequence  of  his  age.  4th  January,  1842,  I
subjected  him  to  the  mesmeric  influence,  by  causing
him  look  at  my  glass  rod,  and  in  thirteen  minutes
aroused  him  by  a  clap  of  the  hands,  when  he
could  hear  the  tick  of  my  watch  applied  to  the  right
ear,  but  only  very  slightly  so  when  applied  to  the
left.  Could  hear  me  speak  loudly,  but  could  not  tell
what  I  said  to  him.  This  took  place  in  presence  of
his  master,  who  brought  him  to  me,  and  now  attests
the  correctness  of  the  above.  The  boy  has  other  two
brothers  deaf  and  dumb.

(Signed)  MATTHEW  BARKER."  *

5th  January.  Again  subjected  him  to  the  operation.
In  twelve  minutes  he  could  hear  my  watch  at  nine
inches  from  right  ear,  and  at  six  from  left.

7th  January.  Called  upon  me,  and  could  hear  with
the  right  ear  at  four  and  a  half  inches,  and  one  inch
from  left  ear.  After  being  hypnotized  for  ten  minutes,
he  could  hear  the  watch  at  seven  inches  from  right,
and  at  four  inches  from  left  ear.

17th  January.  After  operation  could  hear  six  and
a  half  inches  with  left,  and  seven  and  a  half  with
right.  20th.  Could,  after  being  roused,  hear  my
watch  at  seven  and  a  half  inches  from  left  ear,  and  at
nine  inches  from  right."

The  boy  was  now  tested  by  competent  judges,  and

*  Mr  Barker  was  not  the  boy's  master,  but  employed  some
of  his  friends,  as  was  afterwards  explained  to  me.


18G  JAMES  SHELMERDINE'S  CASE.

pronounced  capable  of  imitating  articulate  sound
wit/iout  seeing  the  motion  of  the  lips.  To  render  this
the  more  certain,  he  was  tried  with  a  word  requiring
no  motion  of  the  lips  and  spoken  near  his  ear,  which
he  distinctly  imitated.

I  now  commenced  to  teach  him  to  speak  a  few
simple  words,  and  he  got  on  very  well ;  and  that  he
could  do  so  very  satisfactorily,  I  considered  there  was
ample  proof  by  what  he  accomplished  at  my  lectures.
There  were  some  who  could  not  believe  he  could  have
been  born  entirely  deaf  and  dumb,  when  they  heard
how  well  he  imitated  articulate  sounds  when  the
motions  of  the  lips  were  concealed.  This  was  par-
ticularly and  warmly  disputed  at  a  lecture  I  gave  at
Liverpool,  on  the  1st  of  April,  1842.  The  boy  was
asked,  without  my  knowledge,  by  Mr  Rhind,  head
master  of  the  Deaf  and  Dumb  Institution  of  Liver-
pool, if  he  ever  heard  before  being  operated  on  by  me,
to  which  he  answered,  "  No."  Next  day,  in  the
presence  of  several  friends,  I  again  questioned  him  in
writing  as  to  his  original  condition,  when  he  gave  the
following  answers,  which  he  certified  by  his  signature
as  beiiif  correct.  Fortunately,  this  document,  by  the
merest  accident,  (having  been  written  on  the  back  of
a  letter  belonging  to  another  gentleman,)  has  been
preserved,  and  I  shall  here  transcribe  it  verbatim.
"  •  Could  you  ever  hear  before  I  operated  on  you  ?'  —
*  No.'  '  How  did  the  master  of  the  school  teach  you
to  say,  papa,  mamma  1* — '  Few  days.'  '  How  did  he
doit?'— 'Ba,  be,  bi,  bo,  bu.'  'Did  the  master  ask
you  to  watch  the  motions  of  his  lips  ?'  — '  Yes.'  *  Did
he  try  to  teach  you  to  speak  by  applying  his  mouth
to  your  ear?'— 'No.'  'Did  you  ever  say  what  you


IMPROVEMENT.  187

did  to  me  before?'  —  'No.' 'Did  you  ever  read  it,  so
far  as  you  remember  ?' — '  No.'

(Signed) JAMES  SHELMERDINE."

Hitherto  the  boy  had  only  been  taught  single
words.  The  last  two  questions  refer  to  part  of  the
"  Lord's  Prayer,"  in  English,  which  I  had  been  teach-
ing him  to  speak  by  means  of  hearing  ;  and  although
he  speedily  made  a  good  attempt  at  repeating  part  of
it,  the  effect  was  so  different  from  that  of  the  mode
adopted  at  school,  or  that  conveyed  to  his  mind
through  the  organ  of  sight,  when  reading  it,  as  he
must  have  been  accustomed  to  do,  that  he  did  not  know
what  it  was  I  had  been  teaching  him  to  speak.  Could  a
stronger  proof  than  this  be  adduced  that  the  boy  did
not  learn  to  speak  by  hearing  before  he  was  under
my  treatment  ?

I  also,  on  the  same  day,  taught  this  boy  to  repeat
part  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  in  Latin,  to  do  away  with
all  ground  of  cavil  as  to  what  he  might  have  learned
at  the  Institution  ;  and  at  my  next  lecture  at  Liver-
pool, the  week  after,  he  was  heard  to  be  able  to
repeat  it  when  spoken  to  him  in  a  moderate  tone  of
voice,  whilst  the  motions  of  the  lips  were  concealed,
and  that  taking  the  words  in  any  order,  so  that  there
could  be  no  ground  of  mistake  as  to  his  hearing  what
he  repeated.

Various  surmises  having  now  got  out,  that  this  boy,
James  Shelmerdine,  might  have  had,  or  must  have
had,  the  sense  of  hearing  originally,  and  that  his
present  condition  could  not  possibly  be  the  result  of
hypnotism,  I  addressed  a  letter  to  Mr  Bingham,
who  was  head  master  of  the  Asylum  during  the  five


188  MR  BINOHAM'S  TESTIMONY.

years  this  boy  was  at  school,  requesting  him  to  favour
mo  with  information  as  to  James  Shelmerdine's  real
condition  up  to  the  time  when  he  left  school.  The
following  is  his  reply,  and  I  may  add,  I  am  not  per-
sonally acquainted  with  Mr  Bingham.  After  describ-
ing the  partial  hearing  of  this  boy,  which  varied
greatly,  Mr  Bingham  adds,  —  "  I  never  considered  his
hearing  sufficient  to  distinguish  one  sound  from
another  in  conversation,  and  consequently,  never
attempted  to  teach  him  to  speak  in  any  other  way
than  that  which  I  use  with  all  children  born  deaf.
If  hypnotism,  or  mesmerism,  has  enabled  him  to
imitate  the  sounds  you  wished  to  communicate  to
him,  without  his  observing  the  lips,  I  do  not  hesitate
to  say  that  you  have  achieved  that  which  I  never
could  have  expected  ;  and,  under  such  circumstances,
I  think  every  encouragement  ought  to  be  given  to
your  plan.  You  would  greatly  oblige  me  by  saying
if  this  has  been  accomplished,  as  the  boy  was  quite  in-
capable of  distinguishing  one  word  from  another  when  he
left  me,  if  spoken  behind  his  back"

Fortunately  I  had  no  difficulty  in  satisfactorily
substantiating  this,  for,  besides  having  been  so  re-
peatedly proved  in  the  public  lecture-room,  here  and
elsewhere,  he  had  also  been  tested  before  a  number
of  the  most  distinguished  members  of  the  British
Association,  last  June,  and,  more  recently,  before  a
dozen  witnesses,  including  the  present  head  master  of
the  Deaf  and  Dumb  Institution  of  this  town.  I
instituted  this  investigation  in  consequence  of  some
gross  attempts  which  had  been  made  to  misrepresent
my  conduct  in  reference  to  this  case.  The  following
is  an  extract  from  the  report  of  his  condition  on  the


MR  BINGHAM'S  TESTIMONY.  189

25th  July  last,  (1842,)  and  is  attested  by  Mr  A.
Patterson,  head  master  of  our  Deaf  and  Dumb  School,
and  twelve  more  witnesses  :  —  "James  Shelmerdine
was  examined  at  Mr  Braid's  before  the  undersigned,
in  reference  to  his  hearing,  and  he  readily  repeated
part  of  the  Lord's  Prayer,  both  in  English  and  Latin,
both  backwards  and  forwards,  after  Mr  Braid  repeat-
ing the  words  in  a  moderate  tone  of  voice,  without
being  able  to  see  the  movement  of  the  lips."

I  had  not  seen  the  boy  for  about  a  month  before
this  investigation,  and  I  would  ask,  did  he  not  here
manifest  a  decided  improvement  from  the  state  he
was  in  when  he  left  school,  when,  as  borne  testimony
to  by  Mr  Bingham,  "  he  was  quite  incapable  of  dis-
tinguishing one  word  from  another,"  if  spoken  so
that  he  could  not  see  the  motion  of  the  lips  ?  and  I
am  quite  certain  this  was  his  condition  immediately
after  my  first  operation.  As  has  been  already  stated,
he  could  not  then  distinguish  one  word  from  another,
however  loudly  spoken  close  to  his  ear.

After  communicating  these  statements  of  what  the
boy  could  do,  as  recorded  at  the  investigation  on  the
25th  July,  Mr  Bingham  favoured  me  with  a  second
letter,  from  which  I  make  the  following  extract :  —
"  James  Shelmerdine's  performance  in  repeating  the
Lord's  Prayer,  in  Latin  and  English,  when  the  mo-
tions of  the  lips  were  concealed  from  him,  is  a  con-
vincing proof  that  he  must  have  benefited  greatly  by
it  (hypnotism,)  as  he  could  not  distinguish  one
sound  from  another  by  oral  communication."

The  following  fact  also  proves  the  great  improve-
ment in  the  boy's  hearing.  One  afternoon  he  was  in
my  hall,  when  a  lady  was  playing  the  piano,  and


190  INFERENCES  FROM  WHOLE.

singing,  in  a  room  up  stairs.  He  seemed  so  much
pleased  with  the  music  that  I  gave  him  permission  to
go  and  hear  it.  He  instantly  went  up  stairs,  and  into
the  drawing-room,  by  himself,  and  seemed  quite
delighted  with  the  sound  of  the  music,  as  several  who
saw  him  can  testify.  This,  I  am  quite  certain,  he
could  not  have  done  for  some  time  after  he  came
under  my  care.

In  fine,  I  feel  confident,  that  had  this  boy  persevered
with  the  operation,  and  been  taken  pains  with  by  his
parents,  to  teach  him  to  speak,  and  understand  the
meaning  of  what  he  spoke,  he  would,  long  ere  now,
have  been  able  to  hold  oral  communication  with
others  with  less  trouble,  and  in  a  more  moderate  tone
of  voice  than  we  must  resort  to  with  many  whom  \ve
meet  with,  who  have  become  hard  of  hearing  from
ago  or  disease.  It  is,  however,  so  much  more  trouble,
at  first,  for  the  friends  to  teach  them  language,  than
to  hold  intercourse  with  them  by  signs,  that  they  will
not  bestow  it,  and  the  patients,  from  not  knowing  the
extent  of  their  privation,  can  be  less  expected  to  exert
themselves  for  acquiring  the  good  they  know  not  ;
ami  therefore,  I  feel  assured  there  will  never  be  much
achieved  for  the  poor  in  this  way,  unless  within  the
walls  of  some  public  institution  ;  but,  that  there  are
many  who  might  be  permanently  benefited  in  such
situations  I  have  no  doubt.  In  the  paper  by  Mr
Curtis,  to  which  I  have  already  referred,  he  writes
thus  in  reference  to  the  pathological  condition  of  the
organ  in  those  born  deaf  and  dumb  :  —  "I  am  of  the
same  opinion  as  Itard  in  this  respect,  that  structural
disease  does  not  occasion  more  than  one  case  in  five,
leaving,  consequently,  many  cases  in  which  medical


SARAH  TAYLOR.  191

assistance  may  prove  of  service  ;  and  I  do  not  acknow-
ledge that  the  '  weakness  of  the  nerve,  approaching  to
paralysis,  or  an  actual  paralysis  of  the  nerve,'  which
Dr  Kramer  assumes  to  exist  in  those  cases  where  con-
genital cophosis  is  present,  and  no  structural  derange-
ment, must  necessarily  be  as  incurable  as  structural
deficiency.  We  are  not  apt  to  abandon  incipient
palsy  of  a  nerve  of  sense  or  motion,  in  other  parts  of
the  system,  without  an  attempt  at  relief ;  and  I  see
no  reason  why  the  unfortunate  being  afflicted  with
deaf  dumbness,  should  be  surrendered  to  his  fate,
without  a  well  directed  attempt  being  previously
made  to  redeem  him  therefrom."

This,  together  with  the  statement  of  his  experience,
ought  to  encourage  farther  trials,  and  especially  now
that  we  have  got  a  new  and  more  powerful  agent  to
operate  with  than  any  hitherto  brought  into  opera-
tion in  such  cases.  The  results  of  the  following  case
have  far  more  than  realized  my  most  sanguine  expec-
tations. It  clearly  proves,  that  persons  with  perfect
organization  may  have  been  deaf  and  dumb  from
birth,  and  continue  so  merely  for  want  of  a  sufficient
stimulus  to  set  the  machinery  in  motion.

In  consequence  of  the  remarkable  improvement  of
hearing,  through  hypnotism,  evinced  in  the  case  of
Mrs  C.,  (Case  IV.  already  recorded,)  I  was  asked  to
give  my  opinion  as  to  the  probability  of  a  similar
operation  benefiting  a  girl  who  had  been  deaf  and
dumb  from  birth,  and  who  was  sister  to  a  servant  in
the  family  I  was  then  visiting.  I  told  them  what
my  experience  had  been  in  respect  to  such  cases,  and
it  was  accordingly  arranged  that  I  should  see  the


192  SARAH  TAYLOR.

patient,  and  try  what  could  be  done  for  her,  the  fol-
lowing day.

Case  X.  9th  August,  1843.  The  girl,  Sarah  Taylor,
was  nine  and  a-half  years  of  age,  very  small  for  her
age,  and  very  stupid  looking.  The  following  is  the
history  of  the  case,  as  stated  by  father,  mother,  and
elder  sister.  She  was  a  seven  months'  child,  remark-
ably small,  the  head  large  for  the  size  of  the  body,  and
soft,  ("  like  a  bladder  full  of  water,")  and  it  was  long
before  they  expected  to  be  able  to  rear  the  child.  As
she  grew  up  they  were  much  annoyed  with  her  not
speaking,  and  by  her  paying  no  attention  to  what
•was  said  to  her.  At  last  they  found  that  this  was  not
obstinacy,  to  which  it  had  been  at  first  attributed.
They  now  came  to  the  painful  conviction  that  she  was
deaf  and  dumb.  The  father  has  assured  myself,  and
many  others,  that  in  his  anxiety  to  obtain  proof  of  her
having  any  degree  of  hearing,  he  has  "often  stood
behind  her,  and  shouted  (as  he  expressed  himself)  till
he  was  hoarse  again,"  without  her  evincing  any  sign  of
hearing ;  and  that  when  she  was  out  of  sight  they  were
in  continual  terror  she  would  be  run  over  by  carts  or
carriages,  as  she  could  not  hear  their  approach.  The
testimony  of  the  mother  and  sister  was  to  the  same
effect,  that  they  never  could  make  her  hear,  or  pay
any  attention  by  calling  her,  when  her  back  was  to-
wards them.  In  such  position  they  could  only  make
her  observe  them  by  touching  her.  They  all  agree,
also,  in  stating,  that  she  never  could  speak  so  as  to  be
understood,  till  after  being  operated  on  by  me,  ex-
cepting two  or  three  words, — father,  mother,  sister,
which  she  had  learned  from  watching  the  motions  of


PROFESSOR  TAYLOR'S  TEST.  193

their  lips.  I  regret  not  having  had  her  tested  by  a
musical  box  before  I  operated  on  her  ;  but  I  am  quite
certain,  that  after  the  first  operation  she  could  not
distinguish  one  word  from  another ;  and  I  afterwards
had  the  best  possible  proof  of  her  never  having  heard
for  any  useful  purpose,  as  she  was  quite  ignorant  of
the  name  of  any  part  of  her  own  body,  or  of  any  person,
place,  or  thing,  as  is  well  known  to  many  who  saw
her  after  I  had  operated  on  her.  After  the  third  and
fourth  operation  I  could  manage  to  make  her  speak
a  few  simple  words,  and  also  to  make  a  tolerable
attempt  at  following  me  when  singing  the  musical
scale.

Ten  days  after  the  fourth  trial,  she  was  tested  and
proved  able  to  do  this  before  fifty  or  sixty  highly
respectable  witnesses,  including  many  professional
gentlemen.  For  months  past  she  has  been  attending
the  Scotch  Sessional  School,  and  is  making  very  good
progress  in  learning,  and  I  have  no  doubt,  will  prove
to  be  a  clever  girl ;  she  hears  so  correctly  now,  as  not
only  to  be  able  to  imitate  speaking,  but  also  singing.
Mr  E.Taylor,  Gresham  Professor  of  Music,  lately  affor-
ded a  number  of  my  professional  and  scientific  friends
a  good  proof  of  this,  as  he  composed  an  extemporary
tune  which  she  and  other  two  patients  sang  correctly,
whilst  in  the  state  of  n  euro-hypnotic  sleep.  She
could  have  done  the  same  whilst  awake,  and  hundreds
have  witnessed  her  speak  and  sing,  both  when  asleep
and  when  awake.

It  is  curious,  that  in  some  who  have  a  very  incor-
rect musical  ear,  so  that  they  could  not  be  taught  to
sing  the  most  simple  air  correctly  when  awake,  can

N


104  HYPNOTISM  INCREASES

nevertheless  be  made  to  do  so,  when  in  this  peculiar
sleep.  This  was  remarkably  exemplified  in  a  young
lady,  whom  I  wished  to  be  taught  a  simple  air  which
she  might  sing  by  way  of  exemplification,  at  some
lectures  I  was  to  give  at  a  distance,  but  it  could  not  be
accomplished;  she  could  not  follow  in  tune  more
than  a  note  or  two  together ;  but  when  asleep,  she
can  sing  any  air  correctly  which  I  have  tried  her
with.  Still,  when  awake,  she  cannot  do  so.  For  an
example  of  the  same  sort  during  natural  somnambu-
lism, see  pages  296  —  298,  and  309,  of  Dr  {Abcr-
crombie's  work  on  the  Intellectual  Powers.  Of  one
it  is  noted,  "  She  often  sung,  both  sacred  and  common
pieces,  incomparably  better,  Dr  Dyce  affirms,  than
she  could  do  in  the  waking  state."  Of  the  other,  "  she
was,  when  awake,  a  dull  awkward  girl,  very  dull  in
receiving  any  kind  of  instruction,  though  much  care
was  bestowed  upon  her,  and,  in  point  of  intellect,  she
was  much  inferior  to  the  other  servants  of  the  family.
In  particular,  she  shewed  no  kind  of  turn  for  music,
and  she  did  not  appear  to  have  any  recollection  of
what  passed  during  her  sleep."  During  somnambu-
lism, she  sang  beautifully,  and  exhibited  great  intel-
lectual powers.

I  shall  conclude  this  department  by  recording
the  following  case  from  my  note  book.  The  in-
ability of  this  patient  to  sing  in  tune  may  have  been
partly  owing  to  a  defect  in  the  organ  of  hearing,  and
partly  to  a  state  of  nervousness  affecting  the  vocal
organs.  The  experiment  was  undertaken  merely  to
gratify  the  particular  desire  of  the  patient,  as  at  that
time  I  had  had  no  similar  case,  and  was  not  prepared


TASTE  FOR  MUSIC.  195

to  say,  whether  it  was  likely  or  not  to  be  successful.
However,  I  felt  assured  it  would  do  him  110  harm,  and
made  the  trial  accordingly,  and  assuredly  nothing
could  have  proved  more  successful  or  more  gratifying
than  the  result.

Case  XI.  7th  July,  1842, 1  was  consulted  by  Alex-
ander M'Roberts,  29  years  of  age,  residing  with
Mr  Hannay,  of  42,  Thomas  Street,  Manchester.
He  said,  he  had  never  been  able  to  join  in  tune,  al-
though he  had  frequently  attempted  to  do  so.  After
being  hypnotized  for  some  time,  (about  ten  minutes,)
I  roused  him,  and  desired  him  to  walk  into  the  dining-
room,  and  after  hypnotizing  him  once  more,  a  friend
played  the  organ,  and  I  directed  (or  led)  him  to  sing
the  scale,  beginning  with  D,  as  he  could  not  sing  C,
owing  to  the  natural  pitch  of  his  voice.  He  very  soon
managed  to  sing  the  scale  quite  correctly,  upwards
and  then  downwards.  I  now  roused  him,  and  made
him  sing  it  when  awake,  which  he  did  remarkably
well.  I  now  tried  him  with  the  first  part  of  "  Robin
Adair,"  which  he  followed  in  correct  tune  several
times.  This  took  place  in  presence  of  Mr  James
Reynolds,  Mr  Daniels,  Mr  James  Braid,  my  nephew,
and  myself.  In  the  evening  of  that  day,  after  being
again  hypnotized,  he  sung  the  first  part  of  "  Robin
Adair"  very  correctly  several  times,  and  also  PleyePs
German  Hymn,  and  the  Old  Hundred  Psalm,  quite
correctly.  PleyeFs  German  Hymn  he  never  heard
before.  This  took  place  in  presence  of  four  gentle-
men.

His  inability  to  sing  prior  to  these  operations  was
borne  testimony  to  by  several  of  his  friends,  one  of


196  M'ROBERT'S  CASE.

whom  had  a  good  knowledge  of  music,  but  despaired
of  ever  seeing  M'Roberts  able  to  sing,  and  he  was
exceedingly  surprised  at  the  result.  This  patient  was
operated  on  several  times  afterwards,  and  when  I
last  saw  him,  could  sing  a  considerable  number  of
tunes,  and  follow  any  simple  air  with  ease  and  cor-
rectness.

The  next  sense  I  shall  refer  to  is  that  of  smell.
Having  put  the  patient  into  the  hypnotic  state,  he
ought  to  be  kept  in  it  a  longer  or  shorter  time,  accor-
ding to  the  object  had  in  view.  If  to  excite  or
quicken  the  sense,  the  limbs  should  be  extended  and
a  gentle  current  of  air  should  be  passed  against  the  nos-
trils occasionally  ;  but  if  to  diminish  the  sense,  this
ought  not  to  be  done.

Case  XII.  is  an  interesting  example  of  restoration
of  the  sense  of  smell  by  hypnotizing.  A  young  lady
was  subjected  to  this  operation  for  a  different  com-
plaint. On  being  aroused,  and  after  I  left  the  room,
she  made  inquiries  as  to  the  cause  of  the  great  noise
she  heard  in  the  house,  and  expressed  her  surprise  at
the  noisy  manner  in  which  the  various  duties  of  the
apartment  where  she  was  were  performed.  They
assured  her  there  was  nothing  going  on  in  the  room
where  she  was,  different  from  what  was  usually  the
case,  nor  was  there  any  thing  to  account  for  the  noise
she  complained  of,  and  they  therefore  held  her  com-
plaints to  be  only  imaginary.  She  persisted  they
were  real.  The  fact  was,  she  had  been  for  a  length
of  time  dull  of  hearing,  and  the  improvement  of
this  sense  consequent  on  the  hypnotizing,  had  so
quickened  the  faculty  as  to  account  for  the  difference


SENSE  OF  SMELL.  197

she  experienced.  Moreover,  she  had  for  a  consider-
able time  previously  lost  the  sense  of  smell,  and  it
was  now  ascertained  that  this  sense  had  also  been
restored,  through  the  same  operation.  Another  patient
who  had  lost  the  sense  of  smell  for  nine  years,  had
it  restored  after  being  twice  hypnotized.  For  a  beau-
tiful illustration  of  the  extent  to  which  this  sense  is
roused  during  the  hypnotic  sleep,  see  foot  note,  *  ex-

*  "  A  beautifully  contrived  experiment  was  here  put  in
practice  by  Mr  Clarke,  and  Mr  Townend,  to  test  the  truth  of
the  phenomena.  Mr  Braid  had  drawn  their  attention  to  the
wonderful  exaltation  of  the  sense  of  smell.  A  rose  had  been
held  before  the  patient,  the  scent  of  which  she  had  followed
about  the  platform  in  every  direction  with  the  most  excessive
eagerness  —  now  standing  on  tiptoe  to  reach  it  when  held
aloft,  anon  bending  herself  forward  with  the  most  graceful
ease,  till  her  face  came  almost  in  contact  with  the  floor —  now
darting  after  it  across  the  platform  (notwithstanding  that  her
eyes  were  bandaged)  with  unerring  aim  as  to  the  direction  in
which  it  was  moved — or  throwing  herself  into  the  most
fantastic  attitudes,  but  always  with  surprising  ease,  to  catch
its  fragrance  when  moved  merely  round  her  person  in  tanta-
lizing play.  At  length  she  no  longer  followed  it,  and  Mr
Braid  now  explained  that  the  sense  of  smell  had  entirely
gone,  and  could  only  be  renewed  by  a  current  of  air  across
the  nostrils.  Mr  Clarke  here  motioned  Mr  Townend  to  go
across  the  platform,  which  he  did  very  softly,  and  Mr  Clarke
then  threw  the  rose  to  him,  a  distance  probably  of  from  four
to  five  yards.  Mr  Clarke  having  thus  taken  the  precaution
to  guard  against  the  suspicion  of  collusion  or  trick,  himself
passed  a  current  of  air  across  the  nostrils  of  the  patient,  so  as
to  again  exalt  the  sensibility  of  the  organ.  She  now  moved
forward  as  though  in  search  of  some  object  that  had  escaped
her,  and  was  advancing  in  front  of  the  stage,  which  was  not


198  TOUCH  AND  RESISTANCE.

tracted  from  a  report  of  my  conversazione  to  the  mem-
bers of  the  British  Association,  as  recorded  by  the
"  Manchester  Times."

The  next  senses  I  shall  refer  to,  are  touch  and
resistance ;  under  which  I  shall  adduce  examples  of
the  beneficial  results  of  this  agency,  in  the  cure  of
abnormal  exaltation  or  depression  of  these  functions.
There  are  few  diseases  more  striking  in  their  mani-
festations, or  more  important  in  their  character  and
tendency,  than  those  included  in  this  class,  namely,
paralysis  of  sense  or  motion,  or  both  ;  or  the  reverse,
exalted  feeling,  and  tonic  or  clonic  spasm.

Tic  doloureux  is  well  known  to  be  one  of  the  most
agonizing  affections  to  which  the  human  frame  is
liable.  It  may  arise  from  a  functional  disorder  of  the

exactly  in  the  direction  the  rose  was  thrown,  when  suddenly
her  limbs  and  entire  body  shook  with  a  tremulous  motion,  and
she  stooped  slightly,  and  evinced  the  utmost  terror.  Mr
Braid  explained  that  this  was  occasioned  by  the  rattling  of  a
carriage  over  the  pavement  under  the  window  partly,  and
partly  by  a  feeling  of  insecurity,  arising  from  the  boards  on
which  she  stood  being  limber,  and  yielding  considerably  to
the  foot.  When  the  noise  of  the  carriage  had  ceased,  she
turned  her  face  about  till  it  pointed  in  the  direction
where  Mr  Townend  stood,  when,  though  he  held  the  rose  at
a  distance  of  three  yards  from  her,  she  evidently  caught  the
•-out,  and  darted  towards  it  with  unerring  precision,  and
appeared  almost  to  revel  with  delight  hi  its  fragrance.  A
midden  burst  of  applause  from  the  audience,  quick  as  thought,
dissipated  the  charm,  and  she  stood  aghast,  apparently  in  an
agony  of  terror.  Mr laughed,  and  attempted  to  con-
vey to  a  small  circle  around  him  the  impression  that  all  this
was  feigned,  but  the  attempt  was  disregarded.  In  the  very
front  of  the  company,  and  amongst  those  most  narrowly


TIC  DOLOUREUX.  199

nervous  system,  of  a  local  or  more  general  character,
or  from  an  organic  cause.  The  symptoms  are  much
the  same  in  both  varieties,  but  the  chances  of  effecting
a  cure  are  very  different.  In  the  former  variety,  a
cure  may  be  effected,  and  by  no  means  I  know,  so
speedily  and  certainly  as  by  hypnotism  ;  but  in  the
latter,  the  chances  of  success  are  very  different,  either
from  this  or  any  other  known  remedy.  I  have
repeatedly  applied  it  in  the  one  case,  without  any
apparent  effect,  either  good  or  bad,  but,  in  the  other,
with  the  most  immediate  and  striking  advantage.  I
give  a  few  cases  in  illustration  of  this  success  in  func-
tional disorder.

Case  XIII.  W.  M'Leod  had  been  suffering  for  two
months  from  a  violent  attack  of  tic  of  the  head  and


watching  the  experiments,  were  the  Dean  of  Manchester,  the
Rev.  C.  D.  Wray,  the  Rev.  N.  W.  Gibson,  the  Rev.  H.
Ethelston,  Colonel  Wemyss,  and  a  number  of  others  whom
we  might  mention,  including  several  surgeons,  who  were
capable  of  forming  an  opinion  of  their  own,  and  we  heard
from  several  of  them  expressions  at  once  of  surprise  at  the
phenomena,  and  of  conviction  that  they  were  real.  In  fact,
it  was  the  conviction  of  common  sense,  since  it  would  have
been  far  more  wonderful  as  a  piece  of  trickery  than  as  Mr
Braid  accounts  for  it.  Every  one  must  have  felt  that  it  was
impossible  for  any  person  in  a  natural  state  to  follow  a  flower
about  the  stage  blindfolded,  (supposing  the  patient  was
awake,)  passed  about  as  it  was  from  hand  to  hand  backwards
and  forwards,  with  such  ease,  certainty,  and  rapidity  ;  but
taking  Mr  Braid's  solution  of  the  difficulty,  that  the  senses
are  unnaturally  exalted,  the  mystery  is  at  an  end.  The  only
thing  extraordinary  that  then  remains  is,  that  such  an  agency
should  not  before  have  been  discovered."


200  CASKS  OF  TIC.

face,  which  had  resisted  the  treatment  prescribed  by
his  surgeon.  He  had  been  taking  carbonate  of  iron
in  ample  quantity.  After  eleven  minutes'  hypnotism,
he  was  aroused  quite  free  from  pain,  and  it  never
returned  in  the  same  degree  of  violence,  and  by  a  few
repetitions  of  the  same  process,  he  was  completely
cured,  and  has  remained  well  for  about  a  year.  The
general  state  of  his  health  required  the  aid  of  other
means,  but  the  violence  of  the  tic  was  overcome
before  he  took  a  single  dose  of  medicine  from  me.

Case  XIV.  A  young  lady  was  suffering  from  a  most
violent  attack  of  tic  doloureux,  so  much  so,  that  I
heard  her  screams  before  entering  the  house. "  The
paroxysms  came  on  so  frequently  that  she  was  roused
before  I  could  succeed  in  hypnotizing  her  at  first  trial.
I  now  administered  thirty  drops  of  laudanum,  in  a
little  water,  sprinkled  some  over  the  poultice  on  her
face,  and  instantly  commenced  hypnotizing  her
again.  In  five  minutes  she  seemed  to  be  in  a  com-
fortable sleep,  the  features  perfectly  placid,  the  respira-
tion calm,  not  a  muscle  seemed  to  move  during  the
time  I  remained  in  the  room,  (which  was  a  quarter
of  an  hour,)  whereas  she  had  a  violent  paroxysm
every  three  minutes  previously,  contorting  her  whole
body,  and  when  I  examined  her,  after  having  been
down  stairs  a  considerable  time,  she  was  lying  in
exactly  the  same  posture  as  when  I  left  her,  with
the  same  appearance  of  placid  sleep.  When  I  called
next  morning  I  was  told  she  had  slept  for  five  hours
and  a  half,  and  had  had  no  return  of  tic  after  awaking.
As  she  was  in  the  somnolent  state,  and  the  paroxysms
of  pain  suspended  within  five  minutes,  it  is  quite  clear
this  could  not  be  due  to  the  few  drops  of  laudanum,


CASES  OF  TIC.  201

as  they  could  not  have  been  adequate  to  arrest  such  a
violent  complaint,  at  all  events,  not  in  the  course  of  five
minutes.  *

Case  XV. Miss had  been  suffering  severely

from  tic  for  several  weeks,  and  had  several  teeth  ex-

*  The  following  is  the  statement  of  the  above  case,  attested
by  Mr  Mullard,  druggist,  who  had  been  called  to  visit  this
patient  before  my  arrival,  which  I  give  because  of  some  very
unwarrantable  interference  by  other  medical  men,  —  "I  was
present  with  Miss  G.  when  Mr  Braid  visited  her,  in  conse-
quence of  a  violent  pain  in  the  face,  coming  on  in  severe
paroxysms,  as  occur  in  tic  doloureux.  I  had  applied  poultices,
and  had  other  means  in  readiness,  but  owing  to  the  violence
of  the  pain,  Mr  Braid,  the  usual  medical  attendant  of  the
family,  was  sent  for.  Her  screams  were  heard  in  my  house,
during  the  paroxysms,  and  they  recurred  about  every  minute,
and  lasted  nearly  a  minute  and  a  half,  as  nearly  as  I  can  re-
collect. Mr  B.  had  an  opportunity  of  hearing  her  on  coming
into  the  house ;  and  shortly  after  being  in  her  bedroom  she
had  a  second  attack.  Mr  B.  now  tried  to  hypnotize  her  in
his  usual  way,  but  she  was  roused  by  the  violence  of  the
pain.  He  now  gave  her  a  few  drops  in  water,  and  sprinkled
a  few  over  the  poultice,  and  applied  it  to  the  cheek  again,
and  immediately  repeated  his  operation,  after  which  she
seemed  to  be  in  a  sound  sleep,  and  gave  no  farther  indication
of  pain  in  less  than  five  minutes.  Mr  Braid,  as  well  as  my-
self, remained  a  considerable  time,  at  least  three  quarters  of
an  hour,  and  both  left  convinced  she  was  comfortably  asleep,
and  next  morning  I  heard  she  had  passed  a  good  night,  having
slept  about  five  and  a  half  hours,  and  that  the  tic  had  not
returned  since  we  left.  Every  word  of  this  has  been  care-
fully read  and  considered  before  being  signed.

(Signed)  A.  T.  MULLARD."

21it  June,  1842.


202  PARALYSIS  OF  SENSE

tracted  without  relief.  During  a  violent  paroxysm,  I
succeeded  in  hypnotizing  her,  and  when  aroused,  it
was  quite  gone,  and  has  never  returned.

In  the  affection  to  which  these  cases  belong,  there
is  frequently  such  irritability  of  the  skin,  that  a  slight
touch  over  tho  affected  nerve  is  quite  sufficient  to  ex-
cite a  paroxysm  of  pain.  I  shall  now  adduce  some
cases  illustrative  of  the  opposite  condition,  when  there
was  deficiency  or  entire  loss  of  feeling ;  and  which
have  nevertheless  been  greatly  benefited,  or  entirely
cured  by  hypnotism.  The  following  case  is  illustra-
tive of  its  successful  application  where  there  was
paralysis  both  of  sense  and  motion.

Case  XVI.  Mrs  Slater,  33  years  of  age,  in  the
autumn  of  1841,  had  suffered  a  good  deal  during
her  pregnancy,  and  in  December  of  that  year  was
delivered  of  a  seven  months'  child.  From  this  period,
her  legs,  which  had  been  very  weak  for  some  time
previously,  became  very  much  worse,  and  in  a  short
time  she  lost  all  voluntary  power  over  them,  together
with  loss  of  natural  feeling.  She  had  been  under  the
care  of  three  professional  gentlemen,  but  as  she  be-
came worse  instead  of  better,  notwithstanding  the
means  used,  the  case  had  been  considered  hopeless,
and  left  to  itself,  for  some  time  previous  to  my  being
consulted,  which  was  on  the  22d  April,  1842.  I  found
she  had  not  only  lost  feeling  and  voluntary  motion  of
her  legs  and  feet,  but  that  the  knees  were  rigidly
flexed,  the  heels  drawn  up,  the  toes  flexed,  and  the
feet  incurvated,  and  fixed  in  the  position  of  slight
club  foot  (varus.)  She  had  not  menstruated  since
her  confinement,  but  there  was  no  other  function  as
regarded  the  secretions  or  excretions,  which  appeared


AND  MOTION  CURED.  203

to  be  at  fault.  Her  speech  was  imperfect  and  her
memory  impaired.  I  hypnotized  her,  and  endeavour-
ed, whilst  in  that  condition,  to  regulate  the  morbid
action  of  the  muscles,  and  malposition  of  the  feet  and
legs.  In  five  minutes  I  roused  her,  when  she  thanked
God  she  now  felt  she  had  feet,  could  feel  the  floor  with
them,  and  could  move  her  toes.  I  now  raised  her  on
her  feet,  and  with  the  assistance  of  her  husband  sup-
porting her  by  the  one  arm,  and  myself  by  the  other,
she  went  across  the  room  and  back  again  to  the  sofa,
moving  her  legs  and  supporting  half  the  weight  of
her  body  on  them.  I  operated  on  her  again  the  same
evening,  after  which  she  was  able  to  support  herself
standing  with  the  soles  of  her  feet  on  the  floor.
She  required  merely  to  be  steadied  by  placing  the
points  of  the  fingers  of  one  of  my  hands  against  her
back.  Before  being  operated  on,  the  heels  were  drawn
up,  and  the  feet  twisted  so  that  she  could  only  have
touched  the  floor  with  a  small  portion  of  the  outer  edge
of  the  feet,  near  the  root  of  the  little  toes.  I  hyp-
notized her  in  the  same  manner  daily  for  some  time
with  increasing  improvement,  so  that  in  a  week  she
was  able  to  walk  in  to  her  shop  alone,  merely  requiring
to  steady  herself  by  the  wall,  and  in  two  weeks  more
she  could  walk  into  it  without  any  assistance  whatever.
Two  months  from  my  first  seeing  her,  she  went  to
Liverpool,  and  was  able  to  walk  several  miles  in  a
day.  She  could  walk  from  the  middle  of  the  town
where  she  lodged,  to  the  pier  head  and  back,  and
from  her  lodgings  to  Everton  and  back,  all  in  the
same  day,  which  was  several  miles  partly  on  very
steep  acclivities.  She  had  no  relapse,  and  hag  con-
tinued well  ever  since.


204  SAMUEL  EVANS'S

In  a  very  few  days  after  I  first  operated  on  this
patient,  the  catamenial  discharge  appeared  for  the
first  time  since  her  confinement.  She  had  no  internal
medicine,  nor  external  application  whatever  to  her
legs  for  several  days  after  I  first  saw  her.  Her  extra-
ordinary improvement,  therefore,  resulted  entirely
from  the  effects  of  the  operations.  After  I  had
attended  her  some  days,  she  required  some  simple
aperient  medicine,  and  I  afterwards  prescribed  a  diu-
retic, which  I  hoped  might  expedite  the  cure.  The
feeling  and  power  of  her  legs  and  feet  were  greatly
restored,  her  speech  perfect,  and  her  memory  much
improved,  before  she  had  a  single  dose  of  medicine
from  me.  Her  improvement  therefore  was  strictly
the  result  of  hypnotism  only.

The  extraordinary  effects  manifested  in  this  case,
as  well  as  in  many  others,  after  a  few  minutes'  opera-
tion—  so  different  from  what  is  realized  in  the  appli-
cation of  ordinary  means  —  may  appear  startling  to
those  unacquainted  with  the  powers  of  hypnotism.
On  this  account,  I  have  been  advised  to  conceal  the
facts,  as  many  may  consider  it  impossible,  and  reject
the  less  startling,  although  not  more  true  reports  of  its
beneficial  action  in  other  cases.  In  recording  cases,
however,  I  consider  it  my  duty  to  report  facts  as  I
have  found  them,  and  to  make  no  compromise  for  the
sake  of  accommodating  them  to  the  preconceived
notions  or  prejudices  of  any  one.

Case'  XVII.  Samuel  Evans,  45  years  of  age,  had
suffered  much  from  pain  in  the  spine,  and  also  been
afflicted  with  impaired  feeling  as  well  as  power  of  the
superior  extremities  for  four  years.  He  suffered  also
occasionally  in  the  head,  for  which  he  had  undergone


GREAT  IMPROVEMENT.  206

every  variety  of  treatment  usual  in  such  cases,  under
many  medical  men,  myself  included,  but  with  so
little  success  that  he  had  not  been  able  to  dress  him-
self for  five  years  :  he  could  not  lift  the  left  arm,  and
natural  feeling  was  almost  entirely  gone  from  it.  The
right  arm  was  also  affected,  but  in  a  less  degree,  when
he  applied  to  me  on  the  25th  April,  1842.  I  hypno-
tized him,  and  he  was  so  fully  satisfied  with  the  im-
provement he  experienced,  as  to  induce  him  to  come
to  Manchester  to  be  operated  on  daily.  In  a  very
short  time  his  improvement,  both  as  regarded  strength
and  feeling,  was  most  decided,  as  he  could  lift  a  heavy
chair  with  the  worst  arm,  and  could  feel  a  small
object  such  as  a  pin,  which  could  not  have  been  dis-
tinguished by  him  with  that  hand  when  I  first  saw
him.  The  pain  in  his  back  was  also  speedily  much
relieved.  He  was  exhibited  at  my  conversazione  to
the  British  Association,  29th  June,  1842,  in  this  im-
proved state,  and  has  made  still  farther  progress  since,
although  not  yet  able  to  follow  his  usual  avocation.
I  should  not  omit  to  add,  that  this  patient  was  under
my  own  care  for  some  time  in  1841,  when,  although
he  derived  benefit  from  the  means  used,  he  was  not
nearly  so  much  or  so  rapidly  relieved,  as  by  my  pre-
sent mode  of  treatment  by  hypnotism.

Case  XVIII. Mr  58  years  of  age,  consulted

me  in  consequence  of  a  paralytic  affection  of  two
and  a-half  years'  standing.  Stated  by  his  friends
that  he  had  had  an  apoplectic  seizure  two  years  and
a-half  before,  which  was  at  first  accompanied  with
total  loss  of  consciousness,  and  of  sense  and  mo-
tion of  the  right  side  for  six  weeks.  He  then  gradually


206  MISS  MELLOR  S

recovered,  so  as  to  be  able  to  walk  a  little  in  the
course  of  four  or  five  months.  When  he  called  on  me
3d  June,  1842,  his  gait  was  very  feeble  and  insecure,
always  advancing  the  right  side  foremdst,  his  arm
had  always  been  supported  in  a  sling,  he  could  raise  it
with  an  effort  as  high  as  the  breast,  had  not  the  power
of  opening  the  hand,  the  thumb  was  much  and  rigidly
flexed.  Had  little  or  no  feeling  in  that  hand.  After
being  hypnotized  for  five  minutes,  feeling  was  restored,
he  could  open  the  hand  and  grasp  much  firmer,  and
raise  it  to  his  forehead.  His  speech,  which  had  been
very  imperfect,  was  also  much  improved.  This  patient
was  operated  on  for  some  time  with  partial  improve-
ment, so  that  he  could  manage  his  arm  without  a
sling,  and  the  feeling  continued  improved,  and  there
was  also  slight  improvement  in  his  gait,  but  I  was  of
opinion,  that  there  was  organic  mischief  in  the  brain
which  would  prevent  a  perfect  restoration,  and  there-
fore discontinued  farther  trials.

Case  XIX.  Miss  Sarah  Mellor  had  been  under  my
care  for  nine  months,  for  an  affection  of  the  lower
part  of  the  spine,  accompanied  with  pain  and  weak-
ness of  the  lower  limbs,  and  with  contraction  of
the  knees,  so  that  she  had  been  unable  to  stand  or
walk  without  crutches  during  that  period.  I  had  used
every  means  usually  adopted  in  such  cases,  but  instead
of  improving,  she  was  getting  worse  in  every  respect,
till  I  tried  hypnotism,  the  satisfactory  results  of
which  were  too  immediate  and  apparent  to  admit  of
the  slightest  doubt  of  its  great  value  on  this  occasion.
The  following  is  a  statement  attested  by  the  patient  :—

"  Had  suffered  severe  pain  in  my  ankles,  with  con-


REMARKABLE  IMPROVEMENT.  207

traction  of  the  knees,  and  pain  at  the  bottom  of  my
back,  so  that  I  had  been  unable  to  walk  without  a
pair  of  crutches  for  nine  months.  During  this  period,
I  had  taken  medicines  internally,  used  liniments  to
the  legs  and  spine,  been  leeched  and  blistered  over
the  lower  part  of  the  spine,  but  still,  instead  of  im-
proving, I  was  getting  worse,  both  as  regarded  the
pain  and  contraction,  so  that  I  was  becoming  quite
deformed,  from  the  legs  being  bent  on  the  thighs,  and
they  on  the  body.  I  was  thus  about  nine  or  ten
inches  less  in  stature  than  formerly,  and  than  I  am
now.  About  the  beginning  of  last  March  (1842)  I
came  to  Mr  Braid,  who  had  prescribed  the  other
means  to  me  without  benefit,  when  he  said  he  would
try  his  new  method  with  me.  After  being  hypnotized
three  times,  I  was  able  to  walk  from  my  lodgings  to
the  house  of  a  friend  who  lived  a  few  houses  distant
in  the  same  street  WITHOUT  MY  CRUTCHES,  and  in  two
days  after,  from  that  house  to  Mr  Braid's  WITHOUT
CRUTCHES.  I  was  operated  on  almost  daily  for  three
weeks,  when  I  returned  home,  and  at  that  time  I  was
able  to  walk  half  a  mile  without  crutches.  After  being
at  home  five  weeks,  I  returned  to  Manchester,  and
have  been  attended  by  Mr  Braid  for  two  months,  and
always  found  myself  better  after  the  operations.  I
took  no  medicine  during  my  first  stay  in  Manchester  ;
and  on  this  occasion  having  only  done  so  when  re-
quired for  a  violent  cold  on  two  occasions,  from  im-
prudent exposure.  Since  I  came  to  Manchester  last,
one  day  I  walked  to  Grosvenor  Street,  Piccadilly,  and
back  again  to  my  lodgings  in  Lower  Mosley  Street,
fully  a  mile  and  a  half,  without  inconvenience ;  on
another  occasion  to  Hulme  and  back  again,  fully  two


208  MRS  J/S  CASE.

miles. I  was  quite  sensible,  and  could  hear  all  that  was
said  or  done  during  all  the  operations.

(Signed)  SARAH  ANN  MELLOR.

JANE  LIVESEY,  Witness.
C.  WILSON,  Witness."
MANCHESTER  12th  July,  1842.

This  patient  was  exhibited  at  my  conversazione
29th  June,  1842.  After  returning  home,  she  had  the
misfortune  to  get  entangled  by  one  of  the  feet  in  a
cart  rut,  in  a  lane,  which  threw  her  back,  but  having
returned  and  been  hypnotized,  I  was  enabled  to  send
her  homo  much  improved,  and  when  she  called  on
me  lately,  she  continued  so.

Case  XX.  Mrs  J.,  29  years  of  age,  requested
my  attendance,  17th  February,  1842.  Had  been
attacked  in  the  autumn  of  1840,  with  slight  degree
of  weakness  of  left  side,  and  difficulty  of  speech,
neither  of  which  had  ever  been  entirely  removed.
Three  months  after  she  was  delivered  of  a  still-born
child,  and  had  been  affected  with  convulsions  ten  days
prior  to  delivery,  for  which  she  seemed  to  have  been
treated  in  the  usual  manner.  In  about  a  month  after
delivery,  31st  January,  1841,  she  had  an  apoplectic
attack,  attended  with  total  loss  of  consciousness,  and
paralysis  of  the  left  side,  for  which  her  medical  atten-
dant had  prescribed  the  usual  treatment.  I  was  called
to  attend  her  on  the  17th  February,  and  continued
to  do  so  for  five  weeks,  when,  as  as  there  was  no
particular  improvement  manifested,  she  passed  into
other  hands,  and  after  being  under  treatment  with
them  for  ten  weeks,  without  improving,  she  was  .sent
into  the  country,  where  she  remained  for  about


REMARKABLE  IMPROVEMENT.  209  I

thirteen  months,  when  she  was  brought  back  to  town
to  be  placed  under  my  care,  loth  June,  1842.  The
following  \\-as  her  condition  at  this  period.  Her
mouth  very  much  drawn  to  the  right  side  ;  her  speech
very  imperfect ;  and  her  mind  confused.  The  left
hand  and  arm  were  quite  powerless,  and  rigidly  fixed
to  the  side,  the  hand  clenched,  the  fingers  and  thumb
being  rigidly  and  permanently  flexed.  The  left  leg
very  rigid,  the  heel  drawn  up,  and  the  foot  twisted  so
that  it  could  only  approach  the  ground  by  resting  on
the  outer  edge  near  the  root  of  the  little  toe ;  she
could  move  this  leg  a  little,  but  had  never  been  able
to  stand,  or  walk  a  step,  or  support  any  weight  on  it.
I  hypnotized  her,  though  owing  to  her  mind  being
so  confused,  I  experienced  considerable  difficulty  in
getting  her  to  attend  to  the  necessary  instructions
for  producing  the  condition.  However,  I  at  length
succeeded,  and  after  the  first  operation  —  I  kept  her
in  the  hypnotic  state  for  ten  minutes  —  she  could
hold  her  mouth  much  straighter,  could  move  the
fingers  a  little,  and  lift  the  hand  and  arm  a  few
inches,  and,  with  the  assistance  of  her  mother-in-
law  and  myself  supporting  her  by  the  arms,  she
was  able  to  support  half  the  weight  of  her  body  in
walking  across  the  room  and  back  again.  Her
speech  was  also  improved,  and  she  evinced  less
confusion  of  mind.  Next  day  I  found  the  improve-
ment was  permanent,  and  hypnotized  her  again  with
advantage.  17th,  Found  her  improved,  and  still
more  so  after  being  again  operated  on.  She  could
now,  on  merely  steadying  herself  by  laying  hold  of
her  mother-in-law's  shoulder,  stand  supporting  her-
self on  the  left  leg,  when  the  right  foot  was  lifted
o


210  TERMINATES  IN  APOPLEXY.

clear  from  the  floor.  Her  speech  was  still  more  im-
proved, and  mind  more  collected,  so  that  I  had  very
little  difficulty  in  hypnotizing  her  uow.

She  was  operated  on  daily,  with  advantage,  till  the
end  of  that  month,  and  the  results  shewn  to  some  of
the  most  eminent  professional  and  scientific  gentle-
men in  this  town.  During  the  next  two  months  she
was  operated  on  at  times  only,  being  so  much  better.
In  a  few  weeks  she  could  walk  to  the  door,  steadying
herself  against  the  wall,  and  in  a  few  weeks  was  able
to  walk  into  the  street  with  the  aid  of  a  crutch.  She
had  n6  medicine  during  this  attendance.  I  only  saw
her  occasionally  now,  and  on  the  17th  September,  when
I  had  not  seen  her  for  nine  days  before,  whilst  taking
her  usual  airing  in  the  street,  she  was  seized  with
apoplexy,  from  which  she  died  within  sixteen  hours.
On  inspection,  the  whole  of  the  superior  and  anterior
lobes  of  the  right  side  of  the  brain  were  found  to  bo
in  a  state  of  atrophy,  only  a  thin  layer,  and  that  in  a
state  of  ramolissement,  covering  the  ventricle,  which
was  filled  with  serum,  as  was  also  the  space  between
the  pia  mater  and  arachnoid,  to  make  up  the  space
vacated  by  the  wasting  of  the  cerebral  substance.
There  was  no  effusion  of  blood.  It  is  not  at  all  surpris-
ing that  such  a  case  should  have  resisted  former  treat-
ment, or  proved  fatal  at  last ;  but  it  seems  surprising
that,  with  such  a  state  of  brain,  hypnotism  should
have  had  the  power  of  producing  so  much  improve-
ment as  it  did.

Case  XXI.  14th  June,  1842,  Mr  Thomas  Morris,
42  years  of  age,  consulted  me.  He  had  had  a  pa-
ralytic stroke  fifteen  years  previously,  which  de-
prived him  entirely  of  the  use  of  the  right  leg,  and


MR  MORRIS'S  CASE.  211

rendered  the  left  weak  and  numb.  In  six  weeks  was
able  to  walk  a  little,  but  never  recovered  entirely,
being  always  weak  and  lame.  Fifteen  months  ago
had  a  second  attack,  with  total  loss  of  consciousness
for  a  week,  and  also  complete  loss  of  voluntary  power
of  the  whole  body.  For  several  weeks  required  the
urine  to  be  drawn  off  by  catheter.  He  has  lately
had  the  urine  passing  involuntarily  sometimes,  at
other  times  voided  with  great  difficulty.  He  has
never  regained  the  power  of  his  legs  so  as  to  enable
him  to  stand  or  walk  without  assistance ;  and  has
been,  for  the  last  six  months,  growing  worse.  The
arms  very  weak,  being  unable  to  raise  the  right
higher  than  the  head,  and  even  that  accomplished
with  great  difficulty.  Speech  also  very  imperfect,  and
his  ideas  so  confused  that  he  could  make  himself
understood  with  great  difficulty.  Hypnotized  him
for  five  minutes,  when  he  could  speak  much  better  ;
could  raise  his  arm  and  hold  an  umbrella  perpendicu-
larly, or  horizontally,  with  his  body,  with  perfect
ease,  and  could  walk  across  the  room,  and  back
again,  WITHOUT  ASSISTANCE,  for  the  first  time  since  last
seizure.

(Signed) THOS.  MORRIS.
Witnessed  by  JOHN  SHIPLEY.

Duncan  Street,  Strangeways.

C.  C.  MORRIS.

JOHN  W.  PACEY.

JAMES  BRAID,  Junior.

15th,  Had  the  pleasure  of  finding  the  improve-
ment noted  above  was  permanent,  and  also,  that  he
had  been  able  to  retain  his  urine  and  void  it  at  pleasure,


212  MR  MORRIS'S  PROGRESS.

whereas  it  had  been  passing  involuntarily,  both  by
night  and  day,  immediately  before  being  hypnotized.
He  was  again  hypnotized  to-day  with  additional
advantage.  17th,  Found  him  still  better,  having
been  able  to  walk  in  the  street  with  one  stick  for  the
first  time  for  last  five  years.  Repeated  the  operation.
18th,  Still  better,  so  that,  with  the  aid  of  his  two
sticks,  he  had  walked  into  Ducie  Street  by  himself.
Operation  repeated.

This  patient  went  on  improving,  and  on  the  29th
Juno  was  exhibited  at  my  conversazione.  His  speech
was  greatly  better  immediately  after  first  operation,
and  his  ideas  seemed  more  vivid  and  clear.  He  was
also  able  to  sign  his  name,  and  which  he  did  very
well,  for  the  first  time  since  his  last  seizure.  Nor
should  I  omit  to  add,  that  he  had  regained  power  over
the  rectum,  which  he  had  not  previously ;  and  in
about  ten  days  he  had  got  sufficient  power  of  his
hands  to  enable  him  to  work.  After  he  was  con-
siderably recovered  he  had  the  misfortune  to  fall,  and
injured  the  lower  part  of  the  back  very  much,  which
impaired  the  recently  acquired  power  of  the  legs.
They  are  somewhat  better,  but  not  nearly  so  well  as
they  were  a  few  weeks  after  he  had  been  under  my
care.  His  arms,  however,  still  retain  their  increased
power,  as  I  saw  him  lately  lift  a  bed-room  chair  with
the  right  arm,  and  hold  it  up  nearly  at  full  arm's
length  ;  and  the  mind  keeps  pretty  clear,  much  more
so  than  before  being  hypnotized,  notwithstanding  he
has  had  a  severe  attack  of  bowel  complaint,  from
which  ho  has  been  liable  to  suffer  occasionally.

It  would  be  difficult  to  adduce  a  more  striking
proof  than  the  above,  of  the  extraordinary  power  of


s.  EDWARD'S  CASE.  213

hypnotism,  there  having  been  so  many  points  at
fault,  all  of  which  were  immediately  meliorated,  and
some  of  them  permanently  so.

Case  XXI.  Mr  John  W.,  21  years  of  age,  called
to  consult  me,  18th  April,  1842,  for  a  paralytic  state
of  the  left  side  of  the  face,  of  thirteen  days'  standing.
He  had  no  power  of  the  muscles  of  the  left  side  of
the  face,  consequently  the  mouth  was  drawn  to  the
right,  and  he  had  no  power  of  closing  the  left  eyelid.
In  ten  minutes  after  being  hypnotized,  and  fric-
tion used,  he  could  open  and  close  the  eyelid  with
facility,  and  had  the  power  of  retracting  his  mouth  to
the  left  of  the  mesial  plane.

Case  XXIII.  llth  July,  was  consulted  by  Samuel
Edwards,  who  had  been  unable  to  work  for  six  weeks,
in  consequence  of  a  paralytic  state  of  the  extensor
muscles  of  the  wrist,  and  a  semi-paralytic  state  of  the
flexor  and  extensor  muscles  of  the  fingers.  He  had
injured  the  arm  by  a  heavy  lift,  and  by  a  blow
about  two  years  before.  The  paralytic  state  came  on
suddenly  about  six  weeks  previously  to  my  seeing
him,  accompanied  by  a  tingling  or  prickling  feeling
in  the  fingers.  I  hypnotized  him,  calling  into  action
the  weak  and  entirely  paralytic  muscles  in  the  best
way  I  could.  In  consequence  of  this,  he  acquired  the
power  of  flexing  and  extending  the  wrist,  when  the
arm  was  held  horizontally  with  the  ulna  downwards,
and  of  grasping  pretty  firmly  with  the  fingers,  imme-
diately after  the  first  operation,  which  he  could  not
do  before,  as  witnessed  by  several  highly  respectable
individuals  who  were  present  the  whole  time.  On
the  evening  of  the  following  day,  he  was  able  to  milk
a  cow  with  this  hand,  and  when  he  called  on  me  two


214  s.  EDWARD'S  CASE.

days  after,  I  found  him  greatly  improved.  I  operated
on  him  again  with  additional  advantage,  and  found
him  able  to  grasp  so  firmly  that  he  could  hold  a  single
finger  fast  enough  to  enable  him  to  be  thus  pulled
from  his  seat  without  losing  his  hold.

He  had  undergone  various  treatment,  including
blistering,  under  two  surgeons  before  I  saw  him.

17th  July,  1842,  he  called  on  me,  and  had  still
greater  power  of  the  hand.  After  being  again  hypno-
tized, he  could  readily  lift  the  one  side  of  a  heavy
library  table  with  the  hand,  which  was  quite  power-
less when  I  first  saw  him  six  days  before.  He  stated,
he  had  been  able  to  work  with  it  constantly  from  the
time  I  saw  him,  on  the  14th.

31st,  He  called  on  me,  stated  he  had  been  improv-
ing. Was  hypnotized  once  more.

August  7th,  he  called  on  me,  and  the  first  thing  he
did  was  to  hold  out  his  arm  at  full  length,  and  shew
me  he  could  bend  and  extend  the  wrist,  whilst  the
arm  was  in  the  state  of  pronation.  He  had  been  able
to  do  so  for  some  days.  Had  been  able  to  milk  five
cows  the  day  previous.  Hypnotized  him  again,  after
which  he  had  still  more  power.  He  has  not  required
to  call  on  mo  since,  being  nine  months  ago.  This
patient  must  have  continued  well,  as  I  have  heard
nothing  more  of  him,  which  I  was  to  do  if  he  had  any
relapse.

I  could  easily  multiply  cases  of  successful  practice
in  the  treatment  of  paralysis  by  hypnotism,  were  it
not  for  occupying  too  much  space.  I  shall,  therefore,
condense  a  f«w.

XXIV.  A  gentleman  sixty  years  of  age  had  a  par-
alytic stroke  two  years  and  a  half  before  consulting


ADDITIONAL  CASES.  215

me,  which  deprived  him  entirely  of  the  use  of  the
right  arm,  and  enfeebled  the  right  side  and  leg.  When
he  called  on  me,  he  walked  very  feebly,  could  scarcely
close  the  fingers  and  thumb,  and  could  not  extend
them  fully.  He  could  with  great  difficulty  raise  the
hand  as  high  as  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  the  pupil  of
the  right  eye  was  considerably  larger  than  the  left,
and  not  quite  circular  ;  speech  very  imperfect.  After
being  hypnotized  for  five  minutes,  he  was  able  to  open
and  close  the  hand  freely,  and  to  raise  the  hand  above
the  head,  and  pass  it  to  the  back  of  the  head,  and  he
could  also  walk  and  speak  much  better.  Pulse  regular,
— before  operation,  his  pulse  was  very  irregular.  When
he  called  on  me  next  morning,  I  found  the  improve-
ment had  been  permanent.  I  hypnotized  him  once
more  with  advantage,  and  again  on  the  two  following
days  ;  seven  weeks  afterwards  he  called  on  me,  when
I  found  the  improvement  was  permanent.  He  could
speak  and  walk  much  better,  could  raise  the  arm,  and
move  the  fingers  and  hand  freely,  could  pass  the
hand  above  and  over  the  head,  and  take  off  his  hat
with  it.  The  right  pupil  also  was  quite  circular  now,
and  nearly  the  same  size  as  the  other.

Case  XXV.  4th  June,  1842,  Mr  J.  H.,  67  years  of
age,  had  a  paralytic  stroke,  19  months  previously,
which  deprived  him  entirely  of  speech,  and  of  motion
of  right  leg  and  arm.  When  he  called  on  me,  his
speech  was  very  imperfect,  his  hearing  dull,  and  he
had  very  little  power  in  closing  the  hand,  could  raise
the  hand  to  the  mouth,  said  he  could  sometimes  raise
it  a  little  higher,  but  never  so  high  as  his  head.  After
being  hypnotized  for  five  minutes,  he  could  speak  and
hear  much,  better,  could  grasp  much  stronger,  and


216  THOMAS  JOHNS-TONE'S  CASE.

would  raise  the  hand  afoot  above  the  head,  and  put  his
coat  on  without  assistance,  passing  it  over  his  head.
His  walking  was  also  much  firmer.  He  seemed  greatly
pleased  with  being  able  to  put  his  coat  on,  as  it  was
the  first  time  since  his  seizure.  He  was  also  able  to
sign  his  name  for  the  first  time,  to  attest  the  accuracy
of  my  report  of  his  case,  which  he  did  before  two  wit-
nesses who  had  been  present  during  the  operation.
He  called  on  me  twice  after  this,  the  last  time  two
weeks  from  his  first  visit,  when  I  found  the  improve-
ment was  permanent.

Case  XXVI.  Thomas  Johnstone,  36  years  of  age,
had  a  paralytic  seizure,  13th  February,  1842,  which
deprived  him  of  feeling  and  motion  of  left  arm  and
hand.  Had  partially  recovered  motion  so  as  to  be
able  occasionally  to  move  the  fingers  a  little,  and  to
raise  the  arm  nearly  to  the  horizontal  position,  but
frequently  was  suddenly  struck  with  pain  and  total
loss  of  power  of  the  arm,  and  hand,  and  fingers,  for
four  or  five  hours  after.  Had  been  struck  in  this  way
just  before  I  saw  him,  and  he  wras  quite  powerless,  as
above  described,  or  rather  the  arm  was  spasmodically
fixed  to  the  side  ;  had  been  under  medical  treatment
ever  since  his  first  seizure.  4th  May,  1842,  hypno-
tized him  for  four  minutes,  after  which  he  could  move
the  fingers,  hand,  and  arm  freely,  elevating  it  above
his  head,  across  his  body  in  either  direction,  and
could  retain  it  in  any  situation  he  was  asked.  The
feeling,  however,  was  still  very  imperfect.  6th  May,
called  on  mo  to  go  to  my  lecture,  when  he  had  the
complete  control  of  the  hand,  arm,  and  fingers.  He  was
hypnotized  in  the  lecture-room  the  same  night,  and
in  four  days  after  the  feeling,  as  well  as  power,  was


MR  HOLDITCH'S  CASE.  217

restored  to  it.  26th,  called  on  me  again,  and  has  per-
fect voluntary  power  of  the  arm,  as  well  as  natural
feeling  and  heat  of  the  member.  Attested  as  correct
by  the  patient.

(Signed  by  proxy  to  which  the  patient  affixed
his  mark)  THOMAS  JOHNSTONE.

Witnessed  by  JOHN  HAKDING.

I  have  also  a  copy  of  a  certificate  of  his  condition
from  the  physician  who  attended  him  immediately
before  he  consulted  me.  On  the  20th  January,  1843,
his  father  informed  me  that  his  son  had  requested  him
to  call  on  me,  and  say  he  was  in  America,  and  had
remained  well  ever  since  I  saw  him,  and,  that  he
wished  his  father  to  express  how  grateful  he  felt  for
the  benefit  he  had  derived  from  my  operations.

I  shall  only  give  one  more  case  illustrative  of  this
class.

Case  XXVII.  Mr  H.,  39  years  of  age,  had  been
partially  paralytic  of  the  inferior  extremities  for  ten
years,  which  came  on  some  time  after  a  fall,  accom-
panied with  double  vision.  The  latter  disappeared
under  treatment,  but  the  former  increased.  When  he
called  on  me,  18th  February,  1843,  he  was  walking
with  a  crutch  and  stick,  and  with  the  assistance  of
both  and  a  servant,  it  was  with  great  difficulty  he
could  ascend  the  few  steps  at  my  door.  After  the  first
operation,  he  could  walk  across  the  room  and  back
again,  without  either  crutch  or  stick,  and  after  being
operated  on  next  day,  he  was  able  to  mount  twenty-
eight  steps  to  his  bed-room  without  his  crutch,  and
has  done  so  ever  since.  In  ten  days,  I  was  agreeably
surprised  to  see  him  on  the  fourth  bench  of  the  lec-
ture-room of  the  Manchester  Athenaeum,  to  which


218  GENERAL  SUCCESS.

he  had  ascended  eighty-one  steps,  with  the  aid  of  a
stick  in  one  hand.

This  patient  had  not  been  aware,  until  I  called  his
attention  to  the  fact,  that  he  had  very  defective  vision
of  the  right  eye,  and  was  surprised  to  find  on  testing
this,  that  when  the  left  eye  was  closed,  he  could  with
difficulty  see  the  large  heading  of  the  leader  of  the
Medical  Gazette,  whereas  he  could  read  the  ordinary
sized  print  of  that  article  with  the  left.  After  being
operated  on,  he  could  read  the  small  print  of  the  leader
with  the  right  eye  also,  at  which  he  felt  greatly  sur-
prised, as  well  as  at  the  increased  power  of  his  legs,
because,  as  he  had  been  conscious  all  the  time  of  the
operation,  he  could  not  believe  I  had  done  any  thing
to  him,  till  he  found  on  trial  he  had  been  so  much
benefited  in  both  functions.

Here,  then,  we  have  the  beneficial  results  most  une-
quivocally ensuing  even  when  the  patient  imagined
110  effect  could  have  been  induced.  The  improvement
in  the  sight  has  remained  permanent,  and  he  also
improved  in  the  power  of  his  limbs,  till  he  had  the
misfortune  to  fall,  whilst  carelessly  looking  at  some-
thing when  walking  on  the  street  one  day.

In  confirmation  of  the  efficacy  of  a  few  minutes  of
hypnotism,  in  curing  many  cases  of  paralysis,  I
may  refer  to  the  reports  of  the  Liverpool  papers,
as  to  what  took  place  at  my  lectures  in  that  town  in
April,  1842.  There  were  hundreds  who  witnessed
the  effects  when  I  publicly  operated  on  such  patients,
who  were  entire  strangers  to  me.  Cases  where  the
patients  had  been  for  years  powerless  of  limbs,  so
that  they  could  not  unlock  the  clenched  hands,  nor
raise  the  arm  to  the  chin,  even  with  the  aid  of  the


MRS  E.'s  CASE.  219

other  arm,  have  been  enabled  in  eight  or  ten  minutes,
to  open  the  hand,  and  lift  the  arm  above  the  head.
My  intelligent  friend,  Mr  Gardom,  lately  informed
me,  he  had  treated  a  paralytic  case  most  successfully
by  hypnotism.

Case  XXVII.  Mrs  E.,  thirty-seven  years  of  age,
had  a  paralytic  affection  when  thirteen  months
old,  which  deprived  her  entirely  of  the  use  of  the
right  leg,  which  has  never  been  recovered.  At  seven
years  of  age,  she  had  a  second  attack,  which  deprived
her  also  of  the  use  of  the  right  arm,  which  was
recovered  after  nine  months'  professional  attention  to
it.  At  fifteen  years  of  age  she  had  a  third  attack,
which  drew  her  face,  and  deprived  her  of  speech  for
some  time,  but  was  recovered  from  ;  and  she  had  no
farther  attack  of  the  sort  till  8th  January,  1842,  (being
twenty-two  years  from  former  attack.)  The  latter
attack  enfeebled  the  right  arm,  and  completely  para-
lyzed the  whole  of  the  left  side.

Being  of  full  habit,  she  was  bled  from  the  arm,  had
active  cathartics,  leeches,  and  blisters.  In  six  days
there  was  improvement  to  this  extent,  that  the  right
hand  could  be  raised  as  high  as  the  shoulder,  the  left
arm  could  be  moved  feebly,  and  the  hand  closed
feebly  and  slowly.  When  sitting  on  a  chair,  the  left
leg  could  be  moved  with  great  difficulty,  so  as  to
raise  the  heel  from  the  ground.  I  hypnotized  her,
and  in  five  or  six  minutes  she  could  raise  her  right
hand  and  arm  above  her  head,  could  move  the  left  arm
freely,  and  grasp  firmly,  and  could  raise  the  left  leg  so
as  to  place  the  heel  eighteen  inches  from  the  ground.
Next  day  she  was  able  to  walk  across  the  floor  with
her  one  crutch.  A  pain  in  the  knee  induced  her  to


_':'n  MISS  E.  ATKINSON'S  CASE

avoid  walking  afterwards,  but  in  three  weeks  she  could
walk  quite  cleverly  as  before  last  attack.

The  other  cases  were  all  in  the  chronic  state,  of
long  standing,  and  had  resisted  all  ordinary  means,
and  the  restorative  powers  of  nature  and  time,  and
yet  we  have  seen  what  extraordinary  powers  can  be
exerted,  and  effects  produced,  in  such  cases  by  hypno-
tism. The  latter  proves  its  superior  efficacy,  to  other
means,  in  more  recent  cases.

Case  XXVIII.  I  shall  conclude  the  subject  of
paralysis  with  the  following  most  interesting  case.
The  subject  of  it  was  Miss  Atkinson,  a  middle-aged
and  very  intelligent  lady,  and  I  shall  give  the  case  as
recorded  by  herself  in  a  letter  she  was  so  obliging  as
to  furnish  me  with,  for  the  purpose  of  publication  in
this  work.


LETTER  FROM  Miss  E.  ATKINSON,
(of  the  Priory,  Lincoln.)

u  MOSLEY  ARMS,  MANCHESTER.
Monday,  4tA  July,  1842.

"  Dear  Sir,— I  have  very  great  pleasure  in  furnishing
you  with  a  statement  of  my  case.  I  beg  you  will
make  whatever  use  of  it  you  think  proper,  and  most
sincerely  do  I  wish  that  it  may  lead  others  suffering
from  disorders  on  the  nerves,  to  seek  relief  from  the
same  source,  and  with  the  same  success.

"  In  January,  1838, 1  was  attacked  with  cold  and
influenza,  accompanied  by  a  violent  cough,  on  the
29th  of  this  month.  Ten  or  twelve  days  after  the
first  attack,  without  any  previous  warning,  my  voice


OF  RESTORATION  OF  VOICE.  221

left  me  instantaneously,  and  I  could  not  utter  a  sound
louder  than  the  faintest  -whisper.  For  three  weeks  I
had  no  medical  advice,  hoping  daily,  from  my  igno-
rance of  the  nature  of  the  complaint,  that  my  voice
would  return  ;  but  being  disappointed,  and  feeling  my
health  and  strength  declining,  I  consulted  Mr  Howitt,
an  experienced  and  eminent  surgeon  in  Lincoln,  who
immediately  requested  I  would  confine  myself  to  my
own  lodging-room,  which  was  to  be  kept  at  a  regular
temperature.  He  prescribed  such  medicines  as  my
case  required,  and  ordered  blisters  to  my  throat  and
chest,  which  were  kept  open,  until  I  became  so  com-
pletely debilitated  that  it  was  considered  necessary  to
discontinue  them.  Towards  the  latter  end  of  April
my  health  was  considerably  improved,  and  I  was
allowed  to  leave  my  room,  though  my  voice  was  still
merely  a  feeble  whisper.  Shortly  afterwards,  I  paid
a  visit  to  a  sister  in  York,  whose  family  surgeon,  Mr
Caleb  Williams,  a  man  in  extensive  practice,  pre-
scribed for  me,  and  took  great  interest  in  my  case.
Soon  after  my  return  to  Lincoln,  I  consulted  Mr
Joseph  Swan,  6,  Tavistock  Square,  London,  who
entirely  approved  of  the  treatment  I  had  undergone,
and  prescribed  such  additional  remedies  and  medicines
as  he  thought  would  be  beneficial.  Since  then  he  has
continued  to  visit  me  whenever  he  has  been  in  the
country.  Galvanism  has  been  tried  without  pro-
ducing any  effect ;  electro-magnetism  also,  by  a  scien-
tific friend  (not  a  medical  man.)  I  have  frequently
conversed  with  several  other  professional  gentlemen,
who  have  also  taken  a  great  interest  in  my  case.
They  all  agree  in  opinion  that  the  attack  was  para-
lysis of  the  organs  of  voice,  without  disease ;  and  that


222  MISS  E.  ATKINSON'S  CASE

the  treatment  I  have  undergone  has  been  most  judi-
cious ;  in  fact,  that  every  thing  has  been  done  for  me
the  medical  profession  could  suggest.  Every  one  of
them  has  told  me,  that  when  my  health  and  strength
returned,  there  was  every  reason  to  believe  I  should
recover  my  voice.  I  remained  in  a  very  weak  and
delicate  state  for  some  time,  but  have  now  been  in
perfect  health  for  more  than  twelve  months,  yet
without  having  the  power  of  speaking  above  a
whisper.

**  I  considered  the  recovery  of  my  voice  hopeless,
until  hearing  of  the  many  cures  you  had  performed
by  hypnotism,  I  was  induced  to  state  my  case  to
you,  and  request  your  opinion  as  to  the  probability
of  this  system  benefiting  me.  Your  reply  was,  *  If,
as  seems  to  be  the  opinion  of  most  of  the  profes-
sional gentlemen  consulted,  your  loss  of  voice  is
owing  to  i-.r/iaiiisfion  of  the  nervous  energy  of  the  vocal
nerves,  and  not  to  positive  destruction  of  any  portion
of  them,  I  consider  my  mode  of  operating  is  likely  to  be
very  speedily  successful.  On  the  other  hand,  if  there
ii  positive  destruction  of  the  nervous  substance,  with
lou  of  continuity  of  the  principal  trunks  of  the  nerves,  it
will  alter  the  chances  very  materially.  However,  as
this  cannot  be  positively  known  without  trial,  and  as
the  extraordinary  power  we  possess  of  rousing  nervous
energy  may  be  sufficient  to  enable  the  function  to  be
restored  with  a  state  of  nerve  which  could  not  be  of
service  under  any  other  agency,  I  should  decidedly
give  it  as  my  opinion  that  it  ought  to  be  tried,  as  no
risk  can  attach  to  the  trial,  and  a  week  or  two  ;it  most,
will  IKJ  all  the  time  required  for  giving  it  a  fair  trial.'
This  raised  my  hopes;  I  came  to  Manchester  on


OF  RESTORATION  OF  VOICE.  223

Tuesday  the  28th  of  June.  You  operated  on  me  twice
that  evening,  and  twice  each  succeeding  day,  but
without  producing  any  change  on  my  voice  until
Saturday,  July  2d,  when,  on  rousing  me  from  the
hypnotic  state,  I  spoke  aloud  without  the  slightest
effort.  My  voice  was  then  weak  ;  you  have  continued
to  operate  on  me  until  now,  Monday  morning,  (4th
July,)  and  my  voice  is  fully  restored  to  its  original
strength,  with  the  power  to  vary  its  tone  at  will.
Thus  has  hypnotism  given  me  back  the  power  to
make  myself  understood  by  those  to  whom  I  address
myself,  of  which  I  had  been  deprived  for  the  last  four
and  a  half  years.  I  have  not  suffered  the  slightest
pain  or  inconvenience  while  submitting  to  the  opera-
tions, nor  any  unpleasant  effects  afterwards  ;  neither
did  I  ever  once  lose  consciousness  of  all  that  was
passing  around  me.

"With  heartfelt  humble  thanks  to  our  heavenly
Father  for  this  and  every  blessing,  particularly  for  the
hitherto  unknown  power  bestowed  on  man  ;  and  with
deep  gratitude  to  you  for  your  kind  attentive  care
while  so  skilfully  and  successfully  using  this  power
for  the  restoration  of  my  voice,  I  beg  you  to  believe
me,  dear  sir,  yours  very  respectfully,  and  greatly
obliged,

"  ELIZABETH  ATKINSON.

It  is  but  justice  to  the  professional  gentlemen  who
had  been  consulted  in  this  case  prior  to  application
being  made  to  me,  to  say,  that  I  consider  they  had
treated  the  case  most  judiciously,  according  to  our
previous  experience  in  such  cases;  and  it  must  be
interesting  to  them  to  find  that  in  this  agency  our


224  MISS  B.  ATKINSON'S  CASE

art  has  acquired  a  new  and  efficient  resource  for  such
cases.

This  case  is  interesting  in  many  points  of  view. '
The  circumstance  of  the  patient  having  been  operated
on  twice  each  day  successively,  that  is,  eight  times,
without  any  visible  improvement  —  for  I  had  her
tested  before  and  after  each  operation  —  and  being
able  to  speak  aloud,  without  effort,  on  being  roused
from  the  hypnotic  condition  on  the  fifth  day,  is  suffi-
cient proof  that  the  improvement  was  not  the  effect  of
imagination,  but  of  the  physical  condition  induced  by
carrying  the  operation  farther.  Any  effect  to  have
been  anticipated  from  mere  mental  emotion,  we  should
have  expected  to  have  been  greatest  at  first,  and  to
have  become  less  and  less  as  the  party  became
familiar  with  such  operations.  Here,  however,  it  was
quite  the  reverse.  I  found,  on  testing  the  patient  on
the  2d  of  July,  immediately  before  being  operated  on,
that  no  improvement  had  been  effected  from  the  for-
mer operations,  (she  had  been  operated  on  eight
times,)  and  therefore  resolved  to  carry  it  farther  that
time ;  and  the  result  was,  as  noted  above,  that  on
being  aroused  she  spoke  aloud  without  effort.  It  is
also  important,  as  corroborating  the  statement  of
many  others  who  have  been  cured  of  various  obstinate
complaints  by  hypnotism,  that  they  could  hear  quite
diilinctly,  and  retained  consciousness  the  whole  time,  of
all  that  was  going  on  around  them.  In  some  cases,
however,  it  is  necessary  to  carry  it  to  the  ulterior
stage,  or  that  of  insensibility.

On  the  19th  October,  1842,  I  had  the  pleasure  of
receiving  a  letter  from  Miss  E.  Atkinson,  from  which
I  make  the  following  extract,  in  proof  of  the  perma-


POWER  OF  IMAGINATION.  225

nency  of  the  cure.  "  You  will  be  glad  to  hear  that  I
have  retained  my  voice  without  any  intermission,
since  I  left  you.  The  only  difference  is,  that  it  has
become  stronger ;  and  my  health  is  in  every  respect
perfectly  good."  I  had  also  the  pleasure  of  hearing
from  a  friend,  a  few  days  ago,  that  she  still  continues
well,  and  it  is  now  nine  months  and  a  half  since  her
voice  was  restored.

I  doubt  not  there  may  be  some  who,  on  reading  the
cases  I  have  recorded  in  this  treatise,  will  be  disposed
to  appeal  to  the  well-known  fact,  that  various  com-
plaints have  been  suddenly  cured  by  mere  mental
emotion,  hoping  thus  to  throw  discredit  on  the  cura-
tive powers  of  hypnotism.  Whilst  I  grant  the
premises,  I  deny  the  justness  of  the  inference.  That
I  may  meet  the  subject  fairly,  I  shall  now  quote  some
of  the  most  remarkable  cases  of  the  sort  which  have
been  recorded.  "  Dr  Gregory  was  accustomed  to
relate  the  case  of  a  naval  officer,  who  had  been  for
some  time  laid  up  in  his  cabin,  and  entirely  unable  to
move,  from  a  violent  attack  of  gout,  when  notice  was
brought  to  him  that  the  vessel  was  on  fire  ;  in  a  few
minutes  he  was  on  deck,  and  the  most  active  man  in
the  ship.  Cases  of  a  still  more  astonishing  kind  are
on  record.  A  woman,  mentioned  by  Diemerbroeck,
who  had  been  many  years  paralytic,  recovered  the
use  of  her  limbs  when  she  was  very  much  terrified
during  a  thunder-storm,  and  was  making  violent
efforts  to  escape  from  a  chamber  in  which  she  had
been  left  alone.  A  man,  affected  in  the  same  manner,
recovered  as  suddenly  when  his  house  was  on  fire  ;
and  another,  who  had  been  ill  for  six  years,  recovered
the  use  of  his  paralytic  limbs  during  a  violent  paroxysm


226  POWER  OF  IMAGINATION.

of  anger."  Abercrombie  on  the  Intellectual  Powers,
pp.  398-9.

To  these  might  have  been  added  the  influence  of
the  sight  of  a  tooth  key  or  forceps,  or  even  the
approach  to  the  house  of  a  dentist,  in  curing  tooth-
ache.

Now,  what  are  the  legitimate  conclusions  to  be
drawn  from  the  history  of  such  cases?  Is  it  not
simply  this,  that  such  results  are  possible,  and  that
they  can  be  effected  by  different  means  f  Now,  as  it
is  apparent  that  analogous  results  can  be  induced  by
hypnotism,  I  would  ask  is  hypnotism  not  quite  a»
convenient  and  desirable  a  remedy  as  setting  a  ship  on
fire,  raising  a  thunder-storm,  converting  the  patient's
house  into  a  bonfire,  or  exciting  him  into  "a  violent
paroxysm  of  anger?"

Again,  of  those  who  talk  so  much  about  the  power
of  imagination,  I  would  ask,  what  is  it  ?  How  does
imagination  act  to  produce  such  extraordinary  and
contradictory  results  ?  For  example,  the  mental  emo-
tions of  joy  and  sorrow,  love  and  hatred,  fear  and
courage,  benevolence  and  anger,  may  all  arise  either
from  real,  or  from  imaginary  causes  only,  and  may
seriously  affect  the  physical  frame.  In  many  in-
stances these  different  and  opposite  emotions  have
proved  almost  instantly  fatal  ;  in  other  instances
equally  sanative.  How  is  this  achieved  ?  Are  not
the  whole  of  the  emotions  accompanied  by  remark-
able physical  changes,  in  respect  to  the  respiration
and  circulation  as  well  as  sensation  ?  Are  they  not
highly  excited  in  one  class,  and  depressed  in  the
other?  And  may  not  this  act  as  the  proximate  cause
in  effecting  the  permanently  benef  rial  results  during


RHEUMATISM.  227

hypnotism  ?  As  already  explained,  analogous  physi-
cal results  can  be  produced  by  hypnotism  ;  and  it
is  no  valid  reason  why  we  should  not  profit  by  it  in
the  treatment  of  disease,  that  we  cannot  positively
decide  as  to  its  modus  operandi.  It  seems  quite  evi-
dent that  we  have  acquired,  in  hypnotism,  a  more
ready  and  certain  control  over  the  physical  manifes-
tations referred  to,  and  which  can  be  turned  to  useful
purposes,  than  by  any  mode  of  acting  on  the  imagi-
nation only,  which  has  hitherto  been  devised.

Rheumatism  is  another  affection,  for  the  relief  of
which  I  have  found  hypnotism  a  most  valuable
remedy.  I  have  met  with  some  cases  of  rheumatism,
however,  which  have  resisted  this,  as  they  had  every
other  method  tried ;  and  others,  where  it  afforded  only
temporary  relief ;  but  I  am  warranted  in  saying,  that
I  have,  on  the  whole,  seen  far  more  success,  more
rapid  and  decided  relief,  follow  this  mode  of  treatment,
than  any  other.  It  has  been  chiefly  in  chronic  cases
in  which  I  have  tried  it.  In  its  application,  I  first
induce  the  somnolent  state,  and  then  call  into  action
the  different  muscles  which  I  consider  directly  affected,
or  which,  by  being  so  called  into  action,  are  calculated
to  change  the  capillary  circulation  and  nervous  sensi-
bility of  the  part  implicated.  The  patient  must  be
retained  in  such  position  a  longer  or  shorter  time,  ac-
cording to  circumstances.  The  following  cases  will
illustrate  the  effects  of  this  mode  of  treatment :

Case  XXIX.  Joseph  Barnet,  near  Hope  Inn,Heaton
Norris,  Stockport,  62  years  of  age,  called  to  consult  me
on  the  10th  December,  1841,  for  a  severe  rheumatic
affection  of  the  back,  hip,  and  leg,  of  thirteen  years'


228  RHEUMATISM.

standing,  which  had  been  so  severe,  that  he  had  not
been  able  to  earn  a  day's  wages  during  that  period.
He  h.id  been  equally  a  stranger  to  comfort  by  day,  as
to  refreshing  sleep  by  night.  He  came  to  me  leaning
feebly  over  his  stick,  suffering  anguish  at  every  step,  or
movement  of  his  body.  He  was  treated  at  the  com-
mencement of  his  complaint  by  a  surgeon  ;  but  feeling
no  relief,  like  many  others  similarly  afflicted,  he  had
recourse  to  all  sort  of  nostrums,  and  also  to  hot  salt
water  baths.  I  hypnotized  him,  placing  him  in  such
attitudes  as  his  particular  case  required,  and  in  fifteen
minutes  aroused  him,  when  he  was  able  to  bend  his
body  freely,  and  not  only  to  walk,  but  even  to  run.
He  called  on  me  in  a  few  days  after,  when  he  stated
he  had  slept  comfortably,  and  been  perfectly  easy
from  the  time  he  left  me  till  the  night  before.  I
hypnotized  him  again  with  advantage,  and  a  few  more
times  sufficed  to  restore  him  entirely.  This  patient
was  seen,  and  bore  testimony  to  these  facts,  at  two  of
my  lectures.  After  one  of  them,  from  being  too  late
for  the  coach,  he  walked  home,  a  distance  of  six  miles.
This  was  by  no  means  judicious,  but  proves  iucontes-
tably  his  great  improvement.

I  was  not  at  that  time  so  well  aware,  as  I  have  been
since,  of  the  great  power  of  hypnotism  in  such  cases,  and
therefore  ordered  him  some  medicine  after  the  first  ope-
rations; but  from  observingthat  the  relief  immediately
followed  the  operation  before  taking  medicine,  and  that
the  pain  returned  in  some  degree  the  night  before  next
risit,  and  when,  had  there  been  benefit  resulting/rom
the  medicine,  it  ought  to  have  been  diminished  after  using
it,  and  that  relief  was  again  afforded  during  the  hyp-


RHEUMATISM.  229

notism,  I  felt  convinced  the  medicine  had  no  share  in
the  improvement,  and  therefore  discontinued  it,  and
trusted  entirely  to  hypnotism.  In  the  beginning  of
January,  1842,  when  this  patient  called  on  me,  he
was  so  well,  that  I  told  him  farther  operations  would
be  unnecessary  for  the  present,  but  added,  that  should
he  have  any  relapse,  if  he  called  on  me  again,  I  would
hypnotize  him,  without  charge,  of  which  offer  he
promised  to  avail  himself.

At  my  lecture  on  the  27th  December,  1841,  several
questions  were  put  which  elicited  the  following  an-
swers :  —  "Do  you  mean  to  say  you  were  never  so
well  as  you  are  now  ?"  "  Yes  ;  I  never  earned  two  shil-
lings during  all  that  time.  This  last  winter  I  was
worse  than  ever."  "  Did  you  walk,  sir,  before  ever  you
left  my  surgery,  without  taking  any  medicine  1" — "  I
did,  and  ran  too."  See  Manchester  Guardian,  1st
January,  1842.

I  heard  nothing  farther  of  this  patient  for  about
seven  months,  and  therefore,  after  the  offer  I  had
made  him  at  last  visit,  had  every  reason  to  conclude
he  had  remained  well.  However,  it  appears  he  had
a  relapse  shortly  after  he  left  me,  and  his  family,
upon  whose  exertions  he  depended,  being  out  of  work,
he  could  not  afford  to  pay  the  railway  charge  for
coming  to  see  me  again.  His  relapse  having  been
laid  hold  of,  and  construed  into  a  charge  against  me
as  having  falsely  represented  his  case,  I  was  induced
to  call  on  the  patient,  accompanied  by  two  friends,
when  he  furnished  us  with  the  following  docu-
ment,—
"  Joseph  Barnet,  Providence  Street,  Heaton  Norris,


230  RHEUMATISM.

liail  suffered  from  a  severe  -rheumatic  affection,  prior
to  hist  December,  when  he  applied  to  Mr  Braid.  He

was  first  under  the  care  of  Mr Higher  Hillgate,

who  bled,  blistered,  and  prescribed  medicines  for  him  ;
but  the  complaint  remained  unabated.  From  this
period,  took  various  medicines,  and  other  means  re-
commended to  him  by  those  who  had  been  similarly
afflicted,  and  who  considered  he  would  be  benefited  by
such  means  as  had  relieved  them,  but  received  no
relief.  After  that  applied  to  Mr  •  of  Manches-

ter, from  whom  he  considered  he  derived  benefit  for
:i  fortnight ;  but  the  pain  returning,  he  went  to
Liverpool  to  the  warm  baths,  where  he  remained  as
long  as  money  lasted,  but  without  being  relieved.

"  From  this  time  tried  various  means  as  recommended
by  different  parties.  During  the  whole  of  this  period,
he  had  never  been  able  to  earn  a  day's  wages.  When
he  applied  to  Mr  Braid  in  December  last,  (1841,)  had
been  suffering  extreme  pain  in  every  movement  of
the  body  ;  in  short,  he  had  walked  nearly  double,  sup-
ported on  a  stick.  He  was  operated  on  by  Mr  Braid,
and  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  he  was  roused,  and  found
himself  able  to  walk  and  run.  At  first,  Mr  Braid
walked  him  about  by  the  hand,  and  afterwards  made
him  run  without  any  assistance  whatever,  as  his  wife
and  others  present  can  testify.  The  case  as  stated  by
Mr  Braid  in  his  lectures  in  my  (his)  presence  was  per-
fectly correct,  as  I  (he)  bore  testimony  to  at  the  time.
Owing  to  being  unable  to  pay  the  expenses  of  the
railway,  he  did  not  return  to  Mr  Braid,  when  he  had
a  nrnnvnceof  the  pain.  He  had  never  informed  Mr
Braid,  that  he  had  had  a  recurrence  of  the  pain,  and


RHEUMATISM.  231

never  saw  him  afterwards  until  the  evening  of  the
26th  July,  1842.  his

(Signed) JOSEPH  4.  BARNET.

mark

J.  A.  WALKER.
THOMAS  BROWN.
HARAIT  BROOKS."
(Daughter  of  J.  BARNET.)

Case  XXX.  llth  January,  1840.  Mrs  B.  48  years  of
age.  Catamenia  ceased  last  spring.  Has  suffered  from
a  severe  rheumatic  affection  for  the  last  three  months,
and  been  confined  for  the  last  two  months  to  her  bed-
room. The  legs,  arms,  neck,  and  head,  were  exces-
sively painful,  so  that  the  slightest  movement  was
attended  with  great  agony.  She  was  quite  alarmed  at
my  taking  hold  of  her  arm  to  feel  the  pulse.  When
in  bed  could  not  turn  over,  nor  bear  the  slightest  touch,
llth  January,  1842,  hypnotized  her,  and  roused  her  in
ten  minutes,  when  she  was  quite  free  from  pain,  being
able  to  walk,  stoop,  and  move  the  arms,  wrists,  and
fingers,  with  perfect  freedom.  12th,  had  slept  com-
fortably all  night ;  had  been  able  to  lie  on  her  side,
which  she  could  not  do  before  for  three  months  ;
could  rise  from  the  chair,  and  move  legs  and  arms
without  pain.  There  was,  however,  a  soreness  or  un-
easy feeling,  although  not  amounting  to  pain,  in  some
parts  of  the  limbs.  Hypnotized  her  for  eight  minutes,
when  she  felt  less  of  the  numbness,  and  followed  me
down  stairs,  and  ascended  them  again,  without  taking
hold  of  the  banister,  and  taking  the  steps  regularly
and  cleverly  with  both  feet  alternately.  14th,  Found
her  down  stairs  enjoying  herself  with  her  father,  hus-


232  RHEUMATISM.

band,  and  friends,  almost  quite  well.  Hypnotized  her
again,  and  also  in  a  day  or  two  after,  and  she  had  no
recurrence  of  the  rheumatism,  although  a  degree  of
stiffness  of  the  limbs  remained.  She  had  no  medicine
from  me  till  the  rheumatism  was  gone,  when  she  had
some  for  a  different  complaint.  This  patient  was  seen
at  my  house  seven  months  after  by  about  sixty
friends,  including  several  professional  gentlemen,
when  the  above  statement  was  read  in  her  presence,
and  confirmed  by  her  as  correct  to  that  time  ;  and  as
I  have  heard  no  intimation,  I  feel  assured  she  has  not
had  a  relapse.

Case  XXXI.  Mrs  S.  has  been  already  referred  to,
case  VI.  She  had  suffered  much  from  rheumatism  for
many  years,  and  had  never  been  entirely  free  of  it,
notwithstanding  she  had  undergone  much  treatment.
After  first  operation  she  was  much  relieved,  and  after
a  few  more  was  entirely  free  from  pain.  It  has
recurred  occasionally  since,  but  has  always  been
removed  by  one  or  two  more  operations  of  the  same
sort,  and  which  are  neither  painful,  nor  in  any  way
unpleasant.

Case  XXXII.  Another  rheumatic  case  of  a  patient
53  years  old,  of  seven  years'  standing,  whore  sleep  had
not  only  been  courted  by  exhausted  nature,  but  also
by  the  most  powerful  doses  of  narcotic  drugs  ;  on  one
occasion  400  drops  of  laudanum  had  been  taken  in  two
hours;  still  the  pains  continued,  and  yet,  by  fifteen
minutes  of  hypnotic  sleep,  procured  by  the  simple
agency  I  recommend,  this  patient  was  relieved  of  his
agonizing  pains.  In  this  case,  from  my  knowledge  of
the  eminence  of  the  professional  gentleman  who  had
prescribed  for  him,  I  feel  assured  every  known


RHEUMATISM.  233

remedy  had  been  resorted  to,  but  without  effect,  and
yet  this  agency  succeeded  in  a  few  minutes.  This
patient  had  suffered  severely  for  seven  years  ;  was
first  hypnotized  10th  February,  1842,  and  again  on
the  17th  and  19th.  He  seemed  as  nearly  as  possible
entirely  free  from  pain,  and  had  suffered  very  little
after  the  first  operation,  less  than  at  any  previous
period  during  the  seven  years  he  had  been  a  rheumatic
subject.  I  have  lately  heard  he  had  a  relapse  some
time  after  I  last  saw  him  ;  but  no  reasonable  person
could  expect  three  operations  should  have  sufficed  to
eradicate  such  an  obstinate  complaint  permanently  ;
most  probably  a  repetition  of  the  process  would.

Case  XXXIII.  Mr  John  Thomas,  155,  Deansgate,
consulted  me  at  the  end  of  April,  1842,  for  a  severe
rheumatic  affection  of  the  loins,  and  right  hip  and
leg,  which  had  continued  for  two  weeks.  Had  a
rheumatic  fever  two  years  before,  which  confined  him
to  bed  for  sixteen  days,  and  to  his  room  for  a  week
longer  ;  and  he  did  not  get  rid  of  the  pains  for  three
months  after  he  was  able  to  go  out,  although  he  tried
Buxton  and  Matlock  baths,  and  also  the  medicated
and  sulphur  baths  in  Manchester.  When  he  called  on
me,  (April,  1842,)  I  hypnotized  him,  and  when  roused
he  was  almost  entirely  free  from  pain,  and  never
required  a  repetition  of  the  operation.  He  had  no
medicine.  On  the  28th  July,  he  called  on  me  to  say
he  had  continued  quite  well  in  every  respect  from  the
time  he  was  hypnotized,  and  attested  the  same,  and
the  correctness  of  the  above  statement,  by  appending
his  name  to  it  in  my  case-book,  and  he  has  also  been
seen  by  many  professional  and  other  friends  who  can


234  RHEUMATISM.

bear  testimony  to  the  same  effect. He  continued  well
when  I  saw  him  lately.

Case  XXXIV.  Master  J.  Lancashire,  12  years  of
age,  was  brought  to  me  in  September,  1842.  He  was
suffering  from  a  violent  rheumatic  affection  of  the
legs,  back,  and  chest,  so  that  he  required  to  be  carried
into  my  house.  After  being  hypnotized,  he  %s:is  so
much  relieved  as  to  be  able  to  walk  about  the  room
freely,  and  to  walk  to  his  cab  without  assistance.
Next  day  he  called,  and  was  hypnotized  again,  and
left  my  house  quite  free  from  pain,  and  has  kept  so
well  as  never  to  require  another  operation.  He  had
no  medicine,  either  externally  or  internally.  His
mother  and  he  called  some  time  after  to  inform  me  he
had  remained  quite  well,  when  they  both  attested  the
correctness  of  the  above  statement  of  his  case.

Case  XXXV.  Mrs  P.,  a  lady  upwards  of  50  years  of
age,  had  suffered  so  severely  from  rheumatism  that  she
had  not  enjoyed  a  sound  night's  sleep  for  seven
months.  External  and  internal  means,  which  had
been  beneficial  in  a  former  similar  attack,  had  been
tried  without  effect,  before  I  was  sent  for  to  visit  her.
She  was  suffering  excruciating  pain  in  one  leg,  parti-
cularly about  the  knee  joint.  When  I  proposed  to
relieve  her  by  hypnotism,  she  repudiated  the  idea,
tol.l  UK-  >|,t>  had  no  faith  in  it,  and  felt  assured  in  her
own  mind  such  an  operation  could  be  of  no  use  to
her.  I  told  her  I  cared  little  for  her  want  of  faith  in
the  reme.ly,  provided  she  would  submit  to  be  operated
on  as  I  should  direct.  She  at  last  consented,  and  in
the  presence  of  her  three  daughters  was  hypnotized.
In  eight  minutes  she  was  aroused,  and  was  quite  free


RHEUMATISM.  235

from  pain  ;  wished  to  know  what  I  had  done  to  her ;
said  she  felt  assured  hypnotizing  her  could  not  have
relieved  her.  To  this  I  replied  by  asking  where  her
pain  was  felt  now.  She  answered  she  felt  no  pain,
but  persisted  she  was  sure  I  had  done  nothing  to  take
it  away.  The  manner  in  which  she  could  walk  and
move  her  limbs  was  sufficient  proof  the  pain  was
gone,  notwithstanding  her  scepticism  about  the  agency.
When  I  called  next  day,  I  was  informed  by  her
family  she  had  slept  comfortably  all  night,  and  had  gone
out,  being  quite  well.  Two  days  after  I  called  again,
and  was  informed  by  her  that  she  had  been  overtaken
in  a  shower,  and  had  over-exerted  herself  on  that  occa-
sion, and  had  had  a  return  of  the  pain,  although  not
so  bad  as  at  first.  I  hypnotized  her  again  with  com-
plete relief,  and  she  has  never  required  a  repetition  of
the  operation  since,  so  that  she  has  now  enjoyed  a
release  from  her  old  enemy  for  eleven  months,  in
defiance  of  her  scepticism.  Here,  then,  we  have  a
very  decided  proof  that  it  was  not  imagination  ;  in
short,  that  it  was  a  physical  and  not  a  mental  change
which  effected  the  cure.

Case  XXXVI.  Mr  Hampson,  another  rheumatic  case,
I  was  called  to  16th  May,  1842.  The  patient  was  a
powerful  young  man,  23  years  of  age ;  had  suffered
severely  for  three  weeks,  the  last  two  been  entirely
confined  to  bed,  unable  to  move  his  legs,  or  to  feed
himself;  for  two  weeks  had  not  known  what  it  was
to  have  ten  minutes  continuous  sleep,  from  the  violence
of  the  pain,  and  spasmodic  twitching  of  the  limbs  rous-
ing him.  His  left  hand,  fingers,  and  wrist  were  so
swollen  and  painful,  that  he  was  quite  alarmed  at  my
attempting  to  feel  his  pulse.  After  being  hypnotized


236  ACUTE  RHEUMATISM.

for  five  minutes  whilst  in  the  recumbent  posture,  I
had  his  arms  extended,  and  he  was  now  roused  and
able  to  move  the  wrist  and  fingers  with  comparative
ease.  I  now  hypnotized  him  once  more,  and  operated
on  his  legs.  In  six  minutes  he  was  able  to  get  on  his
feet,  walk  round  the  bed  and  back  again,  and  get
into  bed  and  lie  down  without  assistance.  Next
morning  I  found  him  up  and  dressed,  and  able  to
walk  very  comfortably.  He  had  slept  well  through
the  night.  I  hypnotized  him  again.  Next  night  he
slept  uninterruptedly,  and  in  the  morning  felt
nothing  of  his  pains  excepting  in  the  left  shoulder  ;
but  this  was  quite  well  by  the  next  day.  He  had  no
medicine  except  a  mild  aperient.

The  cases  adduced  I  consider  sufficient  to  prove  this
to  be  a  valuable  agency  in  the  treatment  of  chronic
rheumatism.  I  shall  now  adduce  the  results  of  its
application  in  two  cases  of  acute  rheumatism.

Case  XXXVII.  Mr  G.,  a  literary  gentleman,  con-
sulted me  last  winter.  I  found  him  complaining
of  severe  pain  in  the  right  arm  and  hand  ;  one
point,  the  size  of  a  crown  piece,  on  the  outer  edge
of  the  arm,  a  little  below  the  elbow  joint,  was
exquisitely  painful.  He  was  enveloped  in  double
clothing,  but,  notwithstanding,  was  quite  starved  and
chilly  with  cutis  anscrina,  pulse  120  strokes  a  minute.
I  told  him  I  considered  it  was  the  commencement  of
an  attack  of  rheumatic  fever,  and  I  should  wish  to  try
wh.-ther  it  could  be  cut  short  by  hypnotizing  him.
He  had  never  been  operated  on  in  this  way  before,
but  readily  assented.  In  six  minutes  I  had  him
bathed  in  perspiration,  and  his  pain  greatly  relieved.
He  was  now  ordered  to  bed,  to  take  a  mixture  with


ACUTE  RHEUMATISM.  237

vinum  colchici.  Next  morning  I  found  him  much
freer  from  pain,  it  had  never  been  severe  since  the
operation  the  day  beforej  the  skin  comfortable,  and
his  pulse  only  80.  To  remain  in  bed  and  continue
his  medicine.  Next  day  the  pulse  was  70,  and  no
complaint  of  pain,  and  the  following  day  he  was  able
to  go  out  and  attend  to  his  business.  No  relapse.

Case  XXXVIII.  Mrs  B.,  the  mother  of  a  numerous
family,  had  a  severe  attack  of  rheumatic  fever,  affect-
ing different  joints  in  succession,  and  also  violent  pain
in  her  head.  I  proposed  she  should  be  brought  out
of  bed  and  hypnotized.  The  pain  of  her  knees,  feet,
and  ankles,  was  so  severe  that  she  could  not  stretch
her  legs,  nor  attempt  to  support  herself,  in  the  least
degree,  upon  them.  She  had  therefore  to  be  carried
from  the  bed  to  the  chair  where  she  was  to  be  hypno-
tized. In  five  minutes  she  was  roused,  the  headache
gone,  and  the  pain  in  her  legs  and  feet  so  much  re-
lieved that  she  was  able  to  walk  to  bed,  requiring
only  to  be  slightly  supported  by  the  arm.  The  pains
never  returned  with  the  same  degree  of  severity.  She
was  hypnotized  a  few  times  more,  and  always  with
benefit.  Of  course  I  prescribed  such  medicines  as  I
considered  necessary  to  improve  the  state  of  the
secretions,  so  as  to  put  as  speedy  a  termination  to  the
attack  as  possible,  but  there  could  be  no  doubt  that
hypnotism  contributed  very  much  to  meliorate  her
suffering,  and  also  in  bringing  the  attack  to  a  more
speedy  termination,  than  would  have  been  the  case
had  I  trusted  to  the  effects  of  medicine  only.

The  following  cases  can  perhaps  scarcely  be  intro-
duced in  any  other  place  with  more  propriety  than
the  present.  They  are  cases  of  painful  affection  of


233  IRREGULAR  CONTR ACTION

the  members,  arising  from  irregular  action  of  the
muscles,  consequent  on  mechanical  injury.

Case  XXXIX.  Mr  J.  J.  consulted  me  on  the  Gth
November,  1842.  He  stated  he  had  a  fall  from  a
horse  five  months  previously,  when  he  sustained
severe  injury  of  the  left  hip  and  thigh.  He  was  con-
fined to  bed  for  two  weeks,  under  medical  treatment,
supposing  the  parts  to  be  only  bruised  and  sprained.
He  then  began  to  move  about  with  crutches,  but  with
great  pain  ;  and  a  consultation  being  held,  it  was  con-
sidered there  was  dislocation  of  the  hip  joint,  but  the
attempts  made  to  reduce  it  failed.  At  the  end  of  nine
weeks  from  the  accident,  another  surgeon,  40  miles
off,  was  sent  for,  who  confirmed  the  opinion  that
there  was  dislocation  of  the  hip  joint,  and  he  succeeded
in  reducing  it.  The  patient  was  now  confined  to  bed
for  two  weeks,  and,  on  rising,  was  able  to  move  about
with  the  aid  of  a  stick,  but  without  crutches.  How-
ever, he  was  still  very  lame,  and  in  much  pain.  When
he  called  on  me,  which  was  on  the  Gth  November,
1842,  he  was  not  suffering  much  pain,  but  was  ex-
tremely lame.  The  knee  was  a  little  advanced  for-
wards, and  the  toes  considerably  everted.  In  attempt-
ing to  walk  without  the  aid  and  support  of  his  stick,
the  body  was  thrown  so  much  to  the  left  at  every
stop,  as  if  the  leg  were  considerably  shorter,  that  with
other  circumstances  coupled  with  this,  led  me  to  sus-
pect fracture  of  the  neck  of  the  femur  within  the
capsular  ligament.  A  minute  examination  satisfied
me  this  was  not  the  case  ;  and  I  now  considered  the
affection  was  one  of  irregular  action  of  the  whole
muscles  of  the  hip  and  thigh,  some  being  atrophied
and  semi-paralyzed,  and  others  inordinately  tense.


OF  MUSCLES.  239

With  this  view  I  believed  I  should  be  able  to  rectify
the  irregular  distribution  of  nervous  and  muscular
energy  by  hypnotism,  an  opinion  the  correctness  of
which  was  quickly  verified.  Having  hypnotized  the
patient,  and  placed  the  leg  in  that  position  calculated
to  restore  the  functions  according  to  the  view  I  had
taken,  in  about  six  minutes  he  was  roused,  and  was
agreeably  surprised  with  such  a  remarkable  improve-
ment. Next  morning  he  was  again  operated  on,  and
was  then  almost  entirely  free  from  lameness,  and
entirely  free  from  pain,  so  that  he  asked  my  opinion
whether  I  considered  it  at  all  necessary  for  him  to
take  his  stick  in  going  through  the  town  on  some
business.  He  called  on  me  the  three  following  days,
after  which  he  went  home,  equally  gratified  as  my-
self with  the  result  of  our  operations.  He  had  no
internal  medicine,  nor  external  application,  whilst
under  my*  care.  He  attested  the  accuracy  of  the  above
report  before  leaving  ;  and,  as  I  have  not  heard  from
him  since,  have  reason  to  believe  he  continues  well.

This  patient  was  seen  by  several  gentlemen,  some

of  them  members  of  the  profession,  who  can  bear

testimony  to  the  correctness  of  these  statements,  as

they  had  an  opportunity  of  hearing  the  whole  from

.the  patient  himself.

Case  XL.  Mr  J.  H.,  68  years  of  age,  called  to  con-
sult me  on  the  8th  November,  1842,  relative  to  a  pain-
ful state  of  his  left  shoulder,  the  consequence  of  a
blow  he  had  sustained  two  months  previously.  He
had  been  under  the  care  of  two  eminent  professional
gentlemen  from  the  time  he  received  the  injury  till
within  a  few  days  before  I  saw  him.  There  was  a
wasting  of  the  muscles  about  the  shoulder,  great  pain


240  MECHANICAL  INJURY.

in  moving  the  arm,  and  it  was  so  weak  that  he  had
not  been  able  even  to  button  his  coat  with  it.  After
being  hypnotized  the  first  time  he  could  use  it,  raising
it  above  his  head,  and  moving  it  in  any  direction  with
ease  and  freedom.  After  being  operated  on  next  day
he  had  still  more  power.  The  following  day  he  felt
a  little  pain  behind  the  shoulder,  under  the  scapula,
which  was  entirely  removed  by  being  once  more
hypnotized,  and  calling  the  affected  muscles  into
action.  On  Saturday,  the  12th  November,  1842,  he
left  me,  quite  well,  to  return  home  to  attend  to  his
business.  Both  this  patient  and  his  son  attested  the
correctness  of  the  above  report  in  my  case  book.

Case  XLI.  J.  W.,  25  years  of  age,  had  a  severe
injury  of  the  hip,  which  was  followed  by  suppuration
between  the  trochanter  and  ischium,  where  there
was  a  fistulous  opening  ;  the  leg  was  flexed  and  per-
fectly useless,  being  supported  by  a  sling  passed  over
his  shoulders,  whilst  he  supported  himself  very  feebly
on  two  crutches,  his  health  having  suffered  greatly
during  his  affliction.  He  stated  that  he  had  just  left
a  public  institution,  where  he  was  given  to  under-
stand no  hopes  were  entertained  of  his  recovery.  I
hypnotized  him,  and  during  that  condition  regulated
the  malposition  of  the  limb,  stretching  the  contracted
muscles,  and  strengthening  others,  by  exciting  into
action  those  which  had  been  weakened  by  being
overstretched  and  enfeebled  by  inaction.  The  result
was,  that  on  being  aroused  he  could  straighten  his
leg,  and  walked  (using  his  crutches  of  course)  with
the  sole  of  his  foot  resting  on  the  floor.  He  was
operated  on  daily  with  the  most  marked  improvement
both  as  regarded  his  leg  and  his  general  health.  In


HEADACHE.  241

three  weeks  he  could  walk  with  one  crutch,  in  two
weeks  more  threw  that  aside,  and  walked  with  a
stick,  and  shortly  after  could  walk  without  that  aid,
and  is  now  well,  excepting  a  little  weakness  of  the
ankle  joint.  He  had  no  internal  medicine  from  me,
and  no  external  application,  excepting  one  box  of
ointment,  the  discharge  having  entirely  ceased  within
a  week  of  his  being  under  my  care.

I  shall  now  advert  to  the  remarkable  power  of  this
agency  in  speedily  overcoming  nervous  headache.  I
have  so  many  examples  of  this,  sometimes  two  or
three  fresh  cases  in  a-day,  that  it  is  almost  useless  to
instance  individual  cases.  However,  I  shall  give  a
few.

Case  XLII.  Mrs  B.,  the  mother  of  a  family,  has  been
constantly  annoyed  with  headache  and  maziness,  for
the  last  two  or  three  years,  varying  in  intensity  at
different  times,  but  never  entirely  free  from  it.  Con-
sulted me,  22d  January,  1842,  for  the  above  com-
plaints, and  also  stated  that  she  was  subject  to  attacks
of  epilepsy.  I  hypnotized  her,  and  in  five  or  six
minutes  aroused  her,  when  she  was  quite  free  from
headache.  She  was  hypnotized  almost  daily  for  some
time,  and  remained  quite  free  from  headache,  five
weeks  after  she  was  first  operated  on,  and  had  much
less  of  the  mazy  feeling,  and  no  fit  for  two  months.
She  appeared  so  much  better  as  to  be  taken  notice  of
by  all  her  friends.

Case  XLIII.  Miss  B.,  daughter  of  the  above,  was
brought  to  me  on  the  23d  January,  1843,  in  con-
sequence of  the  improvement  her  mother  had  expe-
rienced from  the  operation.  She  had  suffered  severely
from  headache  for  six  months,  so  much  so,  as  fre-
Q


042  HEADACHE.

quently  to  cause  her  cry  and  shed  tears,  and  was  never
entirely  free  from  it  for  that  period.  I  hypnotized
her,  and  in  five  or  six  minutes  roused  her  quite  free
from  headache  or  any  other  ache.  She  was  operated
on  almost  daily  for  some  time,  and  has  had  no  return
of  the  headache  to  this  time,  —  four  months,  —  and
has  had  her  appetite  much  improved,  and  looks  very
nincli  better.  She  had  no  medicine.

Case  XUV.  Miss  S.,  on  the  25th  January,  1843,
was  suffering  from  a  most  violent  headache,  and  had
been  so  all  day.  She  could  scarcely  open  her  eyes  or
see  when  they  were  open,  and  seemed  quite  prostrated.
I  hypnotized  her,  and  in  five  minutes  she  was  aroused
quite  well,  and  has  had  no  return  of  it  at  the  end  of
ten  days.

Case  XLV.  Miss  N.,  20  years  of  age,  had  suf-
fered severely  from  headache  from  childhood,  and
iiever  knew  what  it  was  to  be  entirely  free  from  that
complaint,  but  frequently  had  it  so  severely  as  to
incapacitate  her  for  any  exertion,  and  almost  to  deprive
her  of  sight.  She  also  had  constant  uneasiness  at
stomach,  sometimes  amounting  to  severe  pain,  and
when  the  attacks  of  headache  were  at  the  worst,  the
pain  at  stomach  was  also  much  aggravated,  and  a  severe
attack  of  vomiting  generally  terminated  the  violence
of  thi-M-  paroxysms.  In  April,  1842,  I  hypnotized
her,  and  from  that  period  she  has  been  almost
entirely  free  from  both  headache  and  stomach  com-
plaint. At  the  end  of  fifty-four  weeks,  I  had  the
pleasure  of  hearing  from  herself,  as  I  had  previously
from  her  mother,  that  she  scarcely  had  suffered  from
headache  at  all  since  the  operation,  and  never  severely,
or  even  in  the  slightest  degree  for  one  hour  at  a  time.


SPINAL  AFFECTION.  243

Case  XLVI.  Mrs.  T.  had  been  suffering  from
severe  pain  of  the  head  for  more  than  two  weeks,
without  intermission  either  by  night  or  day  when
awake.  She  had  also  had  severe  pain  of  the  left  side
of  the  chest  for  three  weeks,  which  was  aggravated
by  a  cough.  For  the  last  two  days,  the  pain  of  the
side  had  been  most  distressing.  The  pulse  was  rapid,
the  cough  frequent  and  severe,  and  the  pain  in  the
side  so  acute  as  to  prevent  free  expansion  of  the  chest
as  in  ordinary  respiration.  I  found  there  was  con-
siderable spinal  tenderness  on  pressing  betwixt  the
shoulder  blades.  I  hypnotized  her,  and  in  five  minutes,
when  aroused,  she  was  quite  free  from  headache,  the
pain  in  the  side  so  much  relieved,  that  she  could
move  her  body  freely,  and  take  a  moderate  breath
with  very  little  inconvenience.  Next  day  I  found  she
had  no  return  of  the  headache,  and  very  little  of  the
pain  in  the  side.  She  was  again  hypnotized  with
advantage,  which  I  repeated  daily,  and  in  six  days  the
pain  of  the  side  was  quite  gone,  the  pain  of  the  head
had  never  returned,  the  cough  was  gone,  the  spinal
tenderness  which  disappeared  at  first  operation  had
never  returned  after  the  first  operation,  and  the  patient
was  now  quite  convalescent.  She  had  no  medicine
but  some  pectoral  mixture  to  moderate  the  cough.

I  shall  now  refer  to  spinal  irritation,  which  is  well
known  to  be  the  source  of  much  suffering,  not  merely
in  the  course  of  the  spinal  column,  but  also,  from  its
influence  on  the  origins  of  sentient  nerves,  on  distant
parts  of  the  body.  I  have  already  referred,  to  this  in
the  cases  16  and  19,  where  there  was  loss  of  feeling
and  motion  in  one  case,  and  pain  of  the  legs  with
contraction  in  the  other.  Where  the  affection  does


244  SPINAL  IRRITATION.

not  depend  on  active  inflammation,  I  hesitate  not  to
say,  that  the  pain  of  the  spine,  and  other  painful
affections  dependant  on  the  state  of  the  spinal  nerves
which  arise  therefrom,  may  be  relieved  more  speedily,
and  certainly,  and  effectively,  by  hypnotism,  than  by
any  means  I  have  either  tried,  read,  or  heard  of.  I
^liall  give  an  example  or  two.

•  Case  XLVII.  Miss  C.  had  suffered  for  years  from
-phial  irritation  and  headache,  the  pain  extending
round  the  chest,  so  that  deep  breathing  or  free  motion
of  the  chest  could  not  be  tolerated.  I  tried  every
variety  of  treatment,  but  in  vain,  and  at  last  despaired
of  benefiting  her,  and,  from  the  extreme  difficulty  of
liivritliing,  suspected  it  must  end  in  pulmonary  con-
sumption. I  now  tried  hypnotism,  which  imme-
diately succeeded  in  relieving  the  whole  catalogue  of
painful  symptoms,  and  she  was  speedily  restored  to
•  perfect  health,  and  has  continued  so  ever  since.

Case  XLVIII.  Miss had  suffered  much  from

spinal  irritation  for  years,  and  had  undergone  much
severe  treatment.  Had  been  restored  to  health  and
strength  under  my  treatment,  but  was  again  threat-
ened with  a  relapse.  I  hypnotized  her,  and  when
roused,  the  spinal  tenderness  was  gone.  A  few  more
operations  made  a  most  marked  improvement,  and
she  continued  well  for  some  mouths.  She  had  a
recurrence  of  the  complaint,  when  hypnotism  was
again  had  recourse  to,  with  immediate  and  decided
advantage.

I  could  easily  multiply  cases  of  this  sort,  were  it
not  for  swelling  the  volume  unnecessarily.  I  shall
therefore  pass  on  to  cases  of  irregular  or  spasmodic
action  of  the  muscles.  I  have  found  it  decidedly  use-


EPILEPSY.  245

ful  in  several  cases  of  chorea ;  and  also  in  cases  of
nervous  stammer.  In  epilepsy  it  also  frequently
proves  highly  useful,  but  there  are  some  varieties  of
this  complaint  over  which  it  has  no  control.  These
I  presume  are  such  cases  as  depend  on  organic  causes,
and  which  are  found  to  resist  every  known  remedy.
It  is  however  well  known  that  many  cases  which
were  supposed  to  have  been  of  this  class  have  worn
themselves  out,  or  time  and  the  efforts  of  nature  have
effected  some  organic  change.  Whether  hypnotism,
if  persevered  in,  might  have  a  tendency  to  expedite
the  favourable  result  in  such  cases,  I  am  not  prepared
to  say,  but  think  it  highly  probable  it  might  do  so.
I  feel  quite  confident,  however,  that  in  cases  which
are  amenable  to  treatment,  this  will  be  found  one  of
the  most  speedy  and  certain  remedies.  Of  all  the
complaints  for  which  mesmerism  has  been  lauded  as
beneficial,  there  are  none  so  conspicuous  as  epilepsy,
as  has  already  been  referred  to  in  the  introduction.
As  the  effects  of  hypnotism  are  so  nearly  allied  to
mesmerism,  it  would  be  superfluous  for  me  to  detail-  a
number  of  cases,  I  shall  therefore  give  only  a  few.

Case  XLIX.  A  girl  who  had  been  liable  to  six  or
eight  fits  in  24  hours,  had  only  one  the  day  after  she
was  first  hypnotized,  none  for  next  five  days,  and  was
shortly  quite  well.

Case  L.  John  Barker,  aged  19  years,  applied  to
me  in  August,  1842,  for  epileptic  fits.  He  had  first
been  seized  with  them  when  four  or  five  years  of
age,  at  first  every  week  or  fortnight,  but  as  he  got
older,  became  more  frequent,  so  that,  for  some  months
previous  to  applying  to  me,  he  had  had  as  many  as
three  fits  a- week  —  had  been  under  treatment  at  a


24C  EPILEPSY.

public  institution  for  two  months  before  calling  on
me,  and  had  a  great  variety  of  treatment,  but  derived
no  benefit,  and  was  then  told  by  the  attendant,  that
he  must  never  expect  to  get  rid  of  them.  He  was
subjected  to  my  usual  hypnotic  operation  for  such
cases,  was  operated  on  ten  times  altogether,  and  has
had  but  one  fit  since  he  was  operated  on  ;  and  that
was  the  day  after  first  operation.  He  had  no  medi-
cine from  me  excepting  three  aperient  powders.  He
has  now  been  free  of  the  fits  for  upwards  of  nine
months.

Case  LI.  Mrs  B.,  the  mother  of  a  family,  had  been
subject  to  epilepsy  for  seven  years,  and  notwith-
standing every  variety  of  treatment,  allopathetic  and
homoepathetic,  she  had  an  attack  at  least  once  a
month.  From  the  time  she  was  hypnotized  she  had
no  fit  for  four  months,  and  has  had  none  since.

Case  LII.  Miss  B.  had  been  subject  to  fits  for  nearly
two  years,  latterly  had  as  many  as  five  and  six  a-day ;
consulted  me  the  end  of  December,  1842  ;  was  hyp-
notized seven  times,  and  had  no  return  of  the  fits  for
four  months,  when  she  had  one,  and  in  two  weeks
after  a  second.

Hypnotism  may  be  applied  with  great  success  in
the  treatment  of  various  distortions,  arising  from
weakness  of  certain  muscles,  or  inordinate  power  or
contraction  of  their  antagonists  ;  and  I  feel  convinced,
that  by  this  means,  we  may  rectify  many  of  those
cases  which  have  hitherto  been  treated  by  section  of
the  tendons  or  muscles.  The  success  which  I  have
ain-ady  had,  by  this  means,  of  treating  lateral  curva-
ture of  the  spine,  warrants  me  to  speak  very  con-
fidently on  the  subject,  in  most  cases.  I  feel  convinced,


SPINAL  CURVATURE.  247

there  are  very  few  recent  cases  which  may  not  be
speedily  cured  by  hypnotism,  without  either  pain  or
inconvenience  to  the  patient.  Patience  and  perseverance
will  of  course  be  necessary  where  the  disease  has  been
of  long  standing,  and  though  in  sucli  cases  the  cure
may  not  be  perfect,  the  patient  may  be  greatly
improved  by  hypnotism.

The  method  of  treating  such  cases  is,  first  to  induce
the  sleep,  and  then  to  call  such  muscles  into  action  as
are  calculated  to  bring  the  body  into  the  most  natural
position.  By  bringing  these  muscles  into  play  during
this  condition,  they  acquire  increased  power,  and
ultimately  are  permanently  strengthened.  As  one
side  of  the  chest  is  enlarged,  and  the  other  collapsed,
I  endeavour  to  restrain  the  enlarged  side,  by  applying
compression  to  it  during  the  sleep,  whilst  the  patient
is  directed  to  take  deep  inspirations,  so  as  to  expand
the  opposite  side.  I  also  endeavour  to  make  the  patient
stand  in  a  position  the  very  reverse  of  that  which  I  con-
sider to  have  been  the  chief  cause  of  the  curvature.  As
already  remarked,  I  feel  convinced  this  method  will
prove  very  speedily  successful,  more  decidedly  so  than
any  other  mode  of  treatment  I  know  of,  and  especially
in  such  cases  as  are  accompanied  with  spinal  irritation.

Case  LIII.  The  following  is  a  case  of  its  remarkable
success  with  a  young  lady,  14  years  of  age,  who  had
had  the  advice  of  some  of  the  most  eminent  members
of  the  profession  in  the  provinces,  and  also  in  Dublin
and  London.  She  was  first  observed  to  become  mal-
formed when  four  years  old.  When  brought  to  me
on  the  12th  September,  1842,  her  chin  rested  on  her
breast,  and  there  was  no  power  of  raising  it,  from
the  weakness  of  the  recti  muscles  of  the  back,  and


248  SPINAL  CURVATURE.

contraction  of  the  sterno-cleido-mastoid  muscles.
The  dorsal  part  of  the  spine  and  shoulders  wen-
thrown  backwards,  the  lumber  vertebra)  and  pelvis
were  thrown  forwards,  so  that  the  deformity  was
very  great,  and  the  vigour  of  the  mind,  as  well  a*  of
the  body,  was  greatly  impaired.  She  had  no  medicine
nor  external  application,  but  was  hypnotized  night
and  morning,  and  treated  in  the  manner  referred  to,
rind  the  result  was,  that  in  six  weeks  she  could  hold
herself  so  much  better,  that  when  the  outline  was
taken,  it  was  found  that  her  spine  was  three  inches
nenrcr  the  perpendicular  than  when  I  first  saw  her.
During  this  period,  no  mechanical  means  had  been
used,  nor  throughout  any  part  of  the  time  she  was
under  my  care  were  any  resorted  to,  with  the  excep-
tion of  a  support  for  the  chin,  by  way  of  remem-
brancer, till  the  habit  of  attention  was  acquired  of
supporting  the  head  by  mere  muscular  effort,  which
she  now  had  the  full  power  of  doing.  Nor  should  I
omit  to  add,  there  was  also  a  great  improvement  in
the  mental  faculties.

Neuralgic  pain  in  the  heart  and  palpitation,  I  have
also  found  to  be  relieved,  or  entirely  cured,  by  neuro-
hypnotisni,  more  certainly  and  speedily,  than  by
any  other  means.  The  following  are  examples  :  —

Case  LIV.  Miss  Tomlinson,  16  years  of  age,  I  have
already  referred  to.  She  had  suffered  severely  from
painful  affection  of  the  heart,  with  palpitation,  which
had  resisted  ail  treatment,  and  she  had  been  pre-
scribed for  by  eminent  professional  men,  both  physi-
cians and  surgeons.  After  being  twice  hypnotized,
the  affection  of  the  heart  disappeared,  and  has
never  returned  but  once,  when  it  was  immediately


AFFECTIONS  OF  THE  HEART.  249

removed  by  hypnotism.  It  is  now  seventeen  months
since  she  was  first  operated  on,  and  she  is  in  perfect
health.

Case  LV.  Miss  Stowe,  22  years  of  age.  I  have
already  referred  to  her  as  one  of  the  cases  in  which
sight  was  remarkably  improved  by  hypnotism.  She
had  also  suffered  most  severely  from  palpitation  of
the  heart,  accompanied  with  difficulty  of  breathing
and  dropsy,  and  various  other  symptoms  which  led
the  medical  attendants,  one  of  them  an  eminent  phy-
sician, to  pronounce  the  case  hopeless,  considering
there  was  serious  organic  disease  of  the  heart.  After
being  twice  hypnotized,  all  symptoms  of  affection  of
the  heart  disappeared,  (sufficient  proof  it  had  been
only  functional  derangement,)  and  she  was  speedily
in  the  enjoyment  of  perfect  health,  and  has  been  so
now  for  the  last  twelve  months,  and  that  from  hyp-
notism only.  This  patient  had  leucorrhreal  discharge,
which  had  resisted  every  remedy  for  years,  and  was
so  offensive  as  to  cause  suspicion  she  had  malignant
uterine  disease.  It  was  completely  gone  in  a  week,
after  being  first  hypnotized.  She  had  no  medicine
excepting  a  simple  aperient  pill  occasionally.  I  should
add,  her  hearing,  as  well  as  sight,  .was  very  much
improved  by  it.

Case  LVI.  Mr  had  suffered  severely  from

pain  in  the  heart  and  palpitation.  He  was  hypno-
tized with  decided  relief,  and  a  second  operation  com-
pletely restored  him,  and  he  has  kept  well  for  the  last
eight  months.

Case  LVII.  Miss  had  suffered  much  from

palpitation  of  the  heart,  so  that  she  could  not  ascend
an  easy  stair  without  bringing  on  the  most  violent


250  PAIN  OF  OPERATION

palpitation.  I  tested  this  before  operating  on  her.
After  being  operated  on,  caused  her  ascend  the  same
flight  of  steps,  which  produced  no  palpitation,  and  she
has  never  required  the  operation  to  be  repeated.

Case  LVIII.  A  young  man  had  suffered  much  from
valvular  disease  of  the  heart  and  palpitation  and  diffi-
culty of  breathing  for  four  years,  the  consequence  of
a  rheumatic  fever.  He  could  not  walk  more  than
twenty  or  thirty  paces  without  being  forced  to  stand
or  sit  down.  After  being  hypnotized  for  a  short  time
he  could  manage  to  walk  upwards  of  a  mile  at  a
stretch.  In  this  case  there  was  so  much  organic  dis-
ease as  precluded  the  hope  of  a  perfect  cure,  but  no
means  could  have  achieved  for  him  what  hypnotism
did,  and  in  such  a  short  time  too.

When  considering  the  power  of  hypnotism  in  blunt-
ing morbid  feeling,  I  may  advert  to  its  power  of
relieving,  or  entirely  preventing,  the  pain  incident  to
patients  undergoing  surgical  operations.  I  am  quite
satisfied  that  hypnotism  is  capable  of  throwing  a
patient  into  that  state  in  which  he  shall  be  entirely
uiifitiscious  of  the  pain  of  a  surgical  operation,  or  of
greatly  moderating  it,  according  to  the  time  allowed
and  mode  of  management  resorted  to.  Thus,  I  have
myself  extracted  teeth  from  six  patients  under  this
influence  without  pain,  and  to  some  others  with  so
little  pain,  that  they  did  not  know  a  tooth  had  been
extracted  ;  and  a  professional  friend,  Mr  Gardom,  has
operated  in  my  way  lately,  and  extracted  a  very  firm
tooth  without  the  patient  evincing  any  symptom  of
feeling  pain  during  the  operation  ;  and  when  roused,
was  quite  unconscious  of  such  an  operation  having  been
performed.  He  has  extracted  a  second  for  this  patient,


MODIFIED  OR  PREVENTED.  251

and  one  for  another,  without  their  being  conscious  of
the  operation.  To  insure  this,  however,  I  consider
that,  in  the  majority  of  instances,  it  is  quite  necessary
the  patient  should  not,  when  he  sits  down,  know  or
imagine  the  operation  is  to  be  performed  at  that  time,
otherwise  the  distraction  of  the  mind,  from  this  cause,
may  render  it  impossible  for  him  to  become  hypno-
tized deeply  enough  to  render  him  altogether  insen-
sible to  pain.  The  following  case  will  illustrate  this
view.

Case  LIX.  Mr  Walker  called  on  me,  stating  he  had
been  suffering  from  a  violent  toothache ;  said  he  was
anxious  to  have  the  tooth  extracted,  but  that  he  suf-
fered so  much  pain  from  the  operation,  on  former
occasions,  that  he  could  not  make  up  his  mind  to  sub-
mit to  it,  unless  when  hypnotized.  He  had  been
frequently  hypnotized,  and  was  highly  susceptible  of
the  influence.  I  told  him  I  should  be  most  happy  to
try,  but  that  unless  he  could  restrain  his  mind  from
dwelling  on  the  operation,  I  might  not  be  able  to  suc-
ceed in  extracting  the  tooth,  entirely  without  pain.  He
sat  down,  and  speedily  became  hypnotized,  but  I  could
not  produce  rigidity  of  the  extremities,  nor  insensi-
bility to  pinching,  which  in  general  were  so  readily  in-
duced in  him.  I  therefore  roused  him,  and  told  him
the  fact.  He  stated  he  went  on  as  usual  to  a  certain
point,  but  then  began  to  think,  "  now  he  will  be
putting  the  instrument  in  my  mouth,"  after  which
the  hypnotic  effects  went  no  farther.  The  pain
was  gone,  and  he  left.  In  the  evening  he  again
called  on  me,  when  I  tried  him  once  more  with  the
same  results.  I  now  aroused  him,  told  him  it  could  not
be  done  with  him  reduced  to  a  state  of  total  insenai-


252  PAIXS  OF  OPERATION  MODIFIED.

bility,  and  that  I  should  therefore  extract  it  now  that
he  was  awake.  I  now  extracted  the  tooth.  He  was
conscious  of  my  laying  hold  of  it,  but  had  felt  so
little  pain  that  he  could  not  believe  the  tooth  had
been  extracted.  Nor  would  he  believe  it  till  he  had
the  tooth  put  into  his  hand.  I  now  requested  him  to
be  hypnotized  once  more,  when  he  became  highly
rigid  and  insensible,  in  a  shorter  time  than  I  had
ever  teen  in  him  before.  From  this,  and  other  ca>e*,
I  infer,  that  if  it  is  intended  to  perform  a  surgical
operation  entirely  without  pain,  whilst  in  the  hypnotic
condition,  the  patient's  consent  should  be  obtained
for  it  to  be  done  sometime,  but  he  ought  on  no  account
to  know  when  it  is  to  be  done,  otherwise,  in  most
cases,  it  would  foil  the  attempt.

However,  that  patients  may  be  operated  on  with
greatly  less  pain  even  when  in  the  first  degree  of
hypnotism,  and  whilst  expecting  an  operation,  is

quite  certain,  from  the  result  of  the  case  of  Mrs ,

ri-lati-d  below,  which  I  now  refer  to  as  Case  LX.
I  have  also  performed  other  operations  under  similar
circumstances,  and  with  similar  results,  namely,  with
greatly  diminished  pain,  although  not  entirely  without
pain.

Case  LX.  A  lady  had  abscess  connected  with
disease  of  the  orbitar  process  of  the  frontal  bone,  had
the  matter  discharged  by  small  puncture,  the  wound
closed  by  first  intention  and  again  opened,  as  required,
by  the  lancet.  She  experienced  so  much  pain  on
each  occasion  as  to  induce  me  to  hypnotize  her,  after
which  she  made  no  complaint,  although  I  durst  not
carry  it  far  owing  to  the  state  of  the  brain.  On  one
occasion  I  was  anxious  to  ascertain  how  she  would


CUTANEOUS  DISEASES  CURED.  253

feel  by  operating  loithout  hypnotizing,  when  the
result  was  so  distressing,  as  to  induce  ine  always  in
future  to  hypnotize  her,  before  such  operations,  and
then  all  went  on  well.

Case  LXI.  An  adult  with  worst  variety  of  Talipes
varus,  of  both  feet,  had  the  first  operated  on  in  the
usual  way,  and  the  other  whilst  in  the  primary  state
of  hypnotism.  The  present  ease  and  future  advantage,
in  respect  to  the  latter  operation,  was  most  remarkable.
I  have  operated  on  upwards  of  three  hundred  club
feet  now,  and  I  am  warranted  in  saying  I  never  had
so  satisfactory  a  result  as  in  the  one  now  referred  to.

In  cases  of  dyspepsia  it  is  of  the  greatest  service.
Most  patients  feel  the  appetite  greatly  increased  by
being  hypnotized,  and  that  the  digestion  is  more
vigorous  than  before  being  operated  on.  All  com-
plaints, therefore,  immediately  connected  with,  or
dependent  on,  indigestion,  may  be  expected  to  be
benefited  by  hypnotism.  It  is  well  known,  many
cutaneous  diseases  are  of  this  class  ;  and  the  following
will  illustrate  the  remarkable  power  exercised  by
hypnotism  on  this  symptom,  as  well  as  several  others
associated  with  it : —

Case  LXI.  Mrs  0.,  33  years  of  age,  the  mother  of
a  family,  had  been  very  nervous  for  fifteen  years,
with  tremor  of  the  arms,  was  easily  alarmed,  much
disturbed  by  distressing  dreams,  and  required  being
aroused  several  times  every  night  from  severe  attacks
of  nightmare.  She  had  also  suffered  severely  from  an
inveterate  eczema  of  the  chest  and  mamma,  and  in-
teguments of  the  abdomen,  which,  for  five  months,  had
resisted  every  remedy,  both  external  and  internal,  un-
der highly  respectable  medical  men.  The  fingers  of


254  CUTANEOUS  DISEASES  CURED.

one  hand  were  also  affected  with  impetigo.  She  con-
sulted me  31st  August,  1842,  when  she  was  hypno-
tized, and  was  aroused  greatly  relieved  from  the
distressing  feelings  of  the  head,  and  general  nervous-
ness. Her  husband  assured  me,  that  on  walking  out
with  her  same  evening,  had  he  not  seen  her,  he  could
not  have  believed  it  was  his  wife  who  had  hold  of
his  arm,  so  much  was  the  tremor  of  her  arm  im-
proved, and  she  slept  soundly  all  night  without  being
troubled  either  by  dreams  or  nightmare.  She  was
hypnotized  daily,  and  in  a  few  days  she  was  quite
well,  both  as  regarded  her  general  health,  and  the
obstinate  skin  disease  ;  and  as  she  had  no  medicine
nor  external  application,  there  could  be  no  disputing
that  it  resulted  entirely  from  the  influence  of  hypno-
tism. She  has  been  well  nearly  ten  months.

Case  LXII.  J.  C.,  aged  40,  had  been  severely
afflicted  for  eighteen  months  with  impetigo  sparsa,
extending  from  a  little  below  the  knee  to  near  the
toes.  He  had  also  severe  pain  in  the  ankle  joint,  so
that  he  had  been  disabled  for  work  for  eighteen
months.  I  hypnotized  him,  when  he  could  walk
better,  after  first  operation,  without  his  stick,  than  he
could  do  immediately  before  with  it.  In  a  few  days
the  improvement  was  very  remarkable,  and  within  a
week  the  disease  of  the  skin  was  nearly  well,  and  very
little  pain  in  the  joint.  He  was  hypnotized  almost
daily  till  the  end  of  the  month,  had  no  medicine,  and
no  dressing  but  a  little  spermaceti  ointment  to  pre-
vent the  cloth  surrounding  his  leg  from  adhering  to
the  sore ;  and  the  skin  disease  being  now  quite  well,
and  very  little  pain  in  the  ankle  joint,  in  a  few  days
after  he  was  enabled  to  resume  his  work.  He  had


CONTRACTION.  255

undergone  much  treatment,  under  both  public  and
private  practitioners,  but  was  becoming  worse  instead
of  better.  The  immediate  improvement  in  the  ap-
pearance of  the  cutaneous  disease,  as  well  as  feelings
of  the  patients  in  the  two  last  cases,  were  too  obvious
to  admit  of  a  doubt  as  to  the  remarkable  powers  of
hypnotism.

The  next  cases  I  shall  refer  to,  are  those  of  perma-
nent contraction  or  tonic  spasm.  The  following  are
interesting  examples  of  this  form  of  disorder,  and  the
success  of  hypnotism  in  the  treatment  of  them.

Case  LXIV.  Mr  J.  0.  21  years  of  age,  called  on  me
1st  October,  1842,  complaining  of  a  pain  in  the  left
temple,  a  continual  noise  in  the  left  ear,  with  occa-
sional shoots  of  pain,  and  the  hearing  of  that  ear
very  imperfect.  He  complained  also  of  inability  to
open  the  mouth  so  as  to  enable  him  to  take  his  food
comfortably,  and  that  mastication  caused  great  pain,
so  that  he  frequently  felt  compelled  to  decline  taking
his  meals.  Complaints  had  been  coming  on  since
previous  Easter,  and  were  becoming  worse,  notwith-
standing he  had  been  under  the  care  of  two  medical
men  up  to  the  day  before  he  called  on  me.  That  day,
10th  October,  1842,  he  could  not  eat  breakfast  but
with  great  difficulty,  and  had  been  compelled  to  take
rice  and  milk  for  dinner  for  two  days,  as  he  could  eat
nothing  solid.  I  found  he  could  not  permit  the
mouth  to  be  opened  more  than  half  an  inch  without
great  pain  and  difficulty  ;  and  besides  the  dulness  of
hearing  already  referred  to,  I  found  he  had  also  very
imperfect  sight  of  the  left  eye,  which  I  tested  very
accurately.  He  had  not  been  aware  of  this  until  I
called  his  attention  to  it.  I  hypnotized  him  for  about


256  SPASMODIC  AFFECTIONS

eight  minutes,  during  which  I  was  enabled  to  open
the  mouth  till  the  front  teeth  were  nearly  two  inches
asunder,  and  he  experienced  no  inconvenience  from
me  doing  so.  On  being  aroused,  all  the  pain  in  the
temple  was  gone  ;  he  could  himself  separate  the  teeth
one  inch  and  three  quarters,  as  accurately  measured,
in  presence  of  four  very  intelligent  gentlemen  who
had  been  present  during  the  operation  ;  and  he  could
move  the  jaws  with  the  most  perfect  freedom,  and
without  pain.  The  hearing  was  also  much  better,
and  the  sight  of  the  left  eye  also  most  remarkably
improved.  2d  October,  called  on  me  again,  when  he
stated  he  had  been  enabled  to  eat  a  good  supper  after
he  left  me  the  night  before,  and  to  take  his  breakfast
and  dinner  with  perfect  comfort  to  himself;  that  his
hearing  was  much  better  ;  and  the  sight  of  both  eyes
as  nearly  as  possible  equal.  He  had  had  no  pain  in
the  temple  since  he  was  operated  on,  unless  when  the
mouth  was  opened  to  the  utmost  extent,  and  even  then
it  was  trifling.  He  could  now  open  the  mouth  to
nearly  one  inch  and  three  quarters,  before  being  ope-
rated on  to-day,  and  after  the  operation,  to  the  extent
of  two  inches,  that  is,  the  front  teeth  were  two  inches
apart.

This  patient  called  on  me  a  few  days  after  to  be
operated  on  a  third  time,  and  retained  the  improve-
ment noted  above.  He  was  to  call  again  if  he  had
any  relapse,  but  as  he  has  not  done  so,  I  conclude  he
continues  quite  well,  and  it  is  now  nearly  seven
months  since  I  last  saw  him.

I  shall  now  refer  to  other  cases  of  spasmodic  affection,
which  are  most  interesting,  as  they  afford  us  strong
grounds  to  hope  that  Tetanus,  Hydrophobia,  and  other


CURED  BT  HYPNOTISM.  257

analogous  affections,  may  be  arrested  and  cured  by
this  agency.

Case  LXV.  A  girl  was  seized  with  violent  tonic  spasm
of  the  right  hand  and  arm,  and  side  of  the  face.  A  re-
spectable surgeon  was  consulted,  who  ordered  a  blister
to  the  nape  of  the  neck,  medicine,  fomentation,  and
liniments  to  the  parts  affected.  The  symptoms  be-
came more  urgent,  and  they  sent  for  the  surgeon
again,  but  as  he  was  out,  and  as  they  were  much
alarmed,  I  was  consulted.  The  blister  had  been
applied,  but  the  medicines  had  not  been  used  as
directed.  I  found  the  hand  so  firmly  clenched  that
it  was  impossible  to  open  it,  the  arm  so  rigid  it  could
not  be  moved  ;  but,  knowing  the  efficacy  of  my  new
remedy,  I  hypnotized  her,  and  in  two  minutes,  with
the  most  perfect  ease,  I  unlocked  the  hand,  and  re-
moved the  other  spasmodic  contractions,  and  she  was
instantly  quite  well,  and  has  continued  so  ever  since,
now  more  than  a  year.

I  shall  only  record  one  additional  case,  and  a  more
remarkable  or  satisfactory  one  I  think  could  scarcely
be  adduced.  I  give  the  case  as  correctly  recorded  by
the  patient's  father,  in  a  letter  he  sent  for  my
approval,  previous  to  having  it  sent  to  be  recorded  in
some  periodical.  I  preferred  having  its  publication
postponed,  and  now  give  it  precisely  in  his  own
words.

Case  LXVI.  Miss  Collins  of  Newark.  "My
daughter,  16  years  of  age,  had  been  afflicted  for  six
months  with  a  rigid  contraction  of  the  muscles  on  the
left  side  of  the  neck,  to  so  great  a  degree,  that  it
would  have  been  impossible  10  insert  an  ordinary
card  between  the  ear  and  shoulder,  so  close  was  their
R


258  TONIC  SPASM

contact ;  and  consequently  she  was  rapidly  becoming
malformed.  She  had  had  the  best  advice  to  be  pro-
cured in  the  country,  and  I  had  taken  her  to  London
with  a  written  statement  of  the  treatment  previously
employed,  and  had  the  opinion  of  Sir  Benjamin
Brodie,  who  approved  of  what  had  been  done,  but
gave  no  hope  of  speedy  relief.

"  In  consequence  of  seeing  a  report  of  a  lecture  given
oil  the  subject  by  Mr  Braid,  surgeon,  St  Peter's
Square,  Manchester,  and  a  letter  written  to  that
gentleman  by  Mr  Mayo  of  London,  I  went  with  her,
by  the  advice  of  Dr  Chawner,  who  indeed  accom-
panied us,  and  placed  her  under  the  care  of  Mr  Braid
on  Thursday  evening,  the  24th  March  last,  (1842.)
In  less  than  a  minute  after  that  gentleman  began  to
fix  her  attention,  she  was  in  a  mesmeric  (neuro-
hypnotic)  slumber,  and  in  another  minute  was  par-
tially cataleptic.  Mr  Braid  then,  without  awaking
her,  and  consequently  without  giving  her  any  pain,
placed  her  head  upright,  which  I  firmly  believe  could
not,  by  any  possibility,  have  been  done  five  minutes
before,  without  disruption  of  the  muscles,  or  the
infliction  of  some  serious  injury,  and  I  am  thankful
to  say,  it  not  only  continues  straight,  but  she  has  the
perfect  control  over  the  muscles  of  the  neck.  A
nervous  motion  of  the  head,  to  which  she  had  been
subject  after  her  return  from  Manchester,  has  entirely
ceased,  and  she  is  at  present  in  excellent  health.  It
is  necessary  to  remark,  that  at  Dr  Chawner's  recom-
mendation she  was  frequently  watched  while  asleep,
but  not  the  slightest  relaxation  was  observed  in  the
contracted  muscles.


CUBED  BY  HYPNOTISM.  259

"  Many  respectable  persons  can  bear  testimony  to
the  statements  herein  made.

(Signed)  JAMES  COLLINS."

"  NEWARK,  Uth  May,  1842."

I  have  been  informed  that  some  very  absurd  reports
have  been  circulated,  even  in  the  metropolis,  as  to
my  mode  of  operating  on  this  patient,  namely,  that  I
had  exhibited  a  vast  display  of  gesticulations  and
hocus  pocus,  in  order  to  work  upon  her  imagination.

SUCH STATEMENTS*  ARE UTTERLY UNTRUE. I simply

desired  her  to  maintain  a  steady  gaze  at  my  lancet
case,  held  above  her  eyes  in  the  manner  pointed  out
at  page  27  of  this  work,  and  after  the  eyes  had  been
closed,  and  the  limbs  extended  for  about  two  minutes,
I  placed  my  left  hand  on  the  right  side  of  her  neck,
and  my  right  hand  on  the  left  side  of  her  head,  and,
by  gentle  means,  gave  a  new  direction  to  the  sensorial
and  muscular  power,  and  was  thus  enabled  by  art,
rather  than  mechanical  force,  in  less  than  half  a
minute,  to  incline  the  head  from  the  left  to  the  right
of  the  mesial  plane.  The  muscular  contraction  being
thus  excited  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  in  muscles
which  had  been  inactive  for  six  months  previously,
was  the  surest  and  most  natural  mode  of  withdrawing
the  power  from  their  antagonists,  and  reducing  the
spasm  of  the  contracted  muscles  on  the  left  side.  After
allowing  the  patient  to  remain  two  minutes  supporting
her  head,  now  inclined  towards  the  right,  by  her  own
muscular  efforts,  to  give  them  power  on  the  principle
already  explained,  I  aroused  her  in  my  usual  way,
by  a  clap  of  my  hands.  The  patient's  father,  and  Dr
Chawner  of  Newark,  were  present  the  whole  time,


Ji^t  CONCLUDING  REMARKS.

and  to  them  I  appeal  as  to  the  correctness  of  this
statement,  and  in  refutation  of  the  vile,  unfounded
calumny  above  referred  to.

After  the  lapse  of  a  year  Mr  Collins  was  so  kind  as
write,  to  inform  me  his  daughter  continued  in  perfect
health,  with  complete  control  over  the  muscles  of  the
neck.

I  could  easily  adduce  many  more  interesting  cases,
but  trust  those  already  recorded  may  be  sufficient  to
prove  that  hypnotism  is  an  important  addition  to  our
curative  means,  and  a  power  well  worthy  the  atten-
tive consideration  of  every  enlightened  and  unpreju-
diced medical  man.


INDEX.


Abercrombie,  Dr,  90,  94,  149,  226.

Armstrong,  Dr,  84.

Atkinson's,  Miss  E.  case,  70,  220.

Barnet's,  Joseph,  case,  227.

Barrallier's,  Mr,  report  of  sleep  from  fixing  eyes,  77.

Bertrand's  opinions,  6,  7,  8,  9.

Bingham's,  Mr,  testimony,  188.

Brain,  modes  of  dividing,  100.

modes  of  communication  with  body,  103.

Brown,  Dr  Thomas,  89.
Brown,  Captain  Thomas,  16.
Brooke's,  Mr  H.  8.

Collins',  Miss,  remarkable  cure,  69,  257.

Colton,  81,  87.

Concluding  remarks,  158,  259.

Critique  on  Mr  Ward's  operation,  152.

Cross  magnetizing,  rationale  of,  125.

Curtis,  Mr,  183,  190.

Cutaneous  diseases  cured  by  hypnotism,  253.


262  INDEX.

Deafness  cured  by  hypnotism,  176.

Deaf  and  Dumb,  erroneous  expectations  of,  190.

case  cured,  192.

Distortions,  246.
Dreaming,  44.
causes  of,  46.

Elliotson,  Dr,  avowal  regarding  volition  and  sympathy,  98.

Epilepsy  cured  by  hypnotism,  245.

Eyes,  effects  of  their  consensual  adjustment  on  pupils,  35.

Erroneous  expectations  of  Deaf  and  Dumb,  190.

Evan  Samuel's  case,  204.

Edward  Samuel's  case,  213.

Faria's,  Abbe*,  mode  of  magnetizing,  7.
Gardom,  Mr,  his  success  as  a  hypnotist,  176,  248.

Headache,  cases  of  cure  of,  by  hypnotism,  238 — 246.

Hypnotism  separated  from  animal  magnetism,  4,  21  ;  pre-
judices against  refuted,  10,  75  ;  origin  and  definition  of
terms,  13  ;  modes  of  inducing,  and  success,  24,  27  ;  causes
of  failure  in  producing,  25  ;  peculiar  phenomena  of,  29,
54 — 57,  and  61 — 67  ;  modes  of  dehypnotizing,  30,  52  ;
proceeds  from  a  law  of  animal  economy,  31  ;  rationale  of,
31 — 48  ;  wherein  differs  from  common  sleep  and  reverie,
49 — 56 ;  accompanied  with  no  electric  nor  magnetic
change,  33  ;  power  of  habit  and  imagination,  36,  61  ;
remarkable  effects  of  a  current  of  air  during,  37 — 39  ;  in-
fluence of  on  smell,  39  ;  and  ordinary  reverie  contrasted,
49  ;  probable  cause  of  perfection  of  arts  amongst  Greeks,
56  ;  phenomena  of  consecutive,  61  ;  its  remarkable  cura-
tive power,  62,  165  to  end  ;  its  effects,  local  or  general,  at
will,  64  ;  its  effects  on  mind  as  well  as  body,  71  ;  so  as  to
produce  refreshing  sleep,  76  ;  power  of  hearing  faint
sounds,  126 ;  how  to  apply  it  as  a  curative  power,  162 ;


INDEX.  263

to  improve  sight, 165  ;  hearing, 176  ;  susceptibility  for

music,  194.

Hall,  M.  Spencer  T.  114,  118,  122—4.
Holditch,  Mr,  175,  217.
Heart,  affections  cured  by  hypnotism,  248.

Imagination,  effects  of,  225.

Insane  patient,  treated  in  accordance  with  phrenology,  120.

Johnstone,  Thomas,  remarkable  case,  216.

Irritation,  Spinal,  243.

Kramer,  his  opinions  criticised  by  Curtis,  183.

Lafontaine's  conversazione,  2, 16.

Liebig's  views  as  to  the  action  of  the  alkaloids,  48.

Magnetism,  animal,  modes  of  producing  phenomena  of,  20.
Materialism,  arguments  in  refutation  of,  81,  et  aeq.
Mayo's,  Mr  Herbert,  testimony,  23,  33,  80.
M'Nish  on  reverie,  49.

Medical Gazette,  papers  in,  contrasted  with  Mr  Braid's
views,  34,  35  ;  extract  from,  59.

Times,  extract  of  experiments  from,  37 — 39.

Mesmer's  experiments  in  Dr  Franklin's  garden,  20.

Mellor's,  Miss,  case,  200.

Miiller,  important  extract  from,  47,  48, 103.

Morris's,  Mr,  case,  210.

M'Robert's  remarkable  case,  195.

Mind  and  matter,  how  related  to  each  other,  81.

the  cause  of  organism,  91.

Music,  its  remarkable  effects  on  hypnotic  patients,  56.

Nodan's  case,  181.

Okeys were most  probably affected  through  imagination
and  habit,  when  operated  on  by  Mr  Wakley,  61.


264  INDEX.

Okeys,  rationale  of  the  power  of  predicating  death.

Palpitation  of  heart  cured  by  hypnotism,  248.

Plato's  opinion  of  mind  and  matter,  90. •

Phrenology  does  not  necessarily  lead  to  materialising,  et  seq.

Passions  excited  by  music,  95  ;  sight,  96  ;  sympathy, 96  ;

touch,  96  ;  mechanical  pressure,  only  during  hypnotism,

103.

Prichard,  Dr,  7,  10.
Phreno-hypnotism,  80.

lUieumatism  treated  successfully  by  hypnotism,  227 — 235.
Roiley,  Mrs,  her  remarkable  case,  165.

S.  Mrs,  opacity  of  cornea  removed,  173.
Shelmerdine's,  James,  case,  184.
Sight  restored  and  improved  by  hypnotism,  165.
Stowe's,  Mrs,  case,  169.

,  Miss,  case,  171,  249.

Slater,  Mrs,  case  of  paralysis  cured,  202.
Sleep,  natural  phenomena  of,  43,  54,  58,  59.

causes  of,  45,  58 — 60.

Stewart,  Dugald,  90.
Somnambulism,  44.
Sunderland,  La  Roy,  his  views,  122.
Smell  restored  by  hypnotism,  196.

interesting  experiments  on,  40,  197.

Smellie's  predication,  1 05.
Spinal  irritation  cured  by  hypnotism,  243.
Spasm,  tonic,  cured  by  hypnotism,  255.
Surgical  operations  during  hypnotism,  250.

Taylor,  Sarah,  deaf  and  dumb  girl  cured,  192.
Tic  Doloureux  cured  by  hypnotism,  198.

Vaughan's,  Mr,  testimony,  1G4.


INDEX.  265

Walker,  Mr,  hypnotized,  17,  19.

whilst  operating  on  another  gentle-
man, 40.

-,  sight  improved  by  hypnotism,  171.


Wakley's,  Mr,  admission  regarding  phenomena,  33.
rationale  of  his  experiments  with  the  Okeys,  61 ,


EDINBURGH
PB1NTKD  BY ANDREW  SHOHTREDE,

CiKORGK  IV.  iiKlDGK.


ERRATA  ET  ADDENDA.


Page  14,  line  2,  for  Arsal,  read  A  real.

—  17,  bottom  line,/or  phenomena,  read  phenomenon.

—  34,  line  17,  for  33,  read  38.

- 57,  line  32,/or  effects,  read  efforts.

—  78,  line  16,/or  state,  read  stage.

24,  line  26,  after  the  word  themselves,  add,  as  farther
proof  of  the  tuccets  of  hypnotism,  At  the  conversazione  given
on  the  29th  June,  1842,  to  the  Members  of  the  British  Asso-
ciation, two  men  and  two  youths  were  brought  off  the  street.
( >ne  man  and  both  youths  were  operated  on  ;  all  the  three
were  hypnotized,  and  one  of  the  youths  reduced  to  the  'rigid
state.

Page  129,  line  G,for  warrants,  read  seem  to  warrant.
— 143,  line  7,  for  the  relation  which,  read  that  some
relation.
