PHYSIOLOGY  OF  FASCINATION,


to*


CRITICS  CRITICISED


IT


JAMES  BRAII),  ^ '


res  f


**  * c »-  »ll»  . BTC.  /**

; , f -y


tjmi  poMe


MANCHESTER:

GRANT  Jc  CO..  CORPORATION  STREET.


[The  following; remarks  oil  the  “ Physiology  of  Fascination"  were  written
and  sent  by  me  to  be  read  before  section  D of  the  meetings  of  the  BlU'risii
Association,  held  at  Glasgow  last  autumn.]


kS  Si  <.  «,  »-<-


< V-


,/  //f  //(  t c ^


THE  PflYapLOGl  OF  FASCINATION.


Th*  P°wcr  P<»»e«e<l  by  serpent*  to  fascinate  birds  has  always  '
bitn  a sourre  of  interest  anti  admiration  to  the  curious.  That
a crawling  reptile,  such  as  a serpent,  doomed  to  move  ptonely
on  the  earth,  should  possess  the  craft  and  power,  br  the  mi  re
fixed  gate  of  its  glaring  eyes,  irresistibly  to  draw  down  from
their  proud  arial  perch  the  very  fowls  of  heaven,  which  cleave
the  air  with  rapid  wing  far  beyond  the  reach  of  the  sports-
man‘s  tube,  seems  to  proclaim  this  as  one  of  the  most  remark-
able ol  nature  » laws,  which  has  ordained  that  extremes  should
meet.  Ibo  question  therefore  arises,  by  what  means  is  this
remarkable  result  effected  ? Is  there  any  magnetic  attraction
in  the  eye  of  the  serpent  by  which  the  bird  is  drawn  ? or  is
U the  result  of  any  poisonous  emanation  projected  by  the
serpent  - Is  it  a voluntary,  or  an  involuntary  process  by  which
the  creature  approaches  and  falls  an  easy  prev  to  its  fell
destroyer  ?

Without  occupying  your  time  by  entering  into  any  elaborate
history  of  the  various  speculations  which  hare  been  advanced
on  this  subject  by  different  authors,  I sliall  at  once  proceed  to
state  what  appears  to  me  to  be  the  true  explanation  of  the
P icnomenon— one  which  is  quite  in  accordance  with  nature’s
laws,  and  which,  moreover,  explains,  on  scientific  principles,
some  remarkable  phenomena  observed  ev<  n in  man.


From  various  observations  which  I have  read  and  heard  on
the  subject,  I feel  satisfied  that  the  creatures  fascinated  do  not
voluntarily  surrender  themselves  to  their  fate ; and  this,  I
consider,  is  proved  by  the  agitation  and  alarm  which  many  of
them  display  when  advancing  to  meet  tlicir  fate,  viz.,  their
plaintive  cries,  and  the  agitation  of  their  bodies,  and  the  instant
escape  which  they  make  when  any  circumstance  has  occurred
to  avert  from  their  sight  the  glaring  eyes  of  the  serpent.  Their
ability  to  escape  so  speedily,  moreover,  under  such  circum-
stances, proves  that  the  charm  had  not  been  the  result  of  any
poisonous  emanation  proceeding  from,  or  projected  by,  the
serpent.  After  due  consideration,  I feel  satisfied  that  the  ap-
proach and  surrender  of  itself  by  the  bird,  or  other  animal,  is
just  another  example  of  the  uumoid eo-dynamic,  or  unconscious
muscular  action  from  a dominant  idea  possessing  the  mind,
which  I was  the  first  to  publish  as  the  true  cause  of  “ table-
turning,”  and  which  has  since  been  confirmed  by  others,  and
most  satisfactorily  so  by  the  report  of  the  medical  committee
published  in  the  Medical  Times  and  Gazette,  and  by  Professor
Faraday,  in  the  London  Times  newspaper,  and  in  the  Athcna  um,
which  contained  reports  of  this  acute  and  profound  philo-
sopher’s ingenious  experiments,  and  unexceptionable  physical
tests,  for  determining  the  question  according  to  this  view.

The  law\ipon  which  these  phenomena  arc  to  be  explained
has  long  been  familiar  to  me,  from  observations  made  during
my  investigation  of  hypnotic  and  mesmeric  phenomena,  and  it
is  simply  this — that  when  the  attention  of  man  or  animal  is
deeply  engrossed  or  absorbed  by  a given  idea,  associated  with
movement,  a current  of  nervous  force  is  sent  into  the  muscles
which  produce  a corresponding  motion,  not  only  without  any
' conscious  effort  of  volition,  but  even  in  opposition  to  volition,
in  many  instances  ; and  hence  they  seem  to  be  irresistibly  drawn,
or  spell-bound,  according  to  the  purport  of  the  dominant  idea
or  impression  in  the  mind  of  each  at  the  time.  1 he  volition  is  pro-


b


sfrate  ; the  individual  is  so  completely  wmoiiieisrd,  or  under  the
influence  of  the  dominant  idea,  as  to  be  incapable  of  exerting
an  efficient  restraining  or  opposing  power  to  the  dominant  idea  ;
and,  in  the  case  of  the  bird  and  serpent,  it  is  first  wonder
which  arrests  the  creature's  attention,  and  then  fear  causes
that  manoitUo-dynamic  action  of  the  muscles  which  involuntarily
issues  in  the  advance  and  capture  of  the  unhappy  bird.  This
is  the  principle,  moreover,  which  account*  for  such  accidents
as  are  frequently  witnessed  in  the  streets  of  every  crowded
thoroughfare,  where  some  persons,  when  crossing  the  streets
amidst  a crowd  of  carriages,  not  only  become  spell-bound  by  a
sense  of  their  danger,  so  that  they  cannot  move  from  the  point
of  danger,  but  it  even  sometimes  happens  that  they  seem  im-
pelled to  advance  forward  into  the  greater  danger  from  which
they  are  anxious  to  escape,  and  from  which  a person  with  more
sfclf-poKwsion  or  presence  of  mind  may  be  find,  by  the  very
sense  of  his  danger,  to  escape,  by  making  an  incredible  bound—
his  natural  powers  having  become  stimulated  to  unwonted
energy,  by  a lively  faith  having  taken  possession  of  his  mind  as
to  his  capability  to  accomplish  such  a feat.  It  is  this  very
principle  of  involuntary  muscular  action  from  a dominant  Idea
which  has  got  possession  of  the  mind,  and  the  suggestions  con-
veyed to  the  mind  by  the  muscular  action  which  flows  from  it,
which  led  so  many  to  be  deceived  during  their  experiments  in
“ table-turning,”  and  induced  them  to  believe  that  the  table
was  drawing  them,  whilst  all  the  while  they  were  unconsciously
drawing  or  pushing  it,  by  their  own  muscular  force.  As  already
remarked,  it  U upon  this  principle  that  the  bird  is  drawn  to  its
fell  destroyer,  and  that  human  beings  may  appear  deliberately
and  intentionally  to  leap  over  precipices,  and  cast  themselves
from  towers,  and  other  situations,  not  only  of  danger,  but  of
Certain  destruction.  It  is  also  upon  the  same  principle  that
some  individuals  may  bo  brought  so  much  under  the  control
of  others,  through  certain  audible,  and  visible,  and  tangible
suggestions  by  another  individual,  as  is  seen  in  the  phenomena


6


exhibited  in  the  waking  condition,  in  what  has  been  so  absurdly
called  “electro-biology.”  The  whole  of  these  phenomena  of
“electro-biology,”  of  “table  turning,”  the  gyrations  of  the
odometer  of  Dr.  Mayo,  of  the  magnetometer  of  Mr.  Rutter,
the  movements  of  the  divining-rod,  and  the  supposed  levity
of  the  human  body  lifted  on  the  tips  of  the  fingers  of  four  indi-
viduals, as  described  by  Sir  David  Brewster,  the  fascination  of
serpents,  the  evil  eye  and  witchcraft,  and  the  charm  by  which
a fowl  may  be  fixed  and  spell-bound  by  causing  it  to  gaze  at  a
chalk  line,  or  strip  of  coloured  paper,  or  of  white  paper  on  a
dark  ground — all  come  under  the  same  category,  namely,  the
influence  of  a dominant  idea,  or  fixed  act  of  attention,  absorb-
ing, or  putting  in  abeyance  for  the  nonce,  the  other  and  great
controlling  power  of  the  mind — the  will.

The  following  is  an  interesting  example  of  a person  becoming
spell-bound  through  a dominant  idea  excited  through  the  sug-
gestion of  a second  party.  The  anecdote  was  communicated
to  me  by  a highly  scientific  friend,  as  an  event  which  occurred
in  his  own  family  circle.  His  grandfather  resided  in  the  country,
and  on  going  into  his  orchard  one  Sunday  morning,  he  descried
a boy  who  had  climbed  up  into  one  of  his  apple  trees,  and  w as
then  in  the  attitude  of  laying  hold  of  an  apple.  At  this  moment
the  gentleman  addressed  the  boy  in  a stern  manner,  declaring
that  he  would  fix  him  there  in  the  position  he  was  then  in.  Having  said
so,  the  gentleman  left  the  orchard  and  went  off  to  church,  not
doubting  that  the  boy  would  soon  come  down  and  effect  his
escape  when  he  knew  the  master  of  the  orchard  was  gone.
However,  it  turned  out  otherwise;  for,  on  going  into  the
orchard  on  his  return  from  church,  he  was  not  a little  surprised
to  find  that  the  boy  had  been  spell-bound  by  his  declaration  to
that  effect— for  there  he  still  remained,  in  the  exact  attitude
in  whick  he  left  him,  with  his  arm  outstretched,  and  his  hand
ready  to  lay  hold  of  the  apple.  By  some  farther  remarks  from  this
gentleman  the  spell  was  broken,  and  the  boy  allowed  to  escape
without  farther  punishment.


My  investigations  have  proved,  beyond  all  controversy,  that
by  these  means  the  ordinary  mental  and  physical  functions  may
be  changed,  so  that  the  subject  shall  lose  his  freedom  of  action,
and  that  aB  the  natural  functions  may  be  either  excited  or  de-
pressed with  great  uniformity,  even  in  the  waking  condition,
according  to  the  dominant  idea  listing  in  the  mind  of  man  or
animal  at  the  time,  whether  that  has  arisen  spontaneously,  has
lx  en  the  result  of  previous  associations,  or  of  the  suggestions
oi  others.  The  whole  of  the  subsequent  abnormal  phenomena
are  due  entirely  to  this  influence  of  dominant  ideas  over  phy-
sical action,  and  point  to  the  importance  of  combining  the
study  of  psychology  with  that  of  physiology,  and  wee  .Warn
I believe  the  attempt  made  to  study  these  two  branches  of
science  so  much  apart  from  each  other,  has  been  a great
hindrance  to  the  successful  study  of  either.

With  the  view  of  simplifying  the  study  of  the  reciprocal
actions  and  re-actions  of  mind  and  matter  upon  each  other,
which  have  hitherto  been  comprised  under  the  vague  terms,
reverie,  animal  magnetism,  mesmerism,  hypnotism,  eketro-
budogy,  Ac.,  I beg  leave  to  suggest  the  adoption  of  the  fol-
lowing specific  terms.  After  having  convinced  myself  by
numerous  experiment*  and  careful  observation  and  reflection'
that  the  phenomena  of  the  so-calfod  animal  magnetism,  or
mesmerism,  did  not  mult  from  any  influence,  ab  ext ru,  of  a
magnetic  fluid  or  force,  projected  from  the  body  of  the  mes-
meriser,  and  passing  into  and  charging  the  body  of  the  subject
with  its  peculiar  properties  and  powers,  but,  on  the  contrary,
that  the  condition  arose  from  influences  existing  within  the
patient , own  body,  viz.,  the  influence  of  concentrated  attention,
or  dominant  ideas,  in  modifying  physical  action,  and  these
dynamic  changes  re-acting  on  the  mind  of  the  subject,  I adopted
the  term  or  nervous  sleep,  in  preference  to  mesmerism,

or  animal  magnetism.  This  term  has  met  with  most  favourable
consideration  from  many  able  writers  on  the  subject;  still  it  is


8


Jiable  to  this  grave  objection— that  it  has  been  used  to  comprise
not  a single  state,  but  rather  a scries  of  stages  or  conditions,
varying  in  every  conceivable  degree,  from  the  slightest  reverie,
with  high  exaltation  of  the  functions  called  into  action,  on  the
one  hand,  to  intense  nervous  coma,  with  entire  abolition  of
consciousness  and  voluntary  power,  on  the  other ; whilst,  from
the  latter  condition,  by  very  Bimple,  but  appropriate  means,
the  subject  is  capable  of  being  speedily  partially  restored,  or
entirely  roused,  to  the  waking  condition.  By  this  means,  I
maintain  that  the  operator  does  not  communicate  any  surcharge
of  a magnetic,  odylic,  electric,  or  vital  fluid  or  force  from  his
own  body  to  that  of  the  subject,  as  the  real  and  efficient  cause
of  the  phenomena  which  follow  in  altering  or  modifying  phy-
sical action  and  curing  disease  ; but  I hold  that  he  acts  merely
as  the  engineer,  by  various  modes  exciting,  controlling,  and
directing  the  vital forces  withih  the  patient’s  own  body,  according
to  the  laws  which  regulate  the  reciprocal  action  of  mind  and
matter  upon  each  other,  in  organised  and  living  beings,  in  the
present  state  of  our  existence.

I ami  well  aware  that,  in  correct  phraseology,  the  term
ltypnotism  ought  to  be  restricted  to  the  phenomena  manifested
in  patients  who  actually  pass  into  a state  of  sleep,  and  who
remember  nothing  on  awaking  of  what  transpired  during
their  sleep.  All  short  of  this  is  mere  reverie,  or  dreaming,
however  provoked  ; and  it,  therefore,  seems  highly  desirable
to  fix  upon  a terminology  capable  of  accurately  characterising
these  latter  modifications  which  result  from  hypnotic  processes.
This  is  the  more  requisite  from  the  fact  that,  of  those  who  may
be  rolieved  and  cured  by  hypnotic  processes  of  diseases  which
obstinately  resist  ordinary  medical  treatment,  perhaps  not
more  than  one  in  ten  ever  passes  into  the  state  of  oblivious
sleep,  during  the  processes  which  they  are  subjected  to.  The
term  hypnotism,  therefore,  is  apt  to  confuse  them,  and  lead  them
to  suspect  that,  at  all  events,  they  cannot  be  benefited  by  pro-


cesses  which  fail  to  produce  the  moit  obvious  indication  which
the  name  imports.  After  much  reflection  on  the  subject,  it  has
occurred  to  me  that  the  object  in  \iew  might  be  attained  very
satisfactorily  as  follows Let  the  term  hypnotism  be  restricted
to  those  cases  alone  in  which,  by  certain  artificial  processes,
oblivious  sleep  takes  place,  in  which  the  subject  has  no  remem-
brance on  awaking  of  what  occurred  during  his  deep,  but  of
which  he  shall  have  t he  most  perfect  recollection  on  passing  into  a
similar  stage  of  hypnotism  thereafter.  In  tins  mode,  hypnotism  will
comprise  those  eases  only  in  which  what  has  hitherto  been  called
the  double-conscious  state  occurs ; and  let  the  term  hypnotic  coma
denote  that  still  deeper  stage  of  the  sleep  in  which  the  patient
seems  to  be  quite  unconscious  at  the  time  of  all  external  im-
pressions, and  devoid  of  voluntary  power,  and  in  whom  no
idea  of  what  had  been  said  or  done  by  others  during  the  said
state  of  hyj>m>tic  omm  can  be  remembered  by  the  patient  on
awaking,  or  at  a«iy  stago  of  tnbmqncnt  hypnotic  operations.
Then,  inasmuch  as  I feel  satisfied  that  the  mental  and  physical
phenomena  which  flow  from  said  processes  result  entirely  from
the  mental  impressions,  or  dominant  ideas,  excited  thereby  in
the  minds  of  the  subjects,  changing  or  modifying  the  previously
existing  physical  action,  and  the  peculiar  physical  action  thus
superinduced  re-acting  on  their  minds — and  that,  whether
these  dominant,  expectant  ideas  existed  in  the  minds  of  the
subjects  previously,  or  were  suggested  to  them  after  passing
into  the  impressible  condition,  by  audible  suggestions  or
sensible  impressions  excited  by  manipulations  of  a second
party— under  these  circumstances,  1 consider  the  following
terms  calculated  to  realise  all  the  precision  which  we  need
desire  on  this  point :

Let  momouhoUAjy  indicate  the  doctrine  of  the  influence  of
dominant  ideas  in  controlling  mental  and  physical  action.

Then  w omtdcvm  will  indicate  the  condition  resulting  from
the  mind  being  possessed  by  a dominant  idea.


10


To  monoideisc  will  indicate  the  act  of  performing  processes
for  inducing  the  state  of  monoideism.

Monoidciser  will  indicate  the  person  who  monoideises.

Monoideised  will  "indicate  the  condition  of  the  person  who  is
in  the  state  of  monoideism .

And  monoideo-dynamics  will  indicate  the  mental  and  physical
changes,  whether  of  excitement  or  depression,  winch  result
from  the  influence  of  monoideism.*

And,  finally,  as  a generic  term,  comprising  the  whole  of  these
phenomena  which  result  from  the  reciprocal  actions  of  mind
and  matter  upon  each  other,  I think  no  term  could  be  more
appropriate  than  psycho-physiology.

It  must  be  obvious  that  these  terms  would  comprehend
erery  conceivable  variety  of  phenomenon,  according  to  the
function  of  the  part  on  which  the  dominant  idea  of  the  subject
might  be  concentrated,  and  the  liveliness  of  his  faith.  Thus,
let  the  mind  of  the  subject  be  engrossed  with  the  notion
that  he  is  to  be  irresistibly  drawn,  repelled,  paralysed,  or
catalepsed,  and  the  monoideo-dynamic  or  ideational  condition
of  the  muscles  corresponding  with  this  idea  will  take  place,
without  any  conscious  effort  of  volition  ol  the  subject  to  that


• In  order  that  I may  <lo  full  justice  to  two  esteemed  friends,  I beg  to
state  in  connection  with  this  term  monoideo-dynamics,  that,  several  year*
a„0  nr  W B.  Carpenter  introduced  the  term  ideo-motor  to  characterise
the ’reflex  or  automatic  muscular  motions  which  arise  merely  from  ideas
associated  with  motiou  existing  in  the  mind,  without  any  conscious  effort  of
volition.  In  1S53,  in  referring  to  this  term.  Dr  Noble  said,  “ Idea-dynamic
would  probably  constitute  a phraseology  more  appropriate,  as  applicable  to
a wider  range  of  phenomena.”  In  this  opinion  I quite  concurred,  because
I was  well  aware  that  an  idea  could  arrest  as  well  as  excite  motion  automa-
tically, not  only  in  the  muscles  of  voluntary  motion,  but  also  as  regards  the
condition  of  every  other  function  of  the  body.  I have,  therefore,  adopted  the
tern,  monoideo-dynamics,  as  still  more  comprehensive  and  characteristic  as
regards  the  true  mental  relations  which  subsist  during  all  dynamic  changes
which  take  place,  in  every  other  function  of  the  body,  as  well  as  in  the  mus-
cles of  voluntary  motion.


11


effect.  It  was,  moreover,  this  very  ideational  or  unconscious
muscular  action,  which  was  the  cause  of  “ table-turning,”
which  so  much  excited  the  public  mind  two  years  ago.  The  ex-
perimenters perceived  the  fact  that  the  table  moved,  but,  not
being  conscious  of  putting  out  any  voluntary  effort,  they
imagined  that  the  table  was  drawing  them,  whilst  all  the  while
their  own  muscles  were  imparting  the  requisite  impulse  to  the
table,  although  they  were  unconscious  that  they  were  doing  so.

It  was  in  18*1  that  I first  undertook  an  experimental  inves-
tigation for  the  purpose  of  determining  the  Mature  and  cause
of  mesmeric  phenomena.  Hitherto  it  had  been  alleged  that
the  mesmeric  condition  arose  from  the  transmission  of  some
magnetic  fluid,  or  occult  influence,  fluid,  or  force,  projected
from  the  body  of  the  operator,  impinging  upon,  and  charging
the  body  of  the  patient.  However,  I was  very  soon  able  to
demonstrate  the  fallacy  of  this  objective  inflame*  theory,  by  \
producing  analogous  phenomena  simply  by  causing  subjects
to  gaxe  with  Axed  attention  for  a few  minute*  at  inanimate  \
Object*.  It  was  thus  dearly  proved  that  it  was  a subjective
influence,  resulting  from  some  peculiar  change  which  l}ic  mind
could  produce  upon  the  mental  and  physical  functions,  when
constrained  to  exercise  a prolonged  act  of  fixed  attention.

I therefore  adopted  the  term  hgpnotuon,  or  nervous  sleep,  to
characterise  the  phenomena  producible  by  my  processes.  t
I became  satisfied  that  the  hypnotic  state  was  essentially  a
state  of  mental  concentration,  during  which  the  faculties  of
the  mind  of  the  patient  were  so  engrossed  with  a single  idea  or
train  of  thought  as,  for  the  nonce,  to  render  it  dead  or  in-
different to  all  other  considerations  and  influences.  The  con-
sequence of  this  concentrated  attention,  again,  to  the  subject
in  hand,  intensified,  in  a correspondingly  greater  degree,
whatever  influence  the  mind  of  the  individual  could  produce
upon  his  physical  functions  during  the  waking  condition,  when
hia  attention  waa  so  much  more  diffused  and  distracted  by


12


other  impressions.  Moreover,  inasmuch  as  words  spoken,  or
various  sensible  impressions  made  on  the  body  of  an  individual
by  a second  party,  act  as  suggestions  of  thought  and  action  to
the  person  impressed,  so  as  to  draw  and  fix  his  attention  to
one  part  or  function  of  bis  body,  and  withdraw  it  from  others,
whatever  influence  such  suggestions  and  impressions  are
capable  of  producing  during  tho  ordinary  waking  condition,
should  naturally  be  expected  to  act  with  correspondingly
greater  effect  during  the  nervous  sleep,  when  the  attention  is  so
much  more  concentrated,  and  the  imagination,  and  faith,  and
expectant  ideas  in  the  mind  of  the  patient  are  so  much  more
intense  than  in  the  ordinary  waking  condition.  Now,  this  is
precisely  what  happens  ; and  I am  persuaded  that  this  is  the
most  philosophical  mode  of  viewing  this  subject ; and  it  ren-
ders the  whole  clear,  simple,  and  intelligible  to  the  apprehension
of  any  unprejudiced  person,  who  may  at  once  perceive  that  the
real  object  and  tendency  of  the  various  processes  for  inducing
the  state  of  hirpnotism  or  mesmerism  is  obviously  to  induce  a state
of  abstraction  or  concentration  of  attention — that  is,  a state
of  monoideism— whether  that  may  be  by  requesting  the  sub-
ject to  look  steadfastly  at  some  unexciting,  and  empty
inanimate  thing,  or  ideal  object,  or  inducing  him  to  watch  the
fixed  gaze  of  the  operator’s  eyes,  his  pointed  fingers,  or  the
passes  or  other  manoeuvres  of  the  mesmeriser.

In  passing  into  sleep,  moreover,  reason  and  will,  the  highest
powers  of  the  mind,  are  the  first  to  wane  as  is  beautifullj
illustrated  in  the  writings  of  Dr.  W.  B.  Carpenter,  well-known
as  one  of  our  ablest  writers  on  physiology — and  thus  the  ima-
gination gains  the  ascendancy,  and  careers  in  unbridled  liberty ;
and,  as  the  cerebro-spinal  functions  or  reflex  actions  become
more  excitable  at  a certain  stage  of  the  sleep,  just  when  the
controlling  power  of  the  will,  which  is  a cerebral  function,  is
withdrawn,  a very  interesting  series  of  phenomena  may  be
elicited  in  the  functions  of  the  patient  by  those  who  thoroughly


13


understand  the  subject,  and  how  to  regulate  and  control  them  ;
and  thus  -various  disease’s  may  be  speedily  and  safely  relieved
and  cured  bv  judicious  and  suitable  manipulations  and  sugges-
tions, which  are  not  at  all  amenable  to  ordinary  medical  treat-
ment. In  this  manner  cases  may  be  cured  in  a few  minutes,
or  in  a few  days,  which,  by  ordinary  treatment,  by  the  admini-
stration of  drugs,  prescribed  by  the  ablest  members  of  the
profession,  or  when  left  to  nature,  may  require  not  only  weeks
or  months,  but  years  to  effect  a recovery.  It  was  to  such  casts  us
these  that  I referred  in  my  article  on  “ Hypnot^ Therapeutics,"
which  was  published  in  the  Monthly  Journal  of  Medical  Science ,
for  July,  185.1,  where  I said,  “The  moat  striking  cases  of  all,
however,  for  illustrating  the  value  of  the  hypnotic  mode  of
treatment,  are  cases  of  hysteric  paralysis,  in  which,  without
organic  lesion,  the  patient  may  have  remained  for  a consider-
able  length  of  time  perfectly  powerless  of  a part,  or  of  the
whole  body,  from  a dominant  idea  which  has  paralysed  or  mis-
directed his  volition.  In  such  cases,  by  altering  the  state  of
the  circulation,  and  breaking  down  the  previous  idea,  and  sub-
stituting a salutary  idea  of  vigour  and  self-confidence  in  their
place  ( which  can  be  done  by  audible  suggestions  addressed  to
the  patient,  in  a confident  tone  of  voice,  as  to  what  mart  and
•halt  be  realised  by  the  processes  he  has  been  subjected  to),  on  be  ing
aroused  in  a few  minutes  thereafter,  with  such  dominant  idea  in
their  minds,  to  the  astonishment  of  themselves,  as  well  as  of
others,  the  patients  are  found  to  have  acquired  vigour  and  volun-
tary power  over  their  hitherto  paralysed  limbs,  as  by  a magical
spell  or  witchcraft.  Assuredly  such  cures  arc  as  important  as
they  axe  interesting  and  surprising,  because  such  eases  may
resist  ordinary  modes  of  treatment  for  paralysis  for  an  indefinite
length  of  time ; but  still  the  rationale  is  simple  enough  when
viewed  according  to  the  principles  which  I have  already  ex-
plained, of  the  influence  of  an  expectant,  dominant  idea,
either  exciting  or  depressing  natural  function,  according  to  the  faith
and  confidence  of  the  patient.''


14


Cases  of  this  sort  arc*  by  no  means  rare,  and  arc  obviously
closely  allied  to  fascination.  Is  it  not  an  important  boon,  there-
fore, which  science  has  achieved  in  discovering  such  a simple,
safe,  speedy,  nnd  certain  mode  of  curing  such  affections ; and
that  the  same  principle  of  a strongly  excited  dominant  idea,
which  is  so  fatal  to  tho,  unhappy  fascinated  bird,  can,  by  judi-
cious management,  be  turned  to  such  salutary  purposes  for  the
relief  and  cure  of  suffering  humanity  ?

JAMES  BRAID.


Bylaw  House,  Oxford  Street,  Manchester,
August,  ISM.


Note. — It  is  my  intention  shortly  to  publish  a volume  entitled  “ Psycho-
Physiology  : embracing  Hypnotism,  Monoideism,  and  Mesmerism."  This
volume,  will  com  prise  in  a connected  and  condensed  form,  the  results  of  tho
whole  of  my  researches  in  this  department  of  science  ; and  it  will,  moreover,
be  illustrated  by  cases  in  which  hypnotism  has  been  proved  peculiarly
efficacious  in  the  relief  and  cure  of  disease,  with  special  directions  how
to  regulate  the  processes  so  as  to  adapt  them  to  different  eases  and
constitutions.


THE


CRITICS  CRITICISED.


JAMES  B K A 1 1),


M »,»,  *»c.


P R E F A C E .


Thf.  following  remarks  were  sent  for  publication  in  the
Association  Medical  Journal , as  that  appeared  to  me  to  be
the  most  natural  medium  for  a member  of  the  Provincial
Association  to  publish  his  defence  against  wrongs  inflicted
upon  him  in  the  pages  of  such  a journal  as  the  Zoist,  which
habitually  refuses  to  publish  replies  to  attacks  upon  others
which  have  appeared  in  that  journal.  The  Editor  of  the
Association  Journal,  however,  declined  to  publish  my  com-
munication, from  his  unwillingness  to  have  any  controversy
on  the  subject  in  question  in  the  Journalt  at  a time  when  he
thought  it  contained  more  controversy  than  was  desirable  on
Association  Polity.  Under  the  circumstances  stated,  that  the
Editor  of  the  Zoist  excluded  all  rejoinders  from  me  to  former
attacks  in  his  journal,  the  publication  of  my  remarks  in  the
Association  Journal  would  not  necessarily  have  imposed  on  the
Editor  any  obligation  to  publish  a reply  in  the  Association
Journal : and,  moreover,  independently  of  the  controversial
style  of  my  communication,  I considered  that  the  observations
embraced  illustrations  of  a psycho-physiological  character
which  would  have  proved  a useful  postscript  to  my  late  publi-
cation in  the  Journal,  “ On  the  Nature  and  Treatment  of
Certain  Forms  of  Paralysis,”  and  with  that  view  they  are  now
published  in  this  separate  form,  for  distribution  amongst  my
professional  and  other  friends  who  take  an  interest  in  the  in-
quiry. Moreover,  in  order  that  I may  accommodate  my  fellow-
associates,  with  whom  I am  not  personally  acquainted,  to  the
utmost  in  my  power,  I have  caused  a few'  extra  hundred  copies
to  be  thrown  off,  and  given  instructions  to  the  printer  to  send
copies  by  post,  at  cost  price,  to  any  member  of  the  Association
who  may  enclose  his  address,  w'ith  three  postage  stamps,  to
Grant  and  Co.,  Printers,  Corporation  Street,  Manchester.


THE  CRITICS  CRITICISED.


Iw  the  Quarterly  Rtvunc  for  September.  1853,  an  article  appeared
cm  Electro- D ioloo t aj»d  Mesmerism.  In  general  estimation
the  said  article  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  able  and
lucid  expositions  which  had  ever  been  published  on  this  interest-
ing and  recondite  inquiry.

The  /food  for  1 864  contained  some  furious  articles  as  critf-
risms  cm  the  above  article  in  the  Quarterly.  The  work  referred
to  being  very  little  known  or  read,  it  may  be  as  well  for  me
here  to  explain  that  the  Zotit  is  a small  quarterly  journal,
devoted  chiefly  to  the  enthusiastic  advocacy  of  mesmeric  doc-
trines and  practice,  and  the  laudation  of  mesmerists,  and  to  the
persecution,  misrepresentation  and  abuse,  of  all  who  dare  to
differ  from  their  dogmas.  Whilst  theoretically  diffe  ring  from  the
mesmerists  as  to  the  mode  of  explaining  the  curative  results
which  flow  from  certain  processes,  and  from  the  general  policy
of  thetr  proceedings,  I have  great  pleasure  in  thus  publicly
stating  that  the  Zoist  has  been  the  medium  of  recording  many
splendid  cures  effected  by  the  atbcaBed  Mesmeric  treatment
In  these  articles  in  the  Zoi.it  Dr.  Carpenter  and  myself  were
assailed,  in  the  coarsest  terms,  as  conjoint  authors  of  the  said
review,  in  which  they  represented  me,  in  addition  to  other
charges,  as  blowing  my  own  trumpet,  anonymously,  “ as  a
quack  advertisement,  with  a purpose,  and  with  the  hope  of


4


turning  something  into  profit.”  Now,  inasmuch  as  I never
wrote  a single  line  of  the  said  article,  nor  ever  saw  a single  line
of  it  in  manuscript  or  in  proof,  I wrote  a short  notice  of  this
fact,  intended  for  publication,  as  I was  unwilling  to  appropriate
to  myself  any  share  of  the  credit  due  entirely  to  Dr.  Carpenter,
he  having  been  the  sole  author  of  that  very  lucid  exposition  of
the  subject.

Unwittingly,  however,  these  Zoisters  have  paid  me  a very
high  compliment  by  the  said  attack,  for  I cannot  feel  it  other-
wise than  a great  compliment  to  find  that  a gentleman  of
Dr.  Carpenter’s  mark,  who  had  enjoyed  many  opportunities
of  investigating  along  with  me  my  various  opinions,  and  the
practical  illustrations  as  the  reasons  thereof,  had  so  thoroughly
set  forth  my  views  in  the  said  article  as  to  have  led  even
the  clairvoyant  carping  critics  in  the  Zoist  to  suppose  that
certain  portions  of  it  must  have  been  written  by  myself,
“ with  a purpose,  and  with  the  hope  of  turning  something  into
profit for  it  is  obvious  that  Dr.  Carpenter  must  have  had  too
much  respect  for  bis  own  reputation  to  have  published  anything
merely  to  serve  rhe,  or  any  one  else,  which  he  believed  to  be
erroneous.

Having  read  to  a mutual  friend  what  I had  written  for  pub-
lication as  an  act  of  justice  to  Dr.  Carpenter,  so  that  I might
not  appropriate  to  myself,  through  silence,  any  share  of  what
w'ns  his  especial  property,  that-  friend  dissuaded  me  from
publishing  it,  by  assuring  me  that  he  knew  Dr.  Carpenter  felt
quite  indifferent  regarding  any  misrepresentation  or  scurrility
which  might  be  published  against  him  in  such  a work  as  the  Zoist.
That  being  the  easel  withheld  it,  as  I had  myself  so  long  been
accustomed  to  misrepresentation  and  abuse  in  that  print ; for,
with  one  or  two  exceptions,  my  name  has  never  been  intro-
duced into  the  Zoist  but  with  the  view  of  misrepresentation
and  the  grossest  abuse,  whilst  they  refused  to  publish  a single
line  from  inc  tocorrcct  their  misrepresentations— that,  personally,


5


l felt  quite  regardless  of  their  unwarrantable  a»*aalt*  on  my  « If
in  that  instance.  • Now,  however,  that  the  Hey,  G.  Saudby,
vicar  of  Flixton,  Suffolk,  a gentleman  who  hud  formerly  re-
fared  to  my  labours  in  a kind  and  liberal  spirit,  has  once
more  renewed  the  charge  of  my  being  one  of  the  writer*  of
said  article — for  he  write*  in  the  ph,nA— and  has  resorted  to
very  unfair  means  in  order  to  misrepresent  roe  and  my  views,
I deem  it  my  duty  at  once  distinctly  to  avow,  through  the  pres*,
that  / had  so  shstre  whatever  m the  amikenkip  oj  the  iaulartwk  in
the  Qum  terly  Review.


* The  following  art  % few  sdditioaU  of  the  dlgwfy  of  dfctien

meokwiw,  BKKiwty,  and  b,„  of  truth,  disytajM*  by  the*  /TU*  ryn.o  ort!
" Tb*  *■***•  rjr  sttUwr.,  stsad  forth  We*. ed  bv  tUtr  very

r*  **  « bytWr  vaOtowhs,  h«od:r.*<Utnen

h*'1  *»l**l*a.  A fsacy  C*rp«t*r.  who  wri!  the  k„*eV

<i. Aouniivjbi,  m «»,»-«knUflc  y«m  late  the  dtseyUr***  of  othtm,
tU*  o«rU,lttf  them  with  .,*«o«h  r^er,  ,*d  * K^Ual  wobroi-
jTi.  * rWUiv**  **  "«<****•«•  to  Br.nl  «a4  tow  bU  ,<w-**i.d

*-*—>»  « - »H  would  *2  to  Ur.

l»  ea  »t  work  upon  tt»  fabric.”

•pjieU  U>  *11  who  know  dm  that  I „.v7  , "* MaSdcatl*

tUyUlr  i»fhr»  -.1  > n ^ ssuwt  fcwaMc,

higUly  tnforror  d— v gr,  highly  informed,  f„  far  ,;_hu*

niiwb  rt-vry  modert  wriU**-  ^ mHe-ee*  «*»,  Lo
one,  of  the  art  it  I*  in  tti«  Quarttetg  Rrriem  ” ’

-*-««*  ft-  rt.  M

- ft-  v~«t ««. .«  m 2^ •—  **  ^

laiSh^'  T'  7“*^”  ^ ^ ehana-

uoevnK-ipkt  Iga^^Lh  »L7T«  £ZZ^,?W^Z

I z ? * * uu?m  b?  tw  »*»  •«  «i,  qusM.d

did  not  hU  7lr'll'',‘  UU”  tn  * W*/  ^alaud  to  mate  hiw  feel,

, ‘ ‘ 4 <Mwrmou*  development  of  »eif  ~ render  lam

* r ;’  th*  e,4“Uite  r‘dH  n,e  **  U»  thtehara.  of  tiM  skin  of  the
.arsei.no.  rhua. ..  wt>*  to  s buli«t  from  a Minid  ritte.'  —Pa*,  19.

* t*  mor*  UBWsrTantitk  than  forth*  wiitor  of  the  Z**i


6


Having  recorded  the  above  declaration,  I now  beg  leave  to
add  a few  remarks  on  the  Rev.  Mr.  Saudby’s  strictures.
Seizing  the  occasion  of  a blind  woman  having  been  relieved  of
severe  pain  in  the  breast  from  a bruise,  by  passes  made  over
the  seat  of  the  pain  without  contact,  and  of  her  having  been
relieved,  on  another  occasion,  of  rheumatism  of  the  knees,  and
an  unpleasant  heat  in  the  head,  by  “ rapid  tractive  passes  over
the  feet,”  and  “common  down  passes,  at  the  distance  of  three
feet,  for  ten  minutes,”  when,  of  her  own  accord,  she  said,
“ ‘ I feel  a fine  glow  all  over  me,  especially  in  the  knee6 — most
in  this  one,'  pointing  to  the  chief  olfcnder.”  Having  still  further
stated  that  the  patient  was  blind;  that  the  pain  left  her  at  the
time  the  passes  were  being  made  by  Mr.  Plowman,  without  her
knowledge,  or  one  word  having  been  said  to  her  on  the  subject ;
and  that  a Mr.  Neilson  produced  an  impression  on  the  same
blind  woman,  on  a subsequent  occasion,  without  informing  her
of  his  intention,  simply  “ by  mesmerising  the  Jett,  at  the  dis-
tance of  three  feet,  when  he  caused  a sensation  of  coldness  in
the  head;" — having  made  these  statements,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Sandby


to  assume  that  I was  one  of  the  writers  of  the  article  in  the  Quarterly
Heriew,  and  charge  me  with  wilfully  withholding  all  allusion  to  com-
munications published  ir.  the  Zuist,  for  he  well  knew  that,  four  or  five  months
previously,  to  wit  in  1863,  I sent  him  a copy  of  my  “ Hypnotic  Therapeutics,"
in  the  appendix  to  which  1 criticised  and  controverted  opinions  of  its  leading
contributors  on  "table-turning,”  and  the  Od  force,  viz.,  the  Kev.  Mr.
Sandby,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Townshend,  Dr.  Elliotson,  and  Dr.  Ashburner,  but
neither  the  editor  nor  any  of  these  gentlemen  have  yet  attempted  to  refute
my  arguments  in  opposition  to  their  dogmas.  I was  the  first  to  publish  the
unconscious  muscular  action  theory  of  table-turning,  and  I still  maintain
that  that  is  the  true  explanation  of  the  phenomenon  ; and  1 moreover  con-
tend that  nothing  short  of  my  opponents  performing  successfully  the  crucial
experiments  which  I proposed— viz.,  lifting  a small  weight,  such  as  an
ounce  of  lead,  copper,  wood,  or  marble,  from  the  centre  of  a table,  and
holding  it  suspended  in  the  air,  say  twelve  inches  above  the  table,  by  the
force  of  the  will  alone  of  ten  or  twenty  efficient  table-turners,  when  no  hu-
man hand  is  near  it,  nor  any  mechanical  contrivance  has  been  had  recourse


thf*n  triumphantly  asks—"  Now,  in  what  manner  wBl  orn  op-
ponents explain  aw  ay  the  above /act*  - Wliat  is  their  rational ,r
liow  doe#  their  hypothesis  apply  ? What  is  the  grand  physio-
logical principle  which  is  to  solve  and  settle  this  case  -”

Now,  in  iny  opinion  these  arc  all  fair  and  legitimate  queries;
and,  far  from  acting  according  to  Mr.  Standby's  expectation
and  prediction,  that  these  gentlemen  " will  simply  say,  ‘ We
are  mistaken  in  our  ! »ctx,  and  so  on,  as  represented  in  page
fiftil,  I readily  admit  that  I have  no  doubt  whatever  that  the
as  stated  in  this  case,  are  ft utt  trne  in  ri'cry  particular  as
there  set  forth ; and  I have  great  pleasure,  nfbreover,  in  giving
t*y  rationale,  and  pointing  oat  what  appears  to  me  " the  grand
physiological  principle  which  is  to  solve  and  settle  this  case
and  that  this  can  be  done  too  independently  of  " Mr.  Braid’s
stanne,  procem,  expectant  attention,  or  dominant  idtas,"  or  a
mesmeric  fluid  or  force.  Had  expectant  attention  or  dominant
ideas  been  excited  in  the  mind  of  the  patient,  however,  by
an  dibit*  suggestions,  I doubt  not  the  satisfactory  results  would
have  been  still  more  speedily  realised.


to  tor  lifting  it —eta  reasonably  satisfy  any  randM  inquirer  after  truth
><.tlunK  but  thr  mm-tmnfaei  plan  r4n.  *r*/A  certs, nl f.  purd  the  fal-

lacy of  unconscious  intis  ntar  action.

Some  misrepresentations  a<  to  the  result*  of  my  processes  in  the  Linde  of
mesmerists  are  more  repetitions  of  charm,  all  of  which  I Ion*  ago  proved
to  Ur  caused  by  their  mismanagement  of  my  processes,  and  then  blaming
hypnotism  for  the  results  of  their  own  blunder*,  or  intended  misdirer-
tionM.~-J.  Braids

The  following  extract*  are  avowedl)  from  the  pen  of  Dr.  ElUotson,  eon-
trastin*  himself  with  Sir  June.  Clark.  Bart.,  ar.d  they  oceur  in  the  eery
next  article  to  that  in  which  the  attack  was  made  upon  Dr.  Carpenter  and
myself.  Dr.  Elliot  win  says- for  hi*  name  is  appended  to  the  article--**  me,
who  stand  quite  l>  high,  I trust,  as  a physician  as  himself,  though  neither
a baronet  Bor  a royal  phjskiao.  * * • J have  examined  hand'  d*  of
abdominal  enlargement*,  and  never  once  made  a mistake;  and  could  not,  I
think,  by  any  posubiHty  make  a mistake,  when  the  size  was  not  trifling  "
,Let  Sir  Jams*  Clark  remember  that  he  is  only  a luck)  man  Ilis  rise


8


At  page  288  the  Rev.  Mr.  Sandby  says  : “ For  instanee,  will
Mr.  Braid,  who  contends  that  the  so-called  mesmeric  effects
are  produced  by  the  patient  being  made  to  concentrate  his
vision  on  some  object  for  a certain  time,  assert  that  the  storing
process  was  the  secret  of  Mr.  Plowman’s  success  ? Did  the
gaze  of  the  blind  woman  excite  her  nervous  temperament,  and
influence  her  system  so  potentially  ?”

Now,  I felt  extremely  sorry — chiefly  on  his  oxen  account —
to  find  that  the  Ilev.  G.  Sandby  had  made  such  an  attack  upon
me,  ns  that  contained  in  the  above  paragraph  ; because  it  was
quite  unworthy  of  a gentleman  of  his  saered  office,  and  of  his
high  talents  and  attainments  ; indeed  it  was  unworthy  of
any  man  who  wished  to  act  the  part  of  an  honourable  and
fair  controversialist,  as  I shall  now  proceed  to  prove ; for  here,
be  it  observed,  the  Rev.  gentleman  wishes  to  represent  me  as
contending  that  fixation  of  the  visual  organ,  or  the  “ staring
process,”  is  the  sole  cause  of  the  phenomena,  which  result
during  hypnotic  and  mesmeric  processes.  Now,  with  what
propriety  could  he  do  this  when  he  knew  that,  at  page  31  of


and  progress  have  not  been  from  hard  work  m hospitals,  for  he  has  never,
like  me,  been  physician  to  any  hospital,  nor  from  teaching  successfully,  for
he  has  never,  like  me,  been  a lecturer  in  a large  medical  school,  or  a lecturer
at  all;  whereas,  I raised  the  Medical  School  of  St.  Thomas’s  from  nothing
to  a high  condition,  and  that  of  University  College  from  a fallen  state  to  a
very  high  condition,  from  which  each  fell  as  soon  as  I left  it.  .Nor  has  he
risen  from  writing  anything  worth  reading.  * * * lie  has  only  been  a
lucky  man.”

“ 1 never  considered  it  an  honour  to  meet  Sir  James  Clark.  I never
gained  an  idea,  or  heard  a sagacious  remark  from  him.  * * When  a
young  man,  he  went  out  a very  awkward  Scotch  body  to  take  care  of  the
son  of  a gentleman  of  rank  and  fortune.”

When  such  is  the  style  and  manner  of  attacking  a man  like  Sir  James
Clark  adopted  by  Dr.  Klliotson,  the  Magnus  Apollo  of  the  Zoist,  what
is  to  be  expected  from  his  associates  and  devotees,  who  attack  others
and  fight  mesmeric  battles  under  the  leadership  of  such  a coiumandvr-
in-chief  !


9


my  work  on  hypnotism,  which  wcuj  published  tv  die  ycxvt  ago,
I said  “ As  the  experiment  succeeds  with  the  blind,  I consider
it  not  so  much  the  optic,  as  the  sentient,  mqttor,  and
sympathetic  nerves,  ami  the  mind  through  which  the
impression  is  made”?  Such  were  my  recorded  sentiment*
and  experience  twelve  years  ago  ; and  I have  published  various
remarks  since  tending  to  confirm  them  ; and  proving,  moreover,
t^at  whatever  produces  a new  impression,  will  modify  or
change  existing  Junctum,  whether  that  new  impression  may  be
of  a mental  or  physical  nature,  and  whether  it  may  have
arisen  from  a sensible  impression  by  fanning  or  breathing  on,
or  wafting  with  the  natural  hand,  or  with  some  artificial  con-
trivance, or  the  gentle  blast  from  a pair  of  bellows,  or  from
audible  suggestions  or  sensible  impressions  directing  the  cir-
culation to  certain  parts,  and  withdrawing  it  fro m others —
thus  stimulating  or  depressing  function — these  natural  results,
however,  being  greatly  influenced  by  dominant  ideas  or  ex-
pectant attention,  either  originating  from  audible  suggestions
of  another  person  present,  or  from  previous  convictions  and
belief  on  this  point  in  the  patient’s  own  mind.  Moreover,
whatever  changes  sensation  changes  also  the  circulation,
secretion,  and  the  capillary  circulation  and  general  function
of  the  part  so  impressed,  and,  concurrently,  the  whole  of  the
other  functions  of  the  body  become  modified  in  a greater  or
lesser  degree,  and  that  whether  the  primary  impression  resulted
from  a mental  or  from  a physical  influence.  The  brain,  more-
over, receives  many  impressions  which  subsequently  influence


the  mind  as  conscious  impressions,  although  they  were  no
perceived  at  the  moment  when  they  were  conveyed  to  the  brai
through  the  organs  of  sense ; and  impressions  too  slight  to  b
conveyed  to  the  brain  at  all,  so  as  ever  to  become  the  object
of  consciousness,  may  nevertheless  be  adequate  to  produc
a local  influence  on  the  organic  nerves  and  capillaries,  and
alter  existing  normal  or  morbid  function.


10


As  regards  the  influence  of  passes,  again,  I have  fully  ad-
mitted that,  independently  of  the  mechanical  influence  pro-
duced thereby,  by  the  agitation  of  the  air  or  by  touch,  they  may
also  produce  impressions  in  some  cases  through  the  influence
of  temperature  or  electric  agency,  as  it  is  an  undoubted  fact
that  a change  in  the  electrical  polarity  takes  place  from  the
mere  proximity  or  contact  of  every  substance  in  nature,  animate
or  inanimate,  independently  of  any  occult,  magnetic,  or  odyljp
force,  such  as  the  mesmerists  contend  for.  That  electricity,
however,  was  not  the  chief  or  important  agency  was  obvious,

I remarked,  from  this  fact,  that  I have  found  similar  results
to  arise  from  touching  a patient  with  a glass  rod,  3£ft.  long,  or
from  making  passes  with  an  artificial  hand  attached  to  the
end  of  the  said  glass  rod,  as  when  doing  so  with  my  own  hand
or  any  other  conductor  of  electricity.

Now,  bearing  these  facts  in  mind,  will  the  Rev.  G.  Sandby
presume  to  say  that  because  the  poor  woman,  Ann  Donaldson,
was  blind,  and  was  not  expecting  any  mesmerising  process  to  *

take  place,  that  therefore  she  could  rut  be  influenced  in  her
organic  functions  and  sensations  by  the  agitation  of  the  air
by  the  passes  made  over  the  painful  part,  or  over  the  feet,  so
as  to  draw'  the  circulation  to  the  feet,  and  thus  relieve  the  op-
pressed brain,  unless  there  was  some  occult  agency  at  work,  such
as  a mesmeric  fluid  or  force  projected  from  the  body  of  the
operator  and  charging  the  body  of  the  blind  woman  ? Is
Mr.  Sandby  not  aware,  moreover,  that  feeling,  hearing,  and
smell  are  generally  prodigiously  exalted  in  blind  people,  to  com-
pensate for  their  loss  of  sight ; and  that  from  this  cause  his  notable
example,  Ann  Donaldson,  was  the  more  likely  to  be  easily  af-
ectcd  by  the  passes,  irrespectively  of  the  transference  to  her  body
of  any  magnetic  fluid  or  force  from  the  body  of  the  operator  r
Again,  is  Mr.  Sandby  not  aware  that  very  slight  impressipns
may  be  sufficient  to  change  existing  physical  action,  through
their  influence  on  the  organic  nerves,  which  preside  over


11


nutrition  and  special  function,  to  slight  as  not  even  to  excitw
consciousness ) and  is  he  not  aware  that  organic  changes  mar
be  effected  through  mental  or  physical  impressions  so  alight
that,  although  sufficiently  intense  to  excite  consciousness
slightly  at  the  time,  nevertheless  arc  too  faint  to  make  a lasting
impression  ou  the  memory?  Is  the  Rev.  Mr.  Sandby  not
aware  that  he  may  be  seated  at  an  open  window,  and  so  en-
gaged in  reading  or  study,  or  in  conversation,  as  not  to  perceive
that  such  effect  is  being  produced  upon  his  frame  by  the  cold
draught  of  air  to  which  he  is  exposed,  as  may  issue  in  rheu-
matism, inflammation  of  his  eyes,  or  ears,  or  nose,  or  glands,  or
throat,  or  lungs,  or  any  other  organ  of  his  body  roost  predisposed
to  take  on  morbid  action  r Is  he  not  aware  that  kindness  and
earnestness  in  his  manner  of  addressing  a suffering  fellow-
mortal,  enforced  by  the  gentle  movement  of  his  hand  the  more
completely  to  arrett  the  patient $ attention,  may  so  withdraw
it  from  his  past  and  present  sufferings  as  to  give  a turn  to
******  m',rbid  function,  and  thus  effect  a crisis,  without  any
magnetic,  odvlic,  or  nervous,  or  vital  force,  extruded  from  the
body  of  the  operator,  and  entering  into  and  charging  the  body
of  the  patient  with  its  peculiar  properties  and  power*?

And  again,  is  the  Rev.  Mr.  Sandbv  not  aware  that  patients
may  be  affected,  even  during  sleep,  from  infancy  to  old  age,  by
passes,  or  by  the  mere  breath  of  heaven — as  by  the  gentle  xcphrr
fanning  their  frames— so  as  to  excite  various  effects,  visible  or
invisible,  which  may  not  be  remembered  by  the  sleepers  on
awaking  ? And  is  he  not  aware,  moreover,  that  a patient  may
fall  asleep  with  one  side  of  his  face  exposed  to  a draught  of
cold  air,  and  although  unconscious  of  its  influence  at  the  time,
and  during  his  sleep,  have,  on  awakening,  most  convincing
physical  proof  of  its  influence,  from  his  face  being  drawn  to  the
oppmiu  side,  through  paralysis  of  the  portio  dura,  caused  by  the
continued  stream  of  cold  air  iropinfing  h gainst  the  trunk  and
ramification*  of  that  nerre  ?


*


12


Now,  it  is  just  because  a blind  patient  is  “ not  like  a piece  of
sulphate  of  iron,  which  we  can  find  at  any  moment  in  our
laboratory,  and  heat  up  in  the  retort  at  will,  and  because  it  is
a material  of  a far  more  delicate  and  sensitive  nature,”  that
the  passes  of  Mr.  Plowman  and  Mr.  Neilson  were  so  effective  inf
changing  the  organic  functions  in  the  frame  of  Ann  Donaldson —
and  that  even  independently  of  any  occult  agent  of  the  nature
alleged  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Sandby  and  other  mesmerists.  Such
is  my  “verdict,  and  the  reasons  thereof.”

As  to  Dr.  Esdaile’s  case  with  the  blind  man,  I shall  leave  it
in  the  safe  keeping  of  Dr.  E.  and  the  Rev.  Mr.  Sandby  ; but
as  to  Dr.  Gregory’s  case,  it  proves  too  much  for  Mr.  Sandby’s
purpose  ; for,  as  this  blind  man  went  to  sleep  when  another
gentleman  was  trying,  at  some  distance,  unknown  to  this  blind  man,
to  put  another  person  to  sleep,  this  fact  furnishes  strong  proof
that  this  blind  man  was  one  of  those  subjects  who  arc  liable  to
be  affected  entirely  through  the  imagination,  expectant  atten-
tion, or  a dominant  idea  and  habit ; and  he  might  just  as  likely
have  been  affected  in  this  way  when  Dr.  Gregory  fixed  his  silent
gaze  upon  him  as  in  the  instance  referred  to  with  the  other
gentleman.  Moreover,  the  other  case  referred  to  by  Mr.  Sandby
very  probably  was  a person  of  the  like  susceptibility.

I think,  by  the  foregoing  remarks,  I have  fully  satisfied  the
requirements  of  the  Rev.  G.  Sandby  where  he  says — “ We  call
upon  the  adherents  of  the  suggestive  theory,  first  to  examine  •
our  evidence  respecting  the  facts  as  rigidly  as  they  wish,  and
then  give  in  their  verdict,  and  their  reasons  thereof”;  and  I
maintain  that  the  case  of  “Ann  Donaldson,  the  poor  blind
Scotch  woman  of  Greenside  ’’  has  not  overthrown  my  theory,
nor  has  it  established  the  mesmeric  theory ; and  I further  main-
tain, that  it  is  to  the  dogmatic  mesmerists  and  lovers  of  the
marvellous,  and  not  to  me  and  others  who  have  espoused  my
views,  that  the  Rev.  gentleman's  strictures  in  his  concluding
paragraph  properly  apply,  as  aiming  at  “laying  down  positive


13


laws  for  universal  application,  and  yet  omit  in  their  calculation*
an  essential  part  of  the  argument,  and  all  tho  most  important
facts  which  militate  against  their  conclusions.’'

I quite  concur  in  the  Rot.  Mr.  Sandby'a  observations,  when
he  says,  “ Different  minds  are  of  course  differently  constituted,
and  observe  the  same  facts  after  a different  fashion.  What
looks  feasible  to  one  man  looks  preposterous  to  another/'
1 hare  never,  however,  said  that  the  whole  results  are  the  pro-
ducts of  the  imagination,  nothing  but  the  fancy  of  the  brain,
the  staring  process,  fixed  ga tv,  or  dominant  ideas  ; but  I have
attempted  to  demonstrate  how  far  these  and  other  influences
co-operate  toward  explaining  various  phenomena  attributed  by
the  mesmerists  to  some  more  mysterious  power ; and  I do
maintain  that,  so  far  as  1 have  seen  mdMieve,  the  whole  results
can  be  accounted  for  upon  the  principles  of  the  reciprocal
action  of  mind  and  matter,  of  the  patient's  own  body,  upon
each  other,  mollified  and  directed  by  external  circumstances,
sensible  impressions,  audible  suggestions,  and  dominant  ideas,
irrespective  of  any  magnetic,  odylic,  nervous,  vital,  or  occult
force  passing  from  the  operator  to  the  patient , as  the  all-efficient
cause,  as  has  been  contended  for  by  the  mesmerists.

Having  thus  disposed  of  the  Rev.  Mr,  Sandby,  I beg  leave
now  to  address  a few  words  to  another  champion  of  occult
mesmerism.  The  Mr.  T.  referred  to  in  the  note,  ante,  is  the
Rev.  C.  II.  rownshend,  who  was  so  moved  by  the  “ heavy  blow
and  great  discouragement  ’ inflicted  on  mesmerism  by  the
article  in  the  Quarterly  Jleview . as  induced  him  forthwith  to
Come  to  the  rescue,  by  perpetrating  a live  shilling  volume  to
stem  the  torrent  set  in  against  his  mesmeric  notions.  Mr.
Townshend’s  main  argument  was  based  upon  what  he  deemed
an  impregnable  dogma  about  the  influence  of  the  personal
pretence  of  the  operator,  or,  as  he  styles  it,  of  “ the  man  in  the
room.  As  it  appears  to  me  that  a few  simple  and  obvious
examples  may  be  adduced,  cspahle  of  demolishing  this  all-


14


powerful  argument  of  “ the  man  in  the  room  ” — either  as  ope-
rator or  sceptic — I shall  venture  to  enter  the  lists  even  with
this  great  champion  for  occult  mesmerism.

Mr.  Townshend  says — “ I cannot  see  how  phenomena  that
are  induced  by  any  methods  of  which  a human  being  is  the
employer  can  apply  to  the  present  question.  Whatever  may
be  their  quality  they  have  been  originated,  and  are  wielded,  by
the  presence,  the  commands,  the  prescriptions  of  a human
being.  There  is  the  man  in  the  room.  You  cannot  get  rid  of
him.  * * * Without  the  hypnotist  or  biologist  the  phe-
nomena do  not  occur.  Thus  have  we  seen  that  the  reviewer’s
handle  to  his  theory  docs  not  truly  fit  the  occasion,  just  because
of  the  man  in  the  room.”

Now,  in  refutation  of  these  dogmas,  I beg  leave  to  state
that,  at  the  very  first  public  lecture  delivered  by  me  in  1841,
in  order  to  prove  the  fallacy  of  such  a fancy,  three  of  my
patients  put  themselves  into  the  hypnotic  state  in  succession,
when  I was  not  only  not  in  the  room,  but  when  I was  actually
in  another  room  at  a considerable  distance  from  that  in  which
they  were,  and  I only  came  in  after  it  was  announced  to  me
that  they  had  gone  to  sleep  by  their  own  unaided  efforts,  as  can
be  testified  by  at  least  six  hundred  witnesses.  My  proof,
however,  does  not  rest  upon  these  cases  only,  for  I have  since
had  innumerable  examples  of  equally  successful  results  with
many  other  subjects;  and  I can,  moreover,  readily  adduce
other  cases  of  the  sort  any  day.  Will  the  Zoist  presume  to  say
that  in  any  of  these  cases  Mr.  Braid  was  “ making  mesmeric
passes  [I  made  no  passes  at  all]  and  looking  hard  at  his  patients
as  he  always  has  done,  while  making  them  stare”}  I am,  therefore,
warranted  in  retorting  on  the  Rev.  Mr.  Townshend  that  in  these
instances  we  hud  got  rid  of  “ the  man  in  the  room and
that  without  the  hypnotist  the  phenomena  did  occur  ; and  con-
flequcntly  that  Mr.  Townshend' s “ handle  to  his  theory  does  not
truly  fit  the  occasion,  just  because  the  man  was"  not  “in  the  room.


1.1


The  self-induced  trance  of  the  Fakirs  in  India,  in  liktf
manner,  ftimishes  ample  proof  in  point.

Nor  was  it  the  influence  of  my  irili ,•  for  I purposely  directed
my  attention  to  other  matters,  the  more  satisfactorily  to  prove
that  the  influence  was  entirely  subjective.

But  perhaps  Mr.  T.  will  wish  to  argue,  that  although  the
patients  were  not  influenced  by  my  pretence  in  the  room,  my
comtmmis  and  prescription »,  before  leaving  the  room,  bad  pro-
duced the  r (suits.  However,  I am  prepared  to  rebut  that
argument  also,  by  other  examples.  Thus,  a patient  whom  I
had  previously  cured,  by  hypnotism,  of  rheumatism  and  opacity
of  the  cornea,  when  at  a distance  of  five  and  forty  miles  from
me  put  herself  into  the  state,  unknown  to  me,  to  convince  some
one  that  the  effect  could  be  produced  by  her  own  efforts,  with-
out ray  knowledge  or  any  special  influence  communicated  by
me  to  the  patient.  The  following  is  another  example  in  point.
A lady  whom  I had  hypnotised,  with  great  relief  to  her  suf-
ferings, after  tho  failure  of  some  noted  mesmerists  by  the  ir
“ old  established  modes  of  mesmerising,”  became  curious  to
know  whether  the  r ©suits  might  not  after  all  arise  from  some
occult  influence  projected  from  my  body  during  my  personal
attendance ; and,  in  order  to  satisfy  her  mind  upon  this  point,
she  one  day  repaired  to  her  room  alone,  and  sat  down  and  fixed
her  attention  in  all  respects  as  when  I used  to  lie  present ; the
result  of  which  was  that  she  fell  as! cep  in  her  chair,  where
she  was  found  last  asleep  an  hour  or  two  afterward*  by  her
friends,  who  went  in  search  of  her,  and  could  not  compre-
hend the  cause  of  her  long  absence,

I shall  only  give  one  more  example,  embracing  the  waking
phenomena.  In  October,  1846,  I exhibited  the  power  of  sug-
gestion and  dominant  ideas  over  certain  subjects  in  the  waking
state,  by  requesting  a gentleman  of  high  intelligence  to  lay  his
hand  on  the  table,  when,  through  my  audible  suggestion,  his
hand  was  instantly  *o  fiimly  fixed  to  the  table  that  neither  hi*


10


own  volition  nor  the  physical  efforts  of  others  could  separate
them.  By  blowing  on  the  hand  it  was  instantly  set  free  ; and
on  being  now  requested  to  extend  his  arm  above  the  table,  I
then  told  him  to  put  it  down  if  he  could — so  emphasised  as  to
suggest  the  idea  that  he  could  not.  He  now  put  forth  a strong
effort  to  put  his  arm  down,  when  the  arm  became  rigidly
cataleptic  in  its  extended  position,  and  his  other  extremities
became  quite  rigid  also,  notwithstanding  he  was  wide  awake,
and  had  undergone  no  process  whatever  that  day.  The
Earl  of  Carlisle  was  present,  and  tested  him,  as  well  as  Pro-
fessor Gregory,  and  others.  These  experiments  in  the  waking
state  very  much  astonished  most  of  those  present ; and  Professor
Gregory  immediately  jumped  to  the  conclusion  that  it  resulted
from  the  influence  of  my  extraordinary  magnetic  force  over  the
said  gentleman  when  I was  near  to  him,  or— in  Mr.Townshend’s
phraseology— that  it  was  the  all-controlling  influence  of  “(he
man  in  the  room.  ’ I repudiated  the  notion  of  it  having  resulted
from  any  such  occult  agency ; but  Dr.  Gregory  insisted  so  much
in  favour  of  the  occult  theory  that,  some  days  thereafter,  when
this  gentleman  was  at  his  own  home,  which  is  thirteen  miles
from  Manchester,  he  resolved  to  put  the  matter  to  the  proof  by
experimenting  upon  himself  when  no  one  else  was  in  the  room
with  him,  and  when  I could  know  nothing  of  his  intentions —
for  he  had  been  led  by  Dr.  Gregory’s  remarks  to  suppose  that
it  was  just  jxjsKiblc,  after  all,  that,  when  present,  I might  have
some  occult  power  over  him.  Well,  in  his  solitary  apartment
this  gentleman  laid  his  hand  on  the  table,  as  in  the  former  in-
stance, and  instantly  his  arm  became  firmly  and  involuntarily
fixed  in  that  position.  However,  his  other  hand  and  arm  being
free,  he  applied  the  other  hand  to  rub  the  cataleptic  arm,  and
thus  set  himself  at  liberty ; and  then  he  felt  satisfied  that  my
explanation  was  correct,  that  it  was  merely  the  result  of  a
dominant  idea  and  habit,  and  that  Professor  Gregory’s  opinion
was  erroneous  in  alleging  that,  on  the  former  occnaion,  he  had


been  affected  through  ionic  occult  agency  emanating  from  m* *
aa  “ the  man  in  tic  room.”

1 have  long  ftlt  convinced  that  the  odium  memericum  vraa  as
inveterate  aa  the  odium  thcologu  urn ; what  then  must  be  my
perilous  position,  when  ao  hardly  and  invitiratcly  assailed  by
the  odium  m*muric%m  and  Uieolo^itum  combined  Still,  how-
ever, I entertain  a confident  hope  that  time,  which  is  the  great
reformer,  will  ultimately  give  in  her  verdict  in  favour  of  my
pay clu>- physiological  theory.


JAMES  BRAID/

RtU*  How,  Manchester,
sent  Ocu.bM.  1836


-Vot*  "-T**  HrititK  AfeWew  for  November,  18M.  nturwd  « very

*Wc  article  «u  “ Mental  Philosophy,  Mvemeriara , Ktertro-  Biology.  Mr  ."  fit*
author  of  the  said  article  merits  my  best  thank*  for  the  very  food  expo-
•itiew  which  be  jrav*  of  my  views,  and  for  the  handkomr  >cn»»  fo  which  he

expressed  himself  regarding  my  labour*  in  thia  department  of  science.
Curiously  enough,  however,  on  w point  be  had  quite  misunderstood  me,
and  laid  the  Utb  upon  my  back  very  smartly,  for  siae  which  I atrrr  tmmi
mitted.  He  had  confounded  me  with  tile  pkrma-mutmtnott  in  the  following
paragraph  « That  touching  particular  parts  of  the  head  will  make  a
hypnotised  patient  iaugh.  pray,  »mg.  steal,  and  «ght,  is  a doctrine  which
m do  not  scruple  to  rank  among  the  wildest  and  most  da ngeruut  that  has
e'er  hr* ,1  propounded, and  we  cannot  but  exprem  our  aatomahniMt  that
it  should  i*c  maintained  by  l>r.  Braid,  who  ha*  shown  *o  much  sagacity  in
rejecting  the  lea*  extravagant  pretension*  of  the  meamenata.”  Now  the
fa  t i*  that  1 never  adduced  the  said  manifestations  as  a proof  of  the
organology  'f  pkrtnalofitt*  I exhibited  the  phenomena,  and  explained  how
they  were  to  be  accounted  for  upon  toiallg  different  prinriplet,  so  that  they
ueirAcr  pwd  nor  dt^retW  I hr  dortnn,  of  pkrmology,  but  left  that
prrciseiy  where  they  found  it.  These  manifestations  may  arise  either  from
a previous  knowledge  of  phrenology,  or  from  a system  of  ti ailing  during  the
*/ccp,  so  that  they  come  out  subsequently,  as  art*  of  memory,  when  <<>r-
rcprmdmg  point,  ir*  touched,  with  whirl,  particular  Metu  had  been  *e*>-


(Ulted  through  audible  suggestions—  which  arbitrary  association*  mijr  be
equally  readily  established  by  touching  oilier  parti  of  the  body  as  by
touching  different  parts  of  the  head— or  they  may  arise  from  the  touch
calling  into  action  certain  muscles  of  expression  of  mental  conditions,
exciting  in  the  mind  of  the  snbject  the  ideas  with  which  they  are  usually
associated  in  the  waking  condition.  This  latter  mode  I consider  the  only
y atuhxl  mode  of  exciting  these  manifestations,  and  it  is  a mere  inversion
of  the  sequence  which  ordinarily  obtains  between  mental  and  muscular  ex-
citation six.,  firstly,  the  touch  calls  into  play  the  muscles  constituting  the
>*  anatomy  of  expression"  of  any  given  passion  or  emotion,  idea  or  train  of
thought;  and,  secondly,  this  physical  expression  suggests  or  excites  in  the
mind  of  the  subject  the  corresponding  idea,  passion,  or  emotion  with  w hi<  h
it  is  usually  associated  in  the  waking  condition  ; «.  e.,  under  ordinary  cir-
cumstances the  mental  impression  precedes  ami  acts  as  the  exciting  cause  of
the  physical  manifestations  of  different  mental  conditions,  but  here  the
physic  al  condition  precedes  and  acts  as  the  exciting  cause  of  the  mental
condition.


e


FIJUS.


('.rant  and  O.,  Printers,  Corporation  Street,  Manchester.
