EX  BIBLIOTHECA
FRANCES  A.  YATES


THE SHIP  OF  FOOLS.
VOL.  II.


THE  SHIP  OF  FOOLS

TRANSLATED  BY

ALEXANDER  BARCLAY


VOI>UME  SECOND


EDINBURGH:  WILLIAM  PATERSON
LONDON  :  HENRY  SOTHERAN  &  CO.

MDCCCLXXIV,


Iby

the  Internet
in  2014

1

Archive


TABULA


[VOLUME  II.]


Of  wymens  malyce  &  wrath, .  .  .  i

Of  the  great  myght  &  powerr  of  Folys,  .  .  12

An  addicion  of  Alexander  barclay  in  the  h^  de  of

kynge  Henry  y^  viij.,  .  .  .  16

Of  y^  vayne  cure  of  Astronomy,  .  ,  18

Of  the  folysshe  descripcion  or  inquysycion  of  dyuers

countres  or  regyons,  .  .  .  .23

Of  folys  y*  stryue  agaynst  theyr  betters  nat  wyllynge

to  se  theyr  foly, .  .  .  .28

Of  folys  that  can  nat  vnderstande  sport  &  yet  wyll

haue  to  do  with  folys,  .  .  .  33

Of  folys  that  hurte  euery  man  nat  wyllynge  to  be

hurt  agayne,  .  .  .  .38

Of  folys  improuyndent,  ....  43
Of  folys  that  stryue  in  the  lawe  for  thynges  of  small

valour,  .  .  .  .  .48

Of  dyshonest  folys  in  wordes  of  rybawdry,  or  vyle

langage, .  .  .  .  -53

Of  the  abusion  of  y'=  spiritualte,  .  .  ^7

Of  carde  players,  and  dysers,  ...  69
or  proude,  vayne  and  superflue  bostys  of  Folys,  .  64


VI


Tabula.


A  rehersinge  of  dyuers  sortes  of  Folys  oppressyd  with

theyr  owne  foly, •  •  •  •  75

Of  the  extorcion  of  men  of  warre,  scrybes  and  other

offycers, ,  .  .  .  .80

Of  folysshe  messangers,  ...  86

Of  the  foly  of  Cokes,  butlers,  and  other  offycers  of

housholde,  .....  90
Of  the  pryde  of  Churles  and  rude  men  of  the

countrey, .  .  .  .  -95

Of  folys  that  despise  and  abhorre  pouertye,  .  99
Of  suche  Folys  as  begyn  to  do  well  and  contynue  nat,  1 08
Of  folys  that  despyse  deth  and  make  no  prouysyon

therfore, .  .  .  ,  .113

Of  folys  that  despyse  god, .  .  .123

Of  blasphemers  of  god,  .  .  .  128

Of  the  plage  and  indignacyon  of  god, .  .  136

Of  folysshe  exchaunges,  .  .  .  141

Of  children  that  dysdayne  to  honoure  &  worshyp

theyr  parentis, .  .  .  .147

Of  claterynge  and  vayne  langage  vsyd  of  prestes

&  clerkes  in  y"^  Q^uere,  .  .  .153

<I  Of  the  elacion  or  bostynge  of  pryde,  .  .  158

Of  vsures  and  okerers,  .  .  .  .166

Of  the  vayne  hope  y*^  folys  haue  to  succede  to  heryt-

age  of  men  yet  lyuynge,  .  '  >  .  .  .  170
Of  the  vyce  of  slouthe,  .  .  .184

Of  Folys  that  gyue  &  that  after  repent  of  that  they

haue  gyuen,  .  .  .  . .  179

Of  Folys  that  kepe  nat  the  holy  daye, .  .  174

Of  mysbeleuynge folys  as  Sarrazyns,  Paynems,

turkes  and  other  suche  lyke,  .  .  .  188


Tabula.


Vll


Of  the  ruyne,  inclynacyon  and  decay  of  the  fayth  of

Christ  by  slouthe  of  estatis, .  .  .  192

A  specyall  exhortacion  and  lawde  of  the  kynge

Henry  the  viij.,  ....  205
Of  flaterers  and  glosers,  . " »  .  210

Of  taleberers  &  Folys  of  lyght  credence  vnto  the  same,  2 1 4
Of  marchauntis  and  other  occupyers  y^  vse  falshode

and  gyle, .  .  .  .  .219

Of  the  falshode  of  Antichrist, .  .  .224

Of  hym  that  dare  nat  vtter  the  trouthe  for  fere  of

displeasour,  &c., .  .  .  .231

Of  suche  as  withdrawe  &  let  other  from  good  dedes,  235
Of  leuyng  gode  warkes  vndone,  .  .  239

Of  the  rewarde  of  wysdom, .  .  .  244

Of  folys  that  wyl  nat  beware  of  mysfortune,  .  249
Of  bacbyters  of  good  workes  &  ayenst  suche  as  shall

dysprayse  this  boke,  .  .  .  254

Of  the  immoderate  vylenes  in  maners  vsed  at  the

table,  .....  259

Of  folys  disgysed  with  visers  and  other  counterfayt

apparayle, .  .  .  .  .267

The  discripcion  of  a  wyse  man,  .  .  .273

C  Alexander  barclay  to  his  welbeloued  frende  syr

Johnn  Bysshop  of  Excester, ,  .  .  278

Of  folys  that  despyse  wysdome  &  Phylosophy  and

a  commendacion  of  the  same,  .  .  .  281

Of  concertacyon  or  stryuyng  bytwene  vertue  &  vol-

uptuosyte, .  .  .  .  .286

The  obieccion  of  lust  blamynge  vertue, .  .  289

The  answere  of  vertue  agaynst  the  obieccion  of

voluptuosyte,  .  ,  .  .296


Vlll


Tabula.


The  vnyuersall  and  generall  Shyp  or  Barge  :  wherin

they  rowe  that  erst  hath  had  no  charge,  .  306

The  vnyuersall  shyp  of  craftysmen  or  laborers,  .  313
Of  folys  that  ar  to  worldly, .  .  .  317

A  brefe  addicion  of  the  syngularyte  of  some  newe

Folys,  .  .  .  .  .322

C  A  conclusion  of  this  Boke  with  a  Balade  of  our  Lady,  333


Of  the  yre  immoderate,  the  wrath  and
great  lewdnes  of  wymen.


For  wrathfull  men  1  purposyd  to  ordayne
A  slowe  Asse  theyr  hastynes  to  asswage
But  nowe  must  they  forgo  that  beste  agayne
For  wymen  clayme  the  same  by  theyr  great  rage
Theyr  furour  passyth,  in  dede  and  in  langage
All  men  in  erth  :  none  may  with  them  compare
He  is  well  happy  whiche  may  of  them  be  ware.

VOL.  II.  A


2  Of  the  wrath  and  great  lewdnes  of  wymen.

My  balade  bare  of  frute  and  eloquence
And  I  also  with  all  my  herte  and  mynde
Wolde  wymen  lawde  and  prayse  with  reuerence
And  namely  suche  as  ar  founde  true  and  kynde
But  of  that  sort,  but  fewe  a  man  shall  fynde
So  the  yll  cause,  and  theyr  nature  cruel!
To  say  the  trouth  doth  me  constrayne  and  bynde
And  of  theyr  vyces  somwhat  brefely  to  tell

I  haue  longe  louyd,  loue  nowe,  and  euer  shall
Them  to  commende  that  in  vertue  haue  delyte
And  that  ar  good  and  chaste  namely  of  all
But  bad,  that  full  of  wrath  ar,  and  despyte
It  is  conuenyent  of  theyr  madnes  to  wryte
And  theyr  condycions  repreue  without  all  drede
So  am  I  bolder  and  redyer  to  endyte
For  no  wyse  woman  shall  these  rebukes  rede

The  mother  of  Graccus. Cornelia  prudent
Chaste  and  discrete,  and  of  beauty  souerayne
Shall  nat  my  Balade  rede  :  for  intent
Was  euer  in  vertue,  hir  honour  to  mentayne
No  godly  woman,  that  doth  from  synne  refrayne
Shall  I  disprayse  but  rather  them  defende
Therfore  in  my  wordes  I  shall  boldly  and  playne
Lawde  iust  and  good,  and  the  yll  discommende

She  that  hath  bene  brought  vp  in  honestye
Fedynge  hir  mynde  with  wysdome  and  prudence
And  kept  hir  gode  name  in  youth  by  chastyte
The  fere  of  God  alway  in  hir  presence


Of  the  wrath  and  great  lewclnes  of  wymen,  3

Suche  ren  nat  lyghtly  to  vyle  synne  and  offence
And  doth  no  thynge,  but  gode  and  commendable
O  that  suche  one  is  worthy  reuerence
Better  than  all  golde,  than  ryches  more  lawdable

A  woman  iust  and  to  goodnes  inclyned
If  wrath  and  yre  hir  husbonde  do  inflame
With  hir  good  counsell  shall  mytigate  his  mynde
And  peas  his  wrath,  an  example  of  the  same
We  haue  by  kynge  Assuerus  by  name
Whiche  coramaundyd  all  the  hebreans  to  be  slayne
But  his  Queue  hester  worthy  of  dede  and  fame
With  hir  fayre  wordes  apeasyd  hym  agayne

The  kynge  Dauyd  despysed  by  Naball

That  wronge  purposyd  to  punysshe  hastely

Yet  was  he  apaysyd  by  a  woman  lyberall

Abygayll  by  name,  whiche  very  womanly

Causyd  hym  that  yre  to  temper  by  and  by

His  hande  withdrawynge,  and  swerde  of  punysshment

So  good  wymen  counsell  well  and  rightwysely

But  yll  gyue  counsell  after  the  worst  intent

Salomon  the  wyse  infect  with  the  foly
Of  wymens  counsell  and  blynde  aduysement
To  his  great  hurte  fell  to  Idolatry
Renounsynge  the  seruyce  of  god  omnypotent
Of  womans  tunge  :  who  can  the  malyce  stent
Forsoth  no  man  :  for  all  theyr  felycyte
Is  set  in  spekynge  of  wordes  imprudent
For  in  theyr  tunge  is  all  theyr  cruelte


4  Of  the  wrath  and  great  lewdnes  of  wymen.

Theyr  cruell  tunge  is  sharper  than  a  dart
Therwith  they  hibour  to  brynge  men  to  yll  name
And  with  the  same  they  stryke  some  to  the  herte
With  thoughtful!  wounde,  no  thynge  can  hele  the  same
They  neuer  haue  done,  and  yet  haue  they  no  shame
Without  occasyon  to  chyde  with  noyse  and  cry
In  cruell  wordes  is  all  theyr  myrth  and  game
Sawynge  theyr  sede  of  chatrynge  lyke  the  pye

O  god  aboue :  o  kynge  moste  glorious

Of  heuen  and  erth  the  whiche  hast  rauysshyd  hell

Delyuer  vs  from  the  tungys  venemous

Of  frowarde  wymen,  cursyd  and  cruell

For  a  thousande  mo  myscheuys  than  man  can  tell

Procede  of  theyr  mad  and  disordred  langage

One  woman  chydynge  raakyth  gretter  yell

Than  sholde  an  hundreth  pyes  in  one  cage

The  pore  husbonde  with  some  is  so  bested

That  he  no  rest  hath  one  houre  of  the  day

Nor  in  the  nyght  whan  he  is  in  his  bed

There  she  hym  techyth  a  brawlynge  crede  to  say

And  if  he  there  ought  vnto  hir  denay

She  gronyth  grutchynge,  with  hir  complayntis  styll

Ye  foure  dayes  after  let  hym  do  what  he  may  ■  ■

He  shall  hir  nat  asswage  tyll  she  hath  chid  hir  fyll

Thus  is  hir  chydynge  to  this  pore  man  great  wo
Moreouer  in  woman  is  gyle  and  sotyltye
And  secrete  malyce  whiche  none  can  take  hir  fro
And  for  that  she  wolde  fayne  commendyd  be


wrath  and  great  lewdnes  of  wymen.  5


She  hym  commaundeth  as  moche  more  wyse  than  he
In  hir  owne  conceyt  despysynge  his  doctryne
And  if  hir  husbonde  to  any  thynge  agre
By  no  maner  mean  wyll  she  therto  inclyne

She  wyll  that  no  thynge  be  perfourmyd  of  his  wyll
All  must  be  rulyd  after  hir  folysshe  mynde
And  that  in  thynges,  wherin  she  hath  no  skyll.
So  oft  the  husbonde  fawtles  great  hurte  doth  fynde
And  also  lossys  whiche  his  herte  sharply  bynde
By  the  lewde  dedys  and  langage  of  his  wyfe
And  though  a  womans  wordes  be  but  wynde
Yet  of  them  growe  bothe  :  murder  losse  and  stryfe

Right  so  Amphyon  of  Thebes  myghty  kynge
For  the  offences :  and  selfe  wyll  of  his  wyfe
Bycause  he  dyd  hir  wyll  in  euery  thynge
For  his  owne  foly  at  laste  he  lost  his  lyfe
Wordes  amonge  wymen  is  comon  and  ryfe
And  fere  of  shame,  from  many  gone  is  quyte
So  one  Calphurnia  in  a  case  playntyfe
Hir  bare  tayle  shewyd  to  the  iuge  in  despyte

But  for  to  speke  of  womans  wrath  and  yre
No  beste  in  erthe  to  wrath  is  so  inclynde
As  she :  hir  wrath  in  hete  passyth  hote  fyre
No  tunge  can  tell  the  rancour  of  hir  mynde
This  wrath  in  woman  is  rotyd  so  by  kynde
That  if  she  be  onys  set  in  hir  madnesse
She  passyth  all  the  cruell  bestis  of  Inde
The  bere  the  wolf  fell  lyon,  and  the  lyones.


6  Of  the  wrath  and  ^reat  lewdnes  of  wymen.


The  cruell  Tyger  to  woman  is  nat  lyke

Whiche  whan  hir  whelpis  from  hir  den  taken  be

Rangyth  about  in  furour  them  to  seke

For  madnes  gnawynge  and  terynge  stocke  and  tre

A  wrathful!  woman  is  yet  more  mad  than  she

Cruell  Medea  doth  us  example  shewe

Of  womans  furour  great  wrath  and  cruelte

Whiche  hir  owne  children  dyd  all  to  pecis  hewe

Progne  also  may  be  to  vs  example

Whiche  sode  hir  owne  childe  after  she  had  hym  slayne

The  story  in  Ouyde  is  wryten  longe  and  ample

But  if  Juuenall  had  nat  wryten  playne

Of  wymen  the  wrath,  theyr  cruelte  and  trayne

The  same  shulde  nowe  haue  wryten  ben  by  me

But  foly  it  is  to  wryte  the  same  agayne.

Therfore  I  leue  it  for  cause  of  breuyte

The  herte  of  woman  is  ay  deuysynge  scornys

Disceyt  and  cautele  falshode  lesynge  and  gyle

It  is  more  sharpe  than  knyfe,  pryckynge  as  thornes

If  she  be  pacient :  it  lastyth  but  a  whyle

Hir  stomacke  swellyth  by  bytter  gall  and  vyle

Hir  body  full  of  rancour  and  madnes

But  where  she  settyth,  man  by  worde  to  reuyle

From  hir  stynkynge  mouth  commyth  all  vnhappynes

No  maner  vyce  shall  she  vntouchyd  leue
She  troubleth  maners  of  men  that  ar  lawdable
And  of  theyr  gode  name  doth  falsly  them  bereue
She  troublyth  right  and  peas  most  profytable


Of  the  wrath  and  great  lewdnes  of  wymen.  7

Brakynge  hir  fayth  by  synne  abhomynable
The  bed  defylynge,  Dean  can  nat  withdrawe
Them  from  that  vyse  theyr  mynde  is  so  vnstable
They  take  theyr  pleasour  in  synne  agaynst  the  lawe

She  that  hir  mynde  doth  to  this  vyce  subdue

Gyuynge  hir  body  to  this  mysgouernaunce

To  husbonde,  nor  to  none  other  man  is  true

Yet  kepeth  she  a  solem  countenaunce

As  none  were  lyke  hir  in  Englonde  nor  in  Fraunce

In  all  vertues,  and  knowynge  nought  of  syn

But  if  that  she  were  well  sought  she  is  perchaunce

A  wolfe  or  gote  within  a  Lammys  skyn

A  woman  is  lyke  a  clyster  laxatyf

In  mannys  purs  voydynge  that  is  within

If  man  shulde  euer  be  rulyd  by  his  wyfe

Hir  proude  aparayle  sholde  make  his  thryst  full  thyn

As  well  can  some  spende  as  theyr  good  man  can  wyn

And  moche  faster,  but  if  that  coyne  do  fayle

She  labowryth  nat  to  get  it  without  syn

But  craftely  to  forge  it  with  hir  tayle

I  fynde  in  the  worlde  that  there  be  thynges  thre
Right  harde  to  knowe,  the  fourth  that  no  man  may
Knowe  nor  perceyue,  first,  whan  a  byrde  doth  fle
Alonge  in  the  ayre  :  no  man  can  spye  hir  way
The  way  of  a  Shyp  in  the  se  thoughe  it  be  day
Harde  is  to  se  whiche  way  the  shyp  hath  gone
The  thirde  harde  thynge  as  I  have  oft  heard  say
Is  the  way  of  a  serpent  ouer  a  stone


8 Of  the  wrath  and  p^reat  lewdnes  of  wymen.


But  the  fourth  way  that  of  all  hardest  is
Of  yonge  man  is,  in  youthes  lustynes
A  vycyous  womans  way  is  lyke  to  this
Whiche  after  hir  synne  and  great  vnhappyness
Fedyth  hir  with  mete  of  blynde  delyciousnes
Than  wypyth  hir  mouth  and  sayth  in  audyence
With  mynde  assured  and  past  all  shamefastnes
I  haue  nat  commyttyd  yll,  synne  nor  any  offence

Thre  other  thynges  on  erth  I  fynde  certayne
Whiche  troubleth  the  grounde  and  also  the  see
The  fourth  nouther  see  nor  londe  may  well  sustayne
The  firste  is  a  churle  that  hath  a  bonde  man  be
And  so  by  fortune  come  vnto  hye  degre
The  seconde  is  a  fole  whan  he  is  dronke  and  full.
The  thirde  a  wrathful)  woman,  full  of  cruelte
He  that  hir  weddyth,  hath  a  crowe  to  pull

Yet  is  the  fourth  wors  and  more  eleuate
That  is  a  hande  mayde  lowe  of  hir  lynage
Promotyd  from  a  begger  and  so  come  to  estate
Succedynge  hir  lady  as  heyr  in  herytage
Of  suche  procedeth  moche  malyce  and  outrage
Disdayne  great  scorne,  vilany  and  debate
For  the  frenche  man,  sayth  in  his  langage
No  thynge  is  wors  than  a  churle  made  a  state  •

I  wolde  fayne  cesse  of  womans  gyle  and  treason
And  theyr  great  falshode  whiche  none  can  well  defende
I  nought  wyll  speke,  howe  some  by  mortall  poyson
Theyr  husbondes  brynge  to  sodayne  deth  and  ende


Of  the  wrath  and  great  lewdnes  of  wymen.

Examples  habunde  :  who  lyst  therto  intende

Of  Agrippina,  and  Poncia  wode  of  mynde

Whiche  on  theyr  husbondes  dyd  mortall  hande  extende

Of  many  suche  we  may  in  wrytynge  fynde

"What  shall  I  wryte  the  cursyd  cruelte  ^
Of  the  susters  of  Danaides  echone
Fyfty  in  nomber,  whiche  by  iniquyte
Slewe  all  their  husbondes  reseruyd  one  alone

0  chast  lucres,  alas  where  art  thou  gone
From  theyr  presence  all  wymen  ner,  the  chace
Thou  art  belouyd,  nowe  almost  of  none

And  bawdy  tays  hath  nowe  thy  rowme  and  place

Fals  Clytymnestra  cruell  of  hir  dede

May  trouble  the  hertis  of  all  men  on  the  grounde

And  cause  them  of  other  suche  to  take  hede

Whose  manyfolde  malyce  doth  mynde  of  man  confounde

The  prudent  Porcia  to  fewe  men  nowe  is  bounde

Or  associat  by  the  way  of  mariage

This  Porcia  kept  hir  body  chast  and  sounde

Trewe  to  hir  husbonde  Cato  the  great  sage

The  Chast  Sabyn  is  nat  weddyd  nowe  a  dayes
To  many  men  :  as  she  was  wont  to  be

1  meane  that  fewe  inclyne,  nowe  to  hir  wayes
"Wherfore  I  say  that  well  happy  is  he

That  hath  a  woman  kepynge  hir  honeste
Pacient  of  mynde,  in  suche  is  great  confort
She  is  a  Jewell  that  louyth  chastyte
It  is  pyte  that  so  fewe,  be  of  that  sort


I  o  Of  the  wrath  and  ^reat  lewdnes  of  wymen.


Ye  gentyll  wymen,  and  other  great  and  small

Be  nat  displeasyd  with  these  true  cours  sentences

For  certaynly  I  haue  nat  wryten  all

The  vyce  of  wymen  theyr  synnes  nor  offences

If  I  had  red  all  the  lyberall  sciences

And  all  my  lyfe  shulde  there  about  intende

Yet  coude  I  neuer  wryte  all  inconuenyences

By  wymen  done,  nor  theyr  malyce  comprehende

But  whyle  I  lyue  the  good  shall  I  commende
And  them  exalt  at  euery  tyme  and  season
I  may  haue  leyser  ynoughe  therto  tyntende
Syns  of  them  is  no  plenty  but  great  geason
But  suche  folys  as  ar  voyde  of  all  reason
And  shame  to  all  wymen  by  theyr  mysgouernaunce
As  powlynge  yre  disceyte  sclaunder  and  treason
Them  shall  I  blame  with  wrathfuU  countenannce

Thenuoy  of  Barclay  the  translatour.
Ye  wrathfull  wymen  by  vyce  lesynge  your  name
Correct  your  selfe,  and  labour  ye  with  payne
In  your  lyuynge  for  to  deserue  no  blame
Assay  with  mekenes  to  get  your  name  agayne
By  that  mean  may  ye,  all  your  wyll  obtayne
Let  chastyte  you  gyde  and  pacience
For  to  be  frowarde,  (it  is  a  thynge  in  vayne
Vnto  hym  to  whom  ye  owe  obedyence

The  lawe  commaundyth  you  to  do  reuerence
Vnto  your  spousys  with  honour  and  mekenesse


wrath  and  great  lewdnes  of  wymen.  1 1


And  nat  displease  hym  by  your  wylfull  offence
As  hasty  langage  disceyte  and  vnkyndnes
If  ye  lyue  well  than  shall  God  sende  riches
To  you  in  erth,  with  welth  and  ioy  mundayne
And  if  ye  fortune  to  fall  in  to  lewdnes
These  great  gyftis  shall  ye  iustly  lese  agayne


Of  the  great  myght  and  power  of  Foly


Blynde  foly  hath  hir  tentis  abrode  displayde
In  euery  place,  from  them  no  felde  is  fre.
With  hir  madnes,  the  worlde  is  hole  dismayde
She  hath  all  men  in  hir  captyuyte
But  namely  suche  as  ar  of  moste  degre
Of  most  riches  power  lynage  and  myght
Vnder  hir  standard  submyt  them  selfe  to  fyght


Of  the  great  myght  and  power  of  folys. 1 3

Thou  folysshe  man  trustynge  in  thy  ryches
Therby  contendynge  to  haue  preemynence
Howe  be  it  that  thou  art  gyuen  to  viciousnes
And  none  so  bolde  to  shewe  the  thy  offence
The  more  thou  errest  in  thy  blynde  negligence
For  if  that  thou  be  hye  of  rowme  and  name
If  thou  offende  the  more  shall  be  thy  shame

Thoughe  all  thy  wordes  be  full  of  folysshenes

And  all  thy  dedys  to  no  good  ende  do  come

Yet  wylt  thou  be  reputyd  in  ryches

Bebefore  all  other  and  also  in  wysdome

O  howe  oft  tymes  (of  these  folys)  wyll  some

Commende  them  self  and  lawde  their  glorious  name

Whan  they  se  that  none  other  wyll  do  the  same

These  folys  them  boste  of  dedys  of  valyaunce
And  worthy  actis  done  by  them  in  batayle
Howe  be  it  that  lawde  wherby  man  doth  auaunce
Hym  self  by  his  owne  mouth  is  of  but  small  auayle
And  vyle  before  men  of  wysdome  and  counsayle
But  suche  fowlys  that  of  eche  hatyd  be
Them  self  may  commende  by  gode  auctoryte.

These  Folys  say  that  londe  is  fortunate
Whiche  is  gouernyd,  by  ryche  Prynce  or  kynge
But  better  is  that  londe  whiche  longyth  to  a  state
Whiche  is  induyd  with  wysdome  and  cunnynge
Workynge  by  counsell  in  euery  maner  thynge
For  who  that  rayneth  in  wysdome  and  vertue
The  great  Vlixes  shall  scantly  hym  subdue


1 4 Of  the  great  myght  and  power  offolys.

A  wyse  Prynce  gydeth  hymselfe  by  reason

And  his  Realme  by  Justyce  and  equyte

Ordeynynge  eche  thynge,  accordynge  to  the  season

Nowe  with  rygour  :  and  oft  by  benygnyte.

Nat  beynge  parcyall  to  hye  nor  lowe  degre

No  coyne  nor  brybe  can  change  or  turne  his  mynde

But  so  he  iugeth  as  lawe  and  right  doth  bynde

Suche  louyth  vertue,  next  god  omnypotent
And  grace  hym  gydeth  with  godly  chastyte
Wherby  his  Realme  becommyth  excellent
His  londe  increasynge  in  great  prosperyte
His  counsell  discrete  and  full  of  grauyte
Graciously' gydeth  the  subiectis  on  his  grounde
And  so  departynge  this  Prynce  in  heuyn  is  crownde

Well  is  that  londe  and  ioyous  may  it  be
Whiche  is  defendyd  by  suche  a  noble  estate
But  wo  be  that  londe,  whose  crowne  of  royalte
Is  gyuen  to  a  childe,  whose  counsell  drynketh  late
Gyuen  to  the  wombe,  to  Ryot  and  debate
Suche  frowarde  counsell  shall  biynde  his  innocence
And  cause  hym  decay  from  his  hye  excellence

A  fole  promotyd  to  riches  and  renowne
Syttynge  in  his  stage  or  chayre  of  rowme  royal!
Blyndeth  iustyce  tournynge  the  lawes  vp  set  downe
By  vyle  rewardes  and  gyftis  temporall
Another  by  fauour^  letteth  true  iustyce  fall
Damnynge  innocence  by  fals  iniquyte
Thus  talsly  ouerthrowen  is  iust  symplycyte


Of  the  great  myght  and  power  offolys. 1 5


Justyce  ought  be  wayed  in  an  euyn  balance
By  egall  mesure,  all  fauour  set  a  syde
Nat  rygorously  for  wrath  or  displeasaunce
The  fere  of  god  ought  a  iuges  mynde  to  gyde
But  moche  I  fere  lyst  the  fals  sede  abyde
In  erthe  yet  :  of  them  whiche  by  fals  polecy
Vnto  deth  iuged  Susanna  wrongfully

And  of  Andronicus  whiche  hath  Onias  slayne
Thoughe  both  be  dede,  the  sede  of  them  abyde
Wherof  fals  traytours  begyn  to  growe  agayne
Infectynge  falsly  the  worlde  on  euery  side
Maystershyp,  and  money  euery  thynge  doth  gyde
Bynadab  by  gyftis  hath  broke  his  othe  alas
Tryphon  by  the  same  disceyued  Jonathas

In  hope  of  brybes  men  of  great  dignyte
Blyndyth  the  lawes,  and  some  doth  oft  betray
Theyr  kynge  and  countrey  sellynge  theyr  honeste
Example  of  Jugurtha  whiche  oft  by  Rome  dyd  say
Whyle  he  frome  it  departyd  on  a  day
O  Rome  Rome,  who  that  had  store  of  golde
By  thy  owne  gyders,  thou  falsly  sholde  be  solde

Trust  me  (on  grounde,  no  maner  man  we  fynde

Of  so  great  wrath  malyce  nor  rancoure

But  the  holy  Crosse  shall  mytygate  his  mynde

All  men  doth  it  great  worshyp  and  honour

Money  ouer  man  is  like  a  conquerour

No  herte  so  stronge  whiche  it  doth  nat  ouercome

It  is  preferred  both  vertue  and  wysdome


I  6  Of  the  great  myght  and  power  offolys.


Whan  mony  labours  it  leuyth  nought  vndone
It  all  ouercomyth  with  hye  and  lowe  degre
And  shortly  to  speke  for  a  conclusyon
It  thousandes  blyndetli  of  men  of  dignyte
With  dyuers  folyes,  whiche  they  themself  nat  se
Thus  doth  the  nomber  of  Folys  rayne  so  wyde
Ouer  all  the  worlde :  that  no  man  can  them  gyde.

Thenuoy  of  Barclay  the  Transi.atour.
O  noble  prynces,  in  worshyp  decorate
Infix  your  myndes  to  vertue  and  prudence
Remember  it  is  more  dishonour  to  a  state
Than  to  a  sympyll  man  to  fall  to  vyle  offence
And  where  as  of  God  ye  haue  preemynence
Aboue  lowe  people,  labour  with  full  intent
To  pass  them  in  vertue,  and  so  with  dylygence
Lerne  to  lyue  by  the  rede  Rose  redolent  ,

Though  that  we  Brytons  be  fully  separate
From  all  the  worlde  as  is  sene  by  euydence
Wallyd  with  the  se,  and  longe  ben  in  debate
By  insurreccion  yet  God  hath  made  defence
By  his  prouysion  ordeyned  us  a  prynce.
In  all  vertues  most  noble  and  excellent
This  prynce  is  Harry  clene  of  conscience
Smellynge  as  the  Rose  ay  freshe  and  redolent

Drawe  nere  ye  Prynces  of  myndes  eleuate
Meknes  may  ye  lerne  beynge  in  his  presence  \.
And  godly  wysdome  as  hath  apered  late
In  dyuers  dedys  done,  by  his  excellence


Of  the  great  myght  and  power  of  folys.  i  7


Subduynge  without  blode  great  inconuenyence
Punysshynge  the  proude,  louynge  the  innocent
Wherfore  to  his  dedys  gyue  your  aduertence
Folowynge  the  smell  of  the  Rose  redolent

By  his  reygne  is  all  Englonde  lawreat
With  godly  peas  nat  nedynge  great  defence
Murdred  is  Mars,  and  with  woundes  sawciate
The  bondys  of  peas  hath  dryuen  the  tyrant  hens
Banysshed  is  batayle  by  his  magnyficence
And  peas  confermyd  by  god  omnypotent
The  blynde  Venus  chefe  grounde  of  neglygence
Is  exyled  from  the  rede  Rose  redolent

In  hym  is  iustyce  with  petye  sociate
Vpon  the  poor  he  spareth  no  expence
Nor  on  the  Churche  after  lyke  maner  rate
Promotynge  men  of  wysdome  and  science
Seruynge  his  maker  with  loue  and  reuerence
Wherfore  O  englonde  be  true  of  thy  intent
With  faythfull  herte  do  hym  obedyence
Thanke  god  whiche  hath  the  Rose  vnto  the  sent


VOL.  II.


Of  the  vayne  cure  of  Astronomy.


He  is  forsoth  of  purpose  vayne  and  blynde

Of  mynde  mysbeleuynge  and  without  aduysement

Whiche  stedfastly  thynkyth  in  his  mynde

To  knowe  thynges  to  come  playne  and  euydent

Onely  by  the  sterrys  of  the  fyrmament

Yet  chui  lys  voyde  of  cunnynge  and  wysdome

Ar  nowe  a  dayes  Astronomyei  s  become


Of  the  vayne  cure  of  Astronomy. 1 9


Here  call  we  to  our  folysshe  company
Suche  folys  as  labour  and  stody  with  great  payne
To  iuge  the  planetis,  by  theyr  Astronomy
And  other  craftis  without  profyte  and  vayne
Come  hyther  Astronomyers  haue  ye  no  disdayne
Ye  planetystis  and  wytches,  and  other  of  this  sort
Whiche  honour  the  sterres  onely :  as  your  confort

Suche  iuge  the  dedys  of  men  both  more  and  les
Expoundynge  the  sterres  by  theyr  vayne  iugement
They  labour  wenynge  by  theyr  folysshnes
To  knowe  the  secrete  of  god  omnypotent
On  this  vayne  stody  so  set  is  theyr  intent
That  what  so  euer  they  in  the  sterres  se
Without  all  dout  they  thynke  the  same  shall  be

On  the  sterrys  is  all  theyr  felycyte
And  in  the  planetis  ar  they  full  dilygent
And  than  vtter  with  great  audacyte
All  that  the  same  do  showe  or  represent
The  preuy  workynges  of  euery  element
And  secrete  causys  of  other  bodyes  aboue.
They  note  to  knowe  to  what  effect  they  moue

Some  gase  vpon  the  wandrynge  of  the  mone
Another  deuysyth  the  cours  of  Phebus  clere
Gasynge  on  the  Sonne  at  mornynge  nyght  or  none
And  by  other  planetis  shewyth  what  doth  apere
Howe  some  of  them  whan  they  do  gyde  the  yere
Engendreth  plenty  pleasour  myrth  and  ioy
And  howe  some  other  doth  man  and  beste  destroy


2  0 Of  the  vayiie  cure  of  Astrojwmy.


Some  techyth  what  thynge  sad  Saturne  doth  manace
And  what  cruell  Mars  doth  note  and  signifye
Some  expoundyth  Venus  with  hir  pleasaunt  face
Howe  she  men  bryngyth  oft  tyme  to  vylany
Another  is  in  hande  to  trete  of  Marcury
Howe  eche  of  these  planetis  doth  men  predestynate
And  howe  Jupiter  theyr  wrath  doth  mytygate

These  folys  say  that  in  theyr  bokes  they  fynde
That  men  borne  vnder  the  constellacion
Of  Saturne  :  to  theft  and  robbynge  ar  inclynyd
Yet  fynde  we  suche  true  ofte  by  probacion
And  gode  and  iust  without  all  decepcion
They  say  that  children  of  Mars  without  fayle
Shall  be  disposyd  and  full  gyuen  to  Batayle

Yet  fynde  we  often  by  playne  experience

That  suche  as  vnder  this  planete  borne  be

Ar  nat  inclyned  after  theyr  sentence

But  gyuen  ay  to  peas  and  tranquyllyte

Right  so  by  Venus  we  often  tymes  se

That  though  she  dispose  hir  children  vnto  lust

And  bodely  pleasour,  yet  ar  they :  chast  and  iust

Thus  it  aperyth  both  playne  and  openly

That  it  is  foly  to  gyue  great  confydence

To  the  vnsure  science  of  Astronomy

Wherfore  haue  done  Just  man,  note  this  sentence

A  man  of  wysdome  vertue  and  science

If  he  the  wayes  of  vyces  set  asyde

Shall  gyde  the  sterris,  and  they  shall  hym  nat  gyde


Of  the  vayne  cure  of  Astronomy. 1 1


Thynke  well  the  sterris  and  eche  elyment
The  hole  firmament  and  planetis  euerychone
Stande  in  the  handes  of  god  omnypotent
None  can  them  gyde  saue  this  hye  lorde  alone
Therfore  mad  man,  let  thy  foly  be  gone
Wylt  thou  knowe  the  secretis  of  thy  creatour
Leue  of  thy  blyndnes,  thy  foly  and  furour

Takest  thou  this  labour  and  charge  vpon  the
As  who  sayth  god  whiche  reyneth  eternall
Wolde  shewe  his  secretis  and  godly  pryuytye
By  sterre  or  planete  to  any  man  mortall
Wherfore  it  is  best  me  thynke  that  we  leue  all
Vnto  the  iugement  and  wyll  of  god  aboue
Whiche  gydeth  all :  howe  euer  the  sterris  moue

He  by  his  myght  hath  made  the  fyrmament

With  all  the  sterres  and  planetis  of  the  same

Whiche  at  his  wyll  ar  euer  obedyent

And  he  them  rulyth,  therfore  what  hurt  or  shame

What  mysfortune  aduersyte  or  blame

Can  all  the  planetis  to  man  or  childe  pretende

If  god  moste  glorious  by  his  myght  vs  defende

Thus  is  it  foly,  voyde  labour  and  vanyte

To  gyue  great  credence  vnto  Astronomy

It  is  great  Foly  also  in  certaynte

To  trust  vnto  fortune,  to  byrth  or  desteny

A  vertuouse  lyuer  may  all  the  same  defye

Lyue  well  and  than  trust  surely  to  goddes  grace

The  sterris  ne  fortune  shall  in  the  haue  no  place.


2  2 Of  the  vayne  cure  of  Asironomy.


Thenuoy  of  Barklay.

Leue  of  your  foly,  whiche  labour  this  science

And  let  this  your  clokyd  errour  be  refusyd

Vnto  the  sterns  gyue  nat  to  great  credence

For  many  one  therby  hath  ben  abusyd.

And  many  one  haue  stodyed  sore  and  musyd

To  wryte  Pronosticacions,  whiche  haue  be  founde

Of  none  effect,  and  than  falsly  excusyd

For  suche  shewe  before  after  as  they  ar  bounde.


Of  the  folysshe  descripcion  and  inquisicion
of  dyuers  contrees  and  regyons.


Who  that  is  besy  to  mesure  and  compace
The  heuyn  and  erth  and  all  the  worlde  large
Describynge  the  clymatis  and  folke  of  euery  place
He  is  a  fole  and  hath  a  greuous  charge
Without  auauntage,  wherfore  let  hym  discharge
Hym  selfe,  of  that  fole  whiche  in  his  necke  doth  syt
About  suche  folyes  dullynge  his  mynde  and  wyt.


2  4  Of  the  folysshe  descripcion  and  inquisicion


That  fole,  of  wysdome  and  reason  doth  fayle
And  also  discression  labowrynge  for  nought.
And  in  this  shyp  shall  helpe  to  drawe  the  sayle
Which  day  and  nyght  infixeth  all  his  thought
To  haue  the  hole  worlde  within  his  body  brought
Mesurynge  the  costes  of  euery  royalme  and  lande
And  clymatis,  with  his  compace,  in  his  hande

He  coueytyth  to  knowe,  and  compryse  in  his  mynde

Euery  regyon  and  euery  sundry  place

Whiche  ar  nat  knowen  to  any  of  mankynde

And  neuer  shall  be  without  a  specyall  grace

Yet  suche  folys  take  pleasour  and  solace

The  length  and  brede  of  the  worlde  to  mesure

In  vayle  besynes,  takynge  great  charge  and  cure

They  set  great  stody  labour  and  besynes

To  knowe  the  people  that  in  the  east  abyde

And  by  and  by  theyr  mesures  after  dres

To  knowe  what  folke  the  west  and  north  part  gyde

And  who  the  sowth,  thus  all  the  worlde  wyde

By  these  folys  is  meated  by  ieometry

Yet  knowe  they  scant  theyr  owne  vnwyse  body

Another  labours  to  knowe  the  nacions  wylde
Inhabytynge  the  worlde  in  the  North  plage  and  syde
Metynge  by  mesure,  countrees  both  fyers  and  mylde
Vnder  euery  planete,  where  men  sayle  go  or  ryde
And  so  this  fole  castyth  his  wyt  so  wyde
To  knowe  eche  londe  vnder  the  fyrmament
That  therabout  in  vayne  his  tyme  is  spent


of  dyiiers  contrees  and  regyons.


Than  with  his  compace  drawyth  he  about
Europe,  and  Asye,  to  knowe  howe  they  stande
And  of  theyr  regyons  nat  to  be  in  dout
Another  with  Grece  and  Cesyll  is  in  honde
With  Apuly,  Afryke  and  the  newe  fonde  londe
With  Numydy  and,  where  the  Moryans  do  dwell
And  other  londes  whose  namys  none  can  tell

He  mesureth  Athlant,  calpe,  and  cappadoce

The  see  of  Hercules  garnado  and  Spayne

The  yles  there  aboute  shewynge  all  in  groce

Throwynge  his  mesure  to  Fraunce  and  to  Brytayne

The  more  and  lesse,  to  Flaundres  and  almayne

There  is  no  yle  so  lytell  that  hath  name

But  that  these  Folys  in  hande  ar  with  the  same

And  regyons  that  ar  compasyd  with  the  se
They  besely  labour  to  knowe  and  vnderstande
And  by  what  cause,  nature  or  propertye
These  doth  flowe,  nat  ouercouerynge  the  londe
So  he  descrybyth  his  cercle  in  his  honde
The  hole  worlde :  leuynge  no  thynge  behynde
As  in  the  Doctrynes  of  Strabo  he  doth  fynde

Whiche  wrote  in  bokes  makynge  declaracion
Somtyme  hym  groundynge  vpon  auctoryte
Howe  eche  Royalme  and  londe  had  sytuacion
Some  in  brode  feldes  some  closyd  with  the  see
But  ye  geometryans  that  of  this  purpose  be
Ye  ar  but  folys  to  take  suche  cure  and  payne
Aboute  a  thynge  whiche  is  fruteles  and  vayne


2  6  Of  the  folysshe  descripcion  and  inquiskion


It  passyth  your  reason  the  hole  worlde  to  discus
And  knowe  euery  londe  and  countrey  of  the  grounde
For  though  that  the  noble  actour  plinius
The  same  purposyd,  yet  fawty  is  he  founde
And  in  Tholomeus  great  errours  doth  habounde
Thoughe  he  by  auctoryte  makyth  mencyon
Of  the  descripcion  of  euery  regyon

Syns  these  actours  so  excellent  of  name

Hath  bokes  composyd  of  this  facultye

And  neuer  coude  parfytely  perfourme  the  same

Forsoth  it  is  great  foly  vnto  the

To  labour  about  suche  folysshe  vanyte

It  is  a  furour  also  one  to  take  payne

In  suche  thynges  as  prouyd  ar  vncertayne

For  nowe  of  late  hath  large  londe  and  grounde
Ben  founde  by  maryners  and  crafty  gouernours
The  whiche  londes  were  neuer  knowen  nor  founde
Byfore  our  tyme  by  our  predecessours
And  here  after  shall  by  our  successours
Parchaunce  mo  be  founde,  wherin  men  dwell
Of  whome  we  neuer  before  this  same  harde  tell

Ferdynandus  that  late  was  kynge  of  spayne

Of  londe  and  people  hath  founde  plenty  and  store

Of  whome  the  bydynge  to  vs  was  vncertayne

No  christen  man  of  them  harde  tell  before

Thus  is  it  foly  to  tende  vnto  the  lore

And  vnsure  science  of  vayne  geometry

Syns  none  can  knowe  all  the  worlde  perfytely


of  dyuers  contrees  and  regyons,  27


Thenuoy  of  Barklay.
Ye  people  that  labour  the  worlde  to  mesure
Therby  to  knowe  the  regyons  of  the  same
Knowe  firste  your  self,  that  knowledge  is  moste  sure
For  certaynly  it  is  rebuke  and  shame
For  man  to  labour, onely  for  a  name
To  knowe  the  compasse  of  all  the  worlde  wyde
Nat  knowynge  hym  selfe,  nor  howe  he  sholde  hym  gyde


hym  that  wyll  nat  se  his  owne  folysshe-
nes:  and  that  stryueth  agaynst  his
strenger.


The  folysshe  Maicia  dyd  with  Apollo  stryue
But  he  ouercome  :  loste  sone  the  victory.
And  for  his  foly  was  fleyd  beinge  alyue
For  that  he  comparyd  to  ioyous  Armony.
His  foulysshe  Bagpype  voyde  of  al  melody.
Yet  kept  he  stylle  his  Bagpype  in  his  honde  :
Nat  willynge  his  foly  to  knowe  nor  vndersionde.


Of  hym  that  wyll  nat  se  his  folysshenes.  29


Ouer  al  the  worlde  eche  folysshe  Creature.

If  he  by  his  foly,  or  neglygence  ofFende.

Hath  suche  condicion  within  hym  by  nature

That  to  mennys  mockes  nought  wyl  he  intende.

Nor  knowlege  his  foly,  nor  stody  hym  to  amende.

But  as  one  obstynate,  continue  in  his  synne.

O  folysshe  Marcia  :  for  this  thou  lost  thy  skynne.

This  folysshe  Marcia  with  Phebus  dyd  contende.
Comparynge  with  hym  in  songe  of  Armony
But  for  that  Marcia  cowde  nat  his  part  defende
He  fleaed  was  alyue  moche  pyteously.
To  whose  example  we  se  that  comonly
Many  mad  brayned  and  blynde  Foles  ar  alyue
Which  voyde  of  reason,  with  prudent  men  dar  stryue.

And  euery  fole  that  is  voyde  of  dyscressyon
At  al  tymes  thynketh  hymself  wyse  and  prudent.
Though  he  be  destytute  of  wysedom  and  of  reason.
Suche  ar  so  blynde  that  they  can  nat  aduyse.
Howe  men  by  mockes  and  scornes  them  despyce.
Lawghinge  to  derision  theyr  maners  and  lewde  dede.
Yet  se  they  nat  the  foles  erys  vpon  theyr  hede.

Thys  fole  thus  lawghed  to  scorne  and  derision

Taketh  al  in  sporte  lawhinge  with  them  also.

Nat  thynkynge  hym  contemned  for  his  mad  condicion,

Lewde,  and  disordred.  but  where  so  euer  he  go

He  best  is  content  with  them  that  so  wyl  do.

He  loueth  to  be  flatered  and  clawed  by  the  sleue

That  thynge  that  he  wolde  here  :  he  gladly  doth  beleue.


3©  Of  hym  that  wyll  nat  se  his  folysshenes.


Who  that  hym  prayseth  in  scorne  and  in  mockage.
And  in  derision  doth  magnyfy  his  name
Anone  he  enclyneth  vnto  that  lewde  langage  :
Auaunsinge  hymselfe  and  presumynge  on  the  same
Stryuynge  with  his  better  to  his  rebuke  and  shame.
So  hangith  on  his  shulders  hys  pype  contynually
Wherby  men  may  his  lewdnes  notefy.

If  suche  a  fole  haue  patrymony  and  londe

Or  in  his  CofFres  great  treasour  and  riches

He  shall  haue  frendes  and  felawys  at  honde

To  egge  hym  forwarde  vnto  vnhappynes

And  sawynge  in  hym  sede  of  moche  vnthryftynes

And  than  to  spoyle  hym :  and  leue  hym  pore  and  bare

"Wherby  he  after  must  lyue  in  payne  and  care

Wastfull  youth  oft  spendeth,  all  his  hole  substaunce
On  suche  Felawys  folowynge  alway  theyr  mynde
Rennynge  hedely  to  vngracious  gouernaunce
But  whan  of  his  good  no  more  is  left  behynde .  -
And  he  theyr  fiilshode  and  preuy  gyle  doth  fynde
He  than  auysyth  hym  of  his  olde  estate
Begynnynge  to  spare,  but  than  it  is  to  late

So  whan  he  by  them  is  brought  to  pouertye

Hauynge  no  thynge  his  bodye  to  sustayne

Than  all  his  frendes  away  fast  from  hym  fle

As  trayters  vntrue  leuynge  the  Fole  in  payne

Than  cryeth  he  on  god,  and  sore  doth  hym  complayne

With  wofull  wordes,  mournynge  with  herte  full  faynt

And  than  forthynkyth  :  but  late  is  his  complaynt


and  that  stryiieth  agaynst  his  strenger.


But  who  that  in  his  costes  is  so  ryfe

That  he  that  spendyth  within  a  yere  or  twayne

Whiche  were  ynoughe  the  dayes  of  his  lyfe

With  honest  rule  his  body  to  mayntayne

He  is  a  fole  spendynge  his  good  in  vayne

But  they  on  whome  he  so  his  good  doth  spende

Shall  more  to  his  money,  than  to  his  loue  intende

Wherot  precedyth  pouerty  and  contempt
Scorne  and  derisyon  nede  and  aduersyte
And  from  all  honour  these  folys  ar  exempt
That  thus  wast  theyr  good  in  prodygalyte
For  who  that  is  of  small  power  and  degre
And  with  his  betters  wyll  in  expence  stryue
Without  all  dout  that  Fole  shall  neuer  thryue

And  also  folys  that  stryueth  in  the  lawe
Agaynst  an  estate  them  passynge  in  ryches
Shall  theyr  owne  flesshe  vnto  the  bonys  gnawe
Or  he  that  is  voyde  of  reason  and  wytles
And  dare  presume  by  his  presumptuousnes
Agaynst  a  man  of  hye  wysdome  and  lore
He  shall  byde  a  fole,  euen  as  he  was  before.

Ye  folys  voyde  of  wysdome  and  scyence
That  wyll  presume  with  cunnynge  men  to  stryue
And  ye  feble  Folys  that  by  your  insolence
Thynke  you  more  stronge  than  any  man  a  lyue
And  ye  pore  Folys  whiche  labour  to  contryue
Mean  to  ouercome  suche  as  better  ar  than  ye
I  you  ensure  that  ye  shalt  neuer  thryue
But  outher  be  brought  to  shame  orpouerte


3  2  Of  hym  that  wyll  nat  se  his  folysshenes.


And  thou  that  art  a  courter  or  a  knaue

Or  a  bonde  chorle,  and  all  thy  hole  lynage

Thynke  well  thou  shalt  but  small  profyte  haue

To  stryue  with  thy  mayster  come  of  hye  parage

I  fynde  it  moste  for  mannys  auauntage

Within  his  bondes  his  body  to  preserue

And  nat  in  riches,  strength  wysdome  nor  langage

To  stryue  agaynst  the  streme,  lyst  he  in  swymmynge  sterue


folys  that  vnderstonde  nat  game  and
can  no  thynge  take  in  sport,  and  yet
intermyt  them  with  Folys.


Who  that  with  Folys  or  children  wyll  play
Or  meddyll  with  suche  as  wyt  and  reason  want
He  ought  them  to  suffer  folowynge  theyr  way
And  them  endure,  as  for  that  small  instant
Lyst  for  his  maners  mad  and  ignorant
I  call  hym  hyther  to  gyde  the  helme  and  sayle
If  the  shyp  brake,  the  les  is  his  auayle


34  Of  fib  ^  ^^^^  vnderstoncle  imt  game

That  man  shall  one  be  of  our  folysshe  sort
Whiche  without  wysdome  and  aduysement
Wyll  besely  with  folys  and  children  sport
And  can  nat  them  indure  with  meke  intent
And  mad  he  is  that  wyll  in  mynde  assent
To  haue  ado  or  accompany  with  boyes
And  can  nat  suffer  theyr  folysshnes  and  toyes

He  is  a  Fole  also,  that  hath  great  game

Whan  childe  or  dronkard  blamyth  one  absent

If  he  can  nat  also  indure  the  same

And  quenche  madnes  with  wordes  pacyent

For  without  dout  who  that  wyll  be  present

And  conuersaunt  with  caytyfs  in  theyr  bourdes

Or  els  with  children,  must  suffer  theyr  lewde  wordes

Yet  some  ar  besy  on  euery  man  to  rayle
With  voyde  wordes,  and  talys  mad  and  vayne
With  scornes  and  mockes  behynde  eche  mannys  tayle
And  yet  disdayneth  to  abyde  the  same  agayne
Theyr  madnes  doth  theyr  myndes  so  constrayne
That  with  euery  Fole  they  gladly  haue  to  do
And  can  nat  suffer  what  doth  belonge  therto

He  that  wyll  labour  a  beast  to  hunt  or  chace
With  his  pleasour  must  take  payne  and  besynes
Folowynge  the  same  about  from  place  to  place
• His  lynes,  colers,  and  lesshes  he  must  dres-
And  often  also  abyde,  full  great  hardnes
So  he  that  wyll  by  yll  worde  man  ouerturne
Must  holde  hym  sure,  lyst  he  vnwarly  spurne


ana  can  no  thynge  take  in  sport.

One  worde  in  sporte  spokyn,  another  lyke  requyrys

Rayle  with  a  Fole,  or  childe  that  can  nat  gyde

Hym  selfe  by  reason,  thy  sportis  lyke,  desyres

He  is  a  fole  whiche  can  it  nat  abyde

For  lyke  wyll  haue  lyke,  if  thou  be  by  the  syde

Or  in  the  company  of  Fole  or  innocent

To  suffer  theyr  foly  thou  moste  be  pacyent

A  fole  hastely  rendreth  yll  for  yll

And  oft  for  good,  and  loue  most  profytable

They  render  hatered  malyce  and  yll  wyll

Whiche  is  a  thynge  wronge  and  intollerable

Yet  this  nature  in  folys  abydeth  stable

That  seldome  or  neuer,  they  goodnes  pay  agayne

They  other  scorne,  of  scornys  hauynge  disdayne

With  suche  Folys  none  wyse  ought  intermyt
But  coueyt  amonge  wyse  men  to  be  conuersaunt
And  so  they  do,  but  Folys  voyde  of  wyt
Takyth  theyr  rowme  amonge  other  ignoraunt
The  company  of  folys  to  folys  is  pleasaunt
For  it  is  a  prouerbe,  and  an  olde  sayd  sawe
That  in  euery  place  lyke  to  lyke  wyll  drawe

A  precious  stone  wrappyd  in  myre  and  fen
Lesyth  his  colour  and  semyth  nat  of  pryce
Right  so  one  good,  amonge  vnthrifty  men
Distayneth  his  name,  with  theyr  yll  name  and  vyce
And  doth  to  hym  selfe  great  wronge  and  preiudice
For  eche  man  is  reputyd  of  the  same  sort
As  is  the  company  wherto  he  doth  resort


36 Offolys  that  vjiderstajide  nat  game


Wherfore  me  thynke  it  best,  for  euery  creature
To  auoyde  the  bandes  and  mad  enormyte
Of  suche  Folys  whiche  can  no  man  endure
By  theyr  blynde  pryde  and  desyre  of  dignyte
They  coueyt  to  gouerne  both  hye  and  lowe  degre
No  dolour  troubleth  a  Folys  mynde  so  sore
As  whan  a  man  of  reason  is  set  hym  before

If  twenty  men  be  in  one  company

Som  of  hye  byrth,  some  wyse,  some  lyberall

If  one  fole  be  amonge  them  certaynly

He  thynkes  hym  selfe  moche  wyser  than  they  all

Thus  shortly  to  speke,  a  folysshe  man  rural!

If  he  a  churle,  a  fole  and  vnthrift  be

The  more  he  lokyth  to  come  to  hye  degre

Suche  folys  promotyd  haue  no  pacience

To  suffer  theyr  folawes,  so  hye  set  is  theyr  mynde

And  to  theyr  betters  they  haue  no  reuerence

They  can  nat  them  endure,  they  ar  so  blynde

So  by  experience  as  we  often  fynde

A  fole  thoughe  he  neyther  haue  wysdome  nor  cunnynge

Yet  thynketh  hym  selfe  aboue  all  worldly  thynge

Hereof  the  Bybyll  examples  doth  expres

Howe  the  fals  Aman  (howe  belt  he  was  vnwyse)

Had  dyuers  statis  of  wysdome  and  riches

To  hym  obeynge,  and  yet  dyd  them  despyse

But  for  that  Mardocheus  wolde  nat  ryse

Out  of  his  place  to  do  to  hym  honour

His  mynde  was  fyllyd  with  malyce  and  dolour


and  can  no  thynge  take  in  sport.  3

In  so  moche  that  he  wolde  haue  had  hym  slayne
For  this  small  faut,  but  god  gaue  remedy
To  mardocheus  for  to  escape  his  trayne
And  so  fals  Aman  his  treason  dyd  abye
And  hanged  was,  for  Mardocheus  worthely
And  that  before  Mardocheus  face  and  iyene
By  the  persuasion  of  Hester  noble  quene

But  of  this  proces  to  drawe  vnto  conclusyon
What  man  that  intendeth  for  to  lyue  quyetly
And  wyse  to  be  callyd  without  abusion
Let  hym  auoyde  mad  and  folysshe  company
But  if  he  nedys  wyll  vnto  suche  aply
Let  hym  mekely  endure  theyr  game  and  sport
Els  shall  he  be  one  of  this  my  folysshe  sort.

Thenuoy  of  Barklay.
O  wyse  man  thou  ought  lewde  company  auoyde
For  it  is  dayly  prouyd  by  experyence
That  with  a  thynge  corrupt,  a  sounde  thynge  is  distroyed
Right  so  good  men  oft  fall  in  to  great  offence
And  iugyd  yll,  though  they  gyde  them  by  prudence
And  that  for  hauntynge  of  company  diffamyd
For  thoughe  one  be  gyuen  to  godly  innocence
As  is  his  company  right  so  shall  he  be  namyd.


Of  them  that  wylfully  offende  nat  takynge
hede  to  the  ende,  and  hurtyth  euery
man  nat  thynkynge  to  haue  theyr
malyce  rendryd  agayne.


That  fole  castyth  a  dart  into  the  ayre

And  gasyth  after  it  without  aduysement

Of  the  fallynge  downe  therof  nat  beynge  ware

Whiche  labouryth  with  dedys  and  wordes  vyolent

To  get  many  foes  hurtynge  the  innocent

And  lokyth  nat  agayne  lyke  to  endure

One  yll  turne  requyreth,  another  be  thou  sure


Of  them  that  wy  fully  offende.


Here  touche  I  folys,  and  men  without  counsell
Whiche  puttyth  many  vnto  besynes  and  payne
And  them  sore  greuyth  by  theyr  dedys  cruell
Nat  thynkynge  to  be  seruyd  with  the  same  agayne
That  fole  forsoth  is  of  a  frantyke  brayne
Whiche  other  men  wyll  hurt  rebuke  and  blame
And  wyll  nat  suffer  of  them  agayne  the  same

Consyder  man,  oft  tyme  within  thy  mynde

The  wronge  that  thou  woldest  do  to  thy  neyghbour

"Whether  thou  myght  in  thy  herte  paciently  fynde

The  same  to  suffer  of  hym  without  rancour

Malyce  or  yll  wyll,  wrath  or  displeasour

For  thou  oughtest  nat  do  to  any  creature

That  thynge  whiche  thou  of  hym  wolde  nat  endure

He  that  wyll  other  men  thurst  by  violence

In  to  a  sak  by  extorcion  and  wronge

Must  in  lyke  maner  arme  hym  with  pacyence

And  suffer  some  blowys  nowe  and  than  amonge

To  one  yll  turne  another  doth  belonge

He  that  is  besy  euery  man  to  displeas

Or  to  indamage  shall  neuer  lyue  in  eas

One  namyd  Peryllus  a  workman  excellent
A  bull  of  bras  forgyd  by  his  subtylte
Wherin  a  Tyrant  myght  put  men  to  tourment
Deuysynge  deth  of  moste  payne  and  cruelte
But  this  workman  to  proue  his  faculte
Was  by  that  Tyrant  put  to  deth  in  lyke  wyse
As  he  for  other  dyd  ordayne  and  deuyse


40  Of  them  that  wy fully  amende


O  vnwyse  Fole  whome  madnes  doth  abuse
Howe  darest  thou  be  so  hardy  for  to  do
That  to  another  whiche  thy  selfe  wolde  refuse
Of  hym  to  be  done,  to  the,  yet  some  do  so
Makynge  a  pyt  to  others  hurte  and  wo
Wherin  hymselfe  is  destroyed  at  the  last
And  some  in  theyr  owne  snarys  ar  taken  fast

So  cursyd  Aman  in  lyke  wyse  dyd  ordayne
For  Mardocheus  a  nianer  of  tourment
Wheron  he  hoped  to  haue  hangyd  hym  in  payne
His  lyfe  consumynge  with  suche  punysshement
But  the  ende  happened  nat  after  his  intent
For  at  the  last  Aman  hym  selfe  with  care
Was  hangyd  vp,  and  that  in  his  owne  snare

On  wronge  and  malyce  yll  wyll  and  iniury
All  moste  all  men  hath  nowe  set  iheyr  intent
Wherfore  let  wyse  men  for  them  fynde  remedy
For  thoughe  that  it  be  a  thynge  conuenyent
To  trust  to  other,  yet  be  thou  prouydent
Of  mannys  gyle  falshode  and  sotelte
So  mayst  thou  escape  oft  tymes,  aduersyte

Suche  men  as  put  to  moche  confydence

In  other  vnknowen,  often  great  domage  wyn

Suffrynge  losse  and  hurt  by  theyr  owne  neglygence

For  whan  thou  lokest  vpon  the  vtter  skyn

Thou  knowyst  full  lytell  what  trust  is  within

For  oft  vnder  flowres  lurketh  the  serpent

So  paynted  wordes  hydeth  a  fals  intent


nat  takynge  hede  to  the  encle.  4 1


Be  nat  a  gest  thou  man  who  euer  thou  art

To  suche  as  louynge  outwarde  thou  seest  apere

Malyciously  within,  and  of  enuyous  hart

He  byddeth  the  ete  and  drynke,  and  make  good  chere

With  loue  as  farre  as  thou  canst  se  or  here.

But  whan  suche  traytours  most  swetly  on  the  smyle

Than  ar  they  besyest  the  falsely  to  begyle

Vnder  fayre  wordes  pleasaunt  and  lyberall
And  smylynges  fals  and  disceyuable
Suche  beryth  venym  to  poyson  the  withall
Auoyde  suche  men :  thou  wyse  man  and  laudable
Theyr  dedes  ar  so  fals  and  so  abhomynable
That  whan  thou  gyuyst  vnto  them  moste  credence
They  shall  the  brynge  to  moste  inconuenyence

Ye :  oft  he  lawygheth  as  he  were  true  and  gode

Grauntynge  thy  wordes  what  euer  thynge  thou  say

Whiche  in  his  mynde :  wolde  fayne  se  thy  herte  blode

And  of  thy  secrete  counsell  the  bewray

Beware  of  suche  men  as  moche  as  thou  may

For  amonge  swete  herbys  oft  growyth  stynkynge  wedes

All  flaterynge  caytyfs  ar  nat  true  in  theyr  dedes

But  whan  these  caytyfes  hath  hurt  a  mannys  name

Or  done  hym  in  body  or  goodes  preiudice

They  thynke  he  ought  nat  to  render  them  the  same

Thoughe  it  may  be  done  by  lawe  and  by  iustyce

But  certaynly  who  that  hym  doth  exercyce

In  doynge  other  losse,  hurt,  or  greuaunce

Shall  lyue  a  fole  and  dye  by  some  myschaunce


42 Of  them  thai  wylfully  offende.


Thenuoy  of  Barclay  the  translatour.
O  men  malycious  fals  and  iniuryous
Whiche  set  your  myndes  fals  meanes  to  deuyse
To  hurte  your  neyghbours  by  malyce  odyous
And  thynke  nat  to  be  seruyd  in  lyke  wyse
Ye  ar  abusyd  therin  I  you  promyse
For  he  that  here  to  his  neyghbour  is  cruell
And  doth  hym  in  dede  or  worde,  hurt  or  despyce
Shall  outher  be  rewardyd  here,  or  els  in  hell.


Of  foles  without  prouysion  :  that  prouyde
nought  in  the  somer  to  lyue  by  in  the
wynter  nor  in  youth  to  lyue  by  in
age.


Who  that  maketh  for  hymselfe  no  purueaunce.
Of  fruyt  and  corne  in  somer  season  clere.
Whan  of  the  same  is  store  and  habundaunce
Shal  after  lyue  in  hunger  all  the  yere
Sowkynge  his  fyngers  lyke  as  the  Bere  doth  here.
And  he  that  in  youth  wyl  nought  for  hym  proayde
In  age  must  the  paynes  of  pouertye  abyde.


44  fi^^^  without  prouys  ion.


Amonge  our  Folys  I  nomber  hym  for  one
Whiche  lyueth  ydylly  and  in  slewthfulnes
Makynge  in  the  somer  no  prouysion
To  auoyde  the  wynters,  payne  and  colde  hardnes
What  man  wyll  nat  curse  and  disprayse  his  madnes
Whiche  at  no  tyme  wyll  for  hym  self  prouyde
Of  sustenaunce,  in  nede  hym  selfe  to  gyde

He  that  begynneth  without  aduysement

Can  nat  prouyde  that  thynge  that  is  to  come

Nor  scantly  that  whiche  must  be  done  present

Thus  ar  his  dedys  done  all  without  wysedome

Of  this  company  yet  fynde  I  other  some

Whiche  nought  wyll  saue  them  self  to  fynde  with  all

But  all  out  wastyth,  by  Ryot  prodygall

These  folys  of  theyr  myndes  ar  so  blynde

That  nought  they  saue  to  theyr  owne  vtylyte

On  wyse  prouysion  they  set  no  thynge  theyr  mynde

But  if  they  be  dryuen  by  extreme  necessyte

As  hunger  thrist  colde,  or  other  aduersyte

So  oft  whan  suche  ar  vexed  with  moste  nede

The  wolde  prouyde,  but  than  they  can  nat  spede

A  fole  of  propertye  that  is  neglygent

For  thynge  to  come  prouydeth  nought  atall

But  on  one  daye  settyth  all  his  intent

So  in  that  space  if  any  nede  do  fall

To  hym.  he  shall  vpon  his  neyghbour  call

For  helpe  and  socour,  and  sore  to  hym  complayne

And  aske  relefe  whiche  he  shall  nat  obtayne


Ofjoles  without  prouyston.  45


Whan  suche  folys  haue  theyr  wombes  full
They  force  no  more,  ne  take  no  farther  thought
Theyr  vayne  myndes  to  farther  thynges  is  dull
Saue  on  that  whiche  from  hande  to  mouth  is  brought
But  he  is  wyse,  and  of  reason  wantyth  nought
Whiche  here  hym  gydeth  by  vertue  and  wysdome
And  so  prouydeth  for  the  tyme  to  come

Wherby  his  wyfe,  his  children  and  ofsprynke
May  without  care  outher  besynes  or  payne
With  honestye  haue  theyr  fode  and  theyr  lyuynge
Without  occasion  theyr  good  name  to  distayne
1  count  hym  wyse  that  thus  doth  set  his  brayne
And  in  the  Somer  can  make  suche  purueaunce
Wherby  all  his  may  haue  theyr  sustenaunce

And  that  in  wynter,  and  the  hardest  of  the  yere

But  hym  I  count  moche  folysshe  and  vnwyse

And  voyde  of  reason,  whiche  makyth  styll  good  chere

And  by  no  men  wyll  the  tyme  to  come  aduyse

But  folys  folowe  moste  comonly  this  gyse

To  slepe  all  Somer  whan  the  season  is  moste  clere

And  labour  in  the  hardest  season  of  the  yere

Suche  no  thynge  labour,  ne  to  no  worke  intende
But  to  ydylnes,  a  vyce  yll  and  damnable
That  whiche  is  gotten  vnwysely  thus  they  spende
So  that  whan  wynter  comys  they  ar  nat  able
To  haue  one  lofe  of  brede  vpon  theyr  table
Nor  other  thynge  theyr  hunger  to  asswage
An  ydell  man  is  worthy  suche  wage


^oles  without  prouysion.


In  wynter  he  abydeth  a  lyfe  myserable
Whiche  in  the  Somer  prouydyd  hath  no  thynge
That  to  his  vse  is  nede  and  profytable
AVho  that  in  July  whyle  Phebus  is  shynynge
About  his  hay  is  nat  besy  labourynge
And  other  thynges  whiche  ar  for  his  auayle
Shall  in  the  wynter  his  negligence  bewayle

And  who  that  can  nat  hym  selfe  wysely  prouyde
Of  wode  and  vytayle  and  other  sustenaunce
Shall  in  the  wynter  nat  knowe  where  to  abyde
For  colde  and  hunger  with  other  lyke  greuaunce
Lerne  man  of  the  symple  Emet  purueaunce
Whiche  gathers  and  puruays  euery  thynge  in  season
Shame  is  to  man  of  beste  to  lerne  reason

For  euery  thynge  god  hath  a  tyme  puruayde
And  gyuen  reason  to  man  hym  selfe  to  gyde
By  good  prouysion,  if  that  his  mynde  be  layde
Vnto  the  same,  and  sleuth  to  set  asyde
But  that  yonge  man  that  wyll  in  age  abyde
Without  prouysion,  wherby  he  myght  hym  fede
Shall  worthely  in  his  age  dye  for  nede

Of  that  Fole  who  shall  haue  compassion
Whiche  by  his  Foly,  great  slouth  and  neglygence
Vpon  hym  selfe  intendyth  to  haue  none
But  all  out  wastyth  by  immoderate  expence
So  to  conclude  in  brefe  and  short  sentence
That  fole  hath  nat  the  way  hym  selfe  to  gyde
Whiche  in  due  season  can  nat  eche  thynge  prouyde


Offoles  without  prouysion,  47


Thenuoy  of  Barclay.
O  blynde  man  vnwyse,  wastynge  and  neclygent
Lerne  of  the  Emet  to  labour  craftely
And  in  thy  youth  to  be  so  dylygent
Wherby  in  age,  thou  lyue  mayst  easely
For  he  that  wyll  nat  his  mynde  therto  aply
In  youth  and  Somer  to  labour  without  fere
In  age  and  wynter  shall  lyue  in  penury
And  sowke  his  clawys  for  hanger  lyke  the  here.


great  stryuers  in  the  lawe  for  thynges
of  nought.


He  is  a  fole,  whether  it  be  man  or  wyfe
Whiche  hym  delyteth  in  iugement  and  lawe
And  euer  contendyth  in  discorde  and  in  stryfe
In  small  tryfyls,  and  scantly  worth  a  srrawe
Suche,  theyr  owne  flesshe  vnto  the  bonys  gnawe
And  labour  by  theyr  sotelty  and  gyle
To  blynde  iustyce,  and  the  lawes  to  defyle.


■reat  stryiiers  in  the  law.  49

A  cause  conuenyent  doth  me  bynde  and  constrayne
To  blame  mo  Folys :  and  that  in  myghty  nomber
Whiche  I  haue  suffred  tyll  this  tyme  to  remayne
To  se  if  they  wolde  waken  from  theyr  slomber
Suche  ar  mad  Folys  whiche  other  men  inconber
With  besy  pledynge,  wherby  them  selfe  ar  brought
By  longe  contynuaunce  vnto  the  poynt  of  nought

For  small  occasion  for  lytell  thynge  or  nought
Vnwyse  men  stryue  deuysynge  falshode  and  gyle
Nowe  euery  fole  hath  set  his  mynde  and  thought
To  seke  the  extreme  of  lawe,  but  though  they  smyle
At  the  begynnynge,  after  within  a  whyle
Theyr  laughynge  shall  turne  to  sorowe  and  damage
And  onely  the  lawyers  catchyth  the  auauntage

Yet  ar  these  folys  ioyous  in  theyr  mynde

They  norysshe  stryfe  without  ende,  them  amonge

And  some  by  falshode  can  crafty  meanes  fynde

By  fals  delayes  theyr  mater  to  prolonge

Suche  Folys  drawyth  the  lawe  thus  wyse  a  longe

To  that  intent  that  by  rightwyse  iugement

Transgressours  sholde  nat  haue  worthy  punysshement

These  folys  that  thus  theyr  maters  doth  diffarre

Shall  in  that  space  theyr  owne  goode  waste  and  spende

To  that  purpose  theyr  neyghbour  also  to  marre

So  ar  they  both  made  beggers  at  the  ende

Than  must  they  to  some  agrement  condiscende

Theyr  cause  and  mater  discussed  neuer  the  more

O  mad  Folys  so  sholde  they  haue  done  before

VOL.  II.  D


50  Of  great  stry  tiers  in  the  law


Some  suffer  them  selfe  for  defaut  of  aparaunce
To  be  outlawyd,  and  other  some  suspendyd
Out  of  the  Churche  for  hys  mysgouernaunce
And  yet  nought  caryth,  therfro  to  be  defendyd
Howe  beit  they  myght :  and  haue  theyr  mater  endyd
Suche  assay  by  falshode  to  prouoke  the  lawe
And  than  it  fle.  and  them  therfro  withdrawe

But  suche  Folys  that  thus  so  besely

Pursue  the  lawe,  with  stryfe  and  brawlynge  vayne

Consyder  nat  that  they  ren  in  great  enuy

Amonge  theyr  neyghbours  whiche  shall  them  pay  agayn«

With  theyr  owne  malyce  and  gyle  to  theyr  great  payne

But  in  the  mean  space  the  lawyers  a  made  ryche

Leuynge  these  Folys  and  theyr  mater  in  the  dyche

Thou  besy  fole  intende  vnto  this  clause

That  euery  lawyer  shall  gyue  more  aduertence

To  mony  and  gyftis  than  vnto  thy  cause

For  after  he  hath  set  thy  wordes  and  sentence

In  his  fat  boke,  fyllyd  with  offence

And  there  pryckyd  with  his  couetous  pen

Thou  neuer  shalt  thryue  whyle  thy  name  is  therin

Yet  thou  vnwysely  art  redy  to  intende

Vnto  thy  cause,  and  though  it  fortune  be

Skant  worth  a  grote,  yet  gladly  wylt  thou  spende

Thy  hole  good  theron  so  sekynge  pouerte

For  ho  we  beit  that  the  lawes  ought  be  fre

Yet  sergeaunt  at  turney  promoter  Juge  or  scribe

Wyll  nat  fele  thy  mater  without  a  preuy  brybe


for  thynges  of  nought.


5^


Therfore  thou  acloyest  with  money  or  rewarde
The  kepars  of  the  lawe  to  make  them  to  the  bounde
In  so  moche  that  thoughe  thy  mater  be  but  harde
Yet  money  shall  make  it  haue  moche  better  sounde
And  to  be  playne  that  case  hath  euer  best  grounde
That  is  best  anoyntyd  with  maystershyp  and  golde
Thoughe  it  be  false  it  strongly  is  vpholde

And  without  dout  the  lawyers  dylygence
Is  in  his  pledynge  euer  moste  substancyall
Whan  of  thy  purse  he  hath  had  experyence
And  knowyth  thy  hande  to  hym  fre  and  lyberall
Wherfore  we  often  vnto  our  mater  call
From  far  places  men  of  greatest  disceyt
And  fayrest  wordes  to  prolonge  our  debate

And  with  theyr  fayre  and  paynted  eloquence

To  glose  our  mater  in  wordes  of  no  substaunce

So  that  Juge  that  by  way  of  innocence

Gydeth  the  lawe  in  Just  and  right  balaunce

Of  suche  pleders  is  led  the  blynde  mannys  daunce

So  that  they  playnly  proue  before  his  syght

The  right  to  be  wronge,  and  the  wronge  to  be  right.

Thenuoy  of  Barklay.

0  men  malycious  thus  besy  in  the  lawe

For  euery  mater  and  thynge  of  nought  to  stryue

1  reade  you  your  myndes  from  suche  stryfe  withdrawe
And  from  suche  falshode  as  ye  oft  contryue


5  2 Of  great  stryuers  in  the  law.

Or  I  ensure  you  ye  shall  neuer  thryue
But  wast  your  goodes  therwith  to  get  enuy
Lyuynge  in  discorde  whyle  ye  ar  a  lyue
And  at  the  ende  your  wylfulnes  defye

Alas  mad  Fole,  and  man  vnmerciable
What  menest  thou  thy  neyghbour  to  oppresse
And  for  thynge  of  nought  to  be  so  vengeable
To  put  both  thy  self  and  hym  to  besynes
Wastynge  your  goodes  about  vnhappynes
Leue  man  thy  malyce  and  mytygate  thy  mynde
For  who  that  can  lyue  in  peas  and  quyetnes
Shall  welth  and  rest  both  loue  and  riches  fynde

Where  as  that  Fole  that  is  alway  inclynde

To  stryfe  and  pledynge  for  thynge  of  none  auayle

And  none  occasion :  labours  the  lawe  to  blynde

Becomynge  a  begger  at  last  for  his  trauayle

And  at  the  laste  shall  euery  man  assayle

This  Fole  with  malyce,  for  his  accostomyd  stryfe

So  that  his  foly  he  shall  mone  and  bewayle

And  so  be  wery  of  his  wretchyd  lyfe.


Of  foles  abhomynable  in  fowle  wordes
of  rybawdry.


The  lothsome  wordes  that  nowe  adayes  we  vse
And  shamefull  commonynge,  full  of  wantonnes
Ar  wont  good  maners  to  infect  and  abuse
Indusynge  yll  maners,  yll  lyfe  and  viciousnes
With  countenaunces  and  dedes  of  vnhappynes
For  as  the  wyse  man  sayth  in  a  parable
Fowle  wordes  infectyth  maners  commendable


54  Q/" fries  abhomynable  m


In  our  tyme  nowf  both  waman  childe  and  man
Without  nomber  worshyp  with  humbyll  reuerence
The  festis  abhomynable  of  vyle  grobyan
With  all  theyr  myght  honour  and  theyr  dylygence
Compassynge  his  auters  with  lawdes  and  insence
With  wordes  and  vsys,  Fowle  and  abhomynable
Suche  men  myscheuous  to  hym  ar  acceptable

To  his  vyle  temple  renneth  yonge  and  o!de
Man,  woman,  mayden,  and  with  them  many  a  childe
And  bere  with  them  insence  as  I  before  haue  tolde
Worshyppynge  his  festis  with  theyr  langage  defylde
And  wordes  from  whiche  all  goodnes  is  exylyd
And  with  vyle  langage  of  rybawdry  the  grounde
Whose  yl  example  doth  sympyll  youth  confounde

Shamefastnes  is  exylyd  and  all  his  hole  lynage
And  in  his  place  is  vylenes  byd  behynde
Vngoodly  maners,  vngoodlyer  langage
Whiche  ar  the  clene  destruccion  of  mankynde
Lo  here  a  fole,  that  with  suche  vyce  is  blynde
A  vyle  swyne,  and  foule  ledyth  by  the  ere
His  bestely  lyfe  of  this  vyle  beste  to  lere

These  Folys  also  ar  in  suche  an  outrage

To  rynge  the  bell  of  theyr  mad  rybaudry

That  men  may  knowe  theyr  lyfe  by  theyr  langage

Wherby  they  vtter  theyr  lewdnes  openly

Thus  all  the  Shyppes  of  our  folysshe  company

Ar  led  by  the  wawes  of  this  see  mundayne

By  the  foule  swyne  folowynge  hir  lyfe  and  trayne


fozvie  worcks  of  rybazvdry.


Lyst  our  Folys  of  theyr  right  cours  myght  fayle
Or  by  great  charge  brake  or  els  be  drowned
The  swyne  of  the  se  them  draweth  at  hir  tayle
And  them  nat  suffreth  to  synke  or  stryke  on  grounde
But  if  all  the  Folys  that  of  this  sort  ar  founde
Sholde  drynke  no  ale  nor  wyne  durynge  this  yere
We  nedyd  nat  to  fere,  that  they  sholde  be  moche  der

But  these  Folys  the  trouth  to  determyne
Bycau^e  the  sowe  so  doth  hir  pygges  multyply
Therfore  they  folowe  the  maners  of  the  swyne
In  rybawde  wordes  full  of  shame  and  vylany
Suche  maners  in  this  tyme  doth  men  best  magnyfy
And  them  promotyth  moche  rather  than  wysedome
O  where  ar  honesty  and  shamefastnes  become

They  ar  exyled  and  haue  no  rowme  nor  place
In  erth  at  this  season  with  hye  nor  lowe  dere
But  suche  as  vse  rybawde  wordes  voyde  of  grace
Ar  nowe  promotyd  sonest  to  dignyte
And  howe  be  it  that  they  racche  vnworthy  be
Who  that  of  his  langage  is  moste  obhomynable
Is  taken  in  the  court  as  man  moste  commendable

The  hogge  promotyd  out  of  the  myre  and  dust
Vyle  and  vngoodly  of  body  and  vsage
Promotyth  and  admyttyth  men  after  his  lust
The  vylest  settynge  moste  hye  vpon  his  stage
And  some  ar  so  past  shame  in  theyr  langage
So  fowle  and  lothly,  that  they  moste  comenly
Haue  all  theyr  wordes  in  viciouse  rybawdry


5  6  Of  fowk  words  of  rybawdry.

So  that  if  mad  Horestes  myght  them  se

Hauynge  respect  vnto  theyr  lothlynes

He  myght  well  say  they  were  more  mad  than  he

And  wonder  on  theyr  langage  full  of  viciousnes

For  all  theyr  delyte  is  in  delyciousnes

Glotony  and  drynke,  but  he  hath  gayest  name

Whiche  rybawde  wordes  can  mengle  with  the  same

Thus  who  that  offreth  the  Fende  suche  sacrafyce
With  rybawde  wordes,  foule  and  abhomynable
Gyuynge  occasion  to  youth  to  fall  to  vyce
Suche  in  his  dedes  is  greatly  reprouable
And  shall  as  a  fowle  both  pore  and  myserable
Shamefully  lyue  without  moche  better  ende
Before  his  deth  if  he  hym  nat  amende.

Thenuoy  of  Barklay.
Man  vse  thy  tunge  in  myrth  and  honeste
And  laude  thy  maker  therwith  with  reuerence
To  that  intent  god  gaue  it  vnto  the
And  nat  to  vse  it  is  incouenyence
In  rybawde  wordes  is  great  synne  and  offence
And  to  youth  great  example,  and  damage
But  thoughe  thou  be  clene  of  dede  and  conscience
Yet  men  shall  the  Juge  after  thy  langage.


Of  the  abusion  of  the  spiritualte.


Here  must  I  yet  another  barge  ordayne

For  many  folys  of  the  spiritualte

Whiche  to  the  intent  to  auoyde  labour  and  payne

In  theyr  meane  youth  take  on  them  this  degre

But  after  whan  they  a  whyle  prestis  haue  be

To  haue  forsaken  the  vvorlde  they  repent

Where  firste  they  sholde  better  haue  prouyd  theyr  intent


5  8 Of  the  abusion  of  the  Spiritiia/te.


Yet  somwhal  here  remayneth  of  my  charge
Whiche  must  be  touchyd  and  here  of  very  right
Amonge  our  Folys  haue  a  sympyll  barge
And  that  is  this,  As  moche  as  I  haue  insyght
Euery  man  laboures  nowe  with  all  theyr  myght.
Vnto  the  order  of  presthode  to  promote
His  Sonne  :  howe  belt  he  be  a  very  sote

If  he  be  folysshe  or  of  his  wyt  vnstable

Mysshapyn  of  his  face,  his  handes  or  his  fete

And  for  no  besynes  worldly  profitable

For  the  holy  Churche  than  thynke  they  hym  most  mete

And  so  thou  rurall  churle,  a  man  may  wete

Thou  woldest  nat  thy  sone  haue  preste  for  this  intent

To  serue  and  to  pleas  our  lorde  omnypotent

But  to  the  intent  to  lyue  in  eas  and  rest
And  to  auoyde  all  worldly  besynes
And  in  his  lust  to  fede  hym  with  the  best
Contynuynge  in  vyce,  and  moche  vnhappynes
Suche  Folys  haue  theyr  myndes  on  ryches
On  cursyd  lucre  pleasour  ioy  and  welth
Carynge  nought  at  all  for  theyr  soulys  helth

They  care  nought  for  wysdome  vertue  nor  doctryne
Cursyd  raony  troubleth  the  goodly  sacryfyce
And  to  the  same  theyr  mynde  they  so  inclyne
That  it  them  ledyth  to  eche  vnhappy  vyce
And  yet  they  thynke  them  self  to  exercyse
By  way  of  wysdome  and  gouernaunce  laudable
Thoughe  they  be  worthy  a  bagpype  and  a  bable


Of  the  abiision  of  the  spiritualte.  59

The  order  of  presthode  is  troublyd  of  eche  fole
The  honour  of  religion  euery  where  decays
Suche  caytyfs  and  courters  that  neuer  were  at  scole
Ar  firste  promotyd  to  presthode  nowe  adays
O  Numa  Numa  thou  folowyd  nat  suche  wayes
In  thy  olde  Temples  suche  folys  to  consecrate
But  suche  as  were  wyse,  and  with  vertue  decorate

And  suche  as  had  in  cunnynge  be  brought  vp

Godly  of  maners  and  of  lyfe  laudable

But  nowe  biynde  Folys  nought  knowynge  saue  the  cup

Falshode  and  flatery  ar  brought  out  of  the  stable

Sreyght  to  the  auter,  and  without  any  fable

Mo  prestes  ar  made  than  lernyd  men  or  clerkes

As  it  aperyth  playne  by  theyr  folysshe  warkes

From  the  kechyn  to  the  quere  and  so  to  a  state
One  yester  day  a  courier  is  nowe  a  prest  become
And  than  haue  these  folys  theyr  myndes  so  eleuate
That  they  disdayne  men  of  vertue  and  wysdome
But  if  they  haue  of  golde  a  myghty  some
They  thynke  them  abyll  a  man  to  make  or  marre
And  ar  so  presumptuous,  and  proude  as  Lucifarre

O  godly  order  ()  prestly  innocence

O  laudable  lyfe  wysdome  and  humylyte

Alas  why  haue  we  you  put  from  our  presence

And  you  exylyd  with  godly  grauyte

Our  lyfe  is  nowe  led  in  all  enormyte

And  all  by  our  foly  and  amasyd  ignoraunce

The  prelatis  ar  the  cause  of  this  mysgouernaunce


6o Of  the  abiislon  of  the  Spiritfialte.


O  cursyd  hunger  of  syluer  and  of  golde
For  your  loue  and  desyre  immoderate
To  folys  and  boyes  presthode  is  nowe  solde
And  to  men  myscheuous  fyllyd  with  debate
The  godly  honour  longynge  to  a  state
Replete  with  wysdome  cunnynge  and  grauyte
Ar  nowe  nat  ordred  right  as  they  ought  to  be

O  folys  cursyd,  o  men  moche  myserable

Say  say  what  Furour  your  myndes  doth  constrayne

To  this  holy  order  whiche  is  to  you  damnable

If  ye  in  vertue  your  lyues  nat  mentayne

Away  with  this  mynde  withdrawe  your  fete  agayne

Assay  your  lyfe  longe  before  or  ye  begyn

For  it  is  damnable  to  man  ensuynge  syn

Yet  certaynly  I  fynde  by  euydence
That  in  the  worlde  is  no  sort  of  degre
Whiche  is  more  gyuen  to  inconuenyence
Than  ar  suche  Folys  of  this  spiritualte
O  where  is  chastnes  and  dame  humylyte
Alas  they  ar  dede  and  nat  with  vs  aquayntyd
But  flaterynge  falshode  hath  our  facis  payntyd

Alas  our  order  is  fallen  in  eiTour
The  path  is  left  wherin  we  ought  vs  kepe
With  what  relygion  do  we  our  lorde  honour
Alas  the  Shepherd  is  lewder,  than  the  shepe
This  great  disorder  causyth  my  herte  to  wepe
Alas  what  lewdness  is  cloked  vnder  cowlys
Who  can  expresse  the  foly  of  these  folys


Of  the  abusion  of  the  Spiritualte. 6 1


O  holy  orders  of  Menkes  and  of  Freres

And  of  all  other  sortes  of  relygion

Your  straytnes  hath  decayed  of  late  yeres

The  true  and  perfite  rule  of  you  is  done

Fewe  kepyth  truly  theyr  right  profession

In  inwarde  vesture,  dyet,  worde,  or  dede

Theyr  chefe  stody  is  theyr  wretchyd  wombe  to  fede

O  holy  Benet  with  god  nowe  glorifyed
O  glorious  Austen,  o  Francis  decorate.
With  mekenes,  the  placis  that  ye  haue  edefyed
Ar  nowe  disordred  and  with  vyces  maculate
Enuy,  Pryde,  Malyce,  Glotony  and  debate
Ar  nowe  chefe  gyders  in  many  of  your  placis
Whiche  grace  and  vertue  vtterly  out  chasys

These  holy  faders  rehersyd  afore  by  name

Composed  rules  holy  and  laudable

For  men  religious,  to  lyue  after  the  same

Whiche  nowe  but  lytell  to  them  ar  agreable

But  in  theyr  lyfe  from  them  moche  varible

O  holy  Benet  Francis  and  Augustyne

Se  howe  your  children  despyseth  your  doctryne

But  to  speke  shortly  and  in  generall

We  fynde  but  fewe  suche  prestis  now  certayne

As  moyses  in  the  olde  lawe  first  of  all

To  serue  in  goddes  Temple  dyd  ordayne

But  vnwyse  men  rasshe,  and  mad  of  brayne

Becomyth  prestis  onely  for  couetyse

Gouernynge  the  Churche  in  a  disordred  wyse


62 Of  the  abusion  of  the  Spiriiualte.


Loke  who  that  nowe  of  mynde  is  eleuate
And  that  gentyhnan  that  mysshapen  and  wytles  is
Shall  be  made  a  preste,  and  after  a  prelate
To  gyde  the  Churche,  full  bacwardly  I  wys
But  suche  as  here  the  same  doth  gyde  amys
And  in  theyr  lyfe  them  selfe  nat  gydyth  well
May  after  theyr  deth  abyde  rewarde  in  hell

Thenuoy  of  Barclay  the  translatour.
Ye  that  ar  gyders  of  goddes  heritage
Be  in  your  dedes  to  hym  faythfull  and  true
Instruct  his  flocke  with  vertuous  langage
And  good  example  to  goodnes  and  vertue
Teche  them  the  wayes  of  lewdnes  to  eschewe
Rather  with  your  workes  than  payntyd  eloquence
For  the  rude  pepyll  moste  gladly  them  subdue
To  that  thynge  wherof  they  se  experyence

Expell  couetyse,  and  desyre  of  dignyte

Beware  of  Venus,  hir  dartis  are  damnable

Take  nat  on  you  the  order  and  degre

Of  presthode :  without  that  ye  be  somwhat  able

For  this  is  often  prouyd  without  fable

That  whan  the  Shepherde  is  folysshe  outher  blynde

Vnto  his  mayster  he  is  nat  profitable

Nor  to  his  flocke :  as  he  shall  after  fynde

The  greattest  rote  of  all  mysgouernaunce
That  nowe  is  vsyd  amonge  the  comonte
Procedith  of  folysshe  prestis  ignoraunce
Whiche  haue  no  wysdome  way  nor  faculte


Of  the  abusion  of  the  Spiritualte.


To  hele  such  shepe  as  they  playne  scabbyd  se
And  straynge  abrode  without  aduysement
They  let  them  alone :  so  spiritually  they  dye
Wherfore  the  kepar  is  worthy  of  punysshement

The  cause  why  so  many  prestis  lackyth  wyt
Is  in  you  bysshops,  if  I  durst  trouth  expresse
Whiche  nat  consyder  what  men  that  ye  admyt
Of  lyuynge  cunnynge  person  and  godlynes
But  who  so  euer  hym  self  therto  wyll  dresse
If  an  angell  be  his  brokar  to  the  scribe
He  is  admyttyd  howe  belt  he  be  wytles
Thus  solde  is  presthode  for  an  vnhappy  brybe


Of  the  prowde  and  vayne  bostynge
of  Folys.


My  hande  is  wery  my  wyt  is  dull  almoste

Fayne  wolde  I  rest  to  refresshe  my  wyt  agayne

But  a  folysshe  bande,  that  vse  them  selfe  to  host

Of  thynge  nat  done  by  them  in  wordes  vayne

To  wiyte  theyr  lewdnes  doth  me  bynde  and  constrayne

For  some  them  host  in  Phesyke  and  the  lawys

Or  in  dedes  of  war  :  howe  beit  they  ar  but  dawes


Of  prowcie  mid  vayne  bostynge.


Here  had  I  purpoysd  as  I  before  haue  sayde

To  haue  stynt  my  tonge  and  seased  for  a  whyle

Or  of  my  boke  here  a  conclusion  made

And  so  these  folys  no  farther  to  reuyle

But  than  aduysement  dyd  me  beholde  :  and  smyle

Saynge  that  my  purpose  was  intendyd  in  vayne

And  I  but  euen  in  the  myddes  of  my  payne

This  worde  to  me  was  halfe  a  di  scon  fort

For  ahnoste  wery  was  I  of  my  trauayle

With  that  of  Folys  I  sawe  a  myghty  sort

Of  dyuers  sortis  and  dyuers  aparayle

Some  rayde  as  knyghtes  in  whyte  harnes  and  mayle

And  other  as  Doctours,  and  gyders  of  some  scoles

But  euer  me  thought  that  they  sholde  be  but  folys

Some  other  Crowned  as  Poetis  lawreat

And  other  as  Doctours  expert  in  medycyne

Of  whose  maners  condicions  and  estate

And  stately  bostynge  of  strength  and  of  doctryne

Here  shall  1  wryte,  who  lyst  therto  inclyne

And  first  I  proue  that  euery  day  we  se

That  bostynge  Folys  leste  of  theyr  dedes  be

Some  is  a  knyght  hym  bostygne  of  his  londes
"With  his  gylt  sporys,  and  other  cognysance
Another  a  Doctour  and  the  lawys  vnderstondes
And  sene  all  the  scolys  of  Italy  and  Fraunce
The  knyght  hym  bostyth  and  boldely  dare  auaunce
Of  his  olde  lynage,  nobles  and  auncetry
Recountynge  the  discent  of  all  his  progeny


66


Of  the  prowde  and


Ye  in  so  moche  that  oft  he  hath  no  shame

Hym  selfe  of  the  stocke  of  the  Romayns  senatours

Or  of  some  kynges  progeny  to  name

Els  other  whiche  hath  ben  myghty  conquerours

And  yet  perchaunce  his  first  progenytours

Came  first  of  all  vnto  theyr  chiefe  estate

By  fals  extorcion,  oppression  or  discayte

Suche  folys  ar  proude  of  suche  noblenes

Whiche  they  haue  neuer  nether  cowde  obtayne

By  theyr  owne  vertue  theyr  strength  or  theyr  boldnes

But  in  the  gettynge  therof  for  to  be  playne

Noblenes  is  gotten  with  dilygence  and  payne

By  iustyce  vertue  strength  and  rightwysnes

And  nat  by  rygour  oppression  or  ryches

Say  folye  by  what  vertue  or  worthynes  ^

Hast  thou  deseruyd  this  renowe  specyall

Or  what  hast  thou  done  wherby  this  noblenes

Wheron  thou  bostest,  is  thus  vnto  the  fall  ■  .'  ■-

If  it  were  sought  I  trowe  no  thynge  atall

Saue  that  thou  lust  suche  folysshe  wordes  to  fayne

Wherby  thy  foly  and  pryde  aperyth  playne

Lo  sayth  a  fole  I  haue  be  longe  in  warre

In  straunge  countrees  and  far  beyonde  the  se

To  dyuers  Nacions  my  dedys  knowen  ar  ''

Both  spayne  and  Egypt  and  Fraunce  spekes  of  me

In  so  many  countrees  in  warrys  haue  I  be

That  all  the  people  of  Est,  west,  North  and  South

My  name  and  laudys  haue  onely  in  theyr  mouth


vayjie  bosty?ige  of  Folys.  67


But  yet  perchaunce  this  fole  that  thus  hym  bostis
Was  neuer  in  war  nor  out  of  his  owne  londe
Some  other  as  Doctours  come  from  strange  costis
Coueytynge  that  name  though  they  nought  vnderstonde.
With  euery  folysshe  thynge  they  ar  in  honde
Spekynge  vayne  wordes  without  wysdome  and  prudence
Yet  count  they  them  wyse  and  of  parfyte  eloquence

They  boste  theyr  stody  and  vant  of  theyr  cunnynge
With  stately  wordes  proude  loke  and  countenaunce
And  thoughe  suche  folys  lernyd  haue  no  thynge
With  theyr  solem  pryde  they  defende  theyr  ignoraunce
As  none  were  wyser  in  all  the  scolys  of  fraunce
If  they  can  reken  and  tell  eche  bokes  name
They  thynke  them  self  great  doctours  by  the  same

So  lede  they  foly  about  fast  by  the  hande
Bostynge  theyr  laudes  and  name  in  euery  place
Howbeit  theyr  owne  dedes  on  se  or  on  lande
Were  neuer  so  noble  suche  lawdes  to  purchace
But  to  be  short  proude  folys  ar  in  that  case
Rotyd  by  nature  that  them  they  moste  auaunt
In  that  wherin  they  ar  moste  ignoraunt

Thenuoy  of  Barclay.
Desyst  ye  folys  your  bostynge  wordes  and  vayne
Let  other  men  commende  your  honestye
And  godly  lyfe,  for  it  is  foly  playne
To  prayse  your  selfe  though  that  ye  worthy  be
Than  moche  gretter  shame  is  it  to  lye
Bostynge  that  thynge  the  whiche  ye  neuer  had
In  cunnynge  strength  lynage  or  degre
Of  all  bostynge  this  namely  is  moste  bad.


68  Of  prozvde  and  vayne  bostynge.


But  yet  men  olde  of  our  predecessours

In  theyr  olde  prouerbes  often  comprehende

That  he  that  is  araonge  shrewyd  neyghbours

May  his  owne  dedes  laufully  commende

Syns  his  yll  wyllers  wyll  nat  therto  intende

Also  I  fynde  that  there  thre  sortes  be

Of  people  lyuynge,  whiche  may  themselfe  defende

In  lesynge,  for  they  haue  auctoryte  to  lye

The  first  is  pylgrymes  that  hath  great  wonders  sene
In  strange  countres,  suche  may  say  what  they  wyll
Before  tho  men  that  hath  nat  also  ben
In  those  same  places,  and  hath  of  them  no  skyll
The  seconde  ar  men  aged  suche  may  bost  theyr  fyll
Without  repugnaunce. And  men  of  hye  degre
Before  theyr  seruauntis  may  playne  say  what  they  wyll
Yet  ar  they  nought  but  folys  if  they  lye


Of  carde  players  and  dysers.


The  damnable  lust  of  cardes  and  of  dyce

And  other  gamys  prohybyte  by  the  lawe

To  great  offencis  some  folys  doth  attyce

Yet  can  they  nat  them  self  therfro  withdrawe

They  count  theyr  labour  and  los  nat  worth  a  strawe

Carynge  nought  els :  therin  is  theyr  delyte

Tyll  thryft  and  helth  from  them  be  scapyd  quyte


Of  car  cle  players  and  dysers.


Lo  yet  agayne  of  Folys  asserablyth  mo

Vnto  my  shyppys  in  hope  of  auauntage

But  oft  it  hapnyth  or  they  depart  and  go

Theyr  lust  them  turneth  to  losse  and  great  damage

By  theyr  lewde  gamys  furour  and  outrage

Suche  ar  great  gamners  hauynge  small  substance

Whiche  often  fall  to  great  losse  and  myschance

Sayth  poetis  that  in  hell  ar  Furyes  thre

The  folys  to  punysshe  that  ar  sende  to  the  same

For  theyr  nat  lyuynge  here  in  equyte

It  nedyth  nat  them  here  to  count  by  name

The  fourth  Fury  is  encresyd  by  this  game

Whiche  (than  the  other)  is  more  furious  and  bad

For  here  in  erth  it  makyth  folys  mad

But  of  men  gyuen  vnto  this  furiousnes

Of  vnsure  game,  chefe  cause  of  stryfe  and  wo

And  moche  losse :  somwhat  I  shall  expresse

But  first  I  say  some  ar  so  gyuen  therto

That  where  so  euer  they  labour  ryde  or  go

If  they  be  onys  inflamyd  with  the  game

To  theyr  destruccion  theyr  mynde  is  on  the  same

In  hope  to  get  (that  they  haue  lost)  agayne
All  theyr  hole  pleasour  is  set  to  throwe  the  dyse
So  of  one  losse  oft  tymes  make  they  twayne
Wherby  oftyme  they  ren  in  preiudyce
And  get  occasion  of  theft  and  other  vyce
But  thre  dyse  rennynge  square  all  of  one  sort
To  suche  Folys  is  chefe  confort  ioy  and  sport


Of  carde  players  and  dysers.  7  i


Suche  folowe  this  game  stryuynge  nyght  and  day
Tournynge  the  dyse  somtyme  by  polecy
Them  falsly  settynge  assaynge  if  they  may
Some  vyle  auauntage  for  to  obtayne  therby
But  than  if  they  nat  set  them  craftely
Anone  begynneth  brawlynge  and  debate
Blasfemynge  and  othes  the  pot  about  the  pate

Exces  of  watchynge  doth  players  great  damage
And  in  that  space  oft  Venus  doth  them  blynde
Makynge  them  hoore  longe  or  they  come  to  age
Also  this  game  troubleth  oft  theyr  mynde
With  wrath  them  makynge  vnstable  as  the  wynde
Theyr  mynde  it  disclosyth  theyr  wyt  infextynge  to
It  also  theyr  reasons  troublyth  with  inwarde  wo

A  couetous  herte  by  game  is  kept  in  fere
And  styrred  to  yre  euer  whan  it  can  nat  wyn
Whiche  yre  vnto  the  stomake  doth  great  dere
Besyenge  the  mynde  pryuely  within
The  wyt  thus  troublyd  of  wysdome  is  but  thyn
And  so  the  more  that  wrath  doth  hym  inflame
The  more  backwarde  and  lewdly  goeth  his  game

These  folys  vngracious  of  theyr  gouernaunce
Care  for  no  thynge  :  theyr  lust  is  fyxed  fast
On  vnsure  fortune :  and  hir  vncertayne  chaunce
Whiche  them  promotyth  to  beggers  at  the  last
Watchynge  without  season  tyll  theyr  wyt  be  past
Ye  two  nyghtes  or  thre  as  folys  voyde  of  grace
No  thyrst  nor  hunger  can  moue  them  from  that  place


72  Of  carde  players  and  dysers.


But  in  the  mean  season  if  that  any  discorde
Amonge  them  fall,  the  woundes  of  god  ar  sworne
His  armys,  herte  and  bonys,  almoste  at  euery  worde
Thus  is  our  sauyour  amonge  these  caytyfs  torne
And  wordes  of  malyce  myscliefe  and  great  scorne ' '
They  throwe  to  god  renounsynge  oft  his  name
Whan  that  mysfortune  doth  bacwarde  gyde  theyr  game

These  folys  in  furour  vpon  our  lorde  thus  cry

As  if  he  caryd  for  theyr  myscheuous  game

Or  whan  they  for  theyr  lossys  ar  sory

That  god  aboue  sholde  also  be  the  same

But  whyle  these  Folys  blasfeme  thus  christes  name

The  wymen  and  maydes,  whiche  is  abhomynable

In  game  and  othes  to  men  ar  euen  semblable

There  is  almoste  no  maner  of  degre

Man,  childe,  woman,  pore  man,  or  estate,

Olde  or  yonge,  that  of  this  game  ar  fre

Nor  yet  the  clargy,  both  pore  preste  and  prelate

They  vse  the  same  almoste  after  one  rate

Whan  by  great  los  they  brought  ar  in  a  rage

Right  fewe  haue  reason  theyr  madnes  to  asswage

I  wyll  nat  say  but  it  is  commendable

For  recreasion  somtyme  to  vse  suche  sport

So  it  be  done  in  season  and  tyme  laudable

And  amonge  persons  mekely  of  one  sort  ^

And  nat  for  lucre,  but  pleasour  and  confort

Without  all  othes  and  with  perfyte  pacyence

In  losse  and  gayne,  in  suche  game  is  none  offence


Of  carde  players  and  dysers.


But  yet  the  Lucre  that  is  won  therby

Is  nat  allowed  ne  by  the  lawes  approbate

For  to  be  gotten  true  and  rightwysely

For  god  almyghty  doth  suche  yll  getters  hate

And  theyr  wronge  gamys  also,  causynge  debate

Enuy  and  murder,  and  euen  for  the  same  cause

They  ar  prohybyte  also  by  the  lawes

And  to  be  playne  great  inconuenyences
Procedyth  to  many  by  this  vnlawfuU  game
And  by  the  same  oft  youth  doth  sue  offences
To  his  destruccion  and  all  his  frendes  shame
For  whan  all  theyr  good  is  wastyd  by  the  same
Often  some  by  foly  fallyth  to  be  a  thefe
And  so  ende  in  shame  sorowe  and  myschefe

Thenuoy  of  Barclay.

Consyder  ye  players  the  great  losse  and  damage
That  comyth  of  this  game  vsyd  vnlaufully
Firste  of  it  comyth  no  maner  auauntage
But  if  one  put  hym  firste  in  ieoperdy
And  that  small  lucre  that  gotten  is  therby
Though  thou  about  the  same  hast  moche  payne
Thynke  well  that  it  is  gotten  wrongfully
The  lawe  the  byndeth :  it  to  restore  agayne

Wherfore  me  thynke  that  man  doth  surest  play
That  with  this  madnes  medlyth  nat  atall
But  in  his  cofres  his  moyney  kepis  alway
For  that  is  sure  howe  euer  the  cardes  fall


74  Of  carde  players  and  dysers.


Or  other  game  as  Tables  dyse  or  ball

And  better  a  lytell  sure  than  moche  in  fere  and  dout

Better  haue  one  birde  sure  within  thy  wall

Or  fast  in  a  Cage  than  twenty  score  without

This  game  also  oft  causeth  wrath  and  othes

And  malyce  where  erst  was  loue  and  amyte

And  moche  falshode,  whiche  god  almyghty  lothes

With  fals  forswerynge  disceyt  and  cruelte

It  causeth  by  watchynge  also  infirmyte

So  men  by  it  (los)  of  goodes  and  body  fynde

Wherfore  let  euery  man  suche  foly  fle

There  was  neuer  wyse  man  that  set  theron  his  mynde.


folys  oppressyd  with  theyr  owne  foly.


Of  folys  1  wot  there  is  great  company

Within  my  boke  in  fygures  and  scripture

But  in  this  Shyp  namely  ar  there  many

Whiche  theyr  owne  foly  can  by  no  meane  endure

Suche  in  this  Barge  shall  of  a  rowme  besure

Thoughe  they  haue  rowme  I  can  graunt  them  no  rest

For  with  the  Asse  they  nidely  ar  opprest


Of  folys  oppressyd


Within  my  shyp :  and  also  on  euery  syde
Ar  so  many  folys  saylynge  before  the  wynde
So  swyftly  that  me  thynke  they  wyll  nat  byde
But  sone  depart,  and  so  leue  me  behynde
The  faute  and  cause  is  in  my  sleuthfull  mynde
But  the  slowe  Asse  hye  on  my  backe  doth  skyp
And  warnyth  me  so  enter  I  the  shyp

The  shyp  I  enter,  and  worthy  am  therto
Amonge  my  folys  my  self  may  clayme  a  place
For  my  great  slouth  in  eche  dede  that  1  do
But  neuertheles  I  am  nat  in  that  case
To  occupy  great  rowme  before  eche  mannys  face
A  lytell  and  strayt  corner  for  me  is  best
That  I  may  slepe  therin  and  take  my  rest

I  coueyt  nat  to  be  in  places  wyde
I  am  content  with  a  corner  of  straytnes
Vpon  the  hatchys  I  coueyt  nat  to  byde
For  there  is  to  moche  labour  and  besynes
And  also  the  Asse  betokenynge  sleuthfulnes
Sholde  haue  to  moche  space  on  me  to  tred
If  I  at  large  about  by  it  were  led

Yet  in  my  sleuth  if  I  coude  be  pacient
And  folowe  the  Asse  without  all  repugnaunce
But  alway  redy  at  his  commaundement
I  sholde  be  put  to  moche  lesse  greuaunce
And  so  haue  hope  to  scape  this  perturbaunce
My  membres  fre,  from  suche  wo  and  payne.
But  well  I  fell  my  trust  is  but  in  vayne


with  theyr  owne  foly.


11


But  this  one  thynge  my  herte  and  mynde  doth  glad
And  in  my  payne  is  the  moste  chefe  confort
That  mo  companyons  by  the  same  Asse  ar  lad.
Of  my  condicion  lyuynge,  and  lyke  sort
Whose  owne  foly,  whiche  they  take  for  a  sport
By  longe  contynuaunce  themself  doth  sore  oppres
Tournynge  theyr  myrth  to  wo  and  wretchydnes

These  ar  they  whiche  wyll  nat  aply  theyr  mynde
To  wyse  mennys  counsell  and  aduysement
Wherby  they  myght  both  welth  and  profyte  fynde
If  to  suche  counsell  they  gladly  wolde  assent
These  ar  suche  folys  as  furious  of  intent
By  wrath  ar  dryuen  to  dyuers  great  offence
For  none  occasion,  without  reason  and  prudence

These  ar  suche  Folys  as  by  stryfe  and  debate

And  other  suche  whiche  lewdly  by  enuy

And  no  cause  gyuen  theyr  neyghbours  hurt  and  hate

And  so  to  malyce  theyr  cursyd  myndes  aply

These  ar  suche  Folys  as  suffer  paciently

For  lacke  of  betynge  theyr  children  folowe  vyce

To  theyr  great  shame,  theyr  losse  and  preiudyce

These  ar  they  that  by  malyce  at  all  hours

Ar  cruell  and  greuous,  and  put  to  losse  and  payne

Suche  as  they  ouer  may  :  both  straunges  and  neyghbours

By  cursyd  lesynges  whiche  they  iniustly  fayne

These  ar  they  that  of  all  men  haue  disdayne

With  dronken  dryuyls  gyuen  hole  to  glotony

These  ar  the  felawes  of  this  mad  company


78  Ofjhiys  oppressyd


Moreouer  into  my  Shyp  shall  they  ascende

That  ar  streght  shoed  whiche  them  doth  sharply  greue

But  yet  they  se  nat  therto,  it  to  amende

Suche  ar  they  that  on  no  goodnes  wyll  byleue

All  wastynge  folys  whiche  to  theyr  great  myscheue

Sell  and  waste  theyr  londes  suche  ar  of  this  sort

And  they  that  more  spende  than  theyr  londes  may  support

These  ar  mad  Folys  and  abhomynable
And  cursyd  of  god  :  that  ar  bawdes  to  theyr  wyues
Lettynge  them  to  hyre,  and  thoughe  that  profytable
This  way  they  thynke,  yet  right  fewe  of  them  thryues
These  ar  mad  Folys  that  lewde  ar  of  theyr  lyues
Knowynge  what  payne  is  ordeyned  for  eche  syn
Yet  moue  they  nat,  but  styll  abyde  therin

These  ar  proude  beggers,  and  other  stately  folys
Sclanderers  lyers,  and  Jurours  of  the  syse
Phesicians  and  lawyers,  that  neuer  went  to  scolys
And  fals  Tauerners  that  reken  one  pot  twyse
Tapsters  and  hostlers  that  folowe  that  same  gyse
These  ar  fals  offycers  that  lyue  vpon  brybes
As  excheters  officials  Counstables  and  scribes

Folys  of  these  sortis  and  mo  than  I  can  tell
For  theyr  myslyuynge  and  great  enormyte
Of  the  slowe  Asse  shal  be  tred  downe  to  hell
If  they  nat  mende  them  self  before  they  dye
But  in  the  mean  tyme  shall  they  be  here  with  me
In  my  folys  Shyp,  on  se  rowynge  with  payne
If  they  amende,  depart  they  shall  agayne


with  theyr  owne  foly.  79


Thenuoy  of  Barclay.
O  folys  oppressyd  with  your  mysgouernaunce
Amende  your  lyfe  expell  this  your  offence
Ye  can  nat  excuse  your  self  by  ignoraunce
Ye  ar  taught  to  leue  your  inconenyence
By  godly  Prechers  men  of  hye  prudence
Also  the  punysshement  whiche  god  doth  often  sende
To  other  Folys  shulde  moue  you  to  amende.


the  extorcion  of  knyghtis,  great
offycers,  men  of  war,  scribes  and  prac-
tysers  of  the  lawe.


Whyle  knyghtes  and  scribes  exchetours  and  constables

And  other  ofFycers  whiche  haue  auctoryte

Vnder  the  kynge :  as  Shryfs  by  fayned  fables

Catche  a  rural]  man  rude,  and  of  symplycite

If  he  haue  money,  These  theues  so  cruell  be

That  what  by  crakynge  thretenynge  and  extorcion

They  spoyle  this  pore  man,  so  that  sympyll  is  his  porcion


Of  the  extorcion  of  knyghtis. 8  i


To  our  folysshe  Shyp  I  sommon  and  assyte
Constables  scribes  lawyers  and  Sowdyours
Exchetours  Sheryfs,  and  knyghtes  that  haue  delyte
To  abuse  theyr  offyces,  by  falshode  and  rygours
They  gyue  me  occasion  to  blame  theyr  errours
And  for  that  in  theyr  charge  they  often  tryp
By  false  abusion,  they  shall  be  in  my  shyp

Hast  hyther  I  requyre,  my  Nauy  is  a  flote
Longe  tary  hurtyth,  for  hawsyd  is  the  sayle
The  anker  wayed,  within  borde  is  the  bote
Our  shyp  decked  after  a  homely  aparayle
By  suche  passyngers  I  loke  for  none  auayle
But  fere  displesour,  bycause  I  shall  be  trewe
Yet  shall  I  so.  ensue  what  may  ensue

Good  offycers  ar  good  and  commendable
And  manly  knyghtes  that  lyue  in  rightwysenes
But  they  that  do  nat  ar  worthy  of  a  bable
Syns  by  theyr  pryde  pore  people  they  oppres
My  mayster  kyrkham  for  his  perfyte  mekenes
And  supportacion  of  men  in  pouertye
Out  of  my  shyp  shall  worthely  be  fre

I  flater  nat  I  am  his  true  seruytour

His  chaplayne  and  bede  man  whyle  my  lyfe  shall  endure

Requyrynge  god  to  exalt  hym  to  honour

And  of  his  Prynces  fauour  to  be  sure

For  as  I  haue  sayd  I  knowe  no  creature

More  manly  rightwyse  wyse  discrete  and  sad

But  thoughe  he  be  good,  yet  other  ar  als  bad

VOL.  II.  F


^  2  Of  the  extorc'wn  of  knyghtts.

They  shall  vnnamyd  my  shyppis  haue  in  cure

And  other  ofFycers  who  so  euer  they  be

Whiche  in  extorcion  and  falshode  them  inure

Hopynge  by  the  same  to  come  do  dignyte

And  by  extorcion  to  augment  theyr  dfcgre

Mansell  of  Otery  for  powlynge  of  the  pore

Were  nat  his  great  wombe,  here  sholde  haue  an  ore

But  for  his  body  is  so  great  and  corporate

And  so  many  burdens  his  brode  backe  doth  charge

If  his  great  burthen  cause  hym  to  come  to  late

Yet  shall  the  knaue  be  Captayne  of  a  barge

Where  as  ar  bawdes,  and  so  sayle  out  at  large

About  our  shyp  to  spye  about  for  prayes

For  therupon  hath  he  lyued  all  his  dayes

But  hym  I  leue,  and  so  retourne  agayne

Namly  to  speke  of  the  vnrightwysenes

Of  knyghtes  and  fals  scribes  whiche  fully  set  theyr  brayne

To  brynge  pore  people  into  gretter  wretchydnes

Than  they  were  erst  and  so  them  to  oppresse

For  playnly  to  speke  fals  knyghtes  and  scribes  be

Of  one  maner  lyuynge  practyse  and  faculte

The  scribe  in  wrytynge  with  his  disceytfull  pen
Sytfynge  in  his  syege  acloyde  with  couetyse
By  subtyle  wordes  spoylyth  the  symple  men
Whiche  come  to  hym,  desyrynge  right  iustyce
The  knyght  in  warre  is  gyuen  to  the  same  vyce
Robbynge  and  spoylynge  by  feldys :  preuely
But  the  scribe  oppressyth  the  pore  men  openly


Of  the  extorcion  of  knyghth.


The  knyght  in  warre  in  tyme  of  frost  or  rayne
Or  the  colde  snowe  as  man  masyd  with  rage
Subduyth  his  body  to  ieopardye  or  payne
Damnynge  his  soule  for  brybynge  auauntage
The  iniust  scribe  ensuys  the  same  vsage
Defylynge  his  soule  with  his  pen  and  black  ynke
Whose  couetyse  causyth  his  soule  in  hell  to  synke

The  cursyd  hunger  of  syluer  and  of  golde
After  one  maner  doth  these  two  so  inflame
That  for  the  Lucre  therof  theyr  soules  ar  solde
The  one  a  thefe  without  all  fere  and  shame
In  tyme  of  warre  in  spoylynge  hath  his  game
Murdrynge  men  and  brennynge  towne  and  vylage
Nought  sekynge  but  Lucre  by  spoylynge  and  pyllag

The  pore  chorle  vnexpert  and  innocent
Suspectynge  nought  for  his  true  symplycyte
Is  by  this  scribe  compellyd  by  falshode  vyolent
To  pay  for  his  pennys  tyll  he  a  begger  be
Thus  lyue  knyghtis  and  scribes  after  one  degre
Oppressynge  the  pore,  them  puttynge  to  great  payn
Vnto  them  self  by  falshode  gettynge  gayne

Eche  of  them  askyth  Lucre  and  wynnynge
Nought  carynge  whether  it  be  wronge  or  right
Thus  cursyd  is  the  sort  that  haue  theyr  lyuynge
In  robbynge  pore  people  by  violence  and  myght
But  if  they  had  lustyce  and  mercy  in  theyr  syght
Theyr  ofFyces  mynystrynge  by  lawe  and  equyte
Both  of  god  and  man  rewardyd  sholde  they  be


84


Of  the  extorcion  of  hiyght'is.


Who  that  is  rightwyse  good,  men  shall  hym  commende
And  lawde  his  name,  and  his  dedes  magnyfye
The  knyght  is  ordeyned  by  manhode  to  defende
Wydowhode  and  age  from  wronge  and  iniury
With  fatherles  children,  and  suche  as  lyue  in  penury
And  with  dynt  of  swerde  to  defende  the  comon  welth
Expellynge  theuys,  sauynge  true  mannys  helth

The  scribe  is  ordeyned  hymself  to  exercyse
To  wryte  with  his  pen  iust  lawes  and  verytable
And  shewe  by  his  craft  the  rule  of  right  iustyce
But  nowe  theyr  dedys  ar  moche  varyable
For  knyghtes  and  scribes  by  wayes  disceyuable
By  the  swerde  and  pen  right  cursydly  intende
Them  to  oppres,  whome  they  ought  to  defende

As  wydowes  pore  men  and  children  pryuate
Of  Father  and  mother  and  feble  men  by  age
By  suche  oppression  they  increase  theyr  estate
And  by  successyon  of  all  theyr  hole  lynage
Alas  the  childe  oft  forgoys  his  heritage
Without :  right  longe  or  he  be  of  discression
And  all  by  fals  knyghtis  spoylynge  and  oppression

In  erth  no  gyle,  nor  falshode  is  doutles

Nor  yll  that  is  to  scribes  comparable

But  touchynge  thoppression  and  vnhappynes

Of  other  offycers  it  is  innumerable

And  namely  sowdeours  ar  nowe  raoste  vengeable

And  other  courters :  that  scant  the  kynges  way

Of  theyr  spoylynge  may  be  quyte  by  nyght  or  day


Of  the  extordon  of  knyghtis.


85


"What  shall  I  wryte  of  powlynge  customers
And  spoylynge  serchers  Baylyfs  and  Constables
Sergeauntis  and  catchpollis  and  other  offycers
Whiche  with  others  plate  garnysshe  gay  theyr  tables
Theyr  howsys  stuffed  with  brybes  abhomynbles
Suche  by  oppression  become  thus  excellent
Contynuynge  in  falshode  for  lacke  of  punysshement

Thenuoy  of  Barclay.
Ye  knyghtes  vnrightwyse  and  offycers  iniust
Auoyde  your  extorcion  done  by  cruelte
Auoyde  this  desyre,  mad  and  myscheuous  lust
Whiche  ye  haue  in  spoylynge  of  the  comonte
Better  is  for  you  to  lyue  in  pouertye
So  plesynge  god  with  vndefyled  name
Than  by  oppression  to  come  to  hye  degre
And  than  after  deth  be  damnyd  for  the  same


Of  folysshe  messangers  and  Pursuyuauntis.


I  am  a  swyft  Pursuyuaunte  or  messangar
None  in  the  worlde  swyfter  as  I  wene
Here  am  I  come  from  londes  strange  and  far
Yet  can  I  nat  (drynkynge)  voyde  my  botell  clene
Tyll  in  the  foles  Shyppes  I  haue  ben
And  to  the  chefe  delyuered  vp  this  byll
Shypman  (tyll  I  enter)  let  thy  shyp  stande  styll


Ofjolysshe  messange?'S.


87


I  had  purposyd  nat  to  haue  tane  on  honde

To  cary  in  my  shyp  any  messangers

Or  pursuyuauntis  that  occupy  on  londe

For  I  myself  and  all  my  maryners

Kepe  on  the  see,  with  our  folysshe  partners

So  far  from  londe,  and  rowynge  with  suche  payne

That  no  messanger  may  vs  reuoke  agayne

Yet  some  of  them  coueyt  to  haue  place

To  them  assigned  within  a  folysshe  barge

And  with  our  folys  to  be  so  moche  in  grace

Of  all  theyr  messages  to  haue  the  cure  and  charge

To  this  intent  to  ren  euer  out  at  large

With  letters  or  Charters,  about  dyuers  londes

Somtyme  in  theyr  mouth  and  somtyme  in  theyr  hondes

Somtyme  other  wyse  them  hydynge  pryuely

To  kepe  them  sure,  from  moystnes  of  the  rayne

And  so  to  go  without  all  ieopardy

In  his  iourney  and  salue  to  come  agayne

But  some  of  these  folys  take  vpon  them  payne

To  execute  more,  than  is  in  theyr  message

To  theyr  owne  scorne,  and  lordes  great  damage

But  yet  oft  tyme  (Howbeit  theyr  promes)
Was  in  all  hast  to  theyr  message  to  entende
They  it  prolonge  by  ouer  moche  dronkennes
Taryenge  theyr  charge,  and  bryngynge  nought  to  ende
By  theyr  slowe  paas,  thus  he  that  dyd  them  sende
Thynkyth  his  mater  well  done  and  brought  to  pas
But  by  theyr  prolongynge  it  is  euyn  as  it  was


88


Offolysshe  messangers


And  often  these  messangers  so  wysely  them  gouerne
That  whyle  they  sholde  be  in  hande  with  theyr  mesage
They  range  about  to  eche  alehous  and  tauerne
"With  the  swete  wyne  theyr  great  hete  to  asswage
Tyll  he  be  brought  into  the  dronken  rage
Than  opyns  he  his  letter  it  redynge  twyse  or  thryse
And  all  for  this  purpose  newe  lesynges  to  deuyse

His  letter  he  openyth  as  fals  and  past  all  shame

To  knowe  the  secrete  therof  to  this  intent

"With  his  fals  tunge  to  glose  vpon  the  same

And  oft  in  his  message  he  is  so  neglygent

To  lese  his  letters,  and  so  as  imprudent

He  can  nat  that  shewe  that  men  to  hym  commyt

Retournynge  without  answere  so  folysshe  is  his  wyt

A  true  messanger  and  of  parfyte  dilygence

Is  moche  worthy,  and  greatly  commendable

For  lyke  as  in  Somers  feruent  vyolence

The  colde  wynde  and  snowe  to  man  is  delectable

And  as  to  men  wery  :  rest  is  moche  confortable

So  a  messanger  spedy  faythfnll  and  parfyte

Retournynge  to  his  lorde  doth  hym  as  great  delyte

Suche  true  messangers  no  man  wyll  discommende
That  is  of  wysdome  mynde  pacient,  or  doctryne
But  folysshe  messangers  here  I  comprehende
Whiche  in  theyr  message  to  folysshe  wordes  inclyne
More  tendynge  to  theyr  botell  full  of  ale  or  wyne
Than  to  theyr  message,  for  this  is  prouyd  playne
That  sende  a  fole  forth, and  so  comys  he  agayne


and  pursiiyiiauntis.

Suche  folys  haue  theyr  mawes  so  feruent
In  hete  by  rennynge,  and  excessyue  langage
Fyllyd  with  foly  :  That  no  drynke  can  it  stent
Nor  with  moystnes  that  feruent  hete  asswage
But  a  faythfull  man  that  doth  truly  his  message
Is  to  be  lawdyd. But  we  dayly  proued  se
That  wyse  wyll  do  wysely,  and  folys  as  they  be.

Thenuoy  of  Barclay  the  actour.
Ye  follysshe  messangers  gyuen  to  neglygence
To  slouth  and  ryot  in  your  besynes
Reduce  your  myndes  to  parfyte  dilygence
So  may  ye  to  your  lordes  do  confort  and  gladnes
Be  true  in  his  myssage,  gyue  you  to  secretnes
If  ye  do  nat  I  Barclay,  shall  certayne
For  eche  of  you  my  folys  lyueray  dres
That  is  a  hode  to  kepe  you  from  the  rayne


89


Of  folisshe  Cokes  and  buttelers  and  other
offycers  of  howsholde  that  wast  theyr
maysters  good  without  mesure.


Lo  nowe  comys  a  sort  by  dosyns  multyplyed
Vnto  my  shyp  :  of  dyuers  cokes  and  buttelers.
A  rowme  to  them  may  nat  be  well  denyed
Nor  to  all  other  suche  howsholde  offycers
These  folys  hast  fast  to  be  my  maryners
Rowynge  with  suche  myght  that  all  the  se  fomes
Suche  increas  our  Nauy,  by  vylenes  of  other  wombes


Of  folisshe  cokes  and  biittelers. 9 1


This  sort  of  seruauntes  whome  thou  dost  here  espy

Gyuen  to  theyr  wombe  by  lust  obhomynable

Of  meat  and  drynke  and  superflwe  glotony

Ar  to  theyr  maysters  but  lytell  profytable.

Oft  Cokes  and  butlers  ar  so  disceyuable

Of  nature,  to  theyr  mayster  and  folowe  this  offence

That  nought  they  set  by  his  losse  by  theyr  expence

These  folys  reuellynge  on  theyr  maysters  coste

Spare  no  expence,  nought  carynge  his  damage

But  they  as  Caytyfs  often  thus  them  boste

In  theyr  glotony  with  dissolute  langage

Be  mery  companyons  and  lusty  of  cowrage

We  haue  our  pleasour  in  deynty  mete  and  drynke

On  whiche  thynge  only  we  alway  muse  and  thynke

Ete  we  and  drynke  we  therfore  without  all  care
With  reuyll  without  mesure  as  longe  as  we  may
It  is  a  royall  thynge  thus  lustely  to  fare
With  others  mete,  thus  reuell  we  alway
Spare  nat  the  pot  another  shall  it  pay
Whan  that  is  done  spare  nat  for  more  to  call
He  merely  slepys  the  whiche  shall  pay  for  all

Thus  fewe  or  none  of  kepars  shall  we  fynde
Trewe  in  theyr  dedys,  and  after  one  intent
Though  maysters  to  theyr  seruauntis  be  full  kynde
Agayne  is  the  seruaunt  fals  and  fraudelent
So  howsholde  seruauntes  though  they  seme  innocent
And  without  falshode  before  theyr  lordes  face
They  wast  all  and  more  in  another  place


92  Of  foils  she  cokes  and  buttelers.


Whan  mayster  and  maystres  in  bed  ar  to  rest

The  hordes  ar  spred,  the  dores  open  echone

Than  farys  the  Coke  and  Butteler  of  the  best

Other  both  togyther,  or  eche  of  them  alone

With  wyne  and  ale  tyll  all  the  best  be  gone

By  galons  and  potels  they  spende  without  care

That  whiche  theyr  lorde  for  his  owne  mouth  dyd  spare

They  ar  nat  content  amonge  them  selfe  to  spende
Theyr  maysters  goodes  in  suche  lyke  glotony  ■
But  also  for  other  glotons  they  do  sende
And  strange  dronkardys  to  helpe  out  theyr  vylany
By  whose  helpe  they  may  the  vessellis  make  dry
And  he  that  hath  way  to  drynke  at  eche  worde
Amonge  these  Caytyfs  is  worshyppyd  as  a  lorde

Amonge  these  wasters  is  no  fydelyte

They  haue  no  hede  nor  care  ne  aduertence.

Of  the  great  losse,  and  the  cause  of  pouertye

Growynge  to  theyr  lorde  by  this  wastfull  expence

But  hym  begyle  behynde  his  backe  and  presence

The  mayster  or  lorde  lyinge  In  his  bed

Full  lytell  knowys  howe  his  howsholde  is  led

But  whyle  the  seruauntes  fals  ryot  thus  ensue
Wastynge  theyr  maysters  good  and  hole  substance
The  mayster  thynkes  his  seruauntes  good  and  true
But  if  it  fortune  after  by  some  chaunce
That  the  mayster  haue  a  desyre  or  plesaunce
Of  his  best  drynke  with  his  louers  to  haue  some
The  vessell  empty  shall  yelde  nought  but  bom  bom


Of foils  she  cokes  and  buttelers.


Than  shall  the  lorde  perceyue  the  great  disceyte

Of  his  wastfuU  seruauntes  and  theyr  fals  abusion

But  his  perceyuynge  than  is  all  to  late

So  it  apereth  that  great  collusion

Comyth  vnto  many,  and  extreme  confusion

By  vntrue  seruauntes  as  Cokes  and  butlers

And  by  all  other  housholde  offycers.

I  thynke  it  shame  to  wryte  in  this  my  boke
The  great  disceyte  gyle  and  vnclenlynes
Of  any  scolyon,  or  any  bawdy  Coke
His  lorde  abusynge  by  his  vnthryftynes
Some  for  the  nonys  theyr  meat  lewdly  dres.
Gyuynge  it  a  tast  to  swet  to  salt  or  stronge
Bycause  the  seruauntes  wolde  eat  it  them  amonge

This  company,  and  bende  vngracious

Ar  with  no  pety  mouyd,  nor  yet  care

They  wast :  and  ete  theyr  mayster  out  of  hous

Deuourynge  his  good,  tyll  he  be  pore  and  bare

And  with  what  meates  so  euer  the  lorde  shall  fare

If  it  be  in  the  kechyne  or  it  come  to  the  hall

The  coke  and  scolyon  must  taste  it  first  of  all

In  euery  dysshe  these  caytyfs  haue  theyr  handes

Gapynge  as  it  were  dogges  for  a  bone

Whan  nature  is  content  fewe  of  them  vnderstandes.

In  so  moche  that  as  I  trowe,  of  them  is  none

That  dye  for  age :  but  by  glotony  echone

But  suche  folys  were  nat  theyr  hasty  lokes

To  my  folysshe  shyp  sholde  chosen  be  for  Cokes


Of  foils  sJje  cokes  ctnd  buttelers.


Thenuoy  of  Barclay.
In  this  shyp  myght  I  compryse  or  comprehende
Seruauntis  of  euery  craft  and  facultye
Whiche  in  lewde  ryot  theyr  maysters  goodes  spende
Bryngynge  them  therby  to  carefull  pouertye
But  as  for  this  tyme  they  shall  passe  by  for  me
Syns  by  theyr  maysters  folysshe  neglygence
They  haue  occasion  so  ryotous  to  be
By  great  cause  gyuen  of  inconuenyence.

But  to  you  seruauntis  I  tourne  my  pen  agayne
Exortynge  you  to  your  maysters  to  be  true
And  nat  thus  to  spende  and  wast  his  good  in  vayne
And  so  to  harde  nede  therby  hym  to  subdue
Lewde  felawshyp  se  that  ye  euer  eschewe
Beware  of  ryot,  be  content  wyth  your  degre.
For  who  that  agaynst  his  mayster  is  vntrewe
In  his  owne  labour  is  seldome  sen  to  thye.


Of  the  arrogance  and  pryde  of  rude  men
of  the  countrey.


The  rustycall  pryde  of  carles  of  the  londe
Remaynyth  nowe,  whiche  I  intende  to  note
Whiche  theyr  owne  pryde  nat  se  nor  vnderstonde
Wherfore  they  coueyte  with  me  to  haue  a  bote
And  so  they  shall,  but  whan  they  ar  a  flote
Let  them  me  pardon,  for  I  wyll  take  no  charge
Of  them  ;  but  them  touche  and  let  them  ren  at  lar  ge


Of  the  arrogance  and pryde


Of  husbonde  men  the  lyfe  and  the  nature
Was  wont  be  rude  and  of  symplycyte
And  of  condicion  humble  and  demure
But  if  a  man  wolde  nowe  demande  of  me
Howe  longe  agone  is  syns  they  thus  haue  be
I  myght  well  answere  it  is  nat  longe  agone
Syns  they  were  symple  and  innocent  echone

And  so  moche  were  they  gyuen  to  symplenes
And  other  vertues  chefe  and  pryncipall
That  the  godly  trone  of  fayth  and  rightwysnes
Had  left  great  townes  lordes  and  men  royall
And  taken  place  amonge  these  men  rurall
All  vertues :  stedfastnes  iustyce  and  lawe
Disdayned  nat  these  pore  cotis  thekt  with  strawe

There  was  no  disceyt  nor  gyle  of  tymes  longe
Amonge  these  men :  they  were  out  chasyd  and  gone
For  iustyce  (as  I  haue  sayd)  was  them  amonge
And  of  longe  tyme  there  kept  hir  chayre  and  trone
Of  brynnynge  Auaryce  amonge  these  men  was  none
No  wrongfull  lucre  nor  disceytful  auauntage
Infect  the  myndes  of  men  of  the  vyllage

That  is  to  say  they  knewe  none  vsury

No  hunger  of  golde  dyd  theyr  myndes  confounde

They  knewe  no  malyce  :  nor  pryde  of  theyr  body

Nor  other  vyces  that  trowbleth  nowe  the  grounde

They  coueyted  nat  to  greatly  to  abounde

In  proude  aparayle,  lyke  Cytezyns  excellent

But  theyr  hole  lyfe  was  symple  and  innocent


of  rude  men  of  the  count  rey.  97


But  nowe  the  lyfe  of  eche  carle  and  vyllayne.
Is  in  all  maners  chaungyd  euen  as  clene
As  if  the  trone  moste  noble  and  souerayne
Of  rightwysenes  :  amonge  them  had  neuer  bene
Of  theyr  olde  vertues  nowe  is  none  in  them  sene
Wherby  they  longe  were  wont  themself  to  gyde
Theyr  lyfe  is  loste  and  they  set  hole  on  pryde

Theyr  clothes  stately  after  the  courters  gyse

Theyr  here  out  busshynge  as  a  foxis  tayle

And  all  the  fassions  whiche  they  can  deuyse

In  counterfaytynge  they  vse  in  aparayll

Party  and  gardyd  or  short  to  none  auayle

So  that  if  god  sholde  theyr  bodyes  chaunge

After  theyr  vesture  theyr  shape  sholde  be  full  strange

Thus  is  theyr  mekenes  and  olde  symplycyte
Tournyd  by  theyr  foly  to  arrogance  and  pryde
Theyr  rightwysenes,  loue  and  fydelyte
By  enuy  and  falshode  nowe  ar  set  asyde
Disceyt  and  gyle  with  them  so  sure  doth  byde
That  folke  of  the  towne  of  them  oft  lerne  the  same
And  other  newe  yllis  causynge  reprofe  and  shame

Theyr  scarsnes  nowe  is  tournyd  to  couetyse
They  onely  haue  golde  and  that,  in  abundaunce
Theyr  vertue  is  gone,  and  they  rotyd  in  vyce
Onely  on  riches  fixed  is  theyr  plesaunce
Fye  Chorles  amende  this  mad  mysgouernaunce
What  mouyth  you  vnto  this  thyrst  feruent
Of  golde  :  that  were  wont  to  be  so  innocent


Of  arrogance  and  pryde.


What  causeth  you  thus  your  ]yfe  to  change
To  cursyd  malyce  from  godly  innocence
Nowe  Carles  ar  nat  content  with  one  grange
Nore  one  ferme  place,  suche  is  theyr  insolence
They  must  haue  many,  to  support  iheyr  expence
And  so  a  riche,  vyllayne  proude  and  arrogant
Anone  becomyth  a  couetous  marchant

Than  labours  he  for  to  be  made  a  state

And  to  haue  the  pryuelege  of  hye  nobles  -  ■ '

Thus  churlys  becomyth  statis  nowe  of  late

Hye  of  renowne  without  all  sympylnes

But  it  is  great  foly  and  also  shame  doutles

For  Carles  to  coueyt  this  wyse  to  clym  so  hye

And  nat  be  pleasyd  with  theyr  state  and  degre

Tknuoy  of  Barclay  thu  translatour.
Fye  rurall  carles  awake  I  say  and  ryse  „  '-  ■

Out  of  your  vyce  and  lyfe  abhomynable
Namely  of  pryde,  wrath,  enuy  and  couetyse  '
Whiche  ye  insue,  as  they  were  nat  damnable
Recouer  your  olde  mekenes,  whiche  is  most  profytable
Of  all  vertues,  and  be  content  with  your  degre
For  make  a  carle  a  lorde,  and  without  any  fable
In  his  inwarde  maners  one  man  styll  shall  he  be.


Of  the  contempt  and  dispysynge  of
pouertye.


In  this  our  tyme  we  pouertye  out  chase
From  vs,  but  ryches  doth  euery  man  content
The  pore  is  oppressyd  to  grounde  in  eche  place
He  onely  is  mocked  and  countyd  imprudent
As  it  were  a  naturall  fole,  or  innocent
He  that  is  pore,  and  wyse,  must  hym  submyt
Vnto  a  riche  fole  whiche  in  a  trone  shall  syu


loo  Of  the  contempt  and


I  cary  of  folys  within  this  present  barge

A  marueylous  nomber  and  almoste  infynyte

Whiche  on  vayne  ryches  only  haue  theyr  charge

And  hath  on  it  more  pleasour  and  delyte

Than  in  good  vertues  that  myght  theyr  soule  profyt(

They  set  more  store  the  peny  to  posses

Than  of  good,  maners,  worshyp,  or  holynes

All  men  forsaketh  in  this  tyme  to  sustayne
The  weght  and  burthen  of  godly  pouerte
The  cursyd  hunger  of  ryches  doth  constrayne
The  hertis  of  men  and  that  of  eche  degre
Good  lyuers  of  no  valour  countyd  be
If  they  lacke  riches,  theyr  goodnes  to  support
To  theyr  company  none  forsyth  to  resort

They  that  haue  honoured  wysdome  here  before

And  loued  vertue,  and  in  the  same  procede

In  this  our  tyme  promotyd  ar  no  more

To  lawde  and  honour  whiche  ought  to  be  theyr  med

To  rightwyse  men  nowe  no  man  taketh  hede

But  onely  they  haue  bribes  in  plente

That  ar  moste  riche  and  hyest  in  degre

But  syns  it  is  so  that  plenty  and  abundaunce
Of  vayne  riches  and  blynde  and  frayle  treasour
Doth  them  that  hath  the  same  lyghtly  auaunce
To  loue,  to  frendshyp,  to  lawdes  and  honour
And  he  that  lackyth  the  same  is  in  dolour
Therfore  all  men  more  gladly  it  ensue
Than  lawdable  lyfe  gode  maners  or  vertue


dispysynge  of  poiiertye.


lO  I


The  worlde  rennyth  on  suche  chaunce  nowe  adayes

That  none  by  vertue  riches  can  attayne

But  who  that  wyll  be  riche  must  folowe  nowe  suche  wayes

Firste  must  he  flater  and  of  honour  haue  disdayne

He  spare  must  none  othes  though  they  be  fals  and  vayne

And  that  he  hath  sayde  by  and  by  forsake.

Nowe  swere  and  promes,  anone  them  both  to  brake

He  must  promes  and  vowe  both  to  god  and  man

And  neuer  care  nor  force  to  kepe  the  same

By  falshode  or  brybynge  get  what  he  can

His  wordes  and  dedes  both  without  fere  and  shame

By  cruell  delynge  he  must  hym  get  a  name

Nought  must  he  care  for  synne  nor  vyolence

Nouther  present  nor  past,  styll  redy  to  offence

He  must  with  rauysshynge  clawes  exercyse
Vsury,  rubbynge  from  people  innocent
Brybes  and  spoylynges  and  tyme  therfore  deuyse
He  must  bere  talys  faynyd  and  fraudelent
And  with  the  lyes  trouble  myndes  pacient
And  into  the  erys  of  good  men  and  laudable
He  droppyth  venym  by  wordes  vengeable

O  damnable  lyfe  pollutyd  all  with  vyce

O  deuylysshe  maners  alas  we  may  complayne

The  worlde  is  wrappyd  in  suche  syn  by  couetyse

Whiche  doth  all  vertue  and  godlynes  distayne

All  thynge  is  solde,  for  frayll  treasour  and  vayne

Laufull  and  vnlaufull  vertue  lawe  and  right

Ar  solde  for  money  whiche  blyndyth  mannys  syght


I  o  2  Of  the  contempt  and


Were  nat  blynde  treasour  and  vnbappy  ryches

Many  one  for  theyr  synnes  and  olFence

Sholde  worthely  haue  dyed  in  wretchydnes

And  other  escapyd  for  theyr  innocence

The  peny  damnyth  :  somtyme  gyuynge  sentence

So  that  oft  tymes  in  tyme  of  iugement

It  reddyth  murdrers  and  Theues  fro  punysshement

Thus  synnes  greuous  escapyth  quyte  and  fre
By  money,  whiche  is  so  good  an  aduocate
That  it  man  reddyth  what  euer  his  trespas  be
From  deth  and  peryll  if  it  come  nat  to  late
It  gettyth  loue  of  pore  man  and  estate
It  wolues  and  Foxis  delyuereth  from  tourment
And  hangeth  vp,  doues  and  Lambes  innocent

The  ryche  by  oppressyon  augmentyth  theyr  ryches

Whiche  is  at  last  to  theyr  owne  great  damage

Lyke  as  the  Bybyll  playnly  doth  expres

Howe  Achab  wolde  haue  had  the  herytage

Of  Nabeth :  descendynge  to  hym  by  his  lynage

Wherfore  this  Naboth  righiwysly  withstode

The  kynges  wyll  and  that  by  reason  gode

Where  as  this  rightwyse  man  full  wretchydly
By  this  ryche  kynge,  by  oppression  playne
And  his  (^enes  falshode  was  damnyd  wrongfully
For  his  denyenge,  and  so  with  stonys  slayne
For  whiche  thynge  this  kynge  after  had  payne
By  wretchyd  deth  whiche  god  to  hym  dyd  sende
Of  extorcioners  this  is  the  comon  ende


dispysynge  of  pouertye.  103


Thus  the  pore  onely  for  theyr  syraplycite
Is  tred  under  fote  by  suche  as  haue  myght
Thus  bagges  must  be  had  of  pure  necessyte
For  without  them  no  man  can  haue  his  right
But  whan  the  golden  age  the  worlde  dyd  lyght
And  rayned  amonge  men,  than  was  pouertye
Of  great  lawde  and  glory  with  men  of  eche  degre

Than  was  theyr,  fode  seas  theyr  lyuynge  lyberall
Theyr  labour  comon,  they  knewe  no  couetyse
All  thynge  was  coraon  than  amonge  them  all
The  lawe  of  nature  from  them  expellyd  vyce
Without  violence  or  rygour  of  iustyce
But  none  of  all  these  our  firste  progenytours
Theyr  myndes  blyndyd  with  gatherynge  great  treasours

But  thoughe  by  ryches  nowe  men  be  enhaunced
Yet  in  tyme  past  men  haue  by  pouertye
In  lawde  and  glory  theyr  royalmes  hye  auaunsyd
And  come  therby  vnto  so  great  dignyte
That  theyr  hye  name  and  fame  can  neuer  dye
Rome  was  firste  pore,  and  pore  was  the  senate
And  in  Rome  pore  was  many  a  great  estate

Yet  were  they  nobly  disposyd  to  batayle

So  that  whyle  they  lyuyd  in  theyr  symplenes

No  other  Nacion  agayne  them  coude  preuayle

But  after  whan  they  gaue  theyr  myndes  to  ryches

Oft  strange  Nacions  them  sharply  dyd  oppres

By  this  example  it  apereth  openly

That  to  a  good  warrour  ryches  is  ennemy


1 04  Of  the  contempt  ana


The  noble  Curias  in  scarsnes  and  vertue
Rulynge  in  Rome,  at  the  Romayns  desyre
Dyd  the  Samnytyens  manfully  subdue
And  the  Ausonyans  vnto  the  same  empyre
With  all  other  that  durst  agaynst  Rome  conspyre
Of  whome  many  for  his  souerayne  wysdome
Of  theyr  frewyll  dyd  subiect  to  hym  become

What  man  doth  not  Publicola  commende

Whiche  by  scarsnes  deseruyd  hath  honour

And  heuenly  worshyp  whiche  none  can  comprehende

Hystoryan,  Poet,  nor  other  oratour

We  lawde  Fabricius  a  mean  Conquerour

Whiche  the  rewardes  of  Pyrrhus  dyd  despyse

Wherby  men  knewe  he  louyd  no  couetyse

Yet  led  this  Fabricius  his  lyfe  in  scarsyte

With  lytell  riches  to  hym  moche  acceptable

Regulus  also  a  man  of  great  dignyte

For  his  suffysaunce  reputyd  it  laudable

In  small  substance  he  thought  to  lyue  most  stable

Thus  is  that  man  both  wyse  and  excellent

That  with  ynoughe  can  holde  hym  selfe  content

The  firste  begynnynge  and  origynall

Of  all  the  worlde  was  first  in  scarsyte

Therby  were  Cytees  byldyd  firste  of  all

And  kynges  establyd  in  theyr  royalte

With  theyr  kyngdomes. and  men  of  eche  degre.

Pouerte  of  all  the  lawes  was  Inuentryce

Mother  vnto  vertue,  confonderes  of  vyce


dispysynge  of  poiiertye.  105

By  scarsyte  Grece  hath  gotten  suche  a  name
Of  laude  and  worshyp  whiche  neuer  shall  decay
That  all  the  worlde  hole,  spekyth  of  the  same
But  howe  the  lordes  therof  lyued  alway
In  stedfast  vertue  somwhat  shall  1  say
The  iust  Arystydes  inuentour  of  iustyce
Was  euer  pore,  nat  gyuen  to  couetyse

Epamynundas  also  lyued  in  vertue
And  he  beynge  Duke  possessyd  small  ryches
Yet  neuer  kynge  nor  Prynce  coude  hym  subdue
By  suffysaunce  suche  was  his  worthynes
The  noble  Poet  homerus  eke  :  doutles
Whyle  he  descrybed  the  sore  ruyne  of  Troy
Was  pore,  and  set  on  couetyse  no  ioy

Socrates  with  godly  wysdome  decorate
Set  neuer  his  mynde  on  ryches  or  treasour
Yet  was  neuer  kynge  so  ryche  nor  estate
That  was  more  worthy  than  he  was  of  honour
In  all  the  worlde  is  no  thynge  at  this  houre
So  proude  nor  hye  whiche  hath  nat  first  of  all
Had  chefe  begynnynge  of  a  Ryuer  but  small

The  worthy  Cyte  callyd  Tarpye  by  name
Of  small  begynnynge  is  nowe  made  excellent
Rome  hath  also  farre  sprede  abrode  hir  fame
Thoughe  it  were  byldyd  (as  lerned  men  assent)
Of  symple  Shepherdes  pore  and  innocent
O  what  a  Cyte,  and  what  a  se  royall
Hath  had  first  name  of  pore  men  and  rurall


io6  Of  the  contempt  and


Where  as  the  cursyd  hunger  of  ryches

Hath  oft  these  Cytees  destroyed  and  lost  agayne

Hath  nat  the  Romayns  byd  oft  great  wretchydnes

And  for  Couetyse  oppressyd  in  great  payne

For  the  same  vyce  Cartago  hath  certayne

Suffred  ruyne  by  fortune  myserable

Where  as  pouerte  brynges  men  to  ende  laudable

Alas  why  Coueyt  we  so  faruently

Exces  of  ryches  as  men  myndles  and  blynde

Syns  it  so  many  hath  brought  to  mysery

Yet  ryches  gotten  is  vnsure  as  the  wynde

Dyd  nat  proude  Cersus  therby  destruccion  fynde

Endynge  in  payne  great  wo  and  wretchydnes

By  the  immoderate  and  lewde  loue  of  ryches

Wherfore  let  men  of  eche  sort  of  degre
Loue  pouertye  as  thynge  moste  commendable
For  suerly  ryches  is  nought  but  vanyte
Rulyd  by  chaunce  vncertayne  and  vnstable
And  to  the  Hauer  oftentyme  damnable
For  a  ryche  man  settynge  theron  his  mynde
Shal  into  heuen  right  hardly  passage  fynde

Thenuoy  of  Barclay.

Withdrawe  your  myndes  men  from  to  great  ryches
Set  nat  your  thought  vpon  vnsure  treasour
Rede  howe  the  Gospell  examples  doth  expres
Of  the  pouertye  of  Christe  our  sauyour


dispysynge  of ponertye.  107


Thoughe  he  of  all  was  lorde  and  creatour
And  seconde  parsone  of  the  holy  Trinite
Yet  he  for  vs  hath  suffred  great  dolour
And  in  all  his  lyfe  wylfuU  pouerte.

Wherfore  blynde  man  make  clere  thy  ignoraunce
Take  here  example  by  god  omnypotent
Holde  thou  thy  selfe  content  with  suffysaunce
Voluntary  scarsnes  is  a  vertue  excellent
That  folowed  the  fathers  of  the  olde  testament
And  also  the  discyples  and  Apostles  in  the  newe
But  to  pouertye  thoughe  thou  wylt  nat  consent
Than  kepe  thou  mesure,  and  couetyce  eschewe


Of  them  that  begyn  to  do  well  and  con-
tynue  nat  in  that  purpose.


Vnto  this  Plough  of  Folys  many  ren
Begynnynge  to  labour  with  dylygence  and  payne
But  they  wyll  nat  contynue  longe  therin
But  shortly  after  cast  of  theyr  worke  agayne
No  maruayle.  for  so  volage  is  theyr  brayne
That  without  reason  they  gyue  moche  gretter  hade
As  wytles  Folys  the  bare  Coko  do  fede


Of  them  that  begyn  to  do  well, 1 09


First  whan  the  Carle  takys  his  ploughe  in  honde

He  is  so  besy  therwith  and  dylygent

As  if  that  he  wolde  Ere  out  his  londe

Vpon  one  day  or  he  leue  of,  or  stent

To  the  first  labour  men  ar  lest  insolent

But  I  shall  tell  the  if  thou  gyue  audyence

Of  this  my  meter  what  is  the  chefe  sentence

Some  men  ar  lyuynge  that  for  awhyle  begyn
To  lyue  well  ynoughe  and  outwarde  represent
For  to  contynue  in  good  lyfe  without  syn
Entrynge  the  way  of  vertue  excellent
But  shortly  after  chaungyd  is  that  intent
They  come  nat  vnto  the  top  of  the  Mountayne
Wherein  is  vertue  and  good  moste  souerayne

These  ar  those  Folys  that  taketh  hastely

The  ploughe  in  hande,  as  for  a  cours  or  twayne

And  than  agayne  it  leuyth  by  and  by

These  Avell  deserue  for  theyr  vnstable  brayne

In  our  lewde  barges  for  to  be  put  to  payne

And  besy  labour,  and  alway  to  trauayle

To  rowe  our  barges  and  hye  to  hawse  the  sayle

The  wyse  man  in  descripcion  of  vertue

Hath  set  the  same  on  the  hyght  of  a  hyll

Whiche  vnto  heuen  a  certayne  way  doth  shewe

To  suche  men  as  with  theyr  full  myndes  wyll

To  that  hyghe  top  theyr  hole  iourney  fulfyll

But  to  this  hyll,  fewe  ar  that  go  forwarde

But  many  thousandes  wolde  clymbe  therto  bacwarde


I  I  o Of  them  that  be^yn  to  do  well


They  ar  suche  that  set  all  theyr  hole  lykyriges
On  ryches  pleasour  and  euery  dedely  synne
And  onely  muse  on  these  lowe  worldly  ihynges  •
As  if  man  myght  hye  goodnes  by  them  wynne
Whiche  haue  no  grace  nor  vertue  them  within
These  men  that  ar  of  mynde  thus  varyable
To  the  children  of  Israeli  ar  most  comparable

Whiche  whan  they  were  delyuered  of  destres
And  out  of  Egypt,  and  past  that  cruell  payne
By  hande  of  moyses,  suche  was  theyr  wylfulnes
That  oft  they  wysshyd  that  they  were  there  agayne
And  all  for  hunger  of  one  day  or  scant  twayne
They  rather  wolde  vytayle  in  sore  captyuyte
Than  with  small  penaunce,  haue  plesaunt  lybertye

These  worldly  thynges  to  Egypt  I  compare
Wherin  mankynde  abydeth  in  bondage
Oft  by  his  foly  suffrynge  great  payne  and  care
But  whan  theyr  mynde  is  red  from  this  outrage
And  they  delyuered,  and  all  theyr  hole  lynage
Forsakynge  the  worlde,  for  vertue  moste  souerayne
Than  for  small  hardnes  anone  they  turne  agayne

Alas  these  people  of  myndes  are  so  rude

That  they  had  leuer  be  in  captyuyte

Of  Faro  the  Fende,  and  his  blynde  seruytude

Than  in  Christis  seruyce  lyuynge  in  lybertye

But  though  the  way  of  Christis  seruyce  be

Harde  to  be  kept  by  blynde  and  frayle  mankynde

Parseuer,  and  thou  shalt  a  Crowne  in  heuen  fynde


and  contynue  nat  in  that  purpose.


But  many  (alas)  retourne  agayne  to  vyce
And  bacwarde  agayne  go  to  theyr  olde  offence
And  he  that  the  seruyce  of  god  dyd  exercyse
In  mekenes  vertue  and  lowe  obedyence
Is  fallyn  nowe  to  all  inconuenyence
Alas  the  state  of  them  is  moche  vnsure
Whiche  chaunge  good  for  yll  agayne  nature

The  quakynge  seke  in  bed  lyenge  prostrate
Halfe  dede  halfe  lyuynge,  by  some  mortall  wounde
And  of  all  his  myghtis  of  manhode  clene  pryuate
Can  nat  be  hole,  but  if  plasters  be  bounde
Vnto  his  grefe  to  clens  it  by  the  grounde
Purgynge  it  by  suche  playsters  mundifycatyue
And  than  it  closynge  by  playsters  sanatyue

And  corrosyues,  somtyme  he  must  endure
To  purge  that  flesshe  whiche  is  putrefyed
Kepynge  and  obseruynge  good  dyet  alway  sure
But  by  this  way  whan  his  payne  is  modefyed
His  wounde  nere  hole,  fresshe  and  claryfyed
Withdrawe  he  his  playsters  for  a  day  or  twayne
His  sore  reneweth  and  rottyth  than  agayne

And  oft  becomyth  wors  than  it  was  before
Corruptynge  the  flesshe  and  skyn.  on  euery  syde
Right  so  it  fortunes  by  a  gostely  sore
In  vertue  we  ought  perseuerantly  abyde
Whiche  to  the  heuenly  regyon  shall  vs  gyde
It  nought  auayleth  thyself  to  boste  and  cry
That  thou  haste  somtyme  lyued  rightwysly


1  I  2 Of  t/je/n  that  heg-yn  to  do  well.


It  is  nat  ynough  from  vyce  the  to  defende
One  day  or  twayne  or  onys  to  haue  done  well
But  that  man  that  contynuys  to  the  ende
Shall  neuer  nede  to  fere  the  paynes  of  hell
For  it  expressed  is  playne  in  the  gospell
Who  that  perseueryth  in  vertue  and  in  grace
To  his  last  ende,  in  heuen  shall  haue  a  place

Therfore  I  pray,  and  humbly  you  beseke  :

Lerne  good  and  vertue,  and  be  therin  actyfe

Nat  onely  for  one  day  nor  yet  one  weke

But  it  contynue  the  dayes  of  all  your  lyfe

Thynges  thus  begone,  of  man,  childe,  mayde,  or  wyfe

Ar  moste  acceptable  to  god  our  sauyour

And  nat  to  do  well,  and  leue  within  an  hour.

Tenuoy  of  Barclay.
O  youth  full  frayle  blynde  youth  I  say  agayne
In  thy  tendernes  stody  thou  to  begyn
To  serue  thy  maker  in  vertues  souerayne
And  se  thou  surely  rote  thy  self  therin
That  thou  the  neuer  pollute  with  dedely  synne
And  if  thou  fall  agayne  ryse  hastely
Than  shalt  thou  sothly  heuen  obtayne  and  wynne
If  thou  perseuer  and  so  lyue  stedfastly.


Of  folys  that  despyse  deth  makynge  no
prouysion  therfore.


O  cruell  deth,  o  fury  fauourl?s
So  fyers  art  thou  of  loke  and  countenaunce
That  thou  nought  sparest  vertue  nor  ryches
Beauty  nor  byrth,  strength  nor  valyaunce
Eche  creature  thou  bryngest  to  vttraunce
Thou  shewest  none  his  season  nor  his  tyde
So  is  he  vnwyse  that  wyll  the  nat  prouyde.

VOL.  II.  H


114


Ofjolys  that  despyse  cleth


O  Brether  in  Christ  conioyned  by  byleue
Our  blynde  presumpcion  doth  vs  sore  abuse
Trust  of  longe  lyfe  our  soules  oft  doth  greue
We  haue  playne  warnynge  and  yet  we  it  refuse
Vnwarely  we  wander,  and  no  thynge  we  muse
On  deth  :  but  despyse  his  furour  intretable
Whiche  sure  shall  come,  though  tyme  be  varyable

Man  dye  thou  shalt  :  this  thynge  thou  knowest  playne

But  as  for  the  tyme,  howe,  where,  and  whan

These  ar  and  shall  be  kept  vncertayne

Fro  the,  and  me,  and  almoste  from  euery  man

Thus  dye  thou  must  prouyde  it  if  thou  can

We  all  must  therto,  olde,  yonge,  yll  and  goode  ;•

Our  lyfe  styll  passyth  as  water  of  a  flode

Ly,  stande,  or  go,  ete,  slepe,  or  drynke
Or  in  what  so  euer  thynge  thou  the  exercyse
Yet  deth  cometh  thoughe  thou  nat  theron  thynke
But  for  that  we  dye  in  suche  varyable  wyse
Thou  this  day  :  if  suche  a  chaunce  doth  ryse
Thy  neyghbour  shall  folowe  outher  first  or  last
Therfore  on  hope  all  men  theyr  myndes  cast

On  hope  to  lyue  set  mortall  men  theyr  mynde
Thoughe  they  be  seke  yet  thynke  they  nat  to  dye
So  this  vayne  hope  doth  them  disceyue  and  blynde
If  deth  them  stryke  in  that  infirmyte
Ye  and  also  we  often  tymes  may  se
That  deth  is  lyke  to  men  opprest  in  age
And  to  yonge  children  and  men  of  hye  corage


makynge  no  proiiys'ion  therfore. i  1 5


Thy  ernest  is  layde,  the  bargen  must  abyde
It  may  nat  be  broke,  but  where  as  synne  doth  growe
And  a  pore  wretche  in  vicious  lyfe  mysgyde
Suche  wretches  thynke  that  deth  is  neuer  to  slowe
And  many  one  in  vyce  habounde  and  flowe
Alway  thoughe  they  that  dye  in  synne  mortall
(As  Dauyd  sayth)  dye  must  rufull  deth  of  all

Deth  is  (as  I  haue  sayd)  so  intreatable

That  all  he  consumeth,  as  his  wyll  doth  aply

Thoughe  one  in  beauty  be  incomparable

In  strength  or  riches,  thoughe  god  hym  magnyfye

It  nought  auayleth :  at  last  yet  must  he  dye

Prolongyd  is  no  tyme,  if  furour  the  submyt

Of  cruell  deth,  thou  must  obey  to  it

Thy  strength  decays,  and  thy  breth  wexeth  short
Thy  vaynes  labours,  and  be  somwhat  colde
Thy  body  wexeth  styf  without  comfort
Anone  thy  beauty  pleasaunt,  semeth  olde
Thy  vysage  chaungynge  by  lokes  manyfolde
Somtymes  Pale  with  colour  chaungeable
Somtyme  as  lede,  from  deth  scant  varyable

Thy  herte  quaketh  thy  vaynes  lesyth  myght
Corrupt  blode  doth  thy  colour  putryfye
Thy  throte  hurtlyth,  thy  wordes,  and  thy  syght
Theyr  naturall  offyce  shall  vnto  the  denye
With  suche  passions  all  mortall  men  shall  dye
For  lyfe  shall  fayle  whan  deth  shall  take  his  place
No  man  of  lyfe  can  charter  here  purchace


1 1 6  Of  folys  that  despyse  deth


O  deth  howe  bytter  is  thy  remembraunce

And  howe  cruell  is  it  thy  paynes  to  indure

To  them  that  in  erth  settyth  theyr  plesaunce -  -  -

On  wretchyd  ryches,  vnstable  and  vnsure

And  on  vayne  pleasours :  yet  euery  creature  '.

Must  from  this  riches  (though  they  be  loth)  depart

"Whan  deth  them  woundeth  with  his  mortall  dart

It  is  thynge  Folysshe  to  trouble  and  encomber '  •

That  man  that  restyth  and  slepyth  quyetly

His  tyme  was  come,  and  we  in  the  same  slomber

Shall  be  opprest :  god  wot  howe  sodaynly  •  •

We  all  must  therto,  there  is  no  remedy

It  hath  to  many  ben  profyte,  and  gladnes

To  dye  or  theyr  day  to  auoyde  this  wretchydnes

And  ende  the  myseries,  and  labours  of  this  lyfe
And  many  one  as  wery  of  this  short  lyfe  and  payne
Them  selfe  hath  murdred  with  theyr  owne  hande  and  knyfe
And  some  with  poyson  also  them  selfe  hath  slayne
With  snare,  with  water  or  with  some  other  trayne
The  cause  why  they  them  selfe  haue  thus  destroyd
Was  worldly  payne  and  mysery  to  auoyde

Yet  better  were  it  lyue  a  lyfe  myserable  . • -  "

Than  thus  to  dye,  yet  so  haue  nat  they  thought

But  naturall  deth  to  some  is  profytable

To  suche  as  therby  out  of  bondage  ar  brought  '

And  paynfull  Pryson,  In  all  the  worlde  is  nought

Concernynge  payne,  dole  wo  and  mysery  -  •

But  that  deth  fyndeth  therfore  a  remedy.


makynge  no  prouysion  therfore.  117


Deth  with  his  fote  doth  worldly  thynges  tred

O  howe  many  that  hath  ben  in  captyuyte

And  bytter  Pryson  doth  deth  clene  quyte  and  red

By  it  all  fetters  and  Chaynes  lowsyd  be

All  worldly  tourment  all  payne  and  cruelte

Is  red  by  deth :  and  they  that  sholde  haue  bene

In  payne  contynuall,  by  deth  ar  quyted  clene

Deth  is  delyuered,  and  from  fortune  lyberall
It  tourneth  downe  the  Castels  and  the  toures
Of  kynges  Prynces  and  other  men  royall
With  lyke  cruelte  of  payne  and  sodayne  shoures
As  pore  mennys  howsis  lyuynge  in  doloures
For  deth  hym  selfe  behaueth  in  one  rate
And  in  lyke  mesure  to  begger  and  estate

And  thoughe  that  fortune  cruell  and  vniust
Exalt  yll  lyuers  and  rightwyse  men  oppres
Deuydynge  honour  and  ryches  where  hir  lust
Deth  all  the  same  doth  order  and  redres
With  egall  payne  by  weght  of  rightwysnes
There  is  no  prayer,  rewarde,  nor  myght  that  may
Of  deth  prolonge  one  houre  of  the  set  day

This  dredfull  deth  of  colour  pale  and  wan

To  pore  and  ryche  in  fauour  is  egall

It  spareth  neyther  woman  childe  nor  man

But  is  indiiferent  both  to  great  and  small

For  as  sayth  Flaccus,  Poet  heroycall

With  one  fote,  it  stryketh  at  the  dore

Of  kynges  palaysys,  and  of  the  wretched  pore


I  I  8  Of  folys  thai  despyse  deth


It  caryth  nought  for  Pryde,  ne  statelynes
Nor  myght,  as  we  se  oft  by  experyence
It  is  nat  peasyd  with  treasour  nor  ryches
With  cunnynge  of  Retoryke  ne  glosyd  eloquence
To  Pope  and  Begger  it  hath  no  difference.
With  throte  lyke  wyde  on  echone  doth  he  gape
None  can  his  clawes  auoyde,  fle,  nor  escape

Yet  he  nat  grauntyth  to  any  creature

As  symple  man  great  Lorde  or  Prynce  souerayne

Of  dethes  hour,  to  be  stedfast  and  sure

To  euery  man  his  comynge  is  sodayne

Except  to  them  that  ar  condemned  playne

Whiche  by  theyr  foly  lewdely  prouoke  theyr  tyme

By  theft  or  murder  or  ellys  some  other  cryme

It  maketh  no  force  :  there  is  no  difference
Whether  thou  dye  yonge  or  els  in  extreme  age  .
For  this  is  sure  eche  creature  shall  hense
Both  state  and  Begger  shall  pas  the  same  passage
Lyue  an  hundryth  wynter  increasynge  thy  lynage
Yet  to  thy  lyfe  deth,  ende  shall  set  and  gyue
But  fewe  ar  that  nowe  one  hundreth  wynter  lyue

And  than  at  last :  whether  he  by  lefe  or  lothe
His  wretchyd  Carcas  shall  the  voyde  graue  fulfyll
And  many  one  also  to  his  ende  gothe
(As  wery  of  his  lyfe)  at  his  desyre  and  wyll
No  man  hath  fauour  (of  deth)  to  byde  here  styll
The  father  dede :  the  sone  shall  after  hastely
And  oft  dyes  the  sone  before  the  Father  dye


makynge  no  proiiysion  therjhre.  119


One  after  other,  out  of  this  lyfe  we  shall

Syster  and  brother,  neuewe  syre  and  dame

Tyll  at  the  last  from  lyfe  we  gone  be  all

And  the  elementis  pourgyd  by  fyry  flame

To  mourne  for  deth  therfore  thou  art  to  blame

Or  crye  for  the  dede,  and  dolefully  to  wepe

Thy  cryenge  (fole)  shall  nat  wake  hym  of  that  slepe

Thynge  worldly  that  to  man  is  delectable

This  deth  disdaynes,  ne  no  commaundement

Can  turne  nor  fere  hym :  his  promys  is  so  stable

His  cruell  daunce  no  man  mortall  can  stent

Nor  lede  his  cruell  cours  after  his  intent

The  pope  nor  Emperour,  if  they  be  in  his  hande

Hath  no  maner  myght  his  sore  cours  to  withstande

The  bysshop,  lorde,  the  Pore  man,  lyke  a  state

Deth  in  his  daunce  ledyth  by  the  sleue

He  oft  causeth  men  them  self  to  fatygate

And  wery  in  his  daunce,  longe  or  they  wolde  byleue

But  thoughe  his  besy  coursys  doth  them  greue

He  gyuys  no  space  to  man  to  stande  nor  syt

But  sue  the  trompe  tyll  he  come  to  the  pyt

There  neuer  was  man  of  so  great  pryde  ne  pompe

Nor  of  suche  myght,  youth  nor  man  of  age

That  myght  gaynsay  the  sounde  of  dethes  trompe

He  makes  man  daunce  and  that  without  courage

As  well  the  state  as  man  of  lowe  lynage

His  cruell  cours  is  ay  so  intretable

That  mannys  myght  to  withstande  is  nat  able


I  2  o  ^ffob^  ^^^^^  despyse  deth


Whan  thou  art  dede,  what  profyte  or  auayle
Hast  thou  in  toumbes  hye  ryche  and  excellent
That  Corps  that  lackes  all  suche  gay  aparayle
Shall  be  ouercouered  with  the  fyrmament
The  blynde,  Arthemisia  yet  was  of  this  intent
A  sumtuous  toumbe  and  ryche  to  edefye
By  vayne  opynyon  hir  name  to  magnyfye

This  toumbe  was  shynynge  with  syluer  and  pure  golde

So  gayly  couchyd  and  set  with  precious  stone

Alayd  with  asure  and  coloures  manyfolde

That  of  the  seuen  wonders  of  kyngdomes  echone

That  ar  vnder  Son  :  that  rekened  is  for  one

Yet  this  gay  tombe  abyll  for  any  kynge

To  hir  pore  soule  profyted  no  thynge

Chemnys  also  as  dyodorus  sayes

Byldyd  a  speere  hye  and  wonderous

To  here  remembraunce  of  his  tyme  and  dayes

This  speere  was  costely  dere  and  sumptuous

And  of  quantyte  so  great  and  marueylous

That  a  thousande  men  and.  iii.  hundreth  fulfyde

In  twenty  yeres  coude  it  skantly  bylde

The  brother  of  the  sayd  chemnys  in  lyke  wyse
Brought  all  his  Royalme  vnto  pouertye
Whyle  he  another  lyke  speere  dyd  deuyse
For  his  vayne  toumbe,  so  that  his  comonte
And  other  workmen  after  one  degre
Were  longe  compellyd  in  this  worke  to  etc
Herbys  and  rotis  for  lacke  of  other  mete


makynge  Jio  prouysion  therfore.  ill


One  Rodopis  callyd  by  suche  a  name

Byldyd  suche  another  vayne  sepulture

The  riche  Amasis  also  dyd  the  same

But  what  was  this,  els  but  a  vayne  pleasure

It  is  great  Foly  to  any  creature

To  make  so  great  expences  and  trauayle

About  vayne  thynges  that  ar  of  none  auayle

So  great  expences,  suche  Folysshe  coste  and  vayne

Is  done  on  toumbes  and  all  by  pompe  and  pryde

That  this  my  shyp  can  it  scarsly  contayne

But  the  soulys  helth  (alas)  is  set  asyde

Whiche  euer  sholde  lyue  and  without  ende  abyde

And  the  caryon  and  fylth :  is  magnyfyed

By  suche  vayne  toumbes  that  nowe  ar  edefyed

Beholde  a  toumbe  and  precious  sepulture

Thought  it  be  gay :  aduyse  what  is  within

A  rottyn  caryon  vyler  than  all  ordure

By  this  proude  toumbe  the  soule  no  welth  can  wynne

But  is  Damnyd  if  the  body  dyed  in  synne

So  is  it  Foly  great  coste  and  vanyte

To  vse  in  Toumbes  suche  curyosyte

Euery  grounde  vnto  god  is  sanctyfyed

A  right  wyse  man  that  well  doth  lyue  and  dye

Shall  in  hye  heuen  in  soule  be  glorifyed

In  what  euer  grounde  his  wretchyd  Carcas  lye

But  where  a  toumbe  is  byldyd  curyously

It  is  but  cause  of  Pryde  to  the  ofsprynge

Helpynge  the  soule  right  lytell  or  no  thynge


12  2  ^ffib^  ^^^^  despyse  deth.


Thenuoy  of  Barclay.

Man  kepe  thy  body  from  synne  exces  and  cryme
And  if  thou  fall  aryse  shortly  agayne
Be  euer  redy,  prouyde  thy  deth  by  tyme
For  dye  thou  shalt  that  one  thynge  is  certayne
And  oft  deth  stelyth  on  man  by  cours  sodayne
He  warneth  none,  but  who  that  dyes  in  syn
Dyes  worst  of  all,  and  sure  is  of  hell  payne
Thus  is  it  peryll  longe  to  abyde  therin

Vnto  an  Archer  deth  may  I  well  compare
Whiche  with  his  dart  stryketh  somtyme  the  marke
That  is  last  age  delyuerynge  therii  from  care
Of  mundayne  thought,  and  payne  of  worldly  warke
Somtyme  he  shotyth  ouer :  as  he  were  darke
Of  syght,  and  somtyme  to  short :  or  els  asyde
But  well  is  hym  that  takyth  thought  and  carke
At  euery  season  his  dartis  to  prouyde.


Of  Folys  that  despyse  god.


Whan  that  man  synneth  or  therto  doth  assent
Thoughe  god  be  of  moche  mercy  and  great  pacience
SufFrynge  hym  escape  without  punysshement
And  often  is  nat  hasty  to  punysshe  eche  offence
Yet  thou  blynde  Fole  voyde  of  all  prudence
He  gyueth  nat  the  his  berde  to  diaw  and  brast
For  euery  synne  he  punyssheth  first  or  last.


124 0/ Folys  that  despyse  god.


What  man  myght  sufFer  with  mynde  pacieiit
These  folys  that  stryue  agaynst  theyr  creatour
With  wordes  despysynge  our  lorde  oranypotent
And  hym  denyenge  as  nat  theyr  gouernour
Both  day  and  nyght  increasynge  theyr  errour
All  goddes  preceptis  these  folys  thus  confounde
With  vicious  wordes  whiche  doth  theyr  soules  wounJe

They  vtter  wordes,  full  of  all  folysshenes
Agaynst  the  Father  of  heuen  they  hym  nat  drede
No  more  than  he  were,  of  no  myghtynes
Lyke  to  mankynde,  or  come  of  mannys  sede
Of  his  great  power  they  haue  no  fere  nor  hede
Nor  yet  aduertyce  his  rightwyse  iugement
Ne  that  yll  doers  ar  worthy  punysshement

What  menest  thou  by  god  the  Father  eternall
Howe  takest  thou  hym,  howe  countest  thou  his  lawe
Whiche  by  thy  presumpcion  foule  and  infernall
Dare  be  so  bolde  his  berde  this  wyse  to  drawe
By  his  hye  myght  thou  countest  nat  a  strawe
And  than  whan  god,  by  mercy  and  pyte
A  whyle  the  suffreth  for  thy  dede  to  go  fre

And  doth  nat  punysshe  this  synne  in  contynent

Therfore  thou  thynkest  that  god  hath  pardoned  the

Bycause  the  lyghtnynge  or  thounder  vyolent

And  other  tempestous  stormes  whan  they  be

Ouertourneth  downe  an  oke  or  other  tre

And  suffreth  the  and  thy  hows  to  be  vnbrent

Thus  thynkest  thou  :  the  pardonyd  by  god  omnypotent


Of  Folys  that  despyse  god.  125


O  people  of  cursyd  hope  and  confydence
What  ioy  haue  ye :  or  what  a  lewde  delyte
Without  amendement  alway  to  sue  offence
And  more  to  offende,  bycause  ye  haue  respyte
Is  godes  lustyce  (thynke  ye)  decayd  quyte
Nay  god  is  more  rightwyse  than  creature  terrene
All  thynge  he  seys,  no  thynge  can  stop  his  iyen

Thynkest  thou  that  thy  lyfe  shall  euer  endure
That  thou  mayst  haue  longe  tyme  our  lorde  to  pray
And  in  thy  last  age  of  pardone  to  be  sure
O  fole  vnrulyd  lay  this  lewde  mynde  away
Trust  nat  to  lyfe,  for  vnsure  is  thy  day
We  all  must  dye :  but  he  that  styll  doth  syn
In  hope  of  longe  lyfe  he  often  dyes  therin

God  suffreth  the  oftymes  to  offende

And  folowe  thy  wyll  and  sensualyte

To  proue  if  thou  thy  lewde  lyfe  wylt  amende

Expellynge  thy  carnall  and  blynde  fragilyte

But  if  thou  contynue  in  thy  iniquyte

The  more  space  that  thou  hast  had  before

Thy  payne  and  tourment  shall  after  be  the  more

Alas  suche  ar  infect  with  great  offence

That  thus  on  synne  infix  alway  theyr  mynde

They  haue  no  wysdome  grate,  goodnes,  ne  prudence

But  kepe  theyr  herte  in  darke  errour  and  blynde

That  to  true  byleue  it  no  thynge  is  inclyned

Whan  synfull  errour  is  set  in  theyr  intent

They  god  despyse,  and  his  commaundement


12  6 Of  Folys  that  despyse  god.


These  folys  in  nianer  nought  care  for  goddes  myght
Whiche  by  his  worde  hath  made  eche  element
The  Sonne :  the  mone,  the  derkenes  and  the  lyght
The  day,  the  nyght,  the  sterrys  and  firmament
Whiche  knowys  all  tymes  eche  hour  and  eche  moment
Both  the  tyme  past  and  tyme  that  is  to  come
Our  lyfe  and  deth  he  knowys  by  his  wysdome

O  man  myserable :  o  wretchyd  creature  ■  '

Sholdest  thou  agaynst  thy  souerayne  lorde  rebel!

Whiche  to  thyntent :  that  thou  sholde  nat  endure

Eternall  deth.  sende  to  tourment  cruell

His  onely  son  to  red  thy  soule  fro  hell

The  whiche  also  with  his  biode  hath  the  bought

Therfore  loue  hym,  and  turne  this  frowarde  thought

Thou  art  nat  so  redy  to  gyue  the  to  penaunce

And  to  set  thy  mynde  on  vertue  parfytely

Forsakynge  thy  synne  and  olde  mysgouernaunce

But  god  is  als  redy  to  take  the  to  mercy

Thus  mayst  thou  thynke  both  sure  and  stedfastly .  ;

That  if  thou  for  thy  synnes  mourne  and  wayle

God  shall  the  here,  and  quyte  the  thy  trauayle

But  who  that  hath  herte  harde  in  suche  a  wyse '  ;

And  rotyd  in  suche  malyce  and  furour

That  by  the  same  by  worde  he  dare  despyse

His  god,  his  maker,  his  hekh  and  sauyour

By  synne,  contempt  or  lyuynge  in  errour

Suche  (but  if  he  chaunge  his  intent)

Is  damnyd,  to  endure  infernal!  punyssliement.


;j-  that  despyse  god.


127


Thenuoy  of  Barclay.

O  people  proude,  and  of  goodnes  ignoraunt
Enclyne  your  myndes  sore  blyndyd  by  offence
Mollyfy  your  hertis  that  ar  harde  as  adamant
Expell  ye  this  pryde  and  stately  insolence
Presume  ye  no  more  in  worde,  nor  conscience
Your  lord,  defender,  and  maker  to  despyse
For  who  that  doth,  shall  outher  here  or  hence
At  last  be  rewardyd,  and  that  in  ferefull  wyse.


Blasphemers  and  sweres  of  the  name
of  god,  and  of  his  Sayntis.


Nowe  commyth  to  cours  to  wiyte  of  the  errours
Of  men  abhomynable,  of  women  mayde  and  childe
Whiche  agaynst  Christ  ar  newe  tourmentours
His  skyn  terynge,  wors  than  lowes  it  defylyd
O  man  myscheuous  by  whome  Christ  is  reuylyd
Thou  worthy  art  to  dye  in  soule  and  in  body
That  luge  that  it  suffreth  sore  shall  it  abye.


Of  Blasphemers  and  szveres


29


O  Myrthles  myse  of  eloquence  barayne
Cast  out  thy  terys  and  mourne  without  mesure
For  from  sore  waylynge  my  selfe  can  nat  refrayne
Nor  as  I  thynke  none  erthly  creature
Consyderynge  howe  men  in  raalyce  them  inure
If  there  were  reason  within  harde  stele  or  flynt
From  carefuU  terys  I  wot  they  coude  nat  stynt

If  beste  had  reason,  wyt,  or  mannys  brayne
To  note  and  aduyse  mannys  mysgouernaunce
Without  all  dout  I  thynke  it  wolde  complayne
For  mannys  synne,  and  wylfull  ignoraunce
Therfore  all  ye  that  haue  wyll  and  pleasaunce
To  rede  of  the  Folys  of  this  iniquyte
Expell  hye  corage,  and  than  come  wepe  with  me

For  certaynly,  I  trowe  no  man  coude  wryte
The  vyce  nowe  vsed,  agaynst  all  ordynaunce
Nor  yet  that  rede,  whiche  other  men  indyte
Without  sore  waylynge,  and  terys  in  habundaunce
For  well  I  wot  my  herte  is  in  greuaunce
Whan  I  consyder  and  wryte,  thus  wyse  of  syn
Seynge  howe  the  worlde  defylyd  is  therin

But  though  I  haue  had  great  dilygence  with  payne
Before  this,  to  blame  blynde  Folys  abhomynable
Yet  this  my  labour  almoste  was  tane  in  vayne
For  none  to  this  present  sort  ar  comparable
These  folys  in  theyr  dedys  ar  so  detestable
That  all  synne  and  vyce  vnder  the  firmament
Theyr  vicious  hertis  can  nat  pleas  nor  content


130 Of  Blasphemers  and  sweres.


Yet  seke  they  wors :  agaynst  our  lorde  aboue
By  theyr  yll  tunge  they  tourment  newe  with  payne
And  though  he  onys  dyed  in  erth  for  mannys  loue
These  caytyfs  hym  tourment  nowe  in  heuen  agayne
These  folys  (with  newe  sperys)  set  theyr  brayne
To  wounde,  our  lorde,  whiche,  can  do  hym  no  grefe
Saue  that  he  seyth  man  seke  his  owne  myschefe

Agaynst  Christ  they  cast  and  throwe  great  othys
Blasphemynge  agaynst  dyuyne  commaundement
Wordes  of  Enuy  whiche  god  almyghty  lothys
They  throwe  agayne  hym  as  trayters  vyolent
O  cursyd  creatures,  with  armour  impotent
That  lorde  that  dyed  to  red  them  out  of  payne
They  haue  good  wyll  to  tere  his  herte  agayne

The  one  blasphemys  by  christis  hede  and  brayne
Grutchynge  and  grennynge  for  symple  thynge  or  nought
Another  Caytyfe,  or  myscheuous  vylayne
By  all  his  holy  membres,  to  swere  hath  lytyll  thought
Another  by  the  blode  wherwith  he  hath  vs  bought
His  Face  his  herte,  or  by  his  crowne  of  thorne
Wherwith  (for  them)  his  skyn  was  rent  and  torne

Another  out  vomytis  wordes  execrable
Agaynst  our  lordes  holy  woundes  fyue
His  handes  his  fete  and  his  crosse  venerable
Wheron  he  dyed  to  make  mankynde  a  lyue
That  fole  that  grettest  othes  can  contryue
Blasphemynge  god,  men  hym  moste  magnyfye
Thus  newe  agayne  our  lorde  they  crucyfye


hsphemers  and  sweres.


O  cruell  Caytyfs  tyrantis  and  tourmentours

O  blynde  blasphemers,  o  men  brought  vp  in  vyce

O  ye  fals  folowers,  and  inherytours

Of  the  cruell  lowes  myschefe  and  malyce

To  moche  immoderate  madnes  doth  attyce

Your  myndes  amasyd  by  othes  to  tourment

The  sayntis  of  heuen  :  and  god  omnypotent

O  ye  blasphemers ;  o  tourmentours  vnkynde
Alas  what  mean  ye  your  maker  thus  to  tere
Syns  in  the  Gospell  we  playnly  wryten  fynde
That  no  creature  iyuynge  ought  to  swere
By  ought  that  god  made,  no  nat  by  a  here
Of  his  owne  hede,  our  othes  ought  to  be
(As  Christ  vs  techyth)  onely  (nay)  and  (ye)

But  nowe  in  our  othes  is  god  omnypotent

With  all  his  membres  and  sayntis  euerychone

All  that  god  made,  and  euery  sacrament

The  fere  of  payne  (alas)  is  from  vs  gone

Our  hertis  harder  than  flynt  or  marbell  stone

Alas  we  tere  our  Lord  that  hath  vs  bought

By  our  blasphemynge,  and  that  for  thynge  of  nought

The  tables,  tenys,  card  is,  or  the  dyce

Ar  chefe  begynnynge  of  this  vnhappynes

For  whan  the  game  wyll  nat  well  aryse

And  all  the  players  troubled  by  dronkenes

Than  suche  Caytyfs  as  ioy  in  this  exces

At  eche  worde  labour  our  sauyour  to  tere

"With  othes  abhomynable  whiche  they  vngoodly  swere


132 Of  Blasphemers  and  sweres.


Alas  these  folys  repute  it  but  a  game

To  cast  suche  wordes  agayne  theyr  creatour

Them  selfe  forswerynge,  blasphemynge  christis  name

And  he  that  is  moste  gyuen  to  this  errour

Is  nowe  reputyd  moste  worthy  of  honour

He  shall  no  rule  in  court  nor  kechen  here

(As  this  tyme  goys)  but  he  can  crake  and  swere

The  yonge  (alas)  this  vyce  doth  here  and  lere

With  stody  intentyf,  and  parfyte,  aduertence

Of  suche  as  ar  olde  :  to  blaspheme,  and  to  swere

The  name  of  god  without  all  reuerence

In  so  moche  that  they  thynke  it  none  offence

To  swere  the  holy  Masse,  that  othe  is  nowe  so  ryfe

In  mouth  of  man,  mayden  childe  and  wyfe

It  was  onys  ordeyned  by  constytucion "  ' ■  ;  '  ■

As  I  haue  harde,  that  both  symple  men  and  hye

Sholde  onely  swere  by  that  occupacion

The  whiche  theyr  Faders  dyd  vse  and  occupy

But  nowe'  eche  sweryth  the  Mas  coraonly

Whiche  is  the  prestis  seruyce  and  besynes

So  mennys  others  theyr  Fathers  doth  expres

Alas  no  honour,  laude  nor  reuerence  ■  ■'

Is  had  nowe  vnto  that  blessyd  sacrament • .  '
But  boyes,  and  men  without  all  difference  '
Tere  that  holy  body  of  god  omnypotent
As  it  were  iowes  to  his  passion  they  assent
In  euery  bargayne,  in  ale  hous  and  at  borde
The  holy  Mas  is  euer  the  seconde  worde


Of  Blasphemers  and  sweres.  133


And  than  these  houndes  can  suche  excusys  fynde
As  to  theyr  soules  without  dout  ar  damnable
Saynge  it  is  gode  to  haue  the  masse  in  mynde
And  the  name  of  god,  and  his  sayntis  honourable
O  erytykes.  o  houndes  abhomynable
That  is  a  thynge  whiche  god  almyghty  lothys
To  take  his  name  in  thy  foule  mouth  by  othys

Yet  doest  thou  so,  there  is  no  maner  place
Nor  no  order  or  state  that  of  this  vyce  is  fre
For  whiche  (alas)  god  hath  withdrawyn  his  grace
And  oft  vs  chastyth  with  plage  of  cruelte
With  dyuers  dethes,  and  moche  aduesyte
For  this  vyce,  luges  ordayne  no  punysshement
Therfore  is  it  punysshyd  by  god  omnypotent

With  tempest  thunder,  lyghtnynge  hete  or  colde
With  murder  by  pestylence  or  els  by  some  batayle
And  sore  diseasys,  and  paynys  manyfolde
We  oft  by  hunger  haue  cause  also  to  wayle
The  come  destroyed  by  wynde  lyghtnynge  or  hayle
Of  suche  punysshement  we  wretchys  worthy  be
For  god  suffreth  nat  our  synnes  to  go  fre

Sennacheryb  as  the  bybyll  doth  expres
Nychanor  and  fyers  Antyochus  also
Hath  shamely  dyed  for  this  vnhappynes
Nat  only  they :  but  many  thousandes  mo
And  in  our  dayes  I  fere  lyst  payne  and  wo
Be  to  vs  sende  by  ryghtwyse  punysshement
For  swerynge  in  vayne,  by  god  omnypotent


134 Q/" Blasphemers  and  sweres.


O  father  almyghty  our  god  and  creatour
In  thy  hye  maiesty  syttynge  in  thy  trone
"With  blessyd  lesu  thy  sone  our  sauyour
And  o  holy  goste  whiche  ar  thre  in  one
O  god  graunt  thy  grace  to  this  our  regyon
Pardon  vs  synners  differ  thy  vengeaunce
Thoughe  we  deserue  it  by  our  mysgouernaunce

0  glorious  godhed  of  mercy  infynyte
Consyder  howe  mankynde  is  prone  alway  to  vyce
Graunt  vs  good  lord  layser  and  respyte

Out  of  our  slombrynge  sinnes  to  aryse
Let  thy  great  mercy  excell  thy  hye  iustyce
For  if  thy  iustyce  sholde  put  vs  to  vttraunce
We  sholde  be  damnyd  for  our  mysgouernaunce

If  thou  good  lorde  denye  vs  to  socour

On  whome  may  we  wretches  for  socour  cry  or  call

Alas  on  none,  therfore  let  our  errour

And  synfuU  dedes  clene  from  thy  presence  fall

Brynge  vs  vnto  thy  realme  celestyall

Where  in  thy  presence  we  may  set  our  plesaunce

And  so  haue  pardon  of  our  mysgouernaunce.

Thenuoy  of  Alexander  Barclay.
Alas  ye  swerers  mourne,  for  ye  haue  cause
Wasshe  ye  away  your  synne  with  syghes  depe
For  if  I  sholde  vtter  my  mynde  in  one  clause

1  say  your  vnkyndnes  causeth  me  to  wepe
What  god  hath  done  for  you  ye  take  no  kepe
But  tere  his  body  by  swerynge  hym  in  vayne
Thoughe  he  as  a  good  Shepherd,  dyed  for  his  shepe
That  is  for  you,  yet  wolde  ye  hym  sle  agayne


Of  Blasphemers  and  sweres.  135


Alas  blasphemer,  of  clirist  thou  hast  the  name

And  callyd  art  christen,  so  made  by  sacrament

But  sothly  that  name  is  to  thy  vtter  shame

Syns  thou  thy  god,  and  sauyour  dare  tourment

O  iuges  luges  ordayne  ye  punysshement

For  eche  blasphemer  wors  than  is  an  hell  hounde

For  if  ye  do  nat  our  lorde  omnypotent

Shall  vs  with  our  synnes  by  right  iustyce  confounde


Of  the  plage  and  indignacion  of  god,  and
folys  that  fere  nat  the  same.


Some  folys  meruayle  and  thynketh  it  great  wonder
Whan  god  vs  stryketh  for  our  yll  and  offence
With  tempest,  hete,  sekenes,  lyghtenynge  or  thunder
Hunger  or  colde,  outher  sodayne  pestylence
But  certaynly  his  hye  magnyfycence
Vs  worthely  punyssheth  for  our  iniquyte
For  vertue  alas  is  gone  from  eche  degre.


Of  the  plage  a?id  indlgtmcion  of  god.  137


O  folys  abusyd  whome  foly  doth  diffame

Say  what  auauntage  what  profyte  or  what  mede

Is  it  to  you  to  haue  christis  name

Whan  ye  nat  folowe  his  lyfe  in  worde  nor  dede

Of  his  preceptis  alas  we  take  no  hede

Yet  we  repute  vs  condigne  in  our  corage

To  be  callyd  christen,  and  christes  herytage

Who  that  in  vyce  his  dayes  doth  meyntayne

May  here  the  name  of  christ  our  sauyour

But  than  his  name  he  chalangeth  in  vayne

And  tyll  he  amende  led  in  a  blynde  errour

So  we  (alas)  often  forget  our  creatour

Abusynge  and  brakeynge  his  hyghe  commaundement

Nat  carynge  the  decrees  of  faders  auncient

We  take  christes  name,  but  his  doctryne  we  deny

And  from  his  way  (alas)  we  sore  declyne

And  to  all  ylles  our  myndes  we  aply

Whiche  often  doth  vs  brynge  to  perelous  ruyne

We  ioy  of  the  name,  and  the  true  fayth  deuyne

Trustyng  therby  to  eschewe  euerlastynge  payne

But  godly  workes  we  abhor  and  disdayne

lustyce  and  hir  lawes  ar  banysshyd  from  eche  place
Mysrule  amasyd  hir  braunches  doth  extende
All  vertuous  doctryne  away  from  vs  we  chase
Thus  goth  the  worlde  aprochynge  to  the  ende
Our  fayth  oftyme  doth  from  hir  chayre  discende
She  is  nat  so  parfyte  as  she  in  tyme  hath  be
Nor  yet  hir  two  systers  hope  and  charyte


138  Of  the  plage  and  indigJiaciott  of  god.


Alas  we  dayly  without  all  drede  commyt
Moche  cursyd  vyce  somtyme  by  ignoraunce
Somtyme  by  malyce,  somtyme  for  lacke  of  wyt
As  wors  than  the  turke,  in  our  mysgouernaunce
Thus  dame  mysrule  so  ledes  vs  in  hir  daunce
That  our  blynde  youth  with  to  moche  lybertye
Subdueth  our  bodyes  to  all  enormyte

So  all  mankynde  with  vyce  is  violate

Both  yonge  and  olde  stronge  feble  and  ympotent

The  ryche,  the  pore,  the  vylayne  and  estate

That  they  rebel!  agaynst  our  lorde  omnypotent

Howbeit  our  lorde  as  a  father  pacyent

Sayth  man  if  thou  my  lawes  kepe  and  loue

I  shall  the  lede  to  my  hye  Royalme  aboue

But  if  thou  by  malyce  selfe  wyll  or  neglygence
Dispyse  my  lawes  reputynge  them  but  vayne
Thou  shalt  nat  escape  ay  fre  for  thyne  offence
"Without  correccion  punysshement  and  payne
Yet  we  blynde  men  of  these  wordes  haue  disdayne
To  this  great  promes  alas  we  nought  intende
Ne  labour  nat  our  errours  to  amende

Suche  is  our  foly  we  thynke  nat  to  amende
But  styll  procede  in  our  olde  mysgouernaunce
We  ar  so  blyndyd  we  note  no  thynge  the  ende
Wherfore  our  lorde,  by  lustyces  balance
Of  suche  offenders  oft  taketh  vengeaunce
With  dyuers  plagis,  and  punysshement  terryble
As  pockes,  pestylence,  and  other  yll  horryble


and  of  filys  that  Jere  nat  the  same.  139


Though  mercy  sauour,  yet  god  of  his  iustyce
With  dyuers  plages  sundry  sorys  and  sekenes
And  dredfull  dolours  punyssheth  vs  for  vyce
Suche  is  the  order  of  his  hyghe  rightwysnes
Whan  men  contynue  in  theyr  vnhappynes
His  swerde  of  vengeaunce  vpon  them  to  extende
And  that  namely  whan  they  wyll  nat  amende

Cruell  Mars  somtyme  vs  thretenyth  with  batayle
Somtyme  our  bodyes  infect  with  pestylence
The  corne  somtyme  distroyed  with  rayne  or  hayle
Than  hunger  men  consumyth  without  all  difference
This  worthely  we  indure  for  our  offence
With  sore  diseasys  that  neuer  were  sene  before
But  yet  our  synnes  increasyth  euer  more

Somtyme  our  fode  with  hete  is  all  to  brent

Somtyme  by  colde  abyde  we  moche  payne

Some  hath  with  thunder  theyr  bodyes  all  to  rent

Now  frost,  nowe  snowe,  lyghtenynge,  tempest,  or  rayne

Some  with  thunder  boltis  theyr  bodyes  smyt  in  twayne

Some  murdred,  some  hanged  some  hedyd,  some  drownde

And  all  for  offence,  and  synne  done  on  the  grounde

The  dyuers  dethes  whiche  dayly  we  indure
And  dyuers  chaunces  whiche  dayly  on  vs  fall
I  trowe  there  is  none  erthly  creature
That  hath  the  brayne  to  comprehende  them  all
Though  that  his  dayes  were  nere  perpetuall
And  often  se  we  tokens  of  ferefull  punysshement
By  sygnes  and  sterres  of  the  clere  fyrmament


140  Of  the  plage  and  hidignacion  of  god.


We  ought  these  paynes  with  mekenes  to  indure

And  nat  to  grutche  therfore,  nor  god  to  blame

For  our  lewde  lyfe  forsoth  doth  them  procure

And  for  our  synnes  ar  we  worthy  of  the  same

Some  nacions  haue  ben  dryuen  out  in  shame

From  theyr  owne  londe  wandrynge  in  payne  and  stryfe

Whiche  sothly  was  for  theyr  disordred  lyfe

Wherfore  thou  man  thynke  sure  in  thyne  intent
That  synne  accostomed,  by  order  of  iustyce
Of  god  aboue,  cryeth  for  punysshement
Other  here  or  els  in  hell :  for  euery  vyce
Hath  suche  rewarde,  wherfore  let  vs  be  wyse
And  shortly  amende  our  olde  mysgouernaunce
Lyst  god  rightwysely  take  on  vs  vengeaunce

Barclay  the  translatour.  -
O  man  clere  thy  syght,  beholde  thy  owne  offence
And  mende  for  the  loue  of  god  omnypotent
For  if  thy  synne  stynke  alway  in  his  presence
Iustyce  shall  nat  let  the  auoyde  his  punysshement
And  though  mercy  be  nat  to  the  moch  vyolent
Nat  suffrynge  vengeaunce  shortly  on  the  to  fall
Yet  mende  betyme  be  nat  ouer  neglygent
Beware  the  ende  for  that  oft  payth  for  all.


Of  folysshe  exchanges  scorsynges  and
permutacions.


Who  that  hath  a  nedy  iourney  for  to  ryde
And  for  a  bagpype  his  hors  wyll  sell,  playnly
He  is  a  fole  and  lewdly  doth  hym  gyde
And  no  auauntage  shall  he  obtayne  therby.
So  hapnyth  it  to  hym  moste  comonly
Whiche  for  frayle  pleasour  of  one  day  or  twayne
Forsaketh  heuen,  sure  of  euerlastynge  payne


142


^olysshe  exchanp^es


Some  Folys  yet  shall  of  a  rowme  be  sure
Within  this  shyp  a  lowe  or  els  a  hye
Suche  ar  they  that  greuous  charges  wyll  indure
Subduynge  theyr  bodyes  to  labour  besely
Theyr  shulders  with  burthyns  chargynge  heuely
In  worldly  curys  sore  labourynge  in  vayne
Therby  hereafter  to  byde  infernall  payne

They  laboure  here  so  sore  for  wretchyd  goodes

That  whan  theyr  body  departyth  from  this  lyfe

Theyr  soule  is  plungyd  in  infernall  flodys

So  what  auayleth  them  to  be  so  actyfe

In  worldly  labour,  so  thoughtfuU  or  pensyfe

Here  in  this  erth  all  other  to  excell

And  after  toren  by  cruell  houndes  of  hell

He  that  here  labours  in  erth  for  frayfe  ryches

SufFreth  more  sorowe  and  payne  contynually

Than  he  that  lyueth  alone  in  wyldernes

And  hym  in  goddes  seruyce  doth  aply

Abydynge  in  fastynge,  and  praynge  deuoutly

So  worldly  wretchys  (as  it  apereth  playne)

Take  here  sore  labour  to  wynne  euerlastynge  payne

Who  that  serueth  god  with  parfyte  dylygence
Shall  in  this  lyfe  auoyde  moche  worldly  wo
And  be  rewardyd  in  heuen  whan  he  goth  hens
Where  as  he  that  serueth  this  worlde  shall  nat  so
Yet  of  this  sort  fynde  we  right  many  mo
That  to  haue  ryches  all  besynes  employ
Rather  than  to  get  in  heuen  eternall  ioy


scorsynges  and  permutaclons.


Mysrule,  wast,  falshode,  and  also  couetyse,
With  other  vyces  as  pryde  or  statelynes
Vs  sorer  labours  causeth  to  exercyse
Than  vertue  doth :  or  godly  holynes
For  them  fewe  men  wyll  take  great  besynes
Easy  is  the  way  to  vyce  and  men  are  prone
To  folowe  that  cursyd  way  almoste  echone

Before  our  syght  it  dayly  apereth  playne
What  great  labours,  what  charge  and  besynes
Proude  people  indure  theyr  pryde  for  meyntayne
With  dyuers  garnamentis  presentynge  statelynes
Onely  on  clothynge  bestowynge  theyr  ryches
Suche  set  all  vertuous  besynes  asyde
And  onely  labour  for  to  meyntayne  theyr  pryde

Somtyme  suche  dare  set  theyr  lyfe  in  ieopardy
Nat  ferynge  lustyce,  but  the  lawe  to  violate
For  to  meyntayne  theyr  statelynes  therby
By  proude  apparayle,  nat  mete  for  theyr  estate
Right  so^  Couetyse  after  lyke  maner  rate
By  ardaunt  desyre  of  hir  blynde  iniquyte
Draweth  men  to  peryls  both  of  londe  and  se

To  dyuers  peryls  men  boldly  them  subdue

In  hope  frayle  ryches  to  purchace  and  obtayne

But  for  the  loue  of  goodnes  or  vertue

Right  fewe  or  none  wyll  put  them  selfe  to  payne

For  money  man  sayles  the  troublous  se  of  spayne

And  moche  of  the  worlde  he  compasyth  about

Of  ieopardy  and  peryll  without  all  maner  dout


144


Of  folysshe  exchanges


Who  that  by  couetyse  is  drawen  and  opprest
Is  neuer  at  eas  ne  quyetnes  of  mynde
By  nyght  nat  takynge  slepe  ne  naturall  rest
With  fyry  ropys  this  fury  so  doth  them  bynde
They  fere  no  flode,  no  colde,  tempest,  or  wynde,
There  is  no  labour  nor  colde  that  can  them  dere
The  hunger  of  golde  them  maketh  without  fere

O  man  commyttynge  thy  lyfe  vnto  the  streme

Alas  note  well  thy  desyrous  vanyte

Howe  thou  the  auenterest  in  holowe  beame

To  pas  the  see  in  contynuall  ieopardye

And  all  this  thou  doest  of  gode  to  haue  plentye

But  for  the  loue  of  god  thy  creatour

Thou  skarsly  woldest  endure  a  symple  shoure

Some  for  vayne  ryches  folowes  another  vyce
Watchynge  by  myght  in  wynter  sharpe  and  colde
To  encreas  his  purse,  by  cardes  or  by  dyce
There  syttynge  in  paynes  and  peryls  manyfolde
Such  sle  them  selfe  longe  tyme  or  they  be  olde
And  waste  theyr  youth  without  all  auauntage
Theyr  soule  submyttynge  to  Lucyfers  bondage

What  shall  I  say  or  of  the  maners  wryte
Of  dronkardes  or  glotons  Whiche  without  mesure
Onely  in  theyr  wombes  set  theyr  hole  delyte
Corruptynge  and  chargynge  them  self  beyonde  nature
So  whan  the  body  can  nat  suche  rule  indure
Theyr  lyfe  they  ende  and  oft  by  deth  sodayne
And  for  this  labour  rewardyd  with  hell  payne


scorsynges  and  perrniitacions.  145


What  shall  I  say  of  the  paynfull  fantasy
Whiche  he  abydeth  and  suffreth  day  and  nyght
Whiche  for  his  wyfe  taketh  thought  and  ielowsy
Hir  alway  ferynge,  thoughe  she  be  in  his  syght
Howe  by  those  Folys  whiche  settyth  all  theyr  myght
By  force  of  Armys  to  be  Uenus  champyon
Rather  than  to  wyn  the  heuenly  regyon

What  shall  I  wryte  of  the  mad  mysgouernaunce
And  vayne  labour  whiche  men  vpon  them  take
Some  watchynge  in  reuell  and  some  to  ren  and  daunce
Some  for  worldly  pleasour  both  day  and  nyght  to  wake
But  nought  wyll  we  suffer  for  god  almyghtyes  sake
In  whose  seruyce  we  rest  at  ende  myght  fynde
We  labour  here  for  deth  as  bestis  blynde

We  seke  our  destruccion :  for  symple  ioy  mundayne
Our  myndes  ar  so  blynde :  and  we  so  prone  to  yll
That  heuen  we  chaunge  for  euerlastynge  payne
In  good  workes  haue  we  no  pleasour  nouther  skyll
Deuyne  preceptis  we  seldome  tyme  fulfyll
Banysshyd  is  vertue  decayed  is  holynes
And  moche  of  the  worlde  ensue  vnthryftynes

Let  wyse  men  stody  (therfore)  to  obtayne
Vertue  though  the  way  be  in  diffyculte
For  thoughe  that  one  neuer  infyx  his  brayne
To  vyce,  yet  shall  the  way  full  esy  be
But  certaynly  wors  than  a  fole  is  he
Whiche  wyll  in  stede  of  heuenly  blyssydnes
Bye  worldly  pleasour,  endynge  in  wretchydnes

TOL.  II.  K


146  Of  folysshe  exchanges.


Thenuoy  of  Barclay.
Remember  Fole  it  is  great  hurte  and  losse
For  worldly  pleasour  to  lese  ioy  eternall
Remember  also  howe  god  dyed  on  the  crosse
Shedynge  his  blode  the  to  redeme  withall
This  payne  he  suffred  for  the  and  for  vs  all
Consyder  his  sorowes,  be  kynde  to  hym  agayne
Lese  nat  ne  change  nat  his  ioy  celestyall
For  folysshe  pleasour,  or  frayll  and  worldly  payne


Of  folysshe  children worshyp  nat  their
fader  and  moder.


Them  also  I  repute  tor  Folys  blynde
Whiche  haue  no  honour  worshyp  ne  reuerence
To  father  and  mother,  but  ar  to  them  vnkynde
And  nat  consyder  what  payne  and  dylygence
What  labour,  thought,  great  costis,  and  expence
Theyr  parentis  had  for  them  in  theyr  yonge  age
But  they  rewarde  the  same  with  great  outrage


148  Of  folysshe  children


That  foule  is  full  of  all  vnhappynes

And  suerly  worthy  of  euerlastynge  payne

Whiche  for  his  frendes  loue  and  great  kyndnes

Rewardeth  them  with  vnkyndnes  agayne

But  hym  I  iuge  a  gretter  fole  certayne

Whiche  on  his  children  bestowys  all  his  substaunce

And  lyues  hym  selfe  (for  nede)  in  harde  penaunce

And  where  as  he  myght  his  age  well  relefe
With  his  owne  goodes  at  euery  tyme  of  nede
There  lyeth  he  gronynge,  in  payne  wo  and  myschefe
His  vnkynde  children  takynge  of  hym  no  hede
And  where  he  labowred  right  sore  his  son  to  fede
Spai-ynge  from  hym  selfe  to  fynde  hym  to  the  scole
In  age  his  son  hym  taketh  for  a  fole

And  where  as  he  ought  his  father  to  honour
To  worshyp  and  loue  by  dyuyne  commaundement
The  vnkynde  caytyf  wyll  do  hym  no  socour
But  sufFreth  hym  abyde  both  pore  and  indigent
And  often  this  Caytyf  with  handes  violent
As  past  all  grace  shame  or  godly  fere
With  strokes  doth  his  Father  hurt  and  dere

Or  suffreth  hym  vtterly  to  dye  for  lacke

Or  els  hym  dryueth  vnkyndly  to  the  colde

With  a  cowpyll  of  croches  a  walet  on  his  backe

Whan  he  hath  spoylyd  hym  of  that  he  wolde

So  whan  the  Father  is  tedyous  and  olde

His  children  thynke  he  lyueth  alto  longe

Oft  wysshynge  hym  to  be  drownyd  outher  honge


j!^  worshyp  nat  theyr  fader  and  moder. 1 49


There  is  no  pyte  that  can  suche  wretches  moue
Anenst  theyr  Faders  wo  and  paynfuU  age
They  shewe  hatered  for  fauour  and  hye  loue
O  folysshe  Fader  consyder  in  thy  corage
Thy  to  great  pyte  thy  olde  and  blynde  dotage
Whiche  to  thy  sonne  hast  gyuen  suche  store  of  gode
Whiche  the  dede  wyssheth  nat  grauntynge  the  thy  fode

He  suffreth  the  to  lyue  with  hunger  harde  bested

And  god  wot  howe  glad  wolde  he  be  in  his  mynde

If  thou  by  cruell  deth  were  from  hym  red

Yet  is  his  owne  lyfe  vnstable  as  the  wynde

And  shortly  shall  dye  leuynge  that  gode  behynde

And  for  his  vylayne,  and  frowarde  vnkyndnes

His  soule  berest  euerlastynge  blessydnes

And  that  worthely,  for  after  my  sentence
He  well  deserueth  an  yll  and  shamefuU  ende
Whiche  wyll  nat  honour,  with  loue  and  reuerence
His  fader  and  mother  as  his  myght  may  extende
And  also  all  them  of  whose  blode  he  doth  discende
And  who  that  agaynst  his  parentis  wyll  rebell
Is  sothly  worthy  to  haue  a  roume  in  hell

And  oft  it  is  sene  by  examples  euydent

That  short  space  they  lyue  and  shamefully  they  dye

Whiche  to  theyr  parentis  ar  nat  obedyent

And  suffreth  them  lyue  in  nede  and  penury

Disdaynynge  them  to  honour  and  worshyp  reuerently

Examples  in  the  Bybyll  we  haue  in  sondry  wyse

Howe  they  haue  endyd  that  doth  theyr  faders  despyse


Of folysshe  children


The  goodly  Absolon  of  beauty  excellent

Of  pleasaunt  fygure  thoughe  he  so  goodly  were

For  beynge  vnto  his  Fader  inobedyent

And  his  purposynge  hym  and  all  his  to  dere

And  to  rob  his  Royalme,  was  hangyd  by  the  here

By  sodayne  chaunce  and  goddes  punysshement

And  with  thre  sperys  his  herte  in  sonder  rent

For  that  Cham  discouered  his  faders  pryuete

As  in  contempt  hauynge  of  hym  disdayne

Was  he  nat  cursyd  by  goddes  maiestye

And  bonde  to  his  bretherne  whiche  was  to  his  great  payne

Thoughe  Sennacheryb  by  his  owne  sonnes  were  slayne

They  hopynge  to  obtayne  his  royalme  for  theyr  mede

Yet  none  of  them  theyr  fader  dyd  succede

Balthasar  kynge  somtyme  of  Babylon
In  sorowfull  yeres  longe  lyued  worthely
For  his  proude  mynde  and  fyers  transgression
Agaynst  his  father,  for  that  he  cruelly
Dismembred  hym  :  but  sothly  if  that  I
Sholde  all  suche  wretches  paynes  comprehende
In  this  my  boke,  I  neuer  sholde  haue  ende

The  bybyll  recordeth  howe  Toby  auncyent
Approchynge  to  deth  almost  in  dethys  hour
Gaue  his  dere  sone  special!  commaundement
With  all  reuerence  his  mother  to  honour
Salomon  therfore  of  sapyence  the  flour
Hauynge  no  respect  to  his  hye  excellence
Vnto  his  mother  dyd  humble  reuerence


worshyp  nat  theyr  Jader  and  moder.  151


Erectynge  hym  vp  from  his  hye  rowme  royall

To  mete  his  mother,  and  set  hir  by  his  syde

On  his  right  hande  as  chefe  and  pryncipall

By  whose  example  all  children  ought  them  gyde

Humbly  to  theyr  parentis  without  all  grutche  or  pryde

But  fewe  alas  nowe  wyll  vnto  this  intende

Whiche  causyth  them  sore  repent  it  at  the  ende

If  Corylaus  had  nat  ben  obedyent

Vnto  his  moder  and  fered  hir.  certayne

By  Rome  he  shoide  haue  suiFred  punysshement

And  by  his  foly  longe  lyued  in  great  payne

The  Bybyll  also  recordeth  to  vs  playne

Howe  the  sonnes  of  Rechab  had  great  preemynence

For  hauynge  to  theyr  fader  loue  and  obedyence

Were  they  nat  lauded  by  god  omnypotent
Yes  certaynly  but  the  chefe  cause  wherfore
Was  for  they  folowed  the  commaundement
Of  Rechab  theyr  fader,  denyenge  nat  his  lore
So  shall  I  conclude  shortly  and  say  no  more
That  he  that  to  Fader  or  moder  is  vnkynde
Shall  here  in  erth  his  soule  to  fendes  bynde

Barclay  to  the  Folys.
Thou  vnkynde  childe  and  inobedyent
Thynke  what  thy  Fader  and  Moder  dyd  for  the
Remember  what  goodes  they  haue  on  the  spent
Or  they  coude  brynge  the  vnto  thy  degre
Endeuer  the  to  them  kynde  agayne  to  be
For  all  the  kyndnes  that  thou  canst  shewe :  certayne
Nor  all  thy  worshyp  nor  thy  humylyte
Can  neuer  be  abyll  them  to  reward e  agayne


152  Of  folysshe  children.


Be  nat  therfore  childe  vnto  them  vylayne
But  take  thou  example  of  Christ  our  sauyour
Howe  he  alway  thoughe  he  were  god  souerayne
His  carnall  moder  benyngly  dyd  honour
And  Joseph  also  whiche  after  the  errour
Of  the  blynde  Jewes  to  hym  was  fader  sayde
Yet  is  he  god  and  gracious  gouernour
Lyke  to  the  Fader  before  the  worlde  was  made

But  thou  aged  man  that  seest  thy  dayes  fade
Thy  strength  decay,  and  thy  colour  fro  the  fall
Thynke  well  that  whan  thou  all  thy  good  hast  layde
Vpon  thy  children  to  auaunce  them  with  all
Whan  thou  hast  nede  perchaunce  none  of  them  shall
Socour  thy  nede,  but  from  theyr  hous  the  cast
Therfore  I  aduyse  the,  nede  nat  on  them  to  call
But  whyle  thou  lyuest  to  holde  sure  that  thou  hast.


Of  the  claterynge  and  bablynge  of  prestis
and  clerkes  in  the  quere.


Of  folys  yet :  may  we  great  nomber  se
In  the  holy  querys  of  chirches  small  and  great
Whose  communycacyon  is  voyde  of  honestye
But  on  vayne  talys  theyr  myndes  clene  ar  set
That  goddes  seruyce  is  oft  hyndred  and  let
By  suche  iapes  and  dedys  of  farre  and  nere
Whiche  they  as  Folys  recount  within  the  quere


154 Of  the  claterynge  and  bablynge


I  haue  before  touchyd  the  great  enormyte
The  foly,  and  disorder,  without  all  reuerence
Whiche  in  the  chirche  dayly  we  may  se
Amonge  lay  folys,  whiche  better  were  be  thens
But  nowe  shall  I  touche  another,  lyke  offence
And  that  is  of  Folys  whiche  in  the  quere  habounde
Nat  saynge  the  seruyce  of  god  as  they  ar  bounde

But  dyuers  toyes  and  lapis  varyable

They  spred  abrode,  encombrynge  the  seruyce

And  namely  with  theyr  tunge  wherwith  they  bable

Eche  one  to  other,  as  if  they  toke  aduyse

And  counsell  togyder  theyr  cartis  to  deuyse

Vnto  our  shyppes  theyr  company  to  cary

For  loth  they  be  to  longe  fro  them  to  tary

O  goddes  temple,  o  godly  ordynaunce
By  holy  faders  ordeyned  to  gyde  the  same
None  labours  you  to  support  nor  auaunce
But  to  decay  they  suffer,  vnto  theyr  shame
The  godly  costomes  ar  tourned  vnto  game
The  Seremonyes  somtyme  kept  stedfastly
Ar  nowe  defyled  by  lestis  of  vylany

The  constitucions  ordeyned  right  holely

In  tyme  past  by  Faders  wyse  and  auncyent

Holy  Chirches  honour  to  meyntayne  therby

Ar  halfe  abusyd,  none  suys  theyr,  right  intent

The  seruyce  also  of  god  omnypotent

Is  nowe  mysusyd :  as  playnly  doth  apere

Nat  in  the  Chirche  so  moche  as  in  the  quere


of  prestis  and  clerkes  in  the  quere.  155


There  be  no  tydynges  nor  neweltees  of  warre
Nor  other  wonders  done  in  any  strange  londe
What  euer  they  be  and  come  they  neuer  so  farre
The  prestis  in  the  quere  at  first  haue  them  in  honde
Whyle  one  recountyth,  the  other,  to  vnderstonde
His  fayned  fable  harkeneth  to  the  glose
Full  lytell  aduertynge  howe  the  seruyce  goes

The  bataylys  done  perchaunce  in  small  brytayne
In  fraunce  or  Flaunders  or  to  the  worldes  ende
Ar  tolde  in  the  quere  (of  some)  in  wordes  vayne
In  myddes  of  Matyns  in  stede  of  the  Legende
And  other  gladly  to  here  the  same  intende
Moche  rather  than  the  seruyce  for  to  here
The  rector  Chori  is  made  the  messanger

He  rennyth  about  lyke  to  a  pursuyuant

With  his  whyte  staffe  mouynge  from  syde  to  syde

Where  he  is  lenynge  talys  ar  nat  skant

But  in  one  place  nat  longe  doth  he  abyde

So  he  and  other  them  selfe  so  lewdly  gyde

Without  deuocion,  by  theyr  lewde  neglygence

That  no  thynge  can  bynde  theyr  tunges  to  sylence

And  in  the  mornynge  whan  they  come  to  the  quere

The  one  begynneth  a  Fable  or  a  hystory

The  other  lenyth  theyr  erys  it  to  here

Takynge  it  in  stede  of  the  Inuytory

Some  other  maketh  respons  antym  and  memory

And  all  of  fables  and  lestis  of  Robyn  hode

Or  other  tryfyls  that  skantly  ar  so  gode


1  c  6 Of  the  clateryii^e  and  habhiip;e


With  tryfyls  they  begyn  and  so  oft  tyme  they  ende
Recountynge  nueltees,  they  waste  theyr  tyme  therin
And  where  as  they  ought  the  seruyce  to  intende
Of  god  almyghty  :  they  spende  the  tyme  in  syn
And  other  some,  vnto  the  quere  doth  ren
Rather  for  lucre  and  cursyd  couetyse
Than  for  the  loue  of  the  dyuyne  seruyce

The  peny  them  prycketh  vnto  deuocyon

But  that  is  outwarde  nat  rotyd  in  the  harte

But  better  were  auoyde  this  hye  promocion

And  surer,  from  the  quere  to  stande  a  parte

Than  thyder  to  presume,  and  if  that  thou  aduert

Thy  owne  order  and  therof  the  excellence

So  shalt  thou  nat  gyde  the  in  goddes  hye  presence

I  thynke  it  better  more  mete  and  profytable
To  stande  afarre  without  the  Chirche  and  quere
Than  there  to  be,  and  so  to  that  bable
That  for  thy  noyse  none  can  the  seruyce  here
And  if  thou  thynke  thy  talys  and  wanton  chere
Or  wordes  superflue  ar  to  our  lorde  pleasaunt
Thou  art  abusyd  and  greatly  ignoraunt

But  certaynly  the  prestis  that  thus  lyue

Disordred  in  the  hous  of  god  our  creatour

Doth  yll  example  vnto  lay  people  gyue

By  theyr  mysrule  to  sue  the  same  errour

But  to  them  selfe  do  they  great  dishonour

And  sclaunder  to  the  Chirche,  so  that  moste  comonly

All  prestis  (of  laymen)  ar  moche  the  lesse  set  by


ofprestis  and  clerkes  in  the  quere.  157


O  folysshe  preste  vsynge  suche  fables  vayne
And  cursyd  cusromes :  thynkest  thou  therby
Of  god  any  mede  or  meryte  to  obtayne
Nay  god  is  nat  pleased  with  suche  lewde  foly
It  is  conuenyent  our  lorde  to  magnyfye
With  parfyte  prayer  lone  reuerence  and  honour
And  nat  with  iapys  and  talys  of  no  valour

Thenuoy  of  Alexander  Barclay,
Ye  prestis  and  clerkes  amende  your  myslyuynge
Defyle  nat  the  Churche  with  wordes  of  vanyte
Remember  :  there  is  tyme  and  place  for  euery  thynge
As  tyme  of  myrth,  and  tyme  of  grauyte
In  euery  place  ye  ought  discrete  to  be
That  men  may  commende  your  vertue  and  goodnes
But  namely  in  churche  vse  wordes  of  honestye
That  is  no  place  for  talys,  but  for  holynes


Of  eleuate  pryde,  and  bostynge.


That  lawde  is  vyle  the  whiche  doth  precede

From  mannys  owne  mouth  vttred  in  wordes  vayne

Of  suche  foly  no  wyse  man  taketh  hede

But  by  discression,  doth  hym  selfe  refrayne

But  pompe  and  pryde  whiche  doth  all  men  disdayne

Engendreth  folys :  whiche  thynkynge  to  exell

All  other  in  erth :  at  last  fall  downe  to  hell.


Of  eleiiate  pryde,  and  bosiynge.


Besyde  our  folys  rehersyd  here  before
In  dyuers  barges  almost  innumerable
Yet  stately  pryde  makyth  the  nomber  more
Whiche  is  a  vyce  so  moche  abhomynable
That  it  surmountyth  without  any  fable
All  other  vyces  in  furour  and  vylenes
And  of  all  synne  is  it  rote  and  maystres

The  noblest  hertis  by  this  vyce  ar  acloyed
It  is  confounder,  of  mekenes  and  vertue
So  by  the  same  is  many  one  destroyed
In  soule  and  body  whiche  them  to  it  subdue
Wherfore  let  the  wyse  his  statelynes  eschewe
For  it  hath  be  sene  is  sene,  and  euer  shall
That  first  or  last  foule  pryde  wyll  haue  a  fall

The  first  inuentour  of  this  vnhappy  vyce
As  doth  the  scripture  playne  expres  and  tell
Was  lucyfer,  whiche  to  hym  dyd  attyce
A  cursyd  nomber  both  stately  and  cruell
In  mynde  intendynge  his  maker  to  excell
Or  els  if  he  coude  come  to  his  intent
For  to  be  egall  with  god  omnypotent

Thus  of  all  synnes  pryde  was  the  first  of  all
Bygon  by  Lucifer,  but  god  omnypotent
Percyuynge  his  foly  made  hym  and  his  to  fall
From  heuen  to  hell  to  paynes  violent
In  horryble  shape :  before  so  excellent
Shynynge  in  heuen  before  the  angels  all
Thus  had  his  folysshe  pryde  a  greuous  fall


1 6o Of  eleuate  prycle,  ajid  bostynge.

But  to  be  short, and  to  retourne  agayne
Vnto  my  auctour :  suche  as  ar  stryke  with  pryde
Vse  for  to  host  them  self  with  wordes  vayne
To  spred  theyr  fame  theyr  name  and  lawes  wyde
And  though  that  they  vngraciously  them  gyde
Yet  as  mad  men  they  host  they  vaunt  and  raue
And  of  that  whiche  they  neuer  deserued  haue

Lo  sayth  a  fole  attached  with  this  vyce

I  haue  ben  norsshed  at  the  vnyuersyte

In  dyuers  contrees  and  stodyes  of  great  pryce

Both  in  these  partyes  and  eke  beyonde  the  se

At  bonony,  Parys  and  Padway  haue  1  be

Wherfore  I  ought  to  haue  preemynence

And  the  chefe  place  with  lawde  and  reuerence

Another  bostyth  hym  self  that  he  hath  ben

In  Grece  at  scolys  and  many  other  londe

But  if  that  he  were  aposyd  well  I  wene

The  grekes  letters  he  skant  doth  vnderstonde

But  thou  vayne  boster  if  thou  wylt  take  on  honde

To  stody  cunnynge  and  ydylnes  despyse

The  royalme  of  Englonde  myght  for  the  suifyse

In  englonde  is  sufFycyent  discyplyne

And  noble  men  endued  with  scyence

And  if  thou  lyst  to  aply  to  theyr  doctryne

Thou  mayst  lerne  wysdome  and  noble  eloquence

Haunt  them  that  haue  therin  preemynence

And  to  theyr  Instruccion  with  all  thy  mynde  intende

It  is  no  great  boste  to  haue  sene  the  worldes  ende


Of  eleuate  pryde  and  bostynge. 1 6 1


But  syns  mad  pryde  Enmy  to  all  vertue

Subdueth  the  worlde  vnder  baner  brode  displayde

Thoughe  folys  obey,  let  wyse  men  it  eschewe

For  Lucyfer,  as  I  before  haue  sayde

Corrupt  with  this  vyce,  had  heuen  to  him  denayde

And  as  first  actour  of  this  infectyfe  sore

Was  dryuen  downe  to  hell  with  his,  for  euer  more

And  nowe  hym  folowe  men,  children  and  wymen
Fallynge  from  erth  for  this  myscheuous  pryde
To  infernall  flodes  and  that  darke  dredefull  den
Where  without  ende  in  payne  they  must  abyde
This  fende  with  his  felawes  layeth  on  euery  syde
Theyr  nettis  of  pryde  wherwith  they  goostly  quell
Foles  without  nomber,  drawynge  with  them  to  hell

Let  man  haue  wysdome  and  beautye  souerayne
Strength,  vertue,  cunnynge,  honour  and  ryches
And  this  one  vyce  shall  all  the  same  dystayne
Defylynge  worshyp  by  his  proude  statelynes
But  namely  this  pryde  is  lady  and  maystres
Ouer  womankynde,  whiche  playnly  without  fayle
Apereth  by  theyr  lokes,  and  stately  apparayle

Whiche  wymen  whan  that  they  on  pryde  do  muse
The  same  representynge  outwarde  in  theyr  habyte
Both  yonge  and  olde  of  men  they  sore  abuse
Whan  theyr  frayle  beautye  doth  mennes  hertes  byte
And  to  be  playne :  in  pryde,  wymen  haue  such  delyte
That  if  some  were  as  they  ar  almost  all
The  pryde  in  them  at  last  sholde  haue  a  fall

VOL.  II.  L


162 Of  eleuate  pryde  and  bostyn^e.


As  I  haue  sayde.  whan  wymen  set  theyr  mynde
Them  selfe  to  garnysshe  by  thys  stately  pryde
Men  that  ar  wyse,  make  they  as  folys  blynde
Nat  knowyng  howe  by  reason  them  to  gyde
As  dyd  ludith :  whiche  whyle  she  dyd  abyde
"Were  the  Tent  of  Holofernes  capytayne
By  hir  feble  hande  he  wretchydly  was  slayne

And  all  by  reason  that  he  was  so  inflamyd
By  hir  fayre  shape,  hir  clothynge,  and  beautye
Yet  was  this  ludith  of  lyuynge  nat  dyffamyd
But  yonge  and  olde  euer  kept  hir  chastyte
And  in  lyke  wyse  lesabell,  whan  that  she
Thought  by  hir  beautye  lehu  to  betray
By  pryde  she  payntyd  hir  face  to  make  hir  gay

Betray  I  say,  to  pardon  hir  offence

Agaynst  the  wyll  of  god  omnypotent

Whiche  myght  haue  turnyd  to  inconuenyence

To  noble  lehu,  by  goddes  punysshement

These  thynges  consydered  wysdome  with  voyce  prudent

Both  lowde  and  shyll  (sayth)  cryeng  to  mankynde

From  womans  pryde  and  beauty  drawe  thy  mynde

Of  all  erthly  thynges  enclyne  nat  to  theyr  gyle
For  with  theyr  iyen  replete  with  wantonnes
Pure  hertes  and  chaste  they  enfect  and  defyle
But  suche  as  ar  gyuen  to  vertue  and  goodnes
To  mesure  and  mekenes  expellynge  statelynes
They  worthy  ar  of  lawdes  for  theyr  humylyte
For  seldome  or  neuer  they  breke  theyr  chastyte


Of  eleuate  pryde  and  bostynge. i  63


If  Barsabe  throughe  hir  blynde  neglygence
In  bathynge  had  nat  discoueryd  hir  beauty
Dauyd  had  nat  fallen  to  that  cruel!  offence
Of  murder,  engendred  by  vyle  auoutry
But  to  be  playne,  and  for  to  speke  shortly
Thousandes  ar  disceyued  and  brought  to  wofull  fall
By  pryde,  and  eke  they  folys  abyde  withal!

But  god  almyghty  dispyseth  and  doth  hate
These  stately  folys  blyndyd  witli  ignoraunce
Whose  myndes  ar  so  hye  and  eleuate
That  they  nat  se  theyr  owne  mysgouernaunce
Wherfore  our  lorde  oft  taketh  vengeaunce
Of  theyr  abusyon,  and  with  infernal!  payne
Whiche  is  rewarde  to  fowle  pryde  and  disdayne

O  that  he  is  happy  whome  this  vnthryfty  syn
Of  pryde  or  vayne  glory  with  liis  hasty  furour
Hath  nat  subdued,  ouercome,  nor  entred  in
Nor  the  vayne  desyre,  of  ryches  nor  honour
And  happy  is  he  whiche  thynketh  euery  hour
Of  liowe  great  valour  is  tlie  royalme  celestyal!
Beynge  ware  of  pryde  by  Lucyfers  fall

Suche  one  nat  forsyth  of  honour  no  hye  name
Nat  carynge  in  this  worlde  to  haue  preemynence
Nor  other  exces  longynge  vnto  the  same
Whiche  ar  attysers  of  men  to  a!!  offence.
But  proude  folys  voyde  of  wysdome  and  scyence
By  vayne  pryde  stodyeth  all  other  to  excell
And  than  at  the  last  they  fall  downe  vnto  hell


1 64 Of  eleuate  prycle  and  bostynge.

Of  proude  Lucyfer  thus  they  assay  the  fall
Receyuynge  a  rewarde  for  theyr  statelynes
Drownynge  theyr  proude  hertis  in  flodes  infernall
Where  payne  is  eternall,  wo,  and  bytternes
More  tedyous  than  all  tunges  can  expres
This  is  of  pryde  rewarde  at  the  last  ende
,  A  thynge  of  the  hyest  thus  nedes  moste  descende

Presumptuous  pryde  hath  euer  a  shamefuU  ende

So  haue  they  that  coueyt  other  to  excell

As  we  of  Chore  :  Datan  :  and  Abiron  fynde

Whiche  by  pryde  agaynst  Moyses  dyd  rebell

Wherfore  they  and  theyrs  alyue  sanke  downe  to  tell

Thus  well  is  hym  that  foloweth  vertue

And  that  with  mekenes  can  stately  pryde  subdue.

Thenuoy  of  Alexander  Barclay.
O  men  meke  your  myndes  :  ensue  humylyte
And  also  ye  wymen,  refuse  your  statelynes
For  certaynly  the  more  hyghe  that  ye  be
The  more  ye  ought  to  gyue  you  to  mekenes
For  pryde  is  the  rote  of  all  vnhappynes
Supporter  of  vyce,  and  enmy  to  vertue
Therfore  it  is  sayd  (and  true  it  is  doutles)
That  pryde  goth  before,  but  shame  do  it  ensue

An  exclamacion  ayenst  pryde.
O  pryde  despytous,  o  hasty  tyranny.
Infernall  fury  with  venym  maculate
Fy  on  thy  fraylte,  out  on  the  I  cry
For  with  thy  venym  thou  hast  intoxicate


Of  e  leu  ate  pryde  and  bostynge. 1 65

So  many  kynges,  so  many  a  great  estate
Thou  man  destroyest,  if  thou  may  hym  subdue
Wherfore  we  ought  the  to  desprayse  and  hate
Thou  goest  before  But  shame  doth  the  ensue

By  the  is  Lucyfer  damned  eternally

Expulsed  to  payne,  from  goddes  hyghe  presence

And  all  mankynde  endureth  mysery

For  that  thou  causyd  hym  by  thy  offence

Of  pryde  :  to  desyre  to  haue  suche  excellence

To  knowe  gode  and  yll,  that  all  mankynde  myght  rewe

Tyll  Aue  :  for  Eue  had  made  a  recompence

Thus,  o  blynde  pryde  ay  shame  doth  the  ensue

The  pryde  of  them  that  byldyd  Babylon
Was  nat  asswagyd  without  great  vengeaunce
The  kynge  transformyd  from  mannys  fassyon
Vnto  a  brute  bestis  shape  and  countenaunce
Dyd  nat  Agar  hir  selfe  also  auaunce
By  pryde  despysynge  hir  lady  bycause  she  knewe
Hir  selfe  conceyued,  but  hir  mysgouernaunce
Was  sharply  punysshed,  and  shame  dyd  it  ensue

But  shortly  to  drawe  me  to  a  conclusyon
Thou  hast  made  thousandes  to  ende  in  care  and  wo
By  the,  had  moab  payne  and  confusion
Holofernes,  Aman,  Nichanor,  and  Pharao
Balthasar,  Anthiochus,  Herode  and  many  mo
In  the  olde  testament  and  also  in  the  newe
But  shortly  to  speke,  and  farther  nat  to  go
Pryde  goeth  before,  and  shame  doth  ensue


Of  vsurers,  and  Okerers.


Vnto  our  shyp  let  them  come  hastely

Whiche  by  theyr  ardent  desyre  of  frayle  ryclies

Theyr  myndes  set  on  deuourynge  vsury

These  ar  the  theues  that  by  theyr  cruelnes

Spoyle  the  pore  people  and  greuously  oppres

They  boste  theyr  gaynes  they  bye  they  sell  agayne

Spoylynge  and  oppressynge,  on  gyle  is  all  theyr  brayne.


Of  vstirerSy  and  okerers.  l6y


A  ShamfuU  sort  of  Folys  doth  remayne

Wors  than  all  other  spoken  of  before

Whose  synfull  lyfe  and  fals  disceytfull  trayne

I  shall  reuyle  with  wordes  sharpe  and  sore

This  sort  is  vtter  ennemy  to  the  pore

Full  of  lyes,  couetyse  gyle,  and  foule  vylenes

Content  with  no  treasour,  nor  innumerable  ryches

The  power  of  the  lawe  ought  sharpely  to  chastyce
With  extreme  rygour  and  mortal!  punysshement
This  sort  infectyf  that  foloweth  this  vyce.
This  rauenynge  sort  worthy  paynes  violent
Agaynst  our  lordes  dyuyne  commaundement
By  theyr  vnmekenes,  the  pore  oft  maketh  bare
Of  londe  and  goodes,  than  ieuynge  them  in  care

These  wretchyd  folys  of  mynde  ar  made  so  dull
That  with  theyr  money  gotten  all  by  fals  vsury
Of  corne  and  vytayle  they  stuff  theyr  howses  full
Therby  to  ingender  nede,  and  paynfull  penury
Vnto  the  pore,  that  they  may  wyn  therby
So  of  all  vytayle  these  wretches  get  plentye
To  sell  it  derer,  whan  some  great  darth  shalbe

These  vsurers  alone  haue  all  the  store

Of  wyne  and  vytayle,  whiche  sothly  myght  suffyse

Many  without  nomber,  of  Cytezyns,  ryche  and  pore

No  punysshement  they  drede  ne  fere  in  any  wyse

But  lyue  the  men  that  theyr  maker  doth  despyse

No  feruent  lyghtnynge,  ne  thunder  vyolent

Can  cause  these  wretches  theyr  vsury  to  stent


1 68  Of  vsurers,  and  okerers.


But  by  all  synne,  and  in  all  vnlefulnes

These  wretches  labour  and  syngulerly  gyue  hede

To  multyply  theyr  foule  and  vyle  ryches

They  brynge  forth  hunger  them  selfe  they  onely  fede

SufFrynge  the  pore  (alas)  to  sterue  for  nede

This  sorte,  thus,  to  the  pore  is  so  cruell

That  for  lacke  of  petye  many  one  they  quell

Thoughe  the  lewes  lyue  in  errour  and  derknes
Gyuen  to  vsury  (as  lobourynge  men  oft  sayes)
Yet  ar  they  more  gyuen  to  pytye  and  mekenes
And  almes :  than  christen  men  ar  nowe  adayes
In  vsury  we  ensue  the  lewes  wayes
And  many  other  synnes  fowle  and  abhomynable
Rennynge  without  mesure  whiche  is  intollerable

For  his  vsury,  the  lewe  is  out  exyled

From  christen  costes  yet  of  vs  many  one  ■

With  the  same  vyce  is  infect  and  defyled

The  pore  by  the  ryche  is  etyn  to  the  bone

Almes  is  banysshed,  pytye  is  there  none

Cruell  crauynge  spoyleth  them  that  erst  had  nought

The  pore  is  vexyd  and  to  a  begger  brought

The  weyke  hath  the  weyght,  the  worlde  so  doth  fare
The  spere  of  extorcyon  persyth  throughe  his  syde
He  that  nere  is  naked  shall  be  made  fully  bare
He  skant  hath  rowme  in  any  place  to  byde
But  these  vsurers,  whome  gylefull  gayne  doth  gyde
Desyreth  no  plenty  of  corne  vpon  the  grounde
But  onely  that  theyr  ovvne  garners  may  habounde


Of  vstirers,  and  okerers.  169


These  caytyfs  wysshe  the  feldes  baryne  in  this  wyse
To  theyr  owne  profyte  and  others  great  greuaunce
That  hunger  and  darth  may  by  the  same  aryse
But  for  bycause  that  they  haue  habundaunce
They  laugh  anone  and  haue  a  great  plesaunce
If  there  be  skant  of  corne  and  of  vytayle
By  mouryn,  lyghtnynge,  tempest,  rayne  or  hayle

These  wretchyd  folys  for  theyr  owne  auauntage
Dayly  desyre,  and  fayne  wolde  here  or  se
A  hole  comontye  to  haue  losse  and  damage
But  to  conclude :  those  men  vyle  caytyfs  be
That  seke  lucre,  enhaunsynge  theyr  degre
Or  that  wyll  gather  ryches  by  couetyse
Or  fals  vsury,  to  others  preiudyce

Some  gladly  lene  to  haue  wynnynge  therby
And  some  fell  dere  bycause  the  payment
Is  set  to  longe  day :  yet  thynke  they  verely
Nat  to  perysshe  the  dyuyne  commanndement
Thoughe  that  suche  folys  thynke  them  innocent
If  that  they  nat  mende  a  rowme  they  haue  in  hell
But  in  the  mean  space  in  my  shyp  shall  they  dwell

Barclay  to  the  Folys.
O  mysbyleuers,  o  men  wytles  and  blynde
Gyue  nat  your  myndes  to  gylefuU  vsury
And  thou  of  the  chirche  reuoke  also  thy  mynde
Frome  the  fowle  synne  of  cursyd  symony
And  ye  marchauntis :  that  greatly  occupy
Expell  this  vyce,  for  sore  is  the  offence
Your  ryches  shall  moche  the  soner  multyply
If  pytye  of  the  pore  be  ay  in  your  presence


Of  the  vayne  hope  that  Poles  hath  to
succede  to  herytage  possession  and
ryches.


Some  ar  that  hope  and  hath  gode  trust  alway

Others  goodes  by  succession  to  attayne

Lokynge,  and  gapynge,  hourly  nyght  and  day

Whan  they  shall  perysshe  and  dye  by  chaunce  sodayne

But  this  they  often  tymes  wysshe  in  vayne

For  suche  as  they  moste  gladly  dede  wolde  haue

Etyth  of  that  gose  that  graseth  on  theyr  graue


Of  the  vayjie  hope  that  Poles i  y  i


Who  may  endure  those  Folys  ignoraunce
Whose  myndes  the  feruour  of  wretchyd  couetyse
Maketh  mad,  and  folysshe,  to  such  extreme  vttraunce
That  the  hole  worlde  myght  say  they  ar  vnwyse
Of  suche  mad  foles  this  is  the  comon  gyse
Contynually  to  gape  for  the  succession
Of  others  goodes,  ryches  and  possessyon

Of  heyres  this  is  the  comon  vse  in  dede
Theyr  parentis  deth  to  wysshe  and  to  desyre
To  the  londe  and  ryches  the  soner  to  siiccede
And  often  by  venemous  treason  they  conspyre
But  syth  the  ruler  of  the  heuenly  Impyre
In  no  mannys  handes  putteth  deth  ne  desteny
Oft  se  we  these  folys  before  the  other  dye

I  say  to  suche  as  others  deth  loke  fore
It  often  happeneth,  as  we  may  dayly  se
That  lyghtly  they  theyr  self  departe  before
Wherfore  thou  fole  fyllyd  with  all  iniquyte
Say  :  is  it  nat  great  foly  and  shame  to  the
And  also  madnes,  to  wysshe  thy  frende  damage
Or  deth  :  for  his  vyle  goode  and  herytage

A  frende  lyuynge  is  a  ryches  excellent

Therfore  I  say  he  is  a  fole  doutles

That  in  his  herte  wolde  gladly  be  content

To  se  hym  dede  for  lyuelode  or  riches

Therfore  fole  expell  this  errour  and  blyndnes

For  this  thy  hope  is  full  of  vanyte

What  knowest  thou  whan  thou  thy  self  shall  dye


172


hath  to  sue  cede  to  herytap^e.


Deth  the  assayleth  and  folowetli  hestely
Thy  lyfe  shortnyth  whether  thou  slepe  or  wake
Thy  selfe  shall  dye  :  there  is  no  remedy
And  if  thou  before  canst  no  prouysion  make
Vpon  his  backe  the  dull  Asse  shall  the  take
And  to  our  shyp  the  lede  through  fen  and  myre
For  this  thy  folysshe  hope  and  vayne  desyre

It  is  great  foly  whan  thou  art  farre  in  age
To  loke  dayly  whan  a  yonge  childe  shall  dye
Hopynge  to  succede  hym  vnto  his  herytage
Howbeit  thou  nerer  art  to  thy  deth  than  he
Yet  this  vayne  hope  doth  fede  and  norysshe  the
By  the  whiche  hope  though  many  confort  haue
Yet  oft  it  doth  his  mayster  sore  discayue

Hope  man  confortyth  makynge  hym  glad  and  fayne
Ought  to  obtayne  whan  that  he  doth  intende
But  from  vayne  hope  thou  oughtest  to  refrayne
For  it  disayueth  his  mayster  at  the  ende
So  if  thou  wylt  my  purpose  comprehende
Whether  thou  be  olde,  yonge,  or  of  myd  age
Set  nat  thy  trust  to  moche  on  herytage

For  though  thou  be  yonge :  as  I  before  haue  sayd
Thy  ioyntis  stronge  in  youthes  lustynes
Thy  colour  quycke,  and  pleasaunt  lyke  a  mayde
Thy  skyn  smoth,  and  thy  herte  full  of  boldles
Yet  deth  dayly  steleth  slyely  on  the :  doutles
Both  yonge  and  olde  must  go  the  same  passage
Thus  is  it  foly  to  hope  on  herytage


Possession  and  ryches.


73


Oft  mourneth  the  Fader,  the  sonnes  deth  sodayne
Thus  dyeth  the  yonge  oft  tyme  before  the  olde
Dyd  nat  Pryamus  right  pyteously  complayne
His  sonnes  dede  whyle  they  were  yonge  and  bolde
Them  to  haue  lyued  though  he  right  gladly  wolde
Whyle  absolon  hoped  by  treason  to  obtayne
His  faders  kyngdome  :  he  wretchydly  was  slayne

Pale  deth  and  cruell,  as  it  is  often  sene

Maketh  hym  thy  heyre  by  his  stroke  mortall

Whome  thou  supposyd,  and  thought  sholde  neuer  haue  bene

So  lytell  knoweth  these  folys  what  may  fall

For  this  is  dayly  sene  and  euer  shall

That  god  almyghty,  owner  of  euery  thynge

Chosyth  heyres  at  his  pleasour  and  lykynge

Thenuoy  of  the  actour.
Ye  wytles  men,  full  blyndyd  with  errour
Set  nat  vayne  hope  on  worldly  herytage
But  only  on  god :  lyue  after  his  pleasour
And  so  infourme  your  ofsprynge  and  lynage
It  is  a  vayne  hope,  a  madnes  and  outrage
On  worldly  thynges  to  hope  contynually
Hauynge  small  hope  within  thy  dull  carage
Of  heuen  :  where  thou  myght  byde  perpetually


Of  folys  that  kepe  nat  the  holy  daye.


He  that  doth  nat  the  holy  day  honour
With  due  deuocyon,  lawde,  and  reueicnce
But  rather  intendyth  to  couetous  labour
Vayne  talys,  sportis,  or  other  lyke  ofFence
Suche  ought  of  dutye  and  very  congruence
To  clym  as  companyon  vp  to  the  cart  of  Apys
Whiche  (eche  day  lyke)  aplyeth  nought  but  apis.


Of  folys  that  kepe  iiat  the  holy  daye. i  7  5


Alas  for  shame,  howe  wretchedly  mankynde
Wandryth  in  the  way  of  obscure  darkenes
They  haue  no  wysdome,  ne  parfytenes  of  mynde
To  knowe  the  cours  of  godly  ryghtwysnes
Though  god  of  his  grace,  and  infynyte  goodnes
To  true  christen  men  hath  grauntyd  hym  to  knawe
By  the  holy  doctryne  of  his  precept  and  lawe

And  thoughe  they  be  chosen  to  god  and  his  kyngdome

As  men  elect,  callyd  to  the  royalme  celestyall

Yet  of  vs  christen  men  (alas)  ar  some

That  of  his  doctryne  worshyp  nought  at  all

We  let  his  lawes  clene  from  our  myndes  fall

Our  holy  fayth  despysed  half :  and  defyled

Hir  honour  decay es :  the  fere  of  payne  exyled

The  fader  of  heuen  gaue  a  commendement
To  moyses  wryten  in  tables  of  harde  stone
Deuydyd  in  Ten  preceptis,  to  this  intent
Mankynde  to  reduce  whiche  had  mysgone
Amonge  the  whiche  preceptis  this  was  one
The  sabbot  to  Worshyp  and  sanctyfy  alway
The  seuenth  day  of  the  weke  called  the  sonday

This  day  was  ordeyned  in  the  olde  testament
After  worldly  werke  done  all  the  weke  before
To  worshyp  and  to  honour  our  lord  omnypotent
And  bysshops  it  conferme,  and  yet  besyde  this  more
They  haue  decreed  and  ordred  by  holy  lore
Other  festis  of  sayntis  in  heuen  gloryfyed
To  be  on  theyr  dayes  halowed  and  magnyfyed


176  Offolys  that  kepe  nat  the  holy  daye.


These  dayes  were  ordeyned  for  men  to  exercyse

Them  selfe  in  prayer,  goodnes  and  vertue

Our  lorde  and  his  sayntis  to  honour :  and  lyke  wyse

Of  worde  and  dede  all  excesse  to  eschewe

But  for  that  we  more  gladly  vs  subdue

To  worldly  tryfyls,  and  bodely  pleasour

We  vyolate  the  fayth  by  our  wylfull  errour

Those  laudable  costomes  we  defyle  and  vyolate
By  the  holy  lawes  (alas)  we  set  no  thynge
But  on  the  holy  day,  mad  ryot  and  debate
Troubleth  the  seruyce  of  the  almyghty  kynge
The  holy  day  we  fyle  with  eche  vnlefuU  thynge
As  fat  festis  and  bankettis  sausyd  with  glotony
And  that  from  mornynge  to  nyght,  contynually

The  heuenly  festis  ar  wasshyd  with  dronkenes

And  whan  quyete  rest  is  gyuen  to  mankynde

By  the  holy  day :  from  worldly  besynes

These  dronken  dastardes  set  nat  theyr  mynde

On  churche  nor  prayer,  but  drynke  tyll  they  be  blynde

And  on  the  holy  day,  we  dayly  se  that  men

Soner  to  the  tauerne  than  to  the  churche  ren

The  tauerne  is  open  before  the  churche  be

The  pottis  ar  ronge  as  bellys  of  dronkenes

Before  the  churche  bellys  with  great  salemnyte

There  here  these  wretches  theyr  Matyns  and  theyr  masse

Who  lysteth  to  take  hede  shall  often  se  doutles

The  stallys  of  the  tauerne  stuffyd  nere  echone

Whan  in  the  churche  stallys  he  shall  se  fewe  or  none


Ofjvlys  that  kepe  nat  the  holy  daye.  177


There  one  drynketh  fastynge  without  discression
Another  deuoureth  drynkynge  out  his  iyen
This  ]yfe  they  lede :  and  that  before  or  one
Of  all  the  sort  hath  at  the  churche  bene
But  besyde  this  vyce :  it  euery  day  is  sene
That  on  the  holy  day  suche  workes  we  tende  to
Whiche  on  the  workynge  day  scantly  we  wolde  do

Alas  man  it  is  a  great  shame  certaynly

Whyle  the  prest  precheth  the  deuyne  commaundement

For  the  to  aply  vnto  bestly  glotony

Or  whyle  any  seruyce  of  god  om.nypotent

Is  done  in  the  churche,  me  thynke  in  myne  intent

It  is  great  shame  to  the  to  take  more  hede

To  fede  thy  foule  wombe :  than  thy  soule  to  fede

And  nat  to  the  churche  nor  auter  for  to  come
Without  thou  erst  be  dronken  so  bestely
That  whan  thou  art  there  outher  art  thou  dombe
Or  els  in  prayeng  thou  bokest  vnmanerly
Spuynge  vp  thy  prayers :  god  wot  vndeuoutly
And  where  the  hole  weke  thou  keptest  sobernes
Thou  worshyppest  the  holy  day  with  dronkenes

It  passeth  my  myght,  I  thynke  none  can  ne  may

Wryte  all  the  folyes  synnes  and  offence

Whiche  nowe  ar  vsed  vpon  the  holy  day

For  some  folowe  Idelnes  slouth  and  neglygence

Some  vse  gamys :  grounde  of  great  inconuenyence

Som  bete  the  stretis,  and  to  rybawdry

On  the  holy  day  moste  namely  them  aply

VOL.  II.  M


178 Offolys  that  kepe  nat  the  holy  daye.


Some  slaunder,  some  lye,  what  shall  I  say  more
We  se  some  more  besy  about  theyr  marchaundyse
Than  they  haue  ben  all  the  hole  weke  before
Thus  on  the  holy  day  forborne  is  no  vyce
These  folys  aply  nat  them  in  the  seruyce
Of  god,  but  the  sabbot  defyle  with  vylany
Wherby  theyr  soulys  they  dam  eternally.

Thenuoy  of  the  actour.
Cesse  fule,  and  leue  of  worldly  besynes
Vpon  the  holy  day,  and  rest  of  the  labour
Of  thy  handes  aplyenge  the  hole  to  holynes
With  worde  and  dede  to  lawde  thy  creatour
Sanctyfy  the  sabbot :  so  sayth  our  sauyour
From  terrene  Lucre  that  day  withdrawe  thy  mynde
For  with  clene  herte  thy  maker  to  honour
On  the  holy  day  :  the  scripture  doth  the  bynde


Of  folys  that  repent  of  that  they  haue
gyuen.


He  is  a  Fole  :  and  voyde  of  wyt  cei  tayne

That  mourneth  for  that  whiche  is  past  remedy

And  by  no  mean  may  reuoked  be  agayne

For  vayne  cure  suche  one  vexeth  contynually

Moreouer  that  man  is  folysshe  certaynly

Whiche  gyueth  his  frende  ought  and  after  doth  repent

Suche  lesyth  the  meryte  :  the  gyft  in  vayne  is  spent


i8o


Of  folys  that  repent


If  thou  lyst  to  gyue  :  and  to  be  lyberall
I  shall  the  shewe  what  thynge  it  is  in  dede,
It  is  a  \'ertue  right  great  and  pryncipall
Of  loue,  and  pytye,  if  that  the  same  procede
And  if  it  be  nat  done  for  fere  and  drede
But  of  a  herte  true,  stedfast,  faythfull  and  fre
It  gendreth  confort,  and  grounde  of  amyte

Who  gyueth  his  frende  with  mery  countenaunce

Gyft  or  rewarde  :  and  who  so  euer  he  be

That  a  straunge  man  doth  worthely  auaunce

With  condigne  rewarde,  by  lyberalyte

It  may  be  proued  and  sayde  forsiith  that  he

Is  worthy  lawdes  and  an  excellent  fame

And  for  his  goodnes  of  vertue  to  haue  name

But  he  is  a  fole  and  full  of  vyiany

Whiche  to  his  louer  gyueth  ought  at  all

And  than  agayne  repentyth  by  and  by

Full  of  sorowe  that  he  was  so  lyberall

He  is  also  a  fole  and  a  man  rurall

Whiche  gyueth  with  mynde  neyther  good  ne  glad

With  lokes  pale  :  and  countenaunce  sore  and  sad

And  for  that  this  displeasour  doth  hym  dere

His  frende  :  he  soone  out  braydeth  of  the  same

Hym  self  (for  malyce)  drawynge  by  the  here

So  hath  this  fole,  by  malyce  and  yll  name

His  rewarde  lost,  for  it  rebuked  and  shame

And  no  meruayle  :  for  no  man  that  hath  skyll

Shall  thanke  hym  for  goodnes  done  agaynst  his  wyll


of  that  they  haiie  gyiien.


i8i


Yet  is  he  moche  wors  and  lewder  of  intent
Whichejwhan  he  hath  gyuen  a  thynge  for  goddes  sake
Of  his  dede,  or  gyft  anone  hym  doth  repent
Thynkynge  that  god  wyll  no  recompence  make
Of  that  rewarde  whiche  to  the  pore  they  take
For  that  he  ne^sendeth  to  euery  fole  agayne
Alway,  and^lyghtly  for  one  gyft  thre  or  twayne

Suche  folys  for  kicre,  gayne  and  auauntage

To  haue  great  gyftis  and  dowble  of  valour

Wolde  gyue  small  gyftis :  and  that  with  glad  courage

But^loth  they  ar  to  departe  with  great  treasour

Be  sure  thou  fole  that  god  our  creatour

Shall  nat  thy  rewardes  ne  gyftis  accept  atall

But  thou  gyue  them  with  fre  herte  and  lyberall

Wenest  thou  blynde  man  that  god  omnypotent
Careth  ought  for  the  small  gyftes  of  mankynde
Thou  art  abused  if  thou  be  of  that  intent
God  onely  marketh  the  gode  wyll  of  thy  mynde
And  in  thy  gyftis  deuout  if  he  the  fynde
For  thy  gode  wyll  and  god  deuocyon
He  shall  to  the  graunt  the  heuenly  region

Thus  he  that  of  goodnes  and  lyberalyte

With  mery  face  and  cherefull  countenaunce

Gyuyth  to  his  frende  that  hath  necessyte

And  to  other  men  good  of  theyr  gouernaunce

By  almes  and  pytye  :  his  dede  shall  hym  auaunce

To  worthy  laudes,  and  thankes  manyfolde

A  nd  vnto  a  gode  name :  which  better  is  than  golde


1 82  Ofjblys  that  repent


Those  rewardes  euer  ar  namely  commendable

And  best  of  all,  that  gyuen  ar  with  glad  mynde

But  yet  is  he  moche  vyle  and  reprouable

Whiche  euer  is  takynge :  remaynynge  styll  vnkynde

In  all  the  worlde  nought  vyler  can  I  fynde

Nor  wors,  than  is  a  fals  vnkynde  vylayne

Yet  many  thousandes  ensue  that  bestly  trayne

A  man  that  is  good  hauynge  wysdome,  skyll  and  wyt
Lyghtly  rewardeth  his  frendes  true  kyndnes
Than  moste  the  other  indeuer  hym  to  quyte
The  same  agayne  with  thanke,  and  faythfulnes
But  if  thou  wylt  gyue,  for  to  haue  thanke  doutles
It  moste  be  done  with  mery  loke  and  mynde
Els  shalt  thou  neyther  thanke,  ne  meryte  fynde

ThENUOY  of  ALEXANDER BaRCLAY  THE  TRANSLATOUR.

Whether  thou  wylt  gyue  rewarde  gyft  or  present

To  god  or  man,  it  must  be  gladly  done

And  with  gode  wyll :  els  thy  rewarde  is  spent

And  loste  vtterly,  with  meryte  small  or  none

Therfore  consyder  with  thy  selfe  alone

To  whome  thou  gyuest :  for  that  is  wyt  and  skyll

And  if  thou  worthy  and  wyse  fynde  the  person

Than  gyue  thy  gyft  with  glad  loke  and  good  wyll

So  shall  thy  kyndnes  rewardyd  be  agayne

But  all  is  lost  that  thou  dost  gyue  to  fynde

Four  sortis  of  people  :  the  first  is  a  vylayne

Or  chorle,  for  agayne  thou  shalt  hym  proue  vnkyn.ie


of  that  they  haue  gyuen.  183

The  seconde  a  childe,  for  his  forgetfull  mynde
Expellyth  kyndnes,  the  thirde  a  man  in  age
The  fourth  a  woman  varyable  as  the  wynde
Beynge  of  hir  loue  vnstable  and  volage  ■


Of  the  vyce  of  slouth.


The  Papy  sede  betokenynge  slouthfulnes  %
Is  sawen  in  the  worlde  and  fast  doth  multyply
The  synne  of  slouth  all  mankynde  doth  oppies
But  namely  seruauntis  them  self  therto  aply
Despysynge  labour,  slepynge  contynually
But  olde  and  yonge  gyue  them  to  this  offence
Chalangynge  theyr  wagis  :  they  voyde  of  dilygence


Of  the  vyce  of  slouth.


■85


Though  that  vyle  slouth  sprenklyd  with  dedely  slomber

Be  destroyer  aud  confounder  of  mankynde

And  in  all  vyce  constrayneth  hym  to  slomber

Yet  many  it  folowe,  and  on  it  set  theyr  mynde

If  thou  take  hede,  thou  clere  and  playne  shalt  fynde

That  damnable  slouth  is  so  corrupt  a  vyce

That  of  his  foule  rote  all  yllys  doth  aryse

Of  slouthys  bosom  out  spryngeth  euery  yll

And  who  that  attachyd  is  with  this  offence

No  vertuous  dede  he  gladly  shall  fulfyll

But  slepyth  ay  in  Idelnes  and  blynde  neglygence

Bytwene  hym  and  the  lame  is  lytell  difference

For  both,  in  maner,  lyueth  in  lyke  case

Nat  vsynge  theyr  membres  but  slepynge  in  one  place

A  slouthfull  man  is  nere  of  that  nature

That  if  he  lay  besyde  a  fyre  brennynge

For  to  be  brent :  he  rather  wolde  endure

Than  take  the  payne  hym  selfe  in  any  thynge

For  to  relefe  by  rysynge  or  mouynge

Thus  is  he  a  Fole,  and  worthy  wretchydnes

To  gyue  other  example,  of  his  lewde  sleuthfulnes

A  slouthfull  creature  is  as  vnprofytable

As  smoke  or  dust,  is  for  a  mannys  iyen

Or  as  a  molle,  or  vant  mete  and  able

For  to  do  profyte  within  a  garden  grene

For  in  no  goodnes  besyed  is  he  sene

Saue  for  to  slepe,  and  watche  the  fyre  alway

Besy  in  no  thynge,  but  in  vayne  sport  and  play


i86


Of  the  vyce  of  slonth.


Amonge  all  other  the  slouthfull  man  onely

Withstandeth  hym  selfe  so  mad  and  blynde  is  he

In  Idelness  lyeng  styll  contynually

By  that  prouysyon  to  purchace  pouertye

But  happy  is  he  whiche  hath  felycyte

To  vse  his  ioyntis  in  workes  iust  and  gode

With  labour  of  his  handes  gettynge  his  dayly  fode

But  our  sauyour  oft  taketh  punysshement

By  godly  iustyce  and  very  rightwysenes

And  that  oft  tyme  with  hell  payne  and  tourment

On  them  that  lyue  alway  in  slouthfulnes

But  them  that  labour  in  lawfull  besynes

He  largely  rewardeth,  and  wryte  doth  testyfy

That  an  Idell  man  to  ete  is  nat  worthy

The  vyce  of  slouth  full  harde  is  to  asswage

Or  to  subdue :  therfore  before  our  dayes

By  it  was  brought  moche  peryll  and  damage

Into  the  worlde.  and  that  by  dyuers  wayes

For  as  Juuenall  the  noble  Poete  sayes

Amonge  the  Romayns  dyd  growe  and  sprynge  therby

The  rote  of  couetyse,  pryde  and  lechery,

And  sothly  slouth  and  wretchyd  Idylnes
By  wayes  remys  and  dranynge  neglygence
Of  all  other  synne  is  rote  and  maystres
Yonge  hartis  attysyth  to  many  a  sore  offence
The  noble  Dauyd,  a  man  of  hye  prudence
Whyle  he  submyttyd  hymselfe  to  Idylnes
Synned  in  adultery  and  murder :  by  blyndenes


Of  the  vyce  of  sloiith.  \  8  7


Whyle  Rome  was  gyuen  to  labour  and  dylygence

They  wan  Cartago,  as  it  is  wryten  playne

But  afterwarde  by  slouth  and  neglygence

That  noble  Cyte  anone  they  lost  agayne

For  whan  the  romaynes  were  voyde  of  care  and  payne

Of  batayle  and  labour,  and  other  besynes

They  gaue  theyr  bodyes  to  slouth  and  ydelnes

They  had  no  warre  to  exercyse  theyr  myght

To  them  obeyed  small,  great,  lowe  and  hye

Enmy  was  none  agayne  whome  they  myght  fyght

Than  gaue  the  youth  them  selfe  to  lechery

"Whiche  lost  theyr  force,  theyr  myght  and  strength  fherby

Amonge  them  selfe  than  began  they  to  conspyre

This  wyse  decayed  theyr  excellent  impyre

For  whyle  the  romayns  straunge  regions  dyd  assayle
Expellynge  faynt  slouth,  and  nedy  Idelnes
By  dedes  of  Armes  and  boldenes  of  batayle
Therin  they  subdued  theyr  hye  cowragyousnes
But  after  by  slouth  vyle  lust  dyd  them  oppres
And  (alas)  so  sore  they  gaue  them  to  the  same
That  vtterly  they  loste  theyr  glorious  name

Thenuoy  of  Alexander  Barclay.
Lerne  by  example  o  man  for  to  beware
Of  faynt  Idelnes  and  of  neglygence
Suffer  uat  that  slouth  take  the  in  hir  snare
For  she  is  rote  of  all  synne  and  offence
Gyue  the  therfore  to  perfyte  dylygence
Be  alway  doynge,  but  se  thy  dede  be  gode
For  as  I  sayde  before  in  a  sentence
An  Idell  man  is  nat,  worthy  of  his  fode.


Of  straunge  Folys  and  infydels  as  sarasyns
paynems,  turkes  and  suche  lyke.


Hytheito  I  haue  me  indeuered  to  repreue

The  folys  of  our  fayth  :  for  theyr  enormyte

But  nowe  shall  I  touche  wretches  of  mysbyleue

Expressynge  theyr  foly  by  theyr  infydelyte

But  thoughe  these  Heretykes  greatly  vnworthy  be

With  vs  christen  men  to  be  :  for  theyr  blynde  slomber

In  errour:  yet  ar  they  of  this  our  folysshe  nomber


Of  straunge  Folys  and  hfydeles.


0  God  aboue :  howe  moche  abundaunt  nomber
Of  folys  rayneth,  from  the  right  way  wandrynge
By  mysbyleue,  wherin  they  slepe  and  slomber
Leuynge  the  right  lawe  of  god  in  euery  thynge
These  ar  fals  Sarasyns,  fals  of  theyr  lyuynge

And  other  mysbyleuers  by  blyndnes  voyde  of  grace
Whiche  in  our  Shyppis  loketh  to  haue  a  place

Of  these  fals  forayns  renneth  so  great  a  bonde

Vnto  our  shyppis  that  the  great  company

Of  them,  ouerspredeth  both  the  brode  se  and  londe

For  of  them  all  nat  one,  is  fautles  verely

These  folys  ar  Forayns :  and  this  is  the  cause  why

For  from  the  folde  of  god  they  falsly  them  withdrav

And  the  trewe  fayth,  despysynge  goddes  lawe

It  were  moche  better  these  wretchys  to  despyse
And  styll  to  leue  them  in  theyr  blynde  darkenes
What  haue  I  to  do  with  the  myscheuous  gyse
Of  them  whome  errour  so  blyndly  doth  oppres
For  they  ar  so  blyndyd  in  theyr  vayne  wyckydnes
That  they  wyll  be  helyd  by  no  medycyne
Nor  from  theyr  vayne  Idolatry  declyne

1  sholde  them  passe  ouer,  for  there  is  no  doctryne
No  gode  monysyon  nor  good  aduysement

That  can  them  moue,  ne  cause  them  to  inclyne
Vnto  the  holy  fayth  of  our  lorde  omnypotent
But  as  blynde  bestis,  of  one  cursed  assent
In  the  lewde  lawes,  they  onely  haue  delyte
Of  theyr  fals  mayster,  diceytfuU  Mahumyte


190 Of  straunge  Folys  and  infy deles.


But  touchynge  the  nomber  and  the  horrible  bende
Of  these  blynde  folys :  they  ar  so  infynyte
That  a  small  volume  can  nat  well  comprehende
Theyr  foly.  who  sholde  the  hole  togyther  wryte
Therfore  after  my  wyt,  my  laysar,  and  respyte
Of  theyr  sectis  onely  I  shall  make  mensyon
For  breuyte  leuynge  theyr  fyrst  inuencion

The  cursyd  lewes  despysynge  christis  lore
For  theyr  obstynate,  and  vnrightwyse  cruelte
Of  all  these  folys  must  nede  be  set  before
The  nacion  of  Turkes  next  to  them  shall  be
The  sarrazyns  next  whose  infydelyte
Is  groundyd  so  blyndly  on  mahumetis  lawe
That  no  instruccion  can  them  fro  it  withdrawe

The  whiche  errour  as  I  in  wrytynge  fynde
Two  partis  of  the  worlde  :  as  afryke  and  asye
With  mysbyleue  full  wretchydly  doth  blynde
And  of  europe  great  part  and  quantyte
Whiche  in  our  shyp  caryed  shall  nedes  be
The  houndes  of  Tartary  ar  of  this  sect  also
With  other  londes  and  Ilys  many  mo

The  Scithians  and  also  they  of  Sarmatyke

And  they  of  Boeme,  by  fendes  fraudolent

Ar  led  and  blyndyd  with  an  errour  lyke  .  -

Despysynge  the  lawes  of  god  omnypotent

Many  ar  the  londes  and  lies  adiacent

Whiche  with  lyke  errour  ar  blyndyd  and  infect

The  owgly  Mauryans  ar  also  of  this  sect


Of  straunge  Folys  and  infy deles. i  9  i


These  with  other  lyke  ar  Folys,  and  blynde  dawes

Hauynge  the  chefe  shyp  of  foly  and  errour

For  that  they  folowe  vayne  doctryne  and  fals  lawes

But  namely  they  that  be  of  siache  furour

Wylfully  to  forsake  god  theyr  creatour

On  fals  enchauntement  whyle  they  theyr  myndes  set

In  the  deuelysshe  scoles :  of  Praga  and  Tolet

Nygromancians,  and  fals  wytches  also
Ar  of  this  sort,  folowynge  lyke  offence
Nat  onely  they  that  wytche  craftis  do
But  they  also  that  gyue  to  them  credence
Or  them  supportyth  with  fauour  or  defence
For  all  suche  Caytayfs  as  vnto  them  assent
Byleue  nat  truly  on  god  omnypotent

It  were  to  moche  and  to  longe  a  labour
To  rehers  all  those  folys  innumerable
Whiche  worshyp  Idollys  and  lyue  in  lyke  errour
As  vayne  sacrifyces,  and  lawes  execrable
Whiche  by  theyr  iugement  moche  abhomynable
Agaynst  the  holy  fayth  of  Christ  dare  obiect
That  it  is  fals,  vayne,  and  of  small  effect

Amonge  these  sayde  folys  plunged  in  hell  payne
I  may  assemble  those  wretched  houndes  of  hell
Whiche  by  dispayre  with  theyr  owne  handes  ar  slayne
By  rope,  water,  knyfe,  or  other  deth  cruell
But  of  these  mysbyleuers  more  to  wryte  or  tell
Or  to  them  enuoy,  theyr  errour  to  counsayle
It  were  but  foly,  and,  payne  without  auayle


Of  the  ruyne,  inclynacion  and  decay  of
the  holy  fayth  catholyke,  and  dymyn-
ucion  of  the  Empyre.


0  christen  Pi  ynces  gydeis  of  Christendome
Whiche  ought  our  fayth  with  manhode  to  defende

1  you  exort,  by  reason  and  wysdome

And  hyghe  discressyon  in  mynde  to  comprehende
The  fall  therof,  and  besely  to  intende
It  to  defende  with  your  labour  dilygent
Leuynge  me  the  hode,  that  I  shewe  here  present


Of  the  ruyne  of  the  holy  fiyth.  193


Whyle  I  remember  the  sore  ruyne  and  dekay

Of  our  christen  fayth,  and  our  parfyte  byleue

Howe  it  decreaseth  to  damage  euery  day

The  causers  therof  I  nedes  must  repreue

Whiche  slouthfull  suffraunce  sothly  me  so  doth  greue

That  with  wete  chekes  by  teres  thycke  as  hayle

I  am  constrayned  this,  harde  chaunce  to  bewayle

My  doleful!  teres  may  I  nat  well  defarre

My  stomake  strykynge  with  handes  lamentable

For  none  with  Trumpet  nor  sounde  betokenynge  warre

This  hurt  out  chaseth,  ne  furour  vengeable

Thoughe  vnto  Prynces  the  dede  were  honorable

To  chace  out  this  hurt  and  inconuenyence

Alas  yet  therto  none  doth  his  dilygence

No  man  is  so  dull,  nor  so  cruell  of  hert

Thoughe  that  his  herte  were  harder  than  the  stone

But  that  this  dolefull  chanse  sholde  cause  it  smert

And  with  inwarde  syghes  sore  to  complayne  and  mone

Seynge  thus  saynt  Petyrs  holy  chare  or  trone

And  the  fayth  decresynge  playne  in  our  presence

By  slouth  of  statis  and  thoughtles  neglygence

The  holy  chayr,  and  apostolyke  See
Lyeth  in  decay,  plungyd  in  fere  and  dout
And  Rome  the  hede,  and  chefe  of  christentye
Thretenyth  ruyne :  and  all  the  londe  about
Tremblynge  for  fere  of  the  vnchristen  rout
Of  cursyd  Turkes  and  other  infydelys
Thus  is  our  fortune  led  forth  on  feble  whelys

VOL.  11.  N


194 ^^'^  rnyjie,  inclynacion  and  decay


All  christen  Royalmes,  and  christis  comonte
Wandreth,  and  ar  cast  in  case  full  myserable
Flowynge,  and  swymmynge  in  the  terapestous  se
And  wawes  of  fere,  abasshyd  and  vnstable
Nat  onely  our  fayth,  and  lawes  honorable
Decreaseth  dayly :  but  also  trouth  to  say
All  holy  ordynaunce  we  dayly  se  decay

But  estatis  as  kynges,  and  other  men  royall
By  theyr  blynde  slouth  and  ferefuU  neglygence
Ar  to  be  blamyd,  for  they  be  cause  of  all
For  though  that  they  be  our  shelde  and  defence
Hauynge  in  theyr  handes,  as  is  sene  by  euydence
The  armour,  and  dartis :  of  warre  and  chyualry
These  peryls  they  beholde :  fyndynge  no  remedy

None  taketh  helme,  spere,  ne  other  armour
With  manly  courage,  and  bolde  audacyte
These  peryls  to  preuent  and  to  socour
Wherfore  o  Rome  :  I  fere  thy  lybertye
Shall  by  thy  enmyes  be  reft  away  fro  the
And  thou  be  brought  to  bondage  payne  and  care
If  that  thy  gyders  be  nat  both  wyse  and  ware

Defence  of  our  fayth  by  slouth  is  left  behynde

Saynt  Peters  shyp  is  cast  from  syde  to  syde

And  all  to  shaken  with  tempest  wawes  and  wynde

Without  respyte  in  eas  and  rest  to  abyde

The  fayth  of  Christ  whiche  all  mankynde  doth  gyde

Vnto  the  hye  Royalme  and  see  celestyall

Declyneth  sore,  ferynge  ruyne  and  fall


of  the  holy  fayth.  19  5


Suche  frowarde  Nacions,  as  ar  of  mysbyleue
Prepareth  armour  in  theyr  mad  crueltye
Agaynst  the  churche,  the  same  to  hurt  and  greue
And  it  to  subdue  to  sore  captyuyte
Whiche  churche  quaketh  ferynge  this  ieopardye
And  skant  goth  fre,  but  if  no  ayde  be  founde
I  fere  sore  lyst  it  shall  be  throwen  to  grounde

The  turke  on  euery  syde  doth  it  assayle
Despysynge  the  fayth  :  demynysshynge  the  same
Whiche  cruell  tyrant  (alas)  if  he  preuayle
Shall  of  them  morder  that  worshyp  christis  name
The  fals  Prophete,  fyllyd  with  synne  and  shame
(I  mean  Mahumet)  by  his  lawes  damnable
Hath  subuertyd  people  almost  innumerable

His  Sectis  infectyf  he  hath  out  cast  and  spred
Nere  ouer  the  worlde,  and  namely  firste  of  all
The  Arabyens  by  his  fals  lawes  ar  led
Next  by  his  venym  dedely  and  mortall
Asye  the  more  obeyeth  (as  bonde  and  thrall)
Vnto  his  lawes,  and  so  in  raaner  lyke
To  his  fals  lawes  obey  they  of  Afryke

The  Soldan  of  Egypt  and  Royalmes  of  Tartary
Ar  of  his  sect,  and  the  fals  Turke  also
"Whiche  to  our  fayth  is  mortall  ennemy,
Our  marchys,  marrynge  as  moche  as  he  may  do
And  moche  of  them  annexeth  his  vnto
Warrynge  dayly  on  christen  royalmes  adiacent
Whiche  with  his  owne  was  wont  to  be  content


196  Of  the  riiyne^  hiclynacion  and  decay


The  londe  of  Trace,  large  in  a  marueylous  wyse
With  the  royahnes  of  Septemtrion  echone
Longynge  to  his  fader :  coude  nat  his  mynde  sn^Fyse
We  lost  haue  the  Nacions  of  lybye  :  echone
Asia  the  lesse :  from  vs  is  reft  and  gone
Whiche  in  tyme  past  was  true  obedyent
To  the  holy  lawes  of  Faders  auncyent

Of  Europe  moche  haue  we  lost  and  forgone  -

Alas  the  excellent  royalme  of  Hungarye

By  this  fals  Turke  had  :  vtterly,  ben  vndone

If  it  had  nat  hym  resystyd  noblye

And  in  lyke  maner  the  men  of  Dalmacye

With  blody  Batayle  and  woundes  wyde  and  depe

Cessyth  nat  they  Royalme,  from  the  fals  Turke  to  kepe

But  in  theyr  dredefull  paynes  and  dolour  '  ^

Theyr  dayly  warre  and  manly  resystence
Seldome,  or  neuer,  haue  they  ayde  or  socour
Of  christen  Sowdyours,  to  be  at  theyr  defence
Thus  by  our  slouth,  and  wylful!  neglygence
Our  fayth  sore  fadeth  (alas)  we  it  despyse
SufFrynge  our  enmyes  to  enter  in  this  wyse

Alas  no  thynge  increasyth  nowe  a  dayes

Vnto  our  fayth  our  londes  to  augment

But  euery  thynge  contynually  decayes

And  namely  our  fayth  and  vertue  excellent

Who  is  so  stuburne  of  stomake  or  intent

Whiche  coude  nat  this  dolefuU  fortune  sore  bewayle

Rendynge  his  here  his  face  and  apparayle


of  the  holy  fayih,  197


Forsoth  I  thynke  so  harde  hertyd  is  none
But  bysyde  these  forsayd  losses  or  damage
From  vs  alas  the  Ilys  of  Grece  ar  gone
Whiche  longe  tyme  kept  our  fayth  and  our  vsage
The  Traciens  from  vs  ar  reft  by  the  outrage
Of  the  Turkes  :  Obeyinge  to  theyr  ydolatry  .
So  doth  Achynus,  and  eke  Masedony

We  Sparta  haue  lost,  by  this  fyers  tyrant
The  cruell  Turke,  and  Tessaly  also
With  his  swete  Laundes  goodly  and  pleasaunt
We  haue  lost  Thebe,  and  dyuers  Cytees  mo
With  dyuers  mo  lies  as  Mysia  :  both  the  two
And  Constantynoble  that  Cyte  excellent
Vnto  the  Turke  nowe  is  made  obedyent

This  noble  Cyte,  worthy  and  lawdable
Condigne  to  be  gouernyd  by  an  eraperour
Vnto  the  noble  Rome  moste  lyke  and  comparable
Is  nowe  in  thraldome,  bereft  his  olde  honour
And  also  the  fayth  of  christ  our  sauyour.
What  shall  I  wryte  farther  of  the  ruyne
And  fall  of  our  fayth,  and  holy  lawe  dyuyne

To  christen  men  it  is  great  vylany
And  shame :  to  suffer  our  fayth  thus  to  decay
The  Turke  hath  all  won  :  by  his  tyranny
Yet  that,  his  mynde  contentyth  by  no  way
But  yet  more  ouer  he  stodyeth  euery  day
Nat  cessynge  his  Army  and  Batayle  to  renewe
Vs  and  our  landes  in  lyke  wyse  to  subdue


198  Of  the  riiyne,  inclynac'wji  and  decay


The  noble  Cecyle  is  dayly  in  great  dout
Istria  :  pannony,  and  also,  Lumberdy
And  dyuers  other  Nacions  there  about
As  Sycyll,  the  Stiryans  Venyce  and  Italy
These  Ilys,  and  regions  quakyth  contynually
The  royalme  of  Naplys  lyueth  also  in  dout
Of  the  fals  Turke  besegeynge  it  about

The  royalme  of  Denmarke  with  his  hyll  ethnay

As  men  sayth,  brennynge  alway  with  flamynge  fyre

Scantly  escapyth  the  leopardous  affray

Of  these  fals  Turkes,  and  theyr  cruell  Impyre

Agaynst  all  christen  royalmes  they  conspyre

But  namely  subdue  they  vnto  captiuyte

Suche  royalmes  as  ioynynge  vnto  theyr  marchys  be

O  holy  Rhodes  thou  nedys  moste  entende
With  thy  noble  knyghtis  thy  manhode  and  vertue
The  fayth  and  Crosse  of  Christ  for  to  defende
And  to  ouerthrowe,  and  manly  to  subdue
The  Turkes,  and  theyr  lawes  moche  vntrue
O  noble  place  thou  moste  the  payne  abyde
Though  thou  assaylyd  be  sore  on  euery  syde

Bagiazit  a  Prynce  moche  proude  and  pyteles
With  his  wylde  people  full  of  crudelyte
Prepareth  armour  our  to  people  oppres
By  batayle  horryble,  dayly  contendyth  he
Our  costes  to  brynge  into  captyuyte
And  onely  that  purpose  fyxeth  in  his  hert
Our  holy  fayth,  by  rygour,  to  subuert


of  the  holy  Jciyth.


199


He  is  throughe  persyd  with  fury  serpentyne
With  madnes  enuyroned  :  and  that  on  euery  syde
Raiiynge  in  his  rage,  as  Bacchus  god  of  wyne
So  that  no  christen  man  dare  hym  abyde
For  with  doleful!  deth,  and  blody  woundes  wyde
He  them  sore  vexeth,  but  suche  as  he  doth  kepe
And  saue  on  lyue :  he  layth  in  pryson  depe

With  no  maner  blode  this  thyrst  is  facyate

Vnto  these  Turkes,  whiche  neuer  ar  content

With  cruell  Batayle  they  bete  agaynst  the  yate

Of  our  christen  Royalmes,  with  strokes  vyolent

Wherfore  o  Rome,  o  Cyte  excellent

O  flour  of  our  fayth,  o  Peters  holy  chear

Be  ware :  for  why  great  cause  thou  hast  to  fear

Beholde  this  Sect  vomyteth  out  madnes

Enflamyd  by  the  fende  with  furour  infernall

Our  holy  fayth,  and  the,  also  doutles

By  ferefull  rygour  for  to  make  bonde  and  thrall-

The  wolfe  (alas)  sore  wastyth  ouerall

The  Innocent  folde,  of  christ  our  sauyour

Drownynge  the  sheepe  in  drede,  wo,  and  dolour

They  al  deuour,  no  man  is  founde  so  bolde
Them  to  withstande,  thus  without  resystence
They  flee  both  man,  and  woman,  yonge  and  olde
Hauynge  no  respect  to  godly  Innocence
Yet  we,  alas,  by  slouth  and  neglygence
Plungyd  in  the  wawes  of  voluptuosyte
Make  no^resystence  to  this  calamyte


2  00  Of  the  ruyne,  hiclynclcion  and  decay


Of  men  and  harnes  whiche  longeth  to  batayle

We  haue  ynoughe  :  and  capytayns  excellent

With  strength  ynough,  bolde  corage  and  counsayle

We  lacke  no  thynge  that  is  expedyent

As  wyt,  and  wysdome,  wyse  practyse  and  prudent

But  yet  suffer  we,  these  turkes  to  procede

And  them  to  resyst  haue  we  no  care  nor  hede

We  lese  our  fayth  (alas)  and  wyllyngly
To  our  great  shame  (forsoth)  and  dishonour
The  cause  is :  for  that  slouth  doth  occupy
The  mynde  of  euery  kynge  and  gouernour
Our  states  slomber,  both  kynge  and  emperour
And  Palynurus  the  hede  of  christente
And  chefe  lodes  man  :  slepyth  in  his  See

Thy  people  Peter  in  ryches  abundaunt
Slepyth  in  lyke  wyse,  and  in  lyke  neglygence
As  if  that  they  were  blynde  and  ignoraunt
Of  this  great  peryll  and  inconuenyence
Our  holy  fayth  without  faut  or  offence
Without  helpe  lyeth  open :  to  the  Turkes  hande
To  be  defyled,  no  man  doth  hym  withstande

None  lettyth  this  cruell  ennemy  to  rage
By  royalmes  and  Cytees,  but  as  we  se  playnly
Theyr  owne  selfe  they  subdue  vnto  bondage
And  ferefull  deth  wyllynge  and  gladly
Therfore  this  turke  (alasj  moche  cruelly
Where  euer  he  comys,  by  batayle  violent
Demynyssheth  the  fiiyth  of  god  oirnypotent


of  the  holy  fayth.  201


And  that  as  a  conquerour  valyent  and  stronge
But  doutles  I  suppose  in  myne  intent
That  the  greuous  synnes  raynynge  vs  amonge
Be  the  chefe  causers  of  this  sore  punysshement
We  it  deserue  :  therfore  god  hath  it  sent
As  scourge  and  penaunce  for  our  vyciousnes
And  that  by  due  order  of  his  rightwysnes

We  worshyp  ryches,  therto  we  vs  subdue
To  golde  and  treasour  we  make  our  sacryfyce
Our  fayth  is  exyled  (alas)  so  is  vertue
With  vs  abydeth  no  thynge,  but  synne  and  vyce
The  execrable  hunger  of  golde  and  couetyse
And  the  vayne  pleasour  of  Folys  fraudelent
Subduyth  our  bodyes  to  worthy  punysshement

The  heuenly  vergyn  from  vs  is  dryuen  hens
I  meane  that  iustice  is  blynde  in  christente
Or  out  of  the  grounde,  disdaynynge  our  presence
With  hir  thre  systers,  strength  or  audacyte
Prudence  and  temperaunce  also  exylyd  be
Charyte  is  banysshyd  also  from  eche  place
For  whose  absence,  alas  we  haue  no  grace

All  christen  Royalmes  ar  thus  corrupt  with  syn

And  gyuen  in  so  moclie  to  slouth  and  ydelnes

That  eche  man  stodyeth  part  of  some  royalme  to  wyn

Suffrenge  the  Turkes  our  fayth  thus  to  oppres

In  tyme  past,  Rome  lanterne  of  worthynes

Chose  four  Susters,  of  Cytees  pryncipall

Felawes  of  the  fayth,  and  in  honour  egall


2  o  2  Of  the  riiyne,  'uiclynacion  and  decay


The  firste  was  Jerusalem  in  holynes  shynynge

The  seconde  Alexander  so  callyd  first  of  all

After  the  name  of  that  moste  noble  kynge

The  thirde  Antyoche,  a  place  or  hold  royall

The  fourth  Constantynoble  whiche  euery  man  dyd  call

Newe  Rome,  and  onely  bycause  of  the  lykenes

But  nowe,  mysbyleuers,  doth  all  the  same  oppres

These  Cytees  nowe  ar  take  from  vs  away
By  the  fals  enmyes,  of  our  godly  byleue
Besyde  all  this  yet  ryseth  euery  day
Newe  sectis  of  gentyles  our  costes  for  to  greue
And  fals  prophetis  whiche  dayly  doth  repreue
And  defyle  our  fayth  in  as  raoche  as  they  may
Yet  fewe,  or  none  at  all  doth  them  gaynsay

So  blynde  ar  our  hertis,  opressyd  in  derkenes
And  also  our  iyen,  this  peryll  wyll  nat  se
Therfore  we  ar  worthy  to  sulFer  this  distres
Suche  is  our  lyfe,  and  our  fragylyte
And  though  we  be  drowned  in  depe  aduersyte
Vnto  vs  denyeth  Christ  socour  for  to  sende
For  that  we  nat  purpos  our  lyues  to  amende

The  Turke  to  his  Idols  hath  gretter  reuerence
And  more  deuocion,  to  his  fals  lawe  and  doctryne
Than  we  christen  men  without  obedyence
Haue  to  our  true  fayth,  and  holy  lawe  dyuyne
Concorde  and  peas  ar  fall  into  ruyne
Vnmekenes  vs  pleasyth :  disceyt  and  vsury
The  pore,  and  good  we,  oppres  by  rebbery


of  the  holy  fayth.


Neyghbour  agayne  neyghbour,  the  son  agayne  nature

Agaynst  the  Fader,  and  echone  nowe  adayes

Anothers  londes  desyreth  to  procure

By  falshode,  oppressyon,  or  suche  disceytfuU  waves

The  states  ar  vexyd  by  foule  dyscorde  and  frayes

But  yet  both  they  and  men  of  lowe  degre

Seke  but  theyr  pryuate  profyte  and  owne  vtylyte

Euery  man  seketh  but  for  his  owne  auayle
Wherby  our  fayth  decayeth  dayly  so
Wherfore  it  is  no  marueyle  without  fayle
Though  we  our  townes  and  Cytees  thus  forgo
Lesynge  our  royalmes,  to  our  great  payne  and  wo
And  namely  suche  as  were  most  auncyent
Best  groundyd  in  the  fayth  of  christ  omnypotent

No  thynge  is  left :  nought  doth  to  vs  remayne

Anone  the  Turke  shall  with  his  hoste  cruell

Enter  on  our  costes  to  our  great  losse  and  payne

Yet  labour  we  nat  his  furour  to  expell

But  namely  suche  as  other  doth  excel  1

In  byrth  and  ryches,  strength  and  audacyte

Labour  leste  to  chalange  and  defende  our  lybertye

The  yate  is  open  :  The  way  is  open  made

"Wherfore  o  Rome,  o  Rome  moste  excellent

I  fere  me  sore  lyst  thy  honour  shall  fade

Thou  skant  shalt  escape,  nor  fle  the  punysshement

The  storme  on  the  comyth  cruell  and  vyolent

A  kynge  the  byldyd  and  eft  a  counsellour

Encreased  thy  name,  and  brought  the  to  hnour


2  04  Of  the  ruyne,  inclynacion  ana  decay


Than  had  this  Cyte  so  hye  a  name  royall

That  through  the  worlde  it  spred  abrode  his  fame

And  also  vp  vnto,  the  Heuen  Iraperyall

Than  after  was  it  subgect  vnder  the  name  <

Of  an  emperour,  to  honour  and  nat  shame

Yet  after  it  was  agayne  admyttyd  fre

But  nowe  may  it  fere,  agayne  in  seruytude  to  be

No  man  resistyth  agaynst  this  vyolence

Our  fayth  also  demynysshyth  euery  day

By  culpable  synne,  and  our  noyson  offence

Whiche  at  the  ende  hath  greuous  payne  alway

O  christen  Prynces  therfore  do  that  ye  may

Our  fayth  to  socour,  out  of  captyuyte

Sauynge  your  owne  londes,  your  lyfe  and  lybertye

O  worthy  prynces  and  lordes  Italyen

Ye  stoberne  Flemynges  and  ye  of  Pannony

O  subtyle  Lumberdes,  Spanyardes  and  Frenchmen

And  o  holy  Fader  the  Pope  moste  specyally

Lay  to  your  handes  by  strength  and  polycy

Our  fayth  to  defende,  and  helpe  ye  shall  nat  want

Throwe  out  your  dartis  with  handes  tryumphant

Expell  your  wrath,  set  statelynes  asyde

Be  stedfast  in  fayth :  keep  ay  in  humylyte

Let  Constance  and  peas  amonge  you  ay  abyde

With  knot  perpetuall  of  loue  and  amyte

Haue  one  assent,  in  Concorde  all  agre

loyn  hande  to  hande,  prepare  you  vnto  warre

Take  soone  your  armour,  and  no  more  tyme  diffarre


of  the  holy  fciyth,  205


If  peas  be  with  vs,  Concorde  and  amyte
We  may  from  our  costis  the  cruell  turke  expell
And  so  kepe  our  fayth  in  stedfast  lybertye
One  hope  we  haue,  our  ennemyes  to  quell
Whiche  hope  is  stedfast  if  we  ourself  do  well
For  Henry  the  eyght  replete  with  hye  wysdome
By  iust  tytyll  gydeth  our  Septer  of  kyngdome

This  noble  Prynce  begynnyth  vertuously

By  iustyce  and  pyte,  his  roylme  to  meyntayne

So  that  he  and  his :  without  mo  company

May  succour,  our  sores  by  his  manhode  souerayne

And  get  with  his  owne  hande  Jerusalem  agayne

He  passyth  Hercules  in  manhode  and  courage

Hauynge  a  respect  vnto  his  tender  age

He  passeth  Achylles  in  strength  and  valyance
His  fame  nere  as  great,  but  as  for  his  larges
And  lyberalyte,  he  shewyth  in  countenaunce
That  no  auaryce  can  blynde  his  rightwysnes
Couetyse  hath  left  behynde  hym  his  ryches
Vnto  the  hyghe  possessyon,  of  lyberalyte
Whiche  with  the  same  shall  kepe,  our  lybertye

Let  go  Pompeius :  and  Camyllus  also

And  Sylla,  for  none  of  them  wyll  I  commende

This  Prynce  I  prayse  alonely  and  no  mo

Whiche  is  moste  abyll  our  fayth  for  to  defende

He  is  moste  worthy  by  honour  to  ascende

Vnto  a  noble  Diademe  Imperyall

So  is  my  hope,  that  he  hereafter  shall


2o6  Of  the  riiyne,  hiclynac'ion  and  decay


Than  shall  he  our  fayth  establysshe  and  make  sure

Defendynge  the  Churche  and  christis  herytage

There  shall  no  Turke  be  abyll  to  indure

His  rampynge  Lyons  rorynge  in  theyr  rage

Nor  none  of  all  the  Sarrazyns  lynage

Thus  may  our  Prynce  be  shelde  of  christendome

By  strength  and  ryches,  but  namely  by  wysdome

His  armys  victorious  shall  ^pred  abrode  theyr  fame
Ouer  all  the  worlde,  for  he  may  wyn  agayne
Jerusalem :  and  the  Crosse  within  the  same
With  the  holy  toumbe  :  for  this  is  my  trust  certayne
That  if  he  begyn  :  he  nought  shall  do  in  vayne
For  god  and  his  sayntis  shall  helpe  hym  for  to  fyght
Saynt  george  our  patrone  shall  eke  augment  his  myglit

But  o  englysshe  states  I  humbly  you  requyre
Vnto  your  kynge  of  hert  and  mynde  be  true
Submyt  your  selfe  gladly  to  his  empyre
So  shall  ye  lyghtly  your  ennemyes  subdue
And  syth  that  all  Christen  prynces  doth  eschewe
Labour  and  payne,  for  the  holy  faythes  defence
In  the  name  of  god  do  ye  your  dylygence

Though  Aufony  slepe  and  also  Italy ■  •  ■
The  kynges  of  Sycyll  and  also  of  Fraunce
And  they  of  the  Churche  for  none  of  them  truly
Defendyth  the  fayth,  but  labour  to  auaunce
Theyr  proper  londes,  suche  is  theyr  gouernaunce
That  christen  kynges  this  wyse  togyder  fyght
Suffrynge  the  fayth  decay  before  theyr  syght


of  the  holy  fayth.  207


They  knowe  the  cause,  hauynge  power  and  myght
Yet  wyll  they  nat  the  holy  fayth  defende
Therfore  lede  ye  your  Host  of  men  forth  right
These  Turkes  to  subdue. If  ye  so  condiscende
Than  be  ye  sure  Christ  shall  you  socour  sende
Of  angels  heuenly  to  your  ayde  and  defence
And  brake  theyr  Tentis  with  his  hande  and  presence

The  noble  Henry  of  Englonde  is  at  hande
Of  kynges  noblest,  of  worthy  auncetrye
Whiche  shall  you  helpe  to  wyn  the  holy  lande
And  brynge  these  tyrantis  vnto  Captyuyte
Enuy  who  wyll :  none  rightwyser  than  he
Is  in  the  worlde  nor  of  more  noblenes
Nor  more  habundant  in  treasour  and  ryches

His  maiestye  presentyth  a  kynges  countenaunce
His  maners  honest,  and  full  of  noblenes
He  seketh  nat  his  kyngdome  to  auaunce
By  gyle  disceyte  :  nor  other  lyke  falsnes
His  mynde  nat  elate  with  scornfull  statelynes
But  in  the  playne  path  of  goodnes  lawe  and  right
The  fere  of  god  alway  before  his  syght

As  longe  as  this  noble  Prynce  shall  be  our  gyde
With  vs  all  honour  godnes  and  ioy  shall  growe
With  perfyte  peas  about  on  euery  syde
In  welth  and  ryches  we  shall  habounde  and  flowe
And  if  there  be  any  of  statis  hye  or  lowe
Whiche  by  yll  councill  wolde  cause  hym  to  mysdo
God  graunt  them  no  myght,  no  space  ne  tyme  therto


2o8  Of  the  ntyne,  inclynacion  and  decay


There  is  no  Prynce  of  greatter  excellence
I  trowe  none  lyuynge  of  hye  nor  lowe  degre
Wherfore  let  them  do  hym  obedyence
As  to  theyr  hede  :  and  moste  of  dignyte
Obey  to  hym  Prynces  than  trust  I  ye  shall  se
That  by  his  manhode,  and  cotmsell  souerayne
All  that  his  lost,  we  shall :  soone  wyn  agayne

And  ye  christen  Prynces  who  so  euer  ye  be
If  ye  be  destytute  of  a  noble  Capytayne
Take  lamys  of  Scotlonde  for  his  audacyte
And  proued  manhode  if  ye  wyll  laude  attayne
Let  hym  haue  the  forwarde,  haue  ye  no  disdayne
Nor  indignacion,  for  neuer  kynge  was  borne
That  of  ought  of  warre  can  shewe  the  vnycorne

For  if  that  he  take  onys  his  spere  in  hande
Agaynst  these  Turkes  strongly  with  it  to  ryde
None  shall  be  abyll  his  stroke  for  to  withstande
Nor  before  his  face  so  hardy  to  abyde
Yet  this  his  manhode  increasyth  nat  his  pryde
But  euer  sheweth  he  mekenes  and  humylyte
In  worde  and  dede  to  hye  and  lowe  degre

In  prudence  pereles  is  this  moste  comely  kynge
And  as  for  his  strength  and  magnanymyte
Concernynge  his  noble  dedes  in  euery  thynge
One  founde  or  grounde  lyke  to  hym  can  nat  be
By  byrth  borne  to  boldnes  and  audacyte
Vnder  the  bolde  planet  of  Mars  the  champyon
Surely  to  subdue  his  ennemyes  echone


of  the  holy  JaytJj.  209


Mars  hath  hym  chosyn  :  all  other  set  asyde

To  be  in  practyse  of  Batayle  without  pere

Saue  ryches  lacketh  his  manful!  myght  to  gyde

He  hath  nat  ,plentye  of  all  thynge  as  is  here

The  cause  is  that  stormes  in  season  of  the  yere

Destroyeth  the  corne  engendrynge  so  scarsnes

Whiche  thynge  moche  hurteth  this  Prynces  worthynes

Let  hym  be  formest,  than  dout  ye  nought  at  all
For  onely  his  loke  (so  bolde  is  his  courage)
The  turkes  pryde  shall  make  decay  and  fall
Lyke  to  a  Lyon  in  dedes  he  shall  rage
Thus  he  beynge  gyde  the  fury  shall  asswage
Of  the  fals  Turkes :  so  that  they  shall  be  fayne
Our  christen  londes  to  vs  to  yelde  agayne

If  the  Englysshe  Lyon  his  wysdome  and  ryches
Conioyne  with  true  loue,  peas  and  fydelyte
With  the  Scottis  vnycornes  myght  and  hardynes
Than  is  no  dout  but  all  hole  christen te
Shall  lyue  in  peas  welth  and  tranquylyte
And  the  holy  londe  come  into  christen  hondes
And  many  a  regyon  out  of  the  fendes  bondes

ThENUOY  of  ALEXANDER  BaRCJLAY.

O  worthy  estatis  of  Christendome  echone
Consyder  your  power  and  your  habylyte
Let  slombrynge  slouth  away  fro  you  be  gone
Fere  nat  to  fyght  for  your  lyfe  and  lybertye
Let  eche  man  do  after  his  power  and  degre
To  withstande  the  Turke  and  the  fayth  to  defende
If  we  manly  fyght  :  and  all  in  one  agre
Than  without  dout  god  shall  vs  socour  sende^

VOL.  II.  O


Of  flaterers  and  glosers.


He  that  wyll  flater  a  hoi  s  of  hye  corage
Clappynge  or  touchynge  :  if  that  he  stande  to  nye
May  happen  to  haue  the  fote  on  his  vysage
To  his  great  hui  t :  and  who  that  subtylly
Wyll  flater  an  estate  to  get  some  good  therby
He  often  at  the  last  is  cast  out  of  fauour
For  flaterynge  pleaseth  no  wyse  man  of  honour


Ofjiaterers  and  glosers.


2  I  I


Our  folys  yet  encreasyth  more  and  more
But  as  for  those  that  nowe  themselfe  present
I  thought  to  haue  set  them  in  a  shyp  before
Where  as  ar  seruauntis  fals  and  fraudelent
But  by  no  meane  wyll  they  therto  consent
They  coueyt  a  shyp  for  them  selfe  to  attayne
Therfore  for  them  this  shyp  I  nowe  ordayne

Great  lordes  seruauntis,  wyll  nedes  sayle  apart
Alone  by  them  self  they  coueyt  for  to  be
For  they  ne  can  well  vse  theyr  craft  and  art
Of  gyle  and  flaterynge  amonge  the  comontye
And  if  that  ye  wyll  knowe  what  men  these  be
They  ar  fals  flaterers  fyllyd  full  of  gyle
And  fowle  corrupcion  :  as  is  a  botche  or  byle

A  crafty  flaterer,  as  nowe  is  many  one

With  grettest  lordes  coueytis  alway  to  dwell

Also  they  labour  to  knowe  eche  thynge  alone

Yet  can  they  nought  kepe  secrete  in  counseli

But  with  the  comon  Folys  for  that  they  wyll  nat  mell

I  ordoyne  to  them  this  Barge  here  present

Lyst  theyr  fraude  myght  be  theyr  owne  impedyment

The  kynges  Court  nowe  adayes  doth  fede

Suche  faynynge  flaterers :  and  best  they  ar  in  grace

As  chefe  with  theyr  lorde,  by  lyes  gettynge  mede

Some  with  a  fals  herte,  and  a  payntyd  face

In  his  lordes  seruyce  to  haue  chefe  rowme  and  place

Into  his  lordes  erys  yetyth  secretly

Lyes  venemous,  debate  to  multyply


2  I  2


OfJIaterers  and  glosers.


Another  can  pyke  vp  the  fethers  properly
Of  his  maysters  clothys  if  they  syt  nat  right
He  maketh  them  yet  for  to  syt  more  awry
To  take  occasion  them  clenlyer  to  dyght
Another  ay  bydeth  in  his  maysters  syght
Nat  to  his  profyte,  but  to  his  charge  and  coste
But  to  support  hym,  if  he  do  crake  or  boste

These  faynynge  flaterers  theyr  lordes  thus  begyle
Yet  ar  theyr  lordes  therwith  right  well  content
They  laughe  out  lowde  if  that  theyr  lorde  do  smyle
What  euer  he  sayth  they  to  the  same  assent
And  in  so  moche  ar  they  fals  and  fraudelent
That  if  theyr  mayster  say  that  the  crowe  is  whyte
They  say  the  same,  and  haue  therin  delyte

They  flater  theyr  lorde  with  wordes  fayre  and  gay
And  vayne  roundynges  to  cause  hym  to  byleue
That  all  is  trouth  whiche  they  vnto  hym  say
Another  hym  stryketh  and  claweth  by  the  sleue
Another  with  fals  talys  his  neyghbour  doth  greue
Vnto  a  ryche  man  accusynge  hym  falsly
To  syt  at  his  dysshe  and  get  some  mete  therby

Thus  cause  these  flaterers,  malyce  and  discorde.
The  ryche  oft  desyreth  suche  lyes  for  to  here
Eche  flaterer  is  in  chefe  rowme  with  his  lorde
Whan  a  symple  seruaunt  must  nedes  stande  arere
The  playne  man  hungreth,  the  Iyer  hath  the  chere
No  man  in  Court  shall  nowe  a  lyuynge  fynde
Without  that  he  can  bowe  to  euery  wynde


Of  Jlaterers  and  glosers.  2  1 3


The  tre  that  bowyth  to  no  wynde  that  doth  blowe
In  stormes  and  tempest  is  in  moste  ieoperdy
And  often  with  sodayne  blastis  ouerthrowe
Therfore  these  flaterers  to  eche  wynde  aply
And  he  that  can,  vpholde  his  maysters  lye
"With  ye  and  nay,  and  helpe  hym  if  he  tryp
Obteyneth  nowe  grettest  honour  and  worshyp

Many  one  in  flaterynge  cometh  to  great  honour

The  cause  is :  for  grettest  statis  nowe  a  dayes

To  be  disceyued  ar  glad,  and  haue  pleasour

In  a  dowble  tunge  beleuynge  that  it  sayes

None  is  nowe  beloued,  but  suche  as  vse  the  wayes

Of  adulacion,  and  that  can  secretely

Whysper  and  rounde  thynges  ymagyned  falsly

And  they  that  haue  lerned  to  forge  tydynges  newe

Ar  most  made  of  if  they  haue  the  scyence

By  flaterynge  wordes  to  make  them  to  seme  true

None  settyth  by  seruauntis  of  faythfull  dilygence

But  for  that  punysshement  foloweth  eche  offence

We  dayly  se  these  flaterers  harde  bested

And  by  theyr  owne  gyle,  they  vnder  fote  ar  tred

ThENUOY  of  ALEXANDER  BaRCLAY.

Amende  fals  flaterers  :  it  is  a  folysshe  sport
And  vayne  besynes,  for  a  small  wretchyd  mede
Folys  in  theyr  lyes  to  flater  and  support
And  whan  all  is  done  nat  to  be  sure  to  spede
Thou  shalt  fynde  truly  :  if  thou  take  gode  hede
That  at  the  ende  flaterers  ar  nought  set  by
But  he  that  is  playne,  to  flater  hauyuge  drede
At  last  shall  be  rewardyd  well  and  worthely


Of  tale  berers  and  Poles  of  lyght  credence
vnto  the  same.


He  is  lyght  myndyd,  and  voyde  of  all  prudence
Whiche  alway  is  wont,  without  aduysement
To  all  vayne  talys  sone  to  gyue  credence
Aplyenge  his  erys  therto  :  with  full  intent
For  why  these  brybours  fals  and  fraudelent
And  bablynge  lyers,  by  wordes  wors  than  knyfe.
Amonge  men  sawe  debate  and  greuous  stryfe.


Of  tale  berers.


These  folys  present  I  sholde  haue  callyd  skant
Vnto  my  shyp  to  rowe  amonge  the  mo
But  that  the  Shyp  before  can  them  nat  want
So  these  two  sortis  wyll  nedis  togyther  go
For  thoughe  the  flaterer  hym  selfe  behauyth  so
By  fayned  talys  good  lyiiers  oft  to  grene
They  ar  as  lewde  that  wyll  the  same  byleue

He  is  a  fole  that  his  erys  wyll  inclyne

Lyghtly :  to  his  wordes  that  is  of  suche  vsage

Newe  talys  and  tydynges  dayly  to  ymagyne

And  that  apereth  superflue  of  langage

For  he  showeth  tokyns  of  foly  and  dotage

Whiche  gyueth  his  erys  to  here  suche  wordes  vayne

As  myght  his  neyghbours  honestye  distayne

A  fole  is  ay  lyght,  and  hasty  of  credence
With  erys  open  to  eche  tale  that  is  newe
Wherof  oft  groweth  great  inconuenyence
But  a  wyse  man  suche  talys  can  eschewe
Nat  them  byleuynge  but  if  he  knowe  them  true
He  is  nat  hardy  the  whiche  one  stryketh  sore
Behynde  his  backe  :  nat  warnynge  hym  before

For  who  that  is  vnwarely  strykyn  so

Can  for  the  same  no  helpe  ne  socour  fynde

No  more  can  he  fynde  remedy  therto

That  of  taleberers  is  sclandred  thus  behynde

But  nowe  is  he  a  mayster  that  hath  suche  wyly  mynde

A  rightwyse  man  with  fals  wordes  to  diffame

And  many  vngoodly  gyue  credence  to  the  same


herers.


But  who  so  euer  vsyth  this  adulacion

Or  that  to  vayne  wordes  gyueth  to  sone  credence

Ar  trayters,  and  full  of  abhomynacion

Cursyd  and  iniust  stynkynge  in  the  presence

Of  god  almyght :  for  by  the  same  offence

Is  sawen  the  sede  of  stryfe :  and  mortall  wo

Amonge  great  statis :  and  comontye  also

Therfore  that  man  that  quyetly  wolde  lyue  •-
And  rightwysely  :  with  name  of  honestye  :
To  flaterynge  talys  must  nat  his  erys  gyue
For  a  fals  tunge  fulfyllyd  with  iniquyte
By  mortall  venym  infecteth  eche  degre
Brekynge  the  bonys  (god  wot)  of  many  one
Howbeit  the  tunge  within  it  hath  no  bone

By  this  vyce  :  the  honour  of  hym  that  is  absent
Thoughe  it  were  gotten  by  way  moste  vertuous
Is  hurt  and  distayned  by  worde  malyuolent
Of  it  Cometh  many  a  vyce  full  peryllous
And  it  often  tymes  by  wayes  iniuryous
Jugement  gyueth  on  man  in  his  absence
Fals  and  iniustly  by  to  hasty  credence

By  this  maner,  iustyce  and  lawe  is  vyolate

Vnto  the  absent  moche  noysom,  harde  and  sore

Whan  he  is  falsly  accusyd  by  some  state

Or  some  other  man,  nat  assytyd  before

Howe  can  he  defende  his  cause  well :  whan  no  more

Tary  is  made,  but  forth  right  the  sentence

Vnwysely  is  gyuen  by  to  hasty  credence


Of  tale  berers.  1 1  7


The  wretchyd  A  man  byleuynge  hastely
By  Mardocheus  the  talys  to  hym  tolde
Wolde  hym  haue  put  to  deth  vnrightwysly
If  the  (^ene  hester  durst  nat  haue  ben  so  bolde
The  kynge  to  asswage,  by  wordes  sad  and  colde
Wherby  fals  Aman  in  paynfull  shame  and  care
Anone  was  hanged  :  and  that  in  his  owne  smare

Ouer  hasty  credence  without  aduysement
Sende  Saulis  sone  :  myphiboseth  by  name
Great  care  and  sorowe  by  paynfull  punysshement
The  noble  Alexander  most  excellent  of  fame
"Wolde  neuer  inclyne  his  erys  vnto  the  same
For  well  he  wyst  to  what  inconuenyence
They  fall :  that  ar  to  hasty  of  credence.

Alexander  Barclay  the  translatour.

Consyder  man  wheder  thou  be  lowe  or  hye

What  thynge  thou  herest,  before  thou  thynke  it  true

For  flaterers  ay  speke  fayrest  whan  they  lye

Or  whan  they  lyst  to  brynge  vp  talys  newe

Beware  of  them  :  Theyr  company  eschue

They  shall  the  cause  to  fall  to  suche  offence

That  all  thy  lyfe  thou  shalt  it  after  rue

To  them,  if  thou  be  hasty  of  credence

Therfore  do  thou  as  doth  the  god  palfray
Whan  they  begyn  to  clawe  the  by  the  sleue
Flynge  with  thy  helys :  and  dryue  them  so  away
And  with  sharpe  wordes  be  bolde  them  to  repreue


2l8


Of  tale  berers.


Stop  fast  thy  erys,  or  els  fro  them  remeue
For  be  thou  sure :  to  speke  in  short  sentence
Mo  men  are  marryd,  than  any  wolde  byleue
And  greuously  ofFende  by  to  hasty  credence


Of  falshode,  gyle,  and  disceyte,  and  suche
as  folowe  them.


The  vayne  and  disceytfull  craft  of  alkemy

The  corruptynge  of  wyne  and  other  merchandyse

Techyth  and  shewyth  vnto  vs  openly

What  gyle  and  falshode  men  nowe  do  exercyse

All  occupyers  almost,  suche  gyle  dyuyse

In  euery  chafFar,  for  no  fydelyte

Is  in  this  londe,  but  gyle  and  subtyhe


2  2  o Ofjalsbode,  gyle,  and  disceyte,


O  well  of  muses :  o  pleasaunt  castaly

0  susters  nyne,  with  lowe  benygnyte

1  you  beseke  my  wyt  to  multyply

By  hundred  folde,  and  tunges  of  lyke  plente
Graunt  to  me  strength  to  wryte  the  subtylte
The  fraude,  and  disceyt,  whiche  is  by  gylefull  wayes
Amonge  all  chraftis  vsed  nowe  adayes

Without  a  hundred  tunges  great  wysdome  and  respyte

Contynuall  labour  :  and  stody  without  ende

None  can  theyr  gyles  ne  all  theyr  falshode  wryte

Nor  all  fals  folys  in  balade  comprehende

So  many  be  that  thus  theyr  lyues  spende

That  all  the  shyppes  ne  galays  vnto  Spayne

Nor  myghty  Carakes  can  nat  them  well  contayne

So  they  that  ar  abrode  fast  about  may  range
Rowynge  on  the  see  :  myself  theyr  lode  and  gyde
In  dyuers  contres  farre  and  londes  straunge
And  spred  theyr  namys  about  on  euery  syde
But  dyuers  ar  the  sortis,  that  the  worlde  wyde
In  euery  part  doth  infect  and  defyle
By  fraudes  fayned,  and  fals  myscheuous  gyle

Firste  fals  loue  disceyuyth  and  doth  greue
Both  age  :  and  youthe  both  wylde  and  prodygall
Lernyd  and  lewde  :  if  that  they  it  byleue
For  vnder  his  tunge  is  hyd  venym  mortall
Frendes  and  felawes  faynynge  and  fals  with  all
Also  shalt  thou  fynde  that  of  suche  maner  be
To  speke  fayre  wordes  mengled  with  sotylte


and  suche  as  folowe  them.


22  I


Suche  in  theyr  hertls  haue  no  fydelyte
And  often  we  se  that  wycked  and  fals  counsell
Disceyueth  many  by  fals  lyberalyte
Disceytfiill  wordes,  dissymuled  as  gospell
Doth  many  abuse  and  from  theyr  right  expell
And  no  maruayle,  for  almoste  euery  man
To  his  pryuate  profyte  intendeth  what  he  can

None  is  that  caryth  for  comon  auauntage
Thus  comon  welth  sore  fallyth  into  decay
But  ouerall,  men  ar  fals  of  theyr  langage
By  lyes  auaylynge  them  selfe  all  that  they  may
Brother  begylyth  brother  as  we  se  euery  day
And  the  sonne  the  Fader  desceyueth  oft  also
But  though  he  can  nat  :  yet  is  his  mynde  therto

No  bondes  of  loue,  amonge  men  nowe  doth  byde
Fals  gyle  vs  gydeth,  blyndyd  is  conscyence
And  suche  as  within  the  cloyster  doth  abyde
Fyle  theyr  relygion  oft  by  the  same  offence
Faynynge  them  sayntis  whan  they  ar  in  presence
With  ypocresy  payntynge  theyr  countenaunce
So  clokynge  and  hydynge  theyr  yll  mysgouernaunce

Some  shyne  without  :  and  as  swete  bawme  they  smell
But  yet  theyr  hertis  ar  fyllyd  with  falsnes
And  within  the  skyn  more  yll  than  man  can  tell
As  gyle  and  disceyte,  iust  men  therwith  toppres
And  wolues  rauysshynge  full  of  vnthryftynes
Bere  shepes  skynnes  showynge  nat  that  they  be
Foxys  within  :  shewynge  out  symplycyte


2  2  2  Of Jal shock,  gyle,  a  fid  disceyte,


By  suche  falshode,  they  many  one  begyle

In  vniust  coyne,  is  founde  also  abusyon

And  disceyt :  whiche  doth  all  the  worlde  defyle

By  clyppynge  and  wasshynge,  and  lyke  dymynusyon

Bysyde  all  this,  yet  in  many  a  regyon

Suche  folys  stody  to  mengle  and  multyply

Eche  sort  of  metall  men  do  disceyue  therby

And  in  theyr  wretchyd  ryches  to  abounde
The  clyp,  they  coyne,  and  that :  counterfayt  metall
And  the  right  kynde  of  golde  they  oft  confounde
They  sell  precious  stones  nat  true  ne  naturall
But  counterfayt  (for  true)  men  to  begyle  withall
The  coyne  by  falshode  also  oft  lacketh  weyght
Thus  ouer  the  worlde  is  nought  but  gyle  and  sleyght

What  shall  I  wryte  of  gyle  and  sotyltye
Vsed  in  weyght  nomber,  tale  and  mesure
Howe  they  bye  with  one,  large,  or  weyghtye
And  sell  by  a  les :  theyr  conscyence  is  so  obscure
Marchaundys  also  in  gyle  them  them  selfe  inure
By  dyuers  wayes  makynge  them  to  seme  plasaunt
True  men  to  disceyue  that  therin  ar  ignoraunt

That  whiche  is  nought  they  make  seme  good  and  fyne

But  to  touche  a  teuerners  hye  experyence

Howe  lyghtly  the  knaue  can  brewe  a  bowle  of  wyne

As  who  sayth  that  he  hath  the  craft  and  scyence

To  amende  that  thynge  that  goddes  hye  prudence

Hath  made  parfyte,  but  he  his  owne  to  saue

By  newe  brewyd  wyne,  men  bryngeth  to  theyr  graue


and  sue  he  as  folowe  them.  223


In  no  man  is  trust,  for  euery  man  by  gyle
And  preuy  falshode  hath  suche  a  craftynes
His  occupacion  by  fraudys  fals  to  defyle
Reputynge  hym  selfe  wyse  for  suche  disceytfulnes
Thus  is  there  no  craft,  pore,  ryche,  more  or  les
But  all  ar  vpholden  with  gyle  and  soteltye
Whiche  falshode  causeth  that  many  neuer  thye

But  if  I  sholde  tarry  so  longe  here  to  expres
All  the  fals  wayes  and  gyle  done  wrongfully
In  eche  occupacion,  and  euery  besynes
It  were  to  longe  :  therfore  I  say  shortly
That  he  is  happy  whiche  lyueth  perfytely
Voyde  of  all  fraude :  but  the  trouth  to  reporte
In  worde  and  dede,  but  fewe  be  of  that  sort

ThENUOY  of  ALEXANDER  BaRCLAY.

Thou  that  hast  to  do  with  worldly  besynes
Outher  occupacyon,  in  court  or  marchaundyse
Kepe  clene  thy  conscyence,  beware  disceytfulnes
All  fraude  and  gyle  take  hede  that  thou  despyce
Than  shalt  thou  to  welth,  ryches  and  honour  ryse
And  if  thou  be  fals  :  beware  of  pouertye
Besyde  hell  payne,  for  Christ  sayth  in  this  wyse
That  in  his  owne  mesure  eche  man  shall  serued  be


Of  the  falshode  of  Antichrst.


We  haue  before,  a  shyp  sende  foi  th  to  see
Swyft  and,  well  stuffed  with  many  a  subtyll  i-out
But  of  lyke  folys,  yet  many  one  there  be
On  our  shyp  sydes,  clymmynge  rounde  about
I  speke  with  pacyence :  for  why  I  am  in  dout
Lyst  this  company,  of  proude  speche  :  yll  and  haut
Witli  theyr  sharpe  dartis  my  feble  shyp  assaut


Of  the  Jal shock  of  Antichrist.


22


But  if  thou  aske  who  they  ar  that  me  incomber

And  what  be  theyr  maners  and  conuersacion

Of  whens  they  ar  and  howe  great  is  theyr  noinber

Of  whome  I  intende  to  make  declaracyon

Vnto  thy  questyons  this  is  my  relacion

And  fynall  answere,  that  they  that  thus  me  greue

Ar  fals  Christen  men,  nat  perfyte  of  byleue

And  fals  Prophetis,  nat  folowynge  the  right
"Whiche  with  fals  hertis  vnperfyte  of  credence
Nat  duly  worshyp  the  lawe  of  god  almyght
Nor  his  holy  doctryne,  with  worthy  reuerence
And  other  suche  as  varye  the  true  sence
Of  goddes  lawes,  expoundynge  other  v/yse
Than  it  in  the  text  clere  and  playnly  lyes

Suche  counterfayte  the  kayes  that  Jesu  dyd  commyt

Vnto  Peter :  brekynge  his  Shyppis  takelynge

Subuertynge  the  fayth,  beleuynge  theyr  owne  wyt

Agaynst  our  perfyte  fayth  in  euery  thynge

So  is  our  Shyp  without  gyde  wanderynge

By  tempest  dryuen,  and  the  mayne  sayle  of  torne

That  without  gyde  the  Shyp  about  is  borne

I  mean  that  euery  fals  interpretour
And  vniust  Prophete  accordynge  in  assent
Defyle  the  lawes  of  Christ  our  sauyour
And  also  the  fayth,  but  suche  in  theyr  intent
Whan  theyr  owne  selfe  by  errour  fraudelent
Ar  all  corrupt,  with  synne  agaynst  the  lawe
They  stody  :  yet  mo  to  theyr  errour  to  drawe


2  2  6 Of  the  falshode  of  Antichrist,


Many  they  disceyue,  by  theyr  myscheuous  lore
Of  theyr  fals  iawes  castynge  abrode  the  sede
Yet  greuous  paynes  of  Hell  byde  them  therfore
But  suche  Hell  houndes  therof  wyll  take  no  hede
But  certaynly  all  our  byleue  and  crede
The  whiche  is  able  to  saue  vs  from  hell  payne
To  vs  is  gyuen  in  wordes  clere  and  playne

In  our  lawe  ar  founde  no  wordes  disceyuable

No  fals  abusyon,  nor  obscure  hardnes

But  many  folys  of  mynde  abhomynable

For  an  hye  name,  for  honour  and  ryches

Or  for  vayne  pryde  and  fals  presumptuousnes

To  shewe  theyr  cunnynge,  they  men  blynde  and  abuse

Makynge  the  playne  lawe,  obscure,  darke  and  diffuse

They  holy  scriptures  rehers  moche  other  wyse
Than  the  holy  goost  them  vttred  first  of  all
The  cause  is  that  pryde  them  vexeth  to  aryse
To  some  hye  Rowme,  and  a  glory  pryncypall
O  blynde  fole  awake  and  to  remembraunce  call
The  prophetis  saynge.  confermyd  by  the  lawe
And  so  from  errour  thy  synfuU  mynde  withdrawe

Were  it  nat  ynoughe  for  the  to  vnderstonde
The  holy  lawes  :  passynge  in  that  scyence
But  yet  presumptuously  to  take  on  honde
To  turne  frowardly,  the  true  and  rightwyse  sence
Chaungynge  our  fayth,  by  thy  fals  neglygence
Whiche  fayth  was  sende  from  god  omnypotent
By  the  holy  gost  to  our  faders  auncyent


Of  the  falshode  of  Ajitichrist.  ii"]


They  seme  in  handes  to  here  a  fals  balance
Whiche  falsly  techyth  the  lawe  of  god  almyght
Some  poyntis  thynke  they  heuy  and  worthy  penaunce
And  other  some  make  they  but  small  and  lyght
By  glose  thus  turne  we  the  lawe  agaynst  right
Thus  they  that  our  faythis  doctryne  wolde  confounde
Before  Antichrist  set  tentis  here  on  grounde

They  set  no  tentis  agayne  hym  for  to  fyght

But  agaynst  his  comynge  they  ordayne  great  treasour

Other  to  subdue  :  for  to  encreas  his  myght

Them  drawynge  to  his  infaciable  errour

Many  one  assembleth  as  to  a  conquerour

Obeynge  and  berynge  his  cursed  cognysaunce

Assaynge  for  to  put  our  fayth  to  harde  vttraunce

Whiche  trayters  also  them  besely  doth  hast
With  Antichrist  theyr  mayster  and  theyr  lorde
Theyr  cursed  lawes  to  spred  abrode  and  cast
Ouer  all  the  worlde,  for  to  infect  concorde
Bryngynge  theyr  fals  goddes  with  them  at  one  accorde
Suche  folys  ar  nat  drawen  by  scourge  of  punysshement
But  to  Antichrist  of  theyr  owne  mynde  thassent

To  be  of  his  garde  they  yelde  them  wyllyngly

But  some  shall  obey  for  meney  and  treasour

Whome  he  by  lyberall  gyftis  crafty

Shall  so  attyce  hym  lowly  to  honour

Suche  foles  shall  he  bye  and  brynge  to  his  errour

Se  here  howe  money  theyr  soules  shall  defyle

But  some  shall  he  wyn  by  sotylte  and  gyle


2  2  8 Of  the  falshode  of  Antichrist.


Some  by  fals  myracles  and  some  by  punysshement

Shall  this  fals  Tyraunt  to  his  seruyce  procure

But  than  by  the  myght  of  god  omnypotent

This  wycked  Nauy  longe  tyme  shall  nat  endure

But  whyle  these  Folys  shall  thynke  them  selfe  most  sure

Theyr  shyppys  shall  dryue  and  shortly  at  the  last

By  myght  of  god  they  all  shall  ryue  and  brast

Togyther  shall  they  fall  vnto  the  pyt  of  hell
And  suche  be  releued  as  they  put  vnto  payne
Antichristis  Charettes  and  Cartis  shall  cesse  theyr  yell
And  the  true  lawe  and  fayth  sprynge  vp  agayne
But  in  the  mean  space,  alas  we  may  complayne
For  the  shyp  of  Peter  in  stormes  and  tempest
Is  throwen  and  cast  clene  destytute  of  rest

The  Mast  nowe  meuyth  the  taklynge  and  the  sayle
O  god  wythsaue  the  wayke  shyp  to  socour
From  the  fals  Herytikes  that  dayly  it  assayle
With  great  violence  and  manyfolde  rygour
For  with  fals  Doctryne,  conteynynge  great  errour
The  holy  scriptures  some  labour  to  expounde
But  the  true  fayth  full  pyteously  is  drowned

Thus  fals  Antichrist,  the  fayth  of  Christ  to  stent
Into  the  wyde  worlde  his  messangers  doth  sende
As  swyfr  Currours,  onely  for  that  intent
His  Tentis  to  prepare,  his  Army  to  defende
And  to  cause  the  Chrysten  to  hym  to  confydence
By  the  fals  sede  of  errour  that  they  sawe
Before  his  comynge  agaynst  our  fayth  and  lawe


Of  the  falshode  of  Antichrist.  229


But  thre  raaner  thynges  I  fynde  that  be  certayne
Whiche  ar  well  worthy  for  to  be  notyd  here
For  they  our  fayth  support,  defende  and  meyntayne
The  firste  is  the  wysdome  and  great  grace  that  apere
From  a  Bysshops  mouth  by  doctryne  playne  and  clere
But  ouer  the  worlde  if  that  poynt  were  well  sought
For  the  most  part  it  slepeth  and  is  set  at  nought

The  seconde  is  of  Bokes  store  and  abundaunce

Whorin  ar  the  lawes  of  Christ  our  sauyour

Whiche  rottyth  nowe,  the  cause  why  in  substaunce

Is  for  they  haue  no  iust  interpretour

Of  the  holy  lawes,  nor  good  exposytour

The  thyrde  is  Doctryne,  wysdome,  and  scyence

But  that  nowe  decayeth  by  slouth  and  neglygence

And  if  that  a  man  haue  cunnynge  parfytely
Tabourynge  by  it  to  make  men  leue  theyr  vyce
The  rude  commontye  shall  set  no  thynge  hym  by
Therfore  we  nowe  our  selfe  moste  exercyse
In  cunnynge  to  wyn  coyne  :  by  blynde  Couetyse
Or  some  other  biyndnes  and  conceytis  newe
Whiche  neyther  sleyth  vyce,  ne  shewyth  vs  vertue

Of  bokis  is  plenty  ynoughe  in  euery  place

And  some  but  pore  theyr  Shoppes  haue  stuifyd  full

But  fewe  or  none  haue  pleasour  nor  solace

The  same  to  stody  theyr  myndes  ar  so  dull

The  ryche  stodyeth,  all,  from  the  pore  to  pull

Disdaynynge  to  set  his  mynde  on  gode  doctryne

For  none  saue  the  pore  doth  nowe  therto  inclyne


230 Of  the  fahhock  of  Antichrist.


Suche  as  ar  noble  and  excellent  of  fame

To  rede  in  bokes  of  wysdome  haue  great  scorne

The  noble  and  holy  lawe  this  wyse  is  lame

And  wytty  Pallas  so  by  the  here  is  torne

I  mean  that  wysdome  hir  greuous  fall  doth  morne

For  they  that  to  hir  doctryne  moste  aply

Can  get  no  laude,  but  malyce  and  enuy

No  mede  ne  rewarde  is  gyuen  to  wysdome
Thus  is  the  labour  of  stody  lost  in  vayne
By  suche  neglygence,  alas  the  tyme  is  come
That  fals  Prophetis  our  holy  fayth  distayne
They  all  shall  turne  if  fauour  them  meyntayne
And  if  they  that  preche  for  mede  and  vyle  rewarde
Shall  them  supportyth  :  our  case  shall  be  full  harde

Thf.nuoy.

O  ye  that  to  Antichrist  disciples  be
Or  fore  messangers  the  chrysten  to  accloy
Corruptynge  the  lawes  by  your  iniquyte
Alas  what  may  I  vnto  you  nowe  enuoy
Your  wycked  errour  your  soules  shall  destroy
Wherfore  I  pray  you  your  herte  therfro  withdrawe
Els  shall  ye  haue  Hell  payne  destytute  of  ioy
Tf'r^r  none  ar  saued  that  corrupt  goddes  lawe.


hym  that  dare  nat  vtter  the  trouth  for
fere  of  displeasour  or  punysshement.


Who  euer  he  be,  that  for  loue,  fere  or  mede
For  fauour,  thretnynge  or  suche  lyke  accydence
Sayth  nat  the  trouth  lyke  as  it  is  in  dede
But  stoppeth  his  mouth,  and  kepeth  so  sylence
To  please  the  people  allowynge  theyr  offence
And  sparynge  theyr  fautes,  it  playnly  doth  apcre
Suche  to  Antichiist  is  frcnde  and  mcssanger


232  Of  hym  that  dare  nat  vtter  the  troiith


Many  hath  a  mynde  redy  prompt  and  clere

To  knowlege,  and  to  preche  the  very  lawe  dyuyne

And  to  say  the  trouth  lyke  as  it  doth  apere

But  oft,  suche,  by  flatery  or  thretenynge  declyne_ ..

From  the  way  of  trouth  and  verytable  lyne

And  so  holy  trouth  and  godly  veryte

By  fere  they  leue,  disdaynynge  it  to  se

Sothly  I  may  say  they  vnderstonde  nat  right
That  for  loue  or  fere  :  dare  nat  the  trouth  expres
But  hydeth  it  away  from  mannys  syght
Doutynge  displeasour  of  them  that  haue  ryches
Thus  is  the  power  of  wordly  wretchydnes
More  in  theyr  myndes  than  the  commaundement
And  chefe  preceptis  of  god  omnypotent

Why  sholde  he  fere  to  preche  and  to  expres
The  lawes  of  god  gyuen  vnto  mankynde
To  whome  our  lorde  of  his  great  goodnes
Hath  sende  chefe  gyftis :  as  reason  of  his  mynde
With  wyt  and  wysdome  :  the  way  therof  to  fynde
To  fayne  or  to  lye  to  hym  it  is  great  foly
Whiche  hath  the  reason  the  trouth  to  fortyfy

But  for  that  flaterynge  so  many  doth  ouercome
And  rewardes,  lettyth  the  trouth  for  to  apere
Therfore  the  Fole,  that  sholde  say  trouth  is  dum
Hackynge  his  wordes  that  no  man  may  them  here
And  if  he  knowe  that  any  one  is  nere
Infect  and  scabbyd,  he  dare  no  worde  let  slyp
But  layeth  his  fynger  anone  before  his  lyp


Jvrjere  of  displeasour  or  punysshement.  i

But  suche  a  wyse  man  as  Vyrgyll  doth  discrybe

Is  stedfast,  fereles,  constant  farme  and  stable

Nat  lettynge,  nor  leuynge  for  fauour,  loue,  nor  brybe

The  trouth  to  shewe,  and  blame  the  reprouable

Ponderynge  the  furour  of  them  that  ar  culpable

And  blamynge  the  same,  playne  and  openly

For  veryte  and  trouth  nat  doutynge  for  to  dye

The  wyse  man  to  vtter  the  trouth  is  nat  aferde
Thugh  he  sholde  be  closyd  within  the  bull  of  bras
Of  Phalaris,  the  tyraunt :  or  if  a  naked  swerde
Henge  ouer  his  necke  his  lyfe  so  to  oppres
For  he  that  is  wyse  perfytely :  doutles
Hath  so  establysshyd  his  mynde  the  trouth  to  say
That  daunger  of  deth  can  hym  no  thynge  affray

No  lorde  nor  man  of  hye  ne  lowe  degre

Nor  thretnynge  wordes,  ne  other  punysshement

Can  cause  suche  one  in  any  poynt  to  lye

He  showyth  out  the  lawes  of  god  omnypotent

In  wordes  playne,  nat  fals  ne  fraudelent

Nat  ferynge  to  touche  the  foly  and  errour

Of  Pope  nor  prelate,  kynge  ne  emperour

Saynt  Johnn  the  baptyst  our  lordes  messanger
Withdrewe  hym  selfe  into  secrete  wyldernes
Nat  wyllynge  amonge  the  people  to  apere
For  theyr  vayne  grutchis  and  wylfuU  frowardnes
Yet  dyd  he  euer  the  very  trouth  expres
As  true  messanger,  the  worlde  to  despyse
Therfore  had  he  grace  our  sauyour  to  baptyse


234  ^^-"^^  ^^'^^^  ^^^^  vtter  the  trouth.


He  that  doth  one  with  pleasaunt  worde  correct
And  colde  pacyence  that  he  may  condiscende
To  lerne  the  wayes  his  vyces  to  abiect
And  take  example  his  lyuynge  to  amende
Vnto  thy  wordes  though  he  nat  than  intende
But  the  beholde  with  Jokes  sharp  and  harde
Yet  tyme  shall  come  whan  he  shall  the  rewarde

If  he  in  hym  haue  any  droppe  of  grace

He  shall  conuerte,  rewardynge  thy  counsell

Therfor  I  say  who  euer  is  in  that  case

For  worldly  ryches,  the  trouth  nat  playne  to  tell

Puttynge  bodely  profyte  before  eternall  well

Suche  shall  dye  a  Fole  blynde  and  ignoraunt

And  may  to  Antichrist  be  callyd  pursuyuaunt.

Thenuoy  of  Alexander  barcly.
O  precher  thou  deth  ought  rather  to  endure
Than  for  loue,  fauour,  fere  or  punysshement
The  veryte  to  cloke,  or  make  the  trouth  obscure
Or  to  hyde  the  lawes  of  god  omnypotent
And  if  that  any  vnto  thy  deth  assent
For  prechynge  trouth :  receyue  it  paciently
So  hath  many  sayntis  theyr  blode  and  lyues  spent
Rather  than  they  wolde  hyde  veryte,  or  lye


Of  folys  that  withdrawe  and  let  other
to  do  good  dedes.


He  that  wyll  walke  in  the  ryght  way  of  vei  tue
And  worshyp  trouth  iustyce  and  rightwysnes
And  stody  all  pleasours  mundayne  to  eschewe
Subduynge  the  flesshe  and  fende  with  his  falsnes
Oft  tymes  suche  one  shall  fynde  contraryousnes
And  byde  and  endure  losse  with  aduersyte
By  enuy  of  them  that  lewde  and  wycked  be


236  Ofjolys  that  w'lthdrawe


He  is  a  naturall  Fole :  and  eke  a  dawe
And  all  his  blode  corrupt  with  folysshnes
Whiche  labours  to  let,  hynder  and  withdrawe
Good  men  and  iust  from  dedes  of  goodnes
I  wyll  nat  say,  but  some,  there  be  doutles
That  assay  to  folowe  good  maners  and  vertue
By  stedfast  lyfe,  all  synne  for  to  subdue

But  than  thou  fole  :  with  all  thy  force  and  myght
Withdrawest  hym  backwarde  full  malyciously
Assaynge  to  hurt  his  wyll  to  good  and  right
Whiche  he  purposyd  to  kepe  contynually
Thou  hym  withdrawest :  this  is  the  reason  why
That  a  Fole  hath  chefe  pleasour  and  confort
To  haue  all  other  lyke  hym  of  the  same  sort

A  fole  is  glad  his  nomber  to  augment
And  euer  is  besy  them  namely  to  pursue
To  hate  and  manace  with  malyce  vyolent
Whiche  iustly  lyue  in  goodnes  and  vertue
But  vyce  hym  pleasyth,  for  that  doth  he  insue
A  fole  fast  stodyeth  to  hym  to  drawe  echone
Lyst  he  of  foly  myght  here  the  name  alone

He  gyueth  counsell  fals  and  reprouable
With  all  his  myght  to  hym  attysynge  mo
Or  els  them  troublyth  by  wordes  moch  vnstable
Whiche  ar  iust  men,  euer  wyllynge  good  to  do
A  prysoner  lyenge  longe  in  payne  and  wo
Hath  consolacion  and  great  confort  certayne
To  haue  many  mo  be  partnes  of  his  payne


and  let  other  to  do  good  dedes.  237


Therfore  if  any  whiche  hath  that  gyft  of  grace
For  to,  despyse  this  worldes  wretchydnes
Withdrawynge  hym  selfe  to  some  solytary  place
Anone  this  Fole  lyuynge  in  viciousnes
Cryeth  out,  and  blamyth  suche  parfyte  holynes
This  iust  man  condemnynge  by  wrongfull  iugement
Bycause  his  lyuynge  is  nat  after  his  intent

Suche  frowarde  folys  all  goodnes  thus  defyle
By  wordes  iniurious,  and  oft  we  here  and  se
That  with  suche  wordes  the  good  men  they  reuyle
Saynge  one  to  other,  lo  yonder  same  is  he
Whiche  without  make  thynketh  hym  wyse  to  be
Secretnes  he  loueth,  and  theder  is  he  gone
Nought  can  hym  pleas,  saue  that  whiche  is  alone

In  christ  and  his  sayntes  he  lyueth  in  dispayre

All  worldly  pleasour  despysynge  vtterly

He  loueth  nat  to  come  in  open  ayre

But  lorkyth  in  cornes  by  fals  Ipocrysy

But  we  with  our  felawes  lyue  alwav  merely

And  though  we  in  erth  oft  tymes  do  amys

Yet  hope  we  hereafter  to  come  to  heuyns  biysse

Who  that  hym  gydeth  by  reason  and  wysdome
Folowynge  the  way  of  parfyte  righwysnes
Intendynge  therby  vnto  hye  heuen  to  come
Shall  here  suche  wordes  of  foly  and  lewdnes
Spoken  of  these  folys  lyuynge  in  viciousnes
And  no  meruayle,  for  thou  shalt  neuer  se
That  synners  shall  with  vertuous  men  agre


238  Offolys  that  let  others  to  do  good  dedes.


Alas  thus  conuersacyon  worldly  or  mundayne
Is  moche  noysom,  and  so  great  preiudyce
-  That  oft  of  vertue  it  maketh  man  barayne
And  hym  corruptyth  with  many  a  greuous  vyce
And  synners  labour  with  all  theyr  myght  to  attyse
Vnto  theyr  lyuynge,  corrupt  and  detestable
Suche  as  of  lyuynge  ar  vertuous  and  laudable

Therfore  if  vertue,  good  lyfe  and  honestye
By  thy  selfwyllyd,  and  owne  malyciousnes
Can  nat  haue  place  ne  rowme  to  be  in  the
Yet  trouble  thou  nat  by  thy  vngraciousnes
Suche  as  ar  good  and  lyue  in  rightwysnes
Fauour  the  good,  and  suffer  hym  precede
That  is  in  the  way  of  vertue  and  good  dede

Alexander  Barclay  to  the  Folys.
Amende  thy  lyfe  man  :  expell  thou  thy  offence
Submyttynge  thy  selfe  vnto  the  true  doctryne
Of  godly  wysdome  ensuynge  hir  prudence
Wherin  is  groundyd  scripture  and  lawe  dyuyne
But  if  that  thou  wylt  nat  therto  inclyne
By  thy  owne  malyce  and  wylfuU  frowardnes
Yet  hynder  them  nat,  that  go  after  the  lyne
Of  good  instruccion,  and  vertuous  goodnes.


Of  the  omyssyon  or  leiiynge  of
good  warkes.


It  is  nat  ynoughe  to  bere  a  lampe  in  hande
But  also  thou  must  haue  oyle  and  lyght  therin
By  whiche  saynge :  this  thynge  I  vnderstande
That,  man  nat  onely  ought  for  to  leue  all  syn
But  also  to  do  good :  suche  shall  heuyn  wyn
Heuyns  yatis  shall  be  opened  to  them  anone
Whiche  do  good  dedys,  after  vyce  fro  them  is  gone


240 Of  the  07nyssyo7i  or  leiiyfige

O  hertis  of  men  in  wylfuU  errour  drowned

And  through  neglygence  oppressyd  sore  in  payne

Though  your  yll  lyuynge  hath  brought  you  to  the  grounde

Seke  the  way  of  helth  :  and  so  ryse  vp  agayne

But  playne  I  se  whiche  causeth  me  complayne

The  myndes  of  all  men  beryed  in  derknes

None  feryth  punysshement  of  goddis  rightwysnes

Alas  mannes  lyfe  graffyd  in  synne  and  vyce
Contynuyth  in  vylenes,  we  plunge  in  the  see
Our  woundyd  hertis :  disdaynynge  to  aryse
Out  of  the  slomber  of  our  iniquyte
Alas  man  it  is  but  small  auayle  to  the
The  deuylles  lawes,  and  vyces  to  eschewe
Without  thou  withall  sue  goodnes  and  vertue

So  to  do  good  dedes  it  is  a  thynge  laudable
As  the  Churche  of  god  to  support  and  meyntayne
In  paynge  tythes  to  be  true  and  verytable
And  in  thy  yonge  age  from  vyces  to  abstayne
Folowynge  vertue  in  dedes  true  and  playne
And  nyght  and  day  to  set  thy  mynde  and  wyll
All  other  poyntis  of  the  lawe  to  fulfyll

But  than  in  age  for  to  go  out  of  kynde

Thy  lyfe  defylynge  with  lewde  mysgouernaunce

It  lytell  auaylyth  as  I  thynke  in  my  mynde

A  whyle  to  lyue  well,  in  suche  inconstance

What  helpeth  it  a  whyle  to  haue  a  short  plesance

The  stedfast  fayth  for  to  folowe  by  vertue

And  nat  in  the  same  alway  to  contynue


of  p;ood  warkes.


Ai  last  whan  god  shall  iuge  all  mankynde
And  that  the  trompes  sounde  shall  them  vp  call
Vnto  his  iugement :  nat  leuynge  one  behynde
Than  shall  there  be  made  a  count  in  generall
And  eche  man  shall  showe  out  his  dedes  all
Bothe  great,  and  small,  receyuynge  theyr  rewarde
Some  of  great  ioy  :  and  some  of  paynes  harde

He  that  wyll  there  haue  ioy  of  god  almyght

Must  haue  his  Lampe  clere  and  yllumynate

And  of  gode  dedes  shewynge  abrode  the  lyght

But  whan  the  Lampe  here  is  voyde  or  maculate

And  in  the  kyndlynge  therof  is  slowe  or  late

As  wyllynge  to  do  well,  whan  his  lyue  dayes  ar  wore

He  often  is  disceyued,  and  abusyd  right  sore

He  is  vnware,  and  clene  without  wysdome

That  doth  no  good  dedes  longynge  to  charyte

Tyll  the  extreme  houre  of  bytter  deth  do  come

So  moche  hopynge,  and  trustynge  euer  is  he

In  hope  of  recoueraynge  from  his  infyrmyte

That  nought  he  caryth  those  wordes  that  Christ  shall  say

Sharply  to  synners  at  Domys  dredefuU  day

But  if  a  wyse  man  by  deth  sodaynly  fall
Whiche  caryth  to  prepare  his  ende  before  he  dye
His  deth  ought  to  be  rewed  nowght  atall
Syth  he  here  hath  lyuyd  well  and  vertuously
And  sende  his  good  dedes  of  pyte  and  mercy
Before  deth  to  make  for  his  soule  purueaunce
O  well  is  hym  that  hath  suche  remembraunce

VOL.  II.  Q


242


By  vertuous  dede  to  prouyde  a  place  before
With  god  in  the  glorious  heuen  Imperyall
Where  as  is  lyfe  that  last  shall  euer  more
Euerlastynge  lyght,  and  ioy  perpetuall
But  that  blynde  fole  shall  haue  a  greuous  fall
Whiche  nat  inclyneth  to  vertue  nor  wysdome
Nor  any  good  dede  tyll  his  last  ende  be  come

Suche  folys  hath  nought  but  foly  them  within

Whiche  vnto  the  ferefull  day  of  iugement

If  they  sholde  lyue,  wolde  alway  lyue  in  syn

Nat  dredynge  infernall  payne  ne  punysshement

But  whan  this  blynde  wretche  hath  thus  his  dayes  spent

The  grounde  hath  his  Carkas,  there  his  Corps  must  dwell

His  sory  soule  beryed  in  the  paynes  of  hell

Alas  we  folowe  mortall  thynges  here
Vnsure  incertayne  :  and  all  without  wysdome
And  as  by  our  folysshe  maners  doth  appere
We  despyse  prouysyon  for  the  tyme  to  come
These  worldly  chargis  doth  folys  thus  ouercome
Fewe  hath  theyr  myndes  on  god  ne  gode,  stedfast
Thus  meruayle  nat,  if  god  despyse  them  at  the  last

Thenuoy  of  the  traslatour.

O  christen  soules  if  ye  wyll  haue  the  syght
Of  glorious  god  in  his  Royalme  celestyall
Whan  ye  haue  syn  ouercome  by  godly  myght
Ye  most  you  indeuer  to  do  good  dedes  withall


of  9-ood  warkes.


243


The  lampe  of  thy  soule  clerely  bren  than  shall
And  at  heuen  gates  knocke,  and  thou  shalt  come  in
For  that  is  rewarde,  with  ioy  eternall
To  them  that  do  good  :  fleynge  from  wretchyd  syn

But  those  wretchyd  folys  whose  lampes  lackyth  lyght
By  remysse  myndes,  slouth,  or  wylfuU  neglygence
May  nat  well  clayme  of  our  sauyour  to  haue  syght
Nor  to  haue  Rowme  or  place  in  his  presence
Therfore  to  my  wordes,  o  man  gyue  aduertence
Do  vertuous  dedes,  and  also  vyce  refrayne
Than  without  dout  for  this  thy  hye  prudence
Thou  shalt  in  heuen  a  glorious  place  obtayne


Of  the  rewarde  of  wysdome.


Two  wayes  lyeth  before  eche  mannys  syght
Of  the  whiche  wayes  man  nedys  one  must  holde
The  one  lyeth  leftwarde,  the  other  lyeth  right
At  whose  ende  we  oft  may  se  a  crowne  of  golde
But  at  the  leftis,  ende,  ar  erys  many  folde
In  sygne  of  Foly,  and  many  folys  be
Whiche  leftwarde  go,  sekynge  captyuyte


Of  the  rewarde  of  wysdome.  245


O  Folys  of  pardon  I  you  requyre  and  pray

And  vnto  you  I  shall  also  gyue  the  same

Take  no  displeasour  with  that  that  I  shall  say

And  though  my  balade  your  maners  touche  or  blame.

Nowe  shall  I  wryte  what  laude  what  mede  and  fame

Ar  gyuen  to  wysdome  vertue  and  rightwysnes

And  what  is  rewarde  moste  mete  for  viciousnes

Many  ar  whiche  greatly  desyreth  an  hye  name
And  famous  honour,  or  tytyll  of  dignyte
Some  ar  desyrous,  to  spred  abrode  theyr  fame
To  be  callyd  Doctours,  or  maysters  of  degre
Moste  clere  in  wysdome  of  the  vnyuersyte
But  these  names  coueyt  they  nat  for  this  intent
The  christen  to  infourme,  that  of  wyt  ar  indigent

Nor  in  holy  doctrine  them  self  to  occupy

As  in  scripture  or  lawes  of  Christ  our  sauyour

Or  other  godly  techynge  our  fayth  to  fortyfy

But  onely  they  ar  drawen  and  led  to  this  errour

For  desyre  of  fame,  vayne  lawde,  and  great  honour

Suche  walke  in  the  way  that  is  on  the  left  syde

On  rockes  and  clyfEs  and  hyghe  mountayns  of  pryde

They  leue  the  right  way  of  goodnes  and  vertue
Of  iustyce  and  wysdome,  hauynge  no  thought  atall
Howe  they  myght  ignoraunt  myndes  with  them  endue
And  fede  them  with  that  sauour  delycious  and  royall
And  other  with  theyr  wordes  hye  and  retorycall
Theyr  sentences  paynt  in  fauour  for  to  come
Or  therby  to  purchace  a  name  of  hye  wysdome


246 Of  the  rewarde  of  wysdome.


But  sothly  all  worldly  wysdome  and  prudence

Vsyd  here  in  erth,  is  before  god  almyght

Of  none  effect,  and  all  worldly  scyence

Is  but  as  foly  in  that  hye  lordes  syght

Thus  many  one  beleue  that  they  go  right

And  towarde  the  right  hande  vnto  the  way  of  helth

By  theyr  vayne  pleasours,  lust  and  worldly  welth

They  suppose  to  walke  in  the  way  of  rightwysnes

Whiche  bryngeth  man  by  gode  labour  contynuall

Vnto  the  endles  ioy,  and  seat  of  blessydnes

Of  the  hye  kyngdome  and  place  celestyll

But  neuertheles,  ignoraunt  foly  with  hir  pall

So  blyndeth  theyr  myndes,  that  they  nat  vnderstande

Mean  to  kepe  duly  the  path  on  the  right  hande

That  way  is  harde,  streyght,  and  full  of  diffyculte ~ '
Whiche  mankynde  ledyth  to  the  heuenly  regyon
But  that  way  is  brode,  easy  and  playne  to  se
Whiche  ledeth  man  to  Hellys  depe  donygon
Therfore  thou  must  stablysshe  thy  intencion
(If  thou  wylt  be  partyner  of  heuenly  ioy  and  chere)
To  despyse  vayne  pleasour  whyle  thou  art  lyuynge  here

Thou  art  vnwyse,  if  that  thou  set  thy  thought
To  wyn  heuenly  ioy  by  worldly  pleasour
Or  to  take  that  thynge  whiche  thou  neuer  bought
Or  aske  rewarde  where  thou  dyd  no  labour
And  surely  he  whiche  lyueth  in  errour
Folowynge  his  foly  in  vyce  without  all  shame
Shall  haue  iust  rewardes  accordynge  to  the  same


rewarde  of  wysdome.  247


Also  the  wyse  that  lyueth  rightwysely
Shall  nat  depart  without  rewarde  and  mede
But  be  rewardyd  right  well  and  worthely
With  gyftis  of  heuen,  whiche  sothly  shall  excede
In  valour,  all  the  worlde  in  lenght  and  brede
This  ioy  that  I  of  speke,  so  passynge  in  valour
Is  the  holy  presence  of  Christ  our  sauyour

So  Plato  dyd  folysshe  company  eschewe

And  all  other  folyes  procedynge  of  the  same

Walkynge  in  the  way  of  goodnes  and  vertue

Wherby  he  wan,  laude  and  immortall  fame

But  nowe  worldly  wysdone  hath  so  corrupt  the  name

That  none  it  makyth  happy  vertuous  nor  wyse

But  hym  that  with  hert  and  mynde  doth  it  despyse

Thenuoy  of  Alexander  Barcly

Lerne  man,  lerne,  wysdome  to  vnderstonde
For  trust  me  though  that  the  way  of  viciousnes
And  dedely  synne,  lyenge  on  the  left  hande
Seme  full  of  pleasour  and  wanton  lustynes
At  the  ende  is  dolour  wo  and  wretchydnes
Mysery  vexacion  and  euerlastynge  payne
And  if  sodayne  deth  in  this  way  the :  oppres
To  late  shall  it  be  for  retourne  agayne

Auoyde  thou  therfore  this  left  and  frowarde  way
For  a  short  pleasour  take  nat  eternall  payne
Go  on  the  right  hande  in  as  moche  as  thou  may
And  whan  thou  art  there  retourne  thou  nat  agayne


248 Of  the  rewarde  of  wysdome.


And  though  the  path  be  nat  moche  smothe  and  playne
But  full  of  sharpe  thornes  whiche  shall  the  hurte  and  noy
Yet  at  the  ende,  thou  shalt  come  to  certayne
A  heuenly  castell  replete  with  myrth  and  ioy


Of  the  despysynge  of  mysfortune.


He  is  a  fole  and  greatly  reprouable

Whiche  seyth  and  felyth  suerly  in  his  mynde

That  all  his  dedes  ar  moche  infortunable

And  where  euer  he  go  agaynst  hym  is  the  wynde

But  in  his  mysfortune  yet  is  he  so  biynde

That  he  is  improuydent,  abydynge  wyllyngly

Despysynge  (thoughe  he  myght)  for  to  fynde  remedy


250 Of  the  despysynge  of  mysfortune.


The  greuous  fallys  of  men  from  theyr  degre
The  frayle  chaunsys,  and  aduersyte  sodayne
And  of  vnsure  fortune  the  mutabylyte
Whiche  we  se  dayly,  shewyth  vnto  vs  playne
That  in  all  thynges  that  to  men  apertayne
Is  no  Constance,  trust  or  confydence
Nor  sure  degre,  or  stable  permanence

For  these  vayne  thynges  the  whiche  we  outwarde  se

Syns  they  ar  so  caduke  in  condicion  frayle

Can  none  make  perfyte  in  true  felycyte

But  that  somtyme  he  may  fynde  cause  to  wayle

Nor  no  man  by  preuate  wysdome  or  counsayle

Nor  strength,  or  labour  can  make  a  warke  so  fast

But  that  it  shall  perysshe  and  decay  at  the  last

But  here  I  purpose  of  suche  a  Fole  to  wryte
To  whom  eche  fortune  is  aduers  and  contrary
And  yet  hath  he  chefe  pleasour  and  delyte
With  all  his  mynde  and  herte  for  to  apply
To  thynges  of  fortune,  that  contynually
Of  cruell  chauncis  he  hath  but  lytell  hede
Trustynge  afterwarde  moche  better  for  to  spede

He  is  nat  ware,  but  bare  without  wysdome
That  can  nat  consyder  surely  in  his  mynde
That  whan  one  yll  is  past :  as  bad  may  after  come
If  he  hym  ieparde  to  suche  lyke  storme  and  wynde
Let  suche  nat  thynke  it  thynge  against  kynde
Nor  any  meruayle  if  theyr  shyp  without  ore
Mast  or  sayle,  be  drownyd  rent  and  tore


Of  the  dcspysynge  of  mysfortune.  251


If  any  mysfortune  happen  on  the  to  fall

At  the  begynnynge  of  thynge  that  thou  wolde  do

If  thou  go  farther  may  fortune  that  thou  shall

Haue  after  that  same,  other  yllys  many  mo

For  wyse  men  sayth,  and  oft  it  fallyth  so

As  it  is  wryten  and  sayd  of  many  one

That  one  rayshap  fortuneth  neuer  alone

An  yll  fortune  growyth  alway  more  and  more
The  ende  oft  is  greuous  :  and  euer  vncertayne
And  if  thou  hast  had  one  mysfortune  before
Another  lyke  sone,  may  after  fall,  agayne
Thou  mayst  se  example  before  the  clere  and  playne
By  dyuers  changes  whiche  playnly  thou  mayst  se
By  fallys  contynuall,  full  of  aduersyte

Thus  fortune  floweth  oft  synkynge  at  the  last
And  playne  shall  perysshe  if  thou  the  space  abyde
Thus  happy  is  he  that  is  of  mynde  stedfast
Doynge  his  deuoyr  the  same  ay  to  prouyde
So  muste  he  do  whiche  hath  desyre  to  abyde
In  suertye  and  rest :  for  dayly  thou  mayst  se
Howe  ferefull  fortune  sodaynly  crepys  on  the

Who  that  dare  auenture  or  ieparde  for  to  rowe
Vpon  the  se  swellynge  by  wawes  great  and  hye
In  a  weyke  vessell,  had  nede  that  wynde  sholde  blowe
Styll,  soft,  and  cawme,  lyst  that  he,  fynally
And  also  his  shyp :  stande  in  great  ieopardy
Throwyn  with  the  flodes  on  the  se  depe  and  wyde
And  drowned  at  the  last :  or  rent  the  syde  fro  syde


■2^2 Of  the  despysynge  of  mysfortune.


And  also  he  whiche  hath  no  craft  nor  skyll

And  dare  auenture  on  the  wylde  se  to  rowe

By  his  rasshe  mynde  his  mad  brawne  and  self  wyll

No  meruayle  is  if  the  wawes  hym  ouer  flowe

And  if  he  than  escape  and  be  nat  clene  ouerthrowe

If  he  after  dare  ieoparde  hym  selfe  agayne

To  the  same  peryll :  he  is  a  fole  certayne

But  he  is  wyse,  and  so  men  may  hym  call

Whiche  hath  nat  alway  his  trust  and  confydence

In  vnsure  fortune  and  chaunsys  inequali

And  of  the  same  can  beware  by  prudence

That  man  is  haphy,  and  shall  fle  the  violence

And  furour  of  the  see,  though  it  moche  rughly  moue

And  with  his  shyp  enter  the  heuenly  port  aboue

Thenuoy  &c.
Beware  of  mysfortune,  ye  men,  in  that  ye  may
And  in  that  thynge  that  comyth  vnfortunate
Procede  nat :  but  your  mynde  drawe  ye  away
And  if  by  good  fortune  that  ye  be  eleuate
To  some  hye  rowme  conuenyent  for  a  state
Whyle  ye  ar  there,  ye  ought  you  euen  to  here
For  myshape  prouydynge  both  erly  and  late
And  than  if  it  come  ye  nede  nat  greatly  fere

We  haue  late  sene  some  men  promotyd  hye
For  whose  sharpnes  all  men  fered  theyr  name
But  for  they  toke  on  them  than  theyr  degre
Myght  nat  support :  they  fell  down  in  great  shame


Of  the  despysynge  of  mysfortune.  253


But  well  myght  they  haue  contynued  without  blame
If  they  had  kept  them  within  theyr  boundes  well
By  right  and  iustyce  :  but  oft  full  yll  they  frame
That  wyll  be  besy  with  to  hye  thynges  to  mell


Of  bacbyters  of  good  men  and  of  them
yt  shal  disprayse  this  warke.


Oft  so  it  hapneth  that  he  that  is  vnwyse
With  his  lewde  tunge,  and  mouth  full  of  enuy
Doth  wyse  men  and  iust  sclaunder  and  despyse
About  the  Cattis  necke  suche  men  a  bell  doth  tye
Thynkynge  that  theyr  dedes  may  be  kept  secretely
And  to  haue  no  name  therof  they  thynke  echone
But  yet  the  dogge  cryeth,  stryken  with  the  bone


Of  bacbyters  of  good  men.  255


Nowe  shall  wyse  men  enioy  and  haue  pleasaunce
With  inwarde  myrth  and  also  outwarde  sport
With  mery  lokes  of  chere  and  of  countenaunce
Seynge  that  we  haue  gathred  so  great  a  sort
Of  folys  in  one  boke  :  To  rede  to  theyr  confort
The  wyse  men  shall  enioy  ;  and  they  that  loue  vertue
That  we  by  craft  haue  forged  this  Nauy  newe

Our  shyp  sayleth  nat  abrode  vnto  presence
Vnto  the  rebuke  of  vertuouse  men  and  wyse
For  in  suche  is  small  faut,  synne,  or  oifence
Wherfore  no  man  ought  them  blame  or  despyse
We  coueyte  nat  to  perysshe  theyr  fame  in  any  wyse
But  pray  god  in  ioy  to  contynue  them  a  lyue
And  that  yll  lyuers  may  mende,  or  neuer  thryue

Amende  may  they  well  if  they  lyst  to  take  hede
For  here  haue  we  gyuen  them  holsome  medecyne
To  rule  theyr  lyfe,  also  we  haue  in  dede
Vnto  them  gyuen,  of  maners,  good  doctryne
Who  lyst  them  to  rede,  and  to  them  to  inclyne
If  he  be  wyse  :  he  shall  auoyde  doutles
The  clowdes  of  synne :  and  nettis  of  folysshnes

Suche  I  commende  as  ar  worthy  great  honour
But  other  be  whiche  sore  I  hurt  and  blame
By  my  wrytynge  :  for  theyr  mysbehauour
Syns  that  of  Folys  they  well  deserue  the  name
Yet  may  they  nat  (without  theyr  owne  great  shame)
Disprayse  my  wrytynge  boldly  by  any  way
Nor  rasshly  yll  wordes  ayenst  the  same  to  say


256  Of  bacbyters  of  good  men.


Yet  dout  I  nat|_:  but  surely  knowe  it_^well
That  some  shall  be  whiche  ayenst  my  wrytynge
With  harde  and  frowarde  wordes  shall  rebell
And  it  contynue,  and  hurt  in  euery  thynge
But  if  that  suche  be  wyse  men  and  cunnynge
They  shall  my  youth  pardone,  and  vnchraftynes
Whiche  onely  translate,  to  eschewe  ydelnes

But  if  some  other  be  troubled  by  enuy
As  brybours  to  barke  agaynst  my  besynes
They  ought  to  cesse,  for  my  boke  certaynly
I  haue  compyled,  for  vertue  and  goodnes
And  to  reuyle  foule  synne  and  viciousnes
At  first  begynnynge  lyke  as  I  toke  the  charge
Requyrynge  pardon  if  1  haue  ben  to  large

To  wryte  playne  trouth  was  my  chefe  mynde  and  wyll

But  if  any  thynke  that  I  hyt  hym  to  nere

Let  hym  nat  grutche  but  kepe  hym  coy  and  styll

And  clawe  were  it  itchyth  so  drawynge  hym  arere

For  if  he  be  hasty,  it  playnly  shall  apere

That  he  is  fauty,  gylty,  and  culpable

So  shall  men  repute  hym  worthy  of  a  bable

But  be  they  angry  or  be  they  well  apayde

This  thynge  oft  prouyd  is  by  experyence

He  that  is  gylty  thynketh  all  that  is  sayde

Is  spokyn  of  hym,  and  touchynge  his  offence

I  fele  well  the  hyssynge  and  malyuolence

Of  some  enuyours  whiche  doth  my  warke  disdayne

But  my  playne  Balade  comfortyth  me  agayne


Of  bacbyters  of  good  men.  257


Suche  Folys  namely  agaynst  my  boke  shall  barke

As  nought  haue  in  them  but  synne  and  viciousnes

Leuynge  all  besynes  vertuous  and  good  warke

And  gyuynge  them  selfe  to  slouth  and  ydylnes

Horace  the  poet  doth  in  his  warke  expres

That  both  wyse  and  vnwyse  dyuers  warkes  wryte

Some  to  gode  :  and  pleasour,  and  some  but  small  profyte

But  if  my  warke  be  nat  moche  delactable

Nor  gayly  payntyd  with  termys  of  eloquence

I  pray  that  at  lest  it  may  be  profytable

To  brynge  men  out  of  theyr  synne  and  olde  offence

Into  the  noble  way  of  good  intellygence

I  care  nat  for  folysshe  bacbyters,  let  them  passe

The  swete  Cymball  is  no  pleasour  to  an  asse

Melodyous  myrth  to  bestis  is  vncouthe

And  the  swete  graffis  of  wysdome  and  doctryne

Sauoureth  no  thynge  within  a  folys  mouthe

Whiche  to  the  same  disdayneth  to  inclyne

Cast  precious  stones  or  golde  amonges  swyne

And  they  had  leuer  haue  dreggis  fylth  or  chaffe

No  meruayle  :  for  they :  were  norysshed  vp  with  draffe

Therfore  o  reders  I  you  exort  and  pray
Rede  ouer  this  warke  well  and  intentyfly
Expell  hye  mynde,  put  statelynes  away
Barke  nat  therat :  loke  nat  theron  awry
With  countenaunce  pale  expressynge  your  enuy
If  ought  be  amysse :  of  that  take  ye  no  hede
Tend  to  the  best  than  shall  ye  haue  the  mede

VOL.  II.  R


2  c  8  Of  bacbyters  of  9-ood  men.


Be  pleased  withall,  and  if  that  ye  ought  fynde

Nat  ordred  well,  and  as  it  ought  to  be

Whiche  may  displeas  or  discontent  your  mynde

In  wantonnes,  or  in  to  and  grauyte

Or  sharply  spoken  with  to  great  audacyte

Vnto  your  correccion  all  hole  I  do  submyt

If  ought  be  amys  it  is  for  lacke  of  wyt. :  \

Thenuoy  of  Barclay,
Ye  folys  enuyous  detractynge  eche  good  dede
Expell  your  malyce,  and,  yre,  and  ougly  syn
And  to  your  selfe,  and  your  owne  warke  take  hede
Howe  yll  infect  and  foule  ye  ar  within
Correct  your  selfe  :  so  sholde  ye  first  begyn
And  than  teche  other  to  vertue  to  aply
And  nat  by  malyce  on  them  to  grutche  and  gryn
Or  behynde  theyr  backe  them  sclaunder  by  enuy


Of  immoderate  vylenes,  in  maners,  vs
at  the  table.


It  is  thynge  laufull :  and  nat  vncommendable

To  touche  the  yll  maners,  the  foule  and  lothsome  wayes

Whiche  dyuers  folys  nowe  vsyth  at  the  table

Whiche  ar  so  past  all  shame,  that  nowe  a  dayes

But  fewe  or  none,  there  honest  vvordes  sayes

Of  pleasaunt  norture  they  haue  no  care  nor  hede

But  bestely  intende  as  swyne  theyr  wombe  to  fede


260


Of  immoderate  vyle?ies,


I  thought  that  I  had  fyllyd  sufFyciently

This  boke  with  folys :  and  men  persuynge  syn

And  endyd  my  rebukes  :  but  yet  one  company

(Of  other  folys  doth)  vnto  my  nauy  ryn

Cryeng  with  lowde  voyce :  captayne  abyde,  haue  in

I  kest  an  Anker:  and  restynge  at  that  worde

Sende  forth  a  bote :  them  to  receyue  abrode

But  vnderstonde  ye  what  company  they  be :

I  you  ensure  that  fewe  of  all  the  sort

Ar  gyuen  greatly  to  disceyt  or  sotylte

In  couetyse,  or  gayne  haue  fewe  of  them  comfort

But  they  echone  that  to  this  shyp  resorte

Ar  lothsome  Folys  of  norture  clene  pryuate

Fedynge  at  theyr  mete :  euyn  after  swynys  rate

In  shameful!  vse  :  voyde  of  all  shamefastnes

All  theyr  hole  dedes :  ar  without  reuerence

But  lyke  to  vnresonable  bestis  in  vylenes

Bytwene  them  and  swyne  as  lytell  difference

They  spare  no  coyne,  no  coste,  nor  yet  expence

But  brede,  and  mete,  dayntyes,  here,  ale,  and  wyne

They  drynke,  and  deuour,  lyke  wyse  as  it  were  swyne

The  first  of  this  sort  whome  I  intende  to  blame
Ar  suche  as  intende  theyr  lothsome  wombe  to  fede
Or  theyr  face  be  wasshyd  or  handes  :  and  the  same
Do  they  or  they  say  theyr  Aue,  or  theyr  Crede
As  for  theyr  Pater  noster :  of  it  take  they  no  hede
And  for  the  great  gyftis  that  they  of  god  obtayne
They  render  no  gracis  ne  thankes  to  hym  agayne


in  maners,  vsyd  at  the  table.  261


Theyr  lyppis  ar  foule,  dryuelynge  on  euery  syde
Within  theyr  handes  is  vyle  fylth  and  ordure
Theyr  noses  droppynge,  in  vylenes  is  theyr  pryde
Theyr  iyen  rawky,  and  all  theyr  face  vnpure
By  suche  vylenes  disfygure  they  nature
Theyr  chekis  dyrty  :  Theyr  tethe  by  rustynes
Blacke,  foule,  and  rottyn,  expressyth  theyr  vylenes

No  honestye,  maner,  norture  nor  clenlynes
Is  in  these  wretchys,  for  they  the  same  disdayne
He  is  kynge  of  dronkardes  and  of  dronkenes
Reputyd  of  them  :  the  v^'hiche  is  moste  vylayne
As  gruntynge  and  drynkynge,  rebokynge  vp  agayne
And  that  can  excyte  his  felawes  to  glotony
Techynge  them  the  bowles  and  pottis  to  occupy

Some  drynkes :  some  quaxes  the  canykyn  halfe  full
And  some  all  out,  chargynge  hym  in  suche  wyse
That  the  wyne  semyth  for  to  ryue  his  skull
That  he  hath  no  power  from  the  borde  to  ryse
Than  bokes  he  all  vp  after  the  comon  gyse
(So  longe  he  drynkyth)  yet  other  haue  no  shame
Seynge  all  the  table  couered  with  the  same

Than  drynke  they  about,  euery  fole  to  other

In  order  :  but  he  that  doth  forsake  the  pot

Shall  no  more  be  taken  as  felawe  frende  and  brother

But  cast  out  of  company,  callyd  fole  and  sot

The  other  stryue  drynkynge,  echone  by  lot

It  nought  auayleth  these  caytyfs  to  reuyle

Shewynge  howe  this  vse  theyr  soulys  doth  defyle


262  Of  immoderate  vylenes,


It  weryeth  the  bodye,  by  anger  and  syknes

Styrynge  it  to  wrath,  to  fyghtynge  and  varyaunce

Nought  is  wors  than  contynuall  dronkenes

For  dyuers  sores,  great  sekenes  and  greuaunce

Procedyth  therof  by  longe  contynuaunce

It  lowsyth  the  body,  troublynge  eche  ioynt  and  vayne

The  wyt  it  wastyth,  blyndynge  the  mynde  and  brayne

O  cursyd  maners,  o  vse  abhomynable
O  bestelynes^  agaynst  nature  humayne
Whether  is  become  the  reuerence  of  the  table
The  moderate  honour  of  it  is  lost  agayne
Where  is  Curius  and  abstynence  souerayne
Where  is  olde  Persymony  wont  to  be  so  gode
Where  is  the  olde  mesure  of  mannys  lyfe  and  fode

Where  is  the  bryght  worshyp  therof  nowe  become

Where  is  the  clenlynes,  and  maners  euerychone

Of  the  borde  or  table,  vsed  amonge  some

Of  our  fore  Faders  that  nowe  ar  dede  and  gone

But  we  vse  nought  but  bestelynes  alone

In  worde  and  dede  corrupt  with  vylany

In  stede  of  good  talkynge  vse  we  rybawdry

Gone  is  the  honour  and  costomes  moderate
Mesure  is  despysyd  :  ryght  so  is  honestye
With  bye  and  lowe :  both  pore  man  and  estate
Yet  at  the  table  another  vse  we  se
Whiche  is  vnlaufull,  and  ought  nat  vsed  be
That  folys  at  the  borde  haue  oft  the  hyest  stage
The  boy  lokes  to  syt  before  a  m.an  of  age


In  maners,  vsyd  at  the  table.


263


Thus  is  no  order  obseruyd  at  the  table
Honestye  hath  the  hyest  place  no  more
But  eche  man  is  reputyd  honorable
After  his  ryches,  his  treasour  and  his  store
The  vyle  Churle  shall  syt  and  drynke  before
Thus  at  the  table  is  gyuen  all  honour
Nat  after  vertue,  but  after  vayne  treasour

To  mannys  maners  no  respect  they  haue

They  take  gode  and  yll  almoste  indifferently

A  gentyl  man  somtyme  is  set  beneth  a  knaue

Without  honestye,  and  moche  vnreuerently

But  whan  these  bestis  hath  set  them  selfe  thus  hye

In  handlynge  or  tastynge,  mete,  bere,  ale,  or  wyne

Them  selfe  behaue  they  moche  bestelyer  than  swyne

One  swalloweth  into  his  throte  a  soppe  or  twayne

Another  drunkard,  goth  to,  so  hastely

That  all  together  he  castyth  vp  agayne

Another  with  fyngers  foule  and  vnmanerly

Tossyth  vp  the  mete,  or  lyftyth  it  a  hye

Vnto  his  foule  nose  holdynge  it  to  wete

If  it  may  lyke  hym  :  and  if  the  sent  be  swete

Some  drynketh,  the  lycour  on  euery  syde  rennynge

Of  his  vyle  mouth  pollute  :  foule  and  horryble

Some  whan  the  cuppis  ar  empty  hyely  synge

Some  voyde  mo  cuppis  than  man  wolde  thynke  possyble

And  other  some,  galons :  so  that  theyr  ioyntis  ar  feble

They  vomytynge  agayne,  rorynge  vnmanerly

Troublynge  the  ayre,  with  barkynge,  noyse  and  cry


264  Of  immoderate  vyle?ies,


Some  synge,  and  reuell  as  in  bacchus  sacryfyce

As  rauysshyd  with  furour,  whiche  Bacchus  doth  blynde

Theyr  myndes :  attysynge  them  vnto  euery  vyce

And  loke  whome  this  sort  moste  vngoodly  can  fynde

He  shall  the  horde  haue  ruled  by  his  mynde

He  brastyth  a  glasse  or  cup  at  euery  worde

So  that  the  drynke  ouercouereth  all  the  borde

Some  pull  from  theyr  felawes  with  hande  rauysshynge
And  from  that  mease  that  nere  to  them  doth  syt
They  taste  the  swettest  and  best  of  euery  thynge
Thus  Sardanapalus :  whiche  onely  dyd  commyt
His  mynde  to  vyle  lust :  without  reason  or  wyt
Hath  nowe  many  felawes  :  whome  lust,  corrupt  and  vyle
Fedyth  and  whome  lackynge  of  mesure  doth  defyle

Suche  ar  best  pleasyd  with  thynges  Immoderate
But  what  man  can  wryte  all  vylenes  of  the  table
And  all  the  folyes  vsyd  in  dyuers  rate
Syns  wyse  men  lyue  nat  all  in  way  semblable
Theyr  lyuynge  and  maners  ar  greatly  varyble
For  euery  Nacyon  at  table  hathe  his  gyse
Some  we  commende,  and  other  some  despyse

The  grekis  Latyns,  and  the  men  of  Almayne
In  theyr  behauour  many  other  thynges  vse
Agaynst  the  vse  of  Englonde,  Fraunce  or  spayne
The  Turkes  and  Paynyms  haue  also  in  them  mysuse
And  men  of  ynde  these  wayes  afore,  refuse
Hauynge  other  maner :  yet  other  them  despyce
Thus  euery  Nacion  lyuynge  hath  his  gyse


in  maners^  vsyd  at  the  table.  265


Mennys  maners  ar  moche  dyuers  and  varyable
Theyr  wyll  vnlyke  in  pleasour  and  solace
Eche  royalme  hath  fedynge  dyuers  at  the  table
And  dyuers  is  theyr  lyfe  almost  in  euery  place
Yet  ought  they  all  with  herte  and  mynde  to  embrace
Wyse  talkynge,  and  maners  longynge  to  honeste
Auoydynge  foule  wordes,  and  bestyalyte

The  swynes  lyuynge  we  all  ought  to  eschewe

In  worde  and  dede  we  ought  to  auoyde  excesse

With  communycacion,  of  goodnes,  and  vertue

Folowynge  the  way  of  honest  clenlynesse

And  with  all  our  herte,  our  mynde,  and  lowe  mekenes

Yelde  thankes  and  gracis  to  god  omnypotent

For  suche  goodes,  as  he :  vnto  vs  hath  sent

We  ar  nat  borne  into  this  worlde  here
Alway  to  ete,  as  bestis  vnresonable
And  euery  houre  :  to  vse  suche  bestely  chere
Ouerchargynge  nature  by  vse  abhomynable
But  to  refresshe  vs  by  wayes  mesurable
Our  lyfe  and  body  togyder  to  preserue
And  hour  of  melys,  by  dyete  to  obserue

That  mete  and  drynke  shall  do  all  men  moste  gode

That  is  receyued  without  superfine  exces

To  confort  the  body,  and  to  norysshe  the  blode

Our  soule  is  a  spyryt  as  scripture  doth  expres

Wherfore  it  may  nat  rest  in  place  of  drynes

So  must  we  our  blode  norysshe  and  meyntayne

For  in  the  same  our  spyryte  doth  remayne


2  66  Of  immoderate  vylenes  vsyd  at  the  table.


But  in  euery  thynge  is  ordre  and  raesure
By  to  great  exces,  and  superfluyte
The  soule  and  lyfe,  may  by  no  mean  indure
And  in  lyke  wyse  by  to  great  scarsyte
But  this  we  fynde  that  many  one,  mo  dye
By  glotony,  excesse,  and  lyuynge  bestyall
Than  by  hunger,  knyfe,  or  deth  naturall

In  lordes  courtis  were  wont  vsyd  to  be

Gode  maners,  worthy,  honest  and  commendable

"Wherby  all  other  myght  lerne  honestye

But  nowe  ar  the  maners  there  no  thynge  laudable

But  corrupt,  and  foule,  but  namely  at  the  table

In  dronken  glotony  is  theyr  chefe,  sport  and  game

And  rybaude  wordes  without  all  fere  and  shame

Norture  fro  them  by  suche  vyce  is  exyled

Theyr  olde  name,  and  fame  of  honestye

Ar  vnder  fote,  so  worshyp  is  exylyd

Nat  onely  from  the  court  and  men  of  hye  degre

But  also  from  the  symple  comontee

Both  yonge  and  olde,  vsyth  suche  excesse

At  tables,  without  maners  of  honest  clenlynes.

Thenuoy  of  Barclay.
Ye  men  vnmanerde,  to  whome  intellygence
And  wysdome  ar  gyuen,  by  the  Prynce  celestyall
It  is  to  you  shame,  that  no  maner  difference
Is  bytwene  your  lyfe,  and  maners,  bestyall
And  that  at  the  table  in  chefe  and  pryncypall
It  is  an  olde  saynge  that  man  ought  of  dutye
Behaue  hym  on  hyll,  lyke  as  he  wolde  in  hall
Vsynge  and  accostomynge  hym  to  honestye


Of  folys  disgysyd  with  vysers  and  other
counterfayte  apparayle.


Democritus  laughed  to  scorne  and  dyd  despy  se
These  folysshe  games  and  worldly  vanyte
And  suche  folys  as  oft  them  selfe  disgyse
By  counterfayt  vysers  exprssynge  what  they  be
But  other  wyse  Cynicus  a  man  of  grauyte
Oft  tyme  bewayled  the  bytter  and  harde  chaunce
Seynge  in  the  worlde  of  folys  suche  abundaunce


2  68 Offolys  disgysyd  with  vysers

If  Democritus  sholde  nowe  agayne  be  borne

Or  in  our  tyme,  if  he  lyued  :  doutles

He  sholde,  the  men  nowe  lyuynge  laugh  to  scorne

For  theyr  dyuers  synnes  and  wylfuU  folysshenes

And  Crassus  also,  for  all  his  great  sadnes

Sholde  laugh  to  scorne,  our  folysshe  lyfe  and  wayes

Thoughe  he  neuer  laughed  but  onys  in  all  his  dayes

But  namely  sholde  he  laughe  :  if  that  he  myght  se
The  wayes  of  men  in  this  our  tyme  lyuynge
Howe  they  with  vysers  dayle  disgysed  be
Them  selfe  difFormynge  almost  in  euery  thynge
"Whan  they  ar  disgysyd  to  them  it  is  semynge
That  no  syn  is  gret :  nor  soundynge  to  theyr  shame
Syns  theyr  foule  vysers  therof  can  cloke  the  fame

To  euery  yll :  theyr  lewde  lyfe  doth  them  drawe
They  wander  ragynge  more  madly  in  theyr  vyce
Than  doth  suche  people  as  forsake  goodes  lawe
Whan  to  theyr  ydols  they  make  theyr  sacrifyce
Whose  names  to  tell  as  for  nowe  I  despyse
But  as  for  these  Folys,  arayed  in  theyr  rage
They  kepe  almost  euyn  suche  lyke  vsage

The  one  hath  a  vyser  vgly :  set  on  his  face
Another  hath  on,  vyle  counterfayte  vesture
Or  payntyth  his  vysage  with  fume  in  suche  case
That  what  he  is  hym  selfe  is  skantly  sure
Another  by  pryde  his  wyt  hath  so  obscure
To  hyre  the  busshe  of  one  that  late  is  dede
Therwith  to  disgyse  his  folys  dotynge  hede


and  other  coiinterfayte  apparayle.  269


Some  counterfayte  theyr  tethe  in  a  straynge  wyse
Some  for  a  mocke  hath  on  gowne  of  whyte
And  other  some  in  straunge  londes  gyse
Aray  them  selfe,  eche  after  his  delyte
And  other  some  besyde  theyr  vayne  habyte
Defyle  theyr  faces :  so  that  playne  trouth  to  tell
They  ar  more  fowle,  than  the  blacke  Deuyll  of  hell

Than  cary  they  theyr  instrumentis  musycall
About :  of  theyr  louers  wyllynge  to  be  sene
And  theyr  wanton  hertis  for  to  disceyue  withall
But  happy  is  she  that  can  her  selfe  kepe  clene
From  these  mad  folys :  for  all  that  euer  they  meane
Is  vnder  theyr  deuyls  clothynge  as  they  go
The  deuyllys  workes  for  to  commyt  also

They  disceyue  myndes  chaste  and  innocent
With  dyuers  wayes  whiche  I  wyll  nat  expres
Lyst  that  whyle  I  labour  this  cursyd  gyse  to  stynt
I  myght  to  them  mynyster  example  of  lewdnes
And  therfore  in  this  part  I  shall  say  les
Than  doth  my  actour :  and  that  in  dyuers  clauses
Whiche  is  nat  done  without  suffycyent  causes

Many  one  whiche  hath  nat  done  amys

All  the  hole  yere  :  but  kept  hym  from  all  vyce

Fallyth  vnto  synne  :  whan  this  disgysynge  is

For  some  in  baudy  wordes  them  exercyce

To  venus  warkes  yonge  wymen  to  attyce

But  all  theyr  maners :  if  that  I  sholde  shewe  playne

It  were  to  longe :  and  labour  without  gayne


270 Of  folys  disp^ysyd  with  vysers


These  folys  that  them  selfe  disgyseth  thus
In  theyr  lewde  gestis  doth  outwarde  represent
The  frowarde  festis  of  the  Idoll  Saturnus
And  other  disceytfull,  goddes  and  fraudelent
Or  els  rather :  forsoth  in  myne  intent
That  they  ar  wyckyd  spiritis  I  byleue
Sende  out  of  hell  (to  erth)  mankynde  to  greue

"With  dyuers  fassyons  they  hyde  the  same  vysage
Whiche  god  hath  made  vnto  his  owne  lykenes
And  gyuen  to  Adam  and  all  his  hole  lynage
For  to  remember  his  excellent  goodnes  ,
But  these  lewde  wretchys  by  theyr  folysshnes
Defylyth  nature,  hauynge  a  chefe  pleasaunce
For  to  disfygure  theyr  shape  and  countenaunce

Yet  haue  they  no  fere  of  god :  ne  drede  of  shame
Them  selfe  to  disfygure  this  wyse  agaynst  kynde
But  besyde  this :  some  them  selfe  fayneth  lame
Some  counterfayt  them  as  they  were  fully  blynde
And  yonge  gentylmen  wyll  nat  abyde  behynde
Some  them  disgyse  euyn  as  the  other  do
And  so  go  forth  as  folys  amonge  the  mo

Some  goeth  on  four  disfourmed  as  a  here
Some  fayne  them  croked,  and  some  impotent
Some  with  theyr  fyngers  theyr  iyen  abrode  blere
And  yet  that  is  wors :  and  worthy  punysshement
These  folys  disgysed  moste  set  theyr  intent
On  hyest  dayes,  and  most  solemne  also
In  suche  disfygured  maner  for  to  go


and  other  coiinterfayt  apparayle,  271


As  is  christis  feste  or  his  Natyuyte

At  Ester,  and  moste  speciall  at  wytsontyde

Whan  eche  creature  sholde  best  disposyd  be

Settynge  all  worldly  vanytees  asyde

Than  Venus  stryfes  accompanyed  with  pryde

Ar  led  by  daunsynge,  and  other  them  disgyse

These  holy  festis  alas  thus  they  despyse

Whan  the  bytter  passyon  of  Christ  our  sauyour

Sholde  be  remembred :  these  wretchyd  folys  ryn

To  theyr  disgysynge,  vanyte  and  errour

To  seke  occasyon  therby  of  dedely  syn

Thus  lytell  they  coueyt  the  heuenly  ioy  to  wyn

With  Crist  our  sauyour  alas  suche  ryse  to  late

For  worldly  synne  them  holdyth  in  one  state

Therfore  let  these  Folys  auoyde  this  mad  mysuse
And  folowe  the  right  way  of  vertuous  grauyte
Let  them  these  lewde  disgysynges  clene  refuse
For  nought  is  therin  :  saue  worldly  vanyte
It  is  vnlefull,  It  can  none  other  be
Where  god  made  man  eche  creature  to  excel!
Than  man  to  make  hym  selfe  a  deuyll  of  hell

I  haue  harde  that  a  certayne  man  was  slayne
Beynge  disgysyd  as  a  Fowle  fende  horryble
Whiche  was  anone  caryed  to  hell  payne
By  suche  a  fende. whiche  is  nat  impossyble
It  was  his  right  it  may  be  so  credyble
For  that  whiche  he  caryed  with  hym  away
Was  his  vysage :  and  his  owne  leueray


272  Of  folys  disgysyd  with  vysers.


Thenuoy  of  Alexander  Barclay.
Man  be  content  with  thy  owne  nature
As  god  hath  made  the  of  shape  and  countenaunce
Diffourme  nat  thy  body,  thy  vysage  or  fygure
Nor  yet  hi  vesture :  in  play,  disgyse  or  daunce
Art  thou  nat  made  to  goddes  owne  semblaunce
Than  certaynely  thou  art  greatly  to  blame
By  the  blynde  pryde  of  thy  mysgouernaunce
Presumptuously  to  counterfayt  the  same


The  descripcion  of  a  wyse  man.


A  man  that  is  gode :  endued  with  sapience

Repreuyth  dedys  nat  good  ne  commendable

He  chastyseth  wordes  :  wherof  myght  growe  offence

And  that  to  the  ere  haue  sounde  abhomynable

But  vnto  the  soule  his  wordes  ar  profytable

He  techyth  vertue:  hauynge  inwarde  regarde

To  his  owne  dedys :  or  he  procede  forwarde


2  74  descripcion  of  a  wyse  man.


He  auoydeth  all  yll  and  worldly  vanyte
Sekynge  and  louynge  the  harde  way  of  goodnes
And  his  hole  lyfe  in  that  way  ordreth  he
In  euery  thynge  auoydynge  great  excesse
The  noble  virgyll  in  wrytynge  doth  expresse
A  wyse  man  describynge  his  poyntis  nere  echone
What  maner  man,  in  our  tyme  lyueth  none

Of  Socrates  the  hyghe  maieste  souerayne

In  this  part  had  the  hyghest  degre

And  went  moste  nere  the  hye  name  to  attayne

For  in  his  maners  and  lyuynge  lyke  was  he

To  suche  a  man :  as  we  may  wryten  se

In  the  crafty  Poesye  of  excellent  virgyll

This  worthy  Socrates  was  ruler  of  his  wyll

Within  his  boundys  kepynge  alway  the  same

He  holly  of  hymselfe  dependyd  stedfastly

So  constant  and  parfyte  that  none  coude  hym  blame

Except  it  were  by  malyce  and  enuy

He  was  prouydent  :  gode  and  eche  thynge  wolde  aply

Vnto  the  best :  nat  doynge  to  any  creature

But  that :  whiche  gladly  he  wolde  agayne  indure

And  euery  man  that  is  in  suche  case

Of  this  goodnes  to  kepe  the  godly  way

Within  his  herte  hath  many  gyftis  of  grace

Shynynge  as  bryght  as  is  the  sonny  day

His  owne  dedes  doth  he  iuge  by  rightwyse  way

Nat  carynge  for  the  grutches  of  the  rude  commonte

Takynge  euyn  lyke  welth  and  aduersyte


The  descripcion  of  a  wyse  man.  275


By  his  prouysyon  he  euer  is  safe  and  sure

From  outwarde  thynges  his  mynde  doth  he  abstayne

He  hath  no  brybes  of  any  creature

To  fauour  syn,  or  yll  men  to  meyntayne

He  euer  is  fre :  lyberall :  true  and  playne

With  stedfast  mynde,  he  vayne  desyre  doth  hate

Desyrynge  no  thynge  :  but  that  is  moderate

He  all  is  foundyd  in  parfyte  stablenes
Nat  gyuynge  hym  selfe  to  rest  in  any  wyse
Before  he  can  by  good  prouysion  dresse
All  thynge  that  to  his  lyuynge  may  suffyce
A  pryuat  profyte,  he  alway  doth  despyse
In  respect  of  the  wele  of  a  hole  comonte
Conioynynge  thynge  honest  with  his  vtylyte

He  euery  day  doth  some  thynge,  great  or  small
Aparteynynge  to  goodnes,  laude  and  honesty e
O  wolde  god  that  suche  fortune  myght  vs  fall
That  in  this  our  tyme,  suche  men  myght  with  vs  be
And  that  men  endued  with  wyt  and  grauyte
Myght  teche  the  same,  to  magnyfy  doctryne
And  that  the  ignoraunt  wolde  to  theyr  lore  inclyne

We  ought  nat  sothly  to  meruayle  in  this  case
That  of  the  folysshe  folke  a  sort  innumerable
Multyplyeth  thus  almoste  in  euery  place
The  cause  is  playne,  for  certis  without  fable
Wysdome  is  banysshed,  as  thynge  nat  profytable
Out  of  the  worlde  with  woundes  on  euery  syde
We  graunt  no  place  to  hir  with  vs  to  byde


2^6 The  clescripcion  of  a  ivyse  man.


Who  that  wyll  labour  in  this  our  wretchyd  tyme

To  lyue  in  wysdome  vertue  and  goodnes

Is  clene  dispysyd  of  them  that  lyue  in  cryme

Gyuen  to  all  synne  and  all  vnthryftynes

They  call  hym  folysshe,  rude  and  full  of  madnes

But  he  that  can  fraude  crafty :  and  gylefull  wayes

Hath  name  of  nobles,  and  wysdome  nowe  adayes

Gode  Aristydes  for  all  his  rightwysenes
In  this  our  tyme  sholde  nat  be  of  great  pryse
Fabricius  and  Curius,  for  all  theyr  hye  goodnes
Sholde  be  despysyd :  and  Cato  sad  and  wyse
Sholde  nowe  be  mocked  of  suche  as  lyue  in  vyce
For  it  is  sayde,  aud  prouyd  true  and  verytable
That  folys  hath  no  pleasour  but  onely  in  they  bable

Of  noble  Plato  :  what  sholde  the  sect  dyuyne
Do  amonge  men  that  nowe  adayes  ar  borne
They  sholde  for  all  theyr  wysdome  and  doctryne
Of  suche  folys  be  laughed  vnto  scorne
And  if  they  trouth  vttred :  be  all  to  rent  and  torne
For  the  lawde  and  glory  of  this  tyme  nowe  present
Ar  gyuen  vnto  folys :  men  fals  and  fraudelent

The  company  of  men  that  lackyth  wyt
Is  best  exaltyd  (as  nowe)  in  euery  place
And  in  the  chayr,  or  hyest  rowme  shall  syt
Promotynge  none :  but  suche  as  sue  theyr  trace
They  ryches  thynke  moste  speciall  gyft  of  grace
But  whan  a  Fole  is  thus  become  a  state
He  shall  with  his  foly  good  myndes  violate


The  descripcion  of  a  wyse  man.  277


If  the  noble  royalme  of  Englonde  wolde  iiuaance
In  our  dayes :  men  of  vertue  and  prudence
Eche  man  rewardynge  after  his  gouernaunce
As  the  wyse  with  honour  and  rowme  of  excellence
And  the  yll  with  greuous  payne  for  theyr  offence
Than  sholde  our  famous  laude  of  olde  obtayned
Nat  bene  decayed,  oppressyd  and  thus  distayned

If  men  of  wysdome  were  brought  out  of  the  scolys

And  after  theyr  vertue  set  in  moste  hye  degre

My  shyp  sholde  nat  haue  led  so  many  folys

Both  of  men  temporall,  and  of  the  spiritualyte

Whiche  in  the  wawes  of  the  tempestuous  se

Of  this  wretchyd  worlde  moche  payne  and  wo  abyde

For  lacke  of  wyt,  and  reason,  them  to  gyde

But  none  doth  iuge  hym  selfe  for  his  offence
With  godly  wysedome  none  doth  endue  his  mynde
None  parfytely  wyll  serche  his  conscyence
Suche  fautis  expellynge  as  he  therin  doth  fynde
These  worldly  pleasours,  alas  mankynde  doth  blynde
So  sore  :  that  if  the  worlde  hole  were  sought
Fewe  sholde  be  founde  that  lyue  ryght  as  they  ought

And  therfore  in  wordes  both  of  sadnes  and  sport
With  folysshe  Cotis  and  hodes  I  haue  disgysed
Of  these  Folys  a  great  and  meruaylous  sort
Lyke  as  my  mayster  Brant  had  first  deuysyd
But  of  these  Folys  though  good  men  be  despysyd
And  had  as  Folys,  no  meruayle  is  truly
For  in  a  folys  syght  hye  wysdome  is  foly


278 The  descripcion  of  a  wyse  mem.


But  though  these  folys  repute  men  of  wysdome
As  wors  than  they :  yet  let  them  lyue  and  do
As  virgyll  techyth,  wysely,  and  they  shall  come
To  heuen  whan  that  theyr  soule  shall  hens  go
They  nought  shall  knowe  of  mysery  nor  wo
And  for  theyr  lyfe  ledynge  here  in  rightwysnes
Shall  be  theyr  rewarde  the  heuenly  blyssydnes

Thoughe  wysemen  here,  of  folys  be  cpprest
Had  in  derysion  :  and  kept  in  lowe  degre
For  this  theyr  trouble  eternall  ioy  and  rest
In  goddes  hye  presence  to  them  rewarde  shall  be
Wherfore  o  man  1  warne  and  councell  the
Prepare  thy  selfe  to  wysdome  and  prudence
Do  thou  hir  honour  with  loue  and  reuerence

Wysedome  shall  men  auaunce  vnto  honour
So  Barclay  wyssheth  and  styll  shall  tyll  he  dye
Parfytely  pray  to  god  our  creatour
That  vertuous  men  and  wyse  may  haue  degre
(As  they  ar  worthy)  of  lawde  and  dygnyte
But  namely  to  his  frende  bysshop  by  name
Before  all  other  desyreth  he  the  same

Which e  was  the  first  ouersear  of  this  warke
And  vnto  his  frende  gaue  his  aduysement
It  nat  to  suffer  to  slepe  styll  in  the  darke
But  to  be  publysshyd  abrode :  and  put  to  prent
To  thy  monycion  my  bysshop  I  assent
Besechynge  god  that  I  that  day  may  se
That  thy  honour  may  prospere  and  augment
So  that  thy  name  and  offyce  may  agre


The  clescripcion  of  a  wyse  man.  279


Thy  name  to  worshyp  and  honour  doth  accorde
As  borne  a  bysshop  without  a  benefyce
Thy  lyuynge  small :  thy  name  is  of  a  lorde
And  though  thou  nowe  be  stryke  with  couetyse
That  vyce  shall  slake  in  the  if  thou  aryse
(As  I  suppose)  and  lyberalyte
Shall  suche  fortune  for  the  by  grace  deuyse
So  that  thy  name  and  ofFyce  shall  agre

But  if  that  fortune  to  thy  goodnes  enuye

As  though  she  wolde  :  the  nat  honour  to  attayne

Yet  let  hir  passe :  and  hir  fraylenes  defye

For  all  hir  gyftis  ar  frayle  and  vncertayne

If  she  nat  smyle  on  the  but  haue  disdayne

The  to  promote  to  welth  and  dignyte

To  olde  acquayntaunce  be  stedfast  true  and  playne

Than  shall  thy  goodnes  and  thy  name  agre

Let  pas  the  worlde  for  nought  in  it  is  stable
The  greatter  Baylyf  the  sorer  is  his  payne
Some  men  that  late  were  callyd  honorable
Dyd  theyr  promosyon  after  sore  complayne
No  wyse  man  is  desyrous  to  obtayne
The  forked  cap  without  he  worthy  be
As  ar  but  fewe  :  but  be  thou  glad  and  fayne
That  thy  good  name  and  maners  may  agre

In  this  short  balade  I  can  nat  comprehende
All  my  full  purpose  that  I  wolde  to  the  wryte
But  fayne  I  wolde  that  thou  sholde  sone  assende
To  heuenly  worshyp  and  celestyall  delyte


280 'The  descripcion  of  a  wyse  man.


Than  sholde  I  after  my  pore  wyt,  and  respyt,
Display  thy  name,  and  great  kyndnes  to  me
But  at  this  tyme  no  farther  I  indyte
But  pray  that  thy  name  and  worshyp  may  agre.


Of  folys  that  dispyse  wysdome  and  Phylo-
sophy  and  a  commendacion  of  the  same.


With  dolefull  dolour :  it  sorowyd  ought  to  be
That  nowe  adayes  the  wysdome  and  doctryne
Of  wyse  men,  iust,  and  full  of  grauyte
Is  nought  set  by :  but  fallyth  to  ruyne
But  folys  that  to  wysdome  wyll  nat  inclyne
Spyttyth  for  despyte  on  hym  the  whiche  is  wyse
And  all  his  dedys  doth  vtterly  despyse


282  Of folys  that  dispyse


The  rude  commontye,  that  wyt  and  wysedome  lacke
Labouryth  with  all  the  power  that  they  may
Wyse  men  and  gode :  to  thyrst  into  a  sacke
For  vnder  fote  of  Folys  without  nay
Phylosophy  lyeth,  oppressyd  nyght  and  day
Folys  it  repute  nought  worth  ne  profytable
They  haue  delyte :  in  men  to  them  semblable

Who  euer  he  be  that  purposyth  in  mynde
The  holy  Toure  of  wysdome  to  attayne
And  coueytyth  his  rest  in  it  to  fynde
Despysynge  worldly  welth  and  ioy  mundayne
He  must  both  hande  and  tunge  fro  synne  refrayne
Obseruynge  his  body  in  grace  by  chastyte
And  than  of  wysedome  receyued  shall  he  be

Phylosophy  doth  mannys  mynde  compace
With  syghtis  and  iyen  replete  with  holynes
To  man  it  gyueth  right  many  gyftis  of  grace
As  eloquence  :  and  waye  of  rightwysnes
It  man  confortyth  oppressyd  in  sadnes
By  holy  doctryne,  and  it  doth  socour  fynde
For  all  yll  mouynges,  and  fantasyes  of  mynde

It  techyth  man  to  all  vertues  to  inclyne

It  shewyth  the  way  for  to  lyue  vertuously

And  by  suche  lore  and  vertuous  doctryne

It  techyth  them  that  truly  it  aply

The  heuenly  way  :  vnto  the  sterres  a  hye

We  sadnes  and  sorowe  may  fle  by  this  wysdome

And  greuous  chaunces  or  fallys  by  it  ouercome


wysdome  and  Phylosophy.  283

The  father  of  heuen  our  lorde  omnypotent

Of  his  great  grace  and  infynyte  goodnes

Hath  sende  this  scyence  to  people  innocent

To  shewe  them  the  way  of  grace  and  rightwysnes

Ail  hir  aparayle  agreyth  to  holynes

Therwith  she  oftreth  frely  to  cloth  mankynde

Sawynge  hir  sede  of  vertue  in  theyr  mynde

She  coueryth  hir  hede  with  vale  of  chastyte
Hir  body  clothyd  with  pall  of  the  same  sort
The  rosys  purpyll  of  fayre  humylyte
Spredyth  the  grounde  where  as  she  doth  resort
Wherfore  let  euery  wyse  man  haue  confort
Onely  in  wysedomys  presence  and  seruyce
For  where  she  rayneth  subdued  is  euery  vyce

She  fedeth  man  with  the  dylycious  drynke
Of  parfyte  wysdome  :  all  vyce  therby  to  fle
And  vnto  hym  that  euer  on  hir  doth  thynke
She  grauntyth  honour  of  parfyte  lybertye
Whyle  she  is  gyde  the  herte  and  mynde  are  fre
For  she  expellyth  :  vyce  and  mysgouernaunce
Whiche  ar  rote  of  mysfortune  and  mychaunce

She  gyueth  laudes  to  all  them  that  hir  loue
And  by  hir  doctryne  and  worthy  sapyence
The  wyse  ascendyth  to  the  hye  heuen  aboue
And  to  iust  lyuers :  and  men  of  innocence
Heuen  yates  she  opyns  theyr  dedes  to  recompence
Thus  wysdome  is  chefe  gyder  of  our  lyfe
In  blyssyd  rest  :  slakynge  debate  and  stryfe


284  Of  fib  ^  ^^^^^  dlspyse


None  lyueth  so  fyers,  nor  so  cruell  tyrant
But  that  noble  wysedome  by  parfyte  pacyence
Shall  hym  ouercome  :  but  he  that  wyt  doth  want
For  lacke  of  wysedome  oft  fallyth  to  offence
There  is  no  lorde  ne  Prynce  of  excellence
That  can  well  gyde  his  scepter  and  kyngdome
Without  the  helpe  and  counsell  of  wysedome

Wysdome  is  moder  of  fayth  :  and  of  iustyce
And  all  goodnes  doth  of  it  growe  and  sprynge
But  yet  moste  people  nowe  insuyth  vyce
Fulfyllynge  theyr  folysshe  lust  in  euery  thynge
They  foly  folowe,  but  wysedome  and  cunnynge
They  clene  dispyse  :  hauynge  scorne  and  enuy
At  suche  god  men  as  them  to  it  aply

But  leue  this  foly,  o  wretchyd  men  alas

And  both  yonge  and  olde  fast  spede  you  to  obtayne

The  godly  gyftis  of  excellent  pallas

Endeuour  your  selfe  to  drynke  of  hir  fountayne

But  o  disciples  of  wysdome  :  spare  no  payne

To  help  your  moder :  for  if  ye  be  to  slacke

The  rude  comontye  shall  thrust  hir  in  a  sacke

A  LEMENTACION  OF  BARCLAY  FOR  THE  RUYNE  AND
FALL  OF  WYSDOME.

O  synfull  season  :  sore  drownyd  in  derkenes
O  wylfuU  foly  o  thou  proude  ignoraunce
Howe  longe  shall  ye  mankynde  thus  wyse  oppres
That  none  almost  in  wysdome  hath  pleasaunce


wysdome  and  Phylosophy.  285


But  men  myslyuynge  in  mad  mysgouernaunce

Ar  so  with  statis  in  fauour  loue  and  grace

That  with  them  wysdome  can  haue  none  acquayntaunce

But  clene  exyled  and  foly  in  hir  place

Alas  the  tyme  :  that  wyse  men  of  mekenes
Sholde  be  despysyd  :  yet  fallen  is  that  chaunce
Nought  is  set  by  :  saue  treasour  and  ryches
Playne  trouth  is  foly :  and  pouertye  penaunce
Boldnes  and  bostynge  ledyth  all  the  daunce
Venus  all  techyth  for  to  insue  hir  trace
Fals  flatery  the  most  part  doth  auaunce
But  gone  is  wysdome  and  foly  in  hir  place

Foule  falshode  hath  confoundyd  faythfulnes
The  newe  disgyses  hath  left  Almayne  and  Fraunce
And  come  to  Englonde :  and  eche  vnclenlynes
Doth  lede  vs  wretchys,  we  make  no  purueaunce
Agaynst  our  ende  whan  deth  shall  with  his  launce
Consume  this  lyfe  :  we  may  bewayle  this  case
Our  wordes  ar  folysshe  :  so  is  our  countenaunce
Thus  gone  is  wysdome,  and  foly  in  hir  place

Who  can  rehers  eche  sort  of  folysshenes
That  vs  mysgydeth  through  our  mysordynaunce
Lust  is  our  Lady :  and  glotony  maystres
Sobernes  is  gone :  and  stately  arrogaunce
Hath  mekenes  slayne  :  alas  this  is  greuaunce
Vnto  my  herte":  expellynge  all  solace
O  glorious  god  direct  this  perturbaunce
That  wysdome  may  agayne  obtayne  hir  place


A  concertacion  or  stryuynge  bytwene
vertue  and  voluptuosyte  :  or  carnall  lust.


Beholde  here  man  dyrect  thy  syght  to  se
For  in  this  balade  I  shall  vnto  the  shewe
The  stryfe  of  vyce  and  voluptuosyte
Had  in  comtempt  of  goodnes  and  vertue
But  do  thou  so  that  vertue  may  subdue
Foule  carnall  lust  whose  pleasour  is  but  vayne
Firste  full  of  myrth:  endynge  in  bytter  payne


Carnall  lust.


287


Whyle  Hercules  lay  slepynge  (as  I  rede)

Two  wayes  he  sawe  full  of  diffyculte

The  one  of  pleasour  :  at  ende  gyuynge  no  mede

The  other  of  vertue  auaunsynge  eche  degre

But  of  both  these  two  wayes  whan  that  he

Had  sought  the  state  :  the  ende,  and  the  strayghtnes

The  way  he  entred  of  vertue  and  goodnes

Therfore  o  reder  that  hast  wyll  to  inclyne
To  souerayne  vertue  that  is  incomperable
Thy  mynde  aplyenge  stedfast  to  hir  doctryne
Ouer  rede  this  balade  for  it  is  profytable
And  though  thou  thynke  it  but  a  fayned  fable
Yet  red  it  gladly  :  but  if  thou  be  to  haut
Fie  from  it  fast  and  fynde  in  it  no  faut

We  pardon  requyre  where  as  we  do  offend e
Grauntynge  the  same  to  other  vsynge  to  wryte
None  doth  so  well  but  some  may  it  amende
But  namely  if  it  be  done  without  respyte.
None  without  leyser  :  can  voyde  of  faut  endyte
And  mannys  wyt,  as  dayly  doth  apere
Somtyme  is  dull :  somtyme  parfyte  and  clere

With  wordes  playne :  I  viciousnes  confounde
Oppressynge  men  with  fals  flatrynge  semblaunt
And  throwynge  Venus  tentis  to  the  grounde
But  vertue  I  lawde :  as  goodnes  moste  plesaunt
Whiche  with  hir  wepen  most  stronge  and  tryumphaunt
Subduyth  vyce  :  and  all  suche  as  hir  loue
With  hir  she  ledyth  to  the  hye  royalme  aboue


288


A  cojicertacion  bytwene


Therfore  let  euery  man,  mayde,  childe,  and  wyfe

In  theyr  yonge  age  to  vertue  them  inclyne

Lernynge  of  hir  the  way  to  lede  theyr  lyfe

As  of  maysteres  moste  holsome  in  doctryne

Who  hir  insuys  assayeth  no  ruyne

For  hir  rewarde  is  sure,  and  eternall

In  erth  here :  and  in  the  royalrae  celestyall

Thus  shall  he  lyue  in  perpetuyte.

But  let  echone  auoyde  the  viciousnes

To  hym  promysyd  by  voluptuosyte

Hir  warkes  ar  all  oppressyd  with  blyndnes

And  where  as  she  can  wanton  youth  oppres

She  hym  so  rotyth  in  slouth  and  neglygence

That  nede  shall  cause  hym  fall  to  all  offence

Lust  brakyth  the  mynde :  and  as  we  often  se

It  blyndyth  the  vnderstondynge  and  the  wyt

From  mannys  hert  it  chasis  chastyte

AH  mortall  venym  hath  the  chefe  rote  in  it

None  can  be  helyd  that  hath  hir  byt

But  noble  blode  she  most  of  all  doth  blynde

Whiche  more  on  hir  :  than  vertae  haue  theyr  mynde

Therfore  yonge  men  gyue  aduertence  and  hede

Here  shall  ye  se  :  and  so  shall  feble  age

What  yll  of  worldly  pleasour  doth  procede

And  howe  she  bryngeth  some  men  to  great  damage

Than  shall  ye  here  what  good  and  auauntage

What  welth  what  rest,  what  honour  and  ryches

Comys  to  mankynde  by  vertue  and  goodnes


The  obiection  of  lust  blamynge  vertiie.


Lo  gorgays  galantis :  lo  galantis  here  am  I

Lo  here  fayre  lust :  full  enmy  to  vertue

Clothyd  in  laurer  :  in  sygne  of  victory

The  large  worlde  I  hole  to  me  subdue

My  stremynge  standardes  alayd  with  sundry  hewe

In  tryumphe  shynyth  bryghter  than  the  sonne

I  all  the  worlde  to  my  Empyre  haue  wonne


2qo  'The  obiectmi  of  lust  hlamyno-e  vertue.


All  fragaunt  floures  most  pleasaunt :  gay  and  swete

Whose  sundry  sortis  no  lyuynge  man  can  tell

Vnto  my  pleasour  ar  spred  vnder  my  fete

That  all  the  ayre  enioyeth  of  the  smeli

The  vyolet  that  in  odour  doth  excell

About  in  bosom  by  me  alway  I  here

The  same  oft  tyme  inlasyd  with  my  here

All  my  vesture  °.  is  of  golde  pure
My  gay  Chaplet,  with  stonys  set
With  couerture  :  of  fyne  asure
In  syluer  net  my  here  up  knet
Soft  sylke  bytwene  lyst  it  myght  fret
My  purpyll  pall,  ouercouereth  all
Clere  as  Christall :  no  thynge  egall

My  wanton  face  :  louers  to  embrace  :  my  wanton  iye
In  suche  a  case  :  shewe  them  solace:  that  none  ar  fre
So  louers  be  subiet  to  me :  in  euery  plame
My  hye  beautye  :  voyde  of  bounte :  doth  them  inlace
To  hunt  to  chace :  to  daunce  :  to  trace  :  what  one  is  he
That  beryth  face :  or  hath  that  grace  :  on  londe  or  se
In  lyke  degre  hym  selfe  to  se  :  my  pleasaunt  pace
Is  lyght  as  fle :  thus  none  that  be  :  can  me  compace

I  cast  my  pleasours  :  and  hony  swete
Ouer  all  the  worlde  none  can  beware
Nor  loke  so  surely  vnto  his  fete
But  that  I  tangle  hym  in  my  snare
Whan  I  with  youth  can  mete
With  reason  nat  well  replete
In  lust  I  cause  hym  flete
Of  grace  barayne  and  bare


T^he  ohiection  of  lust  blamynge  verttie.  291


What  man  is  he  that  can  beware
Whan  1  my  nettis  abrode  display
Namely  to  youth  I  me  repare
I  blynde  theyr  hertis  sorest  alway
I  take  no  thought  ne  care
Howe  euer  the  worlde  fare
No  season  fre  I  spare
Frome  pleasour  :  nyght  nor  day

With  harpe  in  hande,  alway  I  stande
Passynge  eche  hour :  in  swete  pleasour
A  wanton  bande  :  of  euery  lande
Ar  in  my  tour,  me  to  honour
Some  of  voloure,  some  bare  and  poure
Kynges  in  theyr  pryde,  syt  by  my  syde
Euery  fresshe  flour,  of  swete  odour
To  them  I  prouyde,  that  with  me  byde

Whan  the  stature,  of  my  fygure
With  golde  shynyng,  is  hye  standynge
They  that  inure,  in  my  pleasure
With  herte  wandrynge,  moche  swetely  synge
Garlandes  of  golde,  to  me  olfrynge
And  me  beholde  with  countenaunce
Smylynge,  laughynge  :  eche  wanton  thynge
On  myrth  musynge,  lernynge  to  daunce

Mo  men  me  honour  :  for  my  pleasaunce
Than  worshyp  the  mother  of  the  hye  kynge
I  shewe  them  myrth,  she  harde  penaunce
I  pleasaunt  lust :  She  chast  lyuynge


292 The  obiectwn  of  lust  hlamynge  vertue.

Who  euer  they  be,  that  folowe  me
And  gladly  fle  :  to  any  standarde
They  shall  be  fre  :  nat  sek  nor  se
Aduersyte  :  nor  paynes  harde

No  poynt  of  payne,  shall  he  sustayne
But  ioy  souerayne,  whyle  he  is  here
No  frost  ne  rayne,  there  shall  distayne,
His  face  by  payne,  ne  hurt  his  chere

He  shall  his  hede,  cast  to  no  drede
To  get  the  mede,  and  lawde  of  warre
Nor  yet  haue  nede,  for  to  take  hede
Howe  batayles  spede,  but  stande  a  farre

Nor  yet  be  bounde,  to  care  the  sounde
Of  man  :  or  grounde  :  or  trumpet  shyll
Strokes  that  redounde,  shall  nat  confounde
Nor  his  mynde  wounde  :  but  if  he  wyll

Who  wyll  subdue,  hym  to  insue
My  pleasours  newe :  that  I  demayne
I  shall  hym  shewe  :  way  to  eschewe
Where  hardnes  grewe  :  and  to  fle  payne

The  swetnes  of  loue  he  shall  assay

But  suche  as  my  pleasours  hate  and  dispyse

In  hardnes  lyue  and  bytter  payne  alway

In  dolour  drowned,  and  that  in  greuous  wyse

Endynge  theyr  lyfe  after  a  wretchyd  gyse

By  couetyse,  abstaynynge  theyr  pleasour

Chaungynge  swetnes  for  bytter  payne  and  sour


The  obiection  of  lust  blamynge  vertue.


By  pleasaunt  lust  I  callyd  am  ouer  all
Prynces  pereles  and  glorious  goddes
Of  me  procedyth  pleasour  :  as  is  egall
To  come  of  a  hye  and  noble  Empres
In  me  is  myrth  and  songes  of  gladnes
And  vnder  my  dayes  and  hours  fortunate
Age  hath  first  rote  to  holde  vp  his  estate

The  lusty  Parys,  by  whome  the  ryche  troy

Gaue  place  to  grece,  as  subiect  to  the  same

In  my  seruyce  had  pleasour  and  great  ioy

So  that  by  me  he  spred  abrode  his  fame

Those  pleasours  folowynge  of  whan  I  haue  the  name

And  that  remayneth  in  my  auctoryte

And  proude  Cleopatra  :  was  seruytour  to  me

There  is  no  londe  inclosyd  with  the  se

But  that  they  all  haue  folowyd  my  counsell

As  Afryke,  Numyde  the  other  I  let  be

I  wyll  nat  tary  theyr  namys  for  to  tell

But  fewe  or  none  ar  bytwene  heuen  and  hell

In  hethynes  nor  yet  in  chrystente

But  yonge  outher  olde  they  all  obey  to  me

My  deynteous  dartis  about  full  brode  I  cast
Amonge  all  Nacions  vnto  the  worldes  ende
The  Phylosophers  that  were  in  tymes  past
As  Epicurians  to  me  dyd  condiscende
All  theyr  hole  sect  my  quarell  doth  defende
For  all  theyr  sect  to  this  clause  dyd  assent
That  lust  and  pleasour  was  gode  most  excellent


2  94  ^'^^  ob'iection  of  lust  blamynge  vertue.


Without  corporall  labour  :  my  goodes  shall  profyte

Of  mete  and  drynke  I  haue  welth  and  excesse

I  haue  my  pleasour,  my  icy  and  my  delyte

In  deynty  dysshes  and  swete  delyciousnes  ,

1  lede  nat  lyfe  in  peryll  and  hardnes

Vnder  heuy  helme,  in  felde  from  any  towne

Nat  on  harde  strawe  :  but  soft  and  costely  downe

If  ioy,  and  pleasour,  dyd  me  nat  ay  insue
And  lusty  myrthe,  with  corporall  pkasaunce
So  myghty  kynges  wolde  nat  them  subdue
Vnto  my  tentis,  whose  myght  shall  me  auaunce
That  all  the  worlde  vnder  my  gouernaunce
Shall  it  submyt,  and  dwellers  of  the  same
Shall  here  about  the  badges  of  my  name

It  is  longe  past  syns  that  men  first  dyd  thus
Subdue  tlieyr  myndes  and  bodyes  vnto  me
The  myghty  kynge  callyd  Sardanapalus
Left  dedes  that  longyd  vnto  his  royalte
Folowynge  my  pleasour  and  voluptuosyte
And  rome  victorious  at  last  by  hye  courage
Yeldyd  it  selfe  mekely  to  my  bondage

Eas  welth  and  rest  to  me  alway  is  best
Vnto  my  seruauntis  I  gyue  the  same
And  where  as  nature  aperyth  goodlyest
I  am  moste  besy  the  herte  for  to  inflame
With  fyry  brondes  to  Venus  plesaunt  game
No  colde  ne  hunger  to  yonge  men  shall  I  gyue
But  pleasaunt  rest  :  whyle  they  with  me  do  lyue


The  obiection  of  lust  blamynge  vertiie.  1 95


My  lyfe  I  lede  in  ioyfiiU  Idylnes

Nat  let  nor  troubled  by  any  aduersyte

Therfore  o  youth  that  art  in  lustynes

And  age  also  that  of  bad  maners  be

Tourne  hyther  your  faces  beholdynge  my  beaute

And  you  indeuer  your  erys  to  inclyne

To  my  preceptis,  folowynge  my  doctryne

The  tyme  passyth  dayly  fro  mankynde

Our  dayes  of  lyfe  longe .  whyle  can  nat  indure

Therfore  on  pleasour  establysshe  we  our  mynde

For  in  my  mynde  no  erthly  creature

After  this  lyfe  of  pleasour  shall  be  sure

Therfore  be  we  meiy  the  time  that  we  ar  here

And  passe  we  our  tyme  alway  in  lusty  chere


The  answere  of  vertue  agenst  this  obiec-
tion  of  voluptuosyte.


O  Lothsome  lust :  o  mad  mysgouernour
Of  all  mankynde,  and  rote  of  euery  vyce
With  thy  barayne  balade,  and  corporall  pleasour
Howe  darest  thou  greue  me  thus  in  any  wyse
Thy  wordes  ar  vayne  :  thy  myght  I  clene  despyse
How^dare  thy  cowarde  herte  me  thus  assayle
Syns  thou,  the  bostest :  vnmete  vnto  batayle


The  ajiswere  of  vertue.  297

Haue  done  and  answere  :  disceytfull  trayteres
Howe  darest  thou  wretchyd  men  this  wyse  abuse
Or  them  disceyue  by  thy  chraft  of  falsnes
Why  doth  mankynde  on  thy  vayne  pleasours  muse
Why  doth  the  worlde  goodnes  and  grace  refuse
Rennynge  to  thy  foly,  subduynge  them  in  care
As  fysshe  or  byrde  to  panter,  net  or  snare

Why  Jawdest  thou  thy  lust  and  pleasour  vayne
Thy  wandrynge  wayes  in  syn  and  bestlynes
Who  that  the  folowys,  shall  at  the  ende  certayne
Fynde  no  honour,  but  payne  and  great  distres
Thy  faythfull  felawe  is  bestyall  dronkenes
Thy  pursuyuaunt  is  dredfull  worldly  shame
Fleynge  about  to  spred  abrode  thy  name

Shame  them  subdueth  that  them  submyt  to  the
Thy  beautye  blyndyd  is  by  mysgouernaunce
I  say  nat  nay,  but  fayre  thou  art  to  see
And  alway  wrappyd  in  halters  of  pleasaunce
Thy  iyen  wanton,  with  wanton  countenaunce
Thy  here  glystrynge  or  shynynge  as  golde  bryght
That  many  thousande  destroyed  is  by  thy  syght

Thy  purpyll  garlandes  couchyd  with  precious  stone
Pure  and  resplendaunt  is  all  thy  apparayle
Aleyed  gayly  with  perles  many  a  one
Of  purpyll  colour  of  Tyre  is  thy  mantayle
With  precious  stones  beset  as  thycke  as  hayle
Thy  gyrdyls  gay,  and  rynges  pleasaunt  to  se
But  what  is  this :  but  worldly  vanyte


298


T^he  aiiswere  of  vertew


Thou  art  nat  armyd,  nor  to  no  warre  dost  go
But  standest  naked,  and  all  thy  body  bare
As  chefe  champyon  vnto  biynde  Cupido
Suche  feble  men  that  lacke  wyt  to  beware
Attysest  thou  falsly  into  thy  snare
The  bowe  of  Venus,  and  dartis  lye  by  the
Hedyd  with  shame,  myshap  and  pouertye

In  thy  one  hande  is  the  myscheuous  dart
Of  fleshly  lust :  and  pleasour  corporall
Wherwith  thou  sharply  strykest  to  the  hart
The  olde,  the  yonge :  the  pore  and  pryncipal!
Thy  other  hande  bereth  in  it  venym  mortall
Vnto  the  whiche  if  man  nat  well  attende
With  all  yll  shall  he  be  poysoned  at  the  ende

Of  thy  fayre  forehede  :  the  beauty  and  bryghtnes
And  all  the  fassyon,  and  shape  that  is  in  the
Defyled  and  blyndyd  is,  by  viciousnes
And  flesshely  lust  clene  voyde  of  chastyte
In  thy  vayne  wordes  is  nought  of  honestee
Thou  canst  no  skyll  of  honest  sport  ne  game
But  rybaude  wordes,  soundynge  all  to  shame

Thou  art  distroyer  of  all  mankynde
But  namely  to  suche :  as  sue  thy  trayne
The  wyt  thou  dullyst,  troublynge  thy  mynde
The  honest  name  doste  thou  distayne
Thou  bryngest  man  to  infernall  payne
Wastynge  his  goodes  by  wayes  prodygall
But  his  last  ende,  alas  is  worst  of  all


aQ-emt  this  obiectwn  of  voluptuosyte.  2


By  the,  in  the  worlde  true  loue  is  maculate
By  the,  dull  slouth  doth  pyteously  oppres
The  lusty  bodyes  of  many  a  great  estate
Thou  ar  destroyer  of  vertue  and  nobles
And  youth  descendyd  of  byrth  of  worthynes
Whan  they  theyr  myndes  to  thy  precept  inclyne
To  nought  they  vanysshe,  so  fallynge  in  ruyne

By  the,  we  greuous  sores  oft  sustayne

Infyrmytees,  sore  peryls  and  mortall

By  the,  the  soule  is  drowned  depe  in  payne

In  hell,  amonge  the  fendys  infernall

Thou  makest  man  slouthfuU  and  dull  withall

To  chast  hartis  art  thou  mortall  ennemy

The  wyttis  blyndynge,  or  wastynge  vtterly

Thou  wretchyd  lust  dost  stynt  abate  and  swage

The  strength  of  man,  and  his  audacyte

Thou  bryngest  lowe  the  lusty  hye  corage

Of  manly  youth  in  his  prosperite

Thou  art  the  mete  of  all  aduersyte

And  cursyd  fode  of  payne,  wo,  and  doloure

Both  to  the  pore,  and  men  of  great  honoure

Of  the  hath  mortall  sorys  oft  theyr  rote
And  sore  sekenes,  where  to  no  man  mortall
Can  fynde  no  socour,  no  remedy,  nor  bote
But  for  to  speke  of  the,  in  generall
Recount  all  yll :  and  thou  art  grounde  of  all
Thou  art  the  well,  of  eche  disordred  thynge
Of  whose  hede,  vyle  glotony  doth  sprynge


300


The  a?iswere  of  vertezv


Thou  makest  youth  suche  as  thou  dost  attyse

To  lese  the  vertue  of  manhode  and  boldnes

Theyr  hertis  dullynge  with  ferefull  cowardyse

Thou  makest  age  to  grow  in  viciousnes

Thou  makest  many  to  wander  in  derknes

Of  vicious  lyfe,  attysynge  by  thy  gyle

Nought  chaste  thou  techyst :  but  thynge  vnpure  and  vyle

Thou  hast  no  reason  :  ne  stedfastnes  of  mynde
Of  wysdome  the  purest  grayne  is  fro  the  gone
No  parfyte  wyt  shall  man  within  the  fynde
Of  reasons  sad,  thou  certaynly  hast  none
And  thoughe  at  the  first  thou  shewe  vnto  echone
Pleasour  :  and  hope  vnto  honour  to  ascende
Thou  them  disceyuest  falsly  at  the  ende

The  hande  of  many  great  laude  sholde  haue  obtayned
By  worthy  tryumphe,  auaunsynge  so  theyr  name
If  thou  haddest  nat  theyr  hye  purpose  distayned
Them  by  thy  gyle  withdrawynge  from  the  same
So  by  thy  mean  obscured  is  theyr  fame
And  by  thy  venym  thou  hast  intoxycate
The  noble  hertis  :  of  many  a  great  estate

Thou  hast  ouerthowe  the  wallys  of  noble  Troy

The  Parthyans,  and  dwellers  of  Asy

By  thy  deuowrynge  lust  haue  lost  their  ioy

And  many  a  Cyte  by  the,  on  grounde  doth  lye

The  Cytees  of  Grece  with  wallys  strong  and  hye

Ly  nowe  on  grounde  the  wallys  with  gras  ouergrowe

The  Attyke  royalmes  by  the  ar  nowe  full  lowe


agenst  this  obieciion  of  voluptuosyte.  3  o  \

By  the  was  Sodome  and  other  Cytees  drowned

And  that  in  nomber  mo  than  I  can  name

Hath  ben  destroyed,  and  made  euyn  with  the  grounde

Corynth  (by  the)  was  lost  with  swerde  and  flame

And  moche  parte  of  Egypt  was  the  same

Tarent  also,  Assyria  and  eke  Trace

Thou  hast  destroyed :  and  that,  in  wofull  case

What  nedyth  here  to  name  the  royalmes  all

Or  all  those  Cytees  and  places  excellent

Whiche  thou  hast  made  from  theyr  honour  to  fall

By  punysshement  of  our  lorde  omnypotent

Some  drowned,  and  some  with  fyre  of  heuen  brent

But  to  be  playne  we  dayly  se  doutles

That  all  thy  seruauntis  ende  in  wretchydnes

But  better  is  my  state,  my  fortune  and  degre
For  all  my  seruauntis  that  vnto  me  inclyne
Shall  haue  rewarde  of  ioy  and  blysse  with  me
Whiche  ioy,  in  heuen  abydeth  me  and  myne
Vnto  vs  grauntyd  by  the  grace  dyuyne
By  pacyent  labour  I  pore  men  here  auaunce
To  worldly  welth,  and  good  in  abundaunce

The  yatis  of  heuen  to  man  ar  opened  wyde
And  he  receyued  in  ioy  that  neuer  shall  cesse
So  that  I  be  his  helper  and  his  gyde
To  lede  hym  theder  by  way  of  rightwysnes
My  way  his  harde,  and  full  of  besynes
But  at  the  ende  I  haue  a  restynge  place
Wherin  is  lyfe  euerlastynge  and  solace


302  The  answere  of  veriew


Stronge  Hercules  that  myghty  champyon

And  Julius  Cesar  an  Eraperour  royall

And  Alexander  whose  felawe  found  was  none

Consyderynge  well  his  wyt  and  dedys  all

These  hath  renowne  that  neuer  can  stynt  nor  fall

For  that  they  euer  obeyed  vnto  me

And  many  mo  by  me  brought  to  degre

I  haue  auaunsyd  to  glorious  lawde  and  name

Poule  that  was  consull  of  the  Impyre  romayne

Whiche  dyuers  Nacions  wan  encresynge  his  fame

To  the  sayde  romaynes,  triumphe  and  laude  souerayne

And  thoughe  they  suffred  peryll  and  great  payne

Yet  hath  the  loue,  and  mede  of  me  vertue

Nat  suffred  them  harde  chargis  to  eschewe

By  me  the  honour  of  the  hye  eloquence
Of  Cicero  :  and :  his  parfyte  polecy
Ar  spred  abrode,  shynynge :  for  excellence
And  noble  Virgyll  the  Prynce  of  Poetry
The  romayne  lynage  by  vers  dyd  magnyfy
He  and  Homerus  :  with  Poetis  euerychone
Hath  won  theyr  glory  and  laude  by  me  alone

Arystotyll  ensuynge  my  iust  commaundement
Hath  made  his  name,  and  laudes  immortall
And  also  Plato  moste  noble  and  excellent
The  Phylosophers  all  other,  great  or  small
Hauynge  no  name,  in  goodes  temporall
Hath  left  the  worlde,  with  all  his  vanyte
And  at  the  ende  great  honour  had  by  me


agenst  this  obiection  of  voliiptuosyte.  303

I  clere  the  wyt,  the  speche  I  fortyfye

With  sadnes  reason,  and  pleasaunt  eloquence

T  man  conferme,  augment  and  edefye

With  honour,  laude,  and  knowlege  of  science

And  to  expres  my  myght  in  brefe  sentence

None  may  here  wyn,  but  by  my  socour

Lawde,  fame,  ne  helth,  ryches  nor  honour

In  the  is  pryde  :  and  all  thy  wanton  wyll

Is  set  on  ryot  and  wretchyd  lechery

All  vicious  wordes  doth  from  thy  mouth  dystyll

Thy  hole  delyte  in  lust  and  rybawdry

But  as  for  hym  that  wyll  to  me  aply

I  shall  by  vertue  brynge  hym  to  rightwysnes

And  than  to  glory  by  wysdome  and  ryches

I  shewe  my  seruauntis  true  iustyce  and  pyte
In  the  hye  Heuen  sure  fixyd  is  my  mynde
My  hous  is  kept  ay  clene  by  chastyte
My  god  is  hye :  and  who  that  wyll  hym  fynde
For  to  be  lyght :  his  lust  must  leue  behynde
And  so  by  labour,  and  parfyte  dilygence
He  may  attayne  that  place  of  excellence

In  vertue,  is  besy,  and  dylygent  labour

For  no  good  comys  of  slouthfuU  ydelnes

But  swet  and  payne,  at  ende  shall  fynde  pleasour

And  parfyte  rest :  is  ende  of  besynes

And  he  that  walkes  the  way  of  holynes

And  lyues  in  worshyp,  ought  to  be  glad  and  fayne

This  quyet  rest  by  my  helpe  to  obtayne


3^4


The  an s  were  of  vertew


So  whether  thou  lust  to  wyn  name  of  honour

By  wyt,  or  warre  :  by  wysdome  or  by  myght

Or  in  a  Cyte  for  to  be  councellour

Or  els  by  lawe  to  gyue  eche  man  his  right

Let  me  vertue  alway  be  in  thy  syght

Than  shalt  thou  by  my  mean,  the  way  prouyde

In  euery  case  howe,  thou  mayst  best  the  gyde

Who  that  for  loue  of  vertue  speciall

Endureth  labour,  swet,  payne  and  besynes

The  endles  pleasour  of  ioy  celestyall

Shall  be  rewarde  to  hym  for  his  hardnes

Vertue  alone  is  of  suche  worthynes

That  gyde  it  ought  and,  gouerne  euery  thynge

And  gode  gyftis,  parte,  as  is  to  it  lykynge

But  thou  fals  lust  and  pleasour  corporall
All  men  disceyuest  that  vnto  the  inclyne
Thou  first  art  swete,  at  last  more  soure  than  gall
Thou  many  thousandes  hast  brought  vnto  ruyne
And  namely  suche  as  of  most  noble  lyne
Discendyd  ar  :  for  gettynge  theyr  degre
Defyle  theyr  byrth  :  and  auncyent  name  by  the

Thou  art  so  fyers  :  so  hasty  and  cruell
That  no  wylde  beste :  no  :  nat  the  mighty  here
Can  haue  respyte  within  his  den  to  dwell
Thy  cruell  clawes  so  fyersly  doth  him  tere
That  on  his  skyn  remayned  skant  a  here
Thou  sholdest  his  skyn  I  tiowe  rent  of  also
Ne  had  the  Lyon  :  him  socoured  in  his  wo


agenst  this  obiection  of  voluptuosyte.


Therfore  ye  men  (whyle  ye  haue  tyme  and  space)

Expell  vayne  lust  and  pleasour  corporall

Whiche  dedely  yll  is  barayne  of  all  grace

And  rote  or  sparcle  to  kyndell  synnes  all

Therfore  to  Christ  for  grace  se  that  ye  call

Wherby  ye  may  all  carnall  lust  subdue

And  plant  in  your  myndes  goodnes  and  vertue

So  shall  your  hertis  sauour  the  true  doctryne

And  blessyd  fayth  of  Christ  our  sauyour

Whiche  fayth  shall  brynge  you  to  the  syght  dyuyne

Of  goddes  presence,  and  celestyall  pleasour

But  worldly  welth,  as  riches  and  honour

Shall  in  this  lyfe  be  part  of  your  rewarde

Where  as  vayne  lust  endyth  in  paynes  harde


VOL.  u.


The  vnyuersall  shyp  and  generall  Barke
or  barge

Wherin  they  rowe  :  that  yet  hath  had  no
charge.


Within  my  shyp  ar  folys  innumerable

My  shyppys  dyuers  forgyd  here  before

With  furious  Folys,  in  foly  perdurable

But  nat  the  les  yet  here  I  forge  more

And  if  perchaunce  some  one  hath  had  no  ore

Nor  place  before  :  condigne  for  his  degre

In  this  great  Carake  nowe  shall  he  rowe  with  me


'The  viiyiiersall  shyp.  307


Here  shall  Jacke,  charde,  my  brother  Robyn  hyll
With  Myllers  and  bakers  that  weyght  and  mesure  hate
All  stelynge  taylers  :  as  Soper :  and  Manshyll
Receyue  theyr  rowme :  bycause  they  come  to  late
The  foulest  place  is  mete  for  theyr  estate
A  rowme  for  rascoldes  hard  by  the  pompe  shall  be
That  stynkynge  placis  and  knaues  may  agre

Come  to  Companyons :  ren  :  tyme  it  is  to  rowe

Our  Carake  fletis :  the  se  is  large  and  wyde

And  depe  Inough  :  a  pleasaunt  wynde  doth  blowe

Prolonge  no  tyme,  our  Carake  doth  you  byde

Our  felawes  tary  for  you  on  euery  syde

Hast  hyther  I  say  ye  folys  naturall

Howe  oft  shall  I  you  vnto  my  Nauy  call

Ye  haue  one  confort  ye  shall  nat  be  alone
Your  company  almoste  is  infynyte
For  nowe  alyue  ar  men  but  fewe  or  none
That  of  my  shyp  can  red  hym  selfe  out  quyte
A  fole  in  felawes,  hath  pleasour  and  delyte
Here  can  none  want,  for  our  proclamacion
Extendyth  farre  :  and  to  many  a  straunge  nacyon

But  to  be  playne,  and  speke  as  intende
All  men  ar  folys  that  can  nat  them  selfe  gyde
Thus  all  the  worlde  may  I  well  comprehende
Except  a  fewe  :  whome  I  may  set  a  syde
All  hole  Asia ;  though  it  be  longe  and  wyde
And  farre  from  vs,  and  all  nat  of  our  lawe
Yet  ar  they  redy  our  sayles  vp  to  drawe


308  The  vnyiiersall  shyp


From  the  farre  Costis  and  hote  of  Lybia

The  Mawryans  and  eke  the  men  of  ynde

And  all  the  dwellers  almost  of  Africa

The  Lumbarde  nacion  vntrue  of  dede  and  mynde

All  these  within  our  shyp  wyll  placis  fynde

So  may  the  dwellers  of  Cecyle  and  almayne

Of  Italy  Fraunce,  Flaunders,  Grece,  and  Spayne

The  Pycardes,  Normans  and  Neapolytayns
Come  in  great  clusters,  our  Nauy  to  augment  ^
So  doth  Venycians,  Gascowns  and  Romayns
And  lytell  Brytayne  is  all  of  lyke  assent
And  also  the  great  by  ryches  excellent
Whiche  nowe  is  callyd  plentyfuU  in  Englonde
Comyth  to  our  shyp,  with  Wales,  and  Scotlande

The  out  yles  all  dyspersyd  here  and  there
In  the  mayne  se  :  also  come  in  one  bonde
So  many  comys  that  certaynly  I  fere
Within  my  shyp  they  all  can  nat  well  stonde
Hyther  comys  also  the  dwellers  of  Irelonde
Denys  and  Mawrys,  Patryke,  and  Mackmure
In  mantels  preckyd,  for  lacke  of  precious  furre

In  Englonde  is  no  Cyte,  nor  shyre  towne
Boroughe  ne  vyllage  howe  pore  so  euer  it  be
Nor  noble  Palays  of  suche  a  great  renowne
But  some  maryners  sende  must  they  vnto  come
But  to  be  shorte  and  fle  prolixyte
There  is  no  Nacyon,  ne  regyon  vnder  sonne
But  all  or  some,  to  this  my  shyp  doth  ronne


for  those  that  yet  hath  had  no  charge.  309


Both  yonge  and  olde,  pore  man,  and  estate
The  folysshe  moder :  hir  doughter  by  hir  syde
Ren  to  our  Nauy  ferynge  to  come  to  late
No  maner  of  degre  is  in  the  worlde  wyde
But  that  for  all  theyr  statelynes  and  pryde
As  many  as  from  the  way  of  wysdome  tryp
Shall  haue  a  rowme  and  place  within  my  shyp

My  folysshe  felawes  therfore  I  you  exort

Hast  to  our  Nauy,  for  tyme  it  is  to  rowe

Nowe  must  we  leue  eche  sympyll  hauen  and  porte

And  sayle  to  that  londe  where  folys  abounde  and  flowe

For  whether  we  aryue,  at  London  or  Brystowe

Or  any  other  Hauen  within  this  our  londe

We  folys  ynowe,  shall  fynde  alway  at  hande

No  speciall  place  wyll  I  chose  for  our  rode

But  at  auenture :  where  the  wynde  shall  vs  dryue

But  whyle  we  wretchys,  thus  sayle  and  rowe  abrode

On  this  depe  se,  our  foly  doth  depryue

Our  soule  from  helth  :  and  lond  of  men  alyue

So  that  in  the  wawes  of  this  tempestous  se

Oftyme  we  lyue,  in  doutfull  ieopardye

Our  frayle  bodyes  wandreth  in  care  and  payne

And  lyke  to  botes  trowbled  with  tempest  sore

From  rocke  to  rocke  cast  in  this  se  mundayne

Before  our  iyen  beholde  we  euer  more

The  deth  of  them  that  passed  ar  before

Alas  mysfortune  vs  causeth  oft  to  rue

Whan  to  vayne  thoughtis  our  bodyes  we  subdue


310  The  vnyuersall  shyp


By  dyuers  chauncis  ren  we  to  ieopardy
And  of  our  lyfe,  god  wot  we  ar  vnsure
Oft  of  our  chauncis  we  seke  no  remedy
But  wander  forth  :  our  reason  inoche  obscure
Tempest  we  suffer  :  sore  fallys  we  indure
And  to  our  iournay,  so  symple  hede  we  take
That  in  the  se,  and  Rockis  our  shyppis  brake

A  farre  of  Scylhi :  the  rorynge  we  may  here
Yet  by  our  foly,  our  myndes  ar  so  cruell
That  to  the  peryls  (alas)  we  drawe  vs  nere
And  some  so  wander  without  gyde  or  counsell
That  in  the  hourlynge  pyttis  of  ferefull  hell
Theyr  shyppis  brake,  and  there  alway  remayne
Within  that  gulf,  in  endles  wo  and  payne

We  wander  in  more  dout  than  mortall  man  can  thynke

And  oft  by  our  foly,  and  wylfull  neglygence

Our  shyp  is  in  great  peryll  for  to  synke

So  sore  ar  we  ouercharged  with  offence

We  se  the  daunger  before  our  owne  presence

Of  straytis  rockis,  and  bankis  of  sonde  full  hye

Yet  we  procede  to  wylfull  ieopardye

We  dyuers  Monsters  within  the  se  beholde
Redy  to  abuse  or  to  deuour  mankynde
As  Dolphyns,  whallys,  and  wonders  manyfolde
And  oft  the  Marmaydes  songe  dullyth  our  mynde
That  to  all  goodnes  we  ar  made  dull  and  blynde
The  wolues  of  these  oft  do  vs  moche  care
Yet  we  of  them  can  neuer  well  beware


for  those  that  yet  hath  had  no  charge.  3  i  i


We  se  Polyphemus  that  foule  and  great  Geant
In  his  dredefull  den,  mankynde  also  to  dere
Whome  great  vlixes  both  bolde  and  valyant
Myght  for  his  lokes  drede  :  and  quake  for  fere
A  thousande  Monstres  ar  mo,  mankynde  to  tere
And  to  deuour,  and  brynge  vnto  hell  pyt
Yet  we  (alas)  our  selfe  to  them  submyt

About  we  wander  in  tempest  and  tourment
What  place  is  sure,  where  Foles  may  remayne
And  fyx  theyr  dwellynge  sure  and  parmanent
None  certaynly  :  The  cause  therof  is  playne
We  wander  in  the  se,  for  pleasour  bydynge  payne
And  though  the  hauen  of  helth  be  in  our  syght
Alas  we  fle  from  it  with  all  our  myght

Alas,  therfore  dayly  we  must  indure
Great  payne  and  wo  :  and  well  we  it  deserue
For  he  that  of  rest  (whan  he  lysl)  may  be  sure
And  wyll  none  haue  :  he  worthy  is  to  sterue
We  loue  no  wysdome :  ne  tende  nat  to  obserue
Hir  lore,  and  lawes :  ne  way  of  ryghtwysnes
But  arme  our  selfe  with  foly  and  falsnes

Alas,  alas  the  vyle  and  vayne  goddes

Of  folysshnes :  and  worldly  vanyte

Hath  made  vs  drynke :  so  of  hir  cup  doutles

That  all  our  wyttes  and  reasons  blyndyd  be

A  wysdome  wysedome  great  pyte  it  is  to  se

Howe  fewe  to  thy  preceptis  nowe  inclyne

Thy  name  decayes :  and  fallys  to  ruyne


312


The  vnyuersall  shyp.


Alas  dere  bretherne,  alas  thou  wretchyd  man

O  frowarde  stocke  to  thy  creatour  vnkynde

Expell  thy  foly :  aply  all  that  thou  can

To  folowe  wysdome  with  all  thy  myght  and  mynde

What  ioy  hast  thou  to  wander  in  the  wynde

In  vyce  and  errour,  without  good  wyll  to  stent

Cesse  man  :  and  seke  the :  place  ay  permanent

Set  foly :  errour  (and  vanyte  asyde)
Fie  from  the  wayes :  of  suche  as  sue  offence
Labour  to  obtayne  a  place :  ay  to  abyde
Without  ende  before  goddes  hye  presence
Lyst  that  hell  monsters  by  furyous  violence
Swalowe  vp  thy  soule  to  payne  from  ioy  and  blys
Whyle  in  this  lyfe  thou  errest  or  goest  amys


The  vnyuersall  shyp  of  crafty  men,
or  laborers.


3  1 4  The  vnyiiersall  shyp  of


A  company  gathryd  togyther  in  a  rout
Of  folysshe  men,  and  blynde  by  ignoraunce
Rowe  nowe  in  botis  my  shyppis  all  about
Suche  men  ar  they  that  get  theyr  sustenaunce
With  labour  of  hande,  and  lewde  of  gouernaunce
But  suche  as  labour  truly  for  theyr  fode
I  wyll  nat  blame,  but  them  repute  as  gode

Haste  hyther  laborers :  our  sayles  ar  a  loft

Our  shyp  fleys  swyftly  by  myght  of  ore

But  first  of  all  ye  folys  that  labour  soft

And  lese  the  tyme,  makynge  your  maysters  pore

In  this  shyp  present  shall  ye  be  set  afore

And  than  suche  as  spende  theyr  wage  in  dronkenes

For  dronken  workmen  come  neuer  to  ryches

But  why  these  Folys  vnto  my  shyp  I  call

For  to  be  short  this  is  the  reason  why

For  as  the  state  of  all  men  mortall

And  eche  other  thynge  chaungyth  contynually

Without  condicion,  stable  :  certaynly

So  is  the  state  of  labourers,  disceyuable

And  moche  vnsure,  and  also  chaungeable

The  speciall  vyce  comon  amonge  them  all
Is  that  eche  seruaunt  fayne  wolde  a  mayster  be
Yet  in  his  craft  he  knoweth  nought  atall
But  is  a  Fole  therin  :  and  so  shall  dye
And  many  worke  men  :  as  we  may  dayly  se
Wandreth  as  folys :  in  slouth  and  ydelnes
Hurtynge  theyr  wages  by  theyr  folysshnes


crafty  men  or  laborers.


One  laboureth  fast  for  lytell  or  for  nought

His  felawe  to  put  to  los  or  hurte  therby

Yet  he  hym  selfe  to  pouertye  is  brought

By  his  yll  wyll,  his  hatred  and  enuy

And  for  that  this  vyce  his  herte  contynually

Vexyth  and  troubleth,  for  nought  he  ofFreth  forth

That  worke  or  thynge  that  is  great  treasour  worth

Yet  this  foule  abuse  and  malyce  enuyous
Of  laborynge  men  :  oft  tyme  doth  them  oppres
With  pouertye,  to  all  mankynde  odyous
If  one  sell  for  lytell  another  sellys  for  les
Tyll  both  be  opprest  with  pouertees  hardnes
Echone  despyseth  his  pryuate  auauntage
To  do  another  displeasour  and  damage

Some  make  theyr  ware  iniust  and  disceyuable
Sellynge  it  forth  for  small  and  lytell  pryce
The  trouth  appereth  playne  and  verytable
For  in  gode  ware  the  pryse  doth  ay  aryse
But  contrary  if  thou  the  trouth  aduyse
Where  a  great  thynge  for  lytell  pryce  is  bought
It  sygnyfyeth  that  it  is  stolen,  or  nought

All  suche  as  ceueyt  the  byers  to  begyle

With  flaterynge  wordes  fals  and  dysceyuable

Disceyuynge  other,  disceyue  them  selfe  the  whyle

And  all  other  ar  greatly  reprouable

Whiche  make  theyr  warke  nat  true  and  profitable

But  counterfayte  and  pleasaunt  to  the  iye

And  nought  in  profe :  men  to  abuse  therby


3  I  6 The  vny  tiers  all  shyp  of  crafty  men.


The  pryse  of  eche  ware  decayeth  euery  day

And  yet  the  ware  is  skantly  worth  the  pryse

Amonge  all  marchauntis,  skant  and  vneth  we  may

Fynde  one  or  two  that  trouth  do  ercyse

But  all  ar  blyndyd  so  by  couetyse

That  nought  they  force  of  fals  disceytfulnes

So  that  they,  may  therby  obtayne  riches

Thus  so  great  chaungis :  and  mutablyte  '

Styreth  the  hertis  of  labourynge  men  to  yre  •

That  the  most  part  abyde  in  pouertye

And  to  be  short,  echone  of  them  conspyre

Agaynst  other  by.  malyce,  hote  as  fyre

In  all  theyr  hertis  none,  other  thynge  doth  rayne

Saue  enuy  malyce,  hatered  and  disdayne  :

"What  nede  is  it  in  wordes  to  be  large '  ■ " '  -  •

Or  all  the  vyce  of  chrafty  men  to  wryte

The  payne  were  longe,  and  great  sholde  be  the  charge

And  to  the  same  I  haue  to  small  respyte

For  if  that  any  haue  pleasour  and  delyte

In  this  our  tyme  to  be  constant  and  wyse

The  comontye  shall  hym  hate  and  despyse  .■  '

Therfore  I  leue  them  in  theyr  folysshnes  :

Yet  praynge  god  that  they  may  ones  amende  .  .

And  so  increas  in  trouth  and  rightwysnes

That  I  may  haue  cause  theyr  goodnes  to  commende

Who  iustly  lyueth  iustly  also  shall  ende

And  who  that  in  his  craft  is  iust  and  true

Shall  proue  in  ryches,  and  prospere  in  vertue


Of  Folys  that  ar  ouer  worldly.


Oft  whyle  man  labours  for  to  ascende

By  fortune  frayle  alway  forwarde

And  whyle  alway  he  doth  intende

For  his  sore  labour  to  haue  rewarde

Than  is  his  fortune  so  sharpe  and  harde

To  leue  his  fote,  at  his  moste  nede

And  let  hym  slyp  in  mortall  fere  and  drede


3  I  8 Of  Folys  that  ar  oner  worldly.


Who  that  lenyth  on  braunchys  frayle

Or  taketh  his  holde  by  leuys  lyght

Can  fynde  therby  but  small  auayle

But  to  the  grounde  descende  downe  right

And  though  the  braunches  be  stronge  and  wyght

Whan  thou  begynnest  to  slyp  or  slyde

In  thy  degre  harde  is  to  abyde

And  thoughe  the  braunches  be  hole  and  sounde

And  be  to  wayke  the  to  sustayne

Yet  shalt  thou  downe  come  to  the  grounde

So  if  a  man  take  care  and  payne

To  lyue  in  vertue,  and  good  souerayne

Yet  all  this  shall  be  nought  set  by

But  if  they  be  gyded  craftely

The  strongest  braunche  or  boughe  shall  fayle
Without  good  wysdorae  if  man  ascende
But  vnto  the  top  if  thou  preuayle
Yet  ought  thou  to  thy  fete  intende
Eche  thynge  is  prouyd  at  the  ende
Therfore  man  ought  hym  euen  to  here
In  hyest  rowmes  is  greattest  fere

In  clymmynge  vp  man  hath  great  payne
But  whan  he  at  the  hyest  is
Hauynge  great  hope  there  to  remayne
In  welth  and  pleasour  ioy  and  blys
Yet  of  the  frute  small  part  is  his
For  by  one  blast  of  wynde  sodayne
In  one  instant  he  fallys  agayne


Of  Folys  that  ar  ouer  worldly.  319


If  one  be  in  a  rowme  a  hye

Men  that  ar  lowe  seme  to  hym  small

But  to  say  trouth  and  veryte

Yet  may  theyr  stature  be  egall

In  lyke  wyse  though  a  man  royall

Despyse  them  lyuynge  in  pouerte

Of  one  metall  yet  both  they  be

This  worlde  all  hole  goeth  vp  and  downe
It  ebbes  and  flowes  lyke  to  the  se
Wexynge  and  waynynge  lyke  the  mone
Nowe  in  welthe  and  in  prosperyte
Eft  in  aduers  and  frowarde  pouerte
But  that  man  folowes  hye  wysdome
Whiche  takys  all  thynges  lyke  as  they  come

Thoughe  some  in  treasour  and  welth  abounde
Thynkynge  them  self  wyse  men  alone
Yet  whan  that  they  ar  brought  to  grounde
They  and  the  pore :  is  all  but  one
And  thoughe  thou  suerly  marke  the  bone
Of  begger,  and  hym,  that  kynge  hath  bene
Small  difference  shalt  thou  fynde  bytwene

After  the  day  cometh  the  nyght
So  after  pleasour  oft  comys  payne
He  is  in  prudence,  but  porely  pyght
That  can  nat  both  in  lyke  sustayne
But  if  1  shall  be  true  and  playne
No  erthly  thynge  makes  more  debate
Than  a  vyle  chorle  come  to  a  state


320 Of  Folys  that  ar  oner  worldly.


Whan  suche  a  vilayne  rude  of  his  mynde

A  hye  is  set  on  a  myghty  tre

To  gentyll  blode  can  he  nat  be  kynde

Yet  he  forgettis  his  owne  degre

But  thoughe  the  thycke  leuys  let  none  se

Howe  moche  myschefe  suche  go  about

Yet  at  the  last  it  wyll  come  out

If  dethys  ax  the  tre  downe  throwe  -
And  if  theyr  riches  as  leuys  lyght
Away  fro  them  on  grounde  do  flowe
Than  all  theyr  falshode  is  out  in  syght
But  whyle  the  tre  may  stande  vp  right
The  leuys  of  ryches  hangynge  about
To  lorellys  often  the  lorde  moste  lowt  ^

The  noble  fawcons  ar  oft  opprest
The  Egle  blyndyd,  and  byrdes  small
Ar  spoyled  and  dryuen  from  theyr  nest
Whan  the  gredy  kyte  wyll  rule  all  '
But  if  the  kyte  than  after  fall
By  aduers  fortune  :  or  his  iniquyte
The  fawcons  may  well  haue  ioy  to  se

Thus  well  is  hym  that  can  attende
To  take  his  holde  by  braunchys  stronge
Whan  he  purposeth  vp  to  ascende
And  in  the  top  to  byde  there  longe
Without  wysdome  it  shall  be  wronge
For  who  that  clymmes  by  stately  pryde
For  greuous  wyndes  can  nat  abyde


Of  Folys  that  ar  oner  worldly, 3  2  i


Therfore  man  who  so  euer  thou  be
That  hast  mynde  and  concupyscence
To  brynge  the  into  hye  degre
Or  in  the  seruyce  of  kynge  or  prynce
If  thou  be  brought  to  excellence
Kepe  petye  styll  before  thy  iyen
Vse  iustyce,  mekenes,  and  prudence
Remembrynge  euer  what  thou  hast  ben

To  get  loue  do  thy  dylygence

And  if  thou  wylt  haue  amyte

To  auncient  blode,  do  reuerence

Thoughe  it  be  but  of  lowe  degre

Prouyde  the  in  prosperite

For  mysfortune  :  for  it  is  seae

That  fortune  hath  no  certaynte

So  thynke  thou  euer  what  thou  hast  bene

Serue  god  thy  maker  aboue  all  thynge
And  next  that  with  thy  herte  and  mynde
Be  true  and  loyall  vnto  thy  kynge
And  to  his  subiectis  iust  and  kynde
Let  auaryce  by  no  way  the  blynde
Than  myght  thou  fall  or  thou  wolde  wene
So  that  no  faut  in  the  men  fynde
Care  nat  to  be  as  thou  hast  bene


VOL.  11.


X


A  brefe  addicion  of  the  syngularyte  of
some  newe  Folys.


Here  maketh  myne  Autour  a  specyall  mencion

Of  ypocrytis  nat  parfyte  of  byleue

And  suche  as  abuseth  theyr  relygyon

But  I  shall  nat  so  sharply  them  repreue

I  am  full  lothe  relygious  men  to  greue

Or  discontent :  for  if  I  so  do  wolde

A  myghty  volume  coude  nat  theyr  vyces  holde


Of  the  syngidaryte  of  some  newe  Folys.  32^

I  leue  theyr  pryde :  I  leue  theyr  couetyse
I  woU  nat  touche  theyr  malyce  nor  enuy
Nor  them  that  Venus  toyes  exercyse
I  woll  nat  blame,  nor  touche  openly
It  were  but  foly,  syth  is  no  remedy
But  if  I  sholde  vpon  me  take  the  payne
A  newe  labour  I  sholde  begynne  agayne

I  them  nat  touche  that  cunnynge  men  disdayne

There  were  none  ende  in  blamynge  all  the  folys

The  maners,  rude,  vngoodly,  and  vylayne

And  assys  erys  clokyd  vnder  cowlys

Knowynge  no  thynge,  contemnynge  yet  the  scolys

All  these  to  touche  and  sondry  vyces  mo

It  were  to  sore  a  charge  and  payne  to  do

I  wyll  nat  say  that  they  vse  any  syn
Yet  oft,  forsoth  they  folowe  nat  the  way
Of  the  relygyon  that  they  haue  entred  in
Thoughe  they  the  name  and,  habyte  nat  denay
Yet  of  theyr  lyfe  full  harde  it  is  to  say
But  often  at  ende  it  proueth  euydent
That  vnder  floures  lurketh  the  serpent

The  wolfe  or  Foxe  is  hyd  within  the  skyn
Of  the  symple  shepe  pore  and  innocent
Mekenes  without  :  but  pryde  is  hyd  within
The  wordes  fayre  :  but  fals  is  theyr  intent
No  sort  by  falshode,  or  wayes  fraudelent
May  soner  disceyue  good  folke  by  any  way
Than  the  wyckyd  sort  of  ypocrytis  may


3^4


A  hrefe  addicion


Hange  vp  the  scapler :  the  amys  cowle  and  frocke
Or  other  habyte  of  eche  relygyon
Vpon  a  tre  clene  dede,  or  rottyn  stocke
Suche  ar  those  folys  that  haue  professyon
Leuynge  theyr  right  rule  in  eche  condicion
They  here  the  habyte  the  vesture  or  the  wede
And  eke  the  name,  without  the  thynge  in  dede

And  if  that  one  lyue  well  and  vertuously
In  way  of  grace  :  lyke  as  he  ought  to  go
The  remanent  assayle  hym  with  enuy
And  hym  oppres  with  greuous  payne  and  wo
Vntyll  he  folowe  lyke  as  the  other  do
And  leue  his  way  of  godly  ryghtwysnes
Folowynge  theyr  lyfe  full  of  all  viciousnes

The  gode  ar  good  and  worthy  reuerence

And  whan  the  Shepherde  is  ware  and  dylygent

Rulynge  hym  selfe  by  vertue  and  prudence

Than  grace  and  goodnes  soner  shall  augment

Amonge  the  flocke  by  example  euydent

But  if  the  Shepeherde  by  foly  hurte  his  name

Moste  comonly  the  flocke  shall  do  the  same

Whan  that  the  hede  hath  no  diseas  nor  payne
Than  all  the  membres  greatly  the  sounder  be
But  if  the  hede  be  seke  or  sore  certayne
Than  ouer  the  body  goeth  that  infyrmyte
But  to  be  playne  we  dayly  here  and  se
That  the  comontye,  in  theyr  behauour
Ar  suche  as  is  theyr  lorde  and  gouernour


of  the  syngidaryte  of  some  newe  Folys.  325

Alas  what  lewde  relygion  do  they  take

Or  of  what  sort  is  theyr  professyon

That  of  theyr  wombes  vyle  theyr  goddes  make

As  wytles  bestis,  voyde  of  discressyoii

Thus  it  appereth  that  theyr  ingressyon  -

Into  relygion  is  more  for  welth  and  eas

Than  by  harde  penaunce,  our  sauyour  to  pleas

Thoughe  men  relygious  be  countyd  in  the  lawe
As  dede  and  gone  out  of  this  lyfe  actyue
That  saynge  surely  is  scantly  worth  a  strawe
For  suche  dedys  oft  tyraes  they  contryue
That  it  appereth  playne  that  they  ar  alyue
But  as  for  that  :  a  part  it  shall  be  layde
At  eche  season  :  trouth  ought  nat  to  be  sayde

A  heuenly  lyfe  is  to  be  monke  or  frere
Yet  is  it  nat  ynoughe  to  bere  the  name
Suche  must  they  be  in  lyfe  as  they  apere
In  outwarde  habyte :  accordynge  to  the  same
Than  sholde  none  haue  occasion  them  to  blame
For  certaynly  no  vertuous  man  there  is
That  wyll  hym  blame  that  hath  nat  done  amys

For  he  that  is  of  god  without  all  dout
Wyll  be  full  redy  and  besy  nyght  and  day
The  workes  of  god  almyght  to  go  about
The  deuyllys  seruaunt  kepyth  another  way
In  lust  and  pleasour  walkynge  whyle  he  may
Seruynge  his  mayster :  and  yet  in  euery  place
He  fayneth  vertue  outwarde  in  his  face


326


A  brefe  addicion


Of  suche  a  vyle  and  wretchyd  ypocryte
And  of  his  maners  playnly  as  they  be
At  this  conclusion  brefly  shall  I  wryte
As  it  is  founde  in  good  auctoryte
Leuynge  ray  auctour  for  his  prolyxite
And  to  playne  speche,  and  eke  to  lyberall
For  to  be  drawen  in  langage  maternall

By  these  poyntis  the  whiche  I  shall  expres
Those  ypocrytis  shall  openly  apere
Whiche  outwarde  fayne  vertue  and  holynes
In  worde  and  dede  :  where  men  may  se  or  here
But  whan  that  they  haue  brought  them  selfe  arere
And  out  of  syght,  and  others  audyence
They  ar  moche  wors  than,  other  in  offence

They  outwarde  in  face  present  humylyte

As  if  they  were  holy  and  parfyte  of  lyuynge

Yet  wolde  they  nat  of  men  despysyd  be

They  fayne  them  pore :  yet  wyll  they  lacke  no  thynge

Touchynge  theyr  habyte,  vesture  or  clothynge

They  wyll  the  same  in  costely  maner  dresse

Without  all  care  thought,  trouble  or  besynesse

They  loke  to  be  fed,  well  and  delycyously

Without  labour,  therin  is  no  delyte  '  -

Some  men  they  flater,  but  other  they  enuy

And  other  some,  they  cruelly  bacbyte

Some  men  to  malyce,  by  falshode  they  excyte

As  dogges  they  byte  some  in  playne  audyence

For  synne :  thoughe  they  commyt  the  same  offence


of  the  syngiilaryte  of  some  7iewe  Folys.  327


As  Foxis  full  of  falshode  and  of  gyle

By  sotelte  they  all  theyr  workes  gyde

They  boldly,  other  for  statelynes  reuyle

Yet  as  proude  Lyons,  ar  they  accloyd  with  pryde

And  whyle  that  they  in  company  abyde

They  shewe  them  outwarde  as  Lambes  innocent

Lyke  rauysshynge  wolues  yet  ar  they  of  intent

They  wyll  be  luges  without  auctoryte
And  wytnesses  without  knowlege,  or  syght
They  wyll  be  Doctours  of  passynge  grauyte
Without  processe  in  stody  day,  or  nyght
And  to  be  short,  by  lugement  vnright
They  oft  accuse  good  men,  them  to  oppres
Theyr  selfe  yet  bare  of  vertue  and  goodnes

These  ar  the  tokyns  and  sygnes  euydent
Whiche  in  ypocrytis  men  may  note  and  se
Also  the  religyous  sholde  be  obedyent
And  euer  perseuer  in  fayre  humylyte
Beynge  content  with  wylfull  pouerte
Enclynynge  euer  with  all  his  dilygence
His  chasiyte,  to  kepe  by  abstynence

But  nowe  hath  entred  into  relygyon
In  stede  of  mekenes  and  obedyence
Pryde  and  disdayne,  and  fals  rebellyon
Yll  wyll,  enuy,  and  other  lyke  offence
Wylfull  pouertye,  expellyd  haue  they  thence
And  all  ar  gyuen  vnto  worldly  ryches
Whiche  they  out  wast  about  vnthryftynes


328


A  brefe  addicion


But  of  theyr  chastyte  for  to  be  playne

It  for  to  kepe  is  great  diffyculte

Where  glotony  and  dronkenes  doth  rayne

But  where  as  is  abstynence,  and  scarsyte

It  may  be  kept,  and  best  contynued  be

The  flesshe  agaynst  the  reason  doth  rebell

But  well  is  hym  that  the  ardent  hete  may  quell

But  these  wretchys  haue  moche  gretter  hede
Theyr  wombe  to  fede  tyll  they  be  full  as  swyne
As  for  theyr  soule  they  labour  nat  to  fede
With  godly  wordes  or  holsome  discyplyne
The  greattest  part  to  glotony  inclyne
Whiche  is  the  rote  of  Venus  insolence
Nowe  luge  ye  where  is  theyr  contynence

By  flatery  fayre  I  loke  to  haue  no  mede
Theyr  lyfe  is  godly  that  kepe  theyr  order  true
And  of  theyr  right  professyon  taketh  hede
Passynge  theyr  lyfe  in  goodnes  and  vertue
And  that  the  fendes  workes  wyll  subdue
And  eke  the  Fende,  fader  of  all  iniquyte
By  sobernes  subduynge  theyr  sensualyte

Here  purpose  I  no  farther  to  procede

Let  euery  man  chose  for  hym  selfe  a  place

As  he  shall  in  this  boke  ouerse  or  rede

For  hym  moste  mete  :  man  knoweth  best  his  case

And  here  shall  I  by  goddes  helpe  and  grace

Drawe  all  my  Nauy,  to  hauyns  for  to  rest

For  fere  of  wynter  stormes  and  tempest


of  the  syngularyte  of  some  newe  Folys.  ^2ij

Wysdome  hath  gyuen  me  this  commaundement
My  wyt  is  wery  :  my  hande  and  hede  also
Wherfbre  I  gladly  with  all  my  herte  assent
And  lepe  a  horde,  amonge  the  other  mo
But  in  my  iournay  :  if  that  I  haue  mysgo
By  bytynge  wordes  or  scarsnes  of  scyence
1  yelde  me  vnto  men  of  more  prudence

It  is  no  meruayle  (the  trouth  playnly  to  say)
Syth  I  a  mayster  without  experyence
Of  worldly  thynges,  haue  erred  from  the  way
By  ignoraunce,  or  slouthfull  neglygence
Let  none  be  wroth  for  blamynge  his  offence
For  if  his  lyfe  fro  synne  be  pure  and  clere
No  maner  hurt  is  sayde  agaynst  hym  here

Within  a  myrrour,  if  thou  beholde  thy  chere
Or  shap  of  face  :  if  thy  colour  be  pure
Within  the  myrrour  to  the  it  shall  apere
But  if  that  thou  be  foule  of  thy  fygure
The  glas  shall  shewe  the  same  I  the  insure
Yet  blame  thou  nat  the  myrrour  for  the  same
But  thy  owne  shap  thou  ought  rebuke  and  blame

The  myrrour  showys  eche  man  lyke  as  they  be

So  doth  my  boke,  for  who  that  is  in  syn

Shall  of  his  lyfe,  the  fygure  in  it  se

If  he  with  good  aduertence  loke  therin

But  certaynly  his  reason  is  but  thyn

For  his  yll  lyfe  if  he  my  boke  despyse

For  them  I  laude  that  vertue  exercyse


33°


A  brefe  add'ic  'ion


Let  nat  the  redar  be  discontent  with  this

Nor  any  blame  agayne  me  to  obiect

Thoughe  that  some  wordes  be  in  my  boke  amys

For  though  that  I  my  selfe  dyd  it  correct

Yet  with  some  fautis  I  knowe  it  is  infect

Part  by  my  owne  ouersyght  and  neglygence

And  part  by  the  prynters  nat  perfyte  in  science  ~  •

And  other  some  escaped  ar  and  past  '  .;

For  that  the  Prynters  in  theyr  besynes  -  '.; .  :

Do  all  theyr  workes  hedelynge,  and  in  hast  ?  .

Wherfore  if  that  the  redar  be  wytles

He  shall  it  scorne  anone  by  frowardnes

But  if  the  reder  wyse,  sad  and  discrete  be

He  shall  it  mende  :  laynge  no  faut  to  me  ;

It  is  ynoughe  if  my  labour  may  be  sene

Of  lernyd  men,  and  theyr  mynde  to  content

For  nought  is  pleasaunt  before  a  Folys  iyen

And  to  be  playne  it  was  nat  myne  intent  . . .  '

At  my  begynnynge  to  Folys  to  assent

Ne  pleas  theyr  myndes  by  sparynge  of  theyr  vyce

But  it  to  shewe :  and  that  in  playnest  wyse

Therfore  let  Folys  haue  theyr  wordes  vayne
Whiche  nought  can  do,  but  without  reason  chat
All  others  dedes,  by  lewde  tunge  to  distayne

And  if  theyr  belyes  be  full,  and  chekis  fat .

Let  Clerkes  speke,  and  they  haue  scorne  therat

They  knowe  no  thinge :  yet  wolde,  they  fayne  haue  prayse

And  theyr  owne  dedes  onely  doth  them  please


of  the  syngularyte  of  some  newe  Folys.  3  [


With  suche  Folys  I  ende  my  besynes
Whiche  all  thynge  blame,  and  vtterly  dispyse
Yet  all  theyr  lyfe  they  passe  in  ydylnes
Or  in  theyr  bely  fedynge  in  bestely  wyse
But  this  I  fynde,  that  no  man  can  deuyse
A  thynge  so  crafty,  so  good  and  excellent
Or  yet  so  sure  :  that  may  eche  man  content

What  warke  is  that :  that  may  eche  man  content

No  worldly  thynge :  forsoth  I  trowe  the  same

Thoughe  Virgyll  were  a  poet  excellent

Afore  all  other,  shynynge  in  lawde  and  fame

Yet  some  there  were  whiche  dyd  his  warkes  blame

Jerome  with  other  Doctours  certaynly

Cowde  nat  theyr  warkes  defende  well  from  enuy

Holde  me  excusyd  :  for  why  my  wyll  is  gode
Men  to  induce  vnto  vertue  and  goodnes
I  wryte  no  lest  ne  tale  of  Robyn  hode
Nor  sawe  no  sparcles  ne  sede  of  vyciousnes
Wyse  men  loue  vertue,  wylde  people  wantones
It  longeth  nat  to  my  scyence  nor  cunnynge
For  Phylyp  the  Sparowe  the  (Dirige)  to  synge.


[This  curious  astrological  diagram  to  the  year  1503,  is
prefixed  to  ten  supplementary  leaves  of  verses  (not  trans-
lated by  Barclay)  in  the  Latin  edition  of  the  Ship,  dated
August,  1497.  bears  this  title: — "  De  Corrupto  ordine
uiuendi  pereutibus. Inuentio  noua. Sebastiani  Brant."


The  verses  that  follow  are  chiefly  descriptive  of  the  great
empires  of  antiquity,  and  among  them  occur  twenty  lines
entitled  "Figura  celi,  m.ccccc.iii.,"  in  which  the  conjunc-
tion of  planets,  as  pictured  in  the  cut,  is  predicted  to  be  of
evil  omen  to  the  German  nation.]


A  conclusyon  of  this  Boke  with  a  Balade
of  the  translatour  in  the  honoure  of
the  blessyd  Virgyn  Mary,  moder  of  god.


Concliisyon.


O  Moder  mary  flour  of  all  womankynde

In  beauty  passynge  eche  erthly  creature

In  whome  the  Fende  no  thought  of  synne  coude  fynde

O  blessyd  moder  remaynynge  Mayden  pure

O  lemynge  lampe  in  lyght  passynge  nature

Moste  clere  Crystall  by  clene  virgynyte

O  holy  moder,  and  virgyne  most  demure

Direct  our  lyfe  in  this  tempestous  se

O  well  of  mercy  :  o  godly  graffe  of  grace

Bryght  as  the  mone,  and  porte  of  Paradyse

In  whome  Chryst  Jesu  elect  his  dwellynge  place

Chosen  as  the  son,  O  rose  passynge  all  pryce

Plantyd  in  Ann  without  consent  of  vyce

O  noble  fruyte  spronge  of  a  barayne  tre  ■

Syns  to  thy  son  :  thou  art  our  medyatryce

Direct  our  lyfe  in  this  tempestous  se

O  ceder  tre  growynge  in  Lybany
O  rod  of  Jesse,  and  spouse  of  Salomon
O  well  of  water  lastynge  eternally
O  gardayne,  closyd,  o  flees  of  gedeon
O  cyte  of  god,  and  sempiternall  trone
Of  god  elect  for  thy  humylyte
To  the  I  call :  o  Lady  here  my  mone
Direct  our  lyfe,  in  this  tempestous  se

O  Mary,  myrrour  clere  and  immaculate
O  tour  of  Dauyd :  with  Pynacles  without  pere
O  pleasaunt  olyue,  with  vertue  decorate
Pyller  of  fayth,  whyle  thou  wast  lyuynge  here


Conclusyon.


335


O  heuenly  starre,  of  gardyns  fountayne  clere
O  plesaunt  Lyiy  moste  goodly  in  beautye
Compalyd  rounde  with  the  sharpe  thorne  and  brere
Direct  our  lyfe  in  this  tempestous  se

Hayle  moder  of  mercy  :  Hayle  myrrour  of  mekenes
Hayle  Quene  of  blysse  :  hayle  sterre  celestyall
Hayle  hope  of  synners,  eternall  Emperes
Whiche  by  the  fruyt  of  thy  closet  virgynali
Mankynde  hast  wasshyd  from  synne  orygynall
Lowse  of  our  bondes,  and  make  vs  synners  fre
From  paynfull  pyt  and  dongeon  infernall
Gydynge  our  lyfe  in  this  tempestous  se

O  Queue  vs  red  out,  of  captyuyte

On  the  we  call,  in  the  our  confort  is

That  by  thy  prayer  to  the  hye  Trinyte

All  shall  be  pardonyd  that  we  haue  done  amys

Syns  thou  art  in  eternall  ioy  and  blys

Our  mediatryce  :  before  the  deyte

Our  hope  is  sure :  that  thou  wylt  neuer  mys

Our  lyfe  to  gyde  in  this  tempestous  se

O  glorious  Lady :  o  Quene  most  excellent
Howe  may  I  synner  thy  lawdes  comprehende
My  synfull  mouth  is  nat  sufFycyent
Worthy  nor  able  thy  goodnes  to  commende
My  wyt  ne  reason  coude  nat  therto  extende
Thoughe  euery  member  of  myne  were  tunges  thre
Yet  is  my  trust  that  thou  wylt  euer  intende
To  gyde  vs  synners  in  this  tempestous  se


33^


Conclusyon.


Syns  symiers  stray  here  in  this  se  mundayne
In  dyuers  synnes,  by  errour  and  fraylnes
By  thy  bryghtnes  reduce  our  way  agayne
Shewe  vs  thy  lyght  to  clere  our  thycke  derknes
And  to  subdue  the  Prynce  of  viciousnes
With  all  his  pompes,  his  pryde  and  vanyte
And  come  to  heuen  by  way  of  rightwysnes
Thou  gydynge  vs  in  this  tempestous  se.

O  blessyd  Moder,  set  hye  in  goddes  trone

In  ioy  and  blysse  surmountynge  mannes  mynde

Syns  by  thy  fruyte  we  saued  ar  echone

And  heuen  yatis  opened  to  mankynde

Graunt  that  we  dayly  by  the  may  socour  fynde

Of  soule  and  body  in  eche  aduersyte

Let  thy  lyght.  Lady,  the  Fende  subdue  and  blynde

And  gyde  vs  wretches  in  this  tempestous  se

Thou  art  the  Sterre,  blasynge  with  bemys  bryght
Aboue  these  worldes  wawes  so  violent
Our  synnes  darke  enclerynge  with  thy  lyght
Mannys  mediatryce  to  god  omnypotent
Wherfore  to  the,  o  Lady  I  present
This  symple  Boke  thoughe  it  vnworthy  be
But  pore  and  symple  and  moche  ineloquent
Rudely  composyd  in  this  tempestous  se

O  blessyd  virgyn,  O  resplendaunt  lanterne
Defende  my  Shyp  from  the  malyciousnes
Of  fals  enuy,  withsaue  it  to  gouerne
From  stroke  of  stotme  :  as  most  holy  patrones


Concliisyoii.


337


My  soule  and  body :  to  the  also  Empres
And  all  my  workes  I  submyt  besekynge  the
That  the  foule  Fende  me  neuer  may  oppres
Whyle  I  here  wander  in  this  tempestous  se

And  after  whan  my  soule  is  seperate
From  this  mortall  body,  and  clot  of  clay
With  thy  holy  presence,  o  moder  immaculate
From  me  expell  the  ougly  fende  away
O  moder  of  mercy  syns  thou  well  may
Thy  sonnes  presence  purchace  for  me
By  thy  ayde  and  socour  that  I  may  say
That  I  haue  escapyd  this  stormy  se.


Our  Shyp  here  leuyth  the  sees  brode

By  helpe  of  God  almyght  and  quyetly

At  Anker  we  lye  within  the  rode

But  who  that  lysteth  of  them  to  bye

In  Flete  strete  shall  them  fynde  truly

At  the  George  :  in  Richarde  Pynsonnes  place

Prynter  vnto  the  Kynges  noble  grace.

Deo  gratias.


VOL.  11.


Y


GLOSSARY.


C.  refers  to  Caivood's  edition.


A,  II.,  50,  13,  C  ,  are.

Abhyme,  I.,  135,  12,  abyss.

Abrode,  II.,  270,  24,  widely  dis-
tended.

Abusion,  I.,  212,  8,  abuse.

Abyde,  I.,  284,  2,  endured.

Abye,  II.,  37,  4,  expiate.

AcLOYEST,  II.,  51,  I,  overJoadeth.

AcLOYDE,  II.,  82,  23,  overloaded.

Adamond,  I.,  120,  27,  C.  adamant.

Aduyse,  II.,  29,  18,  see.

Aduertence,  II.,  92,  16,  attention.

Aduesyte,  II,,  133,  12.,  C.  aduer-
sitie.

Alayd,  II.,  289,  5,  mixed.

Alestake,  I.,  305,  14,  a  stake  set
up  before  an  alehouse  as  a  sign.

All  TO, I., 288,  9;  II., 139,  15;  II.,
139,  17  ;  II.,  194,  24,  entirely,
altogether.

Amys,  II.,  324,  I,  amice.

Ann,  II.,  333,  5,  Anna  the  pro-
phetess. See  Luke,  ii.  36.

Any,  II.,  292,  2,  C.  my.

Apayde,  I.,  loi,  5,  satisfied,  pleased.

Apayred,  I.,  35,  8,  impaired.

Apose,  I.,  288,  18,  oppose.

Arere,  I.,  297,  26,  backward,  be-
hind.

AssHE,  I.,  141,  17,  and  I.,  169,

25,  C.  aske.
AssYTE,  II.,  81,  I,  cite.
Atons,  I.,  104,  13,  C.  at  once.
Atonys,  I.,  160,  21,  C.  at  once.
At  turney,  II.,  50,  2  7,  C.  atturney.
Attyse,  I.,  296,  6,  entice.
Attysers,  II.,  163,  25,  enticers.
Attysynge,  I.,  239,  2,  enticing.
Auaunt,  II.,  67,  20,  boast.


Auautage,  I.,  206,  12,  C.  auantage.
Auayle,  II.,  81,  12,  advantage.
AuouTRY,  II.,  163,  4,  adultery.
AuTERS,  I.,  22  1,  20,  C.  aulters.
AuYCEN,  I.,  262,  6,  Avicenna.
Ayenst,  II.,  255,  28,  C.  against.

Babyll,  I.,  133,  5,  bauble.
Bagges,  II.,  103,  3,  badges.
Baylyes,  I.,  64,  I,  C.  BaylifFes.
Beawlys,  I.,  144,  23,  roaring  out.
Becke  I.,  146,  4,  bow,  salute.
Bede  man,  II.,  81,  23,  one  em-
ployed in  praying  for  another.
Bende,  II.,  93,  15,  C.  bande.
Beseke,  II.,  112,  8,  beseech.
Beters,  I.,  296,  (title),  those  who

walk  up  and  down.
Better,  I.,  217,  20,  C.  bitter.
Beware  the  ende  is  the  leste  poynt

of  his  charge,  I., 30, 28,  C.

Not  viewing  the  greatest  point  of

his  charge.
Blaberynge,  I,,  1 44, 2 3,  talking  idly.
Blasinge,  I., 36, 19,  blazoning.
Blasynge  I.,  240,  10,  setting  or

spreading  forth  ; II., 335,  9,

blazing.

Blyndnes,  I.,  216,  22,  C.  blinde.
BoCARDO, I.,  144,  20,  a  term  in
logic.

Bocsome,  I.,  169,  23,  obedient,
Bokest,  II.,  177,  18,  boke,  to  vomit.
Boldles,  II.,  172,  25,  C.  boldnes.
BoNDE,  II.,  189,  8,  C.  bande.
Bote,  II.,  299.  24,  help.
Both,  II.,  15,  28,  C.  before.
Bourdes,  I.,  7,  8,  jokes,  jests,  games.
Brast,  II.,  T23,  6,  break.


Glossary.


Brastyth,  II.,  264,  6,  bursteth.
Bravne,  II.,  1 65,  7,  C.  gayne.
Brawne,  II.,  252,  3,  (misprint  for)
brayne.

Erennynge,  II.,  83,  13,  burning.
Brondes,  I.,  149,  2,  torches,  II.,

294,  26,  C.  brandes.
Brgugh,  I.,  202,  20,  C.  brought.
Brybours, I., 64, I.  robbers,

beggars.

Erynnynge,  II.,  96,  19,  burning.
BuRDEws,  I.,  128,  15,  Bordeaux.
Busshes,  I.,  37,  23,  beards.
Byd,  II.,  106,  3,  invited.
Byde,  II.,  226,  3,  wait.
Bydeth,  II.,  212,  5,  remaineth.
Bydynge,  II.,  311,  12,  enduring.
Byte,  I.,  302,  5,  smart.

Caduke,  II.,  250,  9.  fj-ail,  crazy.
Came,  I.  109,  2i,C.  come.
Canell,  I.,  222,  7,  kennel.
Garage,  IL, 173, 21,  measure,
quality.

Carake,  II.,  306,  7,  a  large  ship.
Care,  II.,  292,  13,  think  about;

II.,  310,  27,  concern.
Carefull,  II.,  94,  4,  sorrowful.
Carke,  II.,  122,  15,  care.
Cartis,  II.,  228,  TO,  chariots.
Caryth,  II.,  50,  4,  C.  careth.
Cast,  I.,  284,  6,  intend,  contrive.
Cause,  I.,  202,  11,  C.  not  cause.
Cautell,  I.,  168,  10,  Cautele,  I.,

284,  4,  a  cunning  trick.
Cautelous,I.,49,  5,  artfully  cautious.
Cersus,  II.,  106,  12,  C.  Croesus.
Certayne,  II.,  248,  3,  certainly.
Cesyll,  II.,  25,  4,  C.  Sicil.
Ceueyt,  II.,  315,  15,  C.  couete.
Chaffar,  II.,  219,  6,  merchandise.
Charettes,  II.,  228,  10,  chariots.
Charge,  I.,  231,  26,  trouble.
Chere,  II.,  292,  8,  countenance ;

295,  14,  entertainment.

Chrafty,  I.,  185,  2,  C.  poHtike.

Clyst,  I.,  22,  14,  Broadclyst,  De-
vonshire.


Commooyte,  I,,  127,  3,  complais-
ance.

CoMON,  I.,  287,  22,  C.  commeii

commune.
Compace,  II.,  290,  22,  encompass.
Compalyd  II.,  333,  23,  hedged.
Compase,  I.,  292,  4,  circle.
Confydence,  II.,  228,  26,  C.  geue

confidence.
Copyntanke,  I.,  38,  13,  copatain,  a

conical  hat.
CoRNES,  I.,  170,  I  ;  II.,  237,  18,

C.  corners.
CosTOMER, I., 43, 24, one  who

collects  customs  or  duties.
CoTis,  II.,  96,  14,  cottages.
CouNTRE,  I.,  298,  16,  encounter,
CouRS,  II.,  10,  2,  C.  course.
CouERTURE,  II.,  290,  10,  covering
Coy,  II. ,  256,  17,  quiet.
Craftely,  I.,  204,  17,  C.  warely.
Crafty,  I.,  193,  14,  C.  holsomej

skilfully  made,  I., 199, i,  C.

prudent;  I.,  200,  9,  C.  prouident^

II.,  274,  13,  skilful.
Crakars,  I.,  12,  16,  bi-aggarts.
Crake,  II.,  132,  7,  brag  or  boast.
Crakynge,  II.,  80,  6,  boasting.
Crauys,  I.,  271,  6,  C.  creuis,  the

craw-fish  or  lobster.
Cunnynge,  I.,  261,  25,  knowledge,
CuRius, II., 262, 12,  Dentatus

Curius,  celebrated  for  liis  fru-
gality.

Damnyd,  II.,  102,  24,  condemned
to  death.

Decke,  I.,  38,  12,  trimmed;  applied

to  "  slut."
Defye,  II.,  52,  4,  reject.
Demayne,  II.,  292,  18,  manage.
Departe,  II.,  181,  II,  part.
Dere, I.,2  2  7,  I9,iniure,hurt;  injury
DtRE, I.,  270,  II; II.,  55,  16,

C.  degree.
Despytous,  II.,  164,  23,  very  angry.
Demynge,  I.,  154,  27,  judging.
Deuyse,  1,74,  18,  C.  iudise;  judge.


Glos


sary.


DeYNTEOUS, II., 293, 22, full  of

dainties.

DiFFAMYD,  II.,  37,20,  of  bad  fame.
DiscEYFULL,  I.,  245,  18,  C.  disceyt-
full.

DiscEYUABLE,  II.,  84,  12,  deceitful.

DissYMULED,  II.,  22  1,  4,  dissembled.

DisTAYNE,  II,,  101,  25,  Stain.

Do,  II.,  82,  4,  C.  to  ;  II.,  ICS,  7,
(misprint  for)  to.

DoDART,  I.,  47,  5,  an  old,  infirm,
confused  person.

DoMAs,  I.,  20,  12,  C.  damas.

Dome,  I.,  150,  15,  C.  dombe.

DoRTOR,  I.,  294,  21,  dormitory.

DoTYssHE,  I.,  86,  8,  foolish.

Dranynge,  II.,  186,  23,  draining.

Drede,  tl.,  292,  9,  fear.

Drent,  I.,  90,  5,  drowned.

Dres,  II.,  24,  17,  direct.

Dresse,  II.,  63,  9,  apply;  II.,  275,
10,  prepare.

Druydans,  I.,  292,  8,  "Druids
de  quibus,  Julius  Cssar,  in  com-
ment." (^Marginal  tiote.)

Dryuyls,  II.,  77,  27,  C.  driuels.

Dyght,  II.,  212,  4,  clean.

Earnest,  II.,  115,  i.,  deposit
money  given  to  bind  a  bargain,  or
on  hiring  a  servant.

Edefye,  II.,  120,  5,  build.

Edityed,  I.,  6.  9,  C.  edifyed.

Eft,  II.,  203,  27,  again.

Egall,  II.,  293,  3,  equal.

Eke,  II.,  326,  6,  also.

Enioynge,  I.,  54,  3,  C.  seking.

Enjoye,  I.,  151,  4,  C.  joye.

Entende,  II.,  87,  23,  attend.

Enuye,  II.,  279,  9,  envy.

Ere,  I.,  98,  27,  C.  eare ;  plough.

Ercyse,  II.,  315,  25,  C.  exercise.

Estate,  IL,  14,  16,  a  wealthy
person.

Excheters,  II.,  78,  21,  executors.

Facyate,  II.,  199,  8,  (misprint  for)
sacyate.


Faro,  II. ,  i  iO,  24,  C.  Pharao.
Fasynge, I., 43, 23,  C.  facing;

bragging.
Fatygate,  II.,  119,  17,  fatigued.
Fell, II.,  169,  16,  (misprint  for)  sell.
Fen,  II.,  35,  22;  Fenn,  I.,  157,

1 1,  mud,  mire.
Ferefull,  L,  218,  17,  full  of  fear.
Ferme,  I.,  159,  23,  rent;  II.,  98,

4,  farm.

Flee,  II.,  199,24,  (misprint  for)  slee.
Flete,  II.,  290,  29,  float.
FoLAWEs,  II.,  36,  16,  C.  felowes.
Force,  I.,  278,  21,  care,  regard.
FcRGE,  IL,  306,  4,  invent.
Forked  cappe,  II.,  279, 22,  the
mitre.

For  it  rebuked,  II.,  180,  26,  C.

with  great  rebuke.
Fors,  I.,  51,  6,  same  as  Force.
FoROUR,  I.,  79,  3,  C.  furour.
Forsyth,  II. ,  100,  14,  C.  forceth  ;

endeavoureth  ; II, 163,  22,

esteemeth,  careth  for.
Forthynke, I.,  278,  20,  grieve,

repent.
Foul,  I.,  52,  8,  C.  foole.
FoYsoN,  I.,  I  r,  ~.,  abundance.
Fragaunt,  IL,  290,  1,  fragrant.
Frantyfe,  I.,  149,  13,  C.  frantike.
Frame,  II. ,  253,  3,  to  set  about  a

thing.

Fyers,  L,  165,  9,  C.  fierce.
Fynde,  I.,  304,  18,  su;)ply.

Gaffys, I, 123, 4, C.  grafFes;
grafts.

Garded,  L,  36,  19;  Gardyd,  II,

97,  12,  girded  or  surrounded  with

a  hem.
Gayle,  L,  27,  18,  jail.
Geason,  II.,  10,  12,  scarce.
Gestis,  II.,  270,  2,  gestures.
Get,  L,  63,  20,  C.  jet,  "  wantonlv

to  goe  in  and  out  with  the  legs,"

to  strut  or  walk  proudly.
Getters,  L,  146,  28,  swaggerers,

braggers.


342


Glossary.


Getteth,  I.,  1 43,  27,  C.  Cometh.
Glose,  I.,  58,  28,  comment;  II.,

51,  16,  interpret.
God,  II.,  217,  23,  good.
GoDE,  I.,  100,  7,  C.  goode.
GooDEs,  I.,  234,  7,  C.  goodnes.
GoosTLY,  II.,  161,  13,  spiritually.
GoRGAYs,  II.,  289,  I,  C.  gorgious.
Graff  YD,  II.,  240,  8,  grafted.
Gre  at,  II.,  34,  8,  C.  great.
Gree,  I.,  155,  II,  agree.
Greuaunce,  II.,  262,  4,  injury.
Grennynge,  II.,  130,  16,  roaring.
Grotz,  I.,  100,  6,  C.  grotes.
Grounde,  II.,  292, 14,  an  old

musical  term  for  an  air  on  which

variations  and  divisions  were  to

be  made.  Nares.
Grutchynge,  I.,  145,  10,  grumbling,

grudging.
Gyders,  II.,  15,  21,  straps  to  draw

together  the  open  parts  of  armour.
Gylefull,  II.,  169,  23,  C.  wilfull.
Gyse,  I.,  287,  12,  fashion.
Gyuys,  I.,  184,  23,  C.  geuen.

Hackynge,  II.,  232,  25,  stammer-
ing.

Hant,  I.,  195,  II,  follow.
Hap,  I.,  140,  14,  C.  chaunce.
Haphy,  II.,  252,  12,  C.  happy.
Haut,  II.,  224,  6;  II.,  287,  13,

proud.
He,  I.,  16,  7,  C.  ye.
Hedelynge, II., 330, 10.,  C.
speedely.

Hell  juge  thy  rewarde,  I.,  27,  7,
C.  hell  thy  just  rewai^de.

Here,  I.,  177,  12,  hair.

His,  I.,  42,  5,  C.  my  ;  II.,  2o8,  7,
C.  is.

HoNYNGTON,  I.,  22,  1 4,  Honiton.
HoRLE,  I.,  109,  28,  C.  whirle.

HoURLYNGE, II., 3  lO, 12,  C.

hurling ;  rumbling.
HuRTE,  I.,  141,  24,  C.  heart.
HuRTLYTH,  II.,  115,  24,  closes  or

clashes  together  with  noise.


Incouenyence,  I.,  238,  14,  C.  in-
conuenyence.

Infaciable,  II.,  227,  II,  (misprint
for)  insaciable.

Infect,  I.,  5,  13,  infected;  I.,  126,
8,  contagious.

Infectyfe,  II.,  161,  16,  contagious.

Infextynge,II.,7i,  13,  C.  infecting.

Intreatable,II.,  1 1 4, 6, not  to  be  en-
treated; II., I  i5,8,C.intollerable.

Inure,  II.,  291,  19,  apply  them-
selves to,  serve.

It,  I.,  187,  28,  C.  he.

Iyen,  II.,  125,  7,  eyes.

Japes,  II.,  153,  6,  jests.

Jeopadous,  I.,  194,  5,C.  jeopardous.

Jonathas,  I.,  77,  4.,  I  Mach.  xii.
{marginal  note),  general  of  the
Jews,  brother  to  Judas  Macca-
beus, treacherously  seized  and  put
to  death  by  Tryphon.

JowELL,  I.,  120,  22,  C.  jewell.

Kepe,  I.,  226,  12,  care.
Kest,  II.,  260,  6,  C.  cast.
Kynde, II., 240, 22,  nature,
natural  disposition.

Lachesys,  I.,  188,  27,  Lachesis.
Lackynge,  II.,  264,  14,  want.
Laurer,  II.,  289,  3,  laurel.
Leasing,  (or  Lesynge),  I.,  196,  12,
lie.

Lefe,  I.,  103,  6,  agreeable;  II.,

118,  22,  leave.
Lefte,  1.,  188,  27,  (misprint  for)

leste.

Lemman,  I.,  244,  18,  mistress.
Lemynge,  II.,  332,  5,  shining.
Lese,  I.,  140,  17,  lose.
L.ESHES, I., 221, 23, thongs  or

strings  by  which  dogs  are  led.
Lesynge,  II.,  6,  18,  lie.
Lesyngys,  I.,  53,  3,  lies.
Lesyth,  II.,  115,  22,  loseth.
Let,  I.,  90,  7,  hindered:  I.,  194,

20,  leave  off.


Glossary


343


Lettyd,  I.,  297,  5,  hindered.

Leuer,  I.,  48,  I,  rather.

Leueray,  II.,  271,  28,  C.  liueray,

Lewde,  I.,  52,  5,  ignorant,  lay,  un-
taught, useless.  Later,  vile,  base,
wicked.

Lewdnes,  I.,  127,  5,  unlawful-
ness.

LoDESMAN,  II.,  200,  14,  pilot,
guide.

LoNGYNGE,  II.,  60,  5,  belonging.
LoRELLYs,  II.,  320,  14,  worthless
fellows.

LoTHLY,  I.,  168,  23,  loathsome.
Lout,  I.,  105,  13  ; Loute,  I.,

1 46,  4,  bend,  bow.
Lowde,  I.,  130,  28,  C.  lowe.
Lowe,  I.,  68,  11,  C.  alowe.
Lusty,  II.,  293,  8,  pleasant.
Lustynes,  II.,  295,  3,  gaiety.
Lycynus,  I.,  139,  9. Licinus,  the

extravagant  governor  of  Gaul.
Lyghtly,  I.,  68,  21,  quickly;  II.,

171,  17,  commonly,  easily.
Lyke,  II.,  263,  21,  please.
Lyst,  II.,  255,  15,  please.
Lyuynge,  I.,  187,  21,  C.  leauing.
Lucres,  II.,  9,  9,  Lucretia.

Made,  I.,  248,  21,  C.  mad.
Make,  II.,  237,  12,  companion.
Mawes,  II.,  89,  I,  stomach.
Mars,  prestis  of,  I.,  292,  12,  "De

quibus  Virgilius, II.,  Georgi-

corum." (^Marginal  note.)
Mas,  II.,  132,  13,  C.  sacrament,

19,  eucharist ;  28,  offering ;  II.,

133,  3,  our  Lord.
Masyd,  II.,  83,  2,  stupified.
Maters,  I.,  216,  20,  C.  mates.
Mean,  II.,  104,  12,  temperate.
Meanes,  I.,  199,  22,  C.  no  meanes.
Mease,  II.,  264,  9,  mess.
Mede,  I.,  134,  15,  reward.
Meke,  II.,  164,  15,  make  meek.
Mell,  II.,  211,  19,  mix.
Men,  II.,  45,  18,  C.  mean.
Mery,  I.,  188,  18,  fair.


Mesues,  I.,  262,  4,  Joannes  Mesue;
there  were  several  famous  Arabic
physicians  of  this  name.

Mesure,  I.,  188,  18,  moderate;  II.,
262,  23,  moderation.

Mete,  I.,  155,  16,  fitting.

Mewe,  I.,  222,  6,  stable.

MocHE,  I.,  112,  26,  C.  great.

MoNYsYON,  II.,  189,  23,  monition.

MoRYAGE,  I.,  248,  23,  C.  mariage.

Most,  I.,  217,  19,  C.  must.

MosTE,  I.,  6,  8,  C.  more.

Mowes,  I.,  212,  10,  mocks,  scorn-
ful grins.

MuNDAYNEs,  I.,  1 59,  3,  worldly.

Myght,  II.,  144,  16,  C.  night.

Mysche,  I.,  253,  27,  C.  mischiefe.

Myse,  II.,  129,  I,  muse.

Myshape,  II.,  252,  21,  mishap.

Mysordynaunce,  II.,  285,  22,  mis-
order,  disorderly  proceedings.

Narrynge,  I., 182,  II,  gnarring,

gnarling,  snarling.
Nay,  II.,  282,  4,  denial.
Ner,  II.,  9,  10,  never.
NiLicoLYANs,  I.,  135,  23,  Egyptians.
NoNs,  I.,  154,  27,  occasion.
Norture,  I.,  249,  1 1,  nurture,  train.
NoTHERS,  I.,  112,  24,  C.  an  others.
NoY,  II.,  248,  2,  annoy,  hurt.
NoYsoN,  II.,  204,  10,  C.  noysome.

Occupy,  II.,  169,  26,  use,  trade.
OccuPYERS,  II.,  219,  5,  tradesmen.
Of,  II.,  164,  7,  (misprint  for)  at;

II.,  195,  II,  of  (misprint  for)  all.
Okerers,  II.,  166,  (title)  usurers.
One,  I.,  199,  23,  C.  no.
On  lyue,  II.,  199,  7,  alive.
Or,  I.,  143,  3,  C.  are.
Or,  II.,  60,  13,  that.
Ordayne,  II.,  57,  I,  order.
Orthly,  I.,  231,  II,  C.  earthly.
Others,  II.,  132,  21,  C.  othes.
OuER,  II.,  77,  24,  C.  ouercome.
Ouersene,  I.,  178,  I,  mistaken.
Our,  I.,  182,  2,  C.  your.


344


Glossary.


Palfray,  II.,  217,  23,  palfrey.
Panter,  II.,  297,  7,  net  or  snare.
Papy,  II.,  184,  I,  poppy.
Parage, II., 32, 4,  parentage,

kindred.
Parcyte,  I.,  9,  24,  smallness.
Partnes,  II.,  236,  28,  C.  partners.
Party,  II.,  97,  12,  parti -coloured.
Parysshyngs,  I.,  160,  20,  C.  par-

ishoners.
Payne,  II.,  316,  10,  labour.
Peas,  II.,  3,  8,  appease.
Pens,  I.,  100,  6,  C.  pence.
Perdurable,  II.,  306,  3,  everlasting.
Pertureaunce,  II.,  285,  27,  trouble.
Perysshe,  II.,  255,  12,  injure.
Pheryson,  I,,  1 44,20,a  term  in  logic.
Plage,  II.,  24,  23,  C.  place.
Plage,  II.,  136,  (title),  afflictive

judgment  or  calamity.
Plame,  II.,  290,  17,  C.  place.
Pleasaunce,  II.,  92,  26,  pleasure.
Podalirius,  I.,  262,  4,  Podaleirius,

skilled  in  medicine.
Pollers,  I.,  12,  17,  robbers.
Pompe,  I.,  19,  2,  poop.
Potels,  II.,  92,  6,  a  measure  of

two  qua:ts.
PouLE,  II.,  302.  9,  Paulus  Emilius.
PowLYNGE, I., 64, 3,  robbing,

cheating.
Practyse,  I.,  158,  25,  artifice.
Preckyd,  II.,  308,  21,  decorated.
Precyan,  I.,  144,  12,  Priscian.
Proue,  II.,  316,  21,  thrive.
Prouysicion,  I.,  121,  23,  C.  pro-

uision.

Prouertye,  I.,  304,  I  5,  C.  pouertie.
Prymme,  I.,  250,  I,  C.  paramour.
Pryuate,  II.,  84,  15,  deprived.
PuRUEAUNCE,  II.,  285, 1 6,  provision.
Pyght,  II.,  319,  24,  placed.
Pykers,  I.,  15,  21,  thieves.
Pyllynge,  I.,  254,  II,  peeling.

Quaxes,  II.,  261,  15,  C.  quates.
Quaynt,  I.,  211,  14,  acquaint,  in-
form.


C^ell,  II.,  168,  7,  kill.

Rampynge,  II.,  2g6,  4,  rushing.
Rawky,  II.,  261,  4,  rawlike.
Ray,  I.,  35,  16,  striped  cloth;  I.,

303,  26,  dress.
Read,  I.,  193,  14,  C.  rede.
Reade,  I.,  26,  28,  counsel,  (C.'s

reading,) "  Take  counsayle  of

learned  and  expert  men  before."
Rebokynge,  II.,  261,  12,  belching.
Red,  II.,  307,  18,  rid,  deprive.
Rede,  I.,  151,  i,  advice.
Reddyth,  II.,  102,  10,  C.  riddeth.
Reduce,  II.,  175,  18,  bring  back.
Refuse,  II.,  164,  16,  deny.
Remys,  II.,  186,  23,  remiss.
Renowe,  II,,  66,  16,  C.  renowme.
Reprefe,  I..  32,  21,  C.  repriefe ;

reproof.

Repugnynge,  I.,  283,  4,  repugnant.
Respyt,  II.,  280,  I  ;  Respyte,  II.,

316,  II,  respect.
Reted,  I.,  44,  12  ;  I.,  1 16,  I  I,  C.

rooted.

Reuylde, I., 288,9, revealed;  shown.
Rewed,  II.,  241,  24,  regretted.
RowME,  II.,  212,  24,  place.
Rode,  II.,  309,  15,  harbour.
Rote,  II.,  293,  7,  root.
Roundynge,  I.,  221,  4,  a  kind  of
dance.

Roundynges,  II.,  212,  16,  whispers.
Rouse,  I.,  91,  14,  hedges.
Rout,  II.,  224,  2,  com])any.
Rov/ne,  I.,  161,  14,  C.  rowme.
Rowme,  II.,  13,  6,  place.
RoYALLUE,  I.,  199,  I  r,  C.  realme.
Ruthfully,  I.,  68,  27,  C.  ruefully.
Ryue,  II.,  261,  17,  split.

Sad,  I.,  109,  16,  sei'ious,  sober.
Salue,  II.,  87,  t8,  C.  safe.
Sauour,  II.,  139,  I,  (misprint  for)
fauour.

ScAs,  II.,  103,  8,  C.  scarce.
Scant,  II.,  84,  27,  scarce.
ScAPLER,  II.,  324,  I,  scapulary.


Glossary.


345


ScARSNEss,  II.,  97,  22,  spaiingness.
ScoNSYENCE,  I.,  1 36,  15,  C.  Con-
science.

ScoRsYNGEs,  II.,  141,  (title)  ex-
changes.

ScosYTH,  I.,  159,  25,  C.  ciioseth.
Sectours,  I.,  117,  7,  executors.
Seke,  II.,  1  1 1,  8,  C.  sicke.
Semblaunt,  II.,  287,  23,  appear-
ance.

Semblable,  II.,  264,  1 8,  like.
Sene,  I.,  109,  16,  learned.
Sentence,  II.,  109,  7,  meaning.
Seruautes, I., 238,  7,  C.  ser-
uauntes.

Set  by,  I.,  198,  24,  treated  with

consideration.
Shelde,  I.,  1 1 4,  15,  shield.
Shent,  I.,  22,  17,  abashed.
Shrape,  I.,  47,  16  ;  I.,  105,  22,  C.

scrape.

Shyll,  II.,  162,  20,  shrill.

Slake,  II.,  279,  5,  subside.

Sle,  I.,  198,  9,  C.  slay.

Slut,  I.,  38,  12,  an  apron,  (Halli-
well.)  Used  by  Barclay  as  sy-
nonymous with  Copyntanke.

Smare,  II.,  217,  7,  C.  snare.

So,  I.,  177,  14,  C.  se.

Soft,  II.,  314,  3,  easily.

Solym,  I.,  135,  19,  Jerusalem.

Some  ar  that  thynke  the  pleasoure
and  ioy  of  theyr  lyfe,  I.  54,  i  ,  C.
Some  there  are  that  haue  pleasure
al  their  life.

SoppE,  II.,  263,  15,  C.  suppe.

Sortes  currit,  I.,  144,  19,  a  term
in  logic.

Sote,  I.,  112,  22,  fool.

Sothly,  II.,  112,  2!,  truly.

Sparcle,  I.,  194,  I,  spark.

Sreyght,  II.,  59,  12,  C.  straight.

Stage,  II.,  262,  27,  position.

Stake,  I.,  299,  18,  alestake,  q.v.

State,  II.,  8,  24,  personage  of  high
rank.

Stent,  I.,  31,  12,  allotted  portion  ;
II.,  89,  3,  stop.


Stere,  I.,  291,  4,  C.  Sterne.
Sterue,  II.,  32,  8,  perish.
Straunges, II., 77, 24,  C.

strangers.
Strenger, II., 28, (title),  C.

stronger.

Stryketh,  II.,  212,  18,  stroketh.
Stuys,  I.,  178,  21,  C.  And  as  the

open  stuesthey  are  set  on  waike.
Stynt,  II.,  65,  2,  stopped.
SuBTYLL,  II.,  224,  2,  fine.

SuCHE,  I.,  208,  2,  C.  so.

SuETH,  I.,  183,  6,  foUoweth.
SuLPicE,  I.,  144,  12,  Sulpicius.
SuPERFLUEjIL,  215,  1 1  jSuperfluous.

SuPPORTYTH, II., 230, 14,  C.

support.

SuRMOUNTYNGE, II.,  335,  2,  Sur-
passing.

SusTERS,  II.,  201,  27,  C.  sisters.
Suynge,  L,  60,  13,  C.  shewing.
SwEREs, II., 128, (title),  C.

swearers.
Syege,  II.,  82,  23,  seat.
Syllaeis,  I.,  144,  27,  C.  syllables,
Syse,  I.,  27,  17,  assise.

Tables,  II.,  131,22,  backgammon.
Tachyd, I., 58, II,  blemished,

spotted.
Tane,  II.,  87,  I,  taken.
Tary,  I.,  194,  13,  delay.
Tays,  II.,  9,  12,  Thais.
Tell,  II.,  164,  12,  C.  hell.  .
Tend,  II.,  257,  28,  attend.
The,  L,  183,  24,  C.  in.  ;  II.,  44,

21,  (misprint  for)  they,
i  Theder,  L,  154,  25,  thither.
Thee,  I.,  75,  4,  thigh.
Thekt,  II.,  96,  14,  thatched.
They,  I.,  255,  29,  C.  thy;  II.,

276,  14,  C.  theyr.
Tholomeus,  I.,  20,  22,  C.  Ptolo-

meus.

Thought,  II.,  121,  16,  C.  though.
Thye,  II.,  94,  16; II.,  223,  7,
thrive.

Thynke,  I.,  172,  15,  C.  thinge.


34^


Glossary.


Thryst,  IL,  7,  1 6,  C.  thrift.

TOPPRES, II., 22  1, 25, C.  to

oppresse.

To  RENT,  I.,  302,  16,  quite  or  com-
pletely, or  all  rent — to,  an  inten-
sive prefix.

To  Tore,  I.,  305,  4,  similar  to  To
rent.

Tour,  IL,  291,  12,  castle.
TowLYNGE,  I.,  64,  I,  beating  with

an  oaken  stick.
Trace,  II.,  276,  25,  track,  path.
Trayne,  I.,  227,  13,  knot;  I.,  245,

1 5, deceit;  II.,  1 16, 19, stratagem.
Trough,  I.,  245,  4,  through.
Tryphon,  L,  77,  5,  Tyrian  general.

See  Jonathas.
TuYcioN,  I.,  25,  24,  C.  tuition.
Tyde,  I.,  304,  17; II.,  113,  6,

time,  season.

Unchrafty,  I.,  272,  16,  C.  unwittie.

Vant,  II.,  185,  24,  a  winter  trap
for  birds.

Varyable,  II.,  114,  7,  1 8,  different.
Vayle,  II.,  24,  1 4,  C.  vayne.
Ven,  L,  120,  4,  C.  ben.
Vengeable,  II.,  52,  7,  revengeful,
cruel.

Vermayll,  I..  196,  17,  red.
Vneth,  IL,  315,  24,  uneath,  un-
easily.

Vnmerciable,  II.,  52,  5,  merciless.
Vntretable,  L,  165,  8,  not  to  be

entreated.
Vnware,  L,  177,  19,  unaware.
VoLAGE, I., 126, II,  changeful,

light,  giddy.
VoLOURE,  II.,  291,  13,  C.  valour.
VoYDE,  II.,  86,  4,  make  empty.
Vylayne,  II.,  323,  10,  wicked.


Ware,  I.,  246,  15,  sensible;  II.,

250,  22,  aware.
Waren,  I.,  134,  25,  cunning.
Wary,  I.,  305,  12,  abuse,  curse.
Wawes,  I.,  206,  26,  waves.
Way,  I.,  155,  15,  away.
Way,  I.,  295,  15,  C.  away.
Wayte,  L,  290,  12,  know.
Wene,  IL,  86,  2,  think.
Wenyd,  I.,  138,  27,  C. wened ;

thought,  supposed.
Weray,  I.,  70,  27,  same  as  Wary.
Were,  II.,  162,  6,  (misprint  for)

Nei-e.

Wete,  I.,  150,  4,  know.
Whan,  II. ,  293,  12,  C.  whom.
WoDE,  I.,  116,  10,  C.  wood;  mad,

furious.
WoMBE,  L,  12,  27,  belly.
WoRDLY,  II.,  232,  12,  C.  worldly.
Worldly,  I.,  287,  28,  (misprint  for)

wordly  ;  C.  world.
WoRTHELY,  I.,  247,  7,  wrathfully.
Wyght,  IL,  318,  5,  strong.
Wynter,  I..  42,  7,  C.  wynters.
Wytches,  I.,  195,  15,  C.  wretches.
Wynnynge,  II. ,  83,  22,  gain.

Yate,  II.,  203,  22,  gate;  Scottish,
yat,  yett.

YCHE,  I.,  43,  25,  I.

Ye,  I.,  138,  I,  yea.
Yetyth,  IL,  211,  27,  C.  putteth.
Yll,  L,  112,  14,  C.  eulll.
Ymportable,  L,  139,  23,  intolerable.
YoRDAN,  I.,  297,  26,  chamber  pot.
Your,  I.,  184,  3,  C.  our.
Yowlynge,  I.,  297,  24,  C.  howling.
Ypocras,  I.,  262,  7,  Hippocrates.
Yresshe  game,  I.,  21,  20,  a  game

similar  to  backgammon.
Yrous,  I.,  184,  23,  irate.


Chapter  I.  of  the  Original  Edition,  and  of  the
Latin  and  French  Versions  of  the
Ship  of  Fools.


I. — Chapter  I.  of  the  original  text  of  the  Ship  of  Fools,
as  given  in  Zarncke's  edition.

VON  VNNUTZEN  BUCHERN.

Den  vordantz  hat  man  mir  gelan
Dann  jch  on  nutz  vil  biicher  han
Die  jch  nit  lyfz,  vnd  nyt  verstan

Das  jch  sytz  vornan  jn  dem  schyff
Das  hat  worlich  eyn  sundren  gryff
On  vrsach  ist  das  nit  gethan
VfF  myn  libry  ich  mych  verlan
Von  bUchern  hab  ich  grossen  hort
Verstand  doch  drynn  gar  wenig  wort
Vnd  halt  sie  dennacht  jn  den  eren
Das  ich  jnn  wil  der  fliegen  -weren
Wo  man  von  kiinsten  reden  dut
Sprich  ich,  do  heym  hab  jchs  fast  gut
Do  mit  losz  ich  beniigen  mich
Das  ich  vil  biicher  vor  mir  sych,
Der  kiinig  Ptolomeus  bstelt
Das  er  all  biicher  het  der  welt
Vnd  hyelt  das  fiir  eyn  grossen  schatz
Doch  hat  er  nit  das  recht  gesatz
Noch  kund  dar  vsz  berichten  sich
Ich  hab  vil  biicher  ouch  des  glich
Vnd  lys  doch  gantz  wenig  dar  jnn
Worvmb  wolt  ich  brechen  myn  synn
Vnd  mil  der  ler  mich  bklimbren  hst


Appendix.


Wer  vil  studiert,  wlirt  ein  fantast
Ich  mag  doch  sunst  wol  sin  eyn  here
Vnd  lonen  eym  der  fiir  mich  ler
Ob  ich  schon  hab  eyn  groben  synn
Doch  so  ich  by  gelerten  bin^
So  kan  ich  jta  sprechen  jo
Des  tUtschen  orden  bin  ich  fro
Dann  jch  gar  wenig  kan  latin
Ich  weysz  das  vinu  heysset  win
Gucklus  ein  gouch,  stuitus  eyn  dor
Vnd  das  ich  heysz  donine  doctor
Die  oren  sint  verborgen  mir
Man  slih  sunst  bald  eins  muUers  thicr


2. — Ch;ipter  I.  of  Locher's  Latin  version  : — ■

DE  INUriLIBUS  LIBRIS.

Inter  precipuos  pars  est  mihi  reddita  stultos
Prima  :  rego  docili  vastaque  vela  manu.

En  ego  possideo  multos,  quos  raro  libellos
Perlego  :  tum  lectos  negligo  :  nec  sa}  i o.

Primus  in  excelsa  teneo  quod  naue  rudentes
Stultiuagosque  sequor  comites  per  flumina  \  a-  ta  :
Non  ratione  vacat  certa  :  sensuque  latent! :
Congestis  etenim  stuitus  confido  libellis
Spem  quoque  nec  paruam  collecta  volumina  praebent  :
Calleo  nec  verbum  :  nec  libri  sentio  mentem.
Attamen  in  magno  per  me  seruantur  honore  :
Pulueris  et  cariem,  plumatis  tergo  fiabellis.
Ast  vbi  doctrine  certamen  voluitur  :  inquam
Aedibus  in  nostris  librorum  culta  supellex:
Eminet :  et  chartis  vino  contentus  opertis  :
Ouas  video  ignorans  :  et  vano  lumine  solor.
Constituit  quondam  diaes  Ptolomeus  :  haberet
Vt  libros  toto  quesitos  vndique  mun do  :
Onos  grandes  rerum  thesauros  esse  putabat  :
Non  tamen  archanelegis  documenta  tenebat :


348


Appendix.


349


Ouis  sine  non  poterat  vite  disponere  cursum.

En  pariter  teneo  numerosa  volumina,  tardus

Pauca  lego  :  viridi  contentus  tegmine  libri.

Cur  vellem  studio  sensus  turbare  frequent!  ?

Aut  tarn  soUicitis  animum  confundere  rebus  ?

Qui  studet,  assiduo  mtotu,  fit  stultus  et  amens.

Seu  studeam  :  seu  non  :  dominus  tamen  esse  vocabor

Et  possum  studio  socium  disponere  nostro  :

Qui  pro  me  sapiat :  doctasque  examinet  artes.

At  si  cum  doctis  versor  :  concedere  malo  :

Omnia  :  ne  cogar  fors  verba  latina  profari.

Theutonicos  inter  balbos  sum  maximus  auctor  :

Cum  quibus  incassum  sparguntur  verba  latina  :

O  vos  doctores  ;  qui  grandia  nomina  fertis  :

Respicite  antiques  patres  :  iurisque  peritos  :

Non  in  candidulis  pensebant  dogmata  libris  :

Arte  sed  ingenua  sitibundum  pectus  alebant.

Auriculis  asini  tegitur  sed  magna  caterua.

3. — Chapter  I.  of  the  French  version  of  Pierre  Riviere,
1497-

DES  LIURES  INUTILZ.

Le  premier  fol  de  la  nef  suis
Les  voiles  regis  de  man  main
A  liures  auoir  me  deduys
Lesquelz  ie  ne  voy  soir  ne  main
De  ceulx  que  iay  leuz  faiz  dedain
Ou  ne  les  entendz.  somme  toute
Tel  cuyde  bien  scauoir  qui  doubte.

Le  premier  suis  en  la  nauire
Les  cordes  ie  tourne  ie  vire
le  suis  des  compaignons  vagans
Ie  suis  des  grans  folz  nauigans
Sur  la  mer  du  monde  parfonde
En  sens  et  raison  raal  me  fonde
Et  suis  bien  fol  de  me  fier
Et  mon  cueur  et  corps  dedier


350  Appendix.


En  la  multitude  des  liures
Combien  que  aux  esperitz  deliures
Ne  donne  pas  petit  espoir
lapete  tous  les  iours  de  veoir
Liures  :  lesquelz  ne  puis  aprendre
Ne  la  substance  deulx  comprendre
Toutesfois  bien  les  contregarde
Et  en  tout  honneur  ie  les  garde
De  pouldre  et  dimmundicite
Car  par  grant  curiosite
Souuent  mes  poulpitres  baloye
La  ou  de  doctrine  tournoye
Tous  les  iours  disputacion
Ma  maison  et  ma  mansion
Est  de  liures  resplendissante
Desquelz  veoir  ouuers  me  contente
Me  confortant  veoir  seulement
Mes  grans  volumes  vainement
Sans  en  comprendre  mot  en  somme.

Ptolomeus  qui  fut  riche  homme
Constitua  quon  luy  serchast
Par  Ie  monde  et  quon  luy  trouuast
Lesquelz  quant  ilz  furent  tous  quis
Pour  grant  tresor  les  maintenoit
Et  toutesfois  il  ne  tenoit
Lenseignement  ne  la  doctrine
De  la  sapience  diuine
Combien  que  sans  celle  ne  peust
Quelques  liures  que  lors  il  eust
Riens  de  la  vie  disposer
Ne  chose  de  bien  composer
Qui  luy  fust  pour  lors  incolume
Comme  leu  iay  en  maint  volume
Ou  ie  regarde  bien  petit
Et  en  passe  mon  appetit
De  veoir  seullement  la  verdure
Dont  est  taincte  la  couuerture
Car  ce  seroit  a  moy  folie
De  mectre  tant  mon  estudie


Appendix.


Es  liures  et  leurs  diuers  sens
Q^e  apres  ien  troublasse  mon  sens
Car  cil  qui  trop  scauoir  procure
Et  trop  es  liures  met  sa  cure
En  deuient  souuent  incense
Aussi  chacun  est  dispense
Soit  bien  lettre  scauant  ou  non
De  porter  de  seigneur  le  nom.

Item  ie  puis  en  mon  lieu  mectre
Quelcun  soit  en  prose  ou  en  metre
Qui  prendra  bein  la  pacience
Daprendre  pour  nous  deux  science
Et  se  pres  clercs  et  litterez
Me  voy  ie  leur  concederez
Leur  dire  soit  tart  ou  matin
Affin  de  ne  parler  latin
Et  que  deulx  ne  soye  repris
De  ce  que  iay  si  mal  apris.

O  docteurs  qui  le  nom  auez
De  scauoir  et  riens  ne  scauez
Pour  euiter  tous  vituperes
Contemplez  que  iadis  noz  peres
Dont  les  corps  sont  mors  et  periz
Qui  furent  es  droiz  si  peritz
Leur  grant  science  ne  comprindrent
En  ces  beaulx  liures  ains  laprindrent
Dung  bon  et  desireux  courage
Sans  auoir  lesprit  si  vollage
Comme  les  clercs  de  maintenant
Dont  leur  est  bien  appartenant
Porter  par  choses  non  pareilles
Des  asnes  les  grandes  oreilles


TUKNBtH.L  AND  SPKAKS HUtNTEKS,  EDIN'El'RGH


f


GETTY  CENTER  LIBRARY

3  3125  00656  3726
