More Worlds than One: The Creed of the Philosopher and the Hope of the Christian
David Brewster, 1854
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Brewster's 1854 reply to Whewell — the pluralist counter-manifesto: 'More Worlds than One' kept the inhabited-universe debate alive. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/moreworldsthano02brewgoog). This 1854 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

Google



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I



^\y



«o



c\V



tft^-



9


k


. * t



•<s



V



"2.



A -



MOEE WORLDS THAN ONE



THE CREED OF THE PHILOSOPHER



AKD THE HOPE OF THE CHRISTIAN.



BY

SIR DAVID BREWSTER, K.H., M.A., D.C.L.,

7.K.8., r.P.&.8. SDIir., M.K.I.A.,9.&.8.A., 7.0.8., A8B0CIATK 07 TBS IMPBBIAL

JHSTITUTK OF 7AAirCB, HOHORABT OB COBBXSFOBDIHG MBMBBB

07 THB ACASBMIIIS 07 PBTBB8BDB0, YIXHIIA, BBBLIV,

COPBRHAOXV, STOCKHOLM, BBVS8XLS, GOTTIHGRlt,

MODBRA, A5D 07 TBB RATlOnAL IKSTITUTX

OF VABBIIIGTOH, &C.



Through th« diin twilight of thi« nether iky,
I hail thy beam Kke rinng of the day,
Ilwtt tboa a home for me when I •hall die ?

" Is there a spot within thy radiant ipbere.

Where love, and fitith, and truth, agMU may dwell ;
Where I may eeek the reat I find not here,
And clasp the cherished fonns I loved so well ?"



THIRD THOUSAND.
CORRECTEP AND GRKATLY ENLARGED.



LONDON:
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.

1854.

[The Riiiht of Tnxntlailon u res.rccd.'}



IVCKKTA CBBTIS PROBAKTDB.

QUIMT.

To Beings of limited capacities, Probability is the very guide of Life.

BuTLsa's Analogy, ^c, IrUroductiim.


SDIVirEGH : T. COXtiTiBlR, rEIBTKR TOBXaNAJWTT.


to t>
« w to «

WW *

J ri w «

to «•



• ■



» • • ••

• •

♦ • *



• • a* •

• •• •

• • ••
» • •

• • •



• • •

• • • •

to m


• • • • • •



CONTENTS.

tkom

Frkfacb, ▼

Introduction, 1

Chap. I. Religious Aspect of the Question, ... 7

IL Description of the Solar System, . 17

III. The Geological Condition of the Earth, 38

IV. Analogy between the Earth and the other Planets, 64
V. The Sun, Moon, Satellites, and Asteroids, . 92

VI. The System of Comets, 115

VIL On the Nebular Hypothesis, .... 120

VIII. The Motion of the Solar System round a distant Centre, 125

IX. Religious Difficulties, ...... 138

X. Single Stars and Binary Systems, . 163
XL Clusters of Stars and Nebulse, . . . .172

XII. General Summary, 182

XIIL Reply to Objections drawn from Geology, . 198

XIV. Objections from the Nature of Nebulse, . 210
XV. Objections from the Nature of the Fixed Stars and

Binary Systems, 218

XVL, Objections from the Nature of the Planets, . . 230

XVII. The Future of the Universe, 256



PREFACE.



Having been requested by the Editor of the
North British Review to give an account of a work
entitled Of a Plurality of Worlds, an Essay, I
undertook the task, in the belief that it contained
sentiments similar to my own, and that I should
have the gratification of illustrating and recommend-
ing a doctrine which had long been the Creed of the
Philosopher and the Hope of the Christian. I was
surprised, however, to find that, under a title tend-
ing to mislead the public, the author had made an
elaborate attack upon opinions consecrated, as I had
thought, by Beason and Eevelation ; and had, in
conducting his argument, not only adopted the
Nebtdar Hypothesis, so universally condemned as a



VI PKEFACE.

daDgerous speculatioD, but bad taken a view of the
condition of tbe Solar System, calcnlated to disparage
tbe science of Astronomy, and to throw a doubt over
the noblest of its truths.

Under ordinary circumstances I should have con-
tented myself with such an analysis and criticism
of the work as could be given within the narrow
limits of a Review ; but while the boldness of the
author's speculations, and the ingenuity with which
they were maintained, required a more elaborate
examination of them, the new views which pre-
sented themselves to me during the study of the
subject, demanded a copious detail of facts which
could be given only in a separate Treatise. I
have, therefore, devoted the principal part of the
volume to a statement of the arguments in favour
of a Plurality of Worlds, and have endeavoured,
in the subsequent chapters, to answer the various
objections urged against it by the author of the
Essay, and to examine the grounds upon which he
has attempted to establish the extraordinary doc-
trines that the Earth is " the oasis in the desert of



PREFAC'E. Vll

our system/' — "the largest solid opaque globe in
it,*' and "really the largest planetary body in the
Solar System, — ^its domestic hearth, and the only
world in the Universe f

St. Lbonabd's College, St. Andrews,
AprU 2bth, 1854.



• J



MORE WORLDS THAN ONE.



INTRODUCTION.

There is no subject within the whole range of
knowledge so universally interesting as that of a
Plurality of Worlds. It commands the sympathies,
and appeals to the judgment of men of all nations,
of all creeds, and of all times ; and no sooner do we
comprehend the few simple facts on which it rests,
than the mind rushes instinctively to embrace it.
Before the great truths of Astronomy were demon-
strated—before the dimensions and motions of the
planets were ascertained, and the fixed stars placed
at inconceivable distances from the system to which
we belong, philosophers and poets descried in the
celestial spheres the abodes of the blest ; but it was
not till the form and size and motions of the earth
were known, and till the condition of the other
planets was found to be the same, that analogy com-
pelled us to believe that these planets must be in-
habited like our own.

Although this opinion was maintained incidentally



2 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE.

by various writers both on astronomy and natural
religion, yet M. Fontenelle, Secretary to the Academy
of Sciences in Paris, was the first individual who
wrote a treatise expressly on the subject. It was
published in 1686, the year before Sir Isaac Newton
gave his immortal work, the PriTunpia, to the world,
and was entitled Conversations on the Plurality
of Worlds, It consisted of five chapters with the
foUow^ing titles : —

1. The earth is a planet which turns round its
own axis and also round the sun.

2. The Moon is a habitable world.

3. Particulars concerning the world in the Moon,
and that the other planets are also inhabited.

4. Particulars of the worlds of Venus, Mercury,
Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.

5. The Fixed Stars are as many Suns, each of
which illuminates a world.

In another edition of the work published in 1719,
Fontenelle added a sixth chapter, entitled,

6. New thoughts which confirm those in the pre-
ceding conversations. The latest discoveries which
have been made in the heavens. "

This singular work, written by a man of great
genius, and with a sufficient knowledge of astronomy,
excited a high degree of interest, both from the na-
ture of the subject and the vivacity and humour
with which it was written. The conversations are
carried on with the Marchioness of G , with whom



INTRODUOTION. 3

the author is snpposed to be residing. The lady i$i,
of coarse, distinguished by youth, beauty, and talent,
and the share which she takes in the dialogue is not
less interesting thau the more scientific part assumed
by the philosopher.

The Plurality of Worlds^ as the work was called,
was read with unexampled avidity, and was speedily
circulated through every part of Europe. It was
translated into all the languages of the Continent,
and was honoured by annotations from the pen of
the celebrated astronomer La Lande, and of M.
Gottsched, one of its Grerman editors. No fewer
than three English translations of it were published,
and one of these, we believe the first, had run through
six editions so early as the year 1737. Wherever it
was read it was admired, and though one hwndred and
sixty-seven years have elapsed since its publication,
we have not been able to learn that any attempt has
been made, during that long period, either to ridicule
or controvert the fascinating doctrines which it taught.

A few years after the publication of Fontenelle's
work, the celebrated philosopher Christian Hnygens,
the contemporary of Newton, and the discoverer of
the ring and one of the satellites of Saturn, composed
a work on the Plurality of Worlds, under the title of
the Theory of the Universe^ or Conjectures concerning
the Celestial Bodies and their Inhabitants} This

I Cosmotheorog, rire de Terris Gelestibas, earamqne ornatu, conjectursB, ad Con-
stantinum Hugeniam Fratrem, Gulielmo ^ Magnn Britannise Regi a Secretii.
Hugenii Opera, torn. ii. pp. 645-722.



-. jft- lar^re as liiat of Panisiidle,
L '^Ikh, and iwent tbrcmg^ at

> i; wafi written at i3ie Ege rf
' ruiitr before the anthar"* dosdi ;

> :.", uuerest which ,he ftih in its
"•. -.-i^nestlv beBomrht lus brc-dia-
> *: '• effect He mentioDS the

\.v, iVTJved frcnn the compoa-

' : u.i commiimcatiaii of his

^ . »v,iT 14} enter the world of

^ '..•^T v/nc. had added a new

^^ ..V v^-^l <hsri>vCTed the most

* . '^* ;t of its stmctures,

1-.^ ^' u-rftsr U' a soiiition

-.x^ «,-/' i:\£ intdnesB and

V - ^"'- : •:r.:n';siTi,. He was

^. -u,^ derive tl-«e same

^ >v ..^ A i' u^rie^.?nal iife. aod

\ . vx A \x 4*: :r. Ak in tiie
V .\^ V nX s\ ixxincvn of their

i.«ama ^«^^ikft w kAT* bees psBb-



INTRODUCTION. 5

iDhabitants. The work is to some extent a popular
Treatise on Astronomy, and contains all that was at
that time known respecting the primary and second-
ary planets of the solar system.

We are not acquainted with any other work written
expressly on the subject of a Plurality of Worlds, but
the doctrine was maintained by almost all the distin-
guished astronomers and writers who have flourished
since the true figure of the earth was determined,
Giordano Bruno of Nola/ Kepler and Tycho be-
lieved in it ; and Cardinal Cusa and Bruno, before
the discovery of binary systems among the stars, be-
lieved also that the stars were inhabited. Sir Isaac
Newton likewise adopted it, and Dr. Bentley^
Master of Trinity College, Cambridge, in his eighth
sermon on the Confutation of Atheism from the
origin and frame of the world,^ has ably main-
tained the same doctrine. In our own day we may
number among its supporters the distinguished names
of the Marquis De Laplace, Sir William and Sir John
Herschel, Dr. Chalmers, Isaac Taylor, and M. Arago.

After the publication of Dr. Chalmers's Astronomi-
cal Disoour^es, in which the doctrine of a Plurality
of Worlds was maintained with much eloquence and
force of argument, an attempt to reply to it was
made by a Mr. Alexander Maxwell, a London pub-
lisher, in a work which, though entitled Plurality of

1 In his work eotiiled Universo t Mondi innumerabil*.

2 This sermon was written flrom the information given him by Sir Isaac Newton
in bis four celebrated letters addressed to Dr. Bentley.



C MORE WORLDS THAN ONE.

Worlds, contains only one chapter on the subject.
This volume, a second edition of which was published
in 1820, is written by a person who does not believe
in the grand truths of Astronomy, and who regards
the Newtonian philosophy as containing principles
'' which lie at the foundation of all atheistical sys-
tems," and which are not only absurd but dangerous,
^4nstilling a destructive poison into the human
heart I"

Under these circumstances the scientific world has
been greatly surprised at the appearance of a work
entitled 0/ the Plurality of Worlds, the object of
which, like that of Maxwell, is to prove that our
earth is the only inhabited world in the universe,
while its direct tendency is to ridicule and bring into
contempt the grand discoveries in sidereal astronomy
by which the last century has been distinguished.
Although it is not probable that a work of this kind,
however ably it is written, and however ingenious be
the reasoning by which views so novel and extraordi-
nary are maintained, will influence opinions long and
deeply cherished, we have thought it necessary, in
support of astronomical truth, as well as of the
lessons which it teaches, to defend the doctrine of a
Plurality of Worlds by the aid of modern dis-
coveries, and to analyze and refute the objections
which have been made to it in the work to which
we have referred.



CHAPTER 1.

RELIGIOUS ASPECT OF THE QUESTION.

Before Christianity shed its light upon the world,
the philosopher who had no other gnide but reason,
looked beyond the grave for a resting-place from his
labours, as well as for a solution of the mysteries
which perplexed him. Minds, too, of an inferior
order, destined for immortality, and conscious of their
destination, instinctively pried into the future, che-
rishing visions of another world with all the fervour
of domestic affection, and with all the curiosity which
the study of nature inspires. Interesting as has been
the past history of our race, — engrossing as must
ever be the present, — the future, more exciting still,
mingles itself with every thought and sentiment, and
casts its beams of hope, or its shadows of fear, over
the stage both of active and contemplative life. In
youth we scarcely descry it in the distance. To the
stripling and the man it appears and disappears like
a variable star, shewing in painful succession its spots
of light and of shade. In age it looms gigantic to
the eye, full of chastened hope and glorious anticipa-



•MORE VOEIDS THAN OKE.



L



INTRODUCTION",

There is no suiiject within t.lie wliole raitge of
knowledge so universally interesting as that of a
PJiirality of Worlds. It comraaTidti the synipathies,
and appeals to the judgment of men of all nationB,
of all creeds, and nf ali times ; and no sooner do we
comprehend the few simfile facts on which it rests,
than tlie mind rushes instinctively to embrace it.
Before the great truths of Astronomy were demon-
strated — before the dimensions and motions of the
]ilanets were ascertained, and the fixed stars placed
at inconceivable diKtaoces from the system to which
we belong, philoBopherB and poets descried in the
celestial spheres the abodes of the blest ; but it was
not till the form and size and motions of the earth
were known, and till tho condition of the other
planets was found to be the same, that analogy enm-
pelled us to believe that these planets must be in-
habited like our own.

Although this opinion was maintained incidentally



8 MORE WORLDS THA.N ONE. CHAP. I.

tion ; and at the hour of transition when the outward
eye is dim, the image of the future is the last picture
which is eflFaced from the retina of the mind.

But however universal has been the anticipation of
the future, and however powerful its influence, Beason
did not venture to give a form and locality to its con-
ceptions ; and the imagination, even with its loosest
reins, failed in the attempt. Before the birth of
Astronomy, indeed, when our knowledge of space
terminated with the ocean or the mountain range
that bounded our view, the philosopher placed his
elysium in the sky ; and even when revelation had
unveiled the house of many mansions, the Christian
sage descried his future home in the new heavens and
in the new earth of his creed. Thus vaguely sha-
dowed forth, — thus seen as through a glass darkly,
the future even of the Christian, though a reality to
his faith, was but a dream to his reason. In vain
did he inquire what this future was to be in its phy-
sical relations, — in what region of space it was to be
spent, — what duties and pursuits were to occupy it, —
and what intellectual and spiritual gifts were to be
his portion. But when Science taught him the past
history of our earth, its form, and size, and motions,
— when Astronomy surveyed the solar system, and
measured its planets, and pronounced the earth to be
but a tiny sphere, and to have no place of distinction
among its gigantic compeers, — ^and when the Tele-
scope establishp'^ '^^^"^ systems of worlds far beyond


CHAP. I. RELIGIOUS ASPECT OF THE QUESTION. 9

the boundaries of our own, the future of the sage
claimed a place throughout the universe, and inspired
him with an interest in worlds, and systems of worlds,
— in space without limits, as well as in life without
end. On eagles' wings he soared in imagination
to the zenith, and sped his way to the horizon of
space, without reaching its ever-retiring bourne ; and
in the infinity of worlds, and amid the infinity of life,
which his reason suggested, he descried the home and
the companions of the future.

That these views are in accordance with the
demonstrated truths of astronomy, and deducible
from them by analogies which guide us in the ordi-
nary business of life, it will be the object of this
Essay to shew. But before entering upon the astro-
nomical and geological details which will thus de-
mand our attention, some preliminary observations
are necessary to prepare our minds for the unfet-
tered discussion of a subject which ignorance and
bigotry still surround with many prejudices,

In advocating a plurality of worlds, we are fortu-
nately in a more favoured position than the geologist,
whose researches into the ancient history of the earth
stood in apparent opposition to the declarations of
Scripture. Neither in the Old nor in the New Tes-
tament is there a single expression incompatiUe with
the great truth, that there are other worlds than our
own which are the seats of life and intelligence.
Many passages of Scripture, on the contrary, are



10 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. I.

favourable to the doctrine, and there are some, we
think, which are inexplicable, without admitting it
to be true. The beautiful text,^ for example, in
which the Psalmist expresses his surprise that the
Being who fashioned the heavens and ordained the
moon and the stars, should be mindful of so insig-
nificant a being as man, is, we think, a positive
argument for a plurality of worlds. We cannot
concur in the idea of Dr. Chalmers, that a person
wholly ignorant of the science of astronomy, and,
consequently, to whom all the stars and planets
appear but specks of light in the sky, not more
important than the ignis fatuus upon a marshy field,
could express the surprise and deep emotion of the
Hebrew poet. Inspiration, no doubt, revealed to
him the magnitude, the distances, and the final
cause of the glorious spheres which fixed his admira-
tion; and, when impressed with these truths, two
portions of creation were presented to his mind in
the strongest contrast, — ^Man in his comparative
insignificance, and the Heavens, — the Moon and the
Stars, in their absolute grandeur. He whom God
made a little lower than the angels, whom He
crowned with glory and with honour, and for whose
redemption He sent His only Son to suffer and to
die, could not, in the Psalmist's estimation, be an
object of insignificance, and measured, therefore, by

^ " When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the
Stan, which thou hast ordained ; what is man, that thou art mindAil of him ? and
the son of man, that thou Tisitest hitn ? '— Pbalk viil 3, i.



CHAP. I. RELIGIOUS ASPECT OF THE QUESTION. 11

his high estimate of man, his idea of the heavens,
the mooD, and the stars must have been of the most
transcendent kind. Had he been ignorant of astro-
nomy, he never could have given utterance to the
sentiment in the text. Man, made after GK)ds
image, was a nobler creation than twinkling sparks
in the sky, or than the larger and more useful lamp
of the moon. The Psalmist must, therefore, have
written under the impression either that the planets
and stars were worlds without life, or worlds inha-
bited by rational and immortal beings. If he
r^arded them as unoccupied, we cannot see any
reason for surprise that God should be mindful of
His noblest work, because innumerable masses of
matter existed in the universe, performing, for no
intelligible purpose, their solitary rounds. If they
were thus made for the benefit and contemplation of
man, unseen by any mortal eye but his, then should
the Psalmist have expressed his wonder, not at the
littleness, but at the greatness of the being for whose
use such magnificent worlds had been called into
existence. But if the poet viewed these worlds, as
he doubtless did, as teeming with life physical and
intellectual, as globes which may have required long
periods of time for their preparation, exhibiting new
forms of being, new powers of mind, new conditions
in the past, and new glories in the future, we can
then understand why he marvelled at the care of God
for creatures so comparcUively insignificant as man.



12 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. T.

It is evident, from the text we have been con-
sidering, and from other passages of Scripture, that
the word Heavens, so distinctly separated from the
moon and the stars, represents a material creation, the
work of God's fingers, and not a celestial space in
which spiritual beings may be supposed to dwell ;
and hence we are entitled to attach the same mean-
ing to the term wherever it occurs, unless the context
forbids such an application of it. The writers, both
in the Old and New Testament, speak of the heavens
as a separate material creation from the earth, and
there are passages which seem very clearly to indicate
that they were regarded as the seat of life. When
Isaiah speaks of the heavens being spread out as a
tent to dwell in^ when Job tells us that God, who
spread out the heavens, made Arctwrus, Orion and
Pleiades, and the chambers of the south,^ and when
Amos speaks of Him who buildeth His stories in the
heavens,^ (His house of many mmisions,) they use
terms which clearly indicate that the celestial spheres
are the seat of life. In the book of Genesis, too, God
is said to have finished the heavens and the earth,
and aU the host of them} Nehemiah declares that
God made the heaven, the heaven of heavens, and all
their host, the earth and all things that are therein,
and that the host of heaven worship Him,^ The
Psalmist speaks of oU the host of the heavens as mode



1 Iitaiah xlr. 22. 3 job U. 8, 9. ^ Amoa iz. 0.

« Gon U. 1. « Neh. ix. fl



CHAP. L RELIGIOUS ASPECT OF THE QUESTION. J 3

by the breath of God's mouthy (the process by which
He gave life to Adam ;) and Isaiah furnishes us with
a striking passage, in which the occupants of the
earth and of the heavens are separately described.
^^ I have made the earth, and created man upon it :
I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens,
and all their host have 1 commanded!'^ But in
addition to these obvious references to life and things
pertaining to life, we find in Isaiah the following
remarkable passage, " For thus saith the Lord, that
created the heavens, God himself that formed the
earth and made it ; he hath established it, he created
it NOT IN VAIN, he formed it to be inhabited." ^
Here we have a distinct declaration from the inspired
prophet, that the earth wotdd have been created in
VAIN if it had not been formed to be inhabited; and
hence we draw the conclusion, that as the Creator
cannot be supposed to have made the worlds of our
system, and those in the sidereal universe in vain,
they must have been formed to be inhabited.

In the New Testament we find passages not only
in perfect harmony with the doctrine of a plurality of
worlds, but which cannot be well explained without
admitting it to be true. When St. John tells us that
the Worlds were made by the word of God,* and St.
Paul, that by our Saviour, the heir of all things, were
made the worlds,^ we cannot suppose that they mean

1 Psalm xxxiiL 6. > Isaiah xlv. 12. > Isaiah zIt. la

4 John i. 3. & Hebrews i 3.



16 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. I.

own or in other systems which have been in a state
of preparation, as our earth was, for the advent of
intellectual life.

The connexion thus indicated between the destinies
of the human family and the material system to
which we belong, arising from the limited extent of
the earth's habitable surface, and its unlimited popu-
lation, is a strong corroboration of the views which
we have deduced from Scripture. In the world of
instinct the superabundance of life is controlled by
the law of mutual destruction, which reigns in the
earth, the ocean, and the air; but the swarm of
human life, increasing in an incalculable ratio, both
in the Old and the New World, has never been per-
ceptibly reduced by the scythe of famine, of pestilence,
or of war ; and when we consider the length of time
during which this accumulation may proceed, we
cannot justly challenge the correctness of the conclu-
sion that this earth is not to be the future residence
of the numerous family which it has been destined to
rear. The connexion between this probable truth
and the doctrine of a plurality of worlds, will ap-
pear from the facts and reasonings in the foUowing
chapter.



CHAPTER 11.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM.

In order to appreciate the force of the ai^ument
i'or a plurality of worlds, derived from the similarity
of our Earth to the other planets of the Solar system,
we must call the attention of the reader to a popular
description of the magnitudes, distances, and general
phenomena of the different l)odies that compose it.

There is, perhaps, no sight in the material world
more magnificent than that of the starry firmament.
Seen from our earliest years, it may have ceased to
excite our wonder, but no sooner has science taught
ns its true nature than it reapers in all its glory,
like the gloomy landscape whose varied beauties a
burst of sun-light has revealed. In the stillness of
night, when the moral world is asleep, — when the
aspen leaf has ceased to flutter, and no sound is
heard save that of the remote waterfall, or the rest-
less ocean, or the zephyr breath among the distant
foliage, the silver Moon, the brilliant Planet, and
the twinkling Star, are the beacon-lights which guide
the eye through the brilliant expanse above,

B



18 MOKE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. II.

The orbs of heaven seem at first fixed and motion-
less, like the scene around, but ere long, before our
survey or our reverie is over, we perceive that they
have all been in motion. The Moon has neared the
horizon : one planet has descended in the West, —
another has risen from the Eastern sea, and every
star in the sky has shared in the general movement.
When the observer has discovered that he alone has
moved, — that, night after night, the Moon and Planets
have alone changed their place among the stars, and
that the Earth on which he stands, and the planets,
whose motion he has observed, form a system of their
own, while the thousands of stars, among which they
moved, are fixed at distances invariable, he has
arrived at the leading truths in astronomy.

But to the contemplative mind, the firmament of
stars and planets has a deeper interest. Everything
around us, save it, is in a state of transition. Be-
side the fleeting changes which the return of the
seasons brings, the landscape aromid us is every year
changing its aspect. The heath is robbed of its
purple, and the yellow harvest waves over its once
russet breast. The forests of our youth have ceased
to give us shelter, — ^now the roof-trees of our homes,
— ^now the floating bulwarks on the deep. The very
places of our birth have been removed or efl&iced,
and the lichen has encrusted the record on the tomb-
stones of our fathers. All around is change, — but
the gorgeous creations in the sky are still there, un-



OHAP. II. DESCRIPTION OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM. 19

dimmed in brightness — anchanged in grandeur, —
performing, with unflagging pace and unvarying
precision, their daily, their annual, and their secular
rounda Upon these same heavens, just as we see
them now, bespangled with the same planets and the
same stars, our first parents gazed when they entered
and when they quitted Paradise. The same constel-
lations, Arcturus, Orion, and the Pleiades had sung
together when the foundations of the world were laid,^
and they rolled in darkness over Calvary, when the
Prince of Life was slain. They are truly the only
objects in the universe which all nations have wit-
nessed, and all people admired. They presided at
the horoscope of our birth, and they will throw their
pale radiance over the green mounds beneath which
we are destined to lie.

Such are the associations with which we look at the
firmament above, and deep must be the interest with
which we contemplate the history and purpose of its
mysterious forms. It was, doubtless, under such
associations that the great Philosopher of Mind^ gave
utterance to the feelings with which he contemplated
the two cardinal phases of the physical and the moral
world.

Methinks I ever tremble when I scan

Tbe Starlit Heavens, the sense of Right in Man.

In surveying the material universe thus shadowed
forth in the firmament, the first and the gmndest

Job ix 8. ^ Immaauel Kant



20 MORE WORLDS THAN 0KB. CHAP. U.

object which arrests our attention is the glorious
Sun, — ^ihe centre and soul of the solar system, —
the lamp that lights it, the fire that heats it, —
the magnet that guides and controls it, — the foun-
tain of colour which gives its azure to the sky,
its verdure to the fields, its rainbow hues to the
gay world of flowers, and the "purple light of
love" to the marble cheek of youth and beauty.
This globe, probably of burning gas, enveloping
a solid nucleus, is 880,000 miles in diameter, above
a hundred times that of our globe, and five hun-
dred times larger in bulk than all the planets put
together! It revolves upon its axis in twenty-five
days, and throws off its light with the velocity of
192,000 miles in a second. Sometimes by the naked
eye, but frequently even by small telescopes, large
black spots, many thousand miles in diameter, are
seen upon its surface, and are evidently openings in
the luminous atmosphere, through which we see the
opaque solid nucleus, or the real body of the sun.

Around, and nearest the sun, at a distance of
thirty-six millions of miles, revolves the planet Mer-
cury, with a day of twenty-four hours, and a year of
eighty-eight days. Supposing the light of the sim
to decrease as the square of the distance, he will
receive nearly seven times as much light and heat as
the earth. Through the telescope some astronomers
have observed spots on his surface, and mountains
several miles in height.



CHAP. n. DRSCRIPTION OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM. 21

Next to Mercury the planet Venus revolves at the
distance of sixty-eight millions of miles, with a day of
nearly twenty-four hours, and a year of 225 days.
Her diameter is 7700 miles, a little less than that of
the earth. She changes her phases like the moon,
exhibits spots on her surface, and, according to
Schroeter, has an atmosphere and mountains nearly
tweaty miles in height The light and heat which
she receives from the sun is about double of that
which is received by the earth.^

The next body of the Solar system is our own
Eakth — our birthplace, and soon to be our grave.
Its distance from the sun is ninety-six millions of
miles; its equatorial diameter 7926 miles; the length
of its year 365 days six hours, and of its day twenty-
four hours. The form of the Earth is that of a sphere
flattened at the poles like an orange, the difference
of its diameters being 26^ miles. Its superficies is
divided into continents and seas, the continentfi occu-
pjing one-thirdy and the seas two-thirds of its whole
surfaca The land, sometimes level and sometimes
undulating, occasionally rises into groups and ranges
of mountains, the highest of which does not exceed
five miles. The Earth is surrounded with an aerial
enveloj)e or atmosphere, which is computed to be
about forty-five miles in height, though the region

1 From th« rare appearance and want of permanenoe in the spots of Mercury
and Venus, 1^ John Herschel is of opinion, " that we do not see as in the moon
the real snrlSaoe of these planets, but only their atmogpheres, much loaded with
doads, and which may serve to mitigate the otherwise intense glare of their sun-
riiine.*-— OulMfier of Attronomy, S 509.



22 MORE WOBLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. II.

of clouds does not reach much above the suminits
of the highest mountains.

The Earth is accompanied by a Moon or satellite,
whose distance is 237,000 miles, her diameter 2160
miles, and the time of her revolution round the
Earth twenty-eight days. Her surface is composed
of hill and dale, of rocks and mountains nearly two
nules high, and of circular cavities, sometimes five
miles in depth, and forty in diameter, which are
believed to be the remains of extinct volcanoes. She
possesses neither lakes nor seas ; and we cannot dis-
cover with the telescope any traces of living beings,
or any monuments of their hands, though we hope
that these objects will be seen with some magnificent
telescope which may yet be constructed. Viewing
the Earth as the third planet in order from the sun,
can we doubt that it is a globe like the rest, poised
in ether like them, and, like them, moving round
the central luminary ?

Next, beyond the Earth, is the red-coloured planet
Mars, with a day of about twenty-five hours, and
revolving round the sun in 687 days, at the distance
of one hundred and forty-two millions of miles. His
diameter is 4100 miles, and his surface e^bits spots
of different hues, — the seas, according to Sir John
Herschel, being greefa^ and the land red. The spots
which have been seen on this planet by several astro-
nomers, are not always equally distinct, but when
seen " they ofifer," as Sir John Herschel observes,



"N



CHAP. II. DESCRIPTION OF TH£ SOLA.R 8T8TEK. {3

'^ the appearance of fonns, conBiderably definite and
highly characteristic, brought successively into view
by the rotation of the planet, from the assiduous
observation of which it has even been found practi-
cable to construct a rude chart of the suiface of the
planet. The variety in the spots may arise from the
planet not being destitute of atmosphere and cloud ;
and what adds greatly to the probability of this, is
the appearance of brilliant white spots at its polesy
which have been conjectured, with some probability,
to be snow, as they disappear when they have been
long exposed to the sun, and are greatest when just
emerging from the long night of their polar winter,
the snow line then extending to about six degrees
from the pole."^ In a sketch of this planet, aa seen
in the pure atmosphere of Calcutta by Mr. Grant, it
appears, to use his words, " actually as a little world,"
and as the Earth would appear at a distance with its
seas and continents of different shades.

Hitherto we have been surveying worlds at a re-
spectful distance from each other, and having days,
and nights, and seasons, and aspects, of the same
character ; but we now arrive at a region in space
where some great catastrophe has taken place. At
the distance of about two hundred and fifty millions
of miles from the sun, corresponding to a period of
about 1500 days, astronomers long ago predicted
the existence of a large planet, occupying the wide

^ Ouaines<^AHr<m(my,iS10,



24



MORS WORLDS THAN ONE.



CHAP. II.



space between Mars and Jupiter. In the beginning
of the present century, one very small planet was
discovered in this locality by M. Piazzi ; and after
other two had been discovered, one by himself and
the other by Mr. Harding, Dr. Olbers hazarded the
opiDion that the three planets were fragments of a
larger one which had burst; and this remarkable
theory has been almost placed beyond a doubt by the
discovery, in the same place, of Uiirty fragments in
all, chiefly by M. Gasparis of Naples, and om* eminent
countryman Mr. Hind, by whom no fewer than ten
of these bodies have been discovered.

The following table contains the distances from the
sun, and the periodic times of these remarkable bodies,
the distance of the earth being unity or 1, —


Meandto-


Periodie


Meandia-


Periodio


tanoefrom


Time in


tanoe firom


Time in


Sun.


Tern.


Son.


Teaz&


Ceres,


2.767


4.604


Psyche,


2.947


6.068


PaUM,


2.772


4.617


Thetis,


2.480


8.904


Jnno,


2.669


4.860


MelpomeDe,


2.294


8.476


Vesta,


2.861


8.629


Fortuna,


2.446


8.826


Astnsa,


2.677


4.188


Massilia,


2.449


8.888


Hebe,


2.426


8.777


Calliope,


2.918


4.972


Iris,


2.886


8.684


Lutetia,


2.434


8.800


Flora,


2.201


8.267


Thalia,


2.626


4.267


Metis,


2.887


8.681


Proserpine,


2.668


4 324


Hygeia,


8.161


6.694


Phocea,


2.898


8.704


Parihenope,


2.448


8.830


Themis,


8.160


6.622


Victoria,


2.886


8.668


Euterpe,


8.847


6.697


Egeria,


2.682


4.160


Bellona,


2.781


4.640


Irene,


2.682


4.149


Amphitrite,


2.667


6.168


Eunomia,


2.640


4.289


Another, not named.


CHAP. II. DESCRIPTION OF THK SOLAS SYSTEM. 25

The distance of Flora^ the nearest of these aste-
roids, is 2.201, and its period 3.267 years; and
that of Euterpe, the most distant, 3.347, with a
period of 5.597 years. While this sheet was
printing, Mr. Hind discovered the thirtieth of
these planets, making the tenth discovered hy
himself.

Beyond this remarkable group is situated the planet
Jupiter, a world of huge magnitude, 1320 times
greater in bulk than our Earth, revolving round its
axis in ten hours, and round the sun in 4333 days,
(a little less than twelve years,) at the distance of
four hundred and e^hty-five millions of miles. His
form is that of an oblate spheroid, his equatorial being
to his polar diameter as 107 to 100. His diameter
is 90,000 miles, and he is attended by four Moons,
or satellites, the average size of which is a little
greater than that of our moon. His surface ex-
hibits bright spots and dark bands or belts, which,
though they have always the same direction, vary in
breadth and in position, occasionally running out
into branches or subdivisions, and dark spots. Sir
John Herschel is of opinion, that the belts are tracts
of corresponding clear sky in the planet's atmo-
sphere, through which the darker body of the planet
is seen, and that they are produced by currents like
our trade- winds, but of a more steady and decided
character, owing to the great velocity of his daily
rotation.



X



25 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. II.

The following are the periods and distances of
Jupiter's satellites, —


Periods.


DistaDoesin


Days.


Hours.


Mln.


Radii of Jupiter.


1.


1


18


28


6.049


2.


8


13


16


9.628


8.


7


8


48


15.860


4.


16


16


82


26.998



Next to Jupiter is the remarkable planet Saturn,
accompanied with eight satellites, and surrounded by
a ring. The distance of Saturn from the sun is
eight hundred and ninety millions of miles, his
annual period twenty-nine and a half years, and the
length of his day ten and a half hours. His diameter
is 79,000 miles, and his equatorial is to his polar dia*
meter as 12 to 11. According to very recent observa-
tions, the ring is divided into four different rings, as
shewn in the gilt figure of Saturn. Mr. Jacob has
distinctly seen a fine division through more than
half the circumference of the outer ring. It ap-
pears from some recent observations of Mr. Hippisley,
that the middle ring is convex, and thicker in the
middle than at either of its edges, and that the outer
ring is sensibly raised above the edge of the inner.
Mr. Bond, who thinks that the rings are fluid, is of
opinion that the number of rings is continually
changing, and that their maximum number, in the
normal condition of the mass, does not exceed twenty.
According to Mr. Bond, the power which sustains the
centre of gravity of the ring is not in the planet itself^



CHAP. II. DESCRIPTION OP THE SOLAB SYSTEM. 27

but in his satellites ; and the satellites, though con-
stantly disturbing the ring, actually sustain it in the
very act of perturbation.

Mr. Otto Struve and Mr. Bond have lately studied,
with the great Munich telescope, at the observatory
of Pulkowa, the third ring of Saturn, which Mr.
Lassell and Mr. Bond found to he fluids from having
observed through it the body of the planet, which is
of an amber brown colour, as if seen through a film
of smoke, the colour of the ring, when seen off the
planet being of a slaty character. The principal
division of the outer ring is not black, but of an
amber brown.^ They saw distinctly the dark inter-
val between this fluid ring and the two old ones, and
even measured its dimensions ; and they perceived
at its inner margin an edge feebly iUuminated, which
.they thought might be the commencement of a
fourth ring. These astronomers are of opinion, that
the fluid ring is not of very recent formation, and
that it is not subiect to rapid change : and they have
come to the extmordiuaxy conclulr;, that the inner
border of the ring has, since the time of Huygens,
heen gradually approaching to the body of Saturn,
and that we may expect sooner or later, perhaps in
some dozen of years, to see the rings united with the
body of the planet



1 These observations on the colotir of the part of Saturn seen throng the trans-
parent ring, and on the diyision of the outer ring, were made by Mr. Jacob at
Madras.



28 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. IL

The following are the dimensions of Saturn's rings,
when they were supposed to be only two in number,
according to the measurements of Struve, one second
corresponding to 4400 miles —

HUes.

1. Exterior diameter of the Exterior ring, 40''.096 176,418

2. Interior diameter of the Exterior ring, 35\289 165^72

3. Exterior diameter of the /nt<;rior ring, 84''.476 161,690

4. Interior diameter of the Interior ring, 26^668 117,389
6. Equatorial diameter of Saturn, . 17''. 991 79,160

6. Distance of the Interior ring from planet, 4^889 19,090

7. Breadth ofthe division between the rings, 0^.408 1,791

8. Thickness of the ring, . . 0^.050 220

A singular fact in the structure of Saturn, not yet
explained, was observed by Struve, who found that
the inner edge of the interior ring was 943 miles
nearer the body of the planet on the west side than
on the east side.

The following table shews the distances and perio-
dic times of the satellites of Saturn, —

^^oda, DiBtanoe in BadU

DajL Hoan. Min. ofSatorn.

1. Mimas, 22 87 8.861

2. Enceladus, 1 9 68 4.312
8. Tethys, 1 21 18 6.340
4. Dione, 2 17 42 6.840
6. Rhea, 4 12 26 2.663

6. Titan, 16 22 41 22.146

7. Hyperion, 22 12 28.

8. Japetus, 79 7 64 64.

The seventh satellite, Hyperion, was lately dis-
covered on the same night by Mr. Lassell, Liverpool,
and Professor Bond of Cambridge, U.S.



CHAP. IL DESCRIPTION OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM. 29

Beyond Saturn, at a distance from the sun of one
thousand eight hundred millions of miles, is placed
the planet Uranus, discovered hy Sir William
Herschel. Its year, or annual period, is eighty-four
years, and the length of its day nine and a half hours.
Its diameter is 34,500 miles, and it is attended by
eight satellites, six of which were discovered by Sir
William Herschel, and the other two, a few years
ago, by Mr. Lassell of Liverpool.

The following are the periods and distances of the
satellites of Uranus.


Periods.


Bistanoes in Radii


DayiL


Hours.


MizL


of Uranus.


1.


4


2.


s


16


56


17.0


3.


10


28


19.8


4.


18


11


7


22.8


6.


88


2


45.6


6.


107


12


91.0



The remotest planet of our system, the planet
Neptune, discovered theoretically in 1846 by Adams
and Leverrier, and first recognised in the heavens by
M. Galle of Berlin, is about 42,000 miles in diameter,
and performs its annual revolution in 60,127 days,
(about 165 years,) at the distance of nearly three
thousand millions of miles from the sun. It is ac-
companied with one, or probably two, satellites ; and
there is reason to believe that it is surrounded with a
ring like Saturn. The satellite discovered by Mr.
Lassell revolves round the planet in five days and



30 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. II.

twenty-one hours, at the distance of about 252,000
miles, or twelve radii of the planet.

Having thus travelled from the centre to the verge
of the planetary system, — from the effulgent orb of
day to that almost cimmerian-twilight where Phoebus
could scarcely see to guide his steeds, let us ponder
a while over the startling yet instructive sights which
we have encountered in our course. Adjoining the
sun, we find Mercury and Venus, with days and
seasons like ours. Upon reaching our own planet,
we recognise in it the same general features, but we
find it larger in magnitude, and possessing the ad-
ditional distinction of a satellite and a race of living
beings to rejoice in the pre-eminence. In contrast
with Mars, our earth still maintains its superiority
both in size and equipments ; but, upon advancing
a little farther into space, our pride is rebuked and
our fears evoked, when we reach the part of our
system where thirty asteroids, relics of a once
mighty planet, are revolving in dissevered orbits, and
warning the vain astronomer of another world that
a similar fate may await his own. Dejected, but not
despairing, we pass onward, and, as if in bright con-
trast with the confusion and desolation we have wit-
nessed, there bursts upon our sight the splendid orb
of Jupiter, proudly enthroned amid his four attendant
satellites. When compared with so glorious a crea-
tion, our own earth dwindles into insignificance. It
is no longer the monarch of the planetary throng,



CHAP. U. DESCBIPTION OF THE SOLAB STSTEH. 31

and we blush at the recollection that sovereigns and
pontiflB?, and even philosophers, made it the central
ball, around which the Sun and Moon and planets,
and even the stars themselves, revolved in obsequious
subjection. The dignity of being the seat of intel-
lectual and animal life, however, still seems to be
our own ; and if our globe does not swell so largely
to the eye, or shine so brightly in the night, it has
yet been the seat of glorious dynasties, — of mighty
empires, — of heroes that have bled for their country, —
of martyrs who have died for their faith, — ^and of
sages who have unravelled the very universe we are
surveying. Pursuing our outward course, a new
wonder is presented to us in the gorgeous appendages
of Saturn, encircled with his brilliant rings, and with
eight moons, for the use, doubtless, of living beings.
Advancing onwards, we encounter Uranus, with his
eight pledges that he is the seat of life ; and after
passing the new planet Neptune, and his one or pro-
bably two attendants, at the frontier of our system,
we reach what is the region, and what may be re-
garded as the home, of comets.

Comets, or wandering stars, as they have been
called, are those celestial bodies most of which appear
occasionally only within the Kmits of the Solar sys-
tem. They move in elliptical orbits, in one of the
foci of which the sun is placed; but, unlike the
planets, which always move from west to east, the
comets revolve in orbits inclined at all possible



32 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. TI.

angles, and move in all possible directions. The
movements of several hundred comets which have
been observed, must be chiefly executed within that
vast and untenanted region, which Ues between the
nearest known fixed star and the orbit of Neptune,
an interval equal to six thousand times the distance
of that planet from the sun, or twenty-one million
million of miles. What is their occupation there, or
what it is here, when they are our visitors, we cannot
venture to guess. That they do not perform the
functions of planets is obvious, from their very nature ;
and there is no appearance of their importing any-
thing but vapour into our system, or of their export-
ing anything to another.

The general appearance of a comet is that of a
faint round nebula, densest in the centre, like a piece
of pale cloud through which stars are visible. Many
of these comets have tails, increasing as they approach
the sun. These tails are sometimes short, and some-
times so long as to stretch from the horizon to the
zenith. The great comet of 1680, which produced
such a sensation in London, was visible for four
months. Its greatest distance from the sun was
estimated at 127 times the distance of the earth
from the sun. Its tail was 120 millions of miles long,
and its velocity 880,000 miles in an hour. When it
was nearest the sun its distance from him was only
144,000 miles, or about one-sixth of the sun's diame-
ter, and its heat from this cause so great that Sir



CHAP. II. DESCBIPTION OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM. 33

Isaac Newton computed it to be 2000 times that of
red hot iron. Dr. Halley made its period only 575
years, but Encke makes it 8800, and Argelander
2888 years.

A comet still more remarkable was seen in Eng-
land on the 17th March 1843. Its nucleus had the
appearance of a planetary disc, and had the bright-
ness of a star of the first or second magnitude. It
had a double tail divided by a dark line. At the
Cape of Good Hope it was seen in full daylight, and
in the immediate vicinity of the sea ; but the most
remarkable fact in its history was its near approach
to the sun, its distance from his surface being only
one fourteenth of his diameter. The heat to which
it was exposed, therefore, was much greater than
that which Sir Isaac Newton ascribed to the comet of
1680. Sir John Herschel has computed that it must
have been 24 times greater than that which was pro-
duced in the focus of Parker's burning lens, 32 inches
in diameter, which melts crystals of quartz and agate.
In the interesting work On cometic orbits by Edward
Cooper, Esq. of Markree Castle, the periods of those
comets that move in elliptic orbits vary from four years
to about 15,000 ; but for obvious reasoas, we cannot
place much confidence in the higher numbers.

The tails of comets have occasionally exhibited
very remarkable phenomena. In some, such as that
of 1826, the tail consists of several streams of diverg-
ing light in a state of quick and constant change.

c



34 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. II.

The nucleus of the comet of 1811 sent out rapid
coruscations to iHe very end of its tail; and the
comet of 1824 exhibited two tails diametrically oppo-
site, the one directed to the sun being the smallest
and faintest

Some comets have passed near the earth, and others
may pass still nearer it ; but even if they should not
produce those tremendous effects which Laplace has
indicated, and if their great rarity and rapid motion
should hinder them from acting upon our seas, or
changing the axis of our globe, a sweep of their train
of gas or of vapour would not be a pleasing salutation
to living beings. The greatest distance of the most
distant comet that has been observed, &lls short of
the distance of the nearest fixed star by nine miUion
million of miles. Placing ourselves at this distance,
how ridiculous appears the idea, so long and devoutly
cherished, that the heavens, with all their host, re-
volved round our little planet ! At that point the
earth is not even visible, and the whole starry crea-
tion, and our sun itself dwindled into a star, stand
fixed and immovable.

Till within the last forty years it was the universal
belief among astronomers that every comet strayed
far beyond the Umits of the Solar system, the shortest
period of any of those that had been observed being
about seventy years, indicating the immense distance
which it must have traversed beyond the orbit of
Neptune. In 1818, however, M. Pons discovered a



CHAP. n. DESCRIFTION OF THE SOLAR BTSTEM. 35

cotnet, now called Encke's Cornet^ whose period was
not above three years and five months, and whose
orbit, extending inwards as far as that of Mercury,
did not reach beyond the orbit of Pallas. Other ^ve
oomets, whose periods are 5^, 5^, 6|, 7^, and sixteen
years, have been discovered within the limits of our
system. Among these bodies, the comet of Biela,
discovered in 1826, appeared to separate into two
distinct comets with parallel tails, but after a certain
time it resumed its single state. M. Damoiseau
having predicted that this comet would pass within
18,000 miles of a point in the earth's orbit, the pub-
lication of this fact excited such an alarm in Paris,
that M. Arago was summoned from his studies to
allay the terror of the community. The fears of the
people, however, will not appear unreasonable, when
we recollect that Sir John Herschel has stated that
the orbit of this comet ^^ so nearly intellects that of
the earth, that an actual collision is not impossible,
and indeed must in all likelihood happen in the lapse
of some millions of years !"

A seventh comet belonging to our system, called
LexelVs Comet, which that astronomer discovered in
1770, is supposed to have been lost, as it ought to
have appeared thirteen times, and has not been seen
since that date. It is thought to have been ren-
dered invisible in 1779 by the action o( Jupiter, but
in what wav astronomers have not been able to de-
termine.



36 MOBE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. 11.

The following popular view of the relative sizes
and distances of the planets which compose the Solar
system has been given by Sir John Herschel : —



Size.


Diameter

of orb»J
in feet.


Real dist.

in millions

of mile*.


a Globe two feet in


diameter.


a Mustard Seed^ .


» m


164 '


36


a Pea,


• •


214


til


a larger Pea,


• •


430


96


a large Pin's head,


• •


664
1000


k Grains of Sand, .


• •


to
1200


250


an Orange, .


Half a mile,


•


. 486


a small Orange, .


One mile and


a fifth,


. 899


a Cherry,


One mile and


a half.


. 1800


a Plum,


Two miles and a half.


. 3000



The Sun,

Mercury,

Venus, .

Earth, .

Mars, .

Juno,

Ceres,

Vesta,

Pallas, and
the other 29
Asteroids,

Jupiter,

Saturn,

Uranus,

Neptune, .



To which we may add,



The greatest distance of a Comet, Eight thousand miles.
Distance of nearest Fixed Star, Fifteen thousand miles.

The science which presents such objects to our
contemplation, " constitutes/' to use the language of
Admiral Smyth, in concluding his admirable work,
A Cycle of Celestial Objects, " a sort of scrutiny into
futurity, and truly elevates the mind above the
mundane system. We cannot see, without peculiar
emotion, that the gieat law of gravitation is decidedly
extended through the vast heavens, and that all the
perceptible universe is amenable to the operation of
time and space, motion and force, in similar relation



CHAP. n. DESCRIPTION OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM. 37

to our own. Thus the whole firmanwnt^ with its
countless and glorious orbs^ which^ titough sustaining
apparently independent positions^ are but individual
constituents ofoTie Majesty ofcreoition^ countenances
the sagacity of the ancient dogma, that God works
BY Geometry."



CHAPTER III.

THE OEOLOOICAL CONDITION OF THE EARTH.

I
I

In the preceding brief description of the Solar sys- |

tern, we see distinctly the relation which our own
Earth bears to the other planets, in its position, its
form, its magnitude, its satellite, and its daily and
annual motions. But though a comparison of these
properties of the earth, which constitute what may be
called its astronomical condition^ with the analogous
properties of the other planets, might entitle us to
ascribe to them other functions, — the function, for
example, of supporting inhabitants, which the earth
only is known to possess, yet our argument will
derive new strength, and we shall be prepared to
meet recent objections, by taking into consideration
the geological structure of the earth, and the proper-
ties of its atmosphere, and by endeavouring to read
its past history in the successive steps by which it
has been prepared as a residence for the human
family.

There is no branch of science so closely associated
with our immediate wants and enjoyments as that of



CHAP. ni. GEOLOGICAL CONDITION OF THE EARTH. 39

Greology. In our daily walks we tread with heedless
step upon the apparently uninteresting ohjects of
which it treats ; hut could we rightly interrogate the
rounded pebhle in our path, it would tell us of the
convulsions by which it was wrenched from its parent
rock, and of the floods by which it was abraded and
placed beneath our feet In our visits to the pic-
turesque and the sublime, we come into still closer
proximity to gedogical truths. In the precipices
which defend our rock-girt Isle, and flank our moun-
tain glens, and in the shapeless fragments at their
base which the lichen colours, and round which the
ivy twines, we see the remnants of uplifted and shat-
tered strata which once peacefully reposed at the
bottom of the ocean. Nor does the rugged or the
rounded boulder give a less articulate response from
its lair of sand or its grave of clay. Floated by ice
from some alpine summit, or hurried along in torrents
of mud or of water, it may have traversed a quarter
of the globe, amid the crash of falling forests and the
death-shrieks of the animals which they lodged. The
mountain-range, too, with its catacombs beneath,
along which the earthquake transmits its terrific
sounds, reminds us of the mighty powers by which it
was upheaved, while the lofty peak with its cap of
ice or its nostrils of fire reveals the tremendous agen-
cies which have been struggling beneath us.

But it is not merely among the scenes of external
nature that forces, now subdued, are presented to our



40 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. III.

minds. Our temples and our dwellings are fornae J
from the rocks of a primeBval ^e, — bearing the ripple
marks of a Pre- Adamite ocean, — ground by the fric-
tion of the once-travelling boulder, and embosoming
the relics of ancient life, with the plants which sus-
tained it. Our houses are ornamented with varie-
gated limestones the indurated tombs of molluscous
life, and our apartments heated with the carbon of
primaeval forests, and lighted with the gaseous ele-
ment which it confines. The obelisk of granite and
the monument of bronze which transniit to future
ages the deeds of the hero and the sage, are equally
the production of the earth's prolific womb, and from
the green bed of the ocean have been raised the spot-
less marble to mould the divine lineaments of beauty,
and perpetuate the expression of intellectual power.
From a still greater depth the priraeBval rocks have
yielded a rich tribute to the chaplet of wealth, and the
processes of art. The diamond and the sapphire and
the ruby that shine in the imperial diadem, are also
the valued tools of the artisan ; and the topaz, the
emerald and the chrysoberyl have been scattered from
the jewel caskets of our mother earth, to gratify the
vanity of her children.

When the geologist begins his survey of the globe,
he finds its solid covering composed of rocks, and
beds of all shapes and kinds, lying at every possible
angle, and occupying every possible position. Here
the granite rises in lofty peaks, or is scattered in



CHAP. ni. GEOLOGICAL CONDITION OF THE EARTH. 41

rounded boulder& There the basalt throws its once
liquid current over beds of sandstone, or sustains
them upon its flanks. Here the strata, once at the
bottom of the sea, rest in undisturbed tranquillity —
the more recent deposits from a tranquil ocean.
There they bristle up with their rugged margin, dis-
playing, in serrated outline, the fractured edges of
ancient and of recent beds. Everywhere indeed,
what was deep is brought into visible relation with
what was superficial, — what is old with what is new,
— what preceded life with what followed it.

How these rocks came into their present place it is
the businessof the geologist todetermine, — tocompute
their relative ages, — to fix the position which they
originally occupied, — ^to study the forces by which
thejr were upheayed,-^d the remains of oiganic
life which they entomb. Studies like these possess a
home interest for reflecting and sympathizing man.
Life claims kindred with what once lived. It owns
the same relation between itself and that which is
yet to breathe ; and if on the tombs of our fathers is
inscribed the law under which we are individually
to join them, we read with no less distinctness among
the cemeteries of primeval death that more general
enactment under which the races of man, and the
tributary creation which obeys him, shall take their
place in the coming catastrophe, and reappear to
future pilgrims — memorials of the age of genius —
the cycle of intellectual and immortal generations.



42 MOKE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. III.

Thus identified with astronomy, in proclaiming
tni&s supposed to be hostile to Boripture, Geology
has been denounced as the enemy of religion. The
twin siBteiB of terrestrial and celestial physios have
thus been joint-heirs of intolerance and persecution
— unresisting victims in the crusade which ignorance
and fanaticism are ever waging against science.
When great truths are driven to make an appeal to
reason, knowledge becomes criminal, and philosophers
martyr& Truth, however, like all moral powers, can
neither be checked nor extinguished. When com-
pressed, it but reacts the more. It crushes where it
cannot expand, — ^it bums where it is not allowed to
shine. Human when originally divulged, it becomes
divine when finally established. At first, the breath
of a sage — ^at last it is the edict of a god. Endowed
with such vital energy, astronomical truth has cut its
way through the thick darkness of superstitious
times, and, cheered by its conquests, geology will find
the same open path when it has triumphed over the '
less formidable obstacles of a civili'^ed age.

The Earth, as we have seen, when merely examined
by the eye, consists of land and water. The land is
composed of soils of various kinds, and of stones and
rocks of different characters. It is formed into ex-
tensive plains, into valleys excavated apparently
by rivers or water-courses, and into mountain groups
and mountain ranges, rising to the height of several
miles above the bed of the ocean. In order to obtain



CHAP. III. GEOLOGICAL CONDITION OF THE EARTH. 43

a knowledge of the structure of the earthy geolo-
gists have examined with the greatest care its rocks,
its soils, and its accumulations of day or of gravel,
wherever they have been laid bare by artifidal
or natural causes, by the operations of the miner,
or the road engineer, by the cuttings for railways, or
by the action of rivers or of the sea ; and they have
thus obtained certain general results which give us
aa approximate idea of the different materials which
compose what is called the crust of the earth. In
those portions of its surface, which do not rise into
mountains, the thickness of the crust thus explored
does not exceed ten or twdve mileSj which is only
about the 7(X)th part of the earth's diameter, — a
quantity so small, that if we represent the earth by
a sphere having the same diameter as the cupola of
St Paul's, which is 140 feet, the tiiickness of the crust
would be little more than tivo inches.

Beneath the crust lies the Nucleus of the earth,
or its kemd or its frame-work, of the nature and
composition of which we are entirely ignorant. We
know only, by comparing the average density of the
earth, which is about S^ times that of water, with
the average density of the rocks near its surface,
which is about 2^ times that of water, that the den-
sity of the nucleus, if of uniform solidity, must exceed
5^, and must be much greater if it is hollow or con-
tains large cavities. Geology does not pretend to
give us any information respecting the process by



44 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. III.

which the nucleus of the earth was formed. Some
speculative philosophers indeed have presumptuously
embarked in such an inquiry; but there is not a
trace of evidence that the solid nucleus of the globe
was formed by secondary causes, such as the aggrega-
tion of attenuated matter diffused through space ; and
the nebular hypothesis, as it has been called^ which we
shall have occasion to explain in a subsequent chap-
ter, though maintained in different forms by a few in-
dividuals, has been overturned by arguments that have
never been answered. Sir Isaac Newton, in his four
celebrated letters to Dr. Bentley, has demonstrated
that the planets of the solar system could not have been
thus formed, and put in motion round a central sun.
But though geologists have not been able to give
us any intelligence, from actual observation, respect-
ing the earth's Nucleus, they have examined the rocks
which rest upon it, and extend upwards to the surface
of the earth.

The Primiry formations consist of granite rocks,
trap, syenite, and porphyry. They are composed
chiefly of the simple minerals, Quariz^ Feldspar,
Mica, and Hornblende or Av,gUe, They are conse-
quently crystalline and unstratified, and are believed
to be of igneous origin.

The next series of rocks are what are called the Meta^
morphic or altered rocks. They consist of gneiss, mica
slate, and clay slate, and are more or less stratified.



CHAP. m. GEOLOGICAL CONDITION OF THE EARTH. 45

The other primary rocks are Basalt or ancient lava,
and what are called Trachytic Eocks.

To all these rocks the name of Azoicy or without
U/e, has been given, because they contain no organic
remains either of plants or animals.

Above these Primary Bocks lie the fossiliferous
formations, or those that contain fossils or organic
remains.

Professor Ansted has divided them into three
groups.

I. The Pdlceozoic group (or that of ancient life)
consists of, —

1. The Lower Silurian, or Protozoic rocks, from

their containing the first traces of life.

2. The Upper Silurian rocks.

3. The Devonian System, or Old Red Sandstone.

4 The Carboniferous system, the Lower New
Red Sandstone, and the Magnesian Lime-
stone, or Permian system.

II. The Secondary group consists of, —

1. The Upper New Red Sandstone of England,

or the Triassic formation of Germany.

2. The Liassic, Oolitic, Wealden (Jurassic)

formations ; and,

3. The Cretaceous or chalk formation.



X



46 MORE WOBLI>S THAN ONE. CHAP. III.

III. The Tertiary formcAion consists of, —

1. The oW/er tertiary or Eocene group, viz.,

Bagshot sand and London clay.

2. The middle tertiary^ or Miocene group, viz.,

Eed and Coralline Crag.

3. The newer tertiary^ or Pliocene group, viz., the

Till of the Clyde Valley and Norwich Crag.

4. The superficial deposits^ or Pleistocene group,

viz., all diluvial and alluvial deposits of
gravel and other materials, sometimes stra-
tified.

The proportional thicknesses of these di£ferent for-
mations have been estimated by Professor Phillips as
follows, but the numbers can be regarded only as a
very rude estimate : —



Tertiary formation,
Cretaceous,
Oolite and Lias,
New Red Sandstone,
Carboniferous, .
Old Red Sandstone,
Primary Rocks,



2,000 feet.

1,100 „

2,600 „
2,000 „

10,000 „

9,000 „

20,000 „



Thickness of the Earth's crust, 46,600 b:9 miles nearly.

We wish that we could give our readers some dis-
tinct information respecting the interior condition of
the Earth, the forces which it embosoms, and the
manner in which they have upheaved the strata,
caused volcanoes, and formed those mountain ranges
and inequalities which diversify its external surface.



CHAP. in. GEOLOGICAL CONDITION OF THE EARTH. 47

While the geologist describes the present condition
of the strata, it is the business of the mechanical
philosopher to inquire into the causes by which they
have been thrown into the places which they now
occupy. This inquiry has been pursued with great
ability and success by one of our most distinguished
mathematiciatis, Mr. William Hopkins of Cambridge.
In these inquiries the Earth is supposed to have
been originally in a state of fluidity produced by
heat, and its crust to have become solid by cooling,
the solidification extending only to a certain depth,
and the interior mass remaining in a fluid state. It
had been often assumed by speculative geologists that
the central portion of the Earth was fluid, and that
its solid crust did not exceed ten or twelve miles in
thickness. On these assumed data they founded dif-
ferent theories of volcanoes, — certain chemical philo-
sophers ascribing them to the decomposition of water
and air, which oxidize the solid materials, and gene-
rate heat sufficient to melt them, while o&ers believe
that the solid crust does not exceed twenty or thirty
miles, and that water descending through crevices to
the melted mass is converted into steam, which by
its elastic force produces an external eruption.

The theory of Mr. Hopkins is founded upon better
data, and connects the causes of volcanic acti<»i with
those which explain the general phenomena of the
elevation of the strata. That the interior of the
Earth is in a fluid state by heat is probable from the


48 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. III.

fact, that its temperature iacreases at the rate of 1*
of Fahrenheit for every 65 feet in depth, so that at a
depth of fifty miles the temperature would be twice
that which would be sufficient to melt iron. At so
great a depth the pressure of the superincumbent
matter would be upwards of 200,000 pounds on the
square inch ; and as it appears from a Series of inter-
esting experiments, conducted by Mr. Hopkins, Mr.
Fairbairn, and Mr. Joule,* that the temperature at
which many bodies melt is proportional to the pressure
to which the melted mass is subjected, it follows that
the Earth's solid crust may be much thicker than
forty or fifty miles. The inference from these expe-
rimental results adds great weight to the conclusion
which Mr. Hopkins had previously deduced from
theoretical considerations. From the present amount
of what astronomers call the precession of the equi-
noctial points, arising from the nutation or oscilla^
tion of the Earth's axis, produced by the action of
the Sun and Moon upon the redundant matter at the
equator, he has shewn that the thickness of the
solid shell or crust of the Earth cannot be less than
one-fourth or one-fifth of the Earth's radius, that is,
than 1000 or 800 miles, and may be much greater.
This result is quite incompatible with one of the
volcanic theories which we have mentioned, as the
fluid mass of the Earth is too remote from its
surface to be forced out by the pressure of steam
generated by means of water descending from above.



CHAP. m. OEOLOGIOAL OONBITION OF THE EABTH. 49

Ml. Hopkins is therefore led to the conclusion
that the fluid matters which produced external
ToIcanoeSy exist in internal reservoirs of limited
extent, forming subterranean lakes, and not a sub-
teiranean ocean. The origin of these masses of fluid
lava, or melted granite, he ascribes to the greater
fusibility of the matter of which they consist, and he
attributes their continuance in a state of fusion to the
same cause, and to the removal of the consolidating
influence of pressure, in consequence of their having,
by expansion, raised into a permanent arch the
Jperinoumbeit soUd Btmta.

Instead of one continuous internal lake of melted
matter, a number of lakes may be connected with each
other by more or less obstructed channels of commu-
nication. The vapours generated by heat in these
fluid lakes, and acquiring elastic force, either from
the rapidity of their production, or from long accu-
mulation, will elevate the strata above them, some-
times by a slow and long continued process, and
sometimes by a more rapid one ; and when fissures
or openings have been thus produced, the melted
matter might either be ejected in volcanic eruptions,
—or difiiised through crevices, so as to form veins,—
or poured out in beds over the surface of the superin-
cumbent strata.

The elevations produced on the Earth's surface by
these elastic forces will depend upon the length, and
breadth, and depth, as well as upon the general form



50 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. Ill,

of the subterranean lakes of lava. In many cases the
elevation in one place will be accompanied by a sub-
sidence of the strata in another. When the cohesion
of the strata is first overcome, fissures will be pro-
duced. The strata will in some cases be displaced,
as in what is called 9k faulty in others inverted^ as they
are sometimes found to be ; and when the elastic forces
act horizontally, the strata will be c(ynJtoTte.d or folded.

During the sudden dislocations and explosive
actions which must accompany the upheaval of the
strata, vibratory motions like waves, excited in the
solid and fluid masses in the vicinity of the seat of
upheaval, would be propagated to great distances
through the solid crust, and produce those earthquakes
which so often desolate particular regions of the globe.^

These views are well illustrated by the cavities
which I discovered in topaz, quartz, and other minerals
found in the primitive rocks. These cavities, which
have every variety of shape, contain solid crystals,
fluids, vapours, and compressed gases. When heat is
applied to the specimens which contain them, it
melts the solid crystals within them, converts the
fluids into vapour, and either discharges the con-
tents of the cavity between the fissures along the

1 Mr. Hopkins's valuable researches will be found in the Philosophical Trans^
actions for 1839, p. 38, 1840, p. 193, and 1842. p. 43, and in his interesting "Report
on the Geological Theories of Elevation and Earthquakes," in the Report of the
British AssocieUion for 1847, pp. 33-93. In two recent papen by Mr. Hennesy,
entitled Researches in Terrestrial Physics, ho has arrived at the conclusion that
the least thickness of the Earth's crust cannot be less than eighteen miles, and its
greatest thickness not greater than GOO miles. See Philosophical Transaetiont,
1851, p. 545.



CHAP. III. GEOLOGICAL CONDITION OF THE EARTH. 51

faces of cleavage, or ejects them when the crystal
explodes and is burst in pieces. By the separation
of the laminae, and by the agency of heat and other
causes, electricity is generated and distinctly exhibited
in the phenomena which accompany the bursting of
the crystal. These cavities are often very long, and
of the most extraordinary shapes, and sometimes
several are connected together by narrow necks or
channels, through which the solid, fluid, and gaseous
contents of one cavity are discharged into the next.^
In Brazilian topazes I have found cavities containiag
a white powder, which Berzelius analyzed for me,
and found to consist of silex, alumina, lime, and
water. This powder is undoubtedly the elements of
topaz, which, like the materials in the lakes of the
Earth's crust, have been prevented from solidifying.''
The formation of lakes of unmelted matter in the
crust of the Earth is also beautifully illustrated in
cavities of ice, which contain unfrozen water.^ It is
not necessary, therefore, to suppose that the lakes or
cavities in the crust of the Earth consist of more
fusible materials than the solid matter which sur-
rounds them. The materials have been prevented
from solidifying by the gases which have been simul-
taneously imprisoned during the induration of the
surrounding matter.

1 I have given a fall account of these phenomena In the Edinburgh Tramactioru,
voL X. pp. 1, 407 ; vol. xvl. pp. 7, 11 ; and vol xx. p. 547.
3 €ami)ridge TranMbcUons, 1822.
* Edinburgh Transacliont, vol x. p. 426.



52 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP, in^

Admitting, then, the correctness of Mr. Hopkins's
opinion that the elevation of mountain chains is
produced by elastic forceB, emanating from laige
subterranean lakes, or chains of lakes of melted lava
within the soUd crust of the Earth, it becomes inter-
esting to inquire into the direction of those ranges
of mountains which have been upheaved from the
same subterranean lake at the same tima This
inquiry has been pursued with much success by M.
Elie de Beaumont, who has endeavoured to shew that
all mountain chains, and consequently the great lines
of dislocation through which they have been upheaved,
maybe grouped into parallel systems, and that all these
lines or chains belonging to any single system were
produced at the same time by one great convulsion of
the Earth's crust. More recently, he has arrived
at the conclusion that the lines of direction which
characterize each group are not the effect of acci-
dent, but have such relations to eadi other, that
the different groups or systems are symmetrically
arranged over the Earth's surface, something like the
lines of a dodecahedron. If we combine this theory
with Mr. Hopkins's theory of subterranean reservoirs
or lakes of fluid lava, it will follow that these lakes
have a symmetrical arrangement within the Earth's
crust. Until we know the form of the bottom of our
ocean, it will be difficult to compare these views
extensively with the elevations on the Earth's surface.

As all the stratified formations which, with the



CHAP. in. GEOLOGICAL 00in)ITK>N OF THE EARTH. 53

piimaiy rocks, compose the crust of the earth, have
obviously been deposited in succession, geologists
have endeavouied to form some notion of the time
occupied in their deposition, or the age of the most
ancient of them. By studying the fossil remains
found in the different formations, it has been placed
beyond a doubt, that great changes have taken place
during the f^mation of the crust of the eaxth. The
plante and anunals which existed in one period Are
not found in another, — ^new species ware at different
times created,-and frequent convulsions hav« taken
place, upheavijig the beds of the ocean into continents
and mountain ranges, causing continents and islands
to subside, and covering the dry land wilh the waters
which were thus necessarily displaced. That the de-
position of strata of such thickness, and operations of
such magnitude, required a long period of time for
their accomplishment, has been willingly conceded to
tiie geologist ; but this concession has been founded on
the adoption of a unit of measure which may or may
not be correct It is taken for granted, that many
of the stratified rocks were deposited at the bottom o£
the sea by the same dow processes which are going
on in the present day ; and as the thidmess of the
deposits now produced is probably a very small quan-
tity during a long period of time, it is inferred that
nine or ten miks of strata must have taken millions
of years for their formation.

We are not disposed to grudge the geologist even



54 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. III.

periods so marvelloas as this, provided they are con-
sidered as merely hypothetical ; bat when we find, as
we shall presently do, that speculative writers employ
these assimied periods as positive truths, for establish*-
ing other theories which we consider erroneous, and
even dangerous, we are compelled to examine more
minutely a chronology which has been thus misapplied.

Incerta incertis non probantur.

Although we may admit that our seas and con-
tinents have nearly the same locality, and cover
nearly the same area as they did at the creation of
Adam ; and that the hills have not since that time
changed their form or their height ; nor the beds of
the ocean become deeper or shallower from the diur-
nal changes going on around us, — ^yet this does not
authorize us to conclude that the world was prepared
for man by similar causes operating in a similar
manner. The same physical causes may operate
quickly or slowly. The dew may fall invisibly on
the ground, — ^the gentle shower may descend noise-
less on the grass, — or the watery vapour may rush
down in showers and torrents of rain, destroying
animal and vegetable life. The frozen moisture may
fall in spiculsB or crystals of ice, which are felt only
by the tender skin upon which they light ; — or it may
come down in flakes of snow, forming beds many
feet in thickness ;-— or it may be precipitated in de-
structive hailstones, or in masses of ice which crush
everything upon which they falL



CHAP. IIL GEOLOGICAL CONDITION OF THE EARTH. 55

Wben the earth was completed as the home of the
human family, violent changes upon its surface were
incompatible with the security of life, and the pro-
gress of civilisation. The powers of the physical
world were therefore put under restraint, when man
obtained dominion over the earth: and after the
great catastrophe which destroyed almost every liv-
ing thing, the " bow was set in the clouds," a cove-
nant, between God and man, that the elements
should not again be his destroyer. If the Almighty
then, since the creation of man, " broke up the foun-
tains of the deep, and opened the windows of the
heavens," and thus, by apparently natural causes,
covered the whole earth with an ocean that rose
above the Himalaya and the Andes, — why may He
not at different periods, or during the whole course
of the earth's formation, have deposited its strata by
a rapid precipitation of their elements from the
waters in which they were dissolved or suspended ?
Chemical and physical forces of high activity may
have been the agents in such summary operations,
and in the beautiful process of the Electrotype, we
have a striking example of the influence of electricity
in effecting a rapid precipitation of metals from their
solutions. The period of the earth's formation would,
upon this principle, be reduced to little more than
the united generations of the different orders of
plants and animals which constitute its organic
remains. But even the time thus computed, from



56 MORE WORLDS THAK ONE. CHAP. III.

the supposed duration of animal life, may be still
farther shortened. Plants and animals which, in
our day, require a century for their development,
may in primitive times have shot up in rank luxuri-
ance, and been ready, in a few days, or months, or
years, for the great purpose of exhibiting, by their
geological distribution, the progressive formation of
the earth.

Nor is this a groundless supposition. From the
age of plants and animals in the present day, we are
not entitled to infer their age in primitive times.
Without appealing to the influence of food and cli-
mate and soil on the growth of animal and vegetable
bodies, we find the truth of our position in the his*
tory of our own species. During the first 2000 years
of the human era, the laws of vital organization were
entirely difierent from what they are in the present
day. From Adam to Abraham the age of man varied
from 969 to 175 years, and gradually declined to the
average of threescore and ten ; and in like manner
t^e^plants and animals of primeval times, when they
were required, as epochs in the chronology of creation,
may have had a more luxuriant growth and a shorter
existence.

There are other points, in geological theory, which,
though reasonable inferences from a very limited
number of facts, have been employed, as if they were
absolutely true, to support erroneous and dangerous
theories ; and but for this misapplication of them



CHAP. m. GEOLOGICAL CONDITION OF THE EARTH. 57

we should Dot have called in question opinions in
themsdves reasonable only when viewed as probable
truths. The geol(^cal inference to which we allude
is, that man did not exist during the period of the
earth's formation. Ko work of human skill — ^no
fragment of tiie skeleton — no remains of the integu>
ments of man have been found among the plants
and animals which occupy the graves of primsdval
times. If it be quite certain, or rather sufficiently
credible, which we think it is, that all the formations
vnth fossil remains were deposited before the advent
of Adam, it is possible that pre^amite races may
have inhabited the earth simultaneously with the
animals which characterize its different formations.
But though possible, and to a certain extent avail-
able, as the basis of an argument against a startling
theory, we do not admit its probability. Man, as
now constitfUed, could not have lived amid the storms
and earthquakes and eruptions of a world in the act
of formation. His timid nature would have quailed
under the multifarious convulsions around him. The
thunder of a boiling and tempest-driven ocean would
have roused him from his couch, as its waters rushed
upon him at midnight : Torrents of lava or of mud
would have chased him from his hearth ; and if he
escaped the pestilence from animal and v^etable
death, the vapour of the subterranean alembics would
have suffocated him in the open atatag^e house of
the child of civilisation was not ^f ^hu recep-


58 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. III.

tion. The stones that were to build and roof it, had
not quitted their native beds. The coal that was to
light and heat it, was either green in the forest, or
blackening in the storehouse of the deep. The iroa
that was to defend him from external violence, and
to perform the most important functions in the arts of
life, lay buried in the ground ; and the rich materials
of civilisation, the gold, the silver, and the gems,
even if they were ready, had not been cast within
his reach, from the hollow of the Creator's hand.

But if man could have existed amid catastrophes
so tremendous, and privations so severe, his presence
was not required, for his intellectual powers could
have had no suitable employment. Creation was the
field on which his industry was to be exercised and
his genius unfolded ; and that Divine reason which
was to analyze and combine, would have sunk into
sloth before the elements of matter were let loose from
their prison-house, and Nature had cast them in her
mould. But though there was no specific time in
this prim89val chronology which we could fix as
appropriate for the appearance of man, yet we now
perceive that he entered with dignity at its close.
When the sea was gathered into one place, and the
dry land appeared, a secure footing was provided for
our race. When the waters above the firmament
were separated from the waters below it, and when
the light which ruled the day, and the light which
ruled the night, were displayed in the azure sky, man



CHAP. m. GEOLOGICAL CONDITION OF THE EABTH. 59

could look upward into the infinite of spaoe^ as he
looked downward into the infinite in time. When
the living creature after his kind appeared in the fields,
and the seed-bearing herb covered the earth, human
genius was enabled to estimate the power, and wis-
dom, and bounty of its Author, and human labour
received and accepted its comnussion, when it was
declared from on high that seed-time and harvest
should never cease upon the earth.

But though we think it probable firom these con-
siderations, that intellectual races could not occupy
the earth during its formation, yet we know not what
disclosures might be made had we the power of
examining the whole of the strata which girdle the
earth. The dry land upon our globe occupies only
one-fourth of its whole superficies — ^all the rest is sea.
How much of this fourth part have geologists been
able to examine? and how small seems to be the
area of stratification which has been explored ? We
venture to say not one-hwidredth part of the whole,
and yet upon the results of so partial a survey, there
has been founded a startling generalization. The in-
tellectual races, if they did exist, must have lived at a
distance from the ferocious animals that may have
occupied the seas and the jungles of the ancient
world, and consequently their remains could not
have been found in the ordinary fossiliferous strata.
Their dwelling-place may have been in one or more
of the numerous localities of our continents not yet



60 MORE WOBLDS THAN OKE. CHAP. III.

explored, in steppes and savannahs undisturbed by
upheavals, or in those immense regions of the earth
which are now covered by the great oceans of the
globe ; and till these oceans have quitted their bedB,
or some great convulsions have upheaved and laid
bare the strata above which the races in question may
have lived and died, we are not entitled to maintain
it as a demonMrated truth^ upon which we can found
extravagant speculation, that the ancient earth was
under the sole dominion of the brutes that perish.

But without waiting for the result of catastrophes
like these, the future of geology, even if restricted to
existing continents and islands, may be pr^nant with
startling discoveries ; and the remains of intellectual
races may be found beneath as well as above the primi-
tive Azoic formations of the earth. The astronomers
of the present day have penetrated far into the
celestial depths, compared with those of the preced-
ing age, — descrying in the remotest space glorious
creations, and establishing mighty laws. Like them,
may not geologists descend deeper into the abyss
beneath^ and discover in caverns yet unexplored the
upheaved cemeteries of primordial times. The earth
has yet to surrender its strongholds of gigantic secrets,
— and startling revelations are yet to be read on
sepulchres of stona It is not from that distant
bourne where the last ray of starlight trembles on
the telescopic eye that man is to receive the great
secret of the world's birth, or of his future destiny.



CHAF. IIL GEOLOGICAL CONDITION OF THE BAKTH. 61

It is from the deep vaults to which primaaval life
has been consigned that the history of the dawn of
life is to be composed. Qeologists have read that
chronology backwards, and are decyphering down-
wards its pale and perishing alphabet. They have
reached the embryos of animal and vegetable exist-
ence, the probable terminus of the formation which
has buried them. But who can tell wh(d sleeps
beyond ! If we have followed the omnipotent arm into
the infinity of space, may we not trace it under our
feet in remoter times, and in deeper cemeteries? An-
other creation may lie beneath the Earth's granite
pavement, — more glorious creatures may be entombed
there. The mortal coils of beings more lovely, more
pore, more divine than man, may yet read to us the
humbling lesson that we have not been the first, and
may not be the last of the intellectual race.

In order to compare the condition of the earth with
that of the moon and the other planets of the Solar
system, we must know something of its atmosphere,
of its action in. reflecting, and polarizing light, and of
the phenomena which it will exhibit to other planets
in its various states, as modified by the aqueous va-
pour which it contains, whether it exists in minute
vesicles, or in masses of clouds. The light reflected
by the atmosphere, when in its purest state, is a rick
bltie, becoming paler and paler as the aqueous vapour
is increased. When the light of the sun reaches the
eye, after having been transmitted through great



62 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. III.

lengths of atmosphere, it is bright red, passing into
orange and yellow when the length of its path is
diminished. Considering, then, the diversity of cli-
mate in any one hemisphere of the globe, it is hardly
possible that the earth, as seen from any given point
in space, could appear free from clouds. When the
sky is blue over large portions of the tropical regions,
and smaller portions of the temperate and arctic zones,
it is elsewhere covered with fleecy clouds, or throwing
down its superabundant vapours in rain, or hail, or
snow. The banks of fleecy clouds will reflect a
brilliant light to the distant eye, while the pure air
will exhibit the colour of the land, or of the ocean,
mixed with its own native tint of blue ; and in cer-
tain positions of the sun, the red beams into which
his pure rays have been changed by absorption, will
display themselves in certain parts of the terrestrial
disc. When the earth, therefore, is reduced by dis-
tance to the apparent size of Mars and Jupiter, it will
exhibit a tint composed of all those which we have
described.

When the blue light of the sky, and the light re-
flected from the clouds, are examined by an observer
on the surface of the earth, it is found to be polarized,
like the light which is reflected from the surfaces of
water, ice, and other transparent bodies, whether solid
or fluid ; and, therefore, a greater or less portion of
the light reflected from our earth which reaches the
eye of an observer, placed on another planet, must be



CHAP. m. GEOLOGICAL CONDITION OF THE EARTH. 63

polarized, and exhibit all the properties of that species
of light.^ In like manner, the light reflected from
the air or from the clouds and water of other planets
mtist contain polarized light. We thus obtain a cer-
tain test of the existence of water, air, and clouds in
the other planets of the system, and are enabled to
ascertain the truth of certain speculations respecting
their condition, which affect the question of a plura-
lity of worlds.

1 See Johittton'i FhffHeai AOat, Plate Y. of MeUoroioffy.



ob:



1*^



CHAPTER IV.

ANALOGY BETWEEN THE EARTH AND THE OTHEB

PLANETS.

With the information contained in the preceding
chapter, respecting the structure of the Earth and its
atmosphere, we are now in a condition to compare it
as an inhabited world with the other planets of our
system, and to ascertain, from the analogies which
exist between them, to what extent it is probable
that they are either inhabited, or in a state of pre-
paration, as the earth once was, for the reception of
inhabitants.

In making this comparison, the first point which
demands our attention is the position which the
earth occupies in the Solar system. In reference
to the position of the planets, Jupiter may be
regarded as the middle planet, and is otherwise
highly distinguished. Our earth, therefore, is nei-
ther the middle planet nor the planet nearest
the sun, nor the planet farthest from that lumi-
nary. In reference to the light and heat which
the planets receive from the sun, the Earth has



CHAP. IV. THE EARTH AND THE OTHER PLANETS. 65

neither the warmest, nor the middle, nor the coldest
place. With respect to the number of moons or
sateUites, the only uses of which that we know, is to
give light to the planet, and produce tides in its seas,
the Earth has the lowest number, all the planets
exterior to it having a larger number. If we compare
it with the other planets in reference to their size,
their form, their density, the length of their year,
the length of their day, the eccentricity of their orbits,
we shall find that in all these cases the Earth is not
in any respect distinguished above the rest. Hence
we are entitled to conclude that the Earth, as a planet,
has no pre-eminence in the Solar system to induce
us to believe that it is the only inhabited world, or
has any claim to be peculiarly favoured by the
Creator.

In order to shew the high probability that the
other planets are either inhabited, or in a state of
preparation for the reception of inhabitants, we shall
now proceed to compare the Earth with the planet
Jupiter^ one of the planets farther from the Sun than
ours, and then with Venus^ one of the planets nearer
the sun, — these planets representing the two groups
into which the system may be divided.

The diameter of Jupiter being 87,000 miles, and
that of the Earth 7926, the relative size or bulk of
the two planets will be proportional to the cubes of
these numbers. Hence the size or bulk of Jupiter is
about 1300 times greater than that of the Earth, and



66 MORB WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. IV.

this alone is a proof that it must have been made for
some grand and useful purpose. Like the Earth it
is flattened at its poles, and it revolves round its axis
in 9** 56™, which is the length of its day. It enjoys
different climates, and different seasons in its year ;
but, what especially demands our attention, it is
illuminated by four moons, capable of supplying it
with abundance of light during the short absence of
the sun. Owing to the small inclination of Jupiter's
axis to the plane of its orbit, which is only about
three degrees, there is so little change in the temper-
ature of its seasons, that it may be said to enjoy a
perpetual spring. The rotation of the Earth about
its axis produces currents in its atmosphere parallel
to the equator, which have received the name of the
trade winds. On the surface of Jupiter astronomers
have observed streaks or belts to the number of thirty,
some of which extend to a great distance from its
equator. Large spots, which change their form, have
also been frequently seen upon Jupiter. M. Madler,
by whom these observations have been chiefly made,
is of opinion, that owing to the length of Jupiter's
year, and the small change which takes place in the
seasons, the masses of clouds in his atmosphere have
their form, position, and arrangement more perma-
nent than those in the atmosphere of the Earth, and
he thinks it probable that the inhabitants in latitudes
greater than 40° may never see the firmament
The satellites of Jupiter afford him perpetual



CHAP. IV. THE EARTH AND THE OTHER PLANETS. 67

moonlight. They suffer eclipses like our mooD when
they encounter his huge shadow, and they frequently
eclipse the sun when they pass between him and the
planet. These satellites afford to their primary planet
four months of different lengths, one of which is four
Jovian days, and the others eighty seventeen, and forty
days respectively.

With so many striking points of reseuiblaDce
between the Earth and Jupiter, the unprejudiced
mind cannot resist the conclusion that Jupiter has
"been created like the Earth for the express purpose
of being the seat of animal and intellectual lifa The
Atheist and the Infidel, the Christian and the Maho-
metan, — men of all creeds and nations and tongues,
— the philosopher and unlettered peasant, have all
rejoiced in this universal truth ; and we do not
believe that any individual, who confides in the facts
of astronomy, can seriously reject it. If such a per-
son exists, we would gravely ask him for what purpose
could so gigantic a world have been framed. Why
does the sun give it days and nights and years ?
Why do its moons throw its silver light upon its con-
tinents and its seas ? Why do its equatorial breezes
blow perpetually over its plains.^ unless to supply
the wants, and administer to the happiness of living
beings.

In studying this subject, persons who have only a
superficial knowledge of astronomy, though firmly
believing in a pluralitv of worlds, have felt the force



68 MORB WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. IV.

of certain objections, or rather difficulties, which
natorallj present themselves to the inquirer. The
distance of Jupiter from the sun is so great that the
light and heat which he receives from that luminary
is supposed to be incapable of sustaining the same
animal and vegetable life which exists on the Earth.
If we consider the heat upon any planet as arising
solely from the direct rays of the sun, the cold upon
Jupiter must be very intense, and water could not
exist upon its surface in a fluid state. Its rivers and
its seas must be tracks and fields of ice. But the
temperature of a planet depends upon other causes,
— upon the condition of its atmosphere, and upon
the internal heat of its mass. The temperature of
our own globe decreases as we rise in the atmosphere,
and approach the sun, and it increases as we de-
scend into the bowels of the Earth and go farther
from the sun. In ^^ first of these cases, the increase
of heat as we approach the surface of the Earth from
a great height in a balloon, or from the summit of a
lofty mountain, is produced by its atmosphere ; and
in Jupiter the atmosphere may be so formed as to
compensate to a certain extent the diminution in the
direct heat of the sun arising from the great distance
of the planet. In the second case, the internal heat
of Jupiter may be such as to keep its rivers and seas
in a fluid state, and maintain a temperature suffici-
ently genial to sustain the same animal and vegetable
life which exists upon our own globe.



CHAP. IV. THE EARTH AND THE OTHER PLANETS. C9

These arraogemeiits, however, if they are required,
and have been adopted, cannot contribute to increase
the feeble light which Jupiter receives from the sun ;
but in so far as the purposes of vision are concerned,
an enlargement of the pupil of the eye, and an in-
creased sensibility of the retina, would be amply
sufficieut to make the sun's light as brilliant as it
is to us. The feeble light reflected from the moons
of Jupiter would then be equal to that which we
derive from our owe, even if we do not adopt the
hypothesis, which we shall afterwards have occasion
to mention, that a brilliant phosphorescent light
may be excited in the satellites by the action of the
solar rays.

Another diflSculty has presented itself, though very
unnecessarily, in reference to the shortness of the day
in Jupiter. A day of ten hours has been supposed
insufficient to afford that period of rest which is
requisite for the renewal of our physical functions
when exhausted with the labours of the day. This
objection, however, has no force. Five hours of rest
is surely sufficient for five hours of labour; and when
the inhabitants of the temperate zone of our own
globe reside, as many of them have done, for years
in the arctic regions, where the length of the days
and nights are so unusual, they have been able to
perform their functions as well as in their native
climates.

A difficulty, however, of a more serious kind is



70 MORB WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. IV.

presented by the great force of gravity upon so gi-
gantic a planet as Jupiter. The stems of plants, the
materials of buildings, the humau body itself, would,
it is imagined, be crushed by their own enormous
weight. This apparently formidable objection will
be removed by an accurate calculation of the force of
gravity upon Jupiter, or of the relative weight of
bodies on its surface. The mass of Jupiter is 1300
times greater than that of the Earth, ap that if both
planets consisted of the same kind of matter, a man
weighing 150 pounds on the surface of the Eetrth
would weigh 160 x. 1300, or 195,000 pounds at a
distance from Jupiter's centre equal to the Earth's
radius. But as Jupiter's radius is eleven times greater
than that of the Earth, the weight of bodies on his
surface will be diminished in the ratio of the square
of his radius, that is, in the ratio of 11 x 11, or 121
to 1. Consequently, if we divide 195,000 pounds by
121, we shall have 1611 pounds as the weight of a
man of 150 pounds on the surface of Jupiter, that
is about eleven times his weight on the Earth. But
the matter of Jupiter is much lighter than the mat-
ter of our Earth, in the ratio of 24 to 100, the num-
bers which represent the densities of the two planets,
so that if we diminish 1611 pounds in the ratio of 24
to 100, or divide it by 4.17, we shall have 393 pounds
as the weight of a man on Jupiter, who weighs on
the Earth only 150 pounds, that is, only about 2^
times his weight — a difference which actually exists



CHAP. IV. THE EARTH AND THE OTHER PLANETS. 71

between many individuals on our own planet A
man, therefore, constituted like ourselves, could exist
'Without inconvenience upon Jupiter ; and plants, and
trees, and buildings, such as occur on our own Earth,
could grow and stand secure in so far as the force of
gravity is concerned.!

In removing difficulties, and answering objections
such as these, we have conceded too much to the
limited conceptions of the persons who have felt the
one and urged the other. To assume that the in-
habitants of the planets must necessarily be either
men or anything resembling them, is to entertain a
low opinion of that infinite skill which has produced
such a variety in the form and structure and functions
of vegetable and animal life. In the numerous races
of man which occupy our globe, there is not the same
variety which is exhibited in the brutes that perish.
Although the noble Anglo-Saxon stands in striking
contrast with the Negro, and the lofty Patagonian
with the diminutive Esquimaux, yet in their general
form and structure, and in their physical and mental
powers, they are essentially the same. But when we
look into the world of instinct, and survey the in-
finitely varied forms which people the earth, the
ocean, and the air ; — when we range with the natu-
ralist's eye from the elephant to the worm — ^from the
leviathan to the infusoria — and from the eagle to the
humming bird, what beauty of form — what diversity

» See Chap. XVL


72 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. IV.

of function — what variety of purpose is exhibited to
our view ! In all these forms of being, reason might
have been given in place of instinct, and animals the
most hostile to man, and the most alien to his habits,
might have been his friend and his auxiliary, in place
of his enemy and his prey. If we carry our scratiny
deeper into nature, and survey^ the infinity of regions
of life which the microscope discloses, and if we con-
sider what other breathing worlds lie far beyond even
its reach, we may then comprehend the variety of
intellectual life with which our own planets and those
of other systems may be peopled. Is it necessary
that an immortal soul should be united to a skeleton
of bone, or imprisoned in a cage of cartilage and of
skin ? Must it see with two eyes, and hear with two
ears, and touch with ten fingers, and rest on a duality
of limbs ? May it not reside in a Polyphemus with
one eyeball, or in an Argus with a hundred ? May
it not govern in the giant forms of the Titans, and
direct the hundred hands of Briareus ? But setting
aside the ungainly creations of mythology, how many
probable forms are there of beauty, and activity, and
strength, which even the painter, the sculptor, and
the poet could assign to the physical casket in which
the diamond spirit may be enclosed ; how many pos-
sible forms are there, beyond their invention, which
eye hath not seen, nor the heart of man conceived ?
But no less varied may be the functions which the
citizens of the spheres have to discharge, — no less



CHAP. IV. THE EABTH AND THE OTHER PLANETS. 73

diversified their modes of life, — and no less singular
the localities in which thej dwell. If this little
world demands such duties from its occupants, and
yields such varied pleasures in their discharge : — K
the obligations of power, of wealth, of talent, and of
charity to humanize our race, to unite them in one
brotherhood of sympathy and love, and unfold to
them the wonderful provisions for their benefit which
have been made in the structure and preparation of
their planetary home : If duties, so varied and nu-
merous, have required thousands of years to ripen
their fruit of gold, what inconceivable and countless
functions may we not assign to that plurality of in-
tellectual communities, which have been settled, or
are about to settle in the celestial spheres ? What
deeds of heroism, moral, and perchance physical !
What enterprises of philanthropy, — what achieve-
ments of genius may we not expect in empires so
extensive, and in worlds so grand !

On a planet more magnificent than ours, may there
not be a type of reason of which the intellect of
Newton is the lowest degree ? May there not be
telescopes more penetrating, and microscopes more
powerful than ours ? — processes of induction more
subtle, of analysis more searching, and of combina-
tion more profound ? May not the problem of three
bodies be solved there, — the enigma of the lumini-
ferous ether unriddled, — and the transcendentalisms
of mind embalmed in the definitions and axioms and



74 MORE WORLUS TIIAK OMK, rriAP. IV.

tliooreioK of geonielry ? Chemistry may tliere have
new eleioeDts, new gases, new acids, new alkuliee,
new earths and new metals ; — geology, new rocks,
new classes of cataclysms, and new periods of change;
— and zoology, mineralogy, and botany, new orders
and species, new forms of life, and new types of or-
ganization, — all demanding higher powers of reason,
and leading to a warmer appreciation, and a higher
knowledge of the ways and works of God. But
whatever be the intellectual occupation of the in-
habitants of the planets, who can doubt that it will
be one of their objects to study and develop the ma-
terial laws which are in operation around tliem, above
tliera, beneath them, and beyond them in the akiea ?
Under what suns, in what climates, and in what
habitations, these planetary races are to live and
move, may be conjectured from the place which tlicy
occupy in the system, and from the phenomena which
they exhibit when examined by the telescope. It
may not be in cities exposed to the extremes of heat
and cold, — nor in houses made with hands, — nor in the
busy market-place, — nor in the noisy Forum, — nor in
the Bolemn temple, — nor in the ark which rests upon
the deep, that these feats of power and reason are to
be performed. The being of another mould may
have hia home in subterranean cities warmed by
central fires, — or in crystal cavoa cooled by ocean
tides, — or he may float with the Nereids upon the
deep, or mount upon wings as eagles, or rise upon



CHAP. IV. THE EARTH AND THE OTHER PLANETS. 75

the piDions of the dove, that he may flee away and
be at rest. Amid our meagre conceptions of the con-
ditions of planetary life, we may gather some ideas
from the existences around us. In the cities and
dwellings and occupations of the world of instinct
in our own planet, rude though they be, we may trace
the lineaments of the cities and dwellings and occu-
pations of recLson in another.

In continuing the argument for a plurality of
worlds, it would be a waste of time to enter into the
same details respecting the analogy between the
Earth and the other ^^r superior planets of the sys-
tem, as we have done with respect to Jupiter. In
some, the analogies are more close than in others,
but in all they are suflSciently numerous and power-
ful to command the assent of an unprejudiced mind.

In the three planets, superior to Jupiter, namely,
Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, the direct light and
heat of the sun is greatly less than that which falls
upon Jupiter, being inversely proportional to the
squares of their distances from the centre of their
radiations ; but we have already seen, that in so far
as vision and local temperature are concerned, the
light of the sun may in these planets be as brilliant,
and the temperature of the seasons as genial as they
are upon our own Earth. An increased degree of
sensibility in the nervous membrane of the eye, with
an enlarged pupil, may give to light, geometrically
feeble, a sufficient energy of sensation, while a dif-



^



76 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. IV.

ferent oondition of their atmospheres, and a more
ardent focus of internal heat, may maintain an agree-
able temperature upon their surface.

The planet Saium, encompassed with the extra-
ordinary appendage of a riug, fitted to illuminate
extensive portions of his surface, and encircled with
eight moons lighting him iu the sun's absence, and
revolving round him in months varying from the
length of one day up to eighty days, has always been
an object of peculiar interest to the astronomer, and
of wonder to the ordinary student of nature. The
plane of the ring, which we have described in the
preceding chapter, is parallel to the equator, and has
inequalities like mountains on its surface. His eight
satellites are placed at distances varying from 98,000
miles, the distance of the nearest from the planet, to
nearly two millions of miles, the distance of the most
remote ; and as the first five are nearer Saturn than
our moon is to the Earth, they will exhibit larger
discs of light to the planet. Astronomers have not
yet been able to measure their diameters, but if they
are greatly larger than our moon, which is very pro-
bable, the firmament must exhibit a brilliant vault
of azure, bespangled with large discs of light, with a
variety of phases, and spanned with the brilliant
arches of the planet's ring. As the nearest of these
moons, which is called MimcLS, performs its revolu-
tion in twenty-two hours and a half, its phases must
change from the slenderest crescent to the state of



CHAP. IV. THE EARTH XSD THE OTHER PLANET& 77

half moon in the course of Jive hoursj and as its disc
(if it has the same real size as our moon) must appear
tiffo and a half times larger, the boundary between
the light and dark hemisphere will be seen actually
advancing upon the body of the satellite. For the
same reason, the motion of this satellite among the
stars will be more perceptible than the movement
of our stars and planets from their rising to their
setting, produced by the diurnal motion of the
Earth.1

With respect to the force of gravity upon the sur-
face of Saturn, the analogy between it and the Earth
is stronger than in the case of Jupiter. The density of
Saturn is to that of the Earth as 24 to 100, or a little
more than four times less, so that since the Earth is
5i times denser than water, the density of Saturn
will be Ifthfi that of water. In like manner it may
be shewn that Uranus and Neptune have nearly the
same density as water, and if we make a similar esti-
mate of the force of gravity upon the three superior

1 The Appearance of the syttem of rings from the surface of Satom, and of the
phenomena which they produce in eclipsing occasionally and temporarily the
■un, the ei^t satellites, and other celestial bodies, was for the first time accurately
described by Dr. Lardner in a memoir published in the twenty-second Tolume of
the Transaetion* of the Astronomical Societp for 1853. Dr. Lardner has there
demoostmted " that the infinite skill of the great Architect of the UniTersehas not
permitted that this stupendous annular appendage, the uses of which still remain
undiscoTerad, should be the cause of such darkness and desolation to the inhabi-
tants of the planet^ and such an a^ravation of the rigours of their fifteen years'
winter, as it has been inferred to be firom the reasonings of the eminent astronomers
already named, (Bo^ Herschel, and Madler,) as well as many others, who have
either adopted their conclusions, or arriTed at like inferences by other argumente."
" In dior^"Dr. Lardner adds» "the ring has no such character as would depriTe
the planet q/* any estential condition qf habUabilitv.''^Miuewn of Science and Att,
Tol. i. p. 59.



78 MORE WORLDS THAN ONB. CHAP. IV.

planets, we shall find that in Saturn the force of
gravity is a little greater than in the Earth, and in
Uranus and Neptune a little less, so that human
beings, like ourselves, would experience no inconve-
nience from the greater or less force of gravity on
these planets, and plants and trees, and architectural
structures, of the same character with our own, would
have the same strength and permanence.

In consequence of the rotation of Saturn upon his
axis in about 10^ hours, belts and streaks are seen
upon his surface, produced, doubtless, as those in
Jupiter, by equatorial currents like our trade winds.
Variable masses of cloud diversify his surface, some*
times changing their place, and sometimes continu-
ing so long in one position, that they reappear at one
side of the planet's disc in the same place which they
occupied five hours before when they disappeared on
the other side of it.

In the two remote planets, Utwfiua and N^tuTie^
the principal point of analogy with our Earth is, that
they are lighted with moons, — Uranus with aix^ and
Neptune with one or perhaps two^ though we have
no doubt that, like the other distant planets, he will
be found to possess a greater number. The power
of our best telescopes has not enabled astronomers to
discover belts and clouds upon these two planets, and
thus determine their daily motion. The oblate form
of their discs, too, remains to be discovered ; but not-
withstanding the absence of these points of aualoj^y.



CHAP. IV. THE EARTH AND THE OTHER PLANETS. 79

the very existence of such large globes of matter
levolving round the sun, and lighted up with moons,
cannot fail to satisfy the unprejudiced and inquiring
mind that they must have been created for some
grand purpose worthy of their Maker. In the present
state of our knowledge, it is impossible to conceive
any other purpose than that of being the residence of
animal and intellectual life.

There is one consideration in reference to the two
remote planets, Uranus and Neptune^ which some of
our readers may regard as adding to the probability
of their being worlds like our own. Some writers, or
rather one, for we know of only one, have asserted
that ^' however destitute planets, moons, and rings
may be of inhabitants, they are at least vast scenes
of God's presence, and of the activity with which He
carries into effect everywhere the laws of nature, and
that the glory of creation arises from its being not
only the product, but the constant field of GK)d's
activity and thought, wisdom and power."^ We
shall not venture to ascertain how much more of
God's glory is seen in the mere material structure of
Saturn and his ring, and of Jupiter and his satellites,
than it is in the minutest insect that lives but for an
hour ; nor shall we compare gigantic masses of self-
luminous or opaque illuminated matter with the
smaller organisms which are daily presented to ua
We shall admit that the vulgar eye even is delighted

» Oflhe Plurality of World* : an Easay. p. 254.



go MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. IV.

with the sight of planets made goi^eous by the tele-
scope, — ^that astronomers are entranced by the study
of their movements and their perturbations, and that
the useful art of navigation may derive sonae advan-
tage from the eclipses of Jupiter's satellites. The
poet, too, may rejoice in " the soft and tender beauty
of the moon," and in the inspirations of the morning
and the evening star. But where is the grandeur, —
where the utility, — ^where the beauty, — where the
poetry of the two almost invisible stars which usurp
the celestial names of Uranus and Nepttme, and
wliich have been seen by none but a very few even of
the cultivators of astronomy ? The grand discoveries
of Kepler, Newton, and Laplace, were made before
these planets were known. They have, therefore,
been of no use in establishing the physical laws of
the universe. The seaman in the trackless ocean
never seeks their guidance : to him they have not
even the value of the polar star. They contribute
nothing to the arts of terrestrial life : they neither
light the traveller on his journey, nor mark by their
feeble ray the happy hours which are consecrated to
friendship and to love. They must, therefore, have
been created for other and nobler ends, — to be the
abodes of life and intelligence — the colossal temples
where their Creator is recognised and worshipped, —
the remotest watch-towers of our system from which
His works raav be better studied, and His distant
glories more readily descried.



CHAP. IT. THE EARTH AKD THE OTHER PLANET& 81

From Jupiter and the planets beyond him, we
now proceed to the examination of Mars, Yenus, and
Mercury, and here we shall find analogies more or
less numerous and striking with those of our own
Earth. In this group of planets no moon or satellite
has yet been discovered, and it is probable that none
exists. An atmosphere of great height and of a pecu-
liar constitution reflecting on the planet the light of
the sun many hours after he has set, might in all of
them supply the place of a moon. The density of
Mars and Venus is very nearly the same as that of
the Earth, the density of the former being 096, and
that of the latter 0*92, while the density of Mercury
is a little greater, amounting to 1.12. As the dia-
meter of Venus is nearly equal to that of the Earth,
the force of gravity upon its surface will be almost
exactly the same ; and in Mars and Mercury, whose
diameters are only about one half that of the Earth,
the weight of bodies will be about one half of what
they would be if placed upon our own globe.

In Mars, Venus, and Mercury, the length of the
day is almost exactly twenty-four hours, the same as
that of the Earth,^ and in many other points the
analogy with our globe is very striking. Continents
and oceans, and green savannahs, have been ob-
served upon Mars, and the snow of his polar regions

1 The mean of {be length of the day in these four planets, is within less than a
minute of twenty-fonr homn. The days of Mercoiy, Venns, the Earth, and Man,
are reepeetirely 34'' fi" ; ta^ 21"* ; 24>' 7", and 24>' 7" : the mean of which is 24>* 0»
45*.



82 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. IV.

has been seen to disappear with the heat of sum-
mer. In Venus and Mercury their surface is varie-
gated with mountain chains of great elevation, and
but for the brilliancy of their discs, and the clouds
which envelop them, the telescope would have
discovered to us more minute details upon their
surface.

The planets of this inferior group are surrounded
with atmospheres like our Earth. We actually see
the clouds floating in the atmosphere of Mars, and
there is the appearance of land and water on his disa
Yenus and Mercury are surrounded with the same
medium essential to life, and in Yenus astronomers
have even' observed the morning and the evening
twilight. These atmospheres are doubtless the
means of tempering the great heat which Yenus
and Mercury receive from the sun; and the same
purpose may be answered by the absence of that
internal heat which exists in the Earth, and which
may be used to increase the temperature of the
remoter planets. The intense light which Yenus
and Mercury receive from the sun may be adduced
as an objection to the existence, upon these planets,
of inhabitants like ourselves ; but this objection is
at once removed by the consideration that this in-
tense light may be completely moderated either by a
very small pupil, or by a diminished sensibility of
the retina, or by a combination of both.

Such are the numerous analogies which subsist



CHAP. lY. THE EARTH AND THE OTHER PLANETS. 83

between our Earth and Mars, Venus and Mercury.
They afford, as a popular writer observes, ^' the
highest degree of probability, not to say moral cer-
tainty, to the conclusion, that these three planets
which, with the Earth, revolve nearest to the Sun,
are, like the Eaith, appropriated by the Omnipotent
Creator and Ruler of the Universe to races very
dosely resembling, if not absolutely identical with
those with which the Earth is peopled/'^ After
concluding his examination of the four exterior
planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, the
same able and candid writer closes his elaborate
chapter in these words : —

" We have thus presented the reader with a brief
and rapid sketch of the circumstances attending the
two chief groups of globes which compose the Solar
system, and have explained the discoveries and strik-
ing analogies, which taken together amount to a
demonstration, that in the economy of the material
universe these globes must subserve the same pur-
poses as the Earth, and mvst he the dwellings of
tribes o/orgamzed creatures having a corresponding
analogy to those which inhabit the Earth.

" The differences of organization and character
which would be suggested as probable or necessary
by the different distances of the several planets from
the common source of light and heat, and the con-
sequent differences of intensity of these physical

1 Dr. Lardner*! Museum of Science tmd Art, toL i. p. 23.



84 MORE WOBLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. IV.

agencies upon them, by the different weights of
bodies on their surfaces, owing to the different inten-
sities of their attractions on such bodies, by the
different intervals which mark the alternation of light
and darkness, are not more than are seen to prevail
among the organized tribes, animal and vegetable,
which inhabit different regions of the earth. The
animals and plants of the tropical zones differ in
general from those of the temperate and the polar
zones, and even in the same zone we find different
tribes of organized creatures flourish at different ele-
vations above the level of the sea. There is nothing
more wonderful than this in the varieties of organi-
zation suggested by the various physical conditions
by which the planets are affected."^

To this opinion of a mathematician and a natural
philosopher, who has studied more than any preced-
ing writer the analogies between the Earth and the
other planets, we may add that of the most dis-
tinguished naturalist and anatomist of the present
day, who speaks in an authoritative tone as repre-
senting the cultivators of that department of science
which he has enriched with such important discoveries.
" We have been accustomed,'' says Professor Owen,*
^^ to regard the vertebrate animals as being charac-
terized by the limitation of their limbs to two pairs,
and it is true that no more diverging appendages are



1 Dr. Laidner's Mtueutnqf Science and Art, toI. i. p. 63.
* On the Nature o/Limbt. London, 1849« pp. 83, 64.



CHAP. IV. THE EARTH AND THE OTHEB PLANETS. 85

developed for station, locomotion, and manipulation.
But the rudiments of many more pairs are present
in many species. And though they may never be
developed as such in this planet, it is quite con^ceiv-
able that certain of them may be so developed^ if the
vertebrate type should be Uiat on which any ofOie
inhabitants of other planets of our system are orga^
nissed,

" The conceivable modifications of the vertebrate
archetype are very far from being exhausted by any
of the forms that now inhabit the Earth, or that are
known to have existed here at any period.

** The naturalist and anatomist, in digesting the
knowledge which the astronomer has been able to
furnish regarding the planets and the mechanism of
the satellites for illuminating the night season of the
distant orbs that revolve round one common sun, can
hanrdly avoid speculating on the organic mechanism
thai may exist to profit by such sources ofUght, and
which MUST EXIST iftlve only conceivable purpose of
these beneficent arrangements is to be fulfilled. But the
laws of light, as of gravitation, being the same in Ju-
piter as here, the eyes of such creatures as may disport
in the soft reflected beams of its moons will probably
be organized on the same dioptric principles as those
of the animals of a like grade of organization on this
earth. And the inference as to the possibility of the
vertebrate type being the basis of the organization of
some of the inhabitants of oilier planets, will not



86 UORE WORLDS THAK ONE. CHAP. IV.

appear so hazardous when it is remembered that the
orbits or protective cavities of the eyes of the verte-
brata of this planet are constructed of modilQed
vertebrsB. Our thoughts are free to soar as &r as any
legitimate analogy may seem to guide them rightly
on the boundless ocean of unknown truth. And if
censure be merited for here indulging, even for a
moment, in pure speculation, it may perhaps be dis-
armed by the reflection that the discovery of the
vertebrate archetype could not fail to suggest to the
anatomist many possible modifications of it beyond
those that we know to have been realized in ihia little
orb of ours."

These important and original views arose from the
recognition of what he thought rudiments of limbs
which had never been developed, in so far as yet
known, to functional importance in any terrene ver^
tebrate, and we believe that no naturalist or anato^
mist, except himself, had arrived at any distinct
notion of the common pattern of the vertebrate
skeleton, especially in regard to the nature of limbs^
leading to a recognition of the rudiments of limbs in
the thorax of fishes, crocodiles, and birds.

But valuable as this discovery must be r^arded
by the philosophical naturalist, its application to the
possible forms of life in other planets possesses a more
general interest, and forms an entirely new, and we
think, irresistible argument for a plurality of worlds.

"The insect forms," says Professor Owen, in an



CHAP.* IV. THE E ABTH AND THE OTHEB PLANETS. 87

unpublished memorandum, ^' with which the Creator
has associated instincts that simulate closely our
boasted reason are so inconceivably different from our
own or any vertebrate organization, as to lead any
one conscious of the extremely narrow field to which
his observation of life^phenomena is here restricted,
to deem it highly probable that the forms of organi-
zation endowed with physical powers akin to our own
in other planets, may nevertheless be very different
from ours, and be as admirably adapted to the media
of existence in those planeta As a vast variety of
organizations do exist in one planet to manifest the
riches of creative resources, and amongst that variety
a species capable of conceiving how very far these
resources are from having been exhausted. Since,
moreover, it has been given to that species, in Qod's
good time, to know the subordinate character of the
globe it inhabits amongst the stars of heaven, a con-
ception of the probability of analogous globes being
analogous seats of equal variety of creative adaptations
is inevitable. The grounds of belief vary with the
probability of a proportion : If nothing better than
analogy can be had,— on analogy will belief be based."
In referring to the doctrine of Plato respecting
ideal archetypes, as thus revived by Professor Owen,
the author of the Essay of a Plurality of worlds pays
the following just compliment to this eminent anar
tomist : — " If a mere metaphysician," says he, " were
to attempt to revive this mode of expressing the



88 MORE W0BLD8 THAN ONE. CHAP. IV.

doctrine^ probably his speculations would be dis-
regarded^ or treated as a pedantic resuscitation of
obsolete Platonic dreams, but the adoption of such
language must needs be received in a very different
manner when it proceeds from a great discoverer in
the field of natural knowledge : when it is, as it were,
forced upon Mm as the obvious and appropriate
expression of the result of the most profound and
comprehensive researches into the frame of the whole
animal creation. The recent works of Mr. Owen,
and especially one work On the Nature o/LimbSy are
full of the most energetic and striking passages, in-
culcating the doctrine which we have been endea-
vouring to maintain. We may take the liberty of
enriching our pages with one passage bearing upon
the present part of the subject.

^^ ' If the world were made by an antecedent mind
or understanding, that is, by a Deity, then there
must needs be an Idea and Exemplar of the whole
world before it was made, and consequently, actual
knowledge both in the order of Time and Nature,
before Things. But conceiving of knowledge as it
was got by their own finite minds, and ignorant of
any evidence of an ideal archetype for the world or
any part of it, they (the Democritic philosophers
who denied a Divine Creative Mind) affirmed that
there was none, and concluded that there could
be no knowledge or mind before the world was, as
its cause/ '



CHAP. lY. THE EABTH AND THE OTHER PLANETS. 89

Before we read this passage in Professor Owen's
work On lArnibs^ from which our essayist does not
quote it/ for reasons which may be conjectured, we
never doubted that the accomplished professor did
not believe in a plurality of worlds. Upon turning,
however, to the volume itself, we found the beautiful
passage which we have quoted in direct support of
this great doctrine, which we may truly say, in the
words of the essayist, " proceeds from a great dis-
coverer in the field of natural knowledge, and which
was farced upon him (Professor Owen) as the obvi-
otta and appropriate expression of the result of (he
most profound and cmnprehensive researches into
the frame of the whole animal creaiion"

But not only has the essayist dealt thus unfairly
with his readers, he has treated Professor Owen in
the same manner, by ascribing to him the first half
of the preceding quotation, which the Professor quotes
from " the learned Cudworth'' in his own words, and
which Cudworth gives as the opinion of '' the Demo-
critic AtJieists !"

The observations of Professor Owen on ideal arche-
types throw a real light on the subject of a plurality
of worlds. If there be an ideal exemplar or arche-
type of vertebrate animals, and if the conceivable
modifications of that archetype are far from being
exhausted either in the animal forms which now

1 The quotation may be from Profenor Owen's other works referred to bj the
^Ttst^— his work, for example^ On Ou Archclpps qfthe FarUl^aU Skeleton,



90 MORS WORLDS THAK ONS. CHAP. IV.

inhabit the earth, or in the fosdl remains of its
primeral tenants, it is no idle speculation to suppose
that the modifications may be developed in the ver-
tebrate animals of other planets. We have a reason,
therefore, besides those of analogy and congruity, to
believe in the existence of beings both intellectual
and animal in the other r^ons of spaca And as
there must be an exemplar of intellectual as well as
of physical man, may we not equally expect, in the
upper sph^es, modifications of mind which have not
been exhibited in the terrestrial races ? If the radi-
mentary wing of man be expanded into the soaring
pinion of the et^le, may not those mental powers
which are only rudimentary here, and which fail in
grasping the infinite and the eternal, expand them-
selves in another planet, and approximate to that
divine intelligence of which they are here but a feeble
emanation ?

Under the influence of such views, may we not
conceive also the archetype of a world, the rudiments
of which, imperfectly developed in our own globe,
may have all its modifications exhausted in the plane-
tary and sidereal domains ? The uniformity in the
general design of the bodies of animals, which Sir
Isaac Newton compares with that " wonderful uni-
formity of the planetary system, which is the efiect
of choice,'' being thus compatible with an almost
infinite diversity of parts, there may be the same
numerous deviations from the archetype in the plane-



CHAP. IV. THE EABTH AND TEE OTHER PLANETS. 91

tary world. "It may be allowed," says Sir Isaac New-
ton, " that Gk)d is able to create particles of matter
of seveial sizes and figures, and in several proportions
to space, and perhaps of different densities and forces,
and thereby to vary the laws of Nature, and moke
taorlda of several sorts in several parts of the uni-
w^rstr^ If all the structures of created things are



«f



Parts and proportioiis of a wondrous whole,"



that whole is the sidereal universe, and those parts
and proportions are the inhabited planets, satellites,
and sons of which it is composed.



1 Opliei, edit 1721. pp. 378. 379.



1



CHAPTEE V.

THE BUN, MOON, SATELLITES, AND ASTEROIDS.

So strong has been the belief that the Sun cannot
be a habitable world, that a scientific gentleman^
was pronounced by his medical attendant to be
insane, because he had sent a paper to the Koyal
Society, in which he maintained " that the light of
the sun proceeds from a dense and universal aurora
which may afibrd ample light to the inhabitants of
the surface beneath, and yet be at such a distance
aloft, as not to annoy them ;" — ^that " vegetation may
obtain there as well as with us," — that " there may
be water and dry land there, hills and dales, rain,
and fair weather," — and that " as the light and the
seasons must be eternal," the " sun may easily be
conceived to be by far the most blissful habitation of
the whole system." About half a century before



1 This gentleman wm a Dr. Elliott, who was tried at the Old Bailey for shooting
HJM Boydell. His medical attendant was Dr. Simmons, throned whom he seoA
the paper for the Royal Society, and who referred the Conrt to the passage we
have given as a proof of insanity. See Edinburf^ Encpclopadta, Art Astronomy,
Tol. a p. 616, or G€nUeman*s Magainne for 1787, p. 636.



CHAP. Y. THE SUN AND THE SATELLITES. 93

this opinion was giyen by Dr. Elliott, a pious and
distinguished individual, Lord President Forbes of
CuUoden, stated it as his opinion, that if the planets
were inhabited, '^ the inhabitants must be of a tex*
ture very different from those of the earth," and that
^' we cannot deem it impossible that beings may have
been made, fit to reside,^ to act, and to think in the
very centre, as weU as on the surface of the sun"^
And in less than ten years after this apparently
extravagant notion had been considered a proof of
insanity, it was maintained by Sir William Herschel
as a rational and probable opinion, which might be
deduced from his own observations on the structure
of the sun.

It is by no means necessary that those who believe
in a plurality of worlds within the limits of our own
system, should adopt the opinion that the Sun which
lights it, and the many satellites which light the
primary planets, should be inhabited worlds. They
form an entirely different class of bodies, and the
arguments employed to shew that they may be in-
habited are of a different nature from those analogies
which so strongly apply to the piimary planets. The
Sun has a great function to perform in controlling
the movements of the whole system. It is the main-
spring of the great planetary chronometers, without
which they would stop, and rush into destructive

1 Rffiectiom on the wureti of IncnduXity wUk regard to Rtligion, p. 3. Edin-
burgh, 1750.



94 MOSS WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. V.

collision. It is the lamp which yields them the light
without which life would perish. It is the furnace
which supplies the ftiel without which organic nature
would be destroyed. Created for such noble purposes,
we are led by no analogy to assign to it an additional
function. The very same remark may be applied to
our moon, and to all the satellites of the system.
They are the domestic lamps which light the primary
planets in the absence of the sun, and all of them,
as well as our own, may exercise the other o£B.ce of
producing the tides of their oceans. It is quite
otherwise with the primary planets : They have no
conceivable function to perform but that of support-
ing inhabitants, unless we give them the additional
one which they are all fit for performing, and which
they perform so well, of becoming gigantic lamps to
their satellites; and if we invest them with this
function, we obtain an argument in favour of the
satellites themselves being inhabited.

We are willing therefore to admit, that analogy
would fail us, were we to attempt by its processes to
people the sun and the satellites with inhabitants.
But analogy is not our only guide in such inquirie&
The creations of the material world, whether they be
of colossal or atomic magnitude, may have various
and apparently contradictory purposes to answer ;
and'when we find that other purposes, not cognizable
by our senses, or not demonstrable by our reason,
may be promoted by such objects, we cannot resist



OHAP. V. THE SUN AND THE SATELLITES. 96

the admission that such additional objects may have
been contemplated in their creation. The great
masses of ironstone in our earth, while they are a
necessary part of its firamework, and are intended
mainly to supply man with the tools of civilisation,
may have the secondary or the tertiary purpose of
giving life to the needle of the compass, or of con*
tributing to those great electrical and magnetical
arrangements which exist on our globe. Though the
sun then and the satellites are primarily intended
for the great purposes which they so obviously sub-
serve, it is not unreasonable to suppose that they
may also be the seats of life and intelligence.

After a skilful examination of the solar spots, Sir
William Herschel has made it highly probable, ii* not
certain, that the light of the sun issues from an outer
stratum of self-luminous or phosphoric clouds, be-
neath which there is a second stratum of clouds of
inferior brightness, which is intended to protect the
solid and opaque body of the sun from the intense
brilliancy and heat of the luminous clouds. In
measuring photometrically, the light of these three
different structures, he found that the light reflected
outwards by the clouds of the inferior stratum, was
equal to 469 rays out of a 1000^ or less than one-halt
of the light of the outer stratum ; and that the light
reflected by the opaque body of .the sun below was
only seven rays out of a 1000. Hence he concluded
that the outer stratum of self-luminous or phosphoric



96 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. V.

clouds was the region of that light and heat which
are transmitted to the remotest part of the system ;
while the inferior stratum, which is obviously of a
different character from the other, is intended to pro-
tect the inhabitants of the sun from the blaze of the
stupendous furnace which encloses thepa. In con-
firmation of these views, the faint illumination, —
the seven rays out of a thousand, is a proof that the
light of the outer stratum, and consequently its heat,
must be extremely small upon the dark body of the
luminary which we see through what are called the
solar spots, which are now universally admitted to be
openings in the luminous stratum, and not opaque
scoria floating on its surface.

It is curious to observe, how the conjectures in one
science are sometimes converted into truths by the
discoveries in another. Sir William Herschel, as we
have seen, has stated it as the result of many obser-
vations, that the light of the sun does not proceed, as
was almost universally believed, from a solid or liquid
mass in a state of incandescence, or white heat, and
the fact has been demonstrated by means of a beau-
tiful optical discovery of M. Arago : — When a solid
mass becomes luminous by being raised to a red or
white heat, the rays which emanate from it in every
direction do not proceed only from its outer superficies.
They are radiated like those of heat from an infinite
number of material points below the surface, and
extending to a certain small depth. The rays which



CHAP. V. THE SON AND TAB SATELLITES. 97

traverse this thin luminous film, have been found by
M. Arago to be polarized, whereas, had they proceeded
from an envelope of flame, they would not have ex-
hibited this remarkable property. Now, M. Arago
has also discovered that the rays which issue obliquely
from the sun's surface are not polarized, and hence
he is authorized to draw the conclusion confirming
Sir W. HerscheFs opinion, that the light of the sun
issues from a gaseous envelope of flame, or self-lumi-
nous matter.

With this important result before us, we approach
the question of the habitability of the sun, with the
certain knowledge that the sun is not a red-hot globe,
but that its nucleus is a solid opaque mass receiving
very little light and heat from its luminous atmo-
sphere. Sir William commences his argument by
inquiring into the probability of the moon being
inhabited.

" The moon,'' he says, " is a secondary planet, of a
considerable size, the surface of which is diversified
like that of the earth, by mountains and valleys. Its
situation with respect to the sun is much like that of
the earth, and, by a rotation upon its axis, it enjoys
an agreeable variety of seasons, and of day and night.
To the moon our globe will appear to be a very
capital satellite, undergoing the same regular changes
of illumination as the moon does to the earth. The
sun, the planets, and the starry constellations of the
heavens, will rise and set there as they do here, and

G



98 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. V.

heavy bodies will fall on the moon as they do on the
earth. There seems only to be wanting, in order to
complete the analogy, that it should be inhabited like
the earth.

" To this it may be objected, that we perceive no
large seas in the moon; that its atmosphere (the
existence of which has been doubted by many) is
extremely rare, and unfit for the purposes of animal
life ; that its climates, its seasons, and the length of
its days, totally differ from ours ; that without dense
clouds (which the moon has not) there can be no
rain — perhaps no rivers, no lakes. In short, that
notwithstanding the similarity which has been
pointed out, there seems to be a decided difference in
the two planets we have compared.

" My answer to this will be, that that very differ-
ence which is now objected will rather strengthen the
force of my argument than lessen its value : we find
even upon our globe, that there is the most striking
difference in the situation of the creatures that live
upon it. While man walks upon the ground, the
birds fly in the air, and fishes swim in water, we can
certainly not object to the convenience afforded by
the moon, if those that are to inhabit its regions are
fitted to their conditions as well as we on this globe
are to ours. An absolute or total sameness seems
rather to denote imperfections such as nature never
exposes to our view ; and on this account, I believe
the analogies that have been mentioned sufficient to



CHAP. V. THE SUN AND THE SATELLITES. 00

establish the high probability of the moon's being in-
hcMted like the earth,"

Sir William Herschel proceeds to put the argument
in another shape. He supposes that the inhabitants
of the moon, and the other satellites, if they do exist,
are of opinion that the Earth and the other primary
planets are of no other use but as lamps, and " attrac-
tive centres to direct their revolution round the sun ;"
and he then asks, " if we ought not to condemn their
ignorance as proceeding from want of attention and
proper reflection ?"

From these considerations Sir William thinks that
the inhabitants of the planets ought to be wiser than
we have supposed those of their satellites to be.
"From experience," he adds, "we can aflSrm, that
the performance of the most salutary offices to inferior
planets is not inconsistent with the dignity of supe-
rior purposes ; and in consequence of such analogical
reasonings, assisted by telescopic views which plainly
favour the same opinion, tve need not hesitate to
admit that the sun is richly stored mth inhabitants/'

From the phenomena of variable stars which Sir
William supposes to arise from their having spots,
and revolving about an axis, he considers it as hardly-
admitting of a doubt that the fixed stars are suns ;
and he comes to the conclusion, that " if stars are
suns, and suns inhabitable, we see at once what an
extensive field of animation opens itself to our view."
" It is true," he adds, " that analogy may induce us



100 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. V.

to conclude, that since stars appear to be suns, and
suns, according to the common opinion, are bodies
that serve to enlighten, warm, and sustain a system
of planets, we may have an idea of numberless globes
that serve for the habitation of living creatures. But
if these suns themselves are primary planets, we may
see some thousands of them with our own eyes, and
millions by the help of telescopes ; when, at the same
time, the same analogical reasoning still remains
in full force, with regard to the planets which these
suns may support." ^

The opinion of so distinguished an astronomer as
Sir William Herschel, cannot fail to have much weight
on a subject like this ; but though we are desirous
of strengthening rather than of controverting his ar-
guments, there are yet some difficulties to be removed,
and some additional analogies to be adduced, before
the mind can admit the startling proposition, that
the sun, moon, and all the satellites, are inhabited
spheres. We may, indeed, reject this opinion, and
yet believe implicitly in a plurality of worlds.

In giving an account of these views of Sir William
Herschel, Dr. Thomas Young^ has remarked that
'* no clouds, however dense, could impede the trans-
mission of the sun's heat to the parts below ;" and
that " if every other circumstance permitted human
beings to reside upon it, their own weight would

1 Philotopkieal Tramactions, 1705, pp. 05-69 ; and 1801, p. 2g<.
« EletMnttqf Natural Phttosophp, vol i. pp. 601, 502.



CHAP. V. THE SUN AND THE SATELLITES. 101

present an insuperable difficulty, since it would
become nearly thirty times as great as upon the sui-
face of the earth, a man of moderate dimensions
weighing above two tons" The first of these diffi-
culties has certainly no weight. If the heat of the
Bun's rays is proportional to its light, which it must
be if it is a flame, the darkness of the sun's nucleus
becomes a measure of its coolness. Even a human
being might live and breathe upon the solid nucleus
under the heat which is indicated by seven rays out
of a thousand. The second objection is equally in-
applicable, because Sir William has never asserted,
and never did believe, that the children of the sun
were to be human beings, but, on the contrary, crea-
tures " fitted to their condition as well as we on this
globe are to ours."

It has been stated as an objection to the proba-
bility of the sun's being inhabited, that the whole
firmament would be hid by the double atmosphere
with which he is surrounded, and that the solar in-
habitants would be excluded from all knowledge of
the planets which he guides, and of the sidereal uni-
verse of which he is a part. This, however, is not
strictly true. The planets and stars would be seen
distinctly through the numerous openings in the
solar atmosphere, and as the surface of the nucleus,
which we suppose to be inhabited, is comparatively
near to these openings, large portions of the heavens
would be exposed to view during the rotation of the



102 MORB WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. V.

sun. In many parts of our own globe weeks pass
away without our seeing the sun or the stars, and it
cannot be doubted that the inhabitants of the sun
might study astronomy through the casual openings
in the luminous cupola which encloses them.

The probability of the sun being inhabited is
doubtless greatly increased by the simple consider-
ation of its enormous size. Admitting, with Sir
William Herschel, that the sun may have a tempe-
rature adapted even for human constitutions, it is
diflScult to believe that a globe of such magnificence,
882,000 miles in diameter, upwards of one hundred
and eleven times the size of our earth, and 1,384,472
times its bulk, should occupy so distinguished a place
without intelligent beings to study and admire the
grand arrangements which exist around them ; and
it would be still more difficult to believe, if it is
inhabited, that a domain so extensive, so blessed
with perpetual light, is not occupied by the highest
orders of intelligence. In the material world with
which we are connected, life everywhere meets our
eye. It is virtually almost a property of matter, and
therefore to conceive huge masses of matter, that
are warmed and heated, to be destitute of life, is to
do violence to our strongest convictions. Those who
believe life to be the result of second causes, must
believe in its universal diffiision ; and those who have
the conviction, that into every Uving thing the
Almighty must breathe its breath, will find it diffi-



CHAP. V. THE SUN AND THE SATELLITES. l03

colt to believe that the life which swanns around
him on the earth, the ocean, and the air, of his own
planet, has been denied to the other bodies of the
system. Universal life upon universal matter is an
idea to which the mind instinctively clings. King-
doms without kings and subjects — continents without
cities-— cities without citizens — houses without fa-
milies — ships without crews, and railway trains
without passengers, are contingencies as probable as
solar systems without planets, or planets without
inhabitants.

To the arguments so well stated by Sir William
Herschel in favour of his opinion that the moon is
inhabited, some important considerations may be
added. The moon certainly has neither clouds nor
seas ; but this is no reason why she may not have an
atmosphere, and a precipitation of moisture upon
her surface, sufficient for the support of vegetable
life. The moon may have streams or even rivers
that lose themselves, as some of our own do, either
in the dry ground, or in subterranean cavities ; or
they may be lost by absorption or evaporation, as in
the dry saline deserts of Australia. There may be
springs too, and wells sufficient for the use of man ;
and yet the evaporation from the water thus diffiised
may be insufficient for the formation of clouds, and
consequently for the production of rain. The air
may be charged to such a small extent with aqueous
vapour, that it descends only in gentle dews, to be


104 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. V.

absorbed by vegetation, and again returned to the
atmosphere. Even in our own planet there are re-
gions of some extent where rain never falls,^ and
where the aqueous vapour in the atmosphere descends
only in refreshing dews.

Although Sir John Herschel has stated that there
are no decisive indications of an atmosphere in the
moon, yet he has given the following very ingenious
theory of her climate, which implies the existence of
an atmosphere, and even of runni'n^ water, " The
climate of the moon," says he, " must be very extra-
ordinary ; the alternations being that of unmitigated
and burning sunshine fiercer than an equatorial noon
continued for a whole fortnight, and the keenest
severity of frost, far exceeding that of our polar
winters for an equal time. Such a disposition of
things must produce a constant transfer of whatever
moisture may exist on its surface, from the point
beneath the sun to that opposite, by distillation in
vacuo, after the manner of the little instrument
called a cryophorus. The consequence must be ab-
solute aridity below the vertical sun, constant accre-
tion of hoar frost in the opposite region, and perhaps
a narrow zone of running tvater at the borders of the
enlightened hemisphere. It is possible, then, that
evaporation on the one hand, and condensation on
the other, may, to a certain extent, preserve an equi-
librium of temperature, and mitigate the extreme

1 See Johnston's Physical Atlas, Plate III. of Meteorology.



CHAP. V. THE SUN AND THE SATELLITES. 105

severity of both climates ; but this process, which
would imply the continual generation and destruc-
tion of an atmosphere of aqueous vapour^ must, in
conformity with what has been said above of a lunar
atmosphere, be confined within very narrow limits."

In some of the principal craters, Sir John Herschel
tells us "that there are decisive marks of volcanic
stratification^ arising from successive deposits of
ejected matter^ and evident indications of lava cur-
rents f and he admits that " there are large regions
perfectly level, and apparently of a decided alluvial
charojcter" — conditions of the moon's surface, which
demonstrate that there has been an atmosphere to
promote combustion, and water to produce an allu-
vion. We do not understand how modem writers
on astronomy have overlooked so completely the
many arguments for the existence of an atmosphere
in the moon, which have been almost universally ad-
mitted. Facts observed a century ago by astronomers
distinguished for their accuracy, are not less impor-
tant because they have not been observed by their
successors. Volcanoes may have been seen in the
moon in the 18th century, though they have not
been observed in the 19th ; and a decided indication
of atmospheric action to-day, will not be disproved
by its invisibUity to-morrow.

That volcanoes or burning regions have been ob-
served in the dark portion of the moon's disc, cannot
be doubted. In 1772, Beccaria, and in 1778, Ulloa,



106 MORE W0RLD6 THAN ONE. CHAP. V.

observed a bright white spot on the moon's disc. The
spot observed by UUoa and other three observers,
resembled an opening in the moon ; but Beccaria was
of opinion that this spot, as well as the one seen hy
himself, was the flame of a burning mountain.
Various other persons have seen phenomena of the
same kind; but all doubt upon this subject was
removed when so accurate an observer as Sir William
Herschel announced the discovery of volcanoes in the
moon. On the 4th May 1783, he perceived a lumi-
nous spot in the obscure part of the moon, and two
mountains which toere formed from ihe 4i;h to the
13th of May! On the 19th April 1787, he perceived
"three volcanoes in different pkices of ihe dark part of
the moon. Two of them were already nearly extinct,
or otherwise in a state going to break out, which per-
haps may be decided next lunation. The third shews
an actual eruption of fire, or luminous matter." On
the following day the volcano was burning with
greater violence than the night before, and he found
it equal to twice the size of the second satellite of
Jupiter, and consequently, above three miles in dia-
meter. Sir William observed that the eruption re-
sembled a piece of burning charcoal These volcanic
fires were observed also by Cassini, Captain Kater,
Dr. Maskelyne, and more recently by Admiral Smyth,
who justly remarks that " they settle the contested
point of the existence of a lunar atmosphere." We
have been surprised at the facility with which Dr.



CHAP. V. THE BUN AND THE SATELLITES. 107

Lardner, Mr. Nasmyth, and Mr. Crampton, have
given up the idea of an atmosphere in the moon,
-without assigning anything like a valid reason for
their opinion. Maintaining, as they do^ that the
moon's surface is covered with the craters of " count-
less thousands of volcanoes/' and knowing that in the
opinion of all philosophers, volcanoes are produced
by the elastic force of gases and vapours, which eject
the melted lava, and themselves issue, along with it,
into the ethereal space, how can they suppose that
these gases are again destroyed, and do not, as they
must, form an atmosphere round the planet ? Every
planet whose surface has been perforated with vol-
canic vents, must necessarily have an atmosphere.

M. De La Place regards the moon as having an
atmosphere more attenuated than what is called the
vacuum in an air-pump ; and MM. Madler^ and
Beer, who have studied the moon's surface more dili-
gently than any of their predecessors or contempo-
raries, have arrived at the conclusion that she has an
atmosphere, — ^that her i^mall mass prevents her from
retainiug around her an extensive porti6n of it, and
that the conflicting observations on the form of stars
and planets eclipsed by the moon, may arise from the
influence of local causes in '^ dimming or condensing"
her highly rarefied atmosphere.

But, independent of these considerations, we main-
tain that every pUmet and satdlite in the Solar sys-

1 I>er Hond, p. 152. Berlin. 1837.



108 MOKE WOULDS THAN ONE. CHAP. V.

tern mvst have an aimosfphere. Matter, without water
and gaseous elements, either as adhering substances
or as essential parts of it, is unknown to science. The
water of crystallization of lunar matter must have
been set free during the agency of volcanic forces,
and have taken its place round the body of the Moon.
Another origin of the atmospheres of satellites is found
in the indefinite extension of the atmospheres of their
primaries. Science has not yet limited the extent of
the elastic forces of gaseous bodies, and the failure
of Dr. Wollaston, in his elaborate attempt to prove
the finite extent of an atmosphere, leaves our position
in its original force.

We believe that the whole staff of living astrono-
mers may be arranged inixifcmr classes : —

1. Those who believe that the zodiacal lights as it

is called, is the Sun's atmosphere.

2. Those who believe that the tails of Comets bring

vapour into our system, and leave portions of
it behind.

3. Those who believe in the Nebular Theory ; and

lastly,

4. The single individual, the Essayist, who believes

that the Earth and Moon occupy that middle
part of the system, " where moist and dry is
possible," or, as he otherwise expresses it,
" between the hot and fiery haze on the one
side, and the cold and watery vapours on the
other.'



CHAP. V. THE SUN AND THE SATELLITES. 109

Of these four classes each and all of them are hound
by their opinions to believe in a lunar atmosphere.

1. The Zodiacal light, the Sun's atmosphere,

extends beyond Venus, and, as Sir John Herschel

remarks, "attains nearly ^ perhaps quite, to the

orbit of the Earth," that is, its luminous part ; but

it 18 obvious, that if this part is visible as far as

our Earth, the weaker part of this atmosphere

reflecting light too fidntly to be appreciated by

us, when our retina is affected with other light,

must extend much farther. But even if this is

not the case, it must certaraly reach the Moon when

in her perihelion, or 240,000 miles nearer the Sun

than the Earth. Now, though Sir John Herschel

does not consider this dense and gaseous medium, as

properly speaking an atmosphere revolving with the

Son, yet he considers it as a material resisting mass,

^'loaded perhaps with the actual materials of the

tails of milUons of comets, of which they have been

stripped in their successive perihelion passages."

Hence it follows, that the moon must draw around

her, as an atmosphere of her own, a portion of this

material mass, and even if she were not placed in it,

she must have received no small portion of it when

diflfesed in her vicinity, in the form of comets' tails

millions of miles in extent

2. Those who do not believe in a Solar atmosphere
extending to the Mood, but believe in the gaseous
and vaporous character of the tails of



110 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. V.

comets passing through our system in all directions,
must admit that a portion of such atmospheric ele-
ments could not be withheld from the Moon. The
Comet of Lexell, which passed among Jupiter's satel-
lites, must have paid to them for its passage a portion
of its tail.

3. Those who believe in the Nebular Theory con-
sider it as certain that our Earth derived its solid
matter and its atmosphere from a ring thrown from
the Solar atmosphere, which afterwards contracted
into a solid terraqueous sphere, from which the Moon
was thrown oflf by the same process. The Moon,
therefore, must necessarily have carried off water and
air from the watery and aerial parts of the Earth,
and must have an atmosphere.

4. The Essayist, who believes in the nebular hypo-
thesis, must, therefore, admit an atmosphere in the
Moon ; but he is doubly bound to admit it, and can-
not escape from the admission, when he adds to the
nebular theory the hypothesis of his own that the
watery parts of the Sun's atmosphere were " driven
into the outer orbs," the fiery parts reserved for
Mercury and Venus ; and the Earth, and the Moon of
course, placed between the wet and the dry " lumps" of
the solar system, with all that coolness and moisture
which is essential to organic life. In its passage
outwards the Moon could not have escaped from the
watery current in which it lay, even if it had, at
that time, been divorced from its parent Earth.



CHAP. V. THE SUN AND THK SATELLITES. Ill

Bat the Essayist is committed to a belief in a lanar
atmosphere by another hypothesis in which he has
indalged. Oar readers may perhaps know that about
the 13th of November and the lOth of Angost a
much greater number of shooting or falling stars
occur than at any other time of the year. The
Essayist considers these shooting stars as ^' specks of
nebulad,'' and outriders of the zodiacal light, (the
sun's atmosphere,) portions of it which being external
to the permanently nebulous central mass have
broken into patches and are seen as stars for the
moment we are near to them," — ^that is, portions of a
nebulous mass moist and dry. Now, as the Earth
wUh the Moon passes through this nebular region
twice a year, the Moon must carry off and surround
herself with an atmosphere of this matter. Nay,
we go much further in following out these views.
Shooting stars fall at all seasons of the year, though
they fall in greater numbers in August and Novem-
ber than in any other month. From observations
made in Paris by M. Coulvier Gravier, from July
1841 to February 1845, it appears that in each of
the first six months of the year the hourly mean
number of shooting stars was nearly 4*00, more ac-
curately 3*6, while in July, August, and September,
the number was 7|, and in October, November, and
December, nearly 9. It is evident, therefore, that in
every part of the Earth's orbit the E|||^fl^ Moon
are involved in the nebular matter, (|



MORE WORLDS THA



which fonn the shootiug stars. The Moon conac-
qiieotly, if the speculation of the Essayist he cor-
rect, must he surrounded with an atmosphere of
the vaporous matter throngh which she continaally



Although Sir John Herschel broadly aaaerte, that
in the occultations of stars and planets by the moon,
there is no appearance whatever of an atmosphere ;
yet we have many facta which stand in direct oppo-
sition to this statement. Cassini assures ua, that he
frequently observed the circular figure of Jupiter,
Saturn, and the fixed stare changed into an elliptical
on«, when they approached either the dark or the
illuminated limb of the moon, Mr, Dunn saw Saturn
and hia ring emerge from the moon's limb like a
comet ; Admiral Smyth has observed not only a
diminution of the star's brightness, but an api)arent
projection of the star on the moon's disc at the in-
stant of contact ; and M. Schroeter of lilienthal, with
fine telescopes, observed "several obscurations and
retm-ning serenity, eruptions, and other changes in
the lunar atmosphere." The same astronomer dis-
covered the twilight of the moon at the extremity nf
ite cusps, and he found by measurement, that the
inferior or more dense part of the moon's atmosphere
was not above 1500 feet, or the third of a mile high,
while the height of the atmosphere where it could
affect the brightneae of a fixed star, is not above 5742
feet, or not much more than a mile. Hence we see



i



CHAP. V. THE SUN AND THE SATELUTES. 113

the reason why changes are only occasionally pro-
duced upon stars occulted by the moon. Htr atmo-
sphere is greaUy lower than her mountains. When
the stars, therefore, enter, or emei^e from, behind
mountains higher than her atmosphere, they are not
affected by refraction ; and when behind mountains
or level plains lower than her atmosphere, they are
affected by the refraction of the superincumbent air.
It is evident, therefore, from all these facts,
that in her volcanoes, active and extinct, in her
twilight, and in her action upon immerging and
emerging stars, by which they have been frequently
seen projected on her disc, the moon exhibits such
proofs of an atmosphere, that we have a new ground
from analogy for believing that she either has in-
habitants, or is in a state of preparation for receiving
them.

Had the moon been destined to be merely a lamp
to our earth, there was no occasion to variegate its
surface with lofty mountains and valleys, and deep
cavities, and extinct volcanoes, and cover it with
large patches of matter, that reflect different quanti-
ties of light of different tints, and give parts of its
surface, such as the Mare Serenitatis, Mare Cri-
sium, and Mare Humorum, the appearance of green
fields, continents, and seas.^ It wovld have been a
better lamp had it been a smooth sphere of lime or of

9

1 Dr. Gibers was of opinion that the surface of the moon exhibited signR of
Tegetation. and that she was inhabited.

H



114 MORB WORLDS THAN ONB. CHAP. V.

chalky and it would have performed equally well its
other function of producing the tides in our ocean.
The existence of extinct volcanoes too, the upheaval
of lofly mountains, are proofs of a progression in its
physical history — of a preparation, perhaps long ago
made, for the reception of inhabitants. That it is
not now preparing may be inferred from the absence
of every appearance of change, since its surface has
been studied by astronomers.

If it is probable, then, that the moon is inhabited,
the same degree of probability may be extended to
all the other satellites of the sjrstem. Their great
distance from the earth prevents us from examining
their surface ; but even without any indication of
mountains and valleys, or of any forces that have dis-
turbed or are still disturbing their surface, analogy
compels us to conclude, that like all other material
spheres, the sateUites of the planets must have been
created for the double purpose of giving light to their
primaries, and a home to animal and intellectual life.



CHAPTER VI.



THE SYSTEM OF COMETS.



The Solar system consists of two diflferent groups
of bodies, namely, the Planetary system and the
system of Comets. The Planetary system consists of
eight primary planets, thirty asteroids, and twenty-
two secondary planets or moons, circulating round
their primaries. All the eight primary planets move
very nearly in one plane, rising only a few degrees
(less than 3° on the average) above the plane of the
ecliptic, or that in which the Earth moves round the
Sun. The orbits of the thirty asteroids have all de-
grees of inclination from two-thirds of a degree, that
of MassHia, to 34** 37', that of PaUas, the average
being about T"*. The comets, on the contrary, move
at all possible angles to the ecliptic, and in all possible
directions, so that if their orbits could be supposed
to be fixed and luminous lines, they would form a
luminous sphere, on whose equator the planetary
system would be seen as a narrow luminous band, if
their orbits were also fixed and luminous.



116 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. VI.

These two groups of bodies are essentially different
ia their nature, as well as in the form and position of
their orbits. We have already stated that comets re-
semble a piece of cloud or vapour ; but many of them
have what is called a nucleus, or what resembles a
solid centre, while others have a disc as round and
well defined as Jupiter. This nucleus, however,
never exhibits phases like the Moon, and therefore
cannot be considered as a solid body, though in some
comets solidity is indicated by a minute star-like
point in the centre.

Comets are as variable in their motions as in their
forms. Some move very slow, and others with such a
velocity as to describe an ai'ch of 40° in a day.

There are, doubtless, many hundred comets be-
longing to the Solar system. The orbits of no fewer
than two hundred have been collected by Mr. Cooper
of Markree Castle, and hundreds more have passed
over our system unseen.

Although astronomers have not been able to dis-
cover the use of this remarkable and numerous class
of celestial bodies, yet it cannot be doubted that they
perform some important function in the Solar system,
necessary and useful to all the bodies of the planetary
group. Sir Isaac Newton, who has speculated more
on the nature of comets than other philosophers, re-
gards their tails as a very fine vapour, which is emitted
by the head or nucleus of the comet when heated by
the Sun, and he is of opinion that this vapour, so fre-



CH AP. VI. THE SYSTEM OF COMETS. 1 17

quently rarefied and diluted, may at last be dissipated
and scattered through the whole heavens, and by
little and little be attracted towards the planets by
its gravity, and mixed with their atmosphere. " For
as the seas," as Sir Isaac observes, " are necessary to
the constitution of our Earth, in order that the Sun
by his heat may exhale from them a sufficient quan-
tity of vapour, which, being collected in clouds, may
descend in rains, and water and nourish all the earth
for the production of vegetables ; or, being condensed
by the cold summits of mountains, may run down in
springs and rivers ; so comets seem to be required /w^
the conservation of the seas and fluids ofjplanetSj in
order that, from their condensed exhalations and
vapours, the water consumed in vegetables and pu-
trefaction, and converted into dry earth, may be con-
tinually replaced and supplied.^ For all vegetables
grow wholly from fluids, and then are, to a great
extent, turned into dry earth by putrefaction, a slime
perpetually settling from putrefying fluids. Hence it
is that the bulk of the solid earth is continually in-
creasing, and that its fluids, if not supplied from any
other source, must constantly decrease, and at last
entirely fail. I suspect, also, that the comets supply
our air with that which is the smallest, and most
subtle, and useful part of it, and which is required
to sustain the life of everything.''^

1 It ia obvious, from this passage, that Sir Isaac Newton believed in a plurality
of worlds. See Chap. IT.

2 Principia, Lib. III.. Prob. XLI.



118 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. VI.

According to these views of our great philosopher,
the use of comets is to fill the whole planetary spaces
with moisture, and thus to supply each planet, whether
primary or secondary, with the moisture which is lost
by vegetation, putrefaction, or any other cause. If
the planets are not inhabited by man or by beast,
this supply of moisture would not be wanted ; and it
would be a strange supposition that such an array of
hundreds of comets should be created to supply our
own little planet with the water which it may re-
quire.

But even if Sir Isaac Newton's opinion of the use
of comets is incorrect, it cannot be doubted that
they exercise some function beneficial to the whole
planetary system, a function for which we can see
but little use if the earth only is inhabited. The
Solar system, consisting of planets and comets, and
satellites, is obviously one magnificent and symmetri-
cal creation,

*' AH are but parts of one stupendous whole,"

each part having diflerent and glorious purposes to
perform. The function of one comet, could we ascer-
tain it, must be the function of all ; the function of
one satellite must be the function of all ; and the
function of one planet must be the function of all
the rest. The function of the comets has not yet
been revealed to us. The function of our Moon, to
give light to the Earth, must be the function of the



CHAP. VI. THE SYSTEM OF COMETS. 119

other twenty-two moons of the system; and the
function of the Earth, to support inhabitants, must
be the function of all the other planets.

** From nature's chain, whatever link yon strike,
Tenth or ten thousandth, breaks the chain alike.''



J



CHAPTER VII.

ON THE NEBULAR HYPOTHESIS.

The reference which has already been made to the
NehnIfLr Hypothesis, and the adoption of it by the
author of the Essay "Of a Plurality of Worlds," render
it necessary that we should give some account of it
to our readers. Copernicus, Q^lileOj Tycho, Kepler,
and Newton, having no other guide than Scripture,
believed that God made the worlds, and upheld all
things by the word of His power. After creating by
His mighty fiat the gigantic Sun as the centre of the
Solar system, He created the planets and their satel-
lites, launching them from their proper positions in
space, and with their proper velocities on their daily
and annual movements. Philosophers of another
school were not satisfied with these views, and, we
believe, on the authority of Laplace, that Buffbn was
the first persQn, since the discovery of the true system
of the world, who attempted to explain the origin of
the planets and their satellites. He supposes that a
comet falling upon the sun dashed from it a torrent



CHAP. Vn. ON THE NEBULAR HYPOTHESIS. 121

of matter, which was formed in the distance into
different globes of greater or less magnitude, and
more or less distant from the great luminary. These
globes are the planets and the satellites which, after
cooling, become opaque and solid. In this extrava-
gant speculation, the sun and the comets were made
by the fiat of the Almighty, and the comets directed
by the same power towards the sun. Why, then,
was a secondary cause required to make the little
planets, when it was dispensed with in the case of
the sun and comets ? When these two bodies, five
hundred times ^eater than all the planets put
together, were made by the direct agency of God,
why was not this same agency employed in com-
pleting the system ?

Dissatisfied with this very puerile hypothesis, La-
place invents another more ingenious, but equally at
variance with reason and with Scripture. In order
to explain the motion of all the bodies in our system
in one direction, he supposes a central sun to be
originally created, and made to revolve, with a large
atmosphere, which, by excessive heat, expands beyond
the orbits of all the planets. Neptune, the most
remote, was formed by the outer zone of this atmo-
sphere beiug condensed, by cooling and shrinking,
into a planet. By the same process Uranus was
formed, and last of all. Mercury, the sun's atmosphere
having now shrunk within the orbit of that planet.
In like manner all the planets, without satellites,



.^



122 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. VU.

threw oflf rings from themselves, which contracted
into satellites.^ To this hypothesis, it is a sufficient
answer to state, that when Laplace proposed it, it was
believed that all the planets and satellites moved ia
the same direction from west to east, but since that
time all the satellites of Uranus have been found to
move in the opposite direction, and Mr. Hind has
very recently found that the satellite of Neptune also
moves in the opposite direction, thus proving that
the hypothesis is utterly incapable of explaining the
celestial motions.

In this hypothesis the direct creative power of the
Almighty was employed in making the sun and his
atmosphere, and giving them a motion of rotation.
The same power surely, without the agency of second-
ary causes, might have equally created the planets
and satellites, and launched them in their orbits.

In more recent times this speculation has been
pushed to a much greater extent. The universe is
supposed to be filled with Jire-mist, or star-dust, as it
has been called, something like a mixture of smoke
and steam. From some unknown cause, two par-
ticles attract one another, and are then surrounded by
others, which become an infant san, wriggling itaeK
into motion,-inciea8ing in size, and carrying round
with it the whole mass of fire-mist within the orbit
of Neptune, and then forming planets and satellites,

1 From this hypothesis it necessarily foUows that all the satellites, as trell as
all the planets, must have atmoipheret.


CHAP. Vll. ON THE NEBULAR HYPOTHESIS. 123

as in the last hypothesis. Here, as before, the direct
creative power of the Ahnighty is required to gene-
rate the fire-mist, but when this is done, His arm is
paralyzed, and the Solar system is manufactured by
secondary causes.

Th9 Nebular hypothesis has been adopted by the
author of the Essay " Of a Plurality of Worlds," the
only English philosopher who can be named as giving
it the smallest countenance. His object in adopting
it is to " find additional proofs in favour of his view
of the system," and he employs it to explain how the
inferior planets, Venus and Mercury, cannot have in-
habitants, " because they have not yet fully emerged
from the atmosphere in which they had their origin,
— ^the mother lights and mother Jire, in which they
began to crystallize, as crystals do in their mother
water." In like manner he maintains that the four
exterior planets — Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Nep-
tune — cannot have inhabitants, because they are
" immense clouds," mere " water and vapour packed
into rotating masses," having been "driven to the
outer parts of the system, or retained there by the
central heat of the sun." As for the eighteen or
nineteen sate^ites of these unfortunate water planets,
and the thirty asteroids, he pronounces them to be
"mere shreds and specks of planetary matter," or
" watery globes, with perhaps a lump, or a few similar
lumps of planetary matter at their centre."

Such is the addition to the Nebular hypothesis, for



124 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. Vll.

which the author claims the high praise of " reducing
into consistency and connexion, in a manner whicJh
seems vxmderfid^ the very extraordinary number of
points in the Solar system hitherto unexplained."
These points, of which he thus boasts of having dis-
covered the cause, are ttoelve in number; but we
deny that he has given the slightest explanation of
any one of them, and we assert that there is not a
philosopher in the civilized world that thinks other-
wise than we do. The hypothesis has not even the
merit of ingenuity. It is at once presumptuous and
fanciful, subversive of every principle of the inductive
philosophy, degrading to science, incompatible with
religious truth, and dishonouring to the great Author
of the material universe.^



1 Sir Isaac Newton's opinion of the Nebular hypothesis will be found in Chap.
XIII. and XIV.



CHAPTER VIII.

THE MOTION OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM ROUND A DISTANT

CENTRE.

Had our Sun, with all the planets and comets
which he controls, been absolutely fixed in space, our
system could have had no connexion with the other
systems of the universe. The immense void that
separates it from the stars, would have been regarded
as the barrier which confined it. Astronomers, how-
ever, have not only placed it beyond a doubt that the
Solar system is advancing in absolute space, but have
determined the direction in which it moves, and,
within certain limits, the velocity of its motion.
This great cosmical truth, the grandest in astronomy,
proves that our Solar system is not the central system
of the universe, and will furnish us with a new argu-
ment for a plurality of worlds.

The first astronomer who suggested the idea of such
a motion, was the celebrated Dr. Halley,^ who was
led to it by comparing the places of Sirius, Arcturus,
and Aldebaran, as determined by the observations of

1 Phil Trans., 1718, No. 355, i. v. vL



126 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. Vin.

Hipparchus and Flamsteed. The Frencli astrono-
mers, Cassini and Le Monnier, noticed the same fact ;
but it is to Tobias Mayer^ of GK)ttingen that we are
indebted for a more complete examination of the
subject. By comparing the places of eighty iSxed
stars, as detennined by Eoemer in 1706, with their
places as observed by Lacaille in 1750, and himself
in 1756, he found that the greater number of them
had a proper motion, that is, a motion that could
not be explained by any cause connected with the
motion of our earth in its orbit, or upon its axis.
In order to explain this motion, he suggested that it
might arise from a progressive motion of the sun to
one quarter of the heavens, in consequence of which
the stars to which he was approachiug would appear
to recede from each other, while those in the opposite
region from which he was moving would appear to
approach one another ; and he illustrated this idea
by supposing a person walking in a field surrounded
by trees, in which case the trees to which he ap-
proached would appear to separate, or their dis-
tance to increase, while those which he left behind
would appear to approach to one another, or their
distance to diminish, the trees on his right and left
hand preserving the same apparent distance from
each other. This was the true cause of the proper
motion of the stars, but owing to the imperfection of
astronomical instruments in the time of Eoemer, and

1 opera Inedita, 1775. De Motujbearum propria, pp. 77-81.



CHAP. VIII. MOTION OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM. 127

even in Mayer's time, the observed proper motion
did not correspond with his explanation of it ; and he
quitted the subject with the remark, that many, cen-
turies must elapse before the true cause of this motion
can be explained.

Astronomy, however, was advanciug more rapidly
than its most ardent votaries imagined, and, before
a single century elapsed, the motion of the Solar
system in space, as the cause of the proper motion
of the stars, became a great truth, commanding the
assent and the admiration of every cultivator of
astronomy.

Although Dr. Wilson^ of Glasgow had pointed out,
on theoretical principles, the probability of a progres-
sive motion of the Sun, and Lambert^ and La Lande^
had deduced it from the idea, that the same mechan-
ical impulse which gave the Sun its rotatory motion
upon its axis, would displace its centre and give it a
motion of translation, yet it was not till Sir William
Herschel,^ in 1783, analyzed the accurate observations
of Dr. Maskelyne on thirty-five fixed stars, that a
decided step was made in the investigation. He
found that, in 1790, the Solar system was advancing
to the star X in the constellation Hercules, or to a
point in the heavens whose right ascension is 260**
34', and north declination 26° 17'. By similar cal-

^ TTuwghts on OenerxU QravitaMon^ 1777.

3 SysUme du Monde, pp. 152-158 ; and Lettre$ CosmolOffiquef, 1761, p. 126.

' M^. Acad. Par. 1776, p. 513.

* Phil. Trans,, 1783. p. 247 ; 1605, pp. 233-256.


128 KOBE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. VIU.

cnlatioDS, M. PieTOSt^ found the right ascension of
the same point to be 230"", with north declination
25^ ; and M. Klugel* made it 260°, with north decli-
nation 27'', — a result almost the same as that of Sir
William Herschel.

It would be inconsistent with the nature of an
Essay like this to enter into more minute details upon
this subject We shall, therefore, give a tabular view
of the results which have been obtained from places
of the fixed stara, taken with the more accurate
instruments of the present day, at the principal
Observatories in Europe, and by the accomplished
astronomers that direct them : —

Bight Ascension and DecUnation of the Point to which the Solar

System is advancing.

Olwmn. ™»*" Probable Korth Probable „.^fL.

uoenren. AeoenrioB. Eiror. DeeUnation. Error. **'S"

Argelander I. 256* 25'1 ± 12* 21'-3 SS* 37'-2 ± »• 21 '4 21

Argehmder IL 255* 9'7 ± 8* Si'O 38* 34'-3 ± «• 55'-« 50

Argeluder III. 261* 10'-7 ± 3* 48'» 30* 58' 1 ± 2* 31'-4 319

Lundahl IV. 252* 24'-4 ± 5* 25'-3 14* 26'1 ± 4* 29'-3 147

Otto Strove V. 261" 23'1 ± 4* 4»'-9 37* 35'7 ± 4* ll'-8 392



Mean result VL 259" 9'-4 ± 2* 57''5 34* 36'-5 ± 3* 24'-5

The signs + and — in this table indicate that the
probable error may extend on each side of the tabu-
lar number, by the quantities before which they are
placed.

As the stars from which the preceding deductions
have been made were those which are visible in the

1 M^m. Acad. Berlin, 1781. « Berlin E!phemeris, 1782.



I



CHAP. VIll. MOTION OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM. 120

Observatories of Earope, it became interesting to
determine the point to which the Solar system was
moving, from the proper motion of the stars that
are visible in the Southern hemisphere. This inves-
tigation has been lately made by our distinguished
countryman, the late Mr. Thomas Galloway,^ by
means of eighty-one stars that were observed by
Lacaille in 1751 and 1752, compared with those
observed by Mr. Johnson at St. Helena in 1829-
1833, and by our countryman, the late Mr. Hen-
dei-son, at the Cape, in 1830, 1831. The result of
this inquiry is, that the point of space to which
our Sun is approaching is situated, as in the fol-
lowing table —

ObMTTsr. K. AMeniion. N. Dedination. I*rob. Error.

GaUoway, VII. 260* 0'-6 ± 4* 31'-4 34* 23'-4 ± 5" 17' 12

General Mean, VIII. 259* 35'-0 ± 3» 44'-4 34" 30'0 ± 4" 20' 8

Hence it appears, that the result obtained from the
southern stars agrees with that from the northern
ones, within 35' of right ascension, and 7' of declina-
tion, a coincidence so extraordinary as to amount to
a demonstration of the great physical truth which it
indicates.

But astronomers have not been satisfied with
merely determining the direction to which the Sun,
with all his planets, is advancing in 8))ace: They
have calculated, within certain limits of error, the

» /V««. Trarts,, J 647.
1



130 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. VIH.

velocity with which he moves! Assuming the parallax
of stars of the first magnitude to he 0'''209, a^ deter-
mined by his father, M. Otto Struve finds that the
angular value of the annual motion of the Solar sys*
tern, if seen at right angles from the distance of such
a star, is 0''-3392, with a probable error of 0''03623 ;
and taking the radius of the Earth's orbit as unity,

we have ^^/.^ or 1623, with a probable error of

0*229, as the annual motion of the Sun in space,
reckoned in radii of the Earth's orbit. That is, tak-
ing 95 millions of miles as the mean radius of the
Earth's obit, we have 95 X 1*623 = 154*185 millions
of miles, and consequently —



The Telocity of the Bolar system is
Bo. do.

Do. do.

Do. do.

Do. do.



Kngliih Mile*. !

154,185,000 in a year.
422.424 in a day.
17,601 in an hour.
293inaininata
57 in a second.



" Here, then," says M. Struve, senior, " we have
the splendid result of the united studies of MM. Ar-
gelander, 0. Struve, and Peters, grounded on obser-
vations made at the three Observatories of Dorpat,
Abo, and Pulkova, and which is expressed in the fol-
lowing thesis : — ' The motion of the Solar system in
space is directed to a point of the celestial vault,
situated, on the right line which joins the two stars w
and /A HercuUsy at a quarter of the apparent distance
between these stars from tt Eeivulis, The velocity
of this motion is such, that the Sun, with all the



CHAP. VIII. MOTION OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM. 131

bodies which depend upon him, advances annually
in the above direction 1'623 times the radius of the
Earth's orbit, or 133,550,000 geographical miles.
The possible error of this last number amounts to
17,330,000'' geographical miles, or a seventh of the
whole value. We may thus wager 400,000 to 1 that
the Sun has a proper progressive motion, and 1 to 1
that it is comprised between the limits of 38 and
29 millions of geographical miles.' "^

As there is no auch thing in the heavens as a rec-
tilineal motion, it is evident that the Sun, with all
his planets and comets, is in rapid motion round an
invisible body.^ To that now dark and mysterious
centre, from which no ray however feeble shines, we
may, in another age, point our telescopes, detecting,
perchance, the great luminary which controls our
system, and bends its path into that vast orbit which
man, in the whole cycle of his race, may never be
allowed to round. If the buried relics of primeval
life have taught us how brief has been our tenure of
this terrestrial paradise, compared with its occupancy
by the brutes that peiish, the grand sidereal truth
which we have been expounding impresses upon us
the no less humbling lesson, that from the birth of
man to the extinction of his race, the system to which
he belongs will have described but an infinitesimal
arc in that grand cosmical orbit in which it is des-

1 Btxtdsgd^Agtronomie Stellaire, p. 108.

3 Professor MMIer, without any very weighty reasons, makes the star Alcyone
the brightest of the Pleiades, the centre of the Sun's orbit.



134 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. VIII.

valleys, days and nights, and years analogous to our
own, astronomers could not fail to think it probable
that she was inhabited like the Earth ; and the
abmrdity of believing that she had no inhabitants,
when no other rational purpose could be assigned for
her creation, became an argument of a certain
amount that she was like the Earth, the seat of ani-
mal and vegetable life. When Jupiter was dis-
covered, and was found to be so gigantic a planet
that it required four moons to give him light, the
ai^ument from analogy that he was inhabited became
stronger, from the fact of his having moons, and the
argument for a pluraUty of worlds became stronger
also, because the analogy was extended to two planets.
In like manner, every discovery of a new planet,
either with new points of analogy, or with those
previously existing in other planets, became an addi-
tional argument from analogy. When the system,
therefore, was completed by the discovery of Saturn,
Uranus, Neptune, and their numerous satellites, and
when astronomers had discovered the existence of
atmospheres, and clouds, and arctic snows, and trade
winds in Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and Venus, the
argument from analogy attained a degree of force
which it had not in the time of Fontenelle ; and
when combined with the absurdity of the opposite
opinion that planets could have moons and no inha-
bitants, atmospheres with no creatures to breathe in
them, and currents of air without life to be fanned.



CHAP. VIII. MOTION OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM. 135

it acquired a power of conviction which few minds,
if any, could resist.

(Considering the Solar system as statixyruiTy in
spacCy and unconnected with any other system, the
argument for the existence of inhabitants on its
pliuiets, has a certain fixed value compounded of the
argument from analogy, and the degree of absurdity
which attaches to the idea of the planets being lumps
of moving matter shone upon, and shining in vain.
But when we have proved that this Bolar system
is revolving round some distant centre, in an orbit
of such inconceivable dimensions that thousands
of years must be required to perform one single
round : — When we consider that this distant centre
must, from analogy, be a sun, with attendant planets,
like our own, revolving in like manner round our
sun, or round their common centre of gravity, the
mind rejects, almost with indignation, the ignoble
sentiment that man, in his little chariot of Earth, is
the only living being that performs this immeasurable
journey, and that Jupiter, and Saturn, and Uranus,
and Neptune, with their bright array of regal train-
bearers, and Mars, Venus, and Mercury are but
colossal blocks of lifeless mud and day encumbering
the Earth as a drag, and mocking the creative
majesty of heaven.

It is hardly necessary to illustrate these views by
more familiar similitudes. The architect of a solar
system stationary in space, and with but one of its



136 MORE WORLD THAN ONE. CHAP. VIII.

smallest planets inhabited, may in some degree be
likened to a sovereign, who, in sending a military
colony to cultivate and defend an island in the Pacific,
engaged twenty-five soldiers, one of whom was a light
infantry man, who did all the honours and duties of
the island, while the other twerUy-four were tall and
powerful grenadiers, who enjoyed' themselves day and
night upon merry-go-rounds, heated by genial fires,
and lighted by brilliant chandeliers of gas, but per-
forming no useful work, and doing no honour to their
king. The Creator of the same solar system launched
into an orbit of immeasurable circuit, and wheeling
through ether with the velocity of fifty-seven miles
in a second, may have some resemblance to a mighty
autocrat, who should establish a railway round the
coasts of Europe and Asia, and place upon it an
enormous train of first-class carriages, impelled year
after year by tremendous steam power, while there
was but a philosopher and a culprit in an humble van,
attended by hundreds of unoccupied carriages and
empty trucks !

Since every fixed star, considered as the centre of
a system, must have planets upon which to shine,
we are furnished with a new argument from analogy,
from the fact of our Solar system revolving round a
sun with a similar system of planets, for as there is
at least one inhabited planet in the one system, there
must for the same reason be one inhabited planet in
the other, and conse(}uently, there must be more



CHAP. Vlir. MOTION OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM. 137

inhabited worlds than one — as many indeed as
there are systems in the universe. This argu-
ment will be better understood when we have
treated, in a future chapter, of binary systems of
Btars, to which the Newtonian law of gravity has
been found applicable.



J



CHAPTER IX.



RELIGIOUS DIFFICULTIES.



It is as injurious to the interests of religion, as it
is degrading to those of science, when the votaries of
either place them in a state of mutual antagonism.
A mere inference or a hypothesis in science, however
probable, must ever give way to a truth revealed ;
but a scientific truth must be maintained, however
contradictory it may appear to the most cherished
doctrines of religion. In freely discussing the subject
of a plurality of worlds, there can be no collision
between Beason and Bevelation. Christians, timid
and ill-informed, have, at difierent periods, refused
to accept of certain results of science, which, instead
of being adverse to their faith, have been its best
auxiliaries ; and infidel writers, taking advantage of
this weakness, have vainly arrayed the discoveries
and inferences of astronomy against the fundamental
doctrines of Scripture. This unseemly controversy,
which once raged respecting the motion of the Earth
and the stability of the Sun, and more recently in
reference to the doctrines and theories of geology,



CHAP. IX. RELIGIOUS DIFFICULTIES. 139

terminated, as it always must do. in favour of science.
Truths physical have an origin as divine as truths
religious. In the time of Gralileo they triumphed
over the casuistry and secular power of the Church ;
and in our own day the incontrovertible truths of
primeval life have won as noble a victory over the
errors of a speculative theology, and a false interpre-
tation of the word of God. Science ever has been,
and ever must be the handmaid of religion. The
grandeur of her truths may transcend our failing
reason, but those who cherish and lean upon truths
equally grand, but certainly more incomprehensible,
ought to see in the marvels of the material world
the best defence and illustration of the mysteries of
their faith.

In referring to the planets of our own system, and
to those which surround the fixed stars as suns, Dr.
Bentley justly remarks, " that if any person will in-
dulge himself in this speculation, he need not quarrel
with revealed religion upon such an account. The Holy
Scriptures do not forbid him to suppose as great a
multitude of systems, and as much inhabited as he
pleases. Tis true there is no mention in Moses's
narrative of the creation of any people in other pla-
nets. But it plainly appears that the sacred historian
doth only treat of the origin of terrestrial animals :
he hath given us no account of God's creating the
angels ; and yet the same author in the ensuing
parts of the Pentateuch, makes not unfSrequent men-



iJ



140 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. IX.

tion of the angels of God, Neither need we be soli-
citous about the condition of those planetary people,
nor raise frivohua disputes hoio far they may parti-
cipaie in Adam's fall or in the benefits of Christ's
incarnation. As if because they are supposed to be
national they must needs be concluded to be Men."
He then goes on to shew that there may be " minds
of superior or meaner capacities than human united
to a human body," and " minds of human capacities

united to a different body" "so that

we ought not upon any account to conclude that if
there be rational inhabitants in the Moon or Mars, or
any unknown planets of other systems, they must
therefore have human natures, or be involved in the
circumstances of our world." ^

The doctrine of a plurality of worlds, — of the occu-
pation of the planets and stars by animal and intel-
lectual life, has been stated as " a popular argument
against Christianity not much dwelt upon in books,
but, it is believed, a good deal insinuated in conver-
sation, and having no small influence on the amateurs
of a superficial philosophy."^ Although we have felt
that such a difficulty might be made an objection to
Christianity, we have never heard it made in conver-
sation, and have met with it only in one infidel pub-
lication ; but as it has been so prominently brought
into view by Dr. Chalmers, and also by the author of

1 On the Confutation of AUuUm, &c.. 1693. pp. 6-8.

2 Chalmers's Diicourtft, kc. Discoune L


CHAP. IX. RKLIGIOUS DIFFICULTIES. 141

the Essay Of a Plurality of Worlds^ it is Decessaiy
to ascertain its value, whether it be urged by the
infidel against the truths of Scripture, or by the
Christian against the inferences of science.

" Is it likely," as Dr. Chalmers puts it, " says the
infidel, that God would send His eternal Son to die
for the puny occupiers of so insignificant a province
in the mighty field of his creation.? Are we the be-
fitting objects of so gre^t and so signal an inter-
position ? Does not the largeness of that field which
Astronomy lays open to the view of modem science,
throw a suspicion over the truth of gospel history ?
and how shall we reconcile the greatness of that
Avonderfiil movement which was made in heaven for
the redemption of fallen man, with the comparative
meanness and obscurity of our species ?"

In meeting this astronomical objection. Dr. Chal-
mers states that it consists of an assertion^ which he
denies, that Christianity was established for the
exclusive benefit of our minute and solitary world,
and of an infererice or argument^ that God would not
lavish " such a quantity of attention on so insignifi-
cant a field." In denying the aBseriion^ and main-
taining that the inhabitants of other worlds may not
have required a Saviour, Dr. Chalmers has obviously
cut the knot of the difiSculty rather than untied it.
The assertion of the infidel, and the assertion of the
divine, mutually destroy each other. The assertion
of the infidel, not his inference, has been maintained


142 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. IX.

by some Christians themselves, and is a difiSculty
which ought not to have perplexed them. The
assertion of the divine^ on the contrary, is one which
very few Christians wiU admit, and one which is
opposed to the very system of analogy, which guides
us in proving a plurality of worlds. H we ai^e
that Jupiter, a planet with moons, must be inhabited
because the Earth which has a moon is inhabited, is
not the infidel or the Christian entitled to say, that
since the inhabitants of the Earth have sinned and
required a Saviour, the inhabitants of Jupiter may
also have sinned, and required a Saviour.^ To
maintain the contrary opinion is not only against
analogy, but it is a hazardous position for a divine to
take when he maintains it to be probable that there
are intellectual creatures occupying a world of matter,
and subject to material laws, and yet exempt from
sin, and consequently from suiSfering and death. A
proposition so extraordinary we cannot venture to
affirm. If it be true, the difficulty of the sceptic and
the Christian is at once removed, 'because there can
be no need of a Saviour ; and we are driven to the
extravagant conclusion, that the inhabitants of all
the planets but our own are sinless and immortal
beings that never broke the Divine law, and are en-
joying that perfect felicity which is reserved only for
a few of the less favoured occupants of the Earth.
Thus chained to a planet the lowest and most unfor-
tunate in the universe, the philosopher, with all his



CHAP. IX. RELIGIOUS DIFFICULTIES. 143

analogies broken down, may justly renounce his faith
in a plurality of worlds, and rejoice in the more
limited but safer creed of the anti-pluralist author
who makes the Earth the only world in the universe,
and the special object of God's paternal care.

We must not, however, permit our readers to come
to such a painful conclusion. Men of lofty minds
and of undoubted piety have regarded the existence
of moral evil as a necessary part of the general scheme
of the universe, and consequently as affecting all its
rational inhabitants — ^the race of Adam on our own
globe, and the races, perchance, more glorious than ours
in the planets around us, and in the remotest system in
space. When on the eve of learning the truth of his
x>pinions, the illustrious Huygens did not hesitate to
affirm, that it would be absurd to suppose that all
things were made otherwise than God willed, and
knew would happen ; and that if we had lived in
continual peace, and with an abundant supply of all
the good things of this life, there would have been
neither art nor science, and the human race would
soon have lived like the brutes that perish. And
with these views he comes to the conclusion, that
the inhabitants of the other planets must be .en-
dowed with the same vices and virtues as man,
because without such vices and virtues they would
be far more degraded than the occupant's of the
Earth.

One of the most profound thinkers and elegant



144 MOllE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. IX.

wiiters of the present day^ has viewed this subject
from a loftier eminence. "From the revealed re-
cord," he says, " we learn that the dynasty of man in
the mixed state and character, is not the final one,
but that there is to be yet another creation, or more
properly re-creation, known theologically as the re-
surrection, which shall be connected in its physical
components by bonds of mysterious paternity, with
the dynasty which now reigns, and be bound to it
mentally by the chain of identity, conscious and
actual ; but which in all that constitutes superiority,
shall be as vastly its superior as the dynasty of
responsible man is superior to even the lowest of the
preliminary dynasties. We are further taught, that
at the commencement of this last of the dynasties,
there will be a re-creation, of not only elevated, but also
of degraded beings — a re-creation of the lost We are
taught yet farther, that though the present dynasty be
that of a lapsed race, which at their first introduction
were placed on higher ground than that on which
they now stand, and sank by their own act, it was
yet part of the original design, from the beginning of
all things, that they should occupy the existing plat-
foi?n ; and that redemption is thus no after-thought,
rendered necessary by the fall, but, on the contrary,
part of a general scheme, for which provision has
been made from the beginning ; so that the divine
man, through whom the work of restoration has been

1 Mr. Hugh MiUer, FootpHnU offfte Creator, pp 301 -30a



CHAP. IX. RELIGIOUS DIFFICULTIES. 145

effected, was in reality, in reference to the purposes
of the Eternal, what He is designated in the remark-
able text, ^ the Lamb shin from tliefoundaJtions of the
world! Slain from the foundations of the world !
Gould the assertors of the stony science ask for
language more express ? By piecing the two records
together — ^that revealed in Scripture, and that re-
vealed in the rocks — ^records which, however widely
geologists may mistake the one, or commentators
misunderstand the other, have emanated from the
same great author, we learn that in slow and solemn
majesty has period succeeded period, each in suc-
cession ushering in a higher and yet higher scene of
existence — that fish, reptiles, mammiferous quadru-
peds, have reigned in turn, — that responsible man,
' made in the image of God,' and with dominion over
all creatures, ultimately entered into a world ripened
for his reception ; but farther, that this passing scene,
in which he forms the prominent figure, is not the
final one in the long series, but merely the last of the
'prdirrimary scenes ; and that that period to which
the bygone ages, incalculable in amount, with all
their well-proportioned gradations of being, form the
imposing vestibule, shall have perfection for its oc-
cupant, and eternity for its duration. I know not
how it may appear to others ; but for my own part, I
cannot avoid thinking that there would be a lack of
proportion in the series of being, were the period of
perfect and glorified humanity abruptly connected,



1461 MORE WORLBS THAN ONE. CHAP. IX.

without the introdnction of an int&i'mediate creation
of reaponsihle imperfection^ with that of the dying,
irresponsible brute. That scene of things in which
God became man, and suflFered, seernSj as it no doubt
is, a necessary link in the chain."

At this startling result, our author finds himself
on the confines of a mystery which man has " vainly
aspired to comprehend." " I have," says he, " no new
reading of the enigma to offer. I know not why
it is that moral evil exists in the universe of the All-
wise and the all-powerful ; nor through what occult
law of Deity it is that * perfection should come through
suffering.'" In the darkness of this mystery the best
and the brightest spirits are involved ; and our in-
ability to fathom its depth we willingly acknowledge.
But there are difficulties, which though we cannot
solve them for others, we may solve for ourselves.
An inferior inteUect may disencumber itself of an
i^uta, which . superior o,. m., b, doo^d to
ever to bear. And as the physician, when he cannot
achieve a cure, considers himself fortunate when he
finds an anodyne, so the Spectre of Moral Evil may
haunt the philosopher when the peasant has suc-
ceeded in exorcising it.

To exhibit the Divine attributes, and to display
the Divine glory to an intellectual and immortal
race, must have been the purpose for which a ma-
terial universe was created. In his physical frame
Man is necessarily subject to physical laws. The



CHAP. IX. RELIGIOUS DUTICULTIES. 147

I^w of gravity " cannot cease as he goes by ;" — ^and
finite in his nature, and fallible in his reason, he can
but feebly defend himself against the ferocity of
animal life, the power of the elements, or the poison
that may mingle in his cup. His high reason does
not, in many emergencies, compensate for his inferior
inatinct. He is therefore helplessly exposed to suf-
fering and death. The instincts of self-preservation
and of parental affection give a magnitude and in-
terest to whatever affects the safety and happiness of
himself and his ofifepring. He is thus placed in
antagonism to his fellow-sufferers, and in the collision
of interests and feelings, laws human and Divine are
broken. Nor is this result less conformable to what
we have regarded as the object and end of creation.
In order to glorify God by a knowledge of His attri-
butes, these attributes must be fully displayed. The,
power, and wisdom, and goodness of the Creator, are
exhibited to us every day and every hour ; — they are
proclaimed in the heavens ; — they are stamped on
the earth ; — life, and the enjoyments of life, display
them even to the dumb, the deaf, and the blind. But
in what region are we to descry the attributes of mercy,
of justice, and of truth ? In the abodes of happiness
and peace, the idea of Mercy can neither have an
object nor a name. Justice can be understood only
among the unjust, — and truth only among the un-
truthful. The moral attributes of the most High
can be comprehended and emblazoned only among



148 KOBE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. IX.

ike cmel, the dishoDest, and the false. His power,
wisdoniy and goodness, can be exhibited only in a
material world, governed by the laws of matter ; and
man in his material nature must be subject to their
operation and control. Though thus controlled and
thus suffering, we feel that all is good and wise, and
under this feeble gleam of reason there is light enough
to show us — ^if we are disposed to have it shown—
that the Spectre of Moral Evil has been conjured up
by ourselves :

AU Nature is but art, unknown to thee ;
All chance direction, which thou canst not see ;
All discord, harmony not understood ;
All partial evil, universal good. — Popi.

If we reject, then, the idea that the inhabitants of
the planets do not require a Saviour, and maintain
the more rational opinion, that they stand in the same
moral relation to their Maker as the inhabitants of
the Earth, we must seek for another solution of the
difficulty which has embarrassed both the infidel and
the Christian. How can we believe, says the timid
Christian, that there can be inhabitants in the planets,
when Qod had but one Son whom He could send to
save them ? If we can give a satisfactory answer to
this question, it may destroy the objections of the
infidel, while it relieves the Christian from his
anxieties.

When, at the commencement of our era, the great
sacrifice was made at Jerusalem, it was by the



1



CHAP. IX. REUOIOD8 DIFFICULTTEB. 149

cmcifixion of a man, or an angel, or a GkxL If our
faith be that of the Arian or the Sodnian, the scep-
tical and the religions difficnltjr is at once removed : —
a man or an angel may be again provided as a ran-
som for the inhabitants of the planets. Bat if we
believe, with the Christian Church, that the Son uf
Gtoi was required for the expiation of sin, the dif-
ficulty presents itself in its most formidable shape.

When our Saviour died, the influence of His death
extended backwards, in the past, to millions who
never heard His name, and forwards, in the future,
to millions who will never hear it. Though it
radiated but from the Holy City, it reached to the
remotest lands, and affected every living race in the
old and the new world. Distance in time and dis-
tance in place did not diminish its healing virtue.

** Though curious to compute,
Archangels failed to cast the mighty sum."

'' Ungrasped by minds create," it was a force which
did not vary with any function of the distance. All-
powerfrd over the thief on the cross, in contact with
its divine source, it was in succeeding ages equally
powerful over the Red Indian of the west, and the
wild Arab of the east. Their heavenly Father, by
some process of mercy which we understand not,
communicated to them its saving power. Emanating
from the middle planet of the system, because, per-
haps, it most required it, why may it not have ex-


\



150 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. IX.

tended to them all — ^to the planetary races in the
past, when '^ the day of their redemption had drawn
nigh f and to the planetary races in the fature, when
" their fulness of time shall come f"

** When stars and sans are dust beneath His throne,
A thousand worlds so bought were bought too dear.'*

But, to bring our argument more within the reach
of an ordinary understanding, let ns suppose that our
globe at the beginning of the Christian era had been
broken in two, as the comet of Biela is supposed to
have been in 1846, and that its two halves, the old
world and the new, travelled together like a double
star, or diverged into widely separate orbits. Would
not both its fragments have shared in the beneficence
of the cross, — the old world as liberally as the new, —
the penitent on the shores of the Mississippi, as richly
as the pilgrim on the banks of the Jordan ? If the
rays, then, " of the Sun of righteousness, with healing
on His wings,"' could have shot across the void
between our European and American worlds thus
physically dissevered, may not all the planets, the
worlds made bv our Saviour himself, formed out of
the same material elements, and basking under the
same beneficent sun, be equal participators in His
heavenly gift ?

Should this view of the subject prove unsatisfec*
tory to the anxious inquirer, we may suggest for his
consideration another sentiment, even though we



CHAP. IX. SEL10I0U8 t>IFFICULTI£S. 151

onrselves may not admit it into our creed If one
man can expiate the crime of another by a punish-
ment short of death, he may perform the same
generous deed for a thousand. Should such a noble
martyr consent even to give his life for his friend, by
suffering a death fnm which science could revive
him, he might expiate the crimes of thousands of his
race. May not the Divine nature, which can neither
suffer nor die, and which in our planet, once only,
clothed itself in humanity, resume elsewhere a
physical form, and expiate the guilt of unnumbered
worlds ?

' In his zeal to overthrow the objection of the in*
fidel, Dr. Chalmers has, we think, subjected it to a
species of unnecessary torture. When the infidel
thinks it unlikely '^ that Otod would send His eternal
Son to die for the puny occupants of so insignificant
a province of His creation," he does not mean that
God cannot and does not take care ^^ of the insig-
nificant province" of the earth, because He has so
many other nobler planetary kingdoms to govern.
He means only that the mission of Qod's own eternal
Son was too great a gift to the earth, and therefore
one not likely to be given. The objection, indeed,
which Dr. Chalmers puts into the mouth of the in-
fidel is, in truth, an objection felt by the Christian ;
and the acute author of the Essay 0/a Plurality of
Worlds^ seeing this mistake, actually treats it '^ not
as an objection urged by an opponent of religion, but



152 MORE WORLD& THAN ONE. CHAP. IX.

rather as a difficulty felt by a M^d of religion." He
ooDsiders it as a difficulty bearing on natural religion,
and in this aspect he accepts of it as a difficulty,
discusses its importance, and regards Dr. Chalmers's
reply to it as '^ well fitted to remove the scruples to
which it is especially addressed." The difficulty is
thus put by the anonymous author we have referred
to: —

'' Among the thoughts which it was stated ncttu--
rally arose in men's minds when the telescope re-
vealed to them an innumemble multitude of worlds
besides the one we inhabit was this : — that the Ghver-
nor of the Universe, who has so many worlds under
His managemtTdj cajmat he conceived as bestowing
upon this earthy and its various tribes of inhdbitantSy
thai care which, tiU then, natural religion had tamght
men that He does employ to secure to man the posses-
sion and use of his f amities of mind and body, asad
to off animals the requijsites of ammal existence aind
animcd enjoym/cnt. And upon this Chalmers re-
n^arkS) that just about the time when science gave
rise to the suggestion of this difficulty, she also gave
occasion to a remarkable reply to it. Just about the
same time that the invention of the telescope shewed
that there were innumerable worlds which might
have inhabitants requiring iJie Creator's care as
much as the tribes of this earth do, the invention of
the microscope shewed that there were in this world
innumerable tribes of animals which had been all



CHAP. IX. RELIGIOUS DUFICfULTlliS. 153

along enjoying the benefit of the Creator's care as
much as those kinds with which man had been fami-
liar from the beginning. The tdescope sa^ested
that tiiere might be dwellers in Jupiter or in Satara,
of great size and unknown structure, who must share
with us the preserving care of God. The microscope
shewed that there had been close to us, inhabiting
minute crevices and crannies, peopling the leaves of
plants and the bodies of other animals, animalcules
of a minuteness hitherto unguessed, and of a struo-
ture hitherto unknown, who had been always sharers
with us in God's preserving care. The tdeacope
brought into view worlds as numerous as the drops
of water which make up the ocean ; the mieroacope
brought into view a world in every drop of water.
Infinity in one direction was balanced by infinity in
the other. The doubts which man might feel as to
what God would do, were balanced by certainties
which they discovered as to what He had always been
doii^. His care and goodness could not be supposed
to be exhausted by the hitherto known population of
the Earth, for it was proved they had hitherto been
confined to that population. The discovery of new
worlds (xt vast diskmces from tis was accompanied by
the discovery of new worlds close to us, even in the
very substances with which we were best acquainted,
and tons thus rendered ineffective to didurb the heUef
of those who had regarded the world as having Ood
for its Oovemor,"



154 MORE WORLDS THAN 01?E. OHAP. IX.

The difficulties, or " scruples," so distinctly stated
in the preceding extract, whether we view them as
an objection uiged by an opponent of religion, as Dr.
Chalmers does, or as a difficulty felt by the Christian,
have, in our opinion, no existence ; and, if they had,
we consider the discoveries of the microscope as hav-
ing no tendency whatever to remove them. It is a
singular doctrine to maintain, that ^Hhe truths of
natural religion" were ever exposed to danger by the
discoveries of the telescope, or that astronomical
truth ever excited the " doubts or difficulties," stated
by our author, either in the minds of Theists or
Christians of the most ordinary capacity. We have
never read any reputable works containing such
doubts, nor listened to any conversations in which
they were the subject of discussion. Amid the de-
structive convulsions of the physical world, even
pious minds may have for an instant questioned the
superintending providence of God. In the midst of
famine, or pestilence, or war, they may have stood
horror-struck at the scene. In the triumphs of fraud,
oppression, and injustice, over honesty, and liberty,
and law, Faith may have wavered, and Hope de-
spaired ; but in no condition, either of the physical
or the moral world, does the mind question the
Power of its Maker. The omnipotem/ce of the
Creator, and the exertion of it in every comer of
space, — His care over the falling sparrow, and His
guidance of the gigantic planet, are the earliest of



CHAP. IX. RELIGIOUS DIFFICULTIES. 155

our acquired truths, and the very first that observa-
tion and experience confirm. When Beason gives
wisdom to our conceptions, omnipotence is the grand
truth which they inculcate. Whatever the eye sees,
or the ear hears, or the fingers touch, — every motion
of our body, every function it performs, every struc-
ture in its fabric, impresses on the mind, and fixes
in the heart the conviction, that the Creator is all*
powerful as well as all-wise. Omnipotence, in shorty
is the only attribute of Gk>d which is universally
appreciated, which scepticism never unsettles, and
which we believe as firmly when under the influence
of our corrupt passions, as when we are looking
devoutly to heaven. All the other attributes of God
are inferences. His omnipresence. His omnisdeuce.
His justice, mercy, and truth, are the deductions of
reason, and, however true and demonstrable, they
exercise little influence over the mind ; but the attri-
bute of omnipotence predominates over them ail, and
no mind responsive to its power will ever be disturbed
by the ideas which it suggests of infinity of time,
infinity of space, and infinity of life.

Is it conceivable that a Theist or a Christian of
the smallest mental power could suppose that there
are degrees of omnipotence, and imagine that the
Almighty might be prevented, by the many worlds
under His management, from taking care of the
Earth and its inhabitants ? If that Being who has
made the living world which we see, can make



J



156 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAF. IX.

millions of worlds, the same pow^ which takes
stich care of its inhabitants that not a hair of their
head can fall to the ground without His knowledge,
can equally embrace in His capacious affections,
and clasp in '^ the everlasting arms/' all the &milie8
of the universe.

But even if we admit that such imperfect notions
of omnipotence have been entertained, we deny that
the discoveries of the microscope have the slightest
tendency to correct them. Without alleging, as we
might well do, that minds cherishing such notions of
the Deity are incapable of appreciating the great
truths, that there are " new worlds close to us ;*' that
there is " a world in every drop of water ;" and that
^^ these worlds are as numerous as the drops in the
ocean,"' we maintain that minds of the highest cast
view the microscopic worlds as creations of an entirely
different order from those disclosed by the telescope,
and that such minds can never reason from animalr-
ctdaar to intellectual life. We admit, that the very
same care which is required to preserve even an atom
of invisible life, is necessary to maintain the gigantic
forms of the elephant or the mammoth ; but ordinary
minds, and those who think that their Maker may
have too much to do^ cannot comprehend, and there-
fore cannot receive, the doctrine that God takes care
of mites and mosquitoes, and the other denizens of
the microcosm at their feet, — of animalcules which
they swallow in myriads at every act of deglutition,



CHAP. IX. RBLIGI0U6 DIFFICULTIBS. 157

— which they suffocate in millioDS by every breath
they draw, — and which, at every step, they trample
relentlessly under their feet

The religious difficulty has been presented in an-
other form by the author of the Essay Of a Plurality
of Worlds^ but in a form so unintelligible to us, that
we acknowledge our inability to comprehend it Con-
sidering Man as an inteUecbualj morcd^ and religious
creature, and having a progressive history in the de-
velopment of these different conditions or privileges,
as our author calls them, he sees a great difficulty in
supposing that intellectual and responsible creatures
analogous to man, can have a place in any of the
other planets of our system. Viewing, he says, " the
mode of existence of human species upon the earth
as being a progressive existence^ even in the intellec-
tual powers and their results, necessarily fastens down
our thoughts and our speculations to the earth, and
makes us feel how visionary and gratuitous it is to
assume any similar kind of existence in any region
occupied by other beings than men;" and he else-
where asserts, " that if we will people other planets
with creatures intelligent as man is intelligent, u?e
must not only give to them the intdHgence^ but the
intellectual history of the human species" This as-
sertion is supported by another assertion, '' that the
Earth and its huTnan inhabitants are, as far as we
yet know, in an especial manner the subject of God's
care and government ;" and from these and other



158 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. IX.

assertions, in reference to man being ander the moral
government of God, and to the Earth being the
theatre of the scheme of redemption, he comes to the
incomprehensible conclusion, that man's nature and
place is unique, and incapable of repetition in the
scheme of the universe !

In order to test the accuracy of these assertions,
and to discover what bearing they have upon the
doctrine of a plurality of worlds, we must ascertain
what has been, and what now is, the progressive his-
tory of man, as an intellectual^ moral, and religious
creature ; and in what age, and in what regions of
the globe it has presented, or does now present, that
unity of character and position which is incapable of
repetition in the scheme of the universe.

The history of the human species is the history
of a variety of races in every stage of civilisation
and barbarism, the great majority of which have
neither an intellectual, nor a moral, nor a religious
progressive history. Progression has not been the
character of the history of man. Without alluding
to his primeval fall from his high estate, we have
only to cast our eye over the globe, and look at the
intellectual, moral, and religious catastrophes which
it presents to us, — at ages of light and darkness, — ^at
alternations of progress and decline, — at the highest
civilisation sinking into the lowest barbarism. Mark
those eastern lands, now involved in darkness, from
which the beams of knowledge first radiated on man-



OHAP. IX. RELIGIOUS DIFFICULTIES. 159

kind. Study the extinction of moralitj in many
regions of the earth where its great lessons were first
taught by our Saviour and His apostles ; and above
all, ponder over the total suppression of the Chris-
tian faith in European communities, where it has
been displaced by a religion whose doctrines were
preached by conquest, and whose decalogue was
dictated by the sword.

May we not ask, then, which of these ever-chang-
ing conditions of humanity is that uniqtie condition
which cannot be repeated in the scheme of the uni-
verse ? If it is the intellectual, moral, and religious
race which is typified by Newton, and Shakespeare,
and Milton, why may it not be the lowest in the scale
of existence in some glorious planet, where the under-
standing, and the affections, and the imagiDation are
to rise into higher forms of science, of poetry, and of
philanthropy ? Why may not the red Indian, the
black negro, and the white slave, be the condition of
intelligence in another sphere, — to be elevated to a
nobler type of reason, and to a happier and a holier
lot ? And why may there not be an intermediate
race between that of man and the angelic beings of
Scripture, where human reason shall pass into the
highest form of created mind, and human affections
into their noblest development ?

It is strange, and hardly credible, that the writer,
whose opinion we are considering, should think it
necessary that the planets, if inhabited, should be



160 MORE WOltLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. IX.

occupied by beings like man. Hnygens^ Bentlej,
Laplace, Isaac Taylor, Sir H. Davy, and Chalmers,
have taken a different and a sounder view of the
subject. The diversity in the races of man, — the
immense and beantiful variety of forms and na-
tures in the world of instinct, — and the countless
beauties and differences in the structures and pro-
perties of vegetable and mineral bodies, whether of
the ancient or the present earth, all concur in satis-
fying us that there will be the same diversity in the
occupants and in the productions of the planetary
regions. — Why may not the intelligence of the
spheres he ordained for the study of regions and
objects, unstudied and unknown on earth ? Why
may not labour have a better commission than to
earn its bread by the sweat of its brow ? Why may
it not pluck its loaf from the bread-fruit tree, or
gather its manna from the ground, or draw its wine
from the bleeding vessels of the vine, or inhale its
anodyne breath from the paradise gas of its atmo-
sphere.^

But whatever races be in the celestial spheres, we
feel sure that there must be one, among whom there
are no man-eaters — no parent-slayers — no ^vidow-
burners — no infant-killers — no heroes with red hands
— no sovereigns with bloody hearts — no corrupt le-
gislators, and no statesmen who, by leaving the
people untaught, educate them for the scaffold. In
the decalogue of that community will stand pre-



CHAP. IX. RELIGIOUS DIFFICULTIES. 161

eminent, in letters of burnished gold, the highest of
all social obligations —

THOU SHALT NOT KILL,

— ^neither for territory, for fame, for lucre, nor for
crime, — neither for food, nor for raiment, nor fot
pleasure. The lovely forms of life, and sensation,
and instinct, so delicately fashioned by the Master
hand, shall no longer be destroyed and trodden under
foot, but be objects of unceasing love and admiration,
— the study of the philosopher, the theme of the
poet, and the auxiliaries and companions of man.

The difiSculties we have been considering, in so far
as they are of a religious character, have been very
unwisely introduced into the question of a plurality
of worlds. They have, indeed, no real connexion
with it. Before the advent of our Saviour, such
difiSculties could not have been started ; and had it
been previously an article of faith that Jupiter was
inhabited, the appearance on Earth of a Redeemer
would not have interfered with it. We are not
entitled to remonstrate with the sceptic, but .we ven-
ture to doubt the soundness of that philosopher's
judgment, who thinks that the truths of natural
religion are affected by a belief in planetary races,
and the reality of that Christian's faith who con-
siders it to be endangered by the conviction that
there are other worlds than his own.^

^ A rery able work, by the Rev, Dr Edward Nares, was published in 1 801 , entitled,
*' EI; 010^, eT; JAig-irtis, or an attempt to shew how fax the Philosophical notion

L



162 MOBK WORLDS THAK ONE. CHAP. II.

of ft Flanlitj 9t WoridB is comiitait or not so with tke Uu^nsge of tbe Holy
Scriptona.** He endeftToan to thew that the words 0/jB«9^f»i| — Ov^tig —
K«r/Mf , — Munthu, OHrit, kc., refer to & muTose of worids* end that tbealmie-
ment was made for the ereaturt generally. The same opim<m is maintsined by
Biahop Poneoua, who thinks it eTident firom Seriptare, as well as analogy, that we
are not the only creatures in the uniTerae intoested in the sacrifioe of oar Be-
deem». (9ee his Worts, toL iiL pL 70.)

Dr. Andrew Fuller, in his weak entitled. The Gotptl it* own WUnat, has deroted
a whole chapter of forty pages, to shew ** like eonsistancy of the S a ipture
doctrine of Redonption with the modem opinion, of the Hagnitode of Creation," —
that is, with the doctrine of a plurality of worlds, and systems oi worldsi He is of
opinion ** that the credibility of tbe Bedanptioa is not weakened by this doctrine.
but. on the contrary, ia, in many respects, strengthened and aggrandised." We re-
commend this work to the careful pemsat d those who feel aiqr difficulty on the
subject, and also a Lecture by the late BeT. 8. Xoble, entitled, " The Astronomi-
cal Doetrne of a Plurality of Werids in perfsct harmony wift tbe True Ghriatian
ReUgioa.''



CHAPTER X.

SINGLE STARS ASU BISAKT HYhltm'^.

If we suppose omselves placed mif^^^f^'irt^y '/ft
Mars, Jupiter, Satam, UnmuK, aiiii N^u/ji^^ H^-,
Sun will appear smaller and toialler^ mA ou jV^j;
time it will still have a loaDd arid 4iMh^^\y 'U^mA
disc. At a greater dirtanffi bqr</Dd '/ar nfi^^m ilM^
disc of the Son could be seeo ouly iiiro*i^)t u U^U^
cope, and at diat distaijice all ib^ \/U$mM^ ^,r*A )A
Jupiter and Saturn, will bav^ 4h!^;f/tfM^l, A,i
greater dLstanoes still these two j/U^mM ^'/4 fM/ifhh
in sucoession, and befcire we har<i; ';f'jt^/i U*h Hfi
mense void whidi lies be^we^ ^/fir y.rt^A'iu ^A ^^^a
nearest system of the stars, '/in h'iu W/./ ia ^^^u ^
a single star twinkling \u !)>«; >ky. All h*ir ^Ij^^^^^^
primary and 6ec:/Ddarr, aixd atJJ >;i» ^y/ffj^^jt^ w ;; i' < ^
have disappeared.

Henoe we are fed tc# l^;ier<f, wiv^ H*>y/^t*', ^'^Mi
the fixed 6tax«, threie thcrj*sw>'J i?j /;Vf^V;^ *v >/ao *//
the naked eye. at»i aly/ot <m« UmwIt^A '/////^'>/// >a*^ >^^/ o
by the tAaoof^^ zxh t>*e ^xm^A 'A^^ ^trfi/".u*^ wi>v//'
planets are inrhis^h irr^SA U^a ';>**^v>'/ //*■, ^-'z



I€4 MORE WORLDS THAN 0\li. L'lIAP. X.

change of place has been observed in single 6x6(1
Btars, excepting that which is common to them all,
and which arises from the motion of our aystem, we
are entitled to consider these stars as the centres of
syBtema like our own : To suppose them without
planets, and to be merely globes of light and heat,
would be contrary to analogy as well as to reaaon.
We know that there is one star (our sun) in the
universe surrounded by planets, and one of these
planets inhabited ; and when we see another single
star equal, if not greater in brilliancy, wc are entitled
to regard it as the centre of a system, and that system
with at least one inhabited planet. This conclufdon
is rendered more probable by estimates which have
been made of tlie comparative brightnesa and pro-
bable magnitude of some of the single fixed starH.^



Mocnbiildl, u mnHrmlng III



Ju;ilter, £Cl. ikmilQGr iniglit H



ununlitiOdof.



sy tn nippoBtd only Co liuvB jilbaeu, OLd If

tllcable, htfcauu ftiAlng; leDH lu that Tt u a'
that tbey have them, or twOmT, lu in the i

re mm pluieU vllh'^ut ■ntflUitw. If ttun in



imbfildt wDutd ba quite
1, that BDflifl may h4vc



CHAP. X. SINGLS STABS AXD BQCABT STSTIHS.



IfiS



These estiiiiateB have beat olilaiinpd fioni
of the biightnesB and dwiiiiffp of a flmall number of
stars. The distaiioe at a ster is obtaiDed fiom wliat
is called its PomlZeir, — namelT, ita change of j^aoe
in the heavens when seen fimn the two most diafamt
points of the earth's oibit, or, iriiat is the asme thing,
the angle subtended at the star br fines drawn from it
to the two most distant points of the earth's ofbit,
which are separated by a length oi 190 nuUions of
miles. The following are almost the only conect
measures of parallaT which have been obtained by
the fine instromentB, and the aocorate observations of
modem astronomers.



« Gentami*


0*^13 Hendcnon and Mackar.


eipygni.


0'-874 BesaeL


« Lyra,


0'-207 Peters.


Siring,


0^-230 Hcndenon.


Arctums, ,


0'127 Peters.


Pole Star,


0^106 Peters.


Capella,


0^-046 Peters



The star a Centauri^ which is the nearest to our
system, has been found to be about two-and-a-half
times brighter than our Sun, and the star SiriuSj the
brightest in the heavens, has been found to be four
times brighter than a Centauri ; but the distance of
8iriu8 is four times greater than that of a Centauri,
and therefore the intrinsic brightness of Sinus is
sixty-three times greater than that of our Sun. A
luminary like this, so resplendent in its brightness,

sin^e satellite, analogy could never have led ui to conclude that there were no
primaiy planets round the stars.



166 MORE WORLDS TUAS OSI

and BO gigantic, doubtless, in its magnitude, was
surely not planted in space to shed its light and its
heat upon nothing. The star CapeUa, too, a star of
the first magnitude, is ttoeniy times more remote than
a Centauri, aud must, like Sirius, be a sun of enor-
raoiiB size. Can we doubt, then, that every single
star, shining by it* own native light, is the centre of
a planetary system like our own, the lamp that lights,
the stove that lieats, aud the power that guides in
their orbits inhabited worlds like our own ?

A great number of the fixed stare, some of which
are of the first m^nitude, like Castor, appear double,
when seen through the fine telescopes of modern
times, and, from observations made at different
dates, one of the stars has been found to revolve
round tlie other, and to form what is called a Biib-
ary System; — that is, a system in which one sun
with its system of planets revolves round another
sun with its system of planets, or rather round the
centre of gravity of both. The two suns of course
are only seen, owing to the great distance of their
respective systems from us ; but no person can be-
lieve that two suns could be placed in the heavens
for no other purpose than to revolve round their com-
mon centre of gravity.

The orbits of no fewer than tliirken double
or binary systems, first discovered by Sir Willii
Herschel, have been calculated by Sir John Herschel,
Savary, Madler, Admiral Smyth, Hind, Encke, and



com-
iUia^*



CHAP. X. SINGLE STABS AND BINARY SYSTEMS.



167



Jacob, and there can be no doubt that the Newtonian
law of gravity extends to these bodies. The periods
of these systems extend from 31^ years, which is that
of f Hercidis^ to 737 years, which is that of a Coronce
B, both of which were calculated by Madler ; but the
most interesting binary system is y Virginia^ whose
revolution, as computed by Sir John Herschel, is 182
years. The two stars which compose it are nearly
equal, and, according to Struve, slightly variable, being
sometimes equal in brightness, and sometimes unequal.
Dr. Bradley had observed, in 1718, the apparent
direction of the line joining the two stars. In 1780,
Sir William Herschel observed their distance to be
5'''7, which regularly diminished till 1836, when the
two appeared perfectly round, like a single star seen
by the finest telescopes. After 1836 the stars sepa-
rated, and their distance is now more than 2". The
change in their angular motion, that is, in the direc-
tion of the line joining them, has been equally
remarkable, and was as follows : —



In 1783,


. . 4-


per


annum.


]830,


5*


• • •


1834,


20-


• ■ •


1885,


40-


• • •


1836,


. 70*


• • ■



The star of the shortest period, namely, ^Heradis,
has performed two revolutions since it was first dis-
covered, and the small star has been twice completely
eclipsed by the large one. Other three double stars,
V Coronce, f Cancri, and | Ursce Majoria, have per-



V)H MORE W0BLD8 THAN ONE. CHAP. X.

formed more than one complete levolntion in tiieir
orbits, and there can be no doubt that these motions
are the result of centripetal forces varying inyarselj
as the square of the distance. ^^ We hare the same
evidence, indeed," says Sir John Herschel, '^ of their
motions about each other that we have of those of
Uranus and Neptune about the Sun ; and the oorres-
pondence of their calculated and observed places in
such very elongated ellipses must be admitted to
carry with it proof of the prevalence of the Newtonian
law of gravity in their systems, of the very same na-
ture and agency as that of the calculated and ob-
served places of comets round the central body of
our own,"

In reference to systems like these, the aigument
in favour of their being surrounded wi4h inhabited
plane^ is stronger than in the case of single systems.
We have in this case a decided visible movement of
one of the stars round the other : We have also ellip-
tical orbits described by the same law of force which
guides our own Earth and the other planets in the
Solar system ; and though, upon the same grounds
which led us to agree with Sir William Herschel in
thinking that our own Sun may be inhabited, we mar
believe the two suns of binary systems to be inhabited^
yet it is more reasonable and consistent with analogy
to believe that each of them is accompanied, as &
John Herschel remarks, ^^with its train of planets az>d
their satellites, closely shrouded from our view by the



CHAP. Z. SINGLE STARS AND BINARY SYSTEMS. 169

splendour of their respective suns, and crowded into
a space bearing hardly a greater proportion to the
enormous interval which separates them than the dis-
tances of the satellites of our planets from their pri-
maries bear to their distances from the Sun himself.
A less distinctly characterized subordination would
be incompatible with the stability of their systems,
and with the planetary nature of their orbits. Unless
closely nestled under the protecting wing of their
immediate superior, the sweep of their other sun, in
its perihelion passage round their own, might carry
them off, or whirl them into orbits utterly incom-
patible with the conditions necessary Jbr the existence
of their inhabitants/'^

From the motion of our own system round a dis-
tant centre, «t is highly probable that our sun is one
of a binary system, although its partner has not
been discovered; If Madler's speculation is correct,
our sun and the star Alcyone form a binary system,
and therefore since our sun is attended with planets,
and one of these inhabited, we are entitled by anar
logy to conclude that all other binary systems have
planets at least round one of their suns, and that one
of these planets is the seat of vegetable and animal
life.

The number of double stars, of multiple stars, and
groups and clusters is very great; but ages must
elapse before astronomers can determine the relation

1 Oiiaineg o/Ai


170 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. Z.

in which the stars that compose each system or
group stand to one another. In the meantime we
are compelled to draw the conclusion, that wherever
there is a sun, a gigantic sphere, shining by its own
light, and either fixed or moveable in space, there
must be a planetary system, and wherever there is
a planetary system, there must be life and intelli-
gence.

The number of fixed stars, even though more
numerous than the atoms of sand on the sea shore,
forms no ailment to the instructed mind against
their being occupied by living beings. When the
philosopher, with his microscope, discovered that the
polieschiefer of Bohemia, and chalk and solid marble,
consisted almost wholly of the remains of animal life,
the world stood aghast at the intelligence: — They
were still more astonished at the statement that
many thousands of millions of such infusorial animals
could be counted in a cubic inch of their lifeless re-
mains ; but their faith was more severely taxed when
they learned that whole strata and hills were formed
of these fossil skeletons.^ In like manner we are at
first startled with the deduction that the planets of
our own system are tibe seats of intellectual life.
We marvel still more at the announcement that the
systems of the stars are planetary, and inhabited like

1 Ehrenberg found that one cubic inch of the Bilin polieschiefer date contains
41,000 millions of theae microscopic infusorial animals, called QaUtmdia distans,
and that a cubic inch of the same material contains aboTe one billion 750,000
millions of distinct individuals of CkUumella ferrugitua.



CHAP. X. SINGLE STARS AND BINABY SYSTEMS. 171

our owD ; and our faltering reason utterly fails us
when we are called upon to believe that even the
nehidcB must be surrendered to life and reason.
Wherever there is matter there must be life ; life
Physical to enjoy its beauties — Life Moral to worship
its Maker, and Life Intellectual to proclaim His
wisdom and His power.



CHAPTER XL

CLUSTERS OF STARS AND NEBULiE.

Among the bodies of the sidereal universe, astro-
nomers have from the earliest ages recognised the
existence of clusters of stars and of nebuke. The
Milky Wny indicates by its name that it is of a
nebular character ; but a nebula, properly so called,
is a limited space of light, of various forms and vari-
ous degrees of brightness in its different parts. Sir
William Herschel, who was the first astronomer that
observed this class of phenomena systematically,
divided the bodies which compose it into six classes,
namely,

1. Clusters of stars, in which each star is distinctly
seen.

2. Resolvable Nebuloe, or such as excite a suspicion
that they consist of stars, and which a higher mag-
nifying power TTvay he expected to resolve into sepa-
rate stars.

3. Nebulce, properly so called, in which tJiere is no
appearance tohatever of stars.



CHAP. XI. CLUSTERS OF STARS AND NEBUL.E. 173

4. Planetary NebvloRj or such as resemble planets
from their discs being round or slightly oval.

6. Stellar Nebulce^ or those in which the light is
nearly collected into one point ; and

6. Nebukms Stars, or luminous points, surrounded
with an immense visible atmosphere.

It is very obvious that the language used in the
above classification, is intended to support the hypo-
thesis that there is such a thing in the sidereal
universe as real nebulous matter , or fire-mist, or star-
dust, as it has been almost jocularly called, contni-
distinguished from a nebulous mass of identically the
same appearance which the telescope has resolved
into separate stars. The phrases which we have put
in italics are certainly incorrect, because any appear-
ance, or any expectation of a nebula not being
resolvable, is proved to have been erroneous the
moment it is resolved. The classification of nebulae,
therefore, should have been, 1. NebuleB that the
telescope had resolved; and, 2. Nebulae that the
telescope Jiad not resolved.

Sir William Herschel believed in the existence of
purely nebulous matter, or star-dust, and in what has
been called the theory of sidereal aggregation ; and
since his time it has been made the basis of wild and
extravagant speculations equally incompatible with
physical and revealed truth. It is, therefore, of some
importance that we should succeed in convincing the
reader that the existence of nebulee not yet resolved,



174 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XI.

is no proof of the existence of star-dust, and that we
are entitled to oonclude that such nebulae are clusters
of stars, — ^that each star is the sun of a planetary sys-
tem, and each planet the residence of life and reason.
Each nebula, in short, corresponds with our hill of
microscopic infusorial animals, — each system with a
cubic inch of its materials, and each planet with a
cubic line. If we have seen with our own eyes in
the microscope the individual animal — only the ten
thouscmcUh part of an inch in size, and if we have
seen the hill which is an accumulation of them, need
we wonder at nebulaB being stars, — at stars being
suns, — and at planets being inhabited ?

As it is now an astronomical fact that nebulse,
which Sir William Herschel, with his finest tele-
scopes, could not resolve, and which had no appear-
ance whatever of being resolvable, have been resolved
into distinct stars by the magnificent reflectors of
Lord Bosse, we are enabled without any hypothetical
statements to place the question of the existence of
star-dust or purely nebulous matter, in its proper
aspect ; — that is, we can assign a satisfactory reason
to the reader for considering every unresolved nebula
in the heavens as a cluster of stars which is likely to
be resolved by telescopes superior to those of Lord
Kosse.

For this purpose, let us suppose seven clusters of
stars placed at seven different distances in space, all
of which were regarded as nebulae before the inven-



CHAP. XI. CLUSTERS OF STABS AND NBBULJC. 175

tion of the telescope. When Gblileo applied his little
telescope to Nebula No. 1, or the nearest of the seven,
he observed it to consist of separate stars so distinct
that he could count them, and he concluded from
their having no paraUax, and being at an enormous
distance, that each was a gigantic sun. Gblileo tries
in vain to resolve No. 2, which is at a greater distance,
and therefore though he thought that a better tele-
scope would resolve it and all the other five, they still
remained as nebulaB in the heavens. Sir Isaac New-
ton, however, nearly a century later, applies his little
reflecting telescope to No. 2, and succeeds in resolv-
ing it, but though he fails in resolving the other five
nebulas, he believes, on better evidence than Galileo,
that they are clusters of stars. Hadley with his fine
Gregorian reflector easily resolves No. 3 ; James
Short, in like manner, resolves No. 4 ; Sir William
Herschel No. 5 ; and Lord Bosse No. 6. Now all
these astronomers, after the observation of Gttlileo,
believed that the seven nebulsd were clusters of stars,
each of them with increasing evidence ; and Lord
Bosse, that No. 7 was a cluster on stronger endence
than the rest. Lord Eosse, however, fails in resolving
No. 7 with his largest instrument, but he does not
scruple to express his conviction, nay, he cannot help
being convinced, that, with a telescope, even a little
larger than his own, but certainly with one twice its
size, which may be the work of another century, —
the seventh nebula will also be resolved. The same



176 MORE WORLDS THAN ONB. CHAP. XI.

reasoDing which we have used for seven. nehulsd is
applicable to seventy or seven hundred^ or even seven
thousand; arid the conclusion is inevitable, though
the evidence of demonstration is wanting, that all
nebulaB are clusters of stars.

There is another point of view from which we may
regard this subject. Purely nebulous matter, such
as that which composes comets' tails, and still more
that which, in the form of the zodioucal light, is,
without reason, called the sun's atmosphere, must
consist of the minutest particles, so minute that they
do not retard Venus or Mercury while they pass
through the so-called atmosphere of the sun, which
is alleged to extend beyond their orbits. Now, if
No. 6 was considered a nebula before it was resolved,
it must have been regarded as consisting of minute
particles of star-dust, whereas, the moment it wa«
resolved, it consisted of separate suns, each of which
was probably greater than our own. Is it possible that
self-luminous star-dust, at such an infinite distance
from us in space, and so rare as to be like a non-
resisting medium, could send to our system a light
as intense as that which is emitted by the same
nebula considered as a cluster of suns I If the
resolved nebula No. 6, and the unresolved nebula
No. 7, have the same appearance and the same in-
tensity of light, is it not certain that the latter must
have the same constitution as the former, that is,
must consist of stars ?



CHAP. XI. CLUSTERS OF STARS AND NEBULA. 177

There is another aspect of this question, which, as
it has not yet been the subject of discussion, may
deserve the attention of astronomers. It is not only
quite possible, but we think it is almost certain, that
in the distant sidereal spaces there may be nebulse,
which, though really clusters of stars, never can be
resolved. Our hypothetical nebula, for example, No.
7, may not only resist the telescopes of SLges to come,
but may be incapable of resolution by telescopes of
ir^nite power and infinite perfection. Unless when
a star is in the zenith, the rays by which we see it
are bent and dispersed by the refraction of the at-
mosphere, and as our atmosphere is not a homoge-
neous medium, a star may be so infinitely minute
from its distance, that though its light makes its way
through ethereal space undisturbed in its journey of
a thousand years, it may be so treated in its passage
through our atm(;sphere that an image of it cannot
be formed in the focus of a telescope, considered as
absolutely perfect. An increase of magnifying power
would only increase the indistinctness produced by
the atmosphere. In the case of a single star thus
acted upon, it would be invisible from the diffusion
of its light, while in the case of clusters, the cluster
would continue to appear a nebula, the diffused light
of each star being mingled with that of its neigh-
bours.

The interesting discovery made by Lord Eosse of
what is called spiral nebiUce^ where the nebulous

M



178 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. SI.

matter may be considered as hsiving been thrown off
by Bome singular cause from the ceutre of the nebu-
la, lias been regarded as hostile to the opinion that
such nebulie are composed of separate stars. Au
appearance which mighi he caused by motion, is cer-
tainly no ground for believing that motion caused it.
Various forms have been observed in nebulse. They
are globular and oval, witli all degrees of ellipticity.
from a circle to a straight line ; and Sir John Her-
schel n'marks it as " a fact, connected in some very
intimate manner with the dynamical condition of
their subsistence," that they are more difficult of re-
solution than globular nebula". Now these linear
nebula, which Sir John Ilerachel tliinks are flat
elli]>soids seen edgewise, though they may, by specu-
lators in star-dust, be regarded as sjihei-es thrown into
their ellipsoidal state by a very rapid rotation rouod
their lesser axis, yet they have no such origin, because
they have been resolved into stars. In like manner
the nebulfe called annular, which have the form of
rings, might be regarded by the same theorists as
produced from a still more rapid rotation, which we
know from the beautiful experiments of M. Plateau,
will convert a sphere into a ring ; but that this is
not their origin is proved by their couaJBting of stars.
The beautiful nebula, for example, between ^ and
7 LyrcB, has the appearance of " a flat oval solid ring,"
" The axes of the eilipse," according to Sir John
Herschel, " are to each other in the proportion of



CHAP. XI. CLUSTERS OF STARS AND KEBULJE. 179

about 4 to 5, and the opening occupies about half, or
rather more than half the diameter. The central
vacuity is not quite dark, but is filled in with faint
nebulas like a gauze stretched over a hoop. The
principal telescopes of Lord Rosse resolve this object
into excessively minute stars, and shew filaments of
stars adhering to its edges." When this nebula wu»
unresolved, and had the character of a ring nebula,
which might be produced by the rapid motion of a
nebular sphere round its axis, the star-dust philoHo-
pher would have considered its form as a proof that
it could not consist of stars ; but now that it haM
been resolved, we are entitled to conclude that in ne-
bulas, such as the spiral ones, where there is the appear-
ance of motion, the spirals are not purely nebuloiw
matter thrown off' from the nucleus like water twirled
from a mop, or by any spiral movement wliatcvor.

As the appearance of motion, therefore, in particti-
lar nebulae, is no proof that they consist of puroly
nebulous matter composed of invisible particles, w*j
are entitled to draw the conclusion that thi« Invi/^n
class of celestial bodies are clusters of starn at an Utt
mense distance from our own system, — that iuuiU of
the stars of which they are corai)0«od in ilw nun or
centre of a system of planets, and that ihtm ifUittaiM
are inhabited, or if we follow a strict aruiloj^y, i\uii
at least one planet in each of thes<5 nnut\HU'Um xyw-
tems, is like our earth, the seat of v«jj;otiibl«, imUml,
and intellectual life.



180 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XI.

But independently of these considerations, we are
entitled to ask if these nehulaB are really globulcbr
and elliptical, and their lines of light reaUy spiral.
We assume that it is possible, nay, highly probable,
that they are not. We are all familiar with the de-
ceptive forms assumed by ill-defined and faintly
illuminated surfaces, and with the disappearance or
variation of such forms when we approach the
object or see it better. The globular nebulae of Sir
W. Herschel have disappeared as globes under the
sharp vision of Lord Rosse's telescope, and the hypo-
thesis, founded upon them, of star-dust condensing
into suns has been exploded. The Dumb-bell nebula,
too, of Sir John Herschel, has assumed a new shape
when examined by Lord Eosse, and every cluster of
stars and nebula in the heavens, and every fbnn
which they now present to the astronomer, either in
their outline or on their surface, will, we doubt not,
in another age, undeigo the most complete metamor-
phosis. In like manner may not the telescopes of
the next century discover appendages to these spirals
in certain nebulae, or so resolve them into stars that
their spiral forms will disappear, and the wild specu-
lations which they have suggested be treated with the
contempt and ridicule which they merit A hypothe-
sis founded upon forms that are themselves hypothe-
tical, cannot fail to bring astronomy into contempt.

Before we quit the subject of nebulae, and purely
nebulous matter, we must notice two points connected



CHAP. XI. CLUSTEBS OF STABS AND N£BL'LJ£. ISI

with the optical appearance of nebulas, which we
think are strong argaments in favour of their being
resolvable into stars. If a nebula consisted of phos-
phorescent or self-luminous atoms of nebulous mat-
ter, its light would be immensely inferior in bright-
ness to that of the same nebula composed of suns
which are provided with a luminous atmosphere for
the very purpose of discharging a brilliant light
When we see, therefore, two nebulae of the very same
brightxiess, and find by the telescope that one of them
only is i^lvable into stars, we can scarcely doubt
that the other is similarly composed. We cannot
conceive that a nebula of phosphorescent atoms could
be visible at such enormous distances from our sys-
tem. When a planetary nebula is equally bright in
every part of its disc, like that which is a little to the
south of /3 Urs(B Majoris, and which resembles Sijlat
disc, ^' presented to us in a plane precisely perpendi-
cular to the visual ray," it is impossible to regard it
as nebulous matter in a state of aggregation. In
like manner, all those nebulas, which have strange
and irregular shapes, indicate the absence of any force
of aggregation, and authorize us to regard them as
clusters of stars.



CHAFER XII.



The ai^tnents for a plurality of worlds, contained
in the preceding chapters, are so various, and have
such different degrees of force, that different views of
the subject will be taken by many wbo thoronghl
believe in the general doctrine. We can easily iiifc
deretand why some persons may believe that all t
planets which have satellites are inhabited,
they deny the inhabitability of those that have nooj
and also of the Sun and the satellites themselvc
There are individuals, too, though we doubt the|
faith in sidereal astronomy, who readily believe t
the whole of our planetary system is the seat of Iif{|
while they are startled by the statement that ev^
star in the heavens, and every point in a nebula whic)
the most powerful telescope has not separated fro
its neighbour, is a sun surrounded by inhabits
planets like our own ; and that immortal beings a
swarming through universal space more ni
than drops of water in the ocean, or the grains <j
sand upon its shores. But if these persons really
believe in the distances and magnitudes of the stars,



^Blt. XII. GENERAL SlJMMAItY. i>^Z

and of the laws which govern the binary systems of
double stars, they miifc>t find it equally, if not more
difficult to comprehend, why tonumerable suns and
worlds fill the immensity of the universe, revolviof;
roimd one another, and dischai^ng their light and
heat into space, without a plant to spring under their
influence, without an animal to rejoice in their genial
beams, and without the eye of reason to lift itself
devoutly to its Creator. In peopling such worlds
with life and intelligence, we assign the cause of their
existerice; and when the mind is ouce alive to thiK
great truth, it cannot i'ail to realize the grand combi-
nation of infinity of life with infinity of matter.

In support of these views, we have already alluded
to the almost incredible facf, that there are in our
own globe hills and Btrata miles in length, composed
of the fossil remains of mic roscopic insects ; and we
need scarcely remind the least informed of onr readers,
that the air which they breathe, the water which they
drink, the food which they eat, the earth on which
they tread, the ocean which encircles them, and the
atmosphere above their heads, are awarniing with
universal life. Wherever we have seen matter we
have seen life. Liib was not made for matter, but
matter for life ; and in whatever spot we see its atoms,
whether at our feet, or in the planets, or in the re-
moteBt star, we may he sure that lile is there — life to
enjoy the light and heat of God's bounty — to study His
works, to recognise His glory, and to bless His namn.



184 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XII.

Those nagenial minds, or " Low Souls/' as the poet
cails them, that can be brought to believe that the
Earth is the only inhabited body in the universe, will
have no difficulty in conceiving that it also might
have been without inhabitants. Nay, if such minds
are imbued with geological inferences, they must
admit that for myriads of years the Earth was with-
out inhabitants ; and hence we are led to the extra-
ordinary result, that for myriads of years there was
not an intelligent creature in the vast dominions of
the universal King ; and thai before theformalion
of the protozoic strata, there teas neither a plant nor
an aninud ihraugJwut the infinity of space ! During
this long period of universal death, when Nature
herself was asleep, the Sun with his magnificent
attendants, the planets with their faithful satellites,
the stars in the binary systems, the Solar system itself,
were performing their daily, their annual, and their
secular movements, unseen, unheeded, and fulfilling
no purpose that human reason can conceive, — Clamps
lighting nothing, — ^fires heating nothing, — ^waters
quenching nothing,-^ouds screening nothing, —
breezes fanning nothing, — and everything around,
mountain and valley, hill and dale, earth and ocean,
all meaning nothing,

The Stars

Did wander darkling in the eternal space.

To our apprehension, such a condition of the Earth,



CHAP. Xri. GENERAL SUMMARY. 185

of the Solar system, and of the sidereal univense,
would be the same as that of our own globe, if all its
vessels of war and of commerce were traversing its
seas, with empty cabins and freightless holds, — as if
all the railways on its surface were in full activity
without passengers and goods, — and all our machinery
beating the air, and gnashing their iron teeth without
work performed. A house without tenants, a city
without citizens, present to our minds the same idea
as a planet without life, and a universe without in-
habitants. Why the house was built, why the city
was founded, why the planet was made, and why the
universe was created, it would be diflScult even to
conjecture. Equally great would be the diflSculty
were the planets shapeless lumps of matter poised in
ether, and still and motionless as the grave : But
when we consider them as chiselled spheres teeming
with inorganic beauty, and in full mechanical activity, #
performing their appointed motions with such mi-
raculous precision, that their days and their years
never err a second of time in hundreds of centuries,
the diflSculty of believing them to be without life is,
if possible, immeasurably increased. To conceive
any one material globe, whether a gigantic clod
slumbering in space, or a noble planet equipped like
our own, and duly perfonning its appointed task,
to have no living occupants, or not in a state of pre-
paration to receive them, seems to us one of those
notions which could be harboured only in an ill-edu-



166 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XIL

cated and ill-regtdated mind, a mind without faith
and without hope : But to conceive a whole universe
of moving and revolving worlds in such a category,
indicates, in our apprehension, a mind dead to feeling,
and under the influence of that inteUectual pride
which the poet so justly denounces, —

Ask for what end the heavenly bodies shine.

Earth for whose use ? Pride answers, *' 'Tis for mine :

Seas roll to waft me, Suns to light me rise, —

My footstool Earth, — my canopy the skies." ^ — Pope.

But we have been mistaken in thinking that the
universe was dead : It was but unborn, the perfect
chrysalis from which the living butterfly was to
spring. Protozoic forms arose at the Divine com-
mand, — the infant plant, the simple mollusc, the
noble fish, the still nobler quadruped, successively
appeared, and Man, the image of his Maker, and the
work of His hand, was invested with the sovereignty
of the globe. The Earth, therefore, was made for
man, matter for life ; and wherever another earth is
seen, we are forced to the conviction that it too was
made like ours for the use of an intellectual and
immortal race.

Although we have repeatedly alluded, in the pre-
ceding pages, to the absurdity of supposing suns and
planets to be made without any conceivable object,
yet the argument may be presented in a more general

' Dr. Wh&rton remarks on this passage, Aat it is the highest absurdity to think
that the heaTenly bodies were lighted up principally for our use.



CHAP. XII. GENERAL SUMMARY. 187

form. In all the works which are the result of
human skill, the great object is to obtain a given
effect by the smallest expenditure of labour and of
materials. The genius of the artist is less strikingly
shewn in producing a new effect, than in producing
one well known, with economy of time, of work, and
of material. Everything that is not necessary to the
final effect of a process, or of a machine, is labour in
vain, — a species of work in which man never willingly
indulges. Even where labour is not hallowed by the
sweat of the brow, — where it does not earn bread, or
is not exhausted in the great structures of civilisa-
tion, it is never Idbomr in vain. Every act of the
mind, and every motion of the hand which it
guides, is a step in the great march of social progress,
however frivolous its work may seem, and how-
ever useless its immediate result. The toy for the
child, the telescope for the sage, the locomotive for
the railway, the steam-ship for the ocean, are equally,
though in different degrees, the result of useful occu-
pation. In the world of instinct there is the same
economy of skill and labour, — ^the spider and the bee,
the ant and the beaver, are spendthrifts neither of time
nor of toil ; and in all the works of the Divine artist
around us, — ^in all the laws of matter and of motion,
—in the frame of man |nd of animals, of plants and
of inorganic nature, the economy of power is univer-
sally displayed. Nothing is made in vain, — nothing
hy a complex process which can he made by a simple



188 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. xn.

one ; and it has often been remarked by the most
diligent students of the living world, that the infinite
wisdom of the Creator is more strikingly displayed
in the economy than in the manifestation of power.

With such troths before us, is it possible to believe
that, with the exception of our little planet, all the
other planets of the system, all the hundreds of
comets, all the systems of the universe, are to our
reason made in vain ? It is doubtless possible that
the Almighty Architect of the universe may have
had other objects in view, incomprehensible by us,
than that of supporting animal and vegetable life in
these magnificent spheres ; but as the question we
are discussing is one in which we can appeal only to
human reason, and as human reason in its highest
form cannot discover these other objects, we the
inhabitants of one of the least of these spheres, which
has for immeasurable periods of time been preparing
for the residence of man, must believe, under the
guidance of that reason, that they were destined
certainly, like our Earth, for an intellectual race, and
destined probably for a previous and lengthened
occupation by plants and animals, in order that their
inhabitants may study on the tombstones of the past
those miraculous processes of growth and decay, of
destroction and renovation, by which there has been
provided for them so noble an inheritance.

In his celebrated sermon On the Origin and Frame
of tlie World, to which we have already referred,



CHAP. ZII. GENJSBAL SUMMARY. 1^

Dr. Bentley has taken a view of this part of the
question which, though slightly different from ours,
leads him to the same conclusion. Considering " that
the soul of one virtuous and religious man is of
greater worth and excellency than the Sun and his
planets, and all the stars in the world/' Dr. Bentley
expresses his willingness to believe, that ^' their use-
fulness to man might be the sole end of their creation,
if it could be proved that they were as beneficial to
us as the Polar Star was formerly for navigation, or
as the Moon is for producing the tides, and lighting
us in winter nights." " But," he adds, " we dare not
imdertake to shew what advantage is brought to us
by those innumerable stars in the galaxy and other
parts of the firmament, not discernible by naked eyes,
and yet each many thousand times bigger than the
whole body of the Earth. If you say, they beget in
us a great idea and veneration of the mighty Author
and Grovernor of such stupendous bodies, and excite
and elevate our minds to His adoration and praise ;
you say very truly and well. But would it not raise
in us a higher apprehension of the infinite majesty
and boundless beneficence of Grod, to suppose that
these remote and vast bodies were formed not
merely upon our account to be peeped at through an
optic glass, but for different ends and nobler pur-
poses ? And yet who will deny but there are great
multitudes of lucid stars even beyond the reach of
the best telescopes ; and that every visible star may



i



190 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XII.

have opaqtie planets^ revolving about them which we
cannot discover ? Now, if they were not created for
our sakes, it is certain and evident that they were
not made for their own ; for matter has no life nor
perception, is not conscious of its own existence, nor
capable of happiness, nor gives the sacrifice of praise
and worship to the Author of its being. It remains,
therefore, that all bodies were formed for the sake of
intelligent minds : and as the Earth was principally
designed for the being and service and contemplation
of men ; why may not all other planets be created
for the like uses, each for their own inhabitants which
have life and understanding ?"^

Various attempts have been made, but without
much success, to give a popular illustration of the
argument from analogy, by which we infer the exist-
ence of inhabitants in the planets, from their simila-
rity to the Earth. M. Fontenelle, the first person who
attempted this, has given the following illustration of
it : — " Suppose," says he, " that there never had been
any communication between Paris and St. Denis, and
that a person who had never been out of the city

1 This is the earliest allusion, we remember, to dark bodies in the sidereal re-
gions, unless Dr. Bentley uses the word opaque in contradistinction to se(f-hum-
tioits bodies. The planets in single or binary systems are invisible from their
distance, not from their being unable to reflect light. Mr. Pigot had long ago
concluded, from rarious celestial phenomena, that there are " primary invisible
bodies or unenlightened stars that have ever remained in eternal darkness." The
late Professor Bessel having found that the proper motions of Sirius and Procyon
deviate very sensibly from uniformity, has come to the conclusion, that they de-
scribe orbits in space under the influence of central forces round dark or non4umi-
nntts central bodies, not very remote from the stars themselves.

' Eighth Sermon, pp. 5, 6.



CHAP. XII. GENERAL SUMMARY. 191

was upon the towers of Notre Dame, and saw St.
Denis at a distance : He is asked if he believes that
St. Denis is inhabited, like Paris. He will boldly
answer. No. For he will say, I see distinctly the
inhabitants of Paris ; but those of St. Denis I do not
see ; and I never heard anybody speak of them. It
is true, some will tell him, that from the towers of
Notre Dame he cannot see the inhabitants of St.
Denis, on account of the distance ; — that all that he
can see of St. Denis greatly resembles Paris ; — ^that
St Denis has steeples, houses, and walls, and that it
may very well resemble Paris in being inhabited.
All this will produce no eflFect upon my Parisian ; he
will persist in maintaining that St. Denis is not in-
habited, as he sees nobody. Our St. Denis is the
Moon, and each of us is this citizen of Paris, who
was never out of it. You are too severe, said the
Marchioness ; we are not such fools as your citizen ;
for, as he sees that St. Denis is just like Paris, he
must have lost his reason, if he does not believe that
it is inhabited ; but the Moon is not at all made
like the Earth. Take care, madam, I replied ; for
if the Moon in every respect resembles the Earth,
you will be obliged to believe that the Moon is in-
habited/'i

This illustration is certainly defective; for, as
Fontenelle subsequently remarks, the Moon does
not so much resemble the earth as St. Denis does

1 (Euvres *» FonUtidle. 2de Series, vol ii p. 49, edit. 1758.



192 MOBE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. Xlf.

Paris. The mistake which the author commits arises
from his not comparing the Earth with a planet,
like Jupiter having satellites, and clouds, and trade
winds, and a diurnal motion. In this case, the
citizen should have been a villager looking at Paris
fi'om the steeple of St. Denis, and his answer should
have been, I think it very probable that there are or
have been inhabitants in Paris, but it is possible
that they may have all left it, or have not yet ar-
rived. It is just possible, too, that these walls may
never have been a protection to inhabitants, nor these
churches thronged, nor these houses occupied ; but
if this were the case, the sovereign who founded the
city, who encircled it with a wall, who erected the
churches, and who built the houses, must have been
a fool or a madman.

A very different illustration is given by Huygens :
" If any person," says he, " were shewn, in the body
of a dissected dog, the heart, the stomach, the lungs,
the intestines, and then the veins, the arteries, and
the nerves, then, though he never saw the open body
of an animal, he could hardly doubt that the same
structure and variety of parts existed in the ox, the
sow, and other quadrupeds. In like manner, if we
knew the nature of one of the satellites of Jupiter
and Saturn, would we not believe that the very
same things which were found in it would be found
iu all the other satellites? And, if we saw any-
thing in one comet, we would conclude that this was



CHAP. XII. GENERAL SUMMARY. 193

the structure of all. There is therefore much weight
in conclusions drawn from analogies, and in infer-
ences from things that are seen to things that are
not seen."^

The author of the Essay against a Plurality of
Worlds, considers the illustration of Fontenelle as
unfair; and he gives the following modification of
it as representing his own argument more fairly : —

" Let it be supposed," he says, " that we inhabit
an island, from which innumerable other islands are
visible, but the art of navigation being quite un-
known, we are ignorant whether any of them are
inhabited. In some of these islands are seen masses
more or less resembling churches, and some of our
neighbours assert that these are churches; that
churches must be surrounded by houses, and that
houses must have inhabitants ; others hold that the
seeming churches are only peculiar forms of rocks :
in this state of the debate everything depends upon
the degree of resemblance to churches which the
forms exhibit. But suppose that telescopes are in-
vented and employed with diligence on the question-
able shapes. In a long course of careful and skilful
examination, no house is seen, and the rocks do not
at all become more like churches, rather the contrary.
So fai*, it would seem, the probability of inhabitants
in the islands is lessened. But there are other rea-
sons brought into view. Our island is a long extinct

1 ComoOuorot, ite., lib. i. Hngenii Opera, torn. ii. pp. 699, 653.

N



194 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XIL

volcano, with a tranquil and fertile soil, but the other
islands are apparently somewhat different. Some of
them are active volcanoes, the volcanic operations
covering, so far as we can discern, the whole island •
others undergo changes, such as weather or earth-
quakes may produce ; but in none of them can we
discover such changes as shew the hand of man. For
these islands, it would seem, the probability of inha-
bitants is further lessened.^ And so long as we have
no better evidence than these for forming a judg-
ment, it would surely be accounted rash to assert
that the islands in general are inhabited ; and un-
reasonable to blame those who deny or doubt it.
Nor would such blame be justified by adducing the-
ological or a priori arguments ; as that the analogy
of islands with islands makes the assumption allow-
able ; or that it is inconsistent with the plan of the
Creator of islands to leave them uninhabited. For we
know that many islands are or were long uninhabited.
And if ours were an island occupied by a numerous,
well-governed, moral, and religious race, of which the
historv was known, and of which the relation to the
Creator was connected with its history ; the assump-
tion of a history, more or less similar to ours, for the
inhabitants of the other islands, whose existence was
utterly unproved, would, probably, be generally



^ The observation of volcanoes and church-like rocks, by the telescope, has no
parallel in the analogy of the planets. It is not the moon that our author is deal-
ing with, but innumerable planets.



CHAP. XII. GENERAL SUMMARY. 195

deemed a fitter field for the romance writer thaa
for the philosopher. It could not, at best, rise above
the region of vague conjecture."^

This illustration is, we think, so unfair, and so
constructed to answer the author's purpose, that we
concur in his opinion that the probability of the
islands being inhabited "does not rise above the
region of vague conjecture." No illustration indeed
can be fair or effective, unless it relates to separate
and independent works of God, from the condition of
one of which we draw inferences by analogy relative
to the state of others of which we know nothing,
excepting their points of similitude. In the illus-
tration of Huygens, for example, the dog, the ox, and
the sow, are independent existences, of whose inter-
nal structure we know nothing; but having found
certain oigans upon dissecting the dog, we infer the
existence of the same organs in the ox, from the
external similitude in their general form, and in
various external parts. In the parallel between
islands and planets, the peopled islands should have
been invested with certain properties or conditions
necessary for its inhabitants, which should have been
possessed by the other islands. The inhabited island,
too, should have been made as small in reference to
the rest as the Earth is to Jupiter and Saturn. But
independent of these defects in the illustration, the
mind of the reader is otherwise prepared to admit

I Of the PluralUpo/ WffrUlt, Ao Z^y, pp. 157-1 ?«



196 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XII.

that they may have no inhabitants, because we know
of hundreds of islands without inhabitants. We can
assign also a very good reason why they were made,
and why they are not inhabited, and if we were to be
assured of the fa.t, it would excite no surprise wha^
ever. We could not say that Grod therefore made
them in vain, because when the art of navigation is
discovered, they may be found to contain gold and
silver, coal and iron, and excellent harbours, such as
exist in our inhabited island. We, the islanders,
may suppose also, that the islands either have been
or will be inhabited, and we are entitled to make this
supposition, because we must have been originally
created upon our own island, and not brought to it
by the art of navigation ; and consequently, the same
creation of inhabitants may have taken place, or may
yet take place, in the uninhabited ones. It is obvious,
from these remarks, that the previous knowledge of
the reader, to whom the appeal is made, influences
what he conceives would be the speculation of the
islander ; and the confusion of ideas which thus takes
place, renders the illustration illusory.

The best illustration which we can conceive, is to
suppose a philosopher contemplating from a distance
the bodies of the Solar system, and wholly ignorant
of their condition. He examines them so as to
acquire all the knowledge which we possess of their
size — their motions — the influences they receive from
the sun, and all the phenomena disclosed by the



CHAP. XII. GE19ERAL SUMMARY. 197

telescope. He knows nothing about their being in-
habited or uninhabited, but being permitted to visit
the Earth, he finds it inhabited, and observes the
relation which exists between vegetable, animal, and
intellectual life, — ^the influences which emanate from
the sun and moon, and the days and nights, and
seasons and atmoepkeric changes which oL^^e
oar globe. He then takes his place in the distance,
and pondering over all the bodies of the system, he
will doubtless conclude that they are all inhabited
like the Earth. Had he first visited Jupiter, with its
gorgeous magnitude and numerous satellites, and
found it inhabited, he might have conceived it pos-
sibk that as the monarch of the system, it might
alone have enjoyed the dignity of being the seat of
life ; but even in this case, the force of analogy would
have compelled him to view the Solar system as one
great material scheme planned by its Creator, as the
residence of moral and intellectual life.



i



200 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XIII.

no life at all ; that is, that there is not a plurality
of worlds inhabited by rational beings. Now this is
not the conclusion which the premises authorize. If
Gk)d took a million of years to prepare the Earth for
man, the probability is, that all the planets were
similarly prepared for inhabitants, and that they are
now occupied by rational beings. If one or more of
them are only in the act of being prepared, and are
not yet the seat of intelligence, analogy forces us to
the conclusion, that they are now occupied by the
lower animals, and that they will in due time be inha-
bited like the Earth by rational beings. The asser-
tion that they may be occupied by no life at aU, is
contrary to analogy, unless we suppose that all the
planets are only in that stage of preparation which
preceded the protozoic age, — a supposition which
no person is entitled to make, which the Essayist
himself does not make, but which, if it were true,
would prove that the time is approaching when all
the planets are to pass through the same stages of
revolution to which the Earth has been subjected.

According to the Nelmlar hypothesis adopted by
our author, the exterior planets, Neptune^ UranvSy
Saturn^ Jupiter^ and Mars^ with all the thirty
AsteroidSy were thrown off in rings from the
Solar atmosphere of fire-mist, and condensed into
planets lon^ before the Earth was thus formed ; and
as the operation of planet-making, to use a phrase of
his own, was begim upon all the more important



CHAP. Xin. OBJECTIONS DRAWN FROM GEOLOGY. 201

planets long before ours had emerged from chaos, all
these worlds must have been ready for the reception
of inhabitants before our race occupied the Earth.
Analogy, therefore, authorizes us to conclude not that
they may be, but that they are inhabited.

It is admitted by every geologist that the Earth
was not only made to be a fit residence for the human
family, but that it was made in such a manner that
man might see the wonderful processes by which it
was prepared, and read its vast chronology in the
history of its fossil remains. Is it not probable, there-
fore, that the other planets were formed in a similar
manner, and with a similar object ? And if analogy
leads us to believe that all the planets have been or
are in the azoic, or protozoic, or palceozoic, or neozoic
stage of formation, the conclusion is inevitable, that
they are occupied by beings formed after God's
image ; and consequently, that there is a plurality of
worlds. We may put the argument in a simpler
form. In the time of Huygens and Fontenelle and
Bentley, when the Mosaic account of the creation was
adopted in its literal meaning, the argument from
analogy had a certain degree of force. Has that
degree of force been diminished by the subsequent
discovery or supposition that a million of years, in
place of six days, were occupied in the preparation of
the Earth ? The argument from analogy is not only
not affected by this discovery, but the discovery itself
furnishes us with the new ground of analogy, that



202 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XIIl.

planets are made for the very purpose of being in-
habited, — that they are made in such a way as to
teach their inhabitants the wonderful processes by
which the Almighty has made them, — and that
they are made of materials essentially necessary for
man's personal and social happiness. Man was not
made for the planet — but the planet was made for
man.

Quitting the ground of analogy, our author has
recourse to what we consider the most shallow piece
of sophistry which we have ever encountered in
modern dialectics. He founds an elaborate argument
on the mutual relation of an atom of time and an
atom of space^ comparing the different periods of
time occupied in the formation of the Earth with the
different distances of the systems in space. In this
process, he divides the great geological period into
four periods of time, and the infinity of space into
four lengths of space ; and he " assumes that the
numbers which express the antiquity of the four
periods" are " on the same scale as the numbers which
express the four magnitudes," or lengths of space.
We have placed these periods in contrast in the fol-
lowing table, to exhibit clearly the nature of the
argument : —

TiMB. Spacb.

1. " The Praent orgauic condition of 1. " The magnitude of the Earth."

the Earth."

2. " The Tertiaty period of geologists 2. " The magnitude of the 8olar 8y»-

which preceded that" tem compared with the Earth.**



CHAP. XIII. OBJECTIONS DBA^N FROM 6E0L0GT. 203

Tixi. Spaoi.

3. " The Secondary period which wm 3. " The distance of the nearest fixed

anterior to that" stars compared with the Solar

system.''

4. ** The Primary period whidi pre- 4. " The distance of the most remote

ceded the Secondary." fubuUe compared >rith the nearest

Jtxed star."

In this table of Time and Space, the time doriDg
which the Earth has been in its present condition,
which is nearly 6000 years, is contrasted with the
magnitude of the Earth, which is 7926 miles in
diameter, and these numbers are units in the scale,
the one being called an (xtom of time compared with
the duration of the primary geological period, and
the other an atom of space compared with the dis-
tance of the remotest nebulsB. Now the importance,
or the significance of the Earth, in regard to space,
is fairly measured by its diameter of 7926 miles,
which is a fixed quantity ; but its significance with
regard to time is not measured by 6000 years, because
its duration is constantly increasing, and every year
adds to its significance; that is, the atom of time is
approximating to infinity, while the atom of space is
invariable. Admitting, however, our author's pre-
mises, let us consider his extraordinary conclusions : —

" We find," says he, *' that man (the human race
from its present origin till now) has occvpied bid an
cstom of timcj as he has occupied but an atom of
space." And again, —

^* The scale of man's insignificance is of the same
order in reference to time as to ipace, • . •



204 MORE WOItfiDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XIII.

K the Earth as the habitation of man is a speck in
the midst of an infinity of space, the Earth as the
habitation of man is also a ^ck at the end of an
infinity of time. If we are as nothing in the sur-
rounding universe, we are as nothing in the elapsed
eternity ; or rather in the elapsed organic antiquity
during which the Earth has existed, and been the

abode of life Or is the objection this ?

That if we suppose the Earth only to be occupied
with inhabitants, all the other objects of the universe
are wasted, turned to no purpose ? Is work of this
kind unsuited to the character of the Creator ? But
here, again, we have the like waste in the occupation
of the Earth. All its previom ages have been wasted
upon mere brute life ; often, so far as we can see, for
myriads of years, upon the lowest, the least conscious
forms of life, upon shell-fish, corals, sponges. Why,
then, should not the seas and continents of other
planets be occupied at present with a life no higher
than this, OR WITH no life at all ? . . . .
The intelligent part of creation is thrust into the
compass of a few years in the course of myriads of
ages ; why, then, not into the compass of a few miles
in the expanse of systems .^ .... If then
the Earth be the sole inhabited spot in the work
of creation, the oasis in the desert of our system,
there is nothing in this contrary to the analogy of
creation."

That is. The Earth, the atom of space, is the only



CHAP. Xni. OBJECTIONS DRAWN FROM GEOLOGY. 205

one of the planetary and sidereal worlds that is in-
hoMted, becattge it loas so long toithottt inhabitants^
and hus been occupied only an atom of time ! If
any of oor readers see the force of this argument,
they must possess an acuteness of perception to
which we lay no claim. To us it is not only illo-
gical ; — it is a mere sound in the ear, without any
sense in the brain. What relation is there between
the SHOB,T period of man's occupation of the Earth,
and the small portion which he occupies in space ?
If there is such a relation, that we can reason from
the truth of the^rs^ to the probability of the second,
then we can reason as justly from the truth of the
second to the probability of the Jirst. Now, let us
suppose it to be as certain that the Earth is the
only inhabited planet, as it is certain that Man has
occupied the Earth only for the short period of
6000 years, could any rational being allege that
because man occupied only an atom of space, he
therefore must live only an atom of time upon the
Earth ?

But even if we admit the result with regard to
Man, the argument does not apply to other intellec-
tual beings than Man — ^to an inferior or to a superior
race that never occupied the Earth at all. If Man is
thus limited by a syllogism to the occupation of one
planet, one atom of space, — an angelic race, who
never lived on the Earth at all, may be indulged with
the occupation of Jupiter. But, farther, let us sup-



206 MORE WORLD THAN ONE. CHAP. XIII.

pose that we leam by the telescope that every planet
and satellite in the Solar system is inhabited by
Man^ he would still occupy but an aix/m, of space,
and our author's argument would go to prove that
none of the fixed stars or binary systems are inha-
bited. In like manner, if we could prove that the
binary systems were inhabited, the sum of them all
would be but an atom of space, and our author would
still rejoice in his conclusion, that the clusters of stars
and nebulae were uninhabited vapour.

If the reasoning which we have examined be
sound in its nature, which it is not, it would fail
entirely by a change in the premises. If it is pro-
bable, as we have already shewn it is, that the time
of the Earth's preparation was comparatively short —
If it he possible^ which we aver it is, that intelligent
beings occupied the Earth previous to man ; and if
it is prohohle that Man will continue to occupy
the Earth during a period equal, or approximating
to the period of the Earth's preparation, the whole
of our author's argument has neither force nor
meaning.

But even if the Almighty has spent a million of
years in preparing the crust of the Earth as a suitable
residence for man, by the slow operation of secondary
causes, and has deposited the remains of vegetable
and animal life in each member of its formation, in
order to enable man to read the history of His omni-
potence and wisdom, is that any reason why the



CHAP, Xin. OBJECTIONS DRAWN FROM GEOLOGY. 207

Earth, the residence of man, should, among countless
and more glorious worlds than his own, be the only
one thai is inhabited? Beason and common sense
dictate a very different opinion. If nearly infinity of
time has been employed to provide for intellectual
and immortal life so glorious an abode, is it not pro-
bable that nearly infinity of space will be devoted to
the same noble purpose ?

But without availing ourselves of any of these de-
fects in our author's argument, we may safely meet
him on his own ground, and try the question by the
ordeal of his own principles. We admit, then, to the
fullest extent, that enormous periods of time were
necessary, by the operation of physical causes, to pre-
pare the Earth for the human family — not only for
the past generations of men, but for all future gene-
rations, and possibly for higher orders of intelligence
that may succeed them. But the enormous duration
of past time, which geological phenomena require,
rests on the hypothesis that these phenomena are
due to physical causes similar in their nature to those
which are now in operation. If we believe, then^
that all past changes in the Earth have been the re-
sult of secondary causes, we cannot possibly deny the
probability that future changes will be effected by
the same cause?. Now, admitting this hypothesis as
applicable to the future, the long duration of past
time in the Earth's history is not more certain than
the enormous duration of that period during which



208 MORB WORLDS THAN ONK CHAP. XIIT.

our Earth, under the action of existing agencies, must
continue as it is, adapted for the residence of such
beings as man. Unless, therefore, we suppose that
rational beings are to disappear fi*om the Earth,
while it remains fitted to be their home, it is mani-
fest that the long past, void of intelligent beings, and
the long future of such beings of some order or other,
as inhabitants of the Earth, must rest on the same
hypothesis, — the invariability of the nature of phy-
sical causes. Any argument, therefore, founded on
the absolute length of the former of these periods, and
not on its relative length when compared with the
latter, must be fallacious. At the present time the
period of the Earth's occupation by man has been
short, but every century adds to its length, and
neither reason nor Scripture leads us to believe that
the Solar system will ever be destroyed, or that ra-
tional beings will ever cease to occupy the Earth.
The age of the inhabited Earth is, therefore, conti-
nually approximating to that of the ancient Earth,
and after becoming equal to it, will probably become
greater, and approximate to infinity. In this way
the scale of time in the geological argument of the
Essayist is inverted. The atom of time has, in his
language, become infinity, while the scale of space
continues permanent as before. If this is not the
case, we are involved in the inconceivable absurdity
that the Architect of the universe took millions of
years to make a world which was to be occupied only



C-HAP. XIII. OBJECTIONS DRA.WN FROM GEOLOGY. 209

for a few thousands. To spend a thousand years in
building and furnishing a house which was to be
occupied only for one year, would be a supposition
too ridiculous to be introduced into a volume of
romance.



o



M



CHAPTER XIV.

OBJECTIONS FKOM THE NATURE OF NEBULiB.

In a preceding chapter on nebulse, we trust we
have satisfied the candid inquirer that all nebulsd
are clusters of stars, and that there is no proof what-
ever, not even its shadow, that in the sidereal r^ons
there is what is called nebulous matter, either exist-
ing in a stationary condition, or aggregating into
stars. The author of the Essay Of the Plwrcdiiy of
Worlds^ whose astronomical objections to the doctrine
of a plurality of worlds we are about to consider, very
dexterously commences his argument with an attack
upon that part of the doctrine which relates to
nebulae. He is not content with a statement of facts^
but he attempts to throw ridicule upon his opponents
by the application of words which are calculated to
influence the minds of ignorant or inattentive readers.
By calling nebulae cloiuiSy and pieces of comets' tails,
and the stars into which they are resolved, shining
dots, pieces of bright curd, luminous grains, and
lumps of light, he fancies that he has demolished the
opinion of astronomers that these dots are suns ;



CHAP. XIV. OBJECTIONS FROM NATURE OF NEBULiK. 211

that they are ^^as far from each other as the dog-star"
is from as ; that each sun has its system of planets,
and each planet its animal and vegetable life.

" An astronomer," says the Essayist, " armed with
a powerful telescope, resolves a nebula, discerns that
a luminous cloud is composed of shining dots : — but
what are these dots ? Into what does he resolve the
nebula ? Into stars, it is commonly said. Let us
not wrangle about words. By all means let these
dots be stars, if we know about what we are speaking,
— if a star merely means a luminous dot in the sky.
But that these stars shall resemble in their nature
stars of the first magnitude, and that such stars shall
resemble our sun, are surely very bold structures of
assumption to build on such a basis. Some nebulsB
are resolvable — are resolvable into distinct points —
certainly a very curious, probably a very important
discovery. We may hereafter learn, that aU nebulaB
are resolvable into distinct points ; that would be a
still more curious discovery. But what would it
amount to ? What would be the simple way of
expressing it without hypothesis and without as-
sumption ? Plainly this, — that the substance of all
nebulae is not continuous but discrete; — separable
and separate into distinct luminous elements ; nebulae
are, it would thus seem, as it were, of a curdled
or granulated texture ; they have run into lumps
of light, or have been foimed originally of such
lumps. Highly curious ! But what are these lumps ?



212 MOBE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XIV.

How large are they ? At what distances ? Of what
structure ? Of what use ? It would seem that he
must be a bold man who undertakes to answer these
questions. Certainly he must appear to ordinary
thinkers to be very bold, who, in reply, says gravely
and confidently, as if he had authority for his teach-
ing, These lumps, man, are suns ; they are distant
irom each other as far as the dog-star is from us ;
each has its system of planets, which revolve around
it ; and each of these planets is the seat of animal and
vegetable creation. Among thase planets some, we
do not yet know how many, are occupied by rational
and responsible creatures like man ; and the only
matter which perplexes us, holding this belief on
astronomical grounds, is, that we do not quite see
how to put our theology into its due place and form
in our system/'^

This, surely, is neither the language nor the tone
of a man of science in search of truth, or holding in
respect the great revelations of astronomy. The
Essayist triumphantly asks four questions, and tells
us that he would be a bold man that undertakes to
answer them. We accept the challenge, and appeal
to our readers.

Question 1. How large are the lumps of light ^ or
the shining dots, into which the astronomer's power-
ful telescope has resolved the nebulae ? These lumps
of light are admitted to be stars shining by their

1 Buay, Ac, pp. 120-122i



CHAP. XIV. OBJECTIONS FROM NATURE OF NEBUL-ffl. 213

own light. Now, it has been shewn by the most dis-
tinguished astronomers, by Herschel and by Stnive,
that in the various orders of distances in space, the
distances of the nebulse are the greatest. According
to the recent researches of Mr. Peters, as given by
M. Struve,^ the following are the distances of the
stais of different magnitudes, as ascertained by a
process approximately correct : —



Apparent
fagnitodes.


Parallaxes.


Distances in radii
of Earth's orbit.


1,


C^OO


98600


2, . .


c-iie


1778000


8,


0"076


2726000


4. . .


0"-064


3850000


6,


0"087


5378000


6, . .


0''027


7616000


8J, . .


0"008


24490000


114, . •


0''-00092


224500000



As the nebulaj are obviously more remote than any
of the stars in the above table, and as the nearest of
these stars must, from their distance, be equal to our
sun, we are entitled to conclude, that the stars in
nebulsB must be of a much greater size. Sir John
Herschel observes, that " when we consider that the
united lustre of a group or globtdar cluster of stars,
affects the eye with a less impression of light than a
star of the fourth magnitude, (for the largest of these
clusters is scarcely visible to the naked eye,) the idea
fue are thus compelled to form of their distance from
us may prepare us for almost any estimate of their



1 Etudes SAttrotwmie SteHaire.



214 MOIIE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XIV.

dimensions/' A visible dot^ or a visible lump^ must
therefore be a body of enormous magnitude, and
though we cannot give its exact size in miles or
diameters of the Earth, we are sure that every
astronomer in the old or the new world will allow
that we have answered the question with sufficient
accuracy in reference to the object for which it was
asked. The size of the dot or lump is o/siffficient
magnitude to be a sun.

Qt^est. 2. At what distances are the dots or lumps
from one another ?

In order to answer this question, the Essayist
knows well that we require to have the apparent
distance between the centres of the dots^ and upon
tlie supposition that the two dots are at the same dis-
tance from us, we can easily determine their distance
from the parallax which maybe assumed for resolvable
nebulae. In the binary systems there are two stars,
whose apparent distance is as small as that of the
dots or stars in the nebulsB, and yet every astronomer
admits that there is ample room for a system of
planets to circulate round and between them.

Quest, 3. Wha^ is the structure of these dots or
stars ? The author certainly does not expect to
learn whether the stars are made of granite or grey-
wacke. Analogy teaches us that their structure will
be similar to that of the only sun with which we are
acquainted. It will consist of a luminous envelope
enclosing a dark nucleus.



CHAP. XIV. OBJECTIONS FROM NATURE OF NEBUL-«. 215

QiLest 4. What is the use of (he dots or stars f
Being lai^ bodies, and self-luminous, they can be of
no conceivable use but to give light to planets, or to
the solid nuclei of which they consist.

Having thus given answers to our author's ques-
tions, — answers which we are confident would be
given by every astronomer, may we not ask in return,
What is the stze, and distance^ and structure^ and
vse of the dots upon his hypothesis, that they are
patches of comets' tails or luminous grains ? The
Essayist is silent. Should he be the very bold man
to make the attempt, the astronomical world would
repudiate his theory and his answers.

But there is another way of meeting objections of
such an unreasonable character. Our author is a
firm believer in the geological speculation, that the
Earth required " myriads of millions" of years for
its formation, and assuming his principle of contrast-
ing time and space, may we not ask him in return.
What was the structure of the primitive Earth ?
What were the periods of time required for the depo-
sition of each formation ? And of what use was an
arrangement requiring myriads of millions of years
for its completion ?

Believing that " nebulae are vast masses of incohe-
rent, or gaseous matter, of immense tenuity, and
destitute of solid moving bodies," a theory which he
derives from another theory called the nebular hypo-
thesis J without adducing the least trace of evidence in



21d MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XIV.

its support, our author boasts, not surely in the spirit
of the inductive philosophy, that he seems to have
made it certain that the celestial objects (the nebulae)
are not inhabited. To this we reply, that we have
made it more probable that the celestial objects
are inhabited, — ^an assertion less presumptuous, but
more certain than his.

We have described in a preceding chapter the
spirfd nebtdce discovered by Lord Rosse, and we have
endeavoured to explain the appearance of motion,
which may be considered as indicated by the spirals
which they exhibit. With his accustomed boldness,
and extravagance of speculation, our Essayist has
made the following observations on these spiral
forms : — " The comet of Encke," he aflSrms, " de-
scribes a spiral gradually converging to the Sun," and
" in 30,000 years this comet wiU complete its spiral,

and be absorbed in the central mass

But this spiral converging to its pole so slowly, that
it reaches it only after forming 10,000 circuits (or
spirals,") while " there are at most three or more
circular or oval sweeps in each spiral (of the nebulaa,)
or even the spiral reaches the centre before it has
completed a single revolution round it." From data
like these, the following theory of the spiral nebulse
is deduced : — ^' If we suppose the comet (that of
Encke) to consist of a luminous mass, or a string of
masses, which would occupy a considerable arch of
such an orbit, the orbit would be marked by a track



CHAP. XIV. OBJECTIONS FROM NATURE OF NEBULA. 217

of light as an oval spiral, or if such a comet were to
separate into two portions, as we have, tmth our ovm
eyesj recently seen Bida's Comet do, or into a greater
number ; then these portions would be distributed
along such a spiral. And if we suppose a large mass
of cometic matter thus to move in a highly resist-
ing medium, and to consist of patches of different
densities, then some would move faster, and some
more slowly, but all in spirals, such as have been
spoken of, and the general aspect produced would be
that of the Spiral Nebuloe, which I have endeavoured
to describe." A hypothesis more wild and gratuitous
than this was never before submitted to the scientific
world. In what part of the nebula do the cometic
patches reside before they begin their motion of de-
soent to the nucleus ; and what is the cause of their
quitting their place of rest ? No comet out of the
many hundreds that have been observed, has been so
negligent of its tail as to leave it behind. Encke's
Comet has been equally careful of its appendage, and
the division of Biela's Comet was only apparent.
But even if a comet were to separate into a number
of portions, these portions would, like the half of
Biela's Comet, travel along with it and again unite
themselves into one, so that the analogy of this comet
is destructive of the speculation which it is brought
to support.



CHAPTER XV.

OBJECTIONS FROM THE NATURE OF THE FIXED STARS AND

BINARY SYSTEMS.

Having, as our author congratulates himself,
^'cleared away the supposed inhabitants firom the
outskirts of creation, so far as the nebulsd are the
outskirts of creation/' he proceeds to consider the
fixed stars, and examine any evidence which he may
be able to discover as to the probability of their con-
taining in themselves, or in their accompanying
bodies, as planets, inhabitants of any kind. We have
already stated the grounds upon which the most dis-
tinguished astronomers have believed that single and
double stars are accompanied with planets similar to
our own ; and we shall now consider the objections
which are made to this opinion.

Beginning with dusters ofstarSy the author whose
opinions we have been controverting, justly observes,
that they are in the same category with resolvable
nebulae, and he therefore regards it as " a very bold
assumption to assume, without any further proof,
that these bright points are suns, distant from each



CHAP. XV. FIXED STARS AND BINARY SYSTEMS. 219

other as far as we are from the nearest stars. When
these clusters are globular^ Sir John Herschel regards
their form as '' indicating the existence of some gene-
ral bond of union in the nature of an attractive
force ;" and assuming that the " globular space may
be filled with equal stars, uniformly dispersed through
it, and very numerous, each of them attracting every
other with a force inversely as the square of the dis*
tance, . . . each star would describe a perfect
ellipse about the common centre of gravity as its
centre," Sir John therefore conceives that " ^uch a
system might subsist, and realize in a great measure
that abstract and ideal harmony which Newton has
shewn to characterize a law of force directly as the
distance."

Beferring to this ingenious theory of globular clus-
ters, the Essayist illustrates it by asserting, that if
'' our Sun were broken into fragments, so as to fill
the sphere girdled by the Earth's orbit, all the frag-
ments would revolve round the centre in a year," and
as there is no symptom in any cluster of its parts
moving so fast, he concludes that clusters, like nebu-
lae, must be extremely rare, that is, vaporous, like the
tails of comets. In support of this view of the sub-
ject, he alleges that the boldness of the opposite
opinion, that they are suns, appears to be/eU by our
wisest astronomer, meaning Sir John Herschel, to
whom he refers in such a manner as if Sir John
maintained the same opinion with himself. This,



220 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XV.

however, is far from being the case, as his own words
will prove : " Perhaps" says he, " it may be thought
to savour of the gigantesqae to look upon the indivi-
duals of such a group as suns like our own, and their
mutual distances as equal to those which separate
our sun from the nearest fixed star : yet, when we
consider that their united lustre affects the eye with
a less impression of light than a star of the fourth
magnitude, the idea we are thus compelled to form
of their distance from us may prepare us for almost
any estimate of their dimensions."^

ke ».e ju.. ^ of the ride^l ,^, u.
which no motion is visible, are taken by Dr. Whewell,
in his Bridgewater Treatise.^ " Astronomy," says
he, " teaches us that the stars which we see have no
immediate relation to our system. The obviotis sup-
position is, that they are of the nature and order of
our sun : the minuteness of their apparent magni-
tude agrees, on this supposition, with tiie enormous
and almost inconceivable distance which, from all the
measurements of astronomers, we are led to attribute
to them. If, then, these are suns, they may, like
our sun, have planets revolving round them, and
these may, like our planet, be the seats of vegetable,
animxd, and rational life .—we may thus have in
the universe worlds, no one knows how many, no one
can guess how varied ; but, however many, however



1 Outlines, frc, § 866, referred to by the E^aayist.
s Book HI. chap. ii. p. 270.



CHAP. XT. FIXED 8TABS AND BINARY SYSTEMS. 221

varied^ they are still but so many provinces in the
same empire, subject to common rules, governed by
a common power."

From the globular clusters of stars our author pro-
ceeds to the binary systems, of which we have treated
in a preceding chapter. He admits that the law of
universal gravitation is established for several of these
systems, " with as complete evidence as that which
carries its operation to the orbits of Uranus and Nep-
tune," but he endeavours to shew that each of the
stars of the best known binary systems, a Centaurt
and 61 Cygni^ " may have its luminovs matter dif-
fused thnyagh a globe as large cw the Earth* s annual
orbit" and that, in this case, " it would not he mjore
dense than the tail of a comet." It is in vain to argue
against assertions like these, which can only be met
by an equally positive denial of them. In the pre-
sent case, however, we can do more. Sir John Her-
schel has shewn that the sum of the two masses of
the double star 61 Cygni, is to that of the Sun as
0*353 to 1, or nearly as 1 to 3'1, and hence he con-
cludes, that " the Sun is neither vastly greater nor
vastly less than the stars composing 61 Cygni" The
conclusion, therefore, of the Essayist, that the matter
of these systems, " of these brilliant constituents," as
Sir John Herschel calls them, would fill the Earth's
orbit, and have the rarity of comets' tails, is contrary
to astronomical truth.

We have already seen that Sir John Herschel con-



222 MORE WOBLDS THAN OKK CRAP. XV.

aiders these double stars as suns, ^^ accompanied with
their trains of planets and satellites/' and has stated
the conditions necessary for the existence ofihezr in-
habitants. To our Essayist such a scheme appears
so complex^ that it would be '^ impossible to arrange
it in a stable manner/' so as to protect the inhabi-
tants from such dangers, and he considers himself as
having overturned Sir John HerscheFs view, bj
simply asserting, without a ground even for the as-
sertion, that " their sun may be a vast sphere of
luminous matter, and the planets, plunged into this
atmosphere, may, instead of describing regular orbits,
plough their way in spiral paths through the nebu-
lous abyss to its central nucleus" !

Having obtained, as our author sarcastically re-
marks, ^'but little promise of inhabitants from
clustered stars and double stars/' he turns his atten^
tion to the single stars as the most hopeful cases, and
asks, " what is the probability that the fixed stars or
some of them really have planets revolving round
them ?" To this he justly replies, that " the only
proof that the fixed stars are the centres of planetary
systems, resides in the assumption that these stars
are like the sun; — ^resemble him in their qualities
and nature, and therefore must have the same offices
and the same appendages."

In admitting that the stars, like the sun, shine
with an independent light, oar author attempts to
reduce the force of this point of resemblance by as-



OHAP. XV. FIXED OTARS AND BINARY SYSTEMS. 223

sertiDg, that " they resemble not only the sun, but
nebulous patches ia the sky, and the tails of comets,"
and that "there is no obvious distinction between
the original light of the stars and the reflected light
of the planets." Now these statements are either
irrelevant or erroneous. The nebulous patches are
clusters of stars. It is not true that comets' tails are
self-luminous, and it is utterly untrue that star light
and planet hght are the same. Our author ought to
have known that the reflected light of the planets
contains precisely the same definite dark lines in their
spectra as the light of the sun, which it ought to do,
as it is the same light ; while it has been proved by
the direct observations of Fraunhofer and others, that
the light of Sirius, Procyon, and other stars, is
essentially different, having definite dark lines which
do not exist in the light of the sun.

His next assertion is, that though the mass of cer-
tain stars is one-third of that of the sun, yet their
matter may be diffused through a sphere equal to the
earth's annual orbit, and that this may be the matrix,
so to speak, both of the sun and planets of a system
not yet formed — thus taking for granted the truth of
the nebular hypothesis, adopted by the author of the
Vestiges of Creation, and maintained only by persons
who have very erroneous ideas of creation. The worlds
were not made by the operation of law, but by the
immediate agency of the Almighty. Sir Isaac New-
ton considered the nebular theory as tending to



224 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XV.

Atheism, and in his five interesting letters to Dr.
Bentley, he has ably controverted it " The growth
of new systems/' he says, " out of old ones, (the doc-
trine maintained by the Essayist,) without the medi-
ation of a Divine power, seems to me apparently
absurd." " The diurnal rotation of the planets could
not be derived from gravity, bid required a Divine
arm to impress them." "The same power," says
Newton, " whether natural or supernatural, which
placed the sun in the centre of the six primary pla-
nets, placed Saturn in the centre of the orbs of his
five secondary planets ; and Jupiter in the centre of
his four secondary planets ; and the Earth in the
centre of the moon's orbit ; and therefore had this
cause been a blind one, mtJiout contrivance or design,
the sun would have been a body of the same kind
with Saturn, Jupiter, and the Earth ; that is, toith"
out light or heat. Why there is one body in our
system qualified to give light and heat to all the rest,
I know no reason, but because the Author of the
system thought it convenient : and why there is but
one body of this kind, I know no reason, but because
one was sufiScient to warm and enlighten all the
rest."^

That the stars undeigo changes in their mechanical
condition, the Essayist considers to be proved by
observation. One of these proofs is the difierent
colours of difierent stars, a fact certainly, but in no

' NetoUmi Opera, tom. it. pp. 430, 430.



CHAP. XV. FIXED STARS AND BINARY SYSTEMS. 225

respects a pi'oof of change. Had their colours
changed^ we might have inferred a change of condi-
tion ; but knowing that no such change takes place,
our author most presumptuously regards "their
different colours as arising from their being at dif-
ferent stages of their progress/" an opinion without
a shadow of probability either firom observation or
analogy. His next proof of change is derived from
the " mighty changes of which we have evidence in
the view which geology gives us of the history of this
Earth ;" but this is no proof at all. The changes
there referred to are mere changes in the crust of
the Earth, and not in its mechanical condition, and
changes, too, which would not show themselves even
to the moon by any change of colour or of aspect.
" If^ therefore," the Essayist continues, " stellar globes
can become planetary systems in the progress of ages,
it will not be at all inconsistent with what we know
of the order of nature, that only a few, or even that
"only one, (our Earth he means,) should have yet
reached that condition. All the others but the one
(our Earth) may be systems yet unformed, (or frag-
ments or sparks as he subsequently calls them,)
struck off in the forming of the one !" To such a
succession of assertions and hypotheses it is scarcely
necessary to reply. Stellar globes have never become



1 Ptolemy is said to have noted Sirius ai a red Ftar, though it is now white.
Sirius twinkles with red and blue light, and Ptolemy's eyes, like those of 6e\ eral
other persons, may hare been more sensitiTe to the red than to the 6ju« rays.



226 MORE WORLDS THAN OJbfE. CHAP. XV.

planetary systems; and nature has no such order.
We are thus thrown back to the astronomy of Julius
Caasar :

" The akies are painted with unnumbered sparks."

Shakespeabe.

The next argument adduced by our author, that
the stars are unlike our sun, is the existence of
changes in the stars supposed to be indicated by the
disappearance of some stars, the appearance of others,
and the variations in the light of a considerable num-
ber. The disappearance of a star proves only that it
has turned a dark side to our system, and the appear-
ance of a new star, that its luminous side has come
round to us in the course of its rotation ; while the
variatioDB in the light of others may arise from spots
upon their surface, from eclipses by their planets, or
from obscuration by comets' tails, when the varia-
tions are of an irregular character. From all these
causes our own sun may be a variable star to other
planets. To us even its light is diminished when large
spots come across its disc ; and when we consider the
great number of comets which belong to our system,
and the immense magnitude of their tails, the sun's
light must be occasionally obscured by the interposi-
tion of these imperfectly transparent bodies.

That the Fixed Stars are like our sun in every
point in which it is possible to compare them, will
not now be doubted we think by our readers. That
they are suns themselves, as Copernicus, Galileo,



CHAP. XV. FIXED STARS AND BINARY SYSTEMS. 227

Kepler, Newton, Huygens,^ and Laplace, and almost
every astronomer believes, and as all analogy proves,
is a doctrine which, we trust, will equally command
their faith.

In concluding his chapter on the Fixed Stars, our
[Essayist utters sentiments, and throws out conjectures
so insulting to Astronomy, and casting such ridicule
even on the subject of his own work, that we can
ascribe them only to some morbid condition of the
mental powers, which feeds upon paradox, and de-
lights in doing violence to sentiments deeply cherished,
and to opinions universally believed. We almost
doubt the accuracy of our vision, when we read the
conjecture that the glorious stars which compose the
sidereal universe, — that "Arcturus, Orion, and the
Pleiades,'' which Scripture tells us "God made," were
never created by Him at all, and " are really long
since extinct \" He had previously stated, '* that in
consequence of the time employed in the transmission
of visual impressions, our seeing a star is evidence
Dot that it exists now, but that it existed it may be
many thousands of years ago;" and thinking that
such a statement might seem to some readers to
throw doubts upon reasonings which he had employed,
he makes the following extraordinary observation : —
" It may be said that a star which was a mere chaos



1 «• I cannot doubt," says Huygens, " along teWt the greatest philosophers of the
age, that the Fixed Stan are of the same nature with the iSun."— Cofmot/iforof,
lib. ii. p. 705.



228 MOBE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XV.

•

when the light by which we see it set out from it,
may, in the thousands of years which have since
elapsed, have grown into an orderly toorld. To which
hare possibility we may oppose another supposition,
at least equally possible, that the distarU stars were
sparks or fragments struck off in the formation of
tJie Solar system, which are really long since ex-
tinct, and survive in appearance only by the light
which they at first emitted"^

Now, these two suppositions which our author
makes at least equally possible, stand in a very dif-
ferent relation to each other. The first supposition,
that a world in a state of chaos may have grown into
an orderly world, has a high degree of probability
from the fact, which both Scripture and geology
teach us, that our own Earth passed from a state of
chaos into an orderly world ; while the second sup-
position, th^at the distant stars are sparks struck off
in the formation of the Solar system, is not only
utterly false, but absolutely impossible, — impossible,
too, on the nebular hypothesis to which the author
has set his seal, and impossible on the wildest hypo-
theses of creation which have ever issued from the
disordered brain of humanity. If a spark did escape
from the grasp of the mighty Artist when He meted
out the planets with His measure, and gathered their
waters in the hollow of His hand, it could only have

^ Siderfal Astronomp, the most exalted, branch of human knoivledge, is thus
reduced to the $tudy of xpnrks struck off iu the formation of planets !



CHAP. XV. FIXED STARS AND BINARY SYSTEMS. 229

been a spark or a puff of that mud and steam out of
which our author has modelled the exterior planets,
and which, if steam, must soon have expanded into
its elements before it reached the place of even the
nearest star in the heavens, or formed the hundred
million of stars which roll in the immensity of space.
After such a speculation as this, bordering, as we
think, on the blasphemous, and in palpable contra-
diction of the demonstrated truths of sidereal astro-
nomy, we need hardly put the question with which we
intended to conclude this chapter. If the stars are
not suns, for what conceivable purpose were they
created ? Our author has answered the question
by asserting, that they were never created at all I
To such philosophy and theology we prefer that of
the poet, —

*^ Each of these stars is a religious house ;
I saw their altars smoke, their incense rise,
And heard hosannahs ring through eTery sphere.
The great Proprietor's all-bounteous hand
Leayes nothing waste, but sows these fiery fields
With seeds of reason, which to virtues rise
Beneath his genial ray."

YOUNO.



CHAPTER XVI.

OBJECTIONS FROM THE NATUBE OF THE PLANETS.

Having sullied the glories of the sidereal world
by converting the stars and systems which compose
it, into vapour, gas, and comets' tails, the Essayist
proceeds to apply the same process to the planets of
the Solar system, converting those exterior to the
Earth into ^' immense clouds with continuous water
collected at their centre, and the interior ones into
cinder or slieets of rigid slag like ike moon ! while
the satellites of Jupiter and Saturn are characterized
as '^ vapour wandering loose about their atmospheres,
and neatly wound into bdUs /"

This process commences with Neptune, whose
vast globe he describes as " only a huge mass ofdofud
and vapour, wate/r and air" and as a dark and cold
world, where the light and heat of the Sun is incar
pable of " unfolding the vital powers, and cherishing
the vital enjoyments of animals ;" — an assumption
without any evidence to support it. It is true, that
if we consider the solar influences as emanations



CHAP. XVI. OBJECTIONS FROM THE PLANETS. 231

following a geometrical law, their power upon the
surface of Neptune must be greatly enfeebled ; but
such a law does not exist Although the Sun is
nearest the Earth in winter, his heat and light are,
from different causes, much reduced ; and we know,
as we have shewn in a former chapter, that there
may be conditions of the atmosphere of the remoter
planets which may procure for them a more genial
influence from the Sun, or there may be tempera-
tures in their interior which may supply the place of
it by heat radiated from their surface.

In the very middle of summer we have cold days
and nights, with ciystab of ice floating in the atmo-
sphere, and exhibiting their existence by the produc-
tion of halos round the Sun and Moon ; and in the
very middle of winter, when the Sun is about to
return from the southern tropic, we have frequently
temperatures not very different from those of summer.
With regard to the Sun's light on Neptune and the
remoter planets, we have already mentioned that
with a more sensitive retina, the inhabitants could
see as distinctly as ourselves. In proof of this we
may adduce the fact mentioned by Boyle, of a person
having such a tenderness of retina, that he could, in
a dark night, see and distinguish plainly colours of
ribands and other objects which had been placed on
the inside of his curtains, when he was asleep. The
same sensibility of the nerves of the ear was shewn in
another case, where the person could hear at a dis-



232 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XVI.

tance the softest whispers which no other person
could at all perceive.^

In thus '^ beginning with the outermost of the
planets at present known, namely, Neptune/' the
Essayist exhibits the same ingenuity which he dis-
played in commencing with the NebulaB. In dealing
with Neptune his argument rests solely on the dark-
ness and coldness which is supposed to unfit the
planet for being the residence of life. He takes no
notice of the fact relied upon by his opponents, that
Neptune has certainly one and probably two or more
SateUUeSy but starts into a new maze of sophistry,
by appealing to the Moon ! Under the pretence of
learning if there is '' any general ground for assum-
ing inhabitants in Neptune," he tells us that, '^ the
chance of learning this, is to endeavour to ascertain
the fact in the body which is nearest to us," namely,
the Moon ; and being quite confident that he is to
prove the Moon to be unfit for inhabitants, he gives
us warning of a formidable attack upon our position
by announcing, that if the Earth be inhabited, and
the Moon not, we have then no right to assume at
once^ that any other body in the Solar system belongs
to tlie former of these classes rather tJian to tlie latter,
A position so illogical and untenable, no philosopher,
in search of truth, durst here venture to take. Had
the Moon been the primary planet nearest to the Earth,

1 Of the Determinate Nature of EfBuviums, p. 26, quoted in a MS. of Sir
Isaao Newton'a



CHAP. XVI. OBJECTIONS FROM THE PLANETS. 233

the assertion would have been just, but if it were
revealed to us, that the Moon had no inhabitants,
it would not diminish, in the slightest degree, the
probability of Jupiter's being inhabited. We have
already seen that the Moon has great functions
to perform, as the satellite of the Earth, even if
no living thing breathed upon her surface ; but
no person has ventured to assign any function to
Jupiter, if he does not resemble the Earth in being
the seat of life.

In proceeding to unpeople the Moon, the Essayist
tells us, that ^' careful and skilfiil astronomers, who
have examined the Moon's surface, have, all of them,
without exception, been led to the belief that the
Moon is not inhabited— but waste and barren, like
streams of lava, or the sands of Africa. To this
statement we have only to reply, that it is not true.
Huygensand Sir W. Herschel, Dr. Olbers, and many
others, have declared their belief that there are in-
habitants in the Moon, and we believe, that all
astronomers would come to the same conclusion were
they satisfied that the Moon had an atmosphere.
This incorrect assertion on the part of the Essayist is
followed by other two assertions equally unfounded
— ^that there is no water in the Moon, and " no at-
mosphere and vapour, or air," and that no changes
have been observed upon her surface. We have
already proved, that there must be an atmosphere in
the Moon, and the existence of active volcanoes



234 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XVL

places it beyond a doubt, that there must have been
changes upon her surface.

The same observations which apply to Neptune
are applicable to Uranvs^ Saturn^ and Jupiter , — ^the
same objections on the part of the Essayist, and the
same reply to them. Jupiter, however, is the planet
to which he especially calls our attention ; and after
much irrelevant speculation respecting the internal
condition of our globe, as produced by the super-
incumbent weight of its outer formations, and '^ al-
lowing for the compression of the interior parts o
Jupiter," he pronounces it " tolerably certain that
his density is not greater than it would be if his
entire globe were composed of water," and he con-
cludes that Jupiter must therefore be a mere sphere
of water. He afterwards states there is " much
evidence against the existence of solid land" in that
planet ; but in opposition to this evidence, he subse-
quently contributes a few cinders at the centre^ —
articles, doubtless, of peculiar value and interest,
where everything else is water. The existence of
cinders, however, where there is no heat, and where,
as we shall presently see, the water is ice, must have
perplexed his chemistry, and hence he wisely with-
draws them, by telling us that the waters in Jupiter
are hottorrdess, that is, without a nucleus of cinders.

In order to prove that Jupiter and the exterior
planets cannot be inhabited, he adduces the extreme
cold which is supposed to exist upon their surface ;



CHAP. XVI. OBJECTIONS FROM THE PLANETS. 235

but vrhen his assertion that Jopiter is a spJiere of
water J and if peopled at all, peopled with cartiln-
ginm^^md glvtinoua monsters^ handeas^vxxtery^pulpy
creatures^ imperfect and embryotic lumps of vitality ,
floating in the fluid, is met with the objection that
the leaters must he froxen^ he has no difficulty in
making Jupiter as Ao^ to answer this one purpose as
he formerly made it cold to answer another. In this
wonderM process of adaptaiion^ our author's genius
and his inductive methods are singularly displayed.
No difficulty is to him unsurmountable. In his om-
niscience of speculation he finds a theory for anything
or everything ; " Even in the outer regions of our
atmosphere/' he says, " the cold is probably very
many degrees below freezing, and in the blank and
airless void beyond, it may he colder still. It has
been calculated by physical philosophers, on grounds
which seem to be solid, that the cold in the space
beyond our atmosphere is 100° below Zero. The
space near to Jupiter, if an absolute vacuum, in
which there is no matter to receive and retain heat,

MAY, perhaps, be NO COLDER THAN IT IS NEARER

THE Sun !" Were we to indulge in arbitrary con-
jectures like these, we could refute, without argument,
all our author's objections to a plurality of worlds ;
but without availing ourselves of so destructive a
weapon, may we not upon good grounds, prefer the
prohahle ice to the possible loater, and accommodate
the inhabitants of Jupiter, like Arctic islanders and



236 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XVr.

Russian princes, with very comfortable quarters in
huts of snow and houses of crystal, warmed perchance
by subterranean heat, and lighted with the hydrogen
of its waters^ and its cinders not wholly deprived of
their bitumen ?

But we are not driven to the necessity of believing
that Jupiter and the exterior planets are either tiHiter
or ice. That they are neither composed of the one
material nor the other, is proved by direct experiment.
If their surfaces were either wholly or partly aqueous,
the rays reflected from them when the planets are in
quadrature, would contain, what it does not, a large
portion of polarized light ; and if their crust consisted
of mountains, and precipices, and rocks of ice, some
of whose faces must occasionally reflect the incident
light at nearly the polarizing angle, the polarization
of their light would be distinctly indicated.

Had our author not exhibited the great amount of
his knowledge, we should have charged him with
ignorance of the various forms and conditions of
matter in which the same elements may be combined,
and form bodies of very difierent densities, but we
believe that he knows these as well as we do, and,
in our position, would use them more skilfully. It
is difficult to understand why Jupiter should be
made of water. His density is 1'359, (that of the
Earth being 5*66, and that of water being 1*000,)
greater even than that of certain specimens of coal^
far greater than amianthtis, and pumice stone, which



CHAP. XVI. OBJECTIONS FROM THE PLANETS. 237

are lighter than water. Silex or Jlint, too, occurs
with such various densities that there are conditions
of it less dense than Jupiter. In the state of
tabadieer it is very much lighter than water. In
the state of sUiceoua sinter its density is only 1"8.
In the state of opo^ its density is 1*9, and in certain
varieties of quartz it is so high as 2*88. There are
pUchstoneSj too, varying from 1*9 of specific gravity
to 2*70; and there are metals, too, like spongy platina,
of small specific gravity, so that the hardest mineral,
and the most compact metal, may exist in Jupiter^
and yet his density not exceed 1*359. But why
should the minerals in Jupiter be of the same nature
as those on the Earth ? May not the elementary
atoms of matter be there combined according to dif-
ferent laws, and form spara^ and geffM^ and TnetalSy en-
tirely difierent from ours ? Admitting, however, for
a moment, the supposition, otherwise inadmissible,
that there is a terrestrial type of inorganic bodies
which is to be the exemplar for all the planets, we
have only to suppose these planets to be hollow, or to
contain large cavities, in order to reconcile their aver-
age densities with the densities of terrestrial bodiea

From the watery constitution of Jupiter, the
Essayist passes to the force of gravity on his surface,
as an argument against the existence of inhabitants.
We have already, in a previous chapter, computed
the force of gravity on Jupiter, and shewn that it is
only two and a-half times that on our own gkh^so



238 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XVI.

that a man weighing ten stone here would weigh only
twenty-five on Jupiter, a weight which, with propor-
tionally strong bones and muscles, he could bear, and
at the same time work as actively as we do. We have
all seen corpulent men, weighing twenty-five stone,
such as Daniel Lambert, a man doubtless incapable of
the same active exertions as other men ; but this arises
from his weight not being the result of a due propor-
tion of bone, muscle, and fat, but a mere accumula-
tion of the latter. Let us now see how the Essayist
deals with this question. Admitting, as he does, that
the force of gravity is the same which we have
adopted, he remarks, that a ^^ man transferred to the
surface of Jupiter would feel a stave carried in his
hands, and would feel his own limbs also, become
two and a^half times as heavy as they were before.
Under such circumstances animals of large dimen-
sions would be oppressed with their own weight . . .
An elephant could not trot with two or three ele-
phants placed upon his back. A lion or tiger could
not spring with twice or thrice his own weight hung
about his neck." We request the reader's attention
to this disingenuous statement calculated so expressly
to deceive him. Were an elephant sent to Jupiter,
two and a-half elephants would certainly not be
placed upon his back. His head, his trunk, his tail,
his limbs, and his entrails would all be two and ar-half
times heavier ; but this additional weight would not
act as if it were placed upon his back. His four



CHAP. XVI. OBJECTIONS FROM THE PLANETS. 239

limbs would doubtless bear it, but it would not
hinder him froin trotting, a motion, by the way,
which might be dispensed with in an animal which
cotdd perform much useiiil work by doing it more
slowly. The lion and the tiger would certainly not
spring very nimbly with such a millstone as twice or
thrice their weight hung ahout their neck, but when
they go to Jupiter, they will not be exposed to such a
humiliation. The weight will be difiPused over every
part of their frame, and we are sure that the author
would not place himself within the range of their
spring on the faith of his own hypothesis.

It is interesting to mark with what different feel-
ings Sir John Herschel views the various intensities
of light and of gravity upon the different planets of
our system. After enumerating the proportions of
these different powers, he exclaims, — "Now, under
the various combinations of elements so impoiiant to
life as these, what immense diversity must we not
admit in the conditions of that great problem, the
maintenance of animal and intellectual existence and
happiness, which seems, so far as we can judge, by
what we see around us in our own planet, and by
the way in which every corner of it is crowded with
living beings, to form an unceasing and worthy
object for the exercise of the Benevolence and Wis-
dom which preside over all."^

The arguments against Saturn being inhabited,

1 Outlines of Astronomy, § 508.



240 MORS WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XVI.

our author considers to be much stronger than in
the case of Jupiter. He tells us that '^ the outer part
of the globe of Saturn is proved to be vapour by
his streaks and belts/' and that ^^tue must either
suppose that he has no inhabitants, or that (key are
aqueom gelatinous creatures, too sluggish almost to
he deemed alive, floating in their ice-cold water, and
shrouded for ever by their humid skies ! " He " can-
not tell us/' he says, " whether they have eyes or no,
but prohahly if they had, they would never see the
sun; and therefore," he continues, "we need not
commiserate their lot in not seeing the host of
Satumian satellites, and the ring which to an intel-
ligent Saturnian spectator would be so splendid a
celestial object. The ring is a glorious object for
man's view and his contemplation, and therefore is
not altogether without its use. Still less need we
(as some^ appear to do) regard as a serious misfor-
tune to the inhabitants of certain regions of the
planet, a solar eclipse of fifteen years' duration, to
which they are liable by the interposition of the ring
between them and the sun." This specimen of our
author's dialectics, in which a large dose of banter
and ridicule is seasoned with a little condiment of
science, forms a painful contrast with the following
noble passage, in which Sir John Herschel discusses
the very same subject " The rings of Saturn most



1 The author here refers to Sir John Herschel, whose authority he qaotee for
the Solar eclipse of fifteen years. — OuiUmet, &c, S ^22.



CHAP. XVI. OBJECTIONS FBOM THE PLANETS. 241

present a mf^nifioent spectacle from those r^ons of
the planets which lie above their ^ilightened sides,
as vast arches spanning the sky from horizon to
horizon, and holding an almost invariable situation
among the stars. On the other hand, in the r^ons
beneath the dark side, a solar eclipse of fifteen years
in duration, under their shadow, must afford (to our
ideas) an inhospitable asylum to animated beings, ill
compensated by the faint light of the satellites. But
we shall do umyng to judge of the fitness or unfitness
of their condition from what we see around us, when
perhaps the very combinations which only convey
images of horror to our minds, may be, in reality^
theatres of the most striking/ and ghriotis displays of
benejicent contrivance"

The remarkable phenomenon, however, of 9^ fifteen
years' eclipse of the Sun to the regions of Saturn,
placed under the shadow of the dark side of the ring,
does not exist, and is therefore not a serious misfor-
tune to the inhabitants of those regions. Dr. Lard-
ner, in an elaborate memoir, '^ On the Appearance ot
Saturn's Rings to the Inhabitants of the Planets,"^
has solved the problem of the appearance of the
system of rings in the Satumian firmament, and
described their effect in eclipsing occasionally and
temporarily the sun, the eight moons, and other
celestial objects.

"It is there demonstrated/' he says, '*that the

1 Transactioti* of (kf^M/ltaitlk^Mmetif, 1853, toL xxii.



242 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XVi.

infinite skill of the great Architect of the universe
has not permitted that this stupendous annular
appendage, the uses of which still remain undis-
covered, should be the cause of such darkness and
desolation to the inhabitants of the planet, and such
an aggravation of the rigours of their fifteen years'

winter, as it has been inferred to be It

is shewn, on the contrary, that by the apparent
motion of the heavens, produced by the diurnal
rotation of Saturn, the celestial objects, including, of
course, the sun and the eight moons, are not carried
parallel to the edges of the rings, as has been hitherto
supposed ; that they are moved so as to pass alter-
nately from side to side of each of these edges ; that,
in general, such objects as pass under the rings are
only occulted by them for short intervals, before and
after their meridional culmination ; that though
under some rare and exceptional circumstances and
conditions, certain objects, the sun being among the
number, are occulted from rising to setting, the con-
tinuance of such phenomena is not such as has been
supposed, and the places of its occurrence are far
more limited. In short, it has no such character as
would deprive the planet of any essential condition
of hahitahilityj*

By arguments «of the same kind, as in the case
of Jupiter and Saturn, but greatly increased in
strength," as he alleges, our Essayist banishes inha-
bitants from Neptune and Uranus^ and he sneeringly



CHAP. XVL OBJBCnOKS FROM THE PLAXETS. 24^

^^ commends the sappoation of the probable vateiy
nature and low vitalitY of their inhabitants to the
consideration of those who contend for inhabitants
in those remote regions of the Solar system."

In returning towards the sun, our author pays his
passing respects to Mars, which he thinks is more
likely to have inhabitants than any other planet.
This probability, however, disappears, and he con-
cedes to this planet the possibility of having " crea-
tures of the nature of corals and molluscs, saurians
and iguanodons."

The thirty asteroids between Mars and Jupiter
afford our author a new and inviting field for specu-
lation. He considers them as mere dots, whose form
is not even known to be spherical. Setting aside
the theory that they are the fragments of an exploded
planet, he thinks " they may be the results of some
imperfectly effected concentration of the elements of
our system, (of fire-mist or star-dust,) which if it had
gone on more completely and regularly, might have
produced another planet between Mars and Jupiter.
Perhaps they are only the larger masses among a great
number of smaller ones, resulting from such a pro-
cess : and it is very conceivable that the meteoric
stones, which have from time to time fallen upon the
Earth's surface, are other results of the like process ;
— bits of planets which have failed in the making^
(md lost fh$i^^gpy till arrested by the resistance of

■ere!"


244 MORE WORLDS THAN ONK. CHAP. XVI.

In order to explain how there is such " an immense
number of small bodies" in the Solar system, he be-
gins by enumerating them in the following manner,
— " First, Mars, who is only about one-eighth of the
earth in mass : the thirty small planetoids between
Mars and Jupiter, the five satellites of Jupiter, the
eight satellites of Saturn, the six satellites of Uranus,
and the one satellite of Neptune." Having thus
found fifty small bodies, he states it to be very
remarkable that " all this array begins to be found
outside of the Ea/rth's orbit" and he immediately
provides a theory of their formation, having appa-
rently forgotten that nineteen of them are formed,
according to the nebular theorists, as satellites round
their primaries in the same manner, and for the same
purpose, as the Moon was formed from the Earth's
atmosphere. " That none but masses of this size,*
says he, " are found outside of Mars, appears to in-
dicate, that the planet-making powers which were
eflScacious to this distance from the Sun, and which
produced the great globe of the Earth, were, beyond
this point, feebler, so that they covM only give birth
to smaller rtiasses, to planetoids, to satellites, and to
meteoric stones. Perhaps we may describe this want
of energy in the planet-making power, by saying, that
at so great a distance from the central fire there was
not heat enough to melt together these smaller frag-
ments into a larger globe ; or rather, when they
existed in a nebular, perhaps in a gaseous state, that



CHAP. XVI. OBJECTIONS FKOM THE PLANETS. 245

there was not heat enough to keep them in that state
till the attraction of the parts of all of them had
drawn them into one mass^ which might afterwards
solidify into a single globe." In this singular pas-
sage it is declared, that the power of making planets
transposed by the Creator to material laws existing
on the Sun's atmosphere of fire-mist, is not sufficient
for its purpose. The power has failed, and the work,
consequently, has been bungled The central fire
was not hot enough, and the article was underdone.
In explanation of this failure, our author tells us in
a note, that it is ^^ in our own day a great achieve-
ment of man to direct the fiery influences which he
can command, so as to cast a colossal statue in a
single piece, instead of casting it in several portions •"
that is, man has achieved this difficult task, but God,
or His agency, has failed in it, that is, ^^ in melting
into a larger globe" the fifty small fragments of satel-
lites and asteroids, and the thousand and one meteoric
stones which, owing to the want of a good fire, are
showered down on the earth occasionally and perio-
dically for no other purpose than to kill cattle and
puzzle philosophers. In this explanation, ^q fifty
small bodies and the thousand and one meteoric
stones, are considered as solid fragments^ whereas we
are told in the preceding page that all the nineteen
satellites are pieces of vapour neatly wound into
halls!

As th^ Essayist is not only a believer, but an im-



246 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XVT.

prover of the nebular hypothesis, his expIaDation of
the fifty firagraents ought to hare had, upon his own
principles, a more scientific form. After the Earth,
with its moon, was thrown off from the Sun's atmos-
phere in a ring or belt, and subsequently solidified,
the central fire had not sufficient heat to make a
larger planet than Hars. At the next planetary
station the fire was still more defective, and could
not produce a planet at alL Now, we ask how it
happened that at the next station, when the heat
must have been enormously diminished, it had power
to produce so gigantic a planet as Jupiter ? And we
ask again how Jupiter himself, whose heat must have
been excessive, was not able to melt and consolidate
into one, or to retain as a part of himself, his four sa-
tellites. It is needless to extend the same questions to
Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, where the central heat
was so very evanescent, as our author makes it, and
which are all huge globes of matter compared with
the inferior planets.

The two interior planets, Ventis and Mercury^ are
depopulated in a single page. The light and heat of
Venus is admitted to be only " double those which
come to the Earth." She may have " a surface like
the Moon," or " may have cooled more slowly and
quietly, like glass which has been annealed in the
fire." He finds it " hard to say what kinds of ani-
mals he could place in her, except perhaps the mi-
croscopic creatures with siliceous coverings, which, as



CHAP. XVI. OBJECnOKS FROM THE PLANETS. 247

modem explorers assert, are almost indestructible by
heat." — " Of Mercury," he says, " we know still less,
and he has not, so far as we can tell, any of the con-
ditions which make animal existence conceivable/'

Seasonless, berbless, treeless, moooless, lifeless.
A lump of Death — a chaos of hard clay !

Opinions of a very different nature from these, we
have already had occasion to state in a preceding
chapter, and we must leave it to the judgment of the
reader to decide upon their relative probabilities.

In order to combine under one general principle
the views which he has taken of the condition of the
individual planets, the Essayist adopts the nebular
hypothesis, which we have already explained, and
upon it he erects a scheme or a theory of the Solar
system, which he considers as having a sort oi religious
dignity, though he fears that, at first, it may appear
to many, rash, fanciful, and almost irreverent In
this scheme, the^re and water of the nebular mass
have been separated during their ^^ planst-maJcing
powers" " the water and the vapour which belong to
the system being driven off into the outer regions of
its vast circuit, while the solid masses, .... such as
result from the fusion of the most solid materials, lie
nearer the Sun, and are found principally within the
orbit of Jupiter." In support of these theories he
adduces the zodiacal light, itself a creature of theory,
as an appendage to tht|A||k and as the remains of



i to tht|flMk and as the



248 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XVI.

the Sun's atmosphere extending beyond the orbits of
Mercury and Venus — ^^ planets which are, therefore,
within a nebular region, which may easily be coti-
ceived to he uninhabitable. And where this nebular
region, marked by the zodiacal light, terminates, the
ivorld of life begins, namely, at the Earth ! The
orbit of the Earth is the temperate zone of the Solar
system, and in that zone is the play of Hot and Cold,
of Moist and Dry possible."

In concluding this novel and startling theory of
the Solar system, the Essayist tells us that "the
Earth is placed in that region of the system in which
the planet-forming powers are the most vigorous
and potent, and that the Earth is reaUy the largest
planetary body in the Solar system, — its domestic
hearth, and the only world in the universe;" or,
which is the same thing, that there are no real planets
in the system but the Earth.

Thus man exclaims, " See All things for my use !"
** See man for mine !" replies a pampered goose :
And just as short of reason he must fall,
Who thinks All made for One, not One for All. — Pope.

We are unwilling to charge the author of such
theories with cherishing opinions hostile to religion.
We believe that he is ignorant of their tendency, and
that he has forgotten the truths of inspiration, and
even those of natural religion, amid the excitement
of discussions, from which he is to obtain the high
reputation of ^'having accounted for, and reduced



CHAP. XVI. OBJECTIONS FROM THE PLANETS. 249

into consistency and connexion, a very extraordinary
number of points hitherto unexplained/' But, how-
ever sincere may be his piety, which we do not ques-
tion, we tell him, with confidence, that his theories
are replete with danger, and that young minds will
draw from them opinions the very reverse of his own.
When we are told that a planet has been bungled in
its formation, that meteoric stones are bits of planets
which have failed in the making,^ and lost their way,
can we believe that the all-wise Creator was present
at the process, ^^ making the earth by His power,
establishing the world by his wisdom, and stretching
out the heaven by his understanding ?"^ Can we
believe that He who formed the worlds has made only
onCy and that, in place of resting on the seventh day,
He rested during the whole week of creation, and still
rests, having transferred His almighty power to cer-
tain laws of matter and motion, by which the Sun
and all his planets were manufactured from nebulous
matter ? Sir Isaac Newton considered the nebular
hypothesis, though in his time not known by that
name, as not only absurd, but verging on atheism.
In reference to the creation of a central and immov-
able sun, he observes, that to suppose a " central
particle so accurately placed in the middle (of nebu-



^ " We know of no blemishes or blanden in creation." gays Profeasw Sedgwick,
"and were they there, what would it matter to our conception of than, whether
(h^ sprang from dead material laws ordained by an all-powerful and aU-seeing
God, or from an immediate defect in creative power ?"

s Jerwniah li. 15.



250 MORE WORLDS THAI? ONE. CHAP. XVL

lous matter in a finite space) as to be always equally
attracted on all sides, and thereby continue without
motion, seems to me fully as hard as to make the
sharpest needle stand upright on its point upon a
looking-glass. And much harder it is to suppose
that all the particles in an infinite space should be
so accurately poised, one upon another, as to stand
still in a perfect equilibrium. For I reckon this as
hard as to make not one needle only, but an infinite
number of them, stand accurately poised upon their
points/'^ And in another place he urges another
objection to the hypothesis : " But how the matter
(the nebular matter) should divide itself into two
sorts, and that part of it which is fit to compose a
shining body should fall down into one mass, and
make a sun, and the rest, which is fit to compose an
opaque body, should coalesce, not into one great body,
like the shining matter, but into many little ones,
I do not think explicable by mere natural causes, but
am forced to ascribe it to the counsel and contrivance
of a voluntary agent."^ And with respect to the
diurnal rotation of the planets, he distinctly declares
that " they could not be derived from gravity, but
required a divine arm to impress them."^

A more modern, and still living author, who, we
trust, will long continue an honour to science and to
his country, has characterized speculations like these,
as "dashing from hypothesis to hypothesis, and

I Letters to BetvOey, Lett. iv. » jd. Lett L > Id. Lett iv.



CHAP. XVI. OBJECTIONS FROM THE PLANETS. 251

building a scheme of nature against nature, and
against the sober interpretation of those who have
best studied their works." We will not say of the
language of the Essayist, when he speaks of Nature,
or the God of Nature, having failed in producing a
planet where He intended it to be, and of having
recorded that failure by broken planets and showers
of meteoric stones ;^ — we will not say what Pro-
fessor Sedgwick has said of speculations about the
nebular hypothesis not more absurd, that they are
" the raving madness of hypothetical extravagance ;"
but we sincerely, and without desiring to give offence,
adopt the rest of his declaration, " that it is at open
war with all the calm lessons of inductive truth, and,
in any interpretation we can give it, bears upon its
front the stamp of folly and irreverence towards the
Grod of Nature." Philosophers and divines, with
humbler minds and loftier aspirations, have be-
queathed to us nobler lessons than these which we
have been controverting.

After contemplating the wonderful systems of
Jupiter and Saturn, with their satellites, Huygens
bursts into the following noble expressions of his
views : — " Who, upon studying these systems, and
comparing them together, can fail to be astonished

1 "The planets and the stars," says the E-ssayist, "are the lumps which haye
flown from the Potter's wheel of the Great-worker, the shred coils of which, in His
working, sprung from His mighty lathe; — the sparks which darted from his awfal
snTil, when the Solar system lay incandescent thereon ; — ^the curls of rapour
which rose from the great caldron of creation, when its elements were se-
parated "!!— P. 243.



252 MOKE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XVI.

at the magnitude and noble preparations of these
two planets, in comparison with the little and insig-
nificant Earth of ours ? or whose mind can now
cherish the belief, that in this one planet, among
those circling round the Sun, all beauty was to be
found, all animals, and all beings that could admire
the heavens ; — that the great Creator of all had in-
deed placed nothing upon them, and had created such
vast solid structures, that we dwarfs and mortals
might look at their light, and, perhaps, study their
nature."^

The celebrated Emanuel Swedenborg, a name
not sufficiently respected, has given utterance to the
same sentiments, in language far from visionary.
" Any man of an enlarged understanding," he says,
"may conclude, from various considerations, that
there is a plurality of Earths, and that they are in-
habited by human creatures. It is a suggestion of
reason that so great masses of matter as the planets
are, some of which far exceed this Earth in magni-
tude, are not empty balls, created only to revolve
round the Sun, and to transmit their scanty measure
of light for the benefit of this Earth ; but that their
use must needs be more enlarged and eminent. He
who believes, as every one ought to believe, that the
Deity created the universe for no other end, but that
the human race, and thereby the heavens might have
existence, (for the human race is the seminary of

1 Coimotheoros, Lib. ii. p. 699.



;

CHAP. XVI. OBJECTIONS FROM THE PLANETS. 253

heaven,) must needs believe also, that wheresoever
there is an earth, there are human inhabitants."
After stating the astronomical facts upon which he
has been led to these views, and drawing from them
the conclusion that there is a Plurality of systems,
^ith Suns and Planets of their own, he assigns it as
the object of so immense a creation, that " the visible
universe, or the heaven, resplendent with stars so
innumerable, which are so many suns, is only a means
for the existence of Earths, and of men upon them,
of whom may be formed a heavenly kingdom."^

In language less animated with religious views,
but not less firm and unhesitating, does the illus-
trious Laplace, the Newton of France, express his
belief in a Plurality of Worlds : " Not only," says
he, " does the Sun act, by his attraction, upon all these
globes, by forcing them to move round himself, but
he sheds upon them his light and his heat. This
beneficent action gives life to the plants and animals
that cover the Earth, and analogy leads us to believe
that it produces the same efiects upon the planets ;
for it is not natural to think, that the matter, whose
peculiarity we see developed in so many ways, is
barren upon such a large planet as Jupiter, which,
like our own globe, has its days, its nights, and its
years, and upon which observations indicate changes
that suppose very active forces. Man, made for the
temperature which he enjoys upon the Earth, could

1 " Coucenxing (he Earths in our Solar Stjstcm wl.ich are calkd Planets.'*



254 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XVL

not, according to all appearance, live upon the other
planets : but ought we not to have there an infi-
nity of organisations suited to the different tempera-
tures of the globes of the universe ? If the diflference
merely of elements and of climates produces such a
variety in terrestrial productions, how much greater
a difference ought there to be in those of the different
planets and their satellites ! The most active ima^-
nations cannot form any idea of it ; but their exist-
ence is very probable/'^

Such are the sentiments of philosophers of all
sects, and of divines of all creeds, and we venture to
say, that there is no opinion out of the region of
pure demonstration, more universally cherished than
the doctrine of a Phirality of Worlds. The Astrono-
mer who is guided only by analogies — the Philoso-
pher who has studied the relation between the moral
and the material universe — the Naturalist who looks
to the other worlds for creations indicated, but not
developed, in his own, — the Christian who confides



1 Exposition du Systeme du Monde, Lir. S^, chap. vi. Laplace expresses also
the opinion, that there is, beyond our system, innumerable suns, which may be
the centres of as many planetary systems; and that there exist in the celestial
spheres as many dark bodies as there are stars. Without multiplying extracts
from the writings of philosophers and divines, it m-iy be sufficient to state, that
Dr. Derham, in his AMtrotheology, 3d edit., 1717, pp. xlvii, liil, liv, has stated hiB
reasons for believing that the fixed stars and planets " are worlds^ or places of
habitation, which is concluded from their being habitable, and well provided for
habitation." Dr. Paley also, though he does not discuss the subject, evinces his
opinion when he states, " that even ignorance of the tentUive natures by toAiefc
other planets are inhabited, necessarily keeps from us the knowledge of num-
berless utilities, relations, and subserviences, which we perceive upon our own
globe.'— Natural Theotogy, edited by Lord Brougham and Sir Charles Bell, Lon-
don, 1836, p. 16.



CHAP. XVI. OBJECTIONS FROM THE PLANETS. 255

only in what is revealed, and the Poet who transfers
to the stars the affections and memories of the past,
have all accepted the grand truth, and rejoiced in
the hopes which it inspires.

The depth of human reason must become
As deep as is the holy human heart,
Ere aught in written phrases can impart
The might and meaning of this ecstasy,
To those low souls who hold the mystery
Of the unseen universo for Dark and Dumb.

MONCKTON MlLNES.



CHAPTER XVII.

THE FUTURE OF THE UNIVERSE.

Had the doctrine of a Plurality of Worlds been
one of those subjects which merely gratify our curio-
sity, we should not have occupied the reader's time,
or spent our own, in illustrating and defending it.
While the scientific truths on which it depends form
one of the most interesting branches of natural theo-
logy, and yield the most striking proofs of wisdom
and design, they are intimately associated with the
future destiny of Man.

There are three departments of Natural Theology
which demand our most earnest attention, — the
living world around us, the world of the past, and
the worlds of the future. In the wonderful mechan-
isms of animal and vegetable life with which we are
so familiar, and in the inorganic structures amid
which we dwell, we recognise imperfectly the innu-
merable proofs of matchless skill and benevolent
adaptations with which they abound. Our daily
familiarity with the ordinary phenomena of life, de-
grades them in our estimation. There is something
which we deem unclean even in the healthy condition



OHAP. XVn. THE FUTUBE OF THE UKIVEBSE. 257

of animal bodies, and their functions and their pro-
ducts, which deters all but professional men from
their study, and robs them of their inherent claims
as proofs of design and as incentives to piety. Even
the chemistry of inspiration by which we live, and
the science of the Eye and the Ear, those matchless
proofs of design, on which all our intercourse With
nature and with society depends, are scarcely known
to the best educated of the people.

It is otherwise, however, with that department of
natural science which treats of the formations and
fossil remains of an ancient world. With the struc-
ture and functions of animals which inhabited the
earth previous to its occupation by man, we have no
familiarity. We see them only in their graves of
stone, and beneath their monuments of marble-
creations which cannot again die, and with which
everything mortal has ceased to be associated. Time,
in its most hoaiy aspect, has invested them with a
hallowed and a mystic character. The green waves
have washed them in their coral beds, and after ages
of ablution in a tempestuous sea, the ordeal of a cen-
tral fire has completed their purification. The bones,
and the integimients, and the meanest products of
animal Ufe, have thus become sainted relics which
the most sensitive may handle, and the most delicate
may prize.

But there is another department of natural science
which in its interests is deeper and more varied still.

R



258 MOBE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XVfl.

Carrying us back to the birth of matter, before life
was breathed among its atoms, and before light rushed
through the darkness of space, Astronomy unites, in
a remarkable degree, the interests of the past, the
present, and the Aiture. From the time when the
Earth was without form and void to the present
hour. Astronomy has been the study of the shepherd
and the sage, and in the bosom of sidereal space the
genius of man has explored the most gigantic works
of the Almighty, and studied the most mysterious
of His arrangements. But whUe the astronomer
ponders over the wonderful structures of the spheres,
and investigates the laws of their motions, the Chris-
tian contemplates them with a warmer and more
affectionate interest. From their past and present
history his eager eye turns to the future of the side-
real systems, and he looks to them as the hallowed
spots in which his immortal existence is to run.
Scripture has not spoken with an articulate voice of
the future locality of the blest, but Reason has com-
bined the Scattered utterances of Inspiration, and
with a voice, almost oracular, has declared that He
who made the worlds, will in the worlds which he
has made, place the beings of His choice. In the
spiritual character of their faith, the ambassadors of
our Saviour have not referred to the materiality of
His future kingdom;^ but Reason compels us to

^ Dr. Campbell aod other commentatori are of opinion that there Is nothing
•Uegorioal in our Bariour's promise to drink new wine with His diadples in His
Father's kingdom. (Matthew uri. 29.)



i



CHAP. XVII. THE FUTURE OF THE UNIYSBSE. 259

believe, that the material body, which is to be raised,
must be subject to material laws, and reside in a
material home — in a system of many planets — a
house of many mansions, though not made with
many hands.

In what regions of space these mansions are built —
on what sphere the mouldering dust is to be gathered
and revived, and by what process the immortal being
is to reach its destination, reason does not enable us
to determine ; but it is impossible for intellectual man,
with the light of revelation as his guide, to doubt for
a moment that on the celestial spheres his future is
to be spent — spent, doubtless, in lofty inquiries — in
social intercourse — ^in the renewal of domestic ties, —
and in the service of his almighty Benefactor. With
such a vista before us, so wide in its expanse, and so
remote in its termination, what scenes of beauty —
what forms of the sublime — what enjoyments, phy-
sical and intellectual, may we not anticipate, —
wisdom to the sage — ^rest to the pilgrim — ^and glad-
ness to the broken in heart !

'< How welcome those untrodden spheres !
How sweet this very hour to die !
To soar from earth, and find all fears
Lost in thy light — ^Eternity.

*< Oh ! in that future let us think
To hold each heart the heart that shares ;
With them the immortal waters drink,
And soul in soul grow deathless theirs.'' — Btbon.

If these expectations be just, how are we to im-



260 MORE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XVU

plant them in the popular mind as incentives to piety
and principles of action ? The ftiture of the Chris-
tian is not defined in his creed. Enwrapt in apoca-
lyptic mysteries, it evades his grasp, and presents no
salient points upon which either reason or imagine^
tion can rest. He looks beyond the grave as into a
nebular region, where a few stars are with difficulty
descried ; but he sees no glorious suns, and no gigan-
tic planets upon which he is to dwell. It is astro-
nomy alone, when its simple truths are impressed
upon the mind, that opens to the Christian's eye the
mysterious expanse of the universe ; that fills it with
objects which arrest his deepest attention ; and ere*
ates an intelligible paradise in the worlds to come.

To the vulgar eye that sees nothing in the stars
but their light, and to the dark mind that has no
faith in the verdicts of science, the star-clad firmament
presents neither associations in the past nor glories
in the future. To them the stars are truly but
specks or dots of light ^ not more interesting than the
firefly in a summer evening, or the ephemeral sparks
that fly from the anvil. Their feeble and glimmering
ray, dimmed by each rising exhalation, and paling
even before the zephyr's breath, has failed to airest
the poet's eye, or gild the painter's canvass. It has
never lighted the lover to his mistress, nor the pil-
grim to his shrine, nor the hero to his deed of glory.
But no sooner does Science with her magic wand
marshal the celestial host — planet — satellite and



CHAP. XVII. THE FUTUBE OF THE UNIVERSE. 261

star — into the systems of worlds which roU in the
bosom of space, than Faith '^ takes up the wondrous
tale/' and associates with these bright abodes the
future fortunes of immortal and regenerated man.
It places there the loved and the lost — ^it follows
them into the celestial bowers — ^it joins them in the
anthem to '^mortal minstrelsy unknown" — it lis-
tens to their warning and their welcoming voice, and
round the joyous hearth which it consecrates in the
house of many mansions, it assembles hearts once
severed and broken, and longs to wander beside the
'^rivers of the waters of life" with the prophets that
expounded it — the sages that enlightened it — ^the
martyrs that suffered for it, and the noble victims
that bled in its cause. Imagination takes up the
theme where Faith and Beason leaves it The cha-
riots of flame and the horses of fire that bore Elijah
from his star of earth, and surrounded Elisha in the
mountains of Syria, and the wheels of amber and of
fire which were exhibited to the captive prophet on
the banks of the Ghebar, become, in the poet's eye,
the vehicle from planet to planet, and from star to
star, in which the heavenly host is to survey the
wonders and glories of the Universe.

If the knowledge of the material world — of its
facts and of its laws, is thus instructive, and thus in-
spiring, we must strive to elevate the popular mind
by the truths of natural science, teaching them in
every school, and recommending, if not illustrating



262 MOnE WORLDS THAN ONE. CHAP. XVIL

them, from every pulpit. We must instruct our
youth, and even age itself, in the geology and physi-
cal geography of the Earth, that they may learn the
structure and use of its brother planets ; and we must
fix in their memories, and associate with their affec-
tions, the great truths in the planetary and sidereal
universe on which the doctrine of more worlds than
one must necessarily rest. Thus familiar with the
more magnificent works of creation, — thus seeing
them through the heart, as well as through the eye,
the young will look to the future with a keener
glance, and with brighter hopes ; — the weary and the
heavy laden,

lifting their tearful eye unto the stars,

will rejoice in the vision of their place of rest ; — the
philosopher will scan with a new sense the lofty
spheres in which he is to study ; — and the Christian
will recognise, in the worlds of stars, the gorgeous
Temples in which he is to ofier his sacrifice of praise.



ssinbuagh: t. cohstablb, pkintbb to bbb majesty.



Lftlely pabUshed. OloOi, 4a. 6d.

THE MARTYRS OF SCIENCE;

OR, THE LIVES OF GAIJLEO, TYCHO BRAHE, AND KEPLER.

BT Snt DATID BREWSTER, S.H., DC.L., F.R.S.

London : John Murray, Albemablb Strer.



. WSiaxh bj piss ^nfaster.

WOBX; OB, FLENTT TO DO AND HOW TO DO IT.

BY MARGARET MARIA BREWSTER.

FIRST SETSLlES.-^8ixteenth Thousand, Cloth, gilt edges, price 2&—



Waktabi Wour.
EvnTDAT Woax.

800IA& WOEK.

KOM Work.

8a«U WOMBH'B WOBX.



Waitixo Work.
Pbbpabato&t Work.
Dbsdltort Work.
Praibiho Work.
Sfbcial Work.



Pratino Work.
HoMBLT Hints about

Work.
Rbward op Work.
FuTURR Work.



SECOND SERIES.— Ten^A Thousand. Cloth, gilt edges, price 2s.—



IdflfU Ohildbbn's Work.
Tonrft Ladibs' Work.
WOBX or Tbachbrs ako
Tavobt.



HousiHOLD Work.
Work op Ehplotbrs

AHD Ehfloybd.
OouHTRT Work.



Sabbath Work.
Thought Work.
Proving Work.
Rbst.



To be had complete in One Volume^ price 4«.

" Mte BiewBter is predsely one of the ladies for the time,— not a drowsy dreamer, but
ftdljr ttwake, ttarong in heart, ardent in seal, and intent on the vigorous ose of right means
to promote right ends." — BriUih Banner.

**JMl. of wholesome instruction, clothed in elegant language."— .Eucmjjief/ca^ Christendom.

"Ilie ri^t applicati<m of Christian principle to the ordin&r}' duties of life, it is no easy
mattor accurately and impressively to exhibit The author of this Uttle work has succeeded
admirably here."— 1Fttn«M.

" The tone of the book is eminently Christian, the style unaffected, often rising into
etoquenoe." — Clivrch of England Quarterly Review.

" Modest as is the view Miss Brewster takes of her own labours, it is certain she will gain
the ear and heart of all who become her readers by the holy wisdom and loving-kindneKS of
her truly womanly words ; and we believe that none will lay down her little books without
feeling purified and instructed, nerved and animated." — Nonconformist.



BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
In the press, and speedily will be published,

SUNBEAMS IN THE COTTAGE;

OR, WHAT WOMEN MAY DO.

EDINBURGH : THOMAS CONSTABLE & CO.
LOBTDON: HAMILTON. ADAMS, k CO. DUBLIN: JAMES M'OLASHAN.



so, Albsmablk Stbbbt, London.
Apt% 1864.



MR MURRAY'S

GENERAL LIST OF WORKS.



ABBOTTS (Rbv. J.) Philip Musgraye; or, Memoirs of a Church of

England Missionary in the North American Colonies. Post 8yo. 2$.6d.

ABBLL'S (Mrs.) Recollections of the Emperor Napoleon during
the First Three Yean of his Captivity on the Island of St Helena.
Second Editim. Woodcuts. PostSvo. lOs.dd.

ABEECROMBIE'S (Johh, M.D.) Enquiries concerning the Intel-
lectaal Powers and the Investigation of Truth. FMrUenth Edition,
Feap. 8vo. 6s. 6d.

Philosophy of the Moral Feelings. Ninth

EdUioH. Fcap. 8vo. 42,

Pathological and Practical Researches on the



Diseases of the Stomach, the Intestinal Canal, the Liver, and other
Viscera of the Abdomen. Third Edition. Fcap.Svo. 6$.

ACLAND'S (Rby. Chaelis) Populur Account of the Manners and
Customs of India, Illostrated with Nmnerous Anecdotes. PostSvo. 2$. 6d.

ADDISON'S (Joseph) WORKS. A New Edition, with a New
Life and Notes. By Bev. Whitwbll Elwin. 4 Vols. Svo. In the
Press.

.ZBSCHYLUS. (The Agamemnon and Choephores). A New

Edition of the Text, with Notes, Critical, Explanatory, and Philological,
for the Use of Students. By Bev. W. Peilb, D.D., Head Master of
Bepton School. Second Edition. 2 Vols. Svo. 9«. each.

^SOFS FABLES, for Old and Young. A New Version. By
Bev. Thomas Jambs, MJL. Illustrated with 100 Woodcuts, by John
Tbnnibl. Post Svo. 2«. 6d.

AGRICULTURAL (Thb) Journal. Puhlished (half-yearly) by the

Boyal Agricultural Society of England. Svo. 10«.

AMBERrWITCH (The). The most interesting Trial for Witch-
craft ever known. Edited by Dr. Mbinhold. Translated from the
Qerman by Lady Duff Gordon. Post Svo. 28. 6d.

ARABIAN NIGHTS. A New Translation. By E. W. Lake.

With Explanatory Notes. 600 Woodcuts. Medium Svo. 21».

ARAGO'S (M.) Historical Eloge on James Watt Translated from
the French, with Notes by J. P. Muirhbad. Portrait. Svo. S«. 6d.

ARTHUR'S (Little) History of England. By Lady Calloott.

Seventeenth Edition. Woodcuts. ISmo. is.Qd.

AUNT IDA'S Walks and Talks ; a Stoiy Book for Children. By
eLadt. Woodoats. 16mo. ts,

B



LIST OF WORKS



ADMIRALTY PUBLICATIONS (The) ; Issued by direcUon of
the Lords Commiasionen of the Admiralty: —

1. A MANUAL OF SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRY, for the Use of Offioers in

H.M. Navy and Travellers in General. By Various Hands. Edited
by Sib J. F. Hbbschel, Bart. Sewnd Edition. Post 8to. 10«. Qd,

2. AIBY'S ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATIONS madk at Gbbxkwich.

1836 to 1817. Royal 4to. 60«.each.

8. APPENDIX TO THE ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATIONS.

1836, 18S7, 1812, 8«. each ; and 1817, 14«. Royal Ito.

CONTENTS.

1836.— Bessel's Refraction Tables.

Tables for converting Errors of R JL. and Nl^.D. into Errors
of Longitude and Ecliptic P.D.
1837. — Logarithms of Sines and Couines to every Ten Seconds
of Time.
Table for converting Sidereal into Mean Solar Time.
1812.— Catalogue of 1138 Stars.
1817.— Twelve Years' Catalogue of Stars.

4. MAGNETICAL AND METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVA-
TIONS. 1840 to 1817. Royal Ito. 60«.each.

6. ASTRONOMICAL, MAGNETICAL, AND METEOROLO-
GICAL OBSERVATIONS, 1818, 49, & GO. Royal Ito. 60«. each.

6. REDUCTION Of THE OBSERVATIONS OP PLANETS.

17G0tol8a0. Royal 4to. ^0»,

7. LUNAR OBSERVATIONS. 1750

to 1830. 2 Vols. Royal 4to. 60«.each.

8. BERNOULLI'S SEXCENTENARY TABLE. London, 1779. 4to. 6«.

9. BESSEL'S AUXILIARY TABLES FOR HIS METHOD OF CLEAR-

ING LUNAR DISTANCES. 8vo.

10. FUNDAMENTA ASTRONOMIJB: JUgiomonti. 181& Folio. OOi.

11. BIRD'S METHOD OF CONSTRUCTING MURAL QUADRANTS.

£om2on, 1768. 4to. 2a. Qd.

12. METHOD OF DIVIDING ASTRONOMICAL INSTRU-
MENTS. London, 1767. 4to. 2s. 6d.

13. COOK, KING, AND BAYLY'S ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATIONS.

Loiuion, 1782. 4to. 21«.

14. EDWARDS ON THE COMPOSITION OF METALS FOR REFLECT-

ING TELESCOPES. 8vo. 2«. 6d.

16. EIFFE'S ACCOUNT OF' IMPROVEMENTS IN CHRONOMETERS.
4to. 2a.

16. ENCKE'S BERLINER JAHRBUCH, for 1830. Berlin, 1828. 8vo. 9a,

17. GROOMBRIDGE'S CATALOGUE OF CIRCUMPOLAR STARS.

4to. 10a.

18. HARRISON'S PRINCIPLES OF HIS TIME-KEEPER. Pi^tis.

1767. 4to. 6a.

19. BUTTON'S TABLES OP THE PRODUCTS AND POWERS OF

NUMBERS. 1781. Folio. 7a. Sd.

20. LAX'S TABLES FOR FINDING THE LATITUDE AND LONGI-

TUDE. 1821. 8vo. 10s.

21. LUNAR OBSERVATIONS at GREENWICH. 1788 to 1819. Compared

with the Tables, 1821. 4to. 78. 6d.

22. DISTANCES of the MOON'S CENTRE from the PLANETS.

1822, 3«.; 1823, 4s. 6d. 1824 to 1835. 8vo. is. each.

23. MASKELYNE'S ACCOUNT OF THE GOING OF HARRISON'S
WATCH. 1767. 4to. 28. Qd.



PUBLISHED BY MR. MURRAY.



Admibaltt Publications — eontinued,

84. tf AYER*S THEORIA LUN^ JUXTA 8YSTEHA NEWTOHI-

AMUM. 4to. 28. 6d.
S5. TABULJ5 MOTUUM SOLIS ET LUNJS. 1770. 4to. 6«.

26. ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATIONS MADE AT GOT-

TINGEN, from 1756 to 1761. 1826. Folio. 7#. 6<l.

27. NAUTICAL ALMANACS, firom 1767 to 1866. 8vo. 2». fid. each.

28. SELECTIONS FROM THE ADDITIONS

up to 1812. 8vo. 6s. 1834-64. 8vo. 68.

29. SUPPLEMENTS, 1828 to 1633, 1837 and 1888.

8to. 28. each.
30. TABLE requisite to be used with the NJk..

1766. Svo. 28. ed.

31. Second Edition^ enlarged. 1781. 8vo. 68.

32. Third Edition^ corrected. 1802. 8vo. 5«.

33. POND'S ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATIONS. 1811 to 1835. 4to. 21«.

each.

34. RAMSDEN'S ENGINE for DiviDDro Mathsmatioal Ikbtbumbitts.

4to. 68.

35. ENGINE for DiviDiHa Stbaioht Livbs. 4to. 6t.

86. SABINE'S PENDULUM EXPERIMENTS to Dbtbbmiks thb Fjqubb

OP THS Eabth. 1826. 4to. 409.
37. SHEPHERD'S TABLES for Cobbbcttno Luvab Dibtavobs. 1772.

Royal 4to. 21«.
88. TABLES, GENERAL, of <he MOON'S DISTANCE

ftom the SUN, and 10 STARS. 1787. Folio. 68. (kL

39. TAYLOR'S SEXAGESIMAL TABLE. 1780. 4to. 15«.

40. TABLES OF LOGARITHMS. 4to. 31.

41. TIARK'S ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATIONS for the Lohoitudb

of Madeira. 1822. 4to. 6«.

42. CHRONOMETRICAL OBSERVATIONS for Diffkebwcbs

of LoyoiTUDB between Dovbb, Pobtsmouth, and Falmouth. 1828.
4to. 68.

43. VENUS and JUPITER : ORSKBVATioys of, compared with the Tablbs.

London, 1822. 4to. 28.

44. WALES' AND BAYLY'S ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATIONS.

1777. 4to. 21».
46. WALES' REDUCTION OF ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATIONS

MADB IN THB SOUTHBBN HBMISPHBBB. 1764—1771. 1788. 4tO.

108. ed.

AUSTIN'S (Mbs.) Fragments from German Prose Writen. Trans-
lated, with Biographical Notes. Post. 8va lOw.

Translation of Ranke's Political and Ecclesiastical

History of the Popes of Rome. Third Edition. 2 Vols. 8vo. 24«.

BABBAGE'S (Charles) Economy of Machinery and Manu&cturea.

Iburth Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 68.

Table of the Logarithms of the Natural Numbers

from 1 to 108000. Fourth Edition. Royal 8to. 68.

Ninth Bridgewater Treatise. Second Edition. Syo.



de.Qd.

Reflections on the Decline of Science in England,



and on some of its Canses. 4to. 16«.

Exposition of 1851 ; or. Views of the Industry, the



Science, and the Government of England. Second Edition. 8vo. 78. 6d.

BANKES* (Right How. G.) STORY OP CORPB CASTLE,

with documents relating to the Time of the Ciyil Wars, &c. Woodcuts.
PostSvo. 10».6d.

BASSOMPIERRE'S Memoirs of his Embassy to the Court of
England in 1626. Translated, with Notes. 8vo. fh.ed.

B 2



LIST OF WORKS



BURN'S (LiOTTT.-CoL.) Naval and Military Teclinical IMctionafT- of
the French Language. French and English— English and French.
Crown 8vo. I5a.

BURNE3' (Sir Alexakdkr) Journey to and Residence in the City
ofCabool. Second EdUUm, Plates. 8to. 18«.

BURNS' (Robbrt) Life. By John Gibson Lockhart. Fifth

Edition, Fcap. 8to. 8a.

BURR'S (G. D.) Instructions in Practical Surveying, Topogra-
phical Plan-drawing, and on sketching ground without Instmmenta.
Second Edition, Woodcuts. FostSTO. Is, (id,

BUXTON'S (Sir Fowell) Memoirs. With Selections from his
Correspondence. By his Son. Fourth Edition. 16mo. 7». 6d.

BYRON'S (LoR]>) Life and Letters. By Thomas Moori. Plates.

'6 Vols. Fcap. 8vo. 18«.

— — — Complete in One Volume.

Portraits. Royal 8to. 12a.

Poetical Works. Plates. 10 Vols. Fcap. Sro. 80*.

Complete in One Volume. Portrait.



Boyal Svo. 12t.

Poetical Works. 8 Vols. 24mo. 28. &d, each.



Childe Harold.
Dramas, 2 Vols.
Tales and Poems.



Sold separately as/oUowa



Miscellanies, 2 Vols.
Beppo and Don Juan,
2 Vols.



Childe Harold's Pilgrimage. With Portrait of Ada, and

80 Vignettes. Grown 8to. 10s. 6d.

(Beauties of Lord Byron's Writings), Prose and Verse.

Selected by a Clergyman. Fcap. Svo. Sa.

BUTTMAN'S LEXILOGUS ; or, a Critical Examination of the
Meaning and Etymology of numerous Greek Words and Passages,
Intended principally for Homer and Heslod. Translated, and edited, with
Explanatory Motes and copious Indexes, by Rev. J. B. Fibhlakx.
Third Ediiion, Svo. 14«.

Catalogue of Irregular Greek Verbs; With all the

Tenses extant— their Formation, Meaning, and Usage, accompanied by
an Index. Translated, with Notes, by Rbv. J. R. Fishlakb. Second
Edition. Svo. 7s. 6d,

CALVIN'S (John) Life. With Extracts from his Correspondenee.
By Thomas H. Dyeb. Portrait. Svo. 16s.

OALLCOTTS (Lady) Little Arthur's History of England. Seven-
teenth Edition. Woodcuts. 18mo. 28. 6d.

CABEME'S FRENCH COOKERY. Translated by W. Hail.

Second Edition. Plates. Svo. 16s.

CABMICHAEL'S (A. N.) Greek Verbs. Their Formations,

Irregularities, and Defects. Second EdUion. Post Svo. 8«. 6d,

CARNARVON'S (Lobd) Portugal, Gallicia, and the Basque
Provinces. From Notes made during a Journey to those Countries.
Third Edition, Post Svo. 6s»



,'^



PUBLISHED BY MR. MURRAY.



CAMPBELL'S (Lobd) Lives of the Lord Chancellora and Keepers

of th« Great Seal of England. From the Earliest Times to the Death of
Lord Eldon in 1838. Third Edition. 7 Vols. Svo. 102«.

The Work may alto he had aa follows.

l»l Series. From the Earliest Times to the Reyolution of 1688. 8 Vols.
8yo. 42«.

3iKf Series. From the Revolution of 1688 to the Death of Lord Thnrloir

in 1806. 2 Vols. 8vo. 20s.
Zrd Series. From the Birth of Lord Loughhorough, in 1733, to the

Death of Lord Eldon, in 1838. 2 Vols. 8to. 80«.

Liyes of the Chief Justices of England. Prom the

Norman Gonqaest to the Death of Lord Mansfield. 2 Vols. 8to. 30«.

Life of Lord Chancellor Bacon. Fcap. Svo. 2*.

(Georoe). Modem India. A Sketch of the System



of Civil Government. With some Account of the Natives and Native
InstitntionB. Second Edition. 8vo. 16«.



' — India as it mat be. An Outline of a proposed

Government and Policy. 8vo. 12«.

(Thos.) Specimens of the British Poets. With Bio-



graphical and Critical Notices, and an Essay on English Poetry. Third
Edition. Portrait. Royal 8vo. 16«.

Short Lives of the British Poets. With an Essay



on English Poetry. Post 8vo. bs.

CASTLEREAGH (The) DESPATCHES, from the commencement
of the official career of the late Viscount Castlereagh to the close of his
life. Edited by the Marquis of Loni>ondebbt. 12 Yols.Svo. 14«.each.

The Work was ptMished as follows : —
Ut Series. The Irish Rebellion. 4 Vols.
^nd Series, Military and Miscellaneous. 4 Vols.
Srd Series. Military and Diplomatic. Leipsig— Paris— Waterloo, Ac.
4 Vols.

CATHCABT'S (MajorGeneral) Commentaries on the War in

Russia and Germany, 1812-13. Plans. 8vo. lis.

CHARMED ROE (The) ; or, The Story of the Little Brother and
Sister. By Otto Spbcxtbb. Plates. 16mo. &s.

CLARENDON (Lord Chancellor) ; Lives of his Friends and
Contemporaries, illustrative of Portraits in his Gallery. By Lady
Thebbba Lewis. Portraits. 3 Vols. 8vo. 42«.

CLARK (Sir James) On the Sanative Influence of Climate, with an
Account of the Best Places for Invalids in the South of Europe, &c Fourth
Edition. Post8vo. I0s.6d.

CLAUSEWITZ'S (General Carl Von) Campaign of 1812, in

Russia. Translated from the German. Map. 8vo. 10«. 9d.

CLIVE'S (Lord) Life. By Rev. G. R. Glbiq, M.A. Post 8vo. 6*.

COLERIDGE'S (Samuel Taylor) Specimens of Table-Talk. Fourth
Edition, Portrait. Fcap. 8vo. 6s.

(Henrt Nelson) Introductions to the Study of

the Greek Classic Poets. Third Edition. Fcap. 8vo. bs.Qd,

COLONIAL LIBRARY. [See Home and Colonial Library.]

COMBER'S (Dean) Friendly Advice to the Roman Catholics
of England. By Bev. Dr. Hook. Fcap.Svo. 8s,



LIST OF WOBKS



COOKEBT (MoDSBir Domsnc). Founded on Prineiples of Eeonoiiij

ftnd Pi-actical Knowledge, and adapted for Private Families. New
and Cheaper EdUUm, Woodcuts. Fcap.Svo. 6«.

CBABBE'S (Rby. Gbokos) life and Letters. ByhisSoir. Fortnii.

Fcap. 8vo. 8«.

and Poetieal Works. Plates. 8 Vols. Fcap. 8to. 24«.

. — Complete in One Yolnme.

Portrait and Yignette. Royal 8to. lOa.Qd,

CUMMING'S (R. Gordon) Five Years of a Hunter's Life in the Far
Interior of South AMca. Third Edition, With Woodcvta. 2 Vols.
Post 8to. 24«.

CUBZON'S (Hov. Bobert) Yisits to the Monasteries of the Leyant.

Fmarih Edition, Woodcuts. PostSvo. 16«.

ARMENIA AND ERZEROUM. A Year on the

FronUers of RUSSIA, TURKEY, and PERSIA. Map and Woodcuts.
Post 8T0., 7«. 6d.



CUNNINGHAM'S (Allah) Life of Sir David Wilkie. With his
JoQznals, and Critical R^narks on Works of Art. Portrait. 8 Vols.
8yo. 42«.

■ Poems and Songs. Now first ooUeeted

and arranged, trith Biographical Notice. 24nio. 2s. 64.

(Capt. J. D.) History of the Sikhs. From



the Origin of the Nation to the Battle of the Sutl^. awmi Edition,
Maps. 8vo. 16«.

(Petbr) London — Past and Present. A Hand-



book to the Antiquities, Curiosities, Churches, Works of Art, Public
Buildings, and Places connected with interesting and historical asso-
ciations. Second Edition, PostSvo. 10«.

Modem London. A complete Gnide for



Yisiton to the Metropolis. Map. 16mo. 6«.

Enyirons of London. Including a circle of 80



miles round St. Paul's. With Hints for Excursions by Rail,— Road,—
and Riyer. Post 8vo. In the Preea,

Westminster Abbey. lis Art, Architecture,



and Associations. Woodcuts. Fcap. 8to. Is,

Works of Oliver Goldsmith. A New Library



Edition, now first printed from the last editions which passed under the
Author's own eye. Vignettes. 4 vols. 8vo. 7s. 6d. each. (Mukray'b
British Classics.)

CHOKER'S (Right Hon. J. W.) Progressive Geography for Children.

Fourth Edition, IBmo. Is.^.

- Stories for Children Selected from the History of



England. Fifteenth Edition, Woodcuts. 16mo. 2s. Bd,

Boswell's Life of Johnson. Including the Tour to the



Hebrides. A New Edition, Portraits. Royal 8vo. 16s,

Lord Hbrvet's Memoirs of the Reign of George the



Second, from his accession to the death of Queen Caroline. Edited
with Notes. Portrait. 2 Vols. 8yo.



History of the Guillotine. Woodcuts. Fcap. 8vo. 1«.



PUBLISHED BY MR. HURRAY.



CROMWELL (OuTu) and John Banyan. Seleot Biogn^iMef.

B7 ROBBBT SOUTHXT. FoBt SvO. 2». 6d.

DARWIN'S (Charlbs) Journal of Researches into the Natural
History and Oeologj of the Countries risited during a Voyage round the
Worid. Post 870. 79. ed,

DATES AND DISTANCES; Showing what mi^ be done in a

Tour of Sixteen Months upon the Continent of Europe. Post 8to. 8«. 6d.

DAYY'S (Sib Humphbt) Consolations in Tiayel; or, Last Days

of a Philosopher. Fifth Edition. Woodcuts. Fcap. Svo. Ba,

Salmonia; or. Days of Fly Fishing. With some Account

of fhe Habits of Fishes belonging to the genus Salmo. Fatrth Edition.
Woodcuts. Fcap. 8to. 6».

DENNIS' (Georos) Cities and Cemeteries of Etmria; or, the
extant Local Bemains of Etruscan Art Plates. 2 Vols. 8to. 42fr.

Summer in Andalusia. New Edition. Post 8vo. In

the Press,

DEYEREUX'S (Hon. Capt., R.N.) Lives and Letters of the Deverenx

Earls of Essex, in the Reigns of Elizabeth, James I., and Charles I.,
1640—1646. Chiefly fi'om ttupublished documebts. Portraita. 2 Vols.
8vo. 80a.

DE YERE'S (Aitbkit) English Misrule and Irish Misdeeds.
Four Letters from Ireland, addressed to an English M.P. Second EditioH.
PostSro. 7t.ed.

DODGSON'S (Riv. C.) Controversy of Faith ; or. Advice to Candi-
dates for Holy Orders. Containing an Analysis and Exposition of the
Aigument by which the Catholic Interpretation of the Baptismal Services
is to be vindicated. 12mo. S«.

DOGKBREAKING ; the Most Expeditious, Certain, aad Easy

Method, whether great excellence or only mediocrity be required. By
L1BUT.-C0L. Hutchinson. Second Edition. Woodcuts. Foap.8vo. 7«. 6<^.

DOMESTIC MODERN COOKERY. Founded on Prineiples of
Economy and Practical Knowledge, and adapted for Private Families.
Ifew aad Cheafor Edition. Woodcuts. Feap. 8vo. 6s.

DOUGLAS'S (Gehisal Sir Howabp) Treatise on Improved
Gunnery : with Descriptions of the New Ouns introduced since the War.
Third EditioHj revifsd. Plates. 8vo.

Treatise on the Principle and Construction of Military

Bridges, and the Passage of Kivers in Military OperatioBS. Third
Edition^ with much new matter. Plates. 8vo. 21«.

DRAKE'S (Sir Frarois) Life, Yoyages^ond Exploits, hy Sea and

Land. By John Babbow. Third Edition. Post 8vo. 2*. 6d,

DRINKWATER'S (Johk) History of the Siege of Gihraltar.
1779-1788. With a Description and Account of that Oarrlaon from the
Earliest Periods. Po8t8vo. ^.6d.

DRUMMOND'S (Herry) Ahatract Principles of Revealed Religion.

PostSvo. 9a. 6d. »

DRYDEN'S (John) Works. A New Edition, based upon Sir

Walter Scott's Edition, entirely revised. 8vo. In Preparation. '

DUDLEY'S (Earl of) Letters to the late Bishop of Llandaflf.
Seeond Edition. Portrait. 8vo. tOs,Qd,



LIST OP WORKS



DUKHAItrS (Adkiui. Bii



Fqhif) NSTikl Life and SerriceB. .

IV. 8.0. Si. Bd,

kQd Letters ef John Culvin. CompS



BASTLAKE (Sir CmntKa) The Schools of Pninting in Ita^f.'*
rmm the Exrl[MI IliM>. Frnm tbF OBrniti of Kl'olik. Edited, with
Hole*. Sto^l Eili'ym. Dlustntsd vitli lOU Sngnvinga fcon Iho Old
UuMin. ;iVoI>. Fo!tS">. 24i.

ContributioM U> the Lilatature of the Fine Arte,

EDWARDS' (W. H.) Toyage op the Biver Amazon, inclnding a,

VMltaFKn. PoitaTO. It.Bd.

EGERTON'S (Hon. Capt. Frascib) Jonni»I of a Winter's Tour in



rd) Two Siege* of Tiennaby the Turks.

IbB GarmKil. PonlSro, 9a. M.

. Piedmont.



'4



Lifa and Character of tho Uiiko of Wellinj

Campaign of 1812 in Rnasia, tram the Qi

ELPHINSTONE'8 (Hob. MmnnaiuiRT) History of Tndia—^

ELWIITS (B«i-. W.) Livee of Eminent Britisli Pools. From

ENGLAND (Hisroar or) From tlie Peace of Dtrecht to the Peace
of Vera.illes, 1713-83, By H.at. Miiios, lil™^ j&MIio., 6 Vols.,

From the First Invsaion by the Romans,

doim to tlioUthyurnrqneen Vlctoiii'aEelgD. Br MRa, MiaEua.
eeiK rtouioHd. Woodcnti. ISno. 6>.



With u> law
ERSKINE'S (C«p

tbe pSlyno^
E3KIMAUX (Thk) and English Voeahulaiy, for the ns

FROM "THE TIMES." Being a SBlad



PUBLISHED BY MIL MURRAY. 11



IBSSEX (Thh Earls ov) Their Lives and Letters. 1540— >1646.
Fonnded apon Docnmeiits chiefly tinpiibliBhed. Bj the Hok. Capt.
DxYBESUX, R.N. Portraits. 3 Vols. Svo. 30«.

IIXETER'S (Bishop of) Letters to the late Charles Butler, on the

Theological parts of his Book of the Roman Catholic Church; irith
Remarks on certain Works of Dr. Milner and Dr. Lingard, and on some
parts of the Evidence of Dr. Doyle. Second Edition. 8to. 16*.

' Sermons. Preached during the Visitation of the Bishop

of Exeter in 1845. Published by Request. 12mo. 6«.

FAIRY RING (The), A Collection of Tales and Stories for Young
Persons. From the German. By J. E. Taylob. Illustrated by Rioha&d
DoTLB. Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo.

I'ALKKER'S (Fred.) Muck Manual for the Use of Farmers. A

Treatise on the Nature and Value of Manures. Second Edition, with a
Glossary of Terms and an Index. Fcap. 8vo. fa.

FAMILY RECEIPT-BOOK. A Collection of a Thousand Valuahle

and Useful Receipts. Fcap. Syo. 6a. 6d,

PANCOURT'S (Col.) History of Yucatan, from its DiscoTery
to the Close of the 17th Century. With Map. Svo. 10«. 6d.

PARINI'S (LuiQi Carlo) History of the Roman State, 1815-50.
Translated from the Italian. By Right Hon. W. E. Glaobtonb.
Vols. 3 & 4. 8yo. 12». each.

PBATHERSTONHAUGH'S (G. W.) Tour through the Slave States
of North America, firom the River Potomac, to Texas and the Frontiers
•f Mexico. Plates. 2 Vols. 8vo. 260.

FELLOWS' (Sir Charles) Travels and Researches in Asia Minor,

more particularly in the Province of Lycia. New Edition. Plates. Post
Svo. 9«.

FERGUSON'S (Robert, M.D.) Essays on the Diseases of Women.
Part I. Puerperal Fever. Post Svo. 9«. 6d.

FERGUSSON'S (Jambs) Palaces of Nineveh and Persepolis
Restored: an Essay on Ancient Assyrian and Persian Architecture.
With 45 Woodcuts. Svo. I63.



Peril of Portsmouth ; or French Fleets and English

Forts. Third Edition. Plan. Svo. 3«.

Handbook of Architecture. Being a



Concise and Popular Account of the Different .Styles prevailing in all
Ages and Countries in the World, With a Description of the most
remarkable Buildings. With 1000 Illustrations. Svo. In t?ie Frees.

FEUERBACH'S Remarkable German Crimes and Trials. Trans-
lated from the German by Lady Duff Oobdok. Svo. 12«.

FISHER'S (Rev. George) Elements of Geometry, for the Use of

Schools. Third Edition. ISmo. Se.

First Principles of Algebra, for the Use of Schools.

Third Edition. ISmo. Se.

FISHLAKE'S (Rev. J. R.) Translation of Buttman's Lexilogus ; A
Critical Examination of the Meaning and Etymology of numerous Greek
Words and Passages, intended principally for Homer and Hesiod. With
Explanatory Notes and Copious Indexes. Third Edition. Svo. lis.

Translation of Buttman's Catalogue of Irregular

Greek Verbs; with all the Tenses extant— their Formation, Meaning,
and Usage. With Explanatory Notes, and accompanied by an Index.
Second Edition. Svo. 7s. 6d.



LIST OF W0RK9



Easii; reprinted frost (he



ItLOWKB OAllDBN (Tns>,

1 '■ Qnirttflj Boyiew." F=»p, (tro. ij,

1: FORD'S (Eicnjiaii) Handbook for Spain, Andaloaia,Ronda, Valencia,

* r»lmliinl»,Oriniiaii, OsUlcU, At™eoii.Nii™m!,4o. S Vola. J\nt8TO.

— Galberingi from Spain. Pnat 8vo. 6».
||fOSSTTH'8{Wii,iu»)HortenBiaB, or the Advocal* : an Hialorical



- History of Napoleon



From tbe


fOBTDNE'S (Koeket) NarratiTo of Two TisHs to China, between
earn I84a-Sa, -wMb foil DcwripUDU of tliD Cultnie of Ihi Tn
, TliinllMlim. WiKidcnts. 2 Vnla. PoalSvo. ISi.
VfRANCE (HisTOBT of). From tbeConqnesb b^ the Oauta to ibe Death
>f Idulii Phlltppe. Bj Mrs. Markiiah. SUM rAniwuiJ. WcK^dgotii.



GALTON'S {Fhinoib) Siploring Expedition in Tropisal South

OBOGBAPHICAL (Tsi) JournaL Publiebed bj the Boyal Oeo-
graphicil BociBlf of LodJmi, Sva.
[ OEEMANY (HiBTORT o;). From tbe Inrasion by Mariua, to the
nttlnu. OatfaspJuoridn, Uabuak. 61* lAuiuund. WrMlmU.

(Edward) Decline and Fall of tbe BomMi Empire.
duUhNntei hr HiLKAjr nnd GuizoT. A Kac BiiluM. PnsBdM
le AiKabiogrsphy of Gibboh. EdLlsd with sajiHaDsl Nol» ttf
Vn. Sinrn. Wllh Portr.U and Maps. 8 Vola. Svo. 7i. 6i eiBh. ■

anil CorreBpondence. Bf Dkak Milhan. Portrait. I

T&IFFARD'S (EDwiBD) Tait to the Ionian IsUodfl. Athena, and
- - -lorea. Pliies. Post Svo. ISa.

- Deeda of Naval Daring : or, Anecdotea of the BriUah
-. Fup.STo. ai.oj.
' OILLT'S {Key. En.) Komannt Version of the Gospel of St. John,
nrlRiiullr lu tuB BTDons tbs old Wuldeniw. Edited from On MSB.,

GISBOBNE'S (Thomas) Kasays on Agricultnre. Post Bto. 6».
GLADSTONE'S (Rioht Hon. W. E.) Prayers arranged from the

- Farini'a History of the Roman Slate. From the Italian. -J

fODLBfa (JoHa EoBKir) Letters from America. 2 Voli. Peat. I

! (OLTTBa) Worts, New Library Edition, i



PUBUSHBD BT Wit. HDKRAT.



13



ilCTS (Ri7, O. &.) CftmpiugDi of the fintlih Ana; at Wosliing-
' SWrjof the Bnltlo af Waterloo. Compiled from Pablio

- NftmilJve of Sir Bobert Sale's Brigada in AfghiniBtan,

- Lifa of Robetl Lord Cliro. Post 8vo. 6i.

- Life uid Letters of Oeueral Sir Thomas Kun



P08t



tOlirS (Sir Ajxx. Dvn) Sket«hea of QenniLD Life, uid Scenei
■ iBWirofLibenitloii. Pmih tiij GBmBn. PmIBto. it.

- (Laet Dan), Amber-Witch : the roost iulereating
for WiubeiancTor known, rnim Uie Genntii. I'ustSrir. 2i.6iL

- French in Algiers. 1. The Soldier of the Foreign



Bemirkftble Ocnjun Crimes mid Trinlti. From the



3llrB [Au.bel), Nestoriuis, or tbe LoBb Tribes ; contaiolns
~>ldBni» of tbtlr IdenUIj, their Uuniien, CualDoiB, Bad CenmiDulea;
ItbSlHilchoaof Tnv«l tn Aadeul Amyrli, Anucuia.uid Mcacputuut;
111 XUmintlona of Soriptara Prophery- r«inj iailinn, Pnip. 8™, Bl.

MTILLE (Thi) LETTEE9 AND DLAEIE3 ; being the Public

'obmaiL EiEXTH wbite Fitat Lnrd of Ibe Treiauiy. Edllud, with
)ul«,by W. J. EmTD. IVslii. Bto. lb. eicb.
£ GEAMMAB FOR SCHOOLS. Abridged from Matthisi.

- Accidence for Scbools. Abridged from Matthin.
By iLfl BiflHOP OF LOHDOH. J^rUi.— - - ■ -"■ " - ' '•

fCES (GxDBai) EMor? of Greece. Prom tbe Earlieet Period



I



'hiiipot



i'eisliitnitnB u Albeoi



tBtween (Iw Fcrsiu


Uedbf Riiv.J.£i

1 tbe Earlieet
c. 4U3-3E9]. Utpt.

It, and tbe Legisla
i fiiBl f eniiui IBH
oaof Greeeeby Xr



Relea at



14 tlST OP WORKS



6UIZ0T (M.), on the CauBea of the Snccess of tbe E&gllBli

Bevoltttion of 1640-166& Svo. 69. ; or Cheap EdUion, 12mo, Is.

Democracy in France. Sixth Edition, Syo. 8*. 6dL



GURWOOD'S (Col.) Be^patches of the Duke of Wellington during
his various Campaigns. Compiled from Official and Authentic Docu-
ments. JKew, enlarge and complete EdUion. 8 vols. Svo. . 21a. each.

Selections from the Wellington Despatches



and General Orders. New Edition. Svo. 18^.

. — Speeches in Parliament of the Duke of

Wellington. 2 Vols. Svo. 428.

GUSTAVUS VASA (History of), King of Sweden. With Extracts

from his Correspondence. Portrait. Svo. '10«. 6d.

HALFOKD*S (Sib Hbnrt) Popular Essays and Orations. Third
Edition, Fcap. Svo. 6«. 6d.

KugsB Metrics. Pcap. 8ro. 8«. 6d.

HALLAM'S (Hbnrt) Constitutional History of England, from the
Accession of Henry the Seventh to the Death of George the Second. SkOk
Edition. 2 Vols. Svo. 2U,

History of Europe during the Middle Ages. Tenth

Edition, Including the Supplemental Kotes. 3 Vols. Svo. 80».

Introduction to the Literary History of Europe, during



the 16th, 17th, and 18th Centuries. Fourth Edition. 8 Vols. Svo. 96a.

Literary Essays and Characters. Selected from the

larger work. Fcap. Svo, 2a.

HAMILTON'S (Waltbr) Pacts to Assist the Memory in Yarions

Sciences. Second Edition, Fcap. Svo. 6«. 6d.

Hindostan, Geographically^ Statistically, and His-



torically. Map. 2 Vols. 4to. 94a. 6d,

(W. J.) Researches in Asia Minor, Pontus, and

Armenia; with some Account of the Antiquities and Geology of thooe
Countries. Flutes. 2 Vols. Svo. 98a,

HAMPDEN'S (Bishop) Essay on the Philosophical Evidenee of
Christianity, or the Credibility obtained to a Scripture BeveUtion
from its Coincidence with the Facts of Nature. Svo. 9a. 6d,

HARCOURT'S (Edward Verkon) Sketch of Madeira ; with Map

andFlates. Post Svo. 8a. 6d.

HART'S (Major) ARMY LIST. 8vo. {Published Quarterly and

Annually.)

HASB'S ANCIENT GREEKS; their PubUc and Private Life,
Manners, and Customs. Translated from the German. By Mrs. Ausmr.
Fcap. Svo. 6a. Qd.

HAT'S (J. H. Drummofd) Western Barbary, its wild Tribes and

savage Animals. Post Svo. 2a. 6d,



PUBLISHED BT MR. MURRAY. 15



HAKD-BOOK OF TRAVEL-TALK; or, Conversatioiu in
Engiiah, German, French, and Italian. Intended for Engllahmen tra-
TelUng abroad, or Foreigners yusiting Great Britain. 18mo. S«. 6d,

BELGIUM AND THE RHINE. Maps. Post 8yo. 6*.

NORTH GERMANY AND HOLLAND— inclu-
ding Belgiui^ and the Rhine. Map. Foat 8to. 9«.

SOUTH GERMANY— Bavaria, Austria, Salzberg,



the Anstrian and Bararian Alps, the T7T0I, and the Danube, from Uhn
to the Black Sea. Map. Post 8vo. 9«.

SWITZERLAND— the Alps of Savoy, and Piedmont.



Maps. Post 8vo. Is. 6d.

FRANCE — Normandy, Brittany, the French Alps,



the Rirers Loire, Seine, Rhone, and Garonne, Dauphin^, Provence, and
the Pyrenees. Maps. Post 8vo. 9«.

SPAIN — Andalusia, Ronda, Granada, Yaleneia,



Catalonia, Gallicia, Arragon, and Navarre. Maps. 2 Vols. Post 8vo.
PAINTING— the German, Dutch, Spanish, and



French Schools. Translated in part from the German of Kdolxb.
Edited, with Notes, by Sib Edmukd Hxao. With Illustrations. 2 Vols.
Po8t8vo. 24«.

MADEIRA AND PORTUGAL. Woodcuts. 2 Yols.



PoBtdvo. 12s.

NORTH ITALY— Florence, Sardinia, Genoa» the



Riyiera, Venice, Lombardy, and Tuscany. Map. PostSvo. 9«.
CENTRAL ITALY— Part I. South Tuscany and



the Pap AX Statbs. — Part II. Rohx amd its Environs. Maps. 2 Vols.
Post 8yo. 7s. each.

SOUTHERN ITALY— the Continental Portion of



the Two Sicilies, including Naples, Pompeii, Herculaneum, YesuYius,
Bay of Naples, &c. Map. PostSvo. 16«.

PAINTING— the Italian Schools. From the Ger-



man of KuoLBB. Edited by Sir Ghablbs Eabtlakx. With Woodcuts.
2 Vols. Post Svo. 2i«.

GREECE— the Ionian Islands, Albania, Thessaly,



and Macedonia. Maps. PostSro. 15«.

TURKEY, ASIA MINOR, and CONSTANTI-



NOPLE, Armenia, Mesopotamia, &c. Maps. Post Sto.

MALTA, EGYPT—Thebes, the Nile, Alexandria,



Cairo, the Pyramids, Mount Sinai, &o. Map. Post Svo. 16*.

SYRIA AND THE HOLY LAND. Maps. Post



8vo. {IVeparing.)

DENMARK, NORWAY, AND SWEDEN. Maps.



Post Svo. 12«.

THE BALTIC, RUSSIA, AND FINLAND. Maps.

Post Svo. 12«.

ENGLAND AND WALES.— Part I. Deyon and



Cornwall. Ss.

LONDON, Past ahd Pkbseht. Being an Alpha-
betical Account of all the Antiquities, Curiosities, Churches, Works
of Art, Places, and Streets connected with Interesting and Historical
Associations.. Post Svo. 16c.



UST OF TTOBKB



} HAITD-BOOK— MODEKN LONDON. A Guide to aU otgMtt '

- ESVIKONS OF LONDON. luclnding a Circle of

- BRITISH MC3F.UM ; iw ABngwiiKa abd Boule-

IIE4B Lonwn.

thCrtli<al Motioe!. PoslBio. lOi.

— WESTMINSTEK ABBEY— ita Art, Architectiire,

— HISTORY AND CHBONOLOQY, Alphabetieallj

inged. 8to. (.Vsh-Ij BmiJj.)

— {OFFICIAL). Giving an Hiatorical Accoant of Ihe
ties iiuebed Lo the nrious Civil ud Ecduiutlal DeptrtmMici of



' ABCHTtBCTPEE. Being a Concise and Popular

in the Wnrld. Wllh ( DeBtrlplton of Ihe most rnmarkahle BiiiliUnsi,
CATHEDRALS OP ENGLAND. With Plate.

MEDIEVAL ART. Tranalated from the Fi

of H. Jnlci LsbiTllie, uieI EdLled by Un. Flu

Btd. hUuPrai.
JD'S {Sir Fbibois) Rough Notes of some Hapid Jonmcja

— ■ — BubhloB from the BmimeD of Nasean.


DefencelesB Stale of Great Britain. A aeriea of Descrip-

3. ThB IdvssIdb of Eagland. 4. TbaCBpturB of Ixindoo by ■ Fnuidi
Army. G. The TreatmeDt of Woman in Wur. 6. How lu Defend Glut

■ Paria in 1651— aPaggotof French Sticks. iSecond^tlifion.

Fortnight in Ireland. Second Edition. Map. Svo. ISs.

(SiB Geoboe) Forest Scenes and Incidents ia Canada.

Home Tour through the Manulautnring Distriots of



- (Sift Edkdse) Handbook of Piuating — the German,
. 2Tali.P(Wtevo. Ms.



PUBLISHED BY MR. MURRAY. 17



HEBEB'S (Bishop) Parish Sennons ; on the LessoiiB, the GoBpel,
or the Epistle, for every Sunday in the Year, and for Week-day Festiyala.
Sixth JEditkm, 2 YoIb. Post8vo. 16«.



93. ed.



Sennons Preached in England. Second Edilion, 8to.



Hymns written and adapted for the weekly Chnrch



Service of the Year. TweJfih Edition. 18mo. 2«.



7«.(ki.



Poetical Works. Fifth EdUiaiL Portrait Fcap. Syo.



' Journey through the Upper Provinces of India. From

Calcutta to Bombay, with a Journey to Madras and the Southern Pro-
▼inces. 8 Vols. PostSvo. 10«.

HEIRESS (Thb) in Her Minority; or. The Progress of Character.
By the Author of " Bsbtha's Joubhal." 2 Vols. 12mo. 18f .

HERODOTUS. A Kew English Yersion. Translated from the
TeztofGAiSFOBD, and Edited with Notes, illustrating the History and
Geography of Herodotus, from the most recent sources of information.
By Rev. G. Rawlikbok, CoLOKKLBAwiJX80N,and Sib J. G. Wukimbok.
4 vols. 8vo. In iV«|Nira<ton.

HERSCHKUS (Sib J. W. F.) Manual of Scientific Enquiry, for the
Use of Travellers. By various Writers. Second Edition. PostSvo. 10*. 6d,

HERYEY'S (Lobb) Memoirs of the Reign of George the Second,
. from his Accession to the Death of Queen Caroline. Edited, with Notes,
by Right Hon. J. W. Cbokbb. Portrait. 2 Vols. 8vo.

HICKMAN'S (Wm.) Treatise on the Law and JPractice of Naval
Courts Martial. 8vo. 10«. 6d.

HILL (Gbneral Lobd) Life ol By Rbv. Edwih Sidnxt. Second

Edition. Portrait. 8vo. 12«.

(Fbbdxbio) On Grime : its Amount, Causes, and Remedies.

Svo. 12».

HILLARD'S (G. S.) Six Months in Italy. 2Yols. PostSvo. 16«.

HISTORY OF ENGLAND AND FRANCE tjmdbr thb Housb
ov Langastbb. With an Introductory View of the Early Reformation.
Svo. 16«.

the late War: with Sketches of Nelson, Wellington,

and Napoleon. By J. G. Lookhabt. 18mo. 2s. BdL

HOLLAND'S (Rbv. W. B.) Psalms and Hymns, selected and
adaptedtothe various Solemnities of the Church. 24mo. U.Sd.

HOLMES' (Mbs. Dalebith) Ride on Horseback through France
and Switzerland to Florenoeu 2 Vols. Post Svo. 18«.

HOLLWAY'S (J. G.) Month in Norway during the Autumn of
1S&2. Fcap. Svo. 2s.

HONEY BEE (Thb). An Essay Reprinted from the " Quarterly
Beview." Fcap. Svo. U.

o



18 LIST OP WORKS



HOME AND COLONIAL LIBKAKT. Complete in 76 FteHL
Post 8vo, or bound In 87 Volumes, cloth.

OOHTBVT8 or THB SKBISfl.

THE BIBLE IK SPAIN. By Gbobob Bobbow.

JOURNALS IN INDIA. By Bishop IIvbbb.

TRAVELS IN THE HOLY LAND. 13y Captaiks Ibbt and Mavolbb.

THE SIEGE OF GIBRALTAR. By Johv Dbivkwatkb.

MOROCCO AND THE MOORS. By J. Dbummond Hat.

LETTERS FROM THE BALTIC. By a Ladt.

THE AMBER WITCH. By Lady Duff Gordok.

OLIVER CROMWELL & JOHN BUN VAN. By Robbbt Southbt.

NEW SOUTH WALES. By Mrs. Merbdith.

LIFE OF SIR FRANCIS DRAKE. By Johv Barrow.

FATHER RIPA'S MEMOIRS OF THE COURT OF CHINA.

A RESIDENCE IN THE WEST INDIES. By M.G.Lbwib.

SKETCHES OF PERSIA. By Sir John Maux>lm.

THE FRENCH IN ALGIERS. By Ladt DuffOoroov.

BRACEBRIDGE HALL. By Washimoton Irvino.

VOYAGE OF A NATURALIST. By Charles Darwih.

HISTORY OF THE FALL OF THE JESUITS.

LIFE OF LOUIS PRINCE CONDE. By Lord Mahov.

GIPSIES OF SPAIN. By Gsoroe Borrow.

THE MARQUESAS. By Hbrmavh Mblvillb.

LIVONIAN tales. By a Lady.

MISSIONARY LIFE IN CANADA. By Ret. J. Abbott.

BALE'S BRIGADE IN AFFGHANISTAN. By Rev. G. R. Glbio.

LETTERS FROM MADRAS. By a Lady.

HIGHLAND SPORTS. By Cha&lbs St. Johh.

JOURNEYS ACROSS THE PAMPAS. By Sib F. B. Hbao.

GATHERINGS FROM SPAIN. By Richard Ford.

SIEGES OF VIENNA BY THE TURKS. By Lord ELLEanRE.

SKETCHES OF GERMAN LIFE. By Sir A. Gordoh.

ADVENTURES IN THE SOUTH SEAS. By HBRMAmr Mbltiub.

STORY OF BATTLE OP WATERLOO. By Rev. G. R. Glmo.

A VOYAGE UP THE RIVER AMAZON. By W. H. Edwabim*

THE WAYSIDE CROSS. By Capt. Milmav.

MANNERS & CUSTOMS OF INDIA. By Ret. C. Aclahd.

CAMPAIGNS AT WASHINGTON. By Ret. G. R.GLBia.

ADVENTURES IN MEXICO. By O. P. Roxtok.

PORTUGAL AND GALLICIA. By Lord Carnartow.

LIFE OF LORD CLIVE. By Rev, Q. R. Gleio.

BUSH LIFE IN AUSTRALIA. By H. W. Havoarth.

THB AUTOBIOGRAHY OF HENRY 8TEFFENS.

TALES OF A TRAVELLER. By Wabhimotoh iBvnra.

SHORT LIVES OF THE POETS. By Thomas Campbell.

HISTORICAL ESSAYS. By Lord Mahov.

LONDON & NORTH-WESTERN RAILWAY. By Sir P. B. Hba©.

ADVENTURES IN THE LYBIAN DESERT. By Batlb St. Johv.

A RESIDENCE AT SIERRA LEONE. By a Ladt.

LIFE QF GENERAL MUNRO. By Rbv. G. R. GLEia.

MEMOIRS OF SIR POWELL BUXTON. By bis Sov.

LIFE OF OLIVER GOLDSMITH. By Wabhivckcov iRViKa.



PUBLISHED BY MB. MURRAY. 19



HOOK'S (Rev. Dr.) Church Dictionary. Seventh Edition. 8to. I6«.
Discoarses on the Religious Controversies of the Day.



Svo. 9«.

Advice to the Roman Catholics. By Dean Comber. A

New Edition, With Notes. Fcap. Svo. Ba.

' (Theodore) Life. From the " Quarterly Review." Fcap.

Svo. 1«.

HOOKER'S (J. D.) Himalayan Journals ; or, Notes of an Oriental
Mataralist in Bengal, the Sikkim and Nepal Himalayas, the Khasia
Mountains, &c. Maps, Plates, and Woodcuts. 2 vols. 8to. 368.

HOOPER'S (Lieut.) Ten Months among the Tents of the Tuski;
with Incidents of an Arctic Boat Expedition in Search of Sir John
Franklin. By Lieut. Hooper, R.N. Plates Svo. 143.

HORACE (Works of). Edited by Dean Milman.. I^ew Edition.
With 300 Woodcuts. Crown Svo. 21«.

(Life of). By Dean Milman. Ifew Edition. With Wood-



cuts, and coloured Borders. Svo.
HORNER'S (Francis) Memoirs and Letters. By his Brother.

Second Edition. Portrait. 2 Vols. Svo. 80«.

HOUSTOUN'S (Mrs.) Yacht Voyage to Texas and the Gulf of
Mexico. Plates. 2 Vols. Post Svo. 21«.

HUMBOLDT'S (Alex.) Cosmos ; or, a Physical Description of the
World. Translated hj Col. and Msa. Sabikb. Seventh Edition. 3 Yohu
Post Svo. 10«. 6d.

Aspects of Kature in different Lands and in

different Climates. Translated hj Col. and Mss. Sabime. 2 Vols.
Post Svo. 6«.

HUTCHINSON (Colonel) on Dog-Breaking; the most expe-
ditious, certain, and easy Method, whether great Excellence or only
Mediocrity be required. Second Edition, Woodcuts. Fcap. Svo. 7a. 6d.

INKERSLEY'S (Thos.) Gothic Architecture in France ; Being an
Inquiry into the Chronological Succession of the Romanesque and
Pointed Styles; with Notices of some of the principal Buildings, and
an Index. Svo. 12«.

IRBY AND MANGLES' (Captains) Travels in Egypt, Nubia,
Syria, and the Holy Land, including a Journey round the Dead Sea, and
through the Country east of the Jordan. Post Svo. 2«. Qd.

JAMES' (Rey. Thomas) Fables of Msop. A New Version, for Old
and Young. Witii 100 Original Designs, by John Tbmniel. Post Svo.
^.6d.

JAMESON'S (Mrs.) Handbook to the Picture Galleries in and
near London. With Historical, Biographical, and Critical Notices.
Post Svo. Second Edition. 10«.

JAPAN AND THE JAPANESE. Described from the Accounts

of Recent Dutch Travellers. New Edition. Post Svo. Gs.

JERYIS'S (Lieut.) Manual of Military Operations, for the Use of
Officers. Post Svo. 9«. Bd.



20 LIST OF WORKS



JESSE'S (Edward) Visits to Spots of Interest in the Yidnity of

WindBor and Eton. Woodcuts. Post 870. 12«.

Scenes and Occupations of Country Life. With Becol-



lections of Natural UiBtorjr. Third EdUkm, Woodcuts. Fcap.Svo.
Gleanings in Natural History. With Anecdotes of the



Sagacity and Instinct of Animals. Sixth EdUion, Fcap.Sro. 6$.ed,

JOCELTN'S (Loan) Six Months with the Chinese Expedition; or.
Leaves firom a Soldier's Note-Book. Seventh JEkiition, Fcap. 8to. 6a, 6d,

JOHKSON'S (Db. Saxubl) Life : By James Boswell. Inclndinfi:

the Tour to the Hebrides, with Motes by Sm W. Soorr. Edited hy
the Right Hon. Johk Wilbok Cbokkb. A New EUtiion, with mneli
additional matter. 1 Vol. Portraits. Royal Svo. I69.

Lives of the Poets. A New Edition. Edited

and annotated. By Petbb Gunkingham. 3 toIs. 870. In the Prese.

JOHNSTON'S (Wx.) England as it is : Social, Political, and
Industrial, in the Middle of the 19th Century. 2 Vols. Post Svo. ISa.

JONES'S (Rby. Richard) Essay on the Distrihution of Wealth,
and on the Sources of Taxation. Part I.— RENT. Second Edition, Post
Svo. 79. 6d.

JOTTRNAL OP A NATURALIST. Fourth Edition. Woodcnta.

Post Svo. d8.6d.

JOWETT'S (Rev. B.) St. Paul's Epistles to the Thessalonians,
Galatians, and Romans. With critical Notes and Dissertations. Svo.

IntheJh'eao.

JUKES' (J. B.) Excursions in and about Newfoundland during the

Years 1839-40. Map. 2 Vols. Post Svo. 21«.

KING EDWARD YIth's Latin Grammar; or, an Introduction
to the Latin Tongue, for the Use of Schools. EigMh Edition. 12mo.
8».6d,

' Latin Accidence ; or, Elements of the

Latin Tongue, for the Use of Junior Classes. 12mo. 12».

EINNEAR'S (JoHy G.) Cairo, Petra, and Damascus, described
from Notes made during a Tour in those Countries : with Remarks on
the Government of Mehemet All, and on the present prospect of Syria.
Post Svo. do.ed.

KNIGHT'S (Chaeles) Once upon a Time. 2 Vols. Fcap. Svo. 12«.
KUGLBR'S (Dr. Peahz) Handbook to the History of Painting

(the Italian Schools). Translated firom the German. Edited, with
Notes, by Sir Chaslbs Eastlakb. Second Edition. Witii Woodcnta
fr-om the Old Masters. 2 Vols. Post Svo. 24«.

(the German, Dutch, Spanish,

and French Schools). ParUy Translated from the German. Edited,
with Notes, by Sib Edmund Head, Bart. With Woodcuts from the Old
Masters. 2 Vols. Post Svo. 24s.

LABORDB'S (Lkoh Db) Journey through Arabia Petrsea, to Mount
Sinai, and the Excavated City of Petrssa,— the Edom of the Prophedes.
Second Edition. With Plates. Svo. 18».'

LAMBERT'S (Miss) Church Needlework. With PracUcal Remarka
on. its Preparation and Arrangement. Plates. Post Svo. 9«. 6d.

My Knitting Book. Woodcuts. Two Parts, 16mo. 8«.

My Crochet Sampler. Woodcuts. Two Parts, 16mo. 4«.

Uinta on Deooratiye Needlework. Idmo. 1«. 6d.



PUBLISHED BY MR. MURRAY. 21



LANB'S <E. W.) Antbmn Kighta. Translated with Ezplanatorj

Notes. With Woodeuts. BoyalSyo. 2U,

LATIN GRAMMAR (K»o Edward the VIth'b.) For the Use

of Schools. Eighth EdUioK. 12ino. Bs.Qd,

< Accidence (Knro Edward YI.) ; or. Elements of the

Latin Tongue, for the Use of Junior ClaBses. iJbno. 2»,

LA YARD'S (AusTEK H.) Kineveh and its Remains. Being a

Narrative of Researches and Discoveries amidst the Ruins of Assyria.
With an Account of the Clialdean Christians of Kurdistan ; the Yezedis,
or Devil-worshippers; and an Enquiry into the Manners and Arts of
the Ancient Assyrians. lythEditum. Plates and Woodcuts. 2 Vols.
8vo. 96$,
— Nineveh and Babylon ; being the Result

of a Second Expedition to Assyria. Fourteenth Thousand. Plates and
Woodcuts. 8vo. 21«. Or Fine Paper. 2 Vols. 8vo. SOt.



Monuments of Nineveh. lUastrated by One Hundred

Engravings. Imperial Folio, 101. 10a.

Second Series. Illustrated by



Seventy Plates. Imperial Folio. lOJ. 10».

Popular Account of Nineveh. 16th Edition. With



Woodcuts. Post 8vo. 6«.

LEASE'S <GoL. W. Martih) Topography of Athens, with Remarks
on its Antiquities; to which is added, the Demi of Attica. Second
Edition, Plates. 2yols.8vo. SOa.

Travels in Northern Greece. Maps. 4 Vols. 8vo. 60*.

Greece at the End of Twenty-^hree Years Protection.

Svo. 6<2.

Peloponnesuiea : A Supplement to Travels in the Morea.

Svo. 16*.

Thoughts on the Degradation of Science in England.



6vo. Sa. 6d.

LETTERS FROM THE SHORES OF THE BALTIC. By a

Ladt. Post Svo. 2a. ed.

Madras ; or. First Impressions of Life and

Manners in India. By a Lady. Post Svo. 2a. 6d.

Sierra Leone, written to Friends at Home.



By a Lady. Edited by Mrs. Nobton. Post Svo. 55.

LEWIS' (G. Cornbwall) Essay on the Government of Dependencies.
Svo. 12a.

Glossary of Provincial Words used in Herefordshire and

some of the a4joiaing Counties. 12mo. ia.Od,

Essay on the Origin and Formation of the Romance

Languages: Second Edition. Svo. 12«.

(Ladt Therxsa) Friends and Contemporaries of the

Lord Chancellor Clarendon, illustrative of Portraits in his Gallery.
With an Introduction, containing a Descriptive Catalogue of the Pictures,
and an Account of the Origin of the Collection. Portraits. 8 Vols.
Svo. 42a.

(M. G.) Journal of a Residence among the Negroes in the



West Indies. Post Svo. 2a. Qd.



Iffi LIST OF WORKS



LEXINGTON (Thb) PAPERS; or, Some Account of the OoniiB

of L«ondon and Vienna at the end of the 17th Century. Extracted from
the Official and Private Correspondence of Kobbbt Sutton (IoOko
Lbzinotok) while Minister at Vienna, 1694-1698. Edited by Hon. U.
Manmbbs Sutton. 870. 14«.

LINDSAY'S (Lord) Sketches of the HiBtory <^ Christian Art.

8Vol8.8vo. SU.ed.

Lives of the Lindsays ; or, a Memoir of the Houses

of Crawford and Balcarrea. To which are added, Extracts tram the
Official Correspondence of Alexander, sixth Earl of Balcarres, doring
tlie Maroon War; together with Personal Narratives, by his Brothers,
the Hon. Robert, Colin, James, John, and Hugh Lindsay; and by hia
Sister, Lady Anne Barnard. 3 Vols. Svo. 42a.

Progression by Antagonism. A Theory, inyolrini^



Considerations touching the Present Position, Duties, and Destiny of
Great Britain. 8to. 68.

(Rev. Henbt) Practical Lectures on the Historical



Books of the Old Testament 2 Vols. 16mo. 10s.
LITTLE ARTHUR'S HISTORY OP ENGLAND. By Lady

Callcott. Seventeenth Edition. ISmo. 2s. 6d.

LIVONIAN TALES.— The Disponent.— The Wolves.--The Jewess.

By the Author of " Letters from the Baltic." Post Svo. 2s. 6d.

LOCH'S (Capt. G. 0.) Events of the Closing Campaign in China.

. Map. Postero. 80. 6d.

LOCEHART'S (J. G.) Ancient Spanish Ballads ; Historical and
Romantic. Translated, with Notes. New Editionf with. Illuminated
Titles, Borders, &c. 4to. Or Cheap Edition. Post Svo. 2s. 6d.

Life of Robert Bums. Fifth Edition. Fcap. Svo. 8«.

History of the Late War : with Sketches of Nelson,

Wellington, and Napoleon. 18mo. 28. 6d.

LONG'S (Gboboe) Essays on the Conduct of Life, and Moral Nature

of Man. 2 Vols. Post Svo. 68. each.

LOUDON'S (Mrs.) Ladies' Gardener; or. Instructions in Gardening.
With Directions for Every Month in the Year, and a Calendar of
Operations. Eighth Edition. Woodeots. Fcap. 8vo. 6s.

Modem Botany for Ladies ; or, a Popular Introduction

to the Natural System of Plants. Second Edition. Woodcuts. Fcap. 8to.6».

LOWE'S (Sir Hudson) Letters and Journals, during the Captivity
of Napoleon at St. Helena. By William Fobbtth. Portrait. 8 Vols.
8to. 45«.

LUSHINGTON'S (Mrs.) Narrative of a Journey from Calcutta

to Europe, by way of Egypt. Second Edition. Post Svo. 8s, 6d.

LTELL'S (Sir Charles) Principles of Geology; or, the Modem
Changes of the Earth and its Inhabitants considered as illustrative of
Geology. Ninth Edition. Woodcuts. Svo. 1S«.

Manual of Elementary Geology ; or, the Ancient Changes

of the Earth and its Inhabitants illustrated by Its Geological Monuments.
lyth Edition. Woodcuts. Svo. In the Press.

Travels in North America, 1841-2; with Observations on



the United States, Canada, and Nova Scotia. Plates. 2 Vols. Poet Svo. 2ls.
Second Visit to the United States of North America,



1845-6. Second Sditum, 2 Vols. Poet Svo. 18s.



PUBLISHED BY MR. MURRAY. 23



MAHON'S (LoRi>) History of England, from the Peace of Utrecht

to the Peace of Yeraailles, 1713—83. Third Edition reviiied. Vols.
I. to VI. Library Edition. Sto. 78«. Popular Edition. Post 8vo. 8e«.

** Forty-Fire ; " or, a Narrative of the Rebellion in

Scotland. PostSvo. Z».

History of the War of the Succession in Spain. Second



Edition. Map. 870. 16».

Spain under Charles the Second ; or, Extracts from the



Correspondence of the Hon. Alexandkr Stanhopb, British Minister at
Madrid from 1690 to 1700. Second Edition. Post Svo. . 6«. 6d.



Life of Louis Prince of Cond6, sumamed the Great.

PostSvo. 6*.

Life of BelisariuB. Second Edition. Post 8vo. 10«. 6^/.

Historical and Critical Essays. Post 8vo. 5s.

Story of Joan of Arc. Fcap. 8vo. 1*.



M«CULLOCH (J. R.) ; Collected Edition of Rioardo's Political

Works. With Notes and Memoir. Second Edition. 8vo. 16«.

MACFARLANE'S (Charles) Travels in Turkey during the Years
1847-S. 2yolB.8TO. 28«.

MALCOLM'S (Sir John) Sketches of Persia. Third Edition.
PostSro. 6*.

MANTELL'S (Oidboh A.) Thoughts on Animalcules ; or, the
Jnvisihle World, as revealed by the Microscope. Second Edition. Plates.
16mo. 68.

MANUAL OF SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRY, Prepared for the Use of
Officers and Travellers in general. By varioiu Writers. Edited hy Sib
J. Hbbbchbl, Bart. Second Edition. Maps. Post 8vo. 10*. 6d. {litb-
liohed by order of the Lord* of the Admiralty.)

MAREHAM'S (Mrs.) History of England. From the First Inya-

sion by the Romans, down to the fourteenth year of Queen Victoria's
Beign. I^ew and Cheaper Edition. Woodcuts. 12mo. 6«.,

History of France. From the Conquest hy the Gauls,

to the Death of Louis Philippe. ^010 and Cheaper Edition. Woodcuts.
12mo. 6«.

History of Germany. From the Invasion by Marius,



to the present time. Nero and Cheaper Edition. Woodcuts. 12mo. 6«.

History of Greece. With Chapters on the Literature,



Art, and Domestic Manners of the Greeks. By Dr. Wm. Skith. Wood-
cuts. 12mo, 78. 6d.

■ History of Rome. 12mo. In Preparation,

Sermonsfor Children. Second Edition. Fcap.Svo. 80.

MARELAND'S (J. H.) Remarks on English Churches, and Sepnl-
chral Memorials. Fourth Edition. Woodcuts. Fcap. 8vo. 68. 6d,

Reverence due to Holy Places. Third Edition.

Fcap. 8vo. 2«.

MARRYAT'S (Joseph) History of Pottery and Porcelain, in the
16th, 16th, 17th, and 18th Centuries. With a Description of the Manu-
facture, a Glossary, and a List of Monograms. With Coloured Plates
and Woodcuts. 8vo. ai«..6d.
\* A few eopiec on India Proof Of tMuntcd on Large Bxper. 4to. 6<.6i.



34 LIST OF WO&KS



MATTHU!*S (AvavsTus) Greek Grammar for Schoote. Abiid^od

from the Larger Grammar. By the Bishop of Lokdow. 8&vmih JStittum.
reyised by Bey. J. Edwabdb. 12mo. 8ff.

Greek Accidence for Schools. Abridged by the

Bishop or LoNDOH. ^(wrtiiJScStum, revised by Rer. J. Edwards. 12mo.2f.
Index of Quotations from Greek Authors contained



in Matihle's Greek Grammar. Second Edition. 8ro. Is.Qd,

HAUBEL'S (JuLxs) Essay on the Character, Actions, and Writings

of the Duke of Wellington. Second Edition, Fcap. Svo. la. Qd,.

MAWE'S (H'. L.) Journal of a Passage from the Pacific to the
Atlantic, crossing the Andes in the Northern Provinces of Fern, and
descending the great Biver Maranon. 8vo. 12«.

MAXIMS AND HINTS for an Angler, and the Miseries of

Fishing. By Bichard Pbnk. Second Edition. Woodcnts. 12mo. 6«.

MAYO'S (Dr.) Pathology of the Human Mind. Fcap. 8yo. ba. ed.

MELVILLE'S (Hbbkann) Typee and Omoo; or. Adventures

amongst the Marquesas and South Seas. 2 Vols. Post 8vo. 10«.
MENDELSSOHN'S (Fblix Babtholdt) Life. By Julbs BBHii>icrF.

8vo. 28. 6d.

MEBRIFIELD (Mbs.) on the Arts of Punting in Oil, Miniatare.

Mosaic, and Glass ; Gilding, Dyeing, and the Preparation of Colours
and Artificial Gems, described in several old Manuscripts. 2 Vols. 8vo.
80«.
MEBEDITH'S (Mrs. Charles) Notes and Sketches of New South
Wales, during a Besidenoe from 1889 to 1844. Post 8vo. 2s. 6d,

Tasmania^ during a Residence of Nine Years. With

Illustrations. 2 Vols. Post 8vo. 18«.

MILFORD'S (John) Norway and her Laplanders in 1841 ; with a
Fev Hints to the Salmon Fisher. 8vo. 10».6d.

MITCHELL'S (Thomas) Plays of Aristophanes. With English

Notes. 8vo.— 1. CLOUDS, 10«.— 2. WASPS, 10*.— 8. FKOGS, 16».

MODERN DOMESTIC COOKERY. Pounded on Principles of
Economy and Practical Knowledge, and adapted for Private Families.
Neto and Cheaper Edition. Woodcuts. Fcap. 8vo. 68.

MILMAN'S (Dban) History of Christianity, from the Birth of
Christ to the Extinction of Paganism in the Boman Empire. 8 Vols.
8vo. 86«.

History of Latin Christianity ; including that of the

Popes to the Pontificate of Nicholas Y . Vols. I. to III. 8vo.

Character and Conduet'of the Apostles considered as



an Evidence of Christianity. 8vo. 10«. 6d.

Edition of Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman



Empire. New Edition, irlth Additional Notes by Dr. Wic. Smtih.
Portrait and Maps. 8 Vols. 8vo. Js. 6d. each.

Life and Correspondence of Edward Gibbon. Portrait.



8vo. 98.

Life and Works of Horace. New JSdUion. With SOO



Woodcuts. 2 Vols. Crown 8vo. 80s.

Poetical Works. Second Edition. Plates. 8 YoIb.



Fcap. 8vo. 18<.

Fall of Jerusalem. Fcap." 8vo. 1«.

(Capt. E. a.) Wayside Cross ; or, the Raid of Gomes.



A Tale of the Carlist War. Post 6vo. 2«. Qd.



PUBLISHED BY MR. MURRAY. 35



MOORE'S (Thoxas) Life and Letters of Lord Byron. Plates.

6 Vols. Fcap.8vo. 18f.

— Complete

in One Yolnme. Portrait and Vignette. Royal Svo. 12*.

MUCK MANUAL (The) for the Use of Farmera. A Practical Treatise
on the Chemical Properties, Management, and Applieatlon of Manures.
By Fbbdbrigk Falknbb. Second Edition. Fcap. 8to. 6«.

HUIBHEAD (J. P.). James Watt, an Historical Eloge. By M.

ARA.GO. Translated, with Notes. 8vO|8«. 6d.

Correspondence of James "Watt on his Discoyery of

the Theory of the Composition of Water, with a Letter from his Son.
Portrait Svo. 105. M.



MULLER'S DORIANS ; The History and Antiquities of the Doric
Race. Translated by the Right Hon. Hbxbt Tutnbll and Gboboi
GoBNBWALL Lbwis, Esq. Second Edition, Maps. 2 Vols. 8yo. 26a.

MUKDY'S (Capt. Rodhit) Events in Borneo, including the Occu-
pation of Labuan and Visit to the Celebes. Plates. 2 Vols. Svo. 82«.

MUNRO'S (Gehbral Sib Thomas) Life and Letters. By the RiT.

G. R. GLBia. Post Syo. 6».

MURCHISON'S (Sir Rodbbiok) Russia in Europe and the Ural
Mountains; Geologically Illustrated. With Coloured Maps, Plates^
Sections, Sec. 2 Vols. Royal 4to. 82.8s.

Siluria ; or, a History of the Oldest Rocks con-
taining Organic Remains. With Map and Phttes. 8yo.

MURRAY'S (Capt. A.) Naval Life and Seryices of Admiral Sir

Philip Durham. 8vo. 6*. 6d.

MURRAY'S RAILWAY READING. Published occaaonally;
varying in siBe and price, and suited for all classes of Readers.



[X%e/oUowinff are published i]

WiuineTOH. By LoEB EuiaiiBmB. 6d.

Nmaoo on turn CuA»m, U.

BstAta vaoM "Tub Timbi." 2y<^ 8$.

Motic AND Dbbs*. I«.

Latabd's PorULAB AccoubvovNibbvbb.

ia.
MuHAN*! Fall or Jiburalbii. 1«.

MABON'a''FOBTT-FlTB.'* 9$.

Lira ov Tbbooobb Hook. 1«.
Dbbdi or Natal Dabihs. S Yd-U, i*.
Turn HoNBT Bbb. U.
Jambb' ^sor** Fablbs. 2i. M.

NlMBOB ON THB TVBr. 1«. lid.

OLirHABT^B Vmulvu i$.6d.



Abt or DiNiNA. U. 6d.
H ALLAH'S Litbbakt Ebbatb. 2*.
Mahom'b Joab or Abc. 1b.
Hbad'i Exiobant. 2«. M.

NiMBOD OH THB ROAD. 1«.
WiLKIHSOtf't AMCIBNT EOTrTXAHS. ISc.
CbOKBB on THB OuiLLOTIHB. U.

Hoi.lwat's Nobwat. 30.
MAVBBb's Wbllihoton. 1«.W.
Cakibbll's Lirs or Bacon. St.
Thb Flowbb Gabdbh, 1«.
Lqckbabt'b Spanish Ballavb. St. 6(1.
LuCAt ON HitroBT. Od.
Bbautibb or Btbon. 3t.



MUSIC AND DRESS. Two Essays reprinted from the " Quarterly
Reriew." Fcap. 8vo. 1».

NAUTICAL ALMANACK (The). (Published by Order qf the

Lords Commisnonera of the AdmiraUy.) Royal Syo. 2«. 6d,

NAVY LIST (The Royal). '{Pvbliehed Quarterly, by Authority,)

12mo. 28. 6d.

NEALE'S (E. Y.) Feasts and Fasts : an Esasy on the Rise, Pro-
gress, and Present State of the Laws relating to Sundays and other
Holidays, &c. Fcap. Sro. 0«. 6tf.



26 LIST OF WORKS



}!f£yiLLE'S (HoK.KC.) Saxon Obsequies; illosirated hy Ornaments
and Weapons discovered in a Cemetery near Little Wiibraham, Cam-
bridgeshire. With short Descriptions. Illustrated by 40 Plates. 4to. 84s.

KEWBOLD'S (Lieut.) Straits of Malacca^ Fenang, Malacca, and

Singapore. 2 Vols. Svo. 26a.

KIMROD On the Chace— The Turf— and The Boad. Reprinted
from the " Quarterly Review." Woodcuts. Fcap. 8vo. Bs. 6d.

NORTON'S (Hon. Carolink) Letters from Sierra Leone. By a Lady,
written to Fi-iends at Home. Edited by Mrs. Nobtok. Post 8vo. 6*.

0*BTRNE'S (W. R.) Naval Biographical Dictionary, comprising
the Life and Services of every Living Officer in H. M. Navy, from the
Rank of Admiral tc that of Lieutenant. Compiled firom Authentic and
Family Documents. Royal 8vo. 428.

O'CONNOR'S (R) Field Sports of France ; or, Hunting, Shooting,
and Fishing on the Continent. Woodcuts. 12mo. 7s. 6d.

OLIPHANT'S (Laurence) Journey to Katmandu, with Visit to
the Camp of the Nepaulese Ambassador. Fcap. Svo. 2«. 6d.

OXENH A M'S (Rkv. W.) English Notes for Latin Elegiacs ; designed
for early Proficients in the Art of Latin Versification, with Prefatory
Rules of Composition iu Elegiac Metre. Second Edition. 12mo. 49.

PAGET'S (John) Hungary and Transylvania. With Remarks on
their Condition, Social, Political, and ' Economical. Second Edition.
Woodcuts. 2 Vols. Svo. 24s. ^

PALLISER'S (John) Solitary Rambles and Adventures of a Hunter
in the Prairies. Woodcuts. Post Svo.

PARISH'S (Sir Woodbine) Buenos Ayres and the Provinces of the

Rio de la Plata. Their First Discovery and Conquest, Present State,
Trade, Debt, &c. Second Edition. Map and Woodcuts. Svo. 16«.

PARIS'S (T. C.) Letters from the Pyrenees during Three Months*
Pedestrian Wanderings amidst the Wildest Scenes of the French and
Spanish Pyrenees. Woodcuts. Post Svo. 105. Qd.

PARKYNS' (Mansfield) Personal Narrative of Three Years' Resi-
dence and Adventures in Abyssinia. Woodcuts. 2 Vols. Svo. 30«.

PEILE'S (Rev. Dr.) Agamemnon of Jlschylus. A New Edition

of the Text, with Notes, Critical, Explanatory, and Philological, for
the Use of Students. Second Edition. Svo. 9«.

Choephorse of ^schylus. A New Edition of the Text,



With Notes, Critical, Explanatory, and Philological, for the Use of
Students. Second Edition. Svo. 9«.

PBLLEW'S (Dean of Norwich) Life of Lord Sidmouth, with
his Correspondence. Portraits. 3 Vols. Svo. 42».

PENN'S (Richard) Maxims and Hints for an Angler, and the

Miseries of Fishing. To which is added, Maxims and Hints for a
Chess-player. Second Edition. Woodcuts. Fcap. Svo. 6».

(Granville) Bioscope ; or, Dial of Life Explained. To

which is added, a Translation of St. Paulinns' Epistle to Celantfa, on
the Rule of Christian Life ; and an Elementary View of General Chro-
nology. Second Edition. With Dial Plate. 12mo. 12«.



PUBLISHED BT MR. MURRAY. 37



PENROSE'S (Rkv. John) Lives of Vice- Admiral Sir C. V. Penrose,

and Captain James Trevenen. Portraits. Svo. 10«. 6d.

Sermons for Households, or Fifty -four Sermons Written

for Sunday Reading in Families. 8vo, 10«. 6d.

(F. 0.) Principles of Athenian Architecture, and the



Optical Refinements exliibited in the Construction of the Ancient
Buildings at Athens, from a Survey. With 40 Plates. Folio. 61, 6a.
(Published under the direction o/ the Dilettanti Society.)

PENNINGTON (G. J.) On the Pronunciation of the Greek Lan-
guage. 8vo. 88. 6d,
PHILLIPS* (John) Memoirs of William Smith, LL.D., (the Geo-

legist). Portrait Svo. le.ed,

Geology of Yorkshire. The Yorkshire Coast, and the

Mountain-Limestone District Plates 4to. Part I., Sl«. 6d.— Part II.,
62e.6d.

Rivers, Mountains, and Sea Coast of Yorkshire; with



Essays on the Climate, Scenery and Ancient Inhabitants of the County.
Plated. Svo. 16«.

PHILOSOPHY IN SPORT MADE SCIENCE IN EARNEST ;

or, the First Principles of Natural Philosophy inculcated by aid of the Toys
and Sports of Youth. Seventh ISdition. Woodcuts. Fcap. Svo. 7«. 6d.

PHILPOTT'S (Bishop) Letters to the late Charles Butler, on the
Theological parts of his " Book of the Roman Catholic Church ; " with
Remarlcs on certain Works of Dr. Milner and Dr. Lingard, and on some
parts of the Evidence of Dr. Doyle. Second Edition. Svo. 16s.

PHIPPS' (Hon. Edmund) Memoir, Correspondence, Literary and
Unpublished Diaries of Robert Plumer Ward. Portrait 2 Vols. Svo. 28«.

POOLE'S (R. S.) Horae Egyptiacse ; or, the Chronology of Ancient
Egypt, discovered from Astronomical and Hieroglyphic Records upon
its Monuments. Plates. Sro. 10«. 6d.

(Ret. G. a.) Handbook for the Cathedrals of England;

Containing Descriptions of each. Woodcuts. Post Svo. In the Press.
POPE'S (Alexander) WORKS. An entirely New Edition. Edited
by the Right Hon. John Wilson Cbokeb and Peteb Cumnimohaji,
F.S.A. 6 vols. Svo. In the Press.

PORTER'S (G. R.) Progress of the Nation, in its various Social and
Economical Relations, from the beginning of the Nineteenth Ceatnry.
Tftird Edition. Svo. 24«.

(Mrs. G. R.) Rational Arithmetic for Schools and for

Private Instruction. 12mo. 3s. 6d,

POWELL'S (Rev. W. P.)- LaUn Grammar simplified. 12mo. 3«. 6(i.

PRAYER-BOOK (The), Illuminated with 1000 Illustrations of Bor-
ders, Initials, Vignettes, &c. Medium Svo. Cloth, 21«.; Calf, 31«. 6d.
Morocco, 42a.

PROGRESS OF RUSSIA IN THE EAST. An Historical Sum-
mary, continued to the Present Time. With Map by Abbowbmith.
Third Edition. Svo. 6«. 6d.

PUSS IN BOOTS. Suited to the Tastes of LitUe and Grown

Children. By Otto Spbcktsb. Second Edition, Plates. 16mo. 6s.
QUARTERLY REVIEW (The). Svo. 6&

RANEE'S (Leopold) Political and Ecclesiastical History of the
Popes of Rome, during the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries. Trans-
lated from the German by Mbs. Austin. Third Edition. 2 Vols. Svo. 24«.

History of Prussia ; or. Memoirs of the House of Bran-

denburgh. Translated from the German by Sib Alxxaxdee Duw
GoBDON Babt. 3 Vols. Svo. 86s.



is LIST OF WOBKS



'EA.WLIKSON'S (Bit. Oboboi) Herodotus. A New Sagtish

Venion. TnnsUted from the Text of OAitrOBD, and Edited with
Kotes, illustntting the History and Geography of Herodotus, fix>m the
most recent sources of information, embodying the chief Besnlts,
Historical and Ethnographical, which have been arrived at in the pro-
rrees of Cuneiform and Hieroglyphical Discovery. Assisted by CoiiOxxL.
Eawloisoh, and Sib J. O. Wiuuvbon. 4 Vols. 8vo. In ike Pren.

REJECTED ADDRESSES (Tbb). By Jakbs Aim Horaos Smith.

With Biographies of the Authors, and additional Motes. ISoentj^-^eemd
SetUion. Portraits. Fcap. 8vo. 68.

BICARDO'8 (David) PoUiical Works. With a Notice of his

Life and Writings. By J. B. M'Citlu>gh. New JBdition. 8vo. 16s.

BIDE on Horseback to Florence through France and Switzerland.
Described in a Series of Letters. By a Ladt. 2 Vols. Post 8vo. 18««

BIPA'S (Fathbb) Hemoirs daring Thirteen Tears' Besidence at the
Court of Peking^ in the Service of the Emperor of China. Translated
from the Italian. By FoBTUirA.TO Pbakdi. PostSvo. 2a. 6d.

ROBERTSON'S (Lord) Leaves from a Journal^ and other Fragments

in Verse. Crown 8vo. 7a. 6d,

{Bey. J. C.) History of the Christian Church, to

the Pontificate of Gregory the Great: a Manual for general Beaders aa
well as for Students in Theology, 8vo. 12a.

ROKILLY'S <Sn Samuel) Memoirs and Political Diary. By hig

Sows. Third Edition. Portrait 2 Vols, if cap. 8vo. 12a.

BOSS'S (Sib Jambs) Voyage of Discov^ and Besearch in the

Southern and Antarctic Regions during the years 1839-43. Plates.
SVols.8vo. 369.

BOTAL SOCIETY OF LITEBATUBE (The). Tiuvsaotiors.
Plates. VoL>. I. to III. 8vo. 13*. each.

BITNDELL*S (Mas.) Modem Domestic Cookery, founded onPrinciples
of Economy and Practice, and adapted for Private Families. New and
Cheaper EdUum. Woodcuts. Fcap.8vo. 6a.

BUXTON'S (GBoaoE F.) Trav^ in Mexico ; with Adventures
among the Wild Tribes and Animals of fhe Prairies and Rooky Moun-
tains. Po8t8vo. 6a,

SALE'S (Ladt) /oumal of the Disasters in Affghanistan. £!ighth

Edition. PostSvo. 12a.

(Sib Bobebt) Brigade in Affghanistan. With an Account of

the Seizure and Defence of Jellalabad. ByBBV.G.R.GLEio. Po6t8vo.2«.6(l.

SAXON (The) in Ireland. Being Notes of the Bambles of an
Englishman in the West of Ireland, in search of a Settlement. Second
E^Stion. Fcap. 8vo.

SCBOPE'S (William) Days of Deer-Stalking in the Forest of Atholl ;
with some Account of the Nature and Habits of the Bed Deer. ITtird
Edition. Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. aO«.



Days and Nights of Salmon Fishing in the Tweed ;

with a short Account of the Natural History and Habits of the Salmon.
Seeond Edition. Woodcuts. Boyal dvo.

(O. P.) Memoir of Lord Sydenham, and his Administra-
tion in Canada. Second Edition. Portrait. 6vo. 9a. 6d,



PUBLISHED BY MR. MURRAY. 29



SENTSNOES FROM THE PROVERBS. In English, French,
Italian, and Gennan. For the Daily Use of Young Penona. By A Ladt.
16mo. 8«. 6d.

SERMONS. Preached during the Yiaitation of the Bishop of
Exeter in 1845. Published by Bequest. 12nio. 6s,

SEWELL'S (Rby. W.) Evidences of Christianity; or. Dialogues
between a Brahmin and a Christian. Fcap. 8vo. 7«. 6d,

SHAW'S (Thos. B.) Outlines of English Literature, for the Use of
Young Students. FostSvo. lis,

SIDMOUTH'S (Lord) Life and Correspondence. By the Hok. and
BsY. Gbobok Pellew, Deak or Nobwich. Portraits. 8 Vols. 8yo. 42«.

SIDNEY'S (Rev. Edwik) Life of Lord Hill Second EdUitm.
Portrait. 8vo. \2s.

SIERRA LEONE ; Described in a Series of Letters to Friends at
Home. By A Ladt. Edited by Mbs. Nobtoh . Post 8vo. bs.

SMITH'S (Wk., LL.D.) Dictionary of Greek and Roman Anti-
quities. Second Edition. With 600 Woodcuts. 870. 42«.

Smaller Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities,

abridged from the above Work. Second Edition. With 200 Woodcuts.
Crown 8vo. Is, Qd,

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and My-



thology. With 600 Woodcuts. 3 Vols. 8ro. ia.lbs.6d.

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography. Woodcuts.



Vol. I. 8vo. 86«. (To be completed in 2 Vols.)

— Classical Dictionary for Schools. Compiled from the

aboTe works. Second Edition. 8to. 16*.

Smaller Classical Dictionary. Second Edition, With



SCO Woodcuts. Crown 8to. ls.6d.

New Latin-English Dictionary, founded on the best and



most recent authorities. 8yo. In PreparaUon.

Edition ef Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman



Empire. With Notes by Milman and Gdizot. Portrait and Map.
8 Vols. 8yo. Is. 6i. each.

(Wm. Jas.) Grenyille Letters and Diaries, including



Mb. Gbentillb's Diaby of Political Events, while First Lord of
the Treasury. Edited with Notes. 4 Vols. 8yo. 64«.

(Jakes & Horace) Rejected Addresses. Twefnty-aecond



Edition. Portrait Fcap.Svo. bs.

SOMERVILLE'S (Mart) Physical Geography. Third SdiHan.

Portrait. 2 Vols. Fcap.8vo. 12s.

Connexion of the Physical Sciences. EigMk

Edition. Plates. Fcap.Sro. 10s. Qd.

SOTJTHET'S (Robert) Book of the Church ; with Notes contain-
ing the Authorities, and an Index. Sixth Edition. 8yo. 12«.

Lives ofJohnBunyan& Oliver CfomwelL PoBt8yo.20.6<2.

SPECKTER'S (Otto) Puss in Boots ; or, the Story of the Marquis of

Garabas. Illustrated. Second Edition. 16mo. bs.

Charmed Roe ; or, the Story of the Little Brother and

Sister. Illustrated. 16mo. bs.
STANLEY'S (Edward, D.D., Bp. of Norwich) Addressm awd

Chabobs. With- a Memoir of his Life. By His Son. Second Edition.

8vo. Ids. 6d.

— (Arthur P.) St. Paul's Epistles to the Corinthians.

Edited with Critical Notes and Dissertations, &c 8vo. JnthsFlress.



i



80 LIST OF WORKS



ST. JOHN'S (Chablis) Field Kotes of a Sportsman and NaturaliBi
in Suth«rUnd. Woodcuts. 8 YoIb. Post Svo. 18*.



Wild Sports and Natural History of the Highlands.

Post 8vo. 6s,

(Batlb) Adventures in the Libyan Desert and the



Oaaisof Jupiter Ammon. Woodcuts. PostSvo. '2«. 6d.

STAUNTON'S (Sik Gboboe) Miscellaneous Notices relating to
China, and our Commercial Intercourse with that Country. Including m
tbw Translations from the Chinese Language, and some Observatioiis
on our Intercourse with that Country. Tkird Edition. Svo. 10s. 6(L

STEPHENS' (J. L.) Incidente of a First and Second Visit to
Central America and Yucatan. Kew Edition. Post 8vo. In Preparatiat*

STEVENS' (Wm., M.D.) Observations on the Healthy and Diseaaed
Properties of the Blood. Svo. lbs.

STISTED'S (Mrs. Hbfbt) Letters from the Bye- Ways of Italy.
Plates. Svo. 18*.

STOTHARD'S (Thob., B. A.) Life. With Personal Reminiscences.
By Mrs. Bbat. With Portrait, and 60 Woodcuts. 4to. 21«.

STRIFE FOR THE MASTERY. Two Allegories. With DIub-

trations. Crown 8to. 6*.

SUNLIGHT THROUGH THE MIST; or, Practical Lessons
drawn Arom the Lives of Good Men, intended as a Sunday Book for
Children. By A Lady. 16mo. S«. 6<1

SUTTON (Hon. H. Mahfbbs). Some Account of the Courts of
London and Vienna, at the end of the Seventeenth Century, extracted
from the Official and Private Correspondence of Robert Sutton (lata
Lord Lexington) while British Minister at Vienna, 1694-98. 8vo. 14s.

SUVERN'S ARISTOPHANES. The Birds and the Cloud*.

Translated by W. B. Hahiltoit, F.R.S. 2 Vols. Post Svo. 9«.

SWIFT'S (Jonathan) Works. New Edition, based upon Sir
Walter Scott's Edition, entirely revised. Svo. In the Press.

SYDENHAM'S (Lord) Memoirs. With his Administration in
Canada. By6.PouLBTScBOPB,M.P. Second Edition. Portrait. Svo. 9».Qd,

TAIT*S (Deam) Suggestions to the Theological Student under
present Difficulties. Post Svo. 6a. Qd.

TALBOT'S (H. Fox) English Etymologies. Svo. 12*.
TAYLOR'S (Hbkkt) Notes from Life and Books. Third EditUm.

2 Vols. Post Svo. \6s.

' (J. E.) Fairy Ring. A Collection of Stories for Yonng

Persons. From the German. With Illustrations by Bichabd Dotui.
Second Edition. Woodcuts. Fcap. Svo. Is. 6d.

' Michael Angelo considered as a Philosophic Poet.

Second Edition. Post Svo. 6s.

TENNENT'S (Sib J. E.) Christianity in Ceylon. Its Introduction
and Progress under the Portuguese, Dutch, British, and American Mis-
sions. With an Historical Sketch of the Brahmanical and Buddhist
Superstitionitf. Woodcuts. Svo. 14«.

THEOPHILUS' Fissay upon Various Arts; forming an Encyclo-
pedia of Christian Art of the 11th Century. Translated with Notes,
by KoBBBT Hbndbib. Svo. 21«.

THORNTON'S (Wii. T.) Plea for Peasant Proprietors ; with the
Outlines of a Plan for their EstabliAhment in Ireland. PostSro. 7«.(U.



PUBLISHED BY MR. MURRAY. 31



THRBE-LBAVED MANUAL OP FAMILY PRAYER ; arranged
flo as to save the trouble of turning the Pages backwards and forwards.
Royal Svo. 2s.

THRESHOLD (Thb) OF LIFE. A Series of Letters addressed to

a Son on his Entrance into the World. Fcap. 8vo. In the Press,

TICKNOR'S (Georgb) History of Spanish Literature. With Criti-
cisms on particular Works, and Biographical Notices of Prominent
Writers. SVols.Svo. 42».

TREMENHEERE'S (H. S.) Political Experience of the Ancients,
in its bearing on Modem Times. Fcap. 8vo. 2«. 6d.

— Notes on Public Subjects, made during a

Tour in the United States and Canada. Post Svo. 10s. 6d.

Constitution of the United States compared



with our own. Post Svo. 9a. 6d.

TURNBULL'S (P. E.) Narrative of Travels in Austria, with
Remarks on its Social and Political Condition. 2 Vols. Svo. 2As.

TWISS* (Horace) Public and Private Life of Lord Chancellor Eldon,
with Selections from his Correspondence. Portrait. Third Edition,
SYoIs. Post Svo. 21«.

VAUGHAN'S (Rev. Dr.) Sermons on Various Occasions. Svo. 12«. 6d,
Sermons preached in Harrow School. Svo. 10«. 6(2.

Nine New Sermons. 12mo. 6s.

YAUX'S (W. S. W.) Handbook to the Antiquities in the British
Museum; being a Description of the Remains of Greek, Assyrian,
Egyptian, and Etruscan Art preserved there. With SCO Woodcuts.
Post Svo. 7«.6d.

VENABLES' (Rev. R. L.) Domestic Manners of the Russians.
Dftscribed from a Year's Residence in that Country. Post Svo. 9s. 6d,

YOTAGE to the Mauritius and back, touching at the Cape of Good
Hope, and St Helena. By Author of " Paooiana." Post Svo, 9«. 6d.

WAAGEN'S (Dr.) Treasures of Art in Great Britain. Being an
Account of the Chief Collections of Paintings, Sculpture, Manuscripts,
Miniatures, &c. &c., in this Country. Obtained from Personal Inspeo-
tion during Visits to England. 8 Vols. Svo.

WAKEFIELD'S (E. J.) Adventures in New Zealand, 1S39-1S44.
With some Account of the Beginning of the British Colonisation of the
Island. Map. 2 Vols. Svo. 289.

WALKS AND TALKS. A Story-book for Young Children. By
AuKT Ida. With Woodcuts. 16mo. 6s.

WARD'S (Robert Plumbr) Memoir, Correspondence, Literary and
Unpublished Diaries and Remains. By the Hon. Edhdmd Phippb.
Portrait. 2 Vols. Svo. 28s,

WATT (Jambs) ; an Historical Eloge. By M. Araoo. Translated,
with Notes, by J. P. Muibhbad. Svo, S*. 6d.; or 4to, 21«.

Correspondence on his Discovery of the Theory of the

Composition of Water. Edited, with Notes, by J. P. Muibhbao.
Portrait. Svo, 10«. 6d.; or 4to, 24«.

The Origin and Progress of his Inventions. Illustrated



by his correspondence with his friends. Edited by J. P. Muiuhbad.
2 vols. Svo. Plates, 4to. In the Press.

WBLLESLEY'S (Rkv. Dr.) Anthologia Polyglotta ; a Selection
of Versions in various Languages chiefly from the Greek Anthologj.
8vo,16«.; or4to,42«.


32 LIST OF WORKS PUBLISHED BY MR. MURRAY.



WELLINGTON (Thb Dvem of) ; Mb Character, his Actions, and
his, Writings. By Julbs Maubbi*. Seeond EdUim vrith AddUiont. 1«. fkL

His Despatches during his various Campaigns.

Compiled from Official and other Authentic Doeoments. By Col.
GUBWOOD, G.B. New, Enlarged Edition, 8 Vols. 8vo. 21«. each.

- Selections from the Wellington Despatches.



8yo. 18».

Speeches in Parliament. Collected and Arranged



with his sanction. 2 Vols. 42«.
WILBERFORCE'S (Arohdbaoon) Incarnation of our Lord Jesns

Christ in its relation to Mankind. Fourth Editicm. Fcap. 870. 6$.

Doctrine of Holy .Baptism, with Remarks upon

the Rbv. W. Ogodb's Effects of Infant Baptism. Third EcHHon.
8vo. 78. 6d.

Sermons on the New Birth of Man's Nature. 8vo. Ss.

History of Erastianism. Second EdiHon, Post



8yo. 3s.

WILKIE'S (SiB Dayid) Life, Journals, Tours, and Critical Remarks
on Works of Art, with a Selection from his Correspondence. By Aii^Aif
CmnfiHOHAM. Portrait. 8 Vols. 8ro. 42a,

WILKINSON'S (Sib J. G.) Popular Account of the Private life,
Manners, and Customs of the Andent Egyptians. With 600 Wood-
cats. 2 Vols. Post 8vo. 12«.

Dalmatia and Montenegro ; with a Journey to

Mostar in Hertzegovina, and Remarks on the Slayonic Nations. Hates
and Woodcuts. 2Vols.8vo. 42a.

Handbook for Egypt. — Thebes, the Nile, Alezan-

dria, Cairo, the Pyramids, Mount Sinai, &c. Map. Post 8vo. 16a,

(Matthbw, D.D.) School Sermons^ preached in the



Chitpel of Marlborough College. 8to. 9«.

(G. B.) Working Man's Handbook to South Aus-



tralia ; with Advice to the Farmer, and Detailed Information for the
several Classes of Labourers and Artisans. Map. 18mo. la. 6d.

WOOD'S (LisuT.) Voyage up the Indus to the Source of the
River Oxus, by Kabul and Badakhshan. Map. 8vo. 14«.

WORDSWORTH'S (Rbv. Db.) Athens and Attica. Neio EdUion.

Plates. Post 8vo. In ihe Press,

Fac-Similes of Ancient Writings on the Walls

of P(mipeii. Second Edition. 8vo. 2s. 6d.

King Edward Ylth's Latin Grammar^ for tbe



Use of Schools. Seventh Edition^ reriaei, 12mo. Ss.^d.

Accidence, for ihe



Use of Jimior Classes. 12mo. is.
WORSAAE'S (J. J. A.) Account of the Danes and Northmen in

England, Scotland, and Ireland. Woodcuts. 8vo. 10«. 6d,

YOUNG'S Pb. Thos.) Miscellaneous Works, now first collected
and edited, with a Memoir of his Life. 4 Vols. 8vo. In the Press,



•KAJDaVBT AID XVAHB, WtHMTMMM, WBtTBVKtAlll. ■ .^X.^


1



UU / ^ *dt: iOZ9


